The Second Part of the DVPLY TO M. S. alias Two Brethren.

WHEREIN Are maintained The Kings, Parliaments, and all Civil Magistrates
Authority about the Church. Subordination of Ecclesiastical Judicatories.
refuted the Independency of particular Congregations. Licentiousness of
wicked Conscience, and Toleration of all sorts of most detestable Schisms,
Heresies and Religions; as, Idolatry, Paganism, Turcisme, Judaisme,
Arrianisme, Brownisme, Anabaptisme, etc. which M. S. maintain in their Book.



WITH A brief Epitome and Refutation of all the whole INDEPENDENT-Government.

Most humbly submitted to the Kings most excellent Majesty.
To the most Honorable Houses of Parliament.
The most Reverend and Learned Divines of the Assembly.
And all the Protestant Churches in this Island and abroad.
By ADAM STEUART.

October. 3. 1644. Imprimatur JA: CRANFORD.

London: Printed for John Field, and are to be sold at his house upon
Addle-hill, near Baynards-Castle. 1644.

TO THE Most High and Illustrious, CHARLES LODOWIKE, By the Grace of God, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Archidapifer, and Prince Elector of the Sacred Empire,
Duke of Bavarta, etc.
IT is ordinary with Writers in their Dedicatory Epistles, highly to extol and
commend the Persons and Virtues of those, to whom they Dedicate their Books;
for the most part little heeding, whether the Praises they give them, be just
or unjust, deserved or undeserved: And if any one chance to ask the reason,
they usually answer, That they Characterize and Paint them out, much like
Xenophon his Cyrus; not altogether such, as they are, but as they should be: As
for my self, I may safely and ingenuously say, that I am very far from these
men's courses, or any thing at all, that looks that way: My main aim hereby,
is rather to declare unto others, then to Your Highness, the true Motives and
Reasons, that induced me to Dedicate this Piece unto Your Highness.

The first and chiefest was, for that the Subject of this Treatise, is
concerning the Reformation of Abuses, and the Extirpation of Schisms and
Heresies, in the Church of God: Now then, Your Highnesse's most Illustrious
Predecessors have been the first of all other Princes of Germany, or else where
that received the Reformed Religion in the greatest Purity of it; And not
only so, but who from time to time have been the surest Asylum, and Refuge, to
all the Saints of God, that suffered for it, yea and a Terror also to all
such, as persecuted it: And this the great Forces, wherewith so potently they
assisted the French, as also the States of the Low Countries, so oppressed by
those, who so unjustly have oppressed Your Highness, manifests so
abundantly, that whoever knows it not, must be born, and bred with the
Antipodes, and be altogether a Stranger in the whole Christian World. What also
those Illustrious Princes of blessed Memory, Your Father, and Grandfather, did
for the old Duke of Bouillion, in all Christian, Civil, and Military Virtues,
the very Hero's of His time, I my self and many others, have bin Eyewitnesses.
And as for Your Princely Virtues, I know, that Your Highness takes no
pleasure to hear them so highly commended, as they merit; neither is my Pen
able to do it; and if I should attempt any such thing, I am assured, I should
come as far short, as he, who would go about to Paint the Sun with a Coal:
Nevertheless, this I hold my self bound to say unto the World, That I have
heard sundry of the prime men of this Island, both Noblemen, and
Ecclesiastiques, yea, those of the most Learned and Godly of them, extol very
Highly Your Princely Virtues; and it is no small praise and commendation to be
praised and commended by those, who themselves are so praise worthy and
commendable. To whom then should I rather Dedicate this Book, that concerns
Reformation, then to his Highness, whose Illustrious Ancestors are so
celebrated in all Histories, for promoting of the blessed Work of Reformation?
And this, as I said before, God knows, I say not to flatter Your Highness;
but to the end, that Your Highness having so great and worthy Examples of so
Heroic Virtues, and those not far sought, but found at home, you may thereby
be encouraged against all difficulties, to go on in that Royal Way, that they
have scored out unto you: Your Afflictions verily are great, and such as I
cannot think upon, but with a bleeding heart, and that no less for our selves,
then for Your Highness; for alas! what a check, and affront is this put upon
all the Protestant Churches, to see Him brought so low, whose Predecessors put
them so high, even when they were at their lowest ebb? What a dishonor must
it needs be to the three Kingdoms, to see the Kings Majesty's Nephew reduced to
such an Estate? What serves our Alliance for? What esteem can Foreign Nations
make of us, who esteem no more our own Blood? Truly, God has put your
greatest Enemies very low; Some also, who formerly have hindered that
seasonable Assistance, that we should have afforded you, are now themselves on
the suffering hand; And who knows, whether this be not one of the present
quarrels God has against us at this time? Oh! that God would pity us so far,
as that we could but once learn to pity our selves; then might His Majesty be
a glorious King; we most happy Subjects; and You, Right Illustrious Prince,
soon be restored to Your Ancient Soveraignties, and Dominions, so long, and so
unjustly usurped upon You, by Yours, ours, and all Protestant Princes open and
professed Enemy: And now it seems, that God has already prepared the way, if
we could prepare our selves to enter into it: We see how the Lord has powered
out his vengeance upon the House of Austria, and raised up against it the
French, whose Predecessors stand so many ways obliged to Your Highnesse's
House, and that of late memory, yea, in our own times: We have seen heretofore
what has been the King of Denmarks zeal in this Cause; and I doubt not, but
the States of the Low Countries would contribute as much, as any other, to put
down their Immortal Enemy, and to raise up again their old Confederate, and
dearest Friend. If at this present, when other Princes are in Arms one against
another, we could serve our selves of such an occasion, to make a Peace here at
home, we might easily procure an happy Agreement amongst our Friends and
Confederates abroad; so we might make our selves no less considerable every
where, by such a Peace, then now by our Distractions, we are inconsiderable to
all the World. But this I leave, and return to Your Highness: In a word; my
aim in pleading here, for a Reformation, is to let all true Protestants know,
how this Dispute is due to Your Highness; and how they stand all bound in
Conscience, to take to heart the Cause of such a Prince, whose Ancestors were
the first Reformed, and truest Reformers, and who Himself, in the midst of so
many Temptations, so constantly continues in their ways: If they should
(which God forbid) forget so great Services, that those never sufficiently
commended Princes of Your Illustrious House have done for the Cause of God,
they could not but prove very unthankful, both to God, and to Your Highness:
And yet in such a case, must not Your Highness for all that loose courage;
Your Cause is his Cause, who is All-Sufficient; And therefore Your Highness
will do well to cast Your Self wholly upon him, attending his good pleasure;
and I am assured, that Your deliverance shall come in his good time; which,
that he would be pleased to hasten, So prays, so hops, so earnestly
desires he, who is wholly resolved, in all sincerity, all his life long, to
remain

Your Highnesse's most Humble, most Obedient, and most Faithful Servant, Adam
Steuart.

How great is, and wherein consists the Civil Magistrates power, in matters
Ecclesiastical, or concerning Religion?
CHAP. I. The State of the Question.
IT is an old trick of Heretics, and Schismatics, that when the Orthodox
Churches oppose their novelties, what they cannot get of the Church, they
travel to obtain it at Court; and therefore to arrive at their aims they
flatter the Princes of the earth, and the Civil Magistrate, in crying up the
Civil, and decrying the Ecclesiastical Power: and thus did the Arrians in
former, and the Arminians in latter times, in whose footsteps our Brethren the
Independents at this present do seem to tread; and for this end they confound
all things, yea what ever is well said, as may be seen by this their
scratching, and biting at my words, traveling as they do every where to
confound what I have most clearly written. Wherefore the better to show this
Authors fraud and guile, and mine own sincerity, I will here set down what I
said, and what he opposes. Apol. Narr. in speaking to the Parliament, names
it, The Supreme Iudicatory, severe Tribunal, the most Sacred refuge, and
Asylum for mistaken and misjudged innocence.

A. S. The Parliament indeed is all this in Civil Causes, but it pretends no
directive power in matters of Religion, by Teaching, or Preaching, or Iudgeing
of controversies of Religion; nor any executive power, that is intrinsecall
unto the Church, as in the Vocation, Deposition, and Suspension of Ministers,
in Ecclesiastical Censures, in Excommunication, etc. which are merely
spiritual; but only an executive, coercive, and external power, which is not
in, but about the Church, and for the Church, whereby it compels refractory
men to obey the Church: And this Authority belongs actually, and in effect,
In actu exercito, as they say, and jure in re to true Christian Magistrates;
but to others potentially in actu signato and jure in rem, till they become
true Christians.

My Adversary here carpeth first at the word arrogate, as if it were evermore
taken in ill part, and signified to assume proudly to a man's self.

A. Stewart. But he might know, that being a stranger, and having lived the
most part of my life abroad, I am now and then constrained to take the words
upon tru^t; yet for this word, since he has put me upon the perusal of my
Dictionary, I must tell him I find no such thing as he says; there indeed I
find the words arrogant, arrogantly, and arrogancy to be taken as he such,
but not the word arrogate; for it is turned in French, S'arroger S'attribuer,
S'appropri^r; and in Latin arrogo; all which were taken in good part, before
ever Independency was in rerum natura: but I will not let my self be caption
fly drawn from the question, by this man's Grammatical sophistications. If any
thing were here amiss, as there is nothing, it will I hope be sufficient that
I here declare, that that was never my meaning: I confess they have more, and
better Language then I; but I am content, that my Reasons go as far beyond
theirs, as their Language beyond mine.

Afterward in the same page, he accuses me of contradicting my self, in
following Propositions.

The Parliament has no directive Power by teaching, Preaching, etc.

The Parliament is wise enough to know what is convenient for the Church.

I answer, and answered again, That every young boy, that learnes his
rudiments in Logic, knows, that a Contradiction is only betwixt two
Propositions, which have the same Attributes, which is not to be found here;
for the Attribute in the first is, having no directive Power, etc. but in the
second, wise enough, etc. 2. Neither is it credible, that every man, who is
wi^e enough to know what is convenient for the Church, has a Directive Power
therein, in Preaching, Teaching, etc. for the Independents have many amongst
them in their Churches, who have as much Learning, three or four days before
they be received to be members of their Church, as three or four days after;
and yet before they were received members into their Church, howsoever they
knew well enough what was convenient for the Church, had yet no Directive Power
in it to teach, etc. 3. A little after, viz. p. 34.. 2. this judicious
Observator of Contradictions declares ingeniously, that he knows not what I
mean by a Directive Power; and yet here he tells me, that I contradicted my
self: but how is it possible, that he should know that I contradicted my self
in that, that he himself understands not: He knows not what things I pose,
and yet he finds them opposed one to another. I find him here opposed to
himself, and in finding out a contradiction in my words, he contradicts
himself, and so takes away this pretended contradiction.

Because he knows not what is a directive Power, wherein he founds this
imaginary contradiction, he says, A. S. should befriend my intellect, to tell
me plainly and distinctly, what he means by a Directive Power in matters of
Religion.

A. S. Wherefore if I cannot befriend your Will, I will travel to befriend
your Intellect, not only in declaring you, what is a Directive Power, etc. but
also in expounding all the terms of this question; learn therefore, I pray
you, 1. That the Civil Magistrate, qua talis, is he who governs the State,
qua talem; I say qua talis, and qua talem; for it may fall out, that he who is
a Civil Magistrate to govern the State, may also be chosen to govern the
Church in quality of a Ruling Elder, etc. but that he does not, in quality of a
Civil Magistrate, for then he should not need to be chosen to be a Ruling
Elder; for in quality of a Civil Magistrate already he should have had that
power.

2. Learn, that by the word Church I understand the Visible, Militant Church,
both real, and representative in Church Officers, viz. 1. In Sessions, or
Presbyteries. 2. In Classes. 3. In Provincial, and 4. In National, and 5. in
Oecumenicall Synods; but so, that it must be taken sometimes for the real
Church alone, as when we say, The Presbytery rules the Church: sometimes for
the representative alone, as when we say, Tell the Church: and evermore,
ratione subjectae materiae.

3. Learn, that the word Power, which here is nothing else, but (...)
potestas, authoritas, etc. signifies not; 1. Any Natural Faculty or power in
the Predicament of Quality. 2. Or any Habitude, either Natural, purchased by
our industry, or 3. Supernatural, infused into the soul, by Gods bounty. 1.
For the Power of Ruling, whether it be Directive, Imperative, or Executive,
belongs not to us by birth, as natural powers; nor can we purchase it by our
own industry alone, as we do Natural Habitudes: nor is it evermore
supernatural or infused by God, as we see in the Civil Power amongst Pagans;
yea it is very probable, that some Preachers may have an Ecclesiastical Power,
who have no Supernatural, but only their aturall gifts. 2. And a man before he
be called to a charge in the State, or Church, may have all the natural powers
or faculties of his soul; and all the natural, or supernatural habitudes or
abilities that he has after his calling; and yet not have that power to judge,
command, and punish, which he has after his calling; it has no real, but
only an intelligible being, which is not to be, but to be understood,
conceived, or intelligible; and therefore it is no work of nature, but of
reason: and the maine reason of this is; 1. Because the being of this power,
which is not potentia, but potestas, (...) and authoritas; as also that of the
charge or Office to which it belongs, depends upon a mere assent of the
understanding, and destination of the will, in those who choose the person or
persons to this charge and power, and of him who is so chosen. Now the assent
of the understanding and destination of the will, (since they are immanent
actions, and no ways transient) cannot produce any real or permanent effect
out of themselves: And yet however it be no real faculty, habitude or ability,
yet both can it pose, and indeed it does presuppose some real being: for in
punishing of Malefactors it poseth sometimes a very real eff ct, as that of
burning and hanging of persons; and before it be, it presupposes the natural
faculties of the soul, some natural habitudes or abilities therein, as that
of jurisprudence, in Civil Magistrates and Judges: sometimes some
supernatural habitudes also, as that of divine faith. Ecclesiastical charges,
as in Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and Pastors. 2. Because a man in
receiving of such a Power, potestas or charge, finds no real changement in
himself, as in receiving of a new real being, or quality.

No more can it formally consist in the real being, qualities, or effects,
that the charge or this power produces; for they are all posterior to it.

So it may be defined a work of reason, or a moral being, whereby he who is
sufficiently called, by sufficient assent and destination of the Will of those
who call him, and consent of his own, and endowed with sufficient abilities,
may justly exercise such acts as they intend by such a calling. I call it, 1. a
work of Reason, etc. to the exclusion of the works of Nature. 2. I say, He who
is called. Here you have, 1. the Subject of this power, viz. He. 2. The
efficient cause thereof, somewhat obscurely expressed, by sufficient Calling;
and afterward, 3. more distinctly, by the assent and destination of the will of
those who call him, and consent of the person called. 4. Endowed, etc. Here is
expressed the fundamentum remotum of this charge, whereby he is enabled to the
acts of this power. 5. May justly exercise, etc. Here is the finis, or act of
this power, wherein we have to observe, that this act may be considered, 1. in
its naturalitie; 2. In its habitualitie or faculty; 3. In its morality; 4. In
its particular legalitie. The first is from the natural faculties of the
Soul; The second, from the habitudes or abilities thereof; The third is from
moral habitudes in the Will: The fourth from this potestas; the natural
faculty makes it an act; the habitudes or abilities, an habitual act, or
easily produced by the soul, if it be merely natural: (but if it be a
supernatural act, quoad substantiam, then there must be some supernatural
habitude, that supplieth the place both of the deficient faculty, and habitude
or ability) the virtue of justice in the will, i. a just act: but this moral
power, or (...), makes it a legal and public act, for what before his
calling he could not do, but illegally, (howsoever he had abilities enough)
now after his calling, he can do legally. Item, this moral power induces a
moral obligation to obedience, which all his natural powers, all his natural
and supernatural habitudes, and all his particular moral virtues and justice,
could not do without it.

This moral power is either private or particular, as the Paternall, Maritall,
(if it be merely moral) and despoticall, in domestical and such like
societies, whereof we speak not; Or public, as that of the Secular
Magistrate, and Ecclesiastical Judge: and evermore it produces an obligation
unto obedience in those that are subject thereunto: So the power of the Civil
Magistrate binds the Subject to Civil, and that of Ecclesiastical persons,
the people to Ecclesiastical or spiritual obedience; That of the Husband, the
Wife, to conjugall; that of the Father, the Son, to filial; and that of the
Lord, the servant, to servile obedience or service.

This power, as it is in Church Officers, is either Directive or Executive, and
this either imperative, or strictly executive: Or if you like better of a
Trichotomie, it is either Directive, Imperative, or Executive. The directive
power of the Church, is that whereby she shows us what is to be believed or
done; which is done by Teaching, Ecclesiastical judgments, Laws, and the
interpretation thereof, whereby we are directed and taught. The Imperative
power is, whereby she commands what is to be done: as, Hoc fac: which the
Doctors of the Laws ordinarily express, by jubeo, impero, mando; and some
Kings, by this; For it is our will and pleasure. The Executive power is,
whereby Ecclesiastical judgments are put in execution; which is done by
binding and loosing, in some ways answerable to distributive Justice,
remunerative and coercive.

Now to befriend yet more this Man's understanding, and to show the Christian
Reader how fairly I deal with him, and all those of his party, not hiding my
self, as they ordinarily do, I give another note very necessary in this
matter, which I hope shall discover a great part of these men's cavils and
fraudulent sophistications: and it is this: viz. That the power circa
Spiritualia and Ecclesiastica, about Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters, is
either intrinsecall to the Church, i. e. not only about the Church, but also in
the Church; as that of Church officers, which is only in the Church or Church
officers, in quality of Church and Church officers; as the power to preach, to
excommunicate, etc. for no other but Ecclesiastical persons can preach, or
excommunicate; Neither can the Civil Magistrate, or any other, exercise such
acts. Or Extrinsecall, i. e. about the Church, but not in the Church, in
quality of a Church; as when the Civil Magistrate makes Laws concerning the
Church, in confirming or ratifying her laws, in making them to be received as
well in the State as in the Church; So Justinian declared, that according to
the Evangelicall doctrine and Apostolical discipline, all men should be called
Christians; otherwise that they should be declared distracted and infamous
persons: and that they that were punished spiritually by the Church, should
afterward be punished civilly, by the civil Magistrate: as we may see in the
first book of the Codex, tit. de summa Trinitate, tit. de sacrosanctis
Ecclesiis, tit. de Episc. and Cler. and Orphanotroph. And through all the first
thirteen Titles of that book, and elsewhere in the Civil Laws. But this power
to judge, command, and punish, is not Ecclesiastical, but Civil.

CHAP. II. The first Conclusion about the Intrinsecall power of the Civil
Magistrate in the Church.
THis being presupposed, I put my first Conclusion thus: The Civil Magistrate,
qua talis, or under the notion of a Civil Magistrate, has no intrinsecall
power in the Church: 1. Because the Scripture, which Independents acknowledge
for the only rule of Church Government, contains no such thing. 2. Because
his authority, qua talis, is not Ecclesiastical, but Political or Civil,
Ergo, qua talis, it is not intrinsecall to the Church. 3. Because such must be
his power or authority in the Church, as the acts thereof, at least in genere
morum, or morally. But the acts of his power, as to punish refractorie persons
in a Civil way, by imprisonment, pecuniary mulcts, etc. are not intrinsecall,
yea no ways Ecclesiastical, Ergo, no more is his power or authority. 4.
Because the authority that is intrinsecall unto the Church, must be exercised
by Ecclesiastical persons. But so is not that of the Civil Magistrate. The
Minor is certain, because it is only to be exercised by the Civil Magistrate,
or his officers; and not by Elders of the Church: as when he imprisons any man
for his disobedience unto the Church, or puts Apostates, or some abominable
Heretics to death, as Servet. etc. And it is a certain maxim, that, Ecclesia
nescit sanguinem: as may appear by sundry Canons of the Canon Law. Ergo, The
Major is indubitable, because the power, and the exercise thereof belongs
unto the same sort of persons. 5. Because the Civil Magistrate himself, qua
talis, is no Ecclesiastical person, or Intrinsecall unto the Church, since he
may be a Pagan; how then can his authority be Ecclesiastical, or Intrinsecall
unto the Church, since the authority of a person out of the Church, qua talis,
must be Extrinsecall, or out of the Church? 6. Because the object of the
intrinsecall power of the Church is principally (...), things that are
spiritual, or for spiritual ends; But so is not that of the Civil
Magistrate; since oftentimes he knows him not, as when he is a Turk or a
Pagan. 7. Because this opinion confounds the Kingdom of this World, with that
of Christ, in granting unto the Civil Magistrate the Intrinsecall power of the
Church, which Christ only granted unto the Ministers thereof, viz. unto
Preachers, Teachers, and ruling Elders. But so should it not be; for Christ
distinguished these powers, when he commanded to give unto God that which is
Gods, and unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. 8. Because the
immediate rule of the intrinsecall power of the Church, is only Gods Word,
formally, by consequence or presupposition: so is it not in respect of the
Civil Magistrates power, which is immediately and formally ruled by the Laws
of the State; Ergo, the Civil Magistrates power is not intrinsecall unto the
Church. 9. The intrinsecall power of the Church is only Ministerial, no ways
Despoticall, Imperial, Regal, Majesticall, or Majesty: So is not that of the
Civil Magistrate, in taking the word in a large signification, as it is
sometimes, for the supreme and subalterne Magistrate; For the power of the
Civil Magistrate, at least in the Supreme or Prince, is not Ministerial, but
sometimes Despoticall or Lordly, sometimes Imperial, sometimes Regal,
sometimes Aristocraticall, sometimes Democraticall, and evermore Majesticall.
Ergo, The Assumption is certain; so is the Proposition: for they who have this
intrinsecall power in the Church, are only Christ's Ministers and Servants. 10.
Because (as we said heretofore) not only the Civil Magistrate sometimes is not
a member of the true Church of Christ, but is a member of the Antichristian
Church, yea sometimes not so much as Christened, or a Christian by name; as the
Tuck the Emperor, the French King, and some others, who by maxim of State,
have made some Edicts in favor of true Christians, for the exercise of their
Religion. But how shall he that is not in the Church, that is no true
Christian, yea that is an Antichristian Christian, yea not so much as a
Christian by name, but an open Enemy to the name of Christ, as Herod, Nero,
Dioclesian, Julian the Apostate, that are external unto the Church, have any
intrinsecall power in the Church? 11. Because the Civil Magistrate has no
intrinsecall power, either directive or executive, in common Trades, as that of
Brewers, Shoemakers, Carters, Watermen, etc. whose trades are within the reach
of Nature, and which he directs only extrinsecally: Neither knows the King
how to brew, how to make shoes, etc. neither can he brew, or make shoes: How
much less then is it needful that he have any interne power, either directive
or executive, in Ecclesiastical matters, which are altogether spiritual and
supernatural, above the reach of all natural prudence, and quite out of the
sphere of his activitie. 12. By the same reason the Civil Magistrate should
have an internal power both directive and executive, over all Oeconomicall
Societies under him, viz. over the Husband and the Wife, the Father and the
Son, the Master and the Servant. He might direct them in their duties, and
execute their charges intrinsecally, and so do the duty of a Husband, of a
Father and Master in all things, in every man's family, which could not but be
found very absurd, impious, and altogether intolerable. Heretofore the
Independents did, as much as any men, complain of such an absolute and
independent power in the King: How then is it, that now they grant it? 13. If
such an intrinsecall power in Ecclesiastical matters, be a part of all civil
Magistrates power; then the Magistrates who have it not, are not complete and
perfect Magistrates, since they want one of the principal parts of the civil
Magistrates power, viz. The intrinsecall, directive, and executive power in
Ecclesiastical matters. But the consequent is untrue, yea criminal, and
traiterous; for many Pagans, Antichristians, yea in concreto, and in sensu
composito have a full and perfect civil power over their Subjects, and yet are
destitute of all such intrinsecall or Ecclesiastical power, either directive,
or executive; since neither they know nor will know the word of God, which is
the only directive or regulative principle in Ecclesiastical matters and
Government: neither ever do they or will they exercise any of these powers; yea
they renounce them both. Now morally he is not said to have power to exercise
an Act, who never exercises, nor will exercise it, but renounces it, and all
power unto it. Ergo, 14. If the civil Magistrate, in quality of civil
Magistrate, has any such intrinsecall power or authority about the Church,
Church business, and Religion, then must it not be called only a political,
civil, or secular, but also an Ecclesiastical and spiritual power; Yea, the
civil Magistrate, and his power, must as well be defined by spiritual and
Ecclesiastical actions of direction and Government, and by spiritual and
Ecclesiastiall matters, as by civil actions and matters; for it is ordinary to
define all faculties, habitudes, and all natural or moral powers and
authorities by their acts and objects whereunto they have any intrinsecall
reference, as visum per visibile; auditum per audibile, Logicam per (...),
Phisicam per (...), etc. But so is it not of the civil Magistrates power, for
neither is it called Ecclesiastical, Religious, or Spiritual; neither is it
the custom of any learned Politician, who ever defined it exactly, to define
it in such a manner. Ergo, 15. If it were so, the civil Magistrate could not
be a good Magistrate, unless he ruled the Church well; for in omitting this,
he should omit the principal part of his office, so not being skilled in
Divinity, he should be unworthy of his charge, and worthy to be deposed, which
I believe none but Independent Magistrates will grant. 16. Yea, to be a true
Magistrate, and acquit himself of his charge, he must be an Independent; for
to acquit himself of the charge of a civil Magistrate, he must rule the
Church well; to rule the Church well, he must rule it in the Independent way,
(for Episcopal Government is naught, not being so much as essentially
Ecclesiastical Government, and Presbyterian Government, if they be believed,
is nothing else but Episcopal Government) to rule it in the Independent way,
he must be an Independent. Ergo, a primo ad ultimum, to be a true or lawful
Magistrate, he must be an Independent: This, for any thing I can see, falls
very little short of Treason, for howsoever happily they intend it not, yet
they tend as fast as they can to it. 17. That moral power, whereof the
external acts are morally impossible, is morally impossible: But such is that
intrinsecall power in the civil Magistrate, about Spiritual matters in the
Government of the Church, Ergo, That intrinsecall power. etc. must be morally
impossible. The Major proposition is certain, for neither God, nor Nature, nor
men in their right wits ever ordained any moral power, whereof the act is
morally impossible; for active powers are only for their acts, as for their
ends; now if the end be impossible, so must that which is for that end, be
impossible; and if it were impossible to sail, we should never build ships to
sail with: I prove the Minor, for I put the case there were an Oecumenicall
Council, as has been seen in former times, and may be in times to come; then
should it not be possible for any Christian Magistrate to put in execution, any
such power over an Oecumenick Council, unless he were an Oecumenick
Magistrate, to whose authority it could submit: But such a Magistrate morally
is not like to be found. E. 18. If the King and Parliament, or any civil
Magistrate be judge betwixt us, and the Independents, then must the
Independents submit to their judgment and command: If so, how is it, that
against the Laws of the Kingdom, and their own Tenets, they erect so many
Independent Churches without their permission and consent, and that the
Independent Ministers of the Synod in printed books have divulged their
judgments, upon the matters in debate in the Synod, and brought in so many
novelties in Religion, and all this against the formal Ordinance of both the
Houses of Parliament, to which they pretend so much submission? 19. This
opinion makes all Ecclesiastical power unnecessary, and superfluous; for
since the civil Magistrate has an intrinsecall power, both directive and
executive to govern the Church, as this M. S. would make us beseeve; what need
is it, that the Ministers of the Church have any such power, for the civil
Magistrate has power enough to govern both the State and the Church? But the
Ecclesiastical power is not unnecessary or superfluous, since God has
ordained Presbyteries, and some in the Church to be Rulers, and others to be
ruled: For it is a Maxim both in Nature and in Grace, that Deus et Natura
nihil faciunt frustra, Ergo, the Independents opinion, whereof these
absurdities follow, must be false. 20. Because the Evangelists, Prophets,
Pastors, Doctors, and other Christians of the Primitive Church, would never
acknowledge any such authority in the civil Magistrates, or obey them, as we
see throughout all the History of the Acts, and of the Primitive Church. 21. If
Kings, Parliaments, and the civil Magistrates have any internal Directive,
Imperative, or Executive power over the Church, either it should be Supreme and
Sovereign, or Subaltern; if Supreme, or Sovereign, then we have Kings in the
Church; yea some higher Offices and Officers in the Church, then that of the
Apostolate and the Apostles, which is contrary to St. Paul, 1. Cor. 12. Romans
12. Ephesians. 4. If Subalterne, then the King, and Parliament, and all Magistrates
are subject to some Ecclesiastical power, and are not supreme Judges in the
Church. 22. If the Magistrate have any such power, either the Supreme, or
Subaltern Magistrate has it: But the supreme has it not, as we have seen; nor
the Subaltern; for what reason, that every Justice of Peace, yea be he never so
ignorant in Divinity, or never so vicious in his life, should have power over a
whole National or Oecumenicall Synod? It is not possible, for he has no power
over all the Churches that they represent; neither did ever all the Churches
send their Commissioners to the Synod upon any such terms; neither has it
ever been acknowledged by any Synod; how ridiculous were it to think, that
every Justice of Peace, who has not so much liberty as to enter in to this
present Synod, should notwithstanding rule it, or domineer over it? Neither did
ye grant so much authority, as I believe, to the civil Magistrate in your
Synod in the Netherlands. But what reason is it that the subalterne Magistrate
of one Town, should rule over the Synod, rather then the Magistrate of the
Town from whence is sent an other Commissioner? 23. If the civil Magistrates
or any King qua talis, be a Ruler of the Church, or have any intrinsecall
authoritative power to rule it, he should have the same right to it, that he
has to the State or Kingdom: so some Kings (as in Hereditarie Kingdoms)
should be Kings and rulers of the Church by birth. 24. Some by War, Invasion
or usurpation, which is a pretty way to obtain power in the Church. 25. By
money in buying of a Principallity, and so by direct Simony. 26. By trooquing
and exchange. 27. A Woman, since she may be Queen, might be a Church Ruler, and
so speak in the Church, which St. Paul directly prohibiteth them. 28. A
Prince, being a known Atheist, or a Magician, should have an internal power to
rule the Church, and so be a member thereof; for his Atheism and Magic could
no more hinder him from being a Ruler in the Church, then in the State: Neither
is it possible, that the Ruler of a Church or of any other Society should not
be a member thereof; if so, the Church should be very well guided, and have
holy members: But this is against the principles of Independency, for they will
acknowledge no man for a Member of their Church, unless it appear, that he
have the power of Piety and of Sanctifying Grace, 29. Children, and Babes, who
may be Kings, should be Rulers of the Church: So they, who have not the use of
reason, should rule the Church without reason.


And if it be replied, that they might guide the Church by their Counsel, and
other Officers:

Answ. 1. God is not served by Commissioners and Proctors, in the Church as in
the State: Whatever charge God lays upon Churchmen, they must carry their
own burden themselves, and not lay it upon others. 2. By the same reason, other
Ministers of the Church might do the like, and so they likewise might be born
Gods Ministers, as the King, and so have need of no vocation at all; but every
man, according to his fantasy, might exercise his gift of Prophecy, just for
all the world as they do amongst the Independents.

30. Yea, mad men might rule the Church, since their madness hinders them not
to be Kings, when they have right to the Crown, so might mad men be Preachers
also: for if madness hinder not a Prince or a King to be a Ruler in the
Church, or any other to rule the Church; no more should it hinder any other
Minister to be a Preacher, since there is the same reason for them all.

31. It is a commandment of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. That no man be admitted a
Judge in Christ, Church, but after due examination, viz. of their life and
Doctrine: But Magistrates, and especially the supreme Magistrate, in taking the
word in a large signification, are not so admitted: and some of them cannot be
so admitted, as Princes, who are Infants, mad, etc.

32. Whosoever has any Ecclesiastical power must be called of God, as Aaron,
Heb. 5.4. and Christ took not this honor, but after a lawful vocation. But
Princes and Magistrates are not so called of God, as Aaron.

33. He who has any intrinsecall power in the Church, must first accept of it,
and have some internal vocation, before that he have it: But many Magistrates
accept not of it, nor have they any internal vocation, as Papists, who will
not accept of it, neither have they any vocation to it.

34. If the Civil Magistrate have any such power, either he has it, as a
Magistrate, as a Christian, or as a Christian Magistrate. But he has it not as
a Magistrate: for, as a Magistrate, only he rules the State, and not the
Church: and if he had it, as a Magistrate, all Magistrates, yea Nero, Julian
the Apostate should have it, as we have proved. Not as a Christian; for then
every Christian should have that power, yea, a Cobbler, as well as a King: nam
quod convenit alicui, qua tali, convenit omni. Nor finally, as a Christian
Magistrate; for as a Christian Magistrate, he has no more then as a
Magistrate, and a Christian: Now he has it not as a Magistrate, and a
Christian: for Christianity augmenteth not the power of a Magistrate, since it
is not of the same kind: for if it should augment it, or increase it, it
should be some part or degree of Magistracy, which is false; Neither if it
could be augmented or increased, could it receive any increase, but either
extensive or intensive, in its parts or quantity, or in its degrees: But since
Christianity is not a part or a degree of Magistracy, nor Magistracy of
Christianity, the one cannot increase or augment the other.

35. If we should have a Toleration of all sorts of Religions, put the case of
365. as M. S. wishes; and that the King were Judge in all; then he must have
an intrinsecall power in all those Religions, and all the several Churches
that profess them, and consequently he must be a member of every one of them,
and so of 365 Religions: For, whosoever has an intrinsecall power in the
Church, or is a Governor of it, must be a member, yea the principal member of
it: But the King must not be of so many, viz. 365 Religons; Ergo,

36. If the King be not of all those Churches Religions, then either he must be
of one, or none of them: If of one of them only, then he shall be partial in
judging and ruling them all, and so an incompetent Judge: If of none, so indeed
he shall be indifferent and impartial, but a very dangerous man of no Religion
at all: and so cannot be a competent Judge, unless he be of no Religion at
all. But it were better to quit such a power, then to have it upon such terms.

37. We have examples of Kings punished for interposing themselves in matters
of Religion, which cost some of them no less then their Crowns: as we read of
Saul, 1 Samuel 13.8, 9, etc. Others were stricken with leprosy, as Vzziah, for
undertaking to sacrifice: And howbeit that before he had been a glorious and a
triumphant King, yet for that act was he stricken with leprosy by God, and
opposed by Azariah with fourscore Priests, valiant men, who thrust him out from
thence: so dwelt he several in a house, being a Leper; for he was cut off from
the house of the Lord. All this says the Text, and no less; 2 King. 15.5. 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 17, etc.

38. The Civil Magistrate may be received unto the Magistracy, before he be a
member of the Church: for the Independents receive no man, yea, not the Kings
Majesty, and the Parliament, to be members of their Church, but after a long
trial: Yea, however they profess the Orthodox Religion, and live Christianly,
not giving offense to any man, Ergo, in such a case the civil Magistrate is
out of the Church, and so must his authority be, and consequently, neither he,
qua talis, nor his authority is intrinsecall unto the Church, so long as he is
out of the Church; for the Magistrates authority can be no more intrinsecall
unto the Church, then the Magistrate himself is.

And if it be said, that the Civil Magistrates authority is intrinsecall unto
the Church, but not the Civil Magistrate: I answer, That then the Church has
the civil Magistrates authority, and not his person; so the Church has the
Magistracy, and not the Magistrate, and so the Church has civil, viz.
Imperial, Royal, or Despoticall authority over the subjects: But that cannot
be said, for it is Treason; Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, and the
Church bears no material sword.

39. The Intrinsecall way to govern Christ's Church is convenient unto Gods
wisdom, since it is an act of wisdom, and divine providence: But an
Intrinsecall power granted to Heathen, and Antichristian Christians, and
Magistrates, to govern Christ's Church, is not convenient unto his wisdom, but
repugnant unto it; for it is, as if he should choose a Wolf to keep the
Lambs, and a Kite to shelter the Chickens, which are not means convenient unto
such ends.

40. Such a sort of Government is repugnant unto Gods mercy toward his Church,
for how is it credible that he, who has given Christ his only Son for his
Church, to redeem her, should give her Antichrists and Pagans to lead her
away from Christ to Antichrist, yea to the Devil, and Hell it self, from
which he has redeemed her.

41. I might here ask what Magistrate has this Intrinsecall power; whether the
Supreme, or the Subalterne? If the Supreme, then he has such an authority in
the Church, as in the State, viz. Monarchical, Despoticall, Imperial, Royal,
etc. Aristocraticall, or Democraticall; so the Government of the Church is not
one, but manifold, and may change, and be diversified, as the governments of
this world: If the Subalterne has it also, then it must be derived unto him
from the Prince or Sovereign; Nulla enim potestas, nisi in Principe, aut a
Principe; there is no power, but in the Prince, or from the Prince, so
Ecclesiastical charges shall be venall or saleable, as Subalterne Magistracies
in some Kingdoms are, where the only way to be preferred unto them, is, that
notable Maxim of old Judas, Quantum mihi dabitis?

CHAP. III. The second Conclusion about the Extrinsecall power of the Civil
Magistrate, in Ecclesiastical matters, proved by Scripture.
Conclus. II. THe Civil Magistrate has an extrinsecall, both Directive and
Executive power about the Church, whereby not only he may rule it by
Political Laws, as Pagan, but also as Christian; because he is, or should be
a Nursing Father of the Church, Esaias. 49.23. who 1. is bound to admit in his
Kingdom the true Church, and true Religion. 2. He has power, not to admit it,
to reject it, yea when it is not received or approved, and confirmed by his
secular and civil authority, to reject it, and exile it, however he do it not
as a Nurse of the Church. 3. If the Church be corrupt, and Church Officers
negligent in their charge, and will not reform it, he may command, yea compel
them to do it. Or if they will not, he may extraordinarily do it himself. 5.
When the Church is Reformed, he may command them, when they are negligent, to
be diligent in their charge. 6. If they oppress any man in their
Ecclesiastical judgments and censures, against the Laws of the Kingdom, he
may desire them, yea, command them to revise their judgments; and in case they
reform them not, command them, yea compel them by his civil power, to give
him satisfaction, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, if they derogate not
from the Law of God. 7. He may, yea he is bound to provide sufficient
maintenance for the Ministers of the Churches, and to take a care that their
means be not delapidated, and that they be not Sacrilegiously robbed of them.
8. And what here I say of the Church, I say also of Universities and Schools,
that are the Seminaries of able men for the Church. 9. He may grant unto the
Church some Liberties, Privileges, or Immunities, as sundry Princes have done,
and confirm them by Law, as we see in the Civil Law. 10. He is bound with his
Civil power to maintain the Order, and Discipline of the Church; and
consequently: 11. To hinder all disorder in it. And 12. By his Civil
Authority, to compel all refractory persons to obey the Church. And 13. To
banish, and exile all Sects, Schisms, and Heresies, as we may see by sundry of
the Roman Laws, and especially in the first 13. Titles of the first book of
Instinians Codex, in the Pandects and else where. All this we grant to the
Civil Magistrate; and if the Quinq Ecclesian Ministers with the rest of that
Sect contest it not, we need not to prove it; only we say, that he does all
this by a Civil and Secular, Supreme, Imperial, Royal, Aristocraticall, or
Democraticall, Legislative, and coactive Power, armed with the sword, howsoever
extrinsecall to the Church; but more Absolute, Independent, and Potent in suo
genere, then any Ecclesiastical Power whatsoever, which is Intrinsecall to the
Church, which is no ways Absolute, nor Independent, but Dependent; no ways
Coactive by External force, but Spiritual, merely Ministerial (howsoever
imperative in the name of God) that cannot make any Laws, but of things
merely Circumstantiall, much less abrogate the Laws concerning the
constitution, and Government of the Church, already made by God in his Word.

Now that the Magistrate has an extrinsecall Power over the Church, in
compelling all refractory persons to submit themselves to her just commands,
since M. S. seems to question it, and desires a proof of it, I am ready to
satisfy his desire herein. Wherefore I prove it,

1. From sundry examples of the Judges, and Kings of the people of God, in the
old Testament, Exodus 32.27. Moses commanded the Levites to kill about three
thousand of the Ringleaders, or principalls of those that adored the golden
Calfe; in the performance of which service the Text says, that they
consecrated themselves unto the Lord, verse 29.

2. Deuteronomy. 22.11. to the end of the Chapter, we read how the rest of the Tribes
of Israel resolved to war against Reuben, Gad, and the half Tribe of
Manasseh, for building of an Altar (as they believed) in transgression against
the Lord, which they would not have done, had they not conceived it to be just.

3. Judge. 6.31. Ioash ordained thus, He that will plead for him, i. e. Baal,
let him be put to death.

4. 1 Kings 15.12. Asa removed all the Idols that his fathers had made, 13. And
also Maachah his mother, even her he removed from being Queen, because she had
made an Idol in a Grove, and Asa destroyed her Idol, and burnt it by the
brook Kedron. Here Asa punishes his own Mother for Idolatry, and destroys
her Idol: so no doubt may the Civil Magistrate do with all false Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, false Doctors, Worshippers, and Church Governors; he
may abolish them, and punish their persons, according to the quality of their
false Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, and 2. Chro. 14.4. He, i.e. Asa
commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers. 5. He took away the
high places.

Chap. 15.12. They entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul. 13. That whosoever
would not seek the Lord God of Jsrael should be put to death, whether small or
great, whether man or woman.

5. 2 Kings 10. from the ver. 18. to the 31. Iehu destroys Baal, all his
Images, Prophets, Priests, Servants, and Worshippers, and this fact is highly
commended, and recompensed by God himself, ver. 30.

6. Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 17. took away the high places, and Groves out of
Judah, ver. 6. He sent his Princes, the Priests and Levites to teach throughout
all Juda, ver. 7.8, 9. and Chap. 19. he reformeth the two Sanedrims, and
establishes Amariah the chief Priest over them in all matters of the Lord, and
Zebadiah for all the Kings matters: which he could not lawfully do without
some power. Now we shall show hereafter, that it cannot be Intrinsecall to the
Church, since he was no Ecclesiastic Person, Ergo it must be extrinsecall.

7. 2 Kings 11.18. Under the King Iehoash all the people of the Land went into
the house of Baal, and brake it down, his Altars, and his Jmages brake they in
pieces thoroughly, and slew Matton the Priest of Baal; this they did in virtue
of their Covenant betwixt the King and the People, with their God; and it is
approved in Scripture, as it appears by the Text.

8. 2 Kings 18.4. Ezechias remooved the high places, and brake the Images, and
cut down the Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent, that Moses had
made, for unto those days the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it. Here
not only is Idolatry put down, but also the High Places remooved, and the
brazen Serpent, a thing in it self indifferent, but yet ex instituto Divino set
up, put down, when the people abused it in matter of Religion: Wherefore then
may not the Civil Magistrate do as much with Independency, if it be found
contrary to true Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline?

So, 2 Chronicles. 31. He reformed the Discipline, v. 2. and provided sufficient
maintenance for Church Officers.

9. Josiah, 2 Reg. 23. put down the idolatrous Priests, whom the King of Judah
had ordained to burn incense in the High places in the Cities of Judah. He
slew all the Priests of the High places, whether they were Idolaters, or not:
for the Text here has no distinction, and therefore it is not to us to
distinguish. So that no Kings dispensation, Toleration, or command, can excuse
any man from suffering, if he sin against God, if the Magistrate that
succeeds him will do his duty.

10. So Manasses reformed the Church, 2 Chronicles. 23.15. and 11.5. See the example
of Ezra, Ezr. 9. and 10. and of Nehemiah, Neh. 13.

11. So did Nebuchadnezzar ordain, Dan. 3.29. Therefore I make a Decree, that
every People, Nation, and Language, which speaks any thing amiss against the
God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their
houses shall be made a dunghill; because there is no other God that can deliver
after this sort.

Neither need I to speak, 12, of Darius, 13. Cyrus, 14. Darius Histaspes, 15.
Artaxerxes, and other Pagan Princes, who employed their Civil power about
Religion, Esd. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. and 4.17, 18, 19, etc. and Nehem. 7. We have yet
some other examples, 16. of Phineas, 17. Heliah, 18. Mattathias, 19. Judah, and
some others, who in quality of extraordinary Judges, punished Heretics and
Idolaters, yea some of them by death, Number. 25.8. 1 King. 18.40. 1 Macch. 2. 2
Macch. 36. Now howbeit these acts of extraordinary Judges are not to be drawn
into consequence by private persons: nevertheless they are to be imitated by
ordinary Judges: for, what they did extraordinarily in respect of their
calling, and in quality of Judges, ordinary Judges should do it ordinarily,
since it is their ordinary charge, as the others extraordinarily, and is
commended in Scripture.

We have some examples in the New Testament: in S. Peter's person, who in
quality of an extraordinary Judge, when there was no Christian Magistrate, put
to death Ananias and Saphyra, for their hypocrisy and dissimulation, Act.
5.5.10. How much more might he have done it for Heresy, which is worse? And S.
Paul struck Elymas the Sorcerer blind, because he would have seduced Paulus
Sergius the Proconsul from the says, Act. 13.8, 10. because the Magistrate did
not his duty, or because there was no Christian Magistrate in those times. Now
what they did as extraordinary Magistrates, not being ordinary, the ordinary
Magistrate may do it ordinarily, as an ordinary act of his charge.

We have also the express commandment of God, to punish the Idolater,
Heretic, or false Prophet, and dreamer of dreams, be he never so near to us,
wife, brother, son, friend, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.1. And the reason is, because He
has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, v. 5.10. So, whosoever
seduceth us from the Lord our God, as Heretics, are to suffer, if they be
pertinacious; Yea, whole Cities are to be destroyed for this sin, ver. 15. See
Exodus 22.20. Deuteronomy. 17.2.

Yea, it was not so much as permitted to the people of God to make any
Covenant, or marriage with Idolatrous people, for fear of turning them away
from Gods service, Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Exodus 34.11.15. Ezra 9.10. Nehem.
9. And this was signified by a prohibition, not to let their cattle so much as
gender with a diverse kind, not to sow their ground with mingled seed, nor to
wear garments mingled with linen and woollen, Levit. 19. as Zepperus in
Explanatione legum Mosaicarum forensium, l. 4. c. 2. expounds it.

We nave the Roman laws, in the first Book of the Code of Justinian, through
all the first 14 or 15 Titles, and elsewhere, to this very Head.

So we have solemn Covenants in Scripture, to observe the Law of God, and
consequently the first Commandment, and so to destroy Heresy and Schisms,
which are contrary to it: As (1) that of Moses, pronouncing sundry benedictions
to the keepers, and curses to the transgressors thereof, Deuteronomy. 27. and 28. (2)
Of Joshua, 23. and 24. (3) Of Asa, 2 Chro. 15.12. (4) Of Joash, 2 Chro 23.16.
(5) Of Josiah, 2 Chro. 34.30. (6) Of Ezra, c. 10.3. (7) Of Nehemiah. chap. 9.
v. 28. and 10.1. to the 30. They make a sure Covenant and write it; and enter
into a curse, yea and that with an oath, to walk in Gods law, etc. so far were
they from tolerating Heretics and Schismatics, that might turn them away
from it, as our Independents go about to do. Our own Covenant also obliges
the Magistrate to punish all Heretics and Schismatics, and the People to
assist him herein: yea, the Independents themselves, in as much as they have
entered into the same Covenant, stand equally obliged to reform Religion,
according to their power. Now God has given them the power to reform it, in
punishing Heretics and Schismatics, according to their demerits; which if
either We, or They do not, we are forsworn, and God one day will call us to
an account.

CHAP. IV. Containing our Adversaries Evasions.
NOw what says M. S. to all this, who was so desirous of some proofs from
Scripture?

His first Answer is, That A. S. brings those Examples, for want of better
Arguments.

A. S. Rep. 1. And so he jeereth Gods Word. 2. Wherefore are not Arguments
drawn from Gods Word, good enough in matter of Religion? 3. These Examples are
approved in Scripture, and therefore may very well have the force of a Command.

M. S. 2. His second Answer is, that none of the good Kings of Judah ever
offered any violence to the true Prophets of the Lord.

A. S. Repl. Neither say I any such thing, only I say they had a Royal, or
Political Power (which was extrinsecall unto the Church, or of another nature,
as your Apologists speak) to conserve the true Religion; and in case of
corruption to reform it.

M. S. his third Answer proves nothing for the persecuting, annoying, crushing,
disgracing, banishing, fining the Apologists, whom himself (more then once, or
twice) acknowledges for very Pious, Godly, and Learned men.

A. S. Neither bring I them to prove any such thing, I hope they shall prove no
false Prophets, Heretics, Schismatics, to be so dealt with. 2. Only I bring
these Passages to prove, that the Civil Magistrate may, and is bound in duty
to punish all false Prophets, Heretics and Schismatics, whoever they be. And
howbeit they could perchance find favor enough to establish themselves in one
time, by a Princes Authority, yet notwithstanding all that another, or the very
same Prince upon better information, yea, or a subsequent Parliament may, nay
ought to revoke any such favor so granted them, and to punish the Sectaries,
as those good Kings did. Whereas he says, that I acknowledge the Apologists
for Pious Persons; I Answer; Heretofore I judged so of them, by a judgment of
Charity, which believes all things; but I would pray him, and them both, under
pretext of such a charitable Judgment of mine, not to be too licentious in
broaching, or publishing of erroneous Opinions, least they make me to write
some Book of Retractations, which he, and they will certainly force me to do,
if they continue: Neither shall I be ashamed if they deceive me, but I hope
better things of them: And God forbid that they should go on upon his violent
course, rather to sufferdeath, then to change: God change his heart, and I hope
in his Mercy he shall do it.

M. S. 4. He says: Neither did any of those Kings ever compel any man to the
Jewish Religion, nor yet to profess the Jewish Religion against their
judgments.

A. S. They could not compel their heart or will, but at leastwise they
hindered them from the External Acts of idolatry, and other Religions, so far
forth as death could hinder them, as appeared from all those Texts. They could
also compel their external actions, read the members of their body to give no
offense unto the Church of God; If they could not cut off an ill will, yet
could they cut away an ill tongue.

M. S. 5. Answers. It was permitted to Persons of other Nations to live
amongst them without being Circumcised, yea or without smarting for want.

A. S. But he brings no Text of Scripture to prove, that when the Jews were
a free people, and had good Rulers, they then permitted any such uncircumcised
men to live amongst them. 2. Neither does this any thing against my Argument,
which only proves a Political Power in the Civil Magistrate, who is
Extrinsecall to the Church, whereby he might punish Idolaters, false Prophets,
and Priests, for their Idolatries, false Doctrine, and Worship. 3. If he did it
not, he sinned against the Covenant. 4. However such might live amongst them
for some time uncircumcised; yet could they not be Inhabitants, or true
Denizens without Circumcision. 5. Much less was the Religion of uncircumcised
Persons tolerated amongst them in the times of good Judges, or Kings, as
appearech by all those Texts. 6. But least of all had they power to write
Books against their Religion, as the Independents do here in face of the
Parliament, and the Assembly against ours. 7. Yea they could not so much as
take a stranger to their Wife, as we read, Ezra chap. 9. and 10. and in the
Covenant, Neh. 10. ver. 30. and 13.23, 24, 25. where it is said, that Nehemiah
smote them for such Marriages, and plucked off their hair, v. 27, 28. And Ezra,
chap. 10. made them to put away their strange Wives, and such as were borne of
them. Wherefore then may not the Christian Magistrate do as much?

M. S. 6. Answ. Nor do we ever read that ever they attempted any thing against
any Sectaries, or Schismatics (as A. S. would call them) which yet abounded in
great variety, and numbers amongst them, as Scribes, or Pharisees, or
Herodians, or Persons of any other Sect in the Profession of the Jewish
Religion, that lived peaceably in their State. Idolatry and Idolaters were, as
it seems, the adequate Object of their coercive power in matters of Religion.

A. S. Repl. But we read, that they attempted something against false Prophets,
if death be any attempt against them, as all the Texts, cited by me, show
evidently. 2. I deny your Consequence; we read it not, Ergo it was not, for we
cannot argue a testimonio negative, yea, not of Scripture, unless it be in
things necessary to salvation, such as are not Histories of particular facts.
3. The cause wherefore we read it not is, because under good Judges or Kings,
they were never tolerated: ill Kings would not punish them; but their examples
are not to be drawn in Consequence. 4. As for the Scribes, Pharisees, and
Herodians, no wonder, if they were not punished. 1. For these Sects begun very
late, not long before the coming of Christ, when the Religion was mightily
corrupted, which Christ came to reform. 2. Because the Jews were not then a
free people, neither had they the Civil Power absolutely in their own hands.
3. They had no good Rulers. 4. No more were the Sadduces punished, who denied
Gods Providence, the Resurrection of the Body, the Immortality of the Soul,
and all spiritual natures, as some testify of them; and yet they were more
punished by Gods Law, then Idolaters, since their error was greater; so should
the Herodians have been punished, since they took Herod to be the Messiah, and
that he should come again after that he had been stricken by the Angel; and
yet they were not punished. 5. The Idolaters were to be punished, and yet they
lived in profession of the Jewish Religion, for they apostatized not. It is
false, that the Idolatry was the adequate Object of their coercive power, for
they also were punished, who married strange Women, etc. It is also a mistake
in him, to think, Scribe was the name of a Sect, it is not the name of a Sect,
but of an Office, or Profession; for one man may be a Scribe, and a Pharisee; a
Scribe by his Office, and a Pharisee by his Sect; as you may see, Mat. 22.35.
Then one of them, viz. of the Pharisees, which was a Lawyer, asked him a
question: A Lawyer, i. e. a Scribe as Mark interprets it, chap. 12.28. And one
of the Scribes, whom Matthew calls one of the Pharisees. 2. Esdras also was a
Scribe, and no Pharisee. 3. It is commonly thought by Divines, that there was
three sorts of Scribes, Some about the King, which they prove from 2 Samuel 8.17.
Sariah was the Scribe, and 20.25. Sheva was Scribe, see 2 Kings 12.10. and
22.3. Others were Public Notaries, as were the Kenites, that came of Hemath,
the father of the House of Rechab, 1 Chronicles, 2.25. who had no Heritage with
the rest of the Tribes, see Ier. 32.11. where ye see an Evidence drawn up by
such a Notary, and what was the custom in drawing up of such Evidences. Others
were as it were Doctors, or Professors of the Law, whose charge was to write
the Law, and to expound it in the Temple, and in the Synagogues, wherefore they
were called (...) Lawyers, Matthew. 7.29. and 17.10. and 23.13. Mar. 12.28. Luke
7.30. and 11.46. and wise men, Ier. 8.8. 1 Cor. 1.19. None of them all were
accounted for Sectaries.

M. S. 7. Answ. P. 51. Sect. 21. Nor did they, nor were they to inflict any
outward punishment upon every kind of Idolater, though of the Jewish both
Nation and Religion; as first, not upon covetous Persons, who yet are a kind of
Idolaters: Nor secondly, upon those, who yet worshipped the true God of Israel,
though with some violation of the second Commandment, as when they sacrificed
upon the High Places, etc. But 1. Upon such only, who apostatized from the God
of Israel; and yet 2. Not upon such simply, as such, but as attempting to draw
away others of the People unto the same Idolatries with them.

A. S. 1. It is an untruth, that they punished not, or at least were not bound
to punish all Idolatry, properly so called, since we have produced you formal
examples, and Covenants to the contrary; as Exodus 32.27. Deuteronomy. 22.11.2. Neither
were they Apostates, that pleaded for Baal, and yet a sentence of death was
given against them conditionally, Judge. 6.31, or they of whom it is spoken. 1
Kings 15.12. 2 Chro. 14.4, 5.3. Neither could the small ones in the 15. chap.
ver. 13. yet be Apostates, or entice others to Idolatry: and yet in case of
Idolatry, or of not seeking the Lord, they were to dye. 4. Nor read we, that
Maachah the Kings Mother, who was punished, was an Apostate. 5. Or those that
are mentioned in Esdras, and Nehemiah. 6. Yea when the Kings, or people fell
away to Idolatry, we never find that they apostatized, for then they should
have been no more Gods people. 7. Only they joined Idolatry with the service of
the true God; yea our Divines in disputing against Papists, maintain the
Papists are Idolaters, for the adoration of Statues and Images; and that the
people of the Jews were not so mad, as to have imagined their Statues or
Images to be true Gods: only they adored God in Images and Statues, and the act
of their Adoration terminative was related to God, and not to the Image, as
that of the Papists. And as for your instance of Covetous Persons; it is
ridiculous, for covetousness is not properly Idolatry, such as the Scripture
speaks of in the Texts, which I produce; or such as is comprehended in the
second Commandment, and is against God; but improperly, since it is not
formally a breach of the First, but of the Second Table. 2. Not formally and
immediately a sin against God, but against our Neighbor. Nor is the
sacrificing upon the High Places formally, and essentially Idolatry. 1. For
Idolatry is a sin against the second Commandment, which is Iuris naturalis
and perpetui, but to sacrifice upon High Places is not formally and essentially
against any Commandment, that is Juris naturalis and perpetui. 2. But only
against a Positive, and temporal commandment of not sacrificing in the high
places; after that the Temple was built, whereunto God tied the Religious act
of sacrifice. 3. Because the Prohibitive Commandment about sacrificing upon
High Places came long after the Second Commandment about Idolatry, viz. after
that the Temple was built. Neither can M. S. bring any Text of Scripture for
what he says, viz. that only Apostates, or Idolaters, who enticed others to
Idolatry, were to be punished. 2. Howbeit they be to be punished, yet others
are not to be excluded from punishment. I pray the Reader to consider, how
tenderhearted this man is toward Idolaters and false Prophets; he pleads
for them, as if he had a will to be one of them himself: Neither in our
Religion use we the rigor of this Law, against such as are not pertinacious,
or who will repent of their sin: Our Churches desire not the death of a
sinner, but of the sin; not of the Heretic or Schismatic, but of the
Schism and Heresy. We distinguish betwixt Heresy, and Heresy; Schism, and
Schism; for some are of more, some of less dangerous consequence: Item
betwixt Heretics, and Heretics; Schismatics, and Schismatics; for some are
Ringleaders, some misled: some more, some less pertinacious and malicious,
etc. and every one of them are to be punished according to the quality of the
Heresy and Heretic, of the Schism and Schismatic. Sometimes also the
Circumstances of Times, Places, and Persons are to be considered. And we are to
do what we may, and not what we may not:

M. S. His eighth Answer (as if what he had said were only to exercise his
quick spirit, and to show how cunningly he can elude strong Arguments) is, That
there are two reasons why the Kings of Judah might be invested by God with a
larger power in matters of Religion, then Kings and Magistrates under the
Gospel: 1. Because their Kings were types of Christ, which ours are not: 2. And
their People of the spiritual Church of Christ, and their Land of the Heavenly
inheritance of that Church, which we cannot claim.

A. S. Answ. 1. To be a type of Christ, is not a sufficient ground of a
Political power over the Church, or about the Church: For 1. then the Priests,
and some Prophets, as Jonas, should have had it: Yea, Adam, Isaac, yea some
other thing, as the Tree of Life, the first born of the Flock offered in
Sacrifice by Abel, the Paschall Lamb, the brazen Serpent, all the Victimes of
the Old Testament, the Ark and the Propitiatory: for they were all types of
Christ.

2. Because it has no influence upon Civil Authority.

3. Because it could not represent any Civil authority in Christ, since his
Kingdom was not of this World.

4. It may be doubted how they were types of Christ, whether in respect of
their Civil authority over the Church, or over the State, or otherwise.

5. It may be doubted if they were all types of Christ; as Athalia, Manasseh,
Ammon, who destroyed Gods service, and the order of the Church; item, Herod,
who persecuted Christ, was sure no type of Christ, and yet was King.

6. If so, then the King of Egypt, of Syria, of the Philistims, yea the Romans,
who domineered over them, were types of Christ. At least, the Kings of Israel
were not types of Christ, since they were all apostatized from the Ceremonial
Law that ordained all the types: for a type, whether it be a thing, a person,
persons, action, effect, or event, it must signify something to come. 2. It
must signify, by Gods institution or ordinance; and therefore neither was the
Nazareate, or all the Nazarites types of Christ, as some Divines hold: 1.
Because the Nazareate was not a ceremony ordained by God, but voluntarily
vowed. 2. Because it prefigurated not Christ to come, or his benefits: and
therefore, say they, Christ drank wine, and touched the dead: only they vowed
it to bring under their flesh, and for a pious exercise.

7. Howbeit they had been types of Christ in regard of their authority about
the Church, yet will it not follow, that Christian Princes cannot have it: for
that which was typical might be taken away, and that which was political may
remain.

8. And I put the case, that the Jews had received Christ, as absolutely they
might have done, who can doubt but their Political Government might have
continued, and their Kings ruled as well the Church externally, as they did
before his coming, since Christ's Kingdom was not of this World, and that he
came not to abolish or to diminish the power of Kings, but to save their
souls: they were no ways losers by Christ's coming, but rather gainers. He
might as well have said, they had a Civil power about the Church, because they
had their noses betwixt their eyes. Many were types of Christ, that had not
this authority about the Church; and many had this authority about the Church,
who were not types of Christ: Ergo, this reason of his is false, and ridiculous.

No more were the people of the Jews types of the Christian Church, in respect
of the Civil, but of the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Government by
Church Officers, and the People subject thereunto. So also was their Land a
type of the Celestial Jerusalem, not as it contained the State, but the
Church; otherwise it should have been a type of Heaven, before that the people
of God had any right to it. And finally, types are not ordained by the
Political or Moral Law, as Magistrates, and their Authority, (at least, qua
tales) but only by the Ceremonial Law. True it is, that God may serve himself
of a thing instituted by the Moral Law to be a type, but he must make it a
type by some subsequent Ceremonial Law.

What he says against all this, p. 52..23. that good Kings never oppressed
godly persons, when they were for a while tender in conscience, it is not to
the purpose. We only say here, that they may punish Idolaters, Seducers,
Heretics, and Sectaries; who are never such, till they be sufficiently
convicted, and after that remain pertinacious: But no ways good people, under
the notion of good people, but so far forth as they do amiss: And what
reason, if he who heretofore by the judgment of Charity was thought a good
man, if he become an Heretic, or a Murderer, should not be punished according
to Law, since the Magistrate punishes him not for his good, but for his ill?

. 24. He says, that I must prove that the Kings of Judah had such a power by a
Moral law, which is of a perpetual obligation and engagement upon other
Nations.

A.S. Answ. It suffices, that I have proved it by a Political Law; and that
the same reason obliges Christian Princes, v^z. B. cause they will turn thee
from the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 13.5.10. ^^ Thus Political law is grounded upon
the fifth Commandment, which is Iuris naturalis. It must be so, since it is
grounded in natural reason. 4. And our Reasons (God willing) hereafter shall
make it appear. 5. In the mean time, take for an example Nebuchadnezzar, who,
since he was no le^^, could not do it in virtue of any Political law of the
Jews, for he was no Subject of the Kingdom of Judah: only he could do it in
virtue of the Moral, or some Political law grounded on the Moral, or the law
of Nature.

M. S. It was no more Moral, then that of the staying of the inhabitants of
the idolatrous City, and the cattle thereof, etc.

A. S. I deny it, for the one is grounded upon Natural and Divine reason, as
we have seen, and (God willing) shall see more fully by our following reasons:
but so is not the other.

P. 52, 53.. 25. Answ. 8. M. S. Answers 1. That the Kings of Judah only
exercised their power about Idolatry, and Idolaters.

A. S. I deny it: 1. For they exercised it also in beating down of the High
Places, wherein there was not Idolatry, as having been permitted before the
building of the Temple. 2. Because there is the same reason binding them, to
exercise it against the transgressions of the first Commandment, the violation
whereof is more directly against Gods Honor; for sacrificing in High Places is
but a circumstance of the second Commandment violated, but Heresy and Schism
are formal breaches of the first Commandment; the one of faith, the other of
charity therein commanded, and the false Prophet was to be put to death. 2. In
the same Section he says, that it was the generality of the Church, or Nation
of the Jews, and not their Kings that was invested with it by God, Deuteronomy. 13.
and 7.5. and 12.2, 3.

A. S. Here is Anabaptisme in devesting the Magistrate of his Power, and
vesting the people with it. What? had every one the power of the Sword amongst
the people of the Jews? 2. Was their Government Democraticall? or rather
Anarchicall? Had women, children, and servants this Power? I grant you that in
virtue of the Law, and their Covenant, they had all an hand in in the matter;
but not absolutely, but every man according to his Vocation: the King and
Magistrate, as Judges, but the people only to execute according to their
Commands. Neither is it credible, that when a false Prophet, or an Idolater was
to be punished, every one of the people was to judge him at his pleasure, or to
stone him to death. Neither contain these Passages, that you cite any such
thing, and therefore you did very cunningly not to quote the words themselves,
whereupon you ground this conclusion. And is this all the power and respect you
give to the Parliament, and Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical matters, even
no more then to the meanest of the people? Truly they are much beholden to you
for your great liberality: And if so, ride on in despite of King and Parliament
to your beloved Conventicles. Neither can I find in these passages, Deuteronomy. 7.5.
and 12.2, 3. or Deuteronomy. 13. any such thing, viz. that it was the generality of
the Church, or Nation of the Jews, that were invested with it; for God never
invested the confused multitude in any judicial, or authoritative power.

CHAP. V. Wherein the same Conclusion is further proved by Reasons.
NOw after these Testimonies out of Holy Writ, I bring these Reasons following,
grounded upon it: and 1. That power which the Civil Magitrate had in the old
Testament, and is not abrogated in the New may yet continue in the New, or the
Civil Magistrate may have it in the New.

But the power to punish Heretics, and Schismatics is a Power, which the
Civil Magistrate had in the Old Testament and is not abrogated in the New
Testament. Ergo the power to punish Heretics, and Schismatics, is a such a
Power he may Civil Magistrate may have in the New, and so in virtue of Power,
which the punish them.

The Major is certain, for there is no other true way to make it not to
continue, but only the abrogation: As for the Minor, the first part of it is
certain, as appears by the Texts of Scripture already alleged. The second
Part may easily be proved, because only the Ceremonial Law, which contained
the shadow of things to come, was abrogated in the New Testament. The Moral
Law was not abrogated so far forth as it is a Rule of obedience, nor as it
binds us thereunto: No more is the Political Law in quality of Political;
for by the same reason Christ should have over-thrown and abrogated all the
Political Laws, and policies of the world. But that is false, for Christ's
Kingdom was not of this world; and he submits himself unto the Political
Law of the Jews, yea unto that of the Romans also, established amongst the
Jews: So did Paul and the Apostles, who pleaded their causes before Heathen
Magistrates; I appeal unto Caesar, says Paul, Non auferet mortalia, qui regna
dat Coelestia.

2. Yea, if the Jews had received Christ for their Messiah, I doubt not but
the Political Law of Moses, in quality of Political, should have continued
amongst them, and the Civil Magistrate amongst them should have punished
Heretics, Schismatics, Idolaters, etc. in the New Testament, as they did in
the Old. Neither is there any reason, wherefore Christ, or his Apostles should
have hindered him by his Political power to maintain the Christian Religion in
the New Testament, as before he did in the Old.

3. And it may be further confirmed, because the greater the favors be, that
the Civil Magistrate has received of God in the New Testament then in the
Old; so much the greater obligation is laid upon him by his Power, to maintain
Gods Cause, and Religion.

4. And the holier our Covenant is, and the further it surpasses the Old, so
much the greater should the Civil Magistrates care be, to maintain it by his
Civil Power.

5. If it were not so, the State of the Church in regard of the Civil
Magistrate should be worse in the New, then in the Old Testament; for then he
maintained it by his Civil Power, and by the sword; and now he does it not,
nor yet has the power to do it.

6. Is not this plain Anabaptisme, to approve the authority of the Civil
Magistrate in the Old Testament, and to reject it in the New; for as the
Anabaptists reject it wholly in the New Testament, so do the Independents in
part, yea in a great part, viz. in that, which concerns the defense of the
Church in punishing Heretics, Schismatics, Idolaters, etc.

7. He who should be a Nurse, and a Tutor of the Church in the New Testament,
should defend her by all his power: But Kings and Princes, and good Magistrates
should be such, as we may see in all the Examples heretofore alleged, and in
Pharaoh, and Esaias 1.49.22. where it is promised that Kings shall be Nurses of
the Church.

8. What if foreign Princes would invade the Church of God? may not godly
Princes in such a case justly defend it, and repress them by the sword?
wherefore then may they not do the like to their own Subjects, who will
trouble her peace, and by so doing compel them to their duty?

9. Does not the Civil Magistrate this in New England? wherefore then may he
not do it in Old England, unless forsooth the Majestaticall presence of five
or six Independent Ministers here be capable to dazzle, and discountenance him
here, whereas they receive all their luster and influence from him there, or
that as Monks and Friars ye plead pro immunitate Clericorum, or that the
ridiculous thunderbolts of Master Goodwins pretended Judgments of God, be
capeable to dash it all in pieces here?

10. If the Civil Magistrate have not a sufficient Power to punish Idolaters,
Heretics, and Schismatics for Religion, then all the Roman Laws in the Code
made against Heretics, and those of this Kingdom made against Jesuits,
Monks, and Priests, must be unjust; yea the Judgments given out against them
since this Parliament begun are unjust; and if so, you would do well to tell
them of it: If we believe these American Christians, the Parliaments Laws are
little less then tyrannical.

11. That for which all Princes are commended in Scripture, that all good
Princes should do; and for which they are discommended, that should they not
do. But for punishing of Idolaters, Schismatics, Heretics, etc. all Princes
that did so in Scripture are commended, and for sparing of them are
discommended. Ergo all good Princes should punish Heretics, etc. and not spare
them. The Major is certain, the Minor is sufficiently proved by the Examples
of all the good Kings of Juda, and of Iehu.

12. They are bound to punish all such, as trouble the peace of the State, Ergo
they are likewise bound to punish such as trouble the peace of the Church, for
who ever troubles the peace of the Christian Church, troubles also the peace
of the State, when the State is Christian.

13. If the Civil Magistrate be not bound by his Office to punish Heretics,
Schismatics, etc. he is bound to tolerate them all; and so to tolerate all
Independents, all Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, Socinians, etc. yea some,
who deny the Immortality of the Soul, that hold a general Resurrection of all
Beasts, as well as of men; yea of all, that ever have been since the Creation
of the world, or shall be to the day of Judgment: peradventure of Lice, Flies,
Worms, etc. and so he shall do well to License the Books of such subjects,
till Master Goodwin, alias M. S. resute them; for he finds no other remedy in
Gods Word, but to refute such Books. If we believe this new Gospeller, ye
shall have in a short time as many Religions as days, yea as hours in a
year: yea without all doubt, I tremble to say it, (the Lord preserve us from
it) as many Gods as ever the Greakes, and Remans had. Wherefore in the name of
God take heed, ye all most Honorable Worthies of the two Houses of
Parliament, to this most damnable Tenet.

14. Princes, Kings, and Judges in Scripture are called Deliverers, or Saviors
of the people, because they defend the Church from her Oppressors, Judge. 2.16.
such as be Heretics, Schismatics, etc. If therefore ye be our Judges, most
Honorable, and worthy Senators, it is your part to defend Gods people, the
Religion, which he has established in his Word, and to destroy Oppressors, and
the Enemies thereof; I mean not their Bodies, but their Oppressions, their
Heresies and Schisms.

15. Masters have power to put Heretics and Schismatics out of their houses,
in case they be pertinacious; Ergo Princes and Magistrates have the same power
in the State, for there is the same reason for both, viz. not to suffer God to
be offended so far forth as in us lies.

16. What power is juris naturalis, is to be exercised in all times and places
according to our power: But the power to punish Heretics, etc. is Iuris
naturalis, Erge it is to be exercised in all times, and places. The first
Proposition is certain; for that which is juris naturalis changes not, but is
the same in all times and places, because it is not grounded in any inconstant
or voluntary institution of our will, but in the immutable ordinance of Nature,
which dictates the same thing to all Persons, in all times, and in all places.
The second I prove, because it is a Dictate of the Law of Nature, that such, as
trouble the true Religion, are to be punished; and Moses gives you a natural
reason of it, viz. for they will turn thy heart away from the Lord thy God,
Deuteronomy. 7.4. and 13.5. the reason will be thus: who ever in all Moral
probability will turn the peoples heart away from God, it is the Civil
Magistrates duty to punish him. But Heretics, etc. are such, Ergo it is the
Civil Magistrates duty to punish them; it is Moses argument.

17. If the Civil Magistrate punish not Heretics, he should become a partaker
of other men's sins, because he hinders them not, so far forth as in him
lies by his Civil Power, viz. in punishing them: neither carries he the
sword in vain; neither can it be better employed then in punishing
pertinacious sinners, such as are Heretics and Schismatics: But he should not
become a partaker of other men's sins, as the light of Nature, and Scripture
teaches us, 1 Timothy 5.22.

18. If he punish not Heretics, then every man in the Kingdom shall have
power to mould himself a new Religion, according to his own heart, as the
Israelites did their golden Calfe, and do what should seem right in his own
eyes. But the Consequent is absurd, Deuteronomy. 13.8. Neither was it permitted
amongst the Heathens themselves, that any man should bring in new Gods, or new
Religions, by their own private authority. We read how the Athenians sentenced
Diagoras, Anaxagoras, and Socrates for their new Opinions in matter of
Religion; and Philastrius tells us, how the Audiani were condemned for
Heretics, because that they commended all Sects and Heresies; why not also the
Independents, for commending and defending the toleration of them all?

19. Because we pray to God for Kings, and for all that be in Authority; that
we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy
2.2. By their conversion to Christ, v. 3, 4, 5. to the end, that being
converted, they may defend Religion, in punishing Heretics and Schismatics,
and so in repressing of Schism and Heresy.

20. Because in a State wherein all men profess the truth, the peace of the
State cannot be otherwise preserved; nor the safety of the Kingdom, which is
the ultimate end of the Civil Magistrate, qua talis, and the supreme Law of
the Republike be obtained: for how shall peace, safety, and unity be procured
amongst Orthodox Subjects, but by unity in Truth? and how can the bond of unity
be any ways so soon, and so easily broken, as by diversity of Religions? And
this the Ecclesiastical History fully shows us: for what miseries cannot
these Schisms breed; when the Husband is of one Religion, and the wife of
another; the Father of one, and the Son of another; Brethren and Sisters of
diverse Religions; the King of one, and the Subjects of another? How many
Families has it dissolved? how many Cities has it destroyed? Have we not
Examples fresh and bleeding before us in Ireland, etc? It has cost some Kings
their Crowns, some their lives, and endangered others of their life and
Kingdom both. Yea, what is one of the principal causes of our present
divisions betwixt the King and the Subjects? Is not Arminianisme, Socinianisme,
the Archiepiscopall (I know not what) Religion? Some call it Popery, some
Socinianisme, others Arminianisme, others Lutheranisme, others some mixture of
Religion, not much unlike to Samaritanisme. But be it what it will; diversity
of Religion, and not punishing of Heretics and Schismatics, is the principal
cause of all these our miseries and confusions.

21. The Civil Magistrate is to punish such as marry with those of a contrary
Religion, and that because they are of contrary Religions, as appears by the
texts of Scripture already alleged, [ Deuteronomy. 7.2.3.] How much more those, who
are of contrary Religions? nam propter quod unumquodque tale, id magis tale:
for it is a greater sin to be an Idolater, or an Heretic, then to be married
to them.

22. Those, with whom we cannot enter into Covenant, cannot be tolerated among
us, but must be at least exiled by the Civil Magistrate: for, to live amongst
us, they must, at least, enter into Covenant with us for an offensive and
defensive war against foreign Enemies:

But with Idolaters, Heretics, etc. we cannot enter into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 7.2.
so Esdras and Nehemiah above quoted: Ergo,

23. Because God has promised to destroy our Enemies, if we destroy his:
wherefore, rather then God should not destroy ours, were it not policy to
labor the destruction of his?

24. The man who will not hearken to the Ministers of the Church, and the
Civil Magistrate, the Civil Magistrate must punish him. But Heretics and
Schismatics are the men, who will not hearken unto the Ministers of the
Church, and to the Civil Magistrate; Ergo, the Civil Magistrate must punish
them. The first Proposition is clear: The man that will do presumptuously,
and will not hearken unto the Priest, or unto the Judge, even that man shall
dye, Deuteronomy. 12.12. Neither know I what can be answered, save only, that that
must be understood of the Priest of the Old Testament. But there is the same
reason for the Ministers of the New Testament, viz. 1. The taking away of
evil, the conservation of order and unity, and to avoid Schism. 2. Neither
did Christ by his death obtain for us an immunity from all obedience, or an
independent licentiousness to do ill. 3. And this is the Holy Ghosts reason
in that same place: And thou shall put away the evil from Israel: And all the
people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously, ver. 12.13.
which obliges us as well unto obedience under the New Testament, as those of
the Old Testament.

25. So we have an Example of Corah, Dathan, Abiram, and On, who were
Independents, and for their independency, and not subjection unto the
authoritative power of Moses and Aaron, were severely punished by Moses, and
perished miserably.

We might bring many reasons of the Holy Ghost himself, wherefore the Civil
Magistrate must punish Idolaters, false Prophets, or Heretics, etc.

26. Because Gods people is an holy people to the Lord.

27. Because they know that God is faithful, and keeps his Covenant, Deuteronomy.
7. and 13. Neither can any man blame such Arguments, but those who will blame
the Holy Ghost his Arguments; for they are not mine, but His.

CHAP. VI. Wherein are answered M.S. his Reasons, that he has, Chap. 1. And
first the first six.
NOw I will propound M.S. his Objections, whereof many conclude, that this
Intrinsecall power not only does belong to the Civil Magistrate, but also to
all the members of the Church.

M.S. then, p. 33.. 2. argues, 1. thus: By such an umpirage and decision as
this, between the Civil Magistrate, and himself, viz. A.S. with his fellow
Presbyters, has he not made the one Judex, and the other Carnifex: the one, i.
e. the Civil Magistrate, must give the sentence; the other must do execution.

Answ. A.S. 1. There is no decision at all between the Civil Magistrate, and
A. S. for A. S. is but a private man, neither Magistrate, nor Church Officer.
2. Neither are the Presbyters his fellow-Presbyters, since he is no Presbyter:
These then, in the beginning, are manifest untruths. 3. Neither can this
decision in granting an Intrinsecall power, both directive and executive, to
the Church; and an Extrinsecall to the Civil Magistrate, (viz. which is
extrinsecall in respect of Ecclesiastical power, but intrinsecall to Civil
power) make the Church or Ecclesiastical Assembly a Judge, and the Parliament
or Civil Magistrate a Hangman (to remember his most humble respects unto the
King, Parliament, and all the Judges of this Kingdom) For the Ecclesiastical
Assemblies (as it is the common opinion of all our Divines) cannot judge of the
Civil Magistrate his duty. 2. Neither have they ever been so foolish, as M. S.
most passionately and impudently calumniateth them here, to command him any
thing. 3. They acknowledge most willingly, that the Church, being materially a
part of the State, is subject to Civil Government. 4. That the Church, which
is the Kingdom of Christ, has no Civil power, since it is not of this World,
Joh. 18.26. 5. That the Civil Magistrate commanding and compelling such as be
refractory and disobedient to the Church, must not see with the Churches eyes,
but with his own Civil or Political eyes. 6. And that in so doing he obeys
not the Church, or any Ecclesiastical power, but God, whose power he
exercises in the State, as the Ecclesiastical Assemblies do exercise Christ's
power in the Church. 7. Yea more, that sometimes the Civil Magistrate may not
punish those who are disobedient to the Church, viz. if thereupon may follow
the undoing of the State, etc. 8. For the same reason, it is most untrue, that
the one gives out the sentence, and the other must do execution. 9. And
moreover, because they are two several Iudicatories, they are both independent
one upon another, howsoever both diverse ways subject one to another: for the
Civil Magistrate is subject in a spiritual way to the Church; He must learn
Gods will by the Ministers of the Church, who are Gods Ambassadors, sent unto
him: He must be subject unto Ecclesiastical Censures, as we see by the
Examples of the Kings in the Old Testament, and Theodosius the Emperor in the
New. So the Church again is subject not in a Spiritual, but in a Civil way,
to the Government of the Civil Magistrate, as all Protestants, and Ministers
themselves confess, and plead for it against the Roman Clergy, in favor of
the Civil Magistrate. 10. The Civil Magistrate has power, not to receive
into the State all that which the Church judges fitting: He may irresistably
hinder it, if he will. 11. If he be Carnifex, because that he commands it to be
put in execution, he should be Carnifex, when ever he should command his own
judgments to be put in execution 12. So should Independents be Carnifices,
when either the Civil Magistrate or the Church commands them to do their
duty. 13. The Carnifex or Executioner pronounces not a sentence as the
Magistrate.

M. S. Obj. 2. page 33. The Civil Magistrate is much beholding to the
Presbyter, for giving him a Consecrated sword to fight the Presbiterian
battles; and for persuading of him to pull out his own eyes, upon this
presumption, that he shall see better with his.

A. S. As able as this man is in jeering, and calumniating, as unable is he in
arguing against this truth, especially if he have no better arguments in his
Budget by way of Reserve, then what he brings here, all he says is utterly
false. 1. The Presbyterians have none but spiritual battles to fight; 2 Cor.
10.3, 4. the weapons of their warfare are not carnal. 2. They do not war
after the flesh; neither wrestle they against flesh and blood, but against the
Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in High
Places; their sword is the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.12. And therefore they
cannot, nor pretend they to give him this spiritual sword; they cannot quit
it: much less can they give him the material sword which is none of theirs to
give, for he has it of God; he is the Minister of God, Romans 13.4. avenger, to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. 2. It is false, that the Presbyterians
persuade him to pull out his own eyes, or to see with theirs. 1. For they
teach him to learn the Gospel, by reading the Word, and hearing it Preached
by the Ministers thereof, according to Gods Word, and not by every Cobbler, as
amongst Independents in exercising their gifts. 2. And afterward to see and
judge by his own eyes. 3. They say and Preach that it is a great sin in him,
if he judge with any other then his own eyes. 4. He must judge according to
the Laws of the State; otherwise he does not the part of a Judge. 5. Yea if
his judgment dissent from the judgment of the Law, we know well enough he
ought to quit both his own judgment, and that of the Church, and to judge
against his own private conscience according to the Law, and his public
conscience which he is bound to have, as a public person, conform to Law; for
he sits not upon the Tribunal as a private, but as a public Person, not as
James or Charles, but as King James, or King Charles. So in this there is no
policy, as this malignant spirit calumniateth. I omit here his deep policy in
comparing the Civil Magistrate, 1. King, Parliament, etc. with a Dog. 2. And
the Presbytery with an Ape: whether this be not profanation, and impiety at
least, and that in a pretty high degree, I submit to the judgment of those
whom it so nearely concerns, if they be Apes I wonder you will call them
Brethren. What brother Ape, and so Apes your selves, according to your Tenet:
so let the Conclusion hold for you; but we deny the Antecedent, in so far forth
as applied to Presbyterians.

M. S. Obj. 3. Surely the frame and constitution of Presbytery is exactly
calculated for the Meridian of this present World: And indeed A. S. himself is
somewhat ingenuous, in acknowledging, that this Government has little or no
relation unto, or compliance with the World, which is to come; professing, p.
13. the external peace of the Church to be the adequate end thereof. The
Argument will be thus:

That Government, whose adequate end is the external peace of the Church, has
no compliance with the world to come, but is calculated for the Meridian of
this world:

But Presbyterian Government is a Government, whose adequate end is the
External peace of the Church, as A. S. confesses, p. 13. Ergo: The
Presbyterian Government has no compliance, etc.

A.S. To be short here; Note, when I say, that the peace of the Church is the
adequate end of Church Government; 1. That by the Church Government, I mean
not the Church, according to her essential, but to her accidental or visible
form: 2. And consequently, that by Government I mean not the internal
Government, which belongs to her, in respect of her essential, but the
external, which belongs to her, by reason of her accidental or visible
form: the first is proper to Christ, or God in Christ, who only has a
domination over our souls. But the second he exercises by the Ministry of
men. 3. That by the peace of the Church, I mean not a worldly, but a
spiritual peace or quietness, void of Ecclesiastical trouble, by corruption
of Doctrine, Discipline, or manners; for in the midst of wordly troubles and
persecutions, this peace may be had; neither can there one word of all this be
denied, since our dispute here is only about the visible Church. 4. That by the
word end I meant not, 1. Finem ultimum simpliciter, sed in suo genere, i. e.
not the ultimate end absolutely, but in its own kind; nor 2. Finem operantis
Artificis, or operis; but Artis and Operationis; not the end of the Agent, of
the Artist, or of his work; but of the Art or Habitude, whereby he operateth,
and of his Operation. Nor 3. the external end of Government, such as is the
World to come, or eternal life; but the internal end, which is her peace and
quietness; which however it be an external accident of the Churches Essence,
yet it is the intrinsecall end of her external Government. Nor, 4. the common
end of Government, which is the end of other things also, as, the World to
come; which is the end of our Faith, Charity, of all Christian virtues, of
Discipline and Government also, but the proper and particular end thereof. 5.
Non finem obtinendum solum, but, producendum. And I could not, nor should have
taken it otherwise, as this man most impertinently would have me to do: for
things are defined, notified, and distinguished by their internal, proper,
ultimate ends in suo genere, and that are to be wrought; and not by their
extrinsecall, common, absolutely ultimate ends, etc. as the Philosophers do
teach us.

So I answer, that the Proposition is false; for Church Government may have the
External peace of the Church for its adequate, Intrinsecall, proper, ultimate
end, in sno genere, and for the end of Government and Discipline, which is
finis producendus; And the World to come, for its Extrinsecall, common,
absolutely ultimate end; for the end that is to be obtained, and end of the
Agent, and of his work.

And if it be objected, that the adequate end of Church Government should
contain in it self all its ends, and consequently the life to come. I answer,
that that is most false, for it contains only its partial ends. 2. If it be
the Internal end, it contains not the External end thereof: If it be the
proper end, it cannot contain the common end, but the common end contains
it: neither is it needful that it contain the mediate and ultimate ends, or
the ultimate absolutely, and the ultimate in its own kind or sort; for only it
contains in it the partial ends, such as are not subordinate, as the mediate
and ultimate end, or as the ultimate absolutely, and in its own kind or sort:
And the reason of it is this; because, as parts and compartes, so partial
ends are coordinate and opposed one to another, and not subordinate, as the
mediate and ultimate end, or as the ultimate absolutely, and in its own kind,
as the External peace of the Church, and the World to come.

Object. 4. The sum of M.S. his discourse, p. 33.. 5. and p. 34. comes to
this; If the civil Magistrate has not a Directive power in the Church, but
the Church Assemblies have it alone; then the Church-Assembly must have the
gift of Infallibility.

A.S. This is a Papisticall Argument, whereby the Jesuits prove, that the
Romish Church cannot err: But I answer him, and Papists both.

Ans. 1. I deny this connexum: for a Directive power may be, where there is no
infallibility. 2. The Independents arrogate to their Congregationall Churches
and Presbyteries, a Directive power, without any gift of infallibility. 3. They
grant a Directive power unto the Civil Magistrate, whom they grant to be
fallible. 4. And howbeit the Civil Magistrate be fallible, yet they will not
grant, that the Presbytery may, or should judge over him; no more can the
Civil Magistrate judge over the Presbytery, however it be fallible. 5. For by
the same reason, any man might judge them both, since they are both fallible.
6. Howbeit any Judge, either Secular or Ecclesiastical, be fallible, yet must
they be obeyed, till judicially they be convicted of error; otherwise
controversies should never be ended, since we have no infallible Judge or
Judgment in this life, unless God extraordinarily should reveal it to us.

Object. 5. After such stuff, as we have seen, M. S. p. 34.. 2. guesses what I
mean by a Directive power, and brings three acceptions of it, but all short of
what I mean: The first is, that it may signify a liberty or power of
considering, advising, and proposing of what may be expedient to be done in
matters of Religion, and for the good of the Church, which he would have to
belong to the Parliament, and all others. 2. An Authoritative power, to
conclude, say, and set down what shall, must, or ought to be done (against all
contradiction) in matters of Religion: and this he grants to God alone; and
adds; If the Presbyterians demand such a Directive power, let them ask the
Crown, Throne, and Kingdom of Christ also. To this, A. S. says, that all men
may grant it to be true, if they claimed any sovereign, Royal authoritative
power: But if they claim only a Ministerial power, it is as great a sacrilege
to deny them it, as blasphemy in them to arrogate the other, since they are
Gods Ministers and Ambassadors for Christ. 3. A prudentiall faculty or ability
to direct, order, or prescribe, whether to a man's self, or to others, what in
a way of reason, humane conjecture, or probability, is best and fittest to be
done, followed, or embraced in matters of Religion: and this he grants to the
Parliament, to many private Members of particular Churches, and to Presbyteries
and Synods also, howsoever with a restriction.

But in all these his Conjectures, he has no ways guessed at my mind: for by
a Directive power, however I mean a prudentiall Prudence, yet mean I not a
private prudentiall Prudence, which may be found in Midwives, Maidservants, and
VVater-men; for in granting such a Power to the Parliament and Ecclesiastical
Senates, he grants them no more, then to the meanest of the people; but I mean
an authoritative public, and Ecclesiastical prudentiall power, not Sovereign,
Imperial, Royal, or Despoticall, or Magisteriall; but Ministerial, such as
may belong to Ministers, and Ambassadors of Christ: And as I have said, it is
not (...) or (...) whereof Aristotle speaks in the Category of Quality, but
(...), no natural power, no natural or supernatural Habitude; but Potestas
or Moral Power depending upon will, and not upon Nature, or that is the work
of will, and not of Nature.

CHAP. VII. Wherein are dissolved his 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Reasons borrowed
from the Parliaments Ordinance.
Ob. 6. AFter all his guessing, so little to purpose, p. 35.. 6. he
endeavors to prove by the Ordinance of the Parliament for the calling of the
Assembly, that the Civil Magistrate does claim, yea and exercise, act, and
make use of such an authority from day to day, as occasion requires; Because
the Parliament published their Ordinance for calling the Assembly.

A. S. Ansvv. I deny the consequence, for that contrivance and publishing of
their Ordinance, is not a directive power, intrinsecall to the Church, whereof
we speak, for neither directs it them intrinsecally in Doctrine, Discipline or
manners, but extrinsecally; 1. because the Ecclesiastical Assembly may be, and
has sundry times been convocated without it, as in the Primitive Church. 2.
Because it was before ever the Synod began, and without any Ecclesiastical
act: Now what is before a Synod begins, and without any Ecclesiastical Act
cannot be intrinsecall to the Synod, or to the Church. 3. Because the Directive
power, whereof I speak, was in Judging of Controversies of Religion, etc. but
the publishing of an Ordinance for calling the Assembly, is no such thing.
Ergo, 4. Because that calling of the Assembly by Civil Authority alone, was
extraordinary, howbeit very just and conform unto Gods Word. Neither could
this be an Ecclesiastical Assembly, unless it were vertually called by the
Church Officers in virtue of their subsequent consent thereunto: and all these
Answers must be taken conjunctly, and not severally. 5. Because this Assembly
is not Ecclesiastical in virtue of the Ordinance of the Parliament, but of the
virtuall consent of the Church. The vertuall indiction of it by Church
Authority, contributeth to make it intrinsecally Ecclesiastical: But the
Ordinance of the Parliament is extrinsecall unto it, in so far forth as
Ecclesiastical, howsoever it be very just and necessary: but it is
intrinsecall to it accidentally, and in so far as is to be received in the
State, which absolutely is extrinsecall to the Church.

Ob. M. S. In limiting those, that were to be of the Assembly, to the subject
or Argument, on which it was permitted them to debate; they did no less, i. e.
they exercised a directive power.

A. S. Answ. 1. But this is no intrinsecall directive power, whereof I speak,
viz. in Teaching, Preaching, judgeing of Controversies of Religion, etc. 2.
This was no Ecclesiastical, but a Civil Power. 3. In so doing, the Parliament
judged not what was to be believed or practiced in the Church, but ordained
them to judge, which is the true intrinsecall, directive power. 4. And this was
extraordinary in respect of Gods particular, howbeit not in respect of his
general Providence in the Government of his Church.

M. S. Ob. 8. In appointing and ordering them not to determine or conclude of
things, as they pleased, by Pluralities of Votes, but to deliver their Opinions
and advices as should be most agreeable to the Word of God (another proviso in
the Ordinance) they did the same.

A.S. 1. M.S. would here seem to give some great power unto the Parliament in
matters of Religion, and yet it is nothing else, but that, which he grants to
too many private Members of particular Churches. So that if the King and
Parliament will become Members of this M. S. his Church, and He please to admit
them, it may be, that he will grant them as much power, as to other private
Members thereof. 2. Note, that he says not, that it belongs unto them, but,
that they claim it, exercise, act, and make use of it; but quo jure, quave
injuria, he tells not. 3. In all this there appears no intrinsecall, or
Ecclesiastical Power, they did it not by a Spiritual, but by a Secular Power.
4. And if the Church had not a Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Power to
determine; and to conclude, what needed the Parliament to forbid it the Synod,
rather then ordinary Tradesmen, who have no such power to determine such
matters. 5. Neither by this command is it the Parliaments mind, as I believe,
to take away from the Church the directive and intrinsecall Power, that God
has granted her, but only to desire her to put off her Determinations, till it
see how far it can prevail by fair means to gain pertinacious men, who
may oppo^e it; and happily also till it receive full satisfaction it self,
before it confirm such Determinations by an Act of Parliament, and so make
them to be received by their authority in the State; for the Parliament has no
less Civil and Secular Authority to receive, or not receive it by a Civil
Law into the state, then any Synod has spiritual authority to establish, or
not establish it by an Ecclesiastical Law in the Church. Wherefore in this the
Parliament intended not to cross the Church Government, nor to be crossed in
their Civil Government by the Church, as in former times, but to live
together, as Moses and Aaron, both looking to one end, but each one of them
with their own eyes, the one with a Political, the other with a Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical eye. And this appears by those words of the Ordinance, during
this present Parliament, or until further order be taken. Now, if this Order
were full, what needed the Synod attend for a further Order? Neither is there
any man of judgment, that can blame the Parliament in all this, yea howbeit it
should extraordinarily do more in this extraordinarily miserable estate of
Religion, when now Satan has so manifest and palpable an entrance into the
Church of God, under so many ill-portending shapes, as of Independents,
Brownists, Anabaptists, Socinians, etc. they had need take upon them, for the
defense of the Church, more then in ordinary cases they do. 7. Only I add a
word, viz. that these words (as they pleased by plurality of Votes) are not in
the Ordinance, but are an addition of M. S. in contempt of the Synod, as if the
Members thereof voted not according to Scripture, but as pleased themselves.
And 8. that in case of difference in Opinion, it is not ordained, that they
represent their Opinions, and the reasons thereof, to either or both the
Houses, to the end that they may judge of the matter, but that they may find
out some further direction, whereby the Assembly may judge it. 9. Yea there is
another Ordinance since the printed Ordinance, whereby it is ordained, that all
things agreed upon and prepared for the Parliament should be openly read, and
allowed in the Assembly, and then offered, as the judgment of the Assembly, if
the Major part consent: see how the judgment of the Major part of the Assembly
is here declared by the Parliament, to be acknowledged, as the Decision of the
Assembly, which M. S. will not stand unto.

Object. 9. In enjoining them, in case of difference of opinions between them,
to present the same, together with the reasons thereof, to both Houses; they
did every whit as much.

A.S. Answ. 1. I deny that they who enjoyne, in case of difference, etc. have
an Internal power in the Church, much less an internal Directive power. 2.
This injunctio^ was not in reference to the Intrinsecal power of the Church,
which is evermore within the Church; but to the Extrinsecall power about the
Church, i.e. to that of the Magistrate, whose power is without the Church,
howsoever within the State; and in so far forth as the Parliament, by Civil
Law, intended to approve and confirm the Ecclesiastical Law. 3. Item, it was
to see, if by any means and ways of meekness, it could persuade a few men of
your Sect to submit themselves unto the Order and Government that God has
established in his Church; as they have done you many other favors, which you
too much undervalue, arguing from this favor, as from a Law, to that which is,
or should be ordinary Justice. And yet they ordained, that what is carried by
plurality of Votes in the Assembly, should pass as the judgment of the whole
Assembly.

Object. 10. M.S. In their nominating and calling such and such Ministers, and
not others, to be of the Assembly, they acted the same power.

A.S. Answ. That is also Extrinsecall, since it was not in, but out of, and
before the Assembly. 2. And extraordinary. 3. And yet very ordinate and
ordinary for this extraordinary state of the Church in this Kingdom, when such
a swarm of Sects are crept in; some coming from New England, others from the
Netherlands, and others from other places: For, if every one of them should
have had entry into the Assembly, what should have become of us? 4. Neither
does this prove any Directive power in the Church, in teaching, etc. (as I
said) that should belong unto the Magistrate.

M.S. Ob. 11. In framing the temper and constitution of the Assembly, allaying
it with such and such Members of their own, they steered the same course.

A.S. Answ. 1. This cannot conclude any Directive, Ecclesiastical power that
belongs unto the Parliament. 2. These Members of their own, who did sit in
the Assembly, if they had any Vote, did not sit there in quality of Members of
the Assembly; for then every Member of the Parliament might have sat there:
but in quality of extraordinary Ecclesiastical persons, according to this
extraordinary state and exigence of the Church. 3. If they had no Vote at all,
and yet sat, they were not Members of the Assembly, but this was a special
privilege granted unto the Members of the House, which in other places
likewise is granted unto persons of meaner rank, yea unto Strangers, as we may
see in the Church of Scotland, in their General Assemblies. 4. Or rather they
sit there in name of the Parliament, to procure by their Civil power, the
External order that should be in such Assemblies: But this is no
Ecclesiastical or Internal power in the Church, but External about the
Church, such as the French Kings Commissioners (who are sometimes Papists) have
in our Protestant National Synods in France, and yet are not Members of our
Synods there, neither Vote they, neither pretend they to have any Intrinsecall
power there; for then they should profess themselves thereby to be
Protestants; only they have power to oppose things, that they believe to be
prejudicial to the King or the State. 5. Neither believe I, that they vote in
points of Doctrine. 6. And if they vote in matter of Government, they do it in
quality of Ruling Elders, either extraordinary or ordinary, in virtue of some
virtuall election made by the Synod, or by the Synods toleration, or
approbation; for no man can rule the Church intrinsecally, but he that is
intrinsecally a Church-Ruler or Officer, as I have proved it heretofore.

M.S. Object. 12. Lastly, in their messages or Directions sent unto them from
time to time, how to proceed, what particulars to wave for the present, what to
fall upon, and debate, To hasten the issue of their Consultations; with the
like: What do they else, but claim and exercise such a Directive power in
matters of Religion?

A.S. Answ. To proceed, to wave particulars, to debate things, and consult of
them in the Assembly, argues an intrinsecall directive power, proper unto the
Church: but to send Messages, proves it not at all to be in the Parliament,
but in the Church; and that the Magistrate, by his Civil power, can command
the Church to use its Ecclesiastical power. 2. For the Magistrate may command
the like thing to every Guild or Common Hall in the City, touching their own
professions: Neither can it thereupon be inferred, that he has an Intrinsecall
Directive power in such Trades.

CHAP. VIII Wherein are answered his 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Arguments.
M.S. p. 37.. 1. Ob. 13. BUt if the Parliament have no calling from God, to
judge of matters between the Apologists, and their Brethren (the Assemblers) I
would willingly know who has?

A.S. Answ. The Parliament has power, and a calling to judge Politice about
the Church and Church matters; What Decisions and Constitutions of the Church
Assemblies, they will approve, or disapprove; what Religion, Doctrine, and
Discipline they will admit or tolerate in the State: But they have no calling,
or Directive Authoritative power in the Church, to judge this or that to be the
true Doctrine or Discipline: this belongs to Church Officers: Yet they have a
private judgment of Discretion about such matters, as other Christians; and a
public Political Authoritative judgment, and a coactive Political power,
to compel the Subjects to admit in the State such or such a true Doctrine or
Discipline of the Church, howbeit not to believe it, or to love or approve it
in their judgment or will.

M. S. Ob. 14. asks, Whether it be reasonable, that the Apologists matters
yet remaining undecided and unjudged between them and their Brethren, should
suffer as men convicted, only because their Adversaries and Accusers (the
Brethren ye know of) are more in number then they, and will needs continue
Adversaries to them?

A.S. Answ. 1. Though ye vaunt evermore of your sufferings, we have never seen
them. 2. These, whom ye unjustly call your Adversaries, have suffered much more
then you, and yet publish it not unto the World. 3. It is absolutely false,
that ye suffer. 4. And yet much falser, that ye suffer as men convicted. 5. And
yet falser, that ye suffer, because your Adversaries are more in number. And 6.
falsest of all, that only ye suffer for that. 7. Men that suffer are not
honored, as ye are, neither receive they so great favors, Presents, and
Benefices, as ye do. 8. It is a great sufferance to the Church of God, to be
calumniated and upbraided by so contemptible a number of Ministers, and to see
so many Libels printed against her by those of your Sect. 9. It is false, that
ye are not condemned: for the Church of England, and all other Protestant
Churches, in approving the Presbyterian Government, as we said heretofore,
could not but disprove and condemn you all, who condemn it. 10. Neither does
all this prove a Directive Ecclesiastical power, belonging to the Civil
Magistrate. 11. Ye have no Adversaries here, but your False Opinions. 12.
Neither are your Brethren Adversaries to you, but to your erronions Opinions,
which are a thousand times more your Adversaries then they. 13. And both ye,
and any of us, must legally suffer according to our demerits, when we are
sufficiently convicted and condemned by plurality of Votes, in foro externo, as
ye are already, in very many things: for this is the way of all Civil and
Ecclesiastical Judicatories; Neither can Independents change it.

15. Ibid. M.S. reasons thus: If our Saviors testimony concerning himself,
in his own cause, was not valid; how much less the testimony of any other, yea
of a thousand, in any matter, that concerns themselves, and consequently that
of our Brethren in the Synod? But the first is true, Joh. 5.31. If I bear
witness of my self, my witness is not true, i. e. it is not in a formal and
Legal interpretation true, but you may reasonably wave it.

A.S. Ans. 1. Either Christ here speaking of his own testimony, speaks of
himself according to his Divine, to his Humane, or according to both his
Natures. Item, 2. Either he speaks of its validity in it self, or in respect
of the Jews, to whom he did speak, and who should have admitted of it. Item,
3. Either of his public and judicial, or of his private testimony: 1. If in
the first Proposition we take our Savior according to his Divine nature, or
according to both, viz. as Mediator, the Assumption is false; for there Christ
speaks not of himself according to his Divine Nature, or to both, or as
Mediator; for under that notion he is Judge of quick and dead: and Christ
says, Ioh. 8.14. that if he testify of himself, his testimony is true. 2. Or
if he speak of himself under this notion, then he speaks not of his
testimony, as it is in it self, but as it is in respect of them, who received
it not, viz the Jews, and unbeleevers, who received it not as the testimony of
God, or of the Mediator, (however it was such) for they knew him not, Ioh.
8.15.19. but they judged according to the flesh neither knew they him, nor his
Father: And if they had known the King of Glory, they had never crucified him.
And then the Proposition is false: for it follows not, that if Christ's
testimony, who is God, was not acknowledged as valid by those who knew it not;
Ergo, the testimony of a Presbytery or Synod should not be acknowledged by such
as are subject thereunto, and know it: for by the same reason, two or three
idle fellows should not believe the testimony of your Presbytery or Assembly.
3. I retort then the Argument: If Christ's testimony was not legally valid in
his own cause; Ergo, Yours, in your Presbyteries and Assemblies, is not legally
true, or valid in your own cause, when ye judge in matters of Faith and and
Discipline, But the first is true: Ergo, the second also.
4. If Christ be here taken according to his Humane Nature; then either he is
taken according to his Humane nature, as it is in it self without sin, or as
it was in the Pharisees estimation. If in the first way, the Assumption is
false; for there the Pharisees took Christ for a sinful man: and who can deny,
but that the testimony of a man, in the state of integrity, is valid? 5. If it
be taken in the second way, I deny the first Proposition for the testimony of
Judges, in judging according to Law, in things that concern not so much their
persons, as the Society that they represent in judgment, as the Assembly, and
all Ecclesiastical Judges do, is to be preferred before the testimony of any
particular man. 6. And if this Maxim of the Independents hold, the judgment
of no Civil Magistrate yea not of the Parliament it self shall hold, if any
of them, or any D^linquent, take the Parliament to party in any business. The
Parliament will do well to take notice of such Independent Maxims. 7. But
this was the Arminians way, at the Synod of Dort, to the end they might decline
the judgment of the Synod: and he is an Arminian who propounds this Argument,
who of late is become an Independent: I ^eare, they mean to unite the two Sects
in one. 8. Christ was not here speaking of himself, how far forth his
testimony and judgment might hold in a judicial way, (whereof we speak here)
but in a private way; for this action was not judicial, but a particular
discourse. 9. Neither are the businesses now in hand at the Synod, of
particular, but of public concernment, viz. the Church; wherein the Church,
that is Judge, cannot be taken to party, however ye call her a crowd, wherein
many particular persons are concerned.


M. S. Ob. 16. p. 37.. 2. They who are Party, cannot be their Parties Judge,
since they are all equals, Et par in parem non habet imperium; and to be both
Judge, and Party in one cause, cannot be granted to those, that have no
authoritative power one over another, as A.S. himself affirms. But the
Assembly are those, who are Party to the Independents, and nothing else, but
their equals, Ergo the Assembly cannot be their Judges.

A. S. Ans. A Party cannot judge a Party; I distinguish, for either this Party
is only pretended, and so I deny the Major; or real; and then this real Party
either compeareth in some personal, or real actions of his own alone; or in
some cause of public concernment: if he compeare under the first notion, the
Major is true, but the Minor is false; for the Members of the Assembly compeare
not in the Assembly for any personal or real action of their own alone, or
of particular concernment: if he compeareth under the second notion, the Major
is false, unless ye have sufficient cause to forsake him for Judge. 2. Item,
If it be a Party, that has no power over the Party in such a cause, the Major
is true, but the Minor is false; for the Assembly in matters of Discipline has
power over all the Independents in England, viz. to condemn their Tenets
according to Gods Word: If it be a party, that has power over the Party in
such a cause, as a Judge, the Major is false, and so it was reasoned, and this
your Tenet judged, and condemned in the Arminians, as I hope, it shall be in
this Arminian and the Independents, in this Assembly. 3. It is false that
parties are equals, when the one has power over another; or when the one, that
is pretended to be party, judges not in a matter concerning himself, but the
public. 4. For if that should hold, the parties of the Independent Churches
might reject the judgment of whole Churches, yea of all the Churches of the
world, pretending them to be parties. 5. Yea for the same reason they might
reject the Judgment of the Parliament. 6. This Argument proves not the
question, viz. that the Parliament has an intrinsecall, directive power in
matters of Religion, or an Ecclesiastical power, to judge in matters of
Religion. 7. It is a very proud and Independent expression of yours, when you
say, that the Synod and all the Churches in the Christian world are but the
Apologists equals; you will find them, I hope in God, their Judges; and yet
they are put in authority by the Parliament, to represent the whole Church of
England, which is more then such an inconsiderable number of Independents.

M. S. Ob. 17. p. 37.. 2. If all Churches were equal, (as for ought I know,
or for any thing A.S. alleges to the contrary, they are) there can be neither
superiors, nor inferiors, and consequently no obedience or disobedience: But
the first is true.

A. S. Ans. 1. This proves not that the Parliament has any intrinsecall
power in the Church; much less any directive intrinsecall power. 2. Only it
pretends to prove an Independent Power in the Church, which takes away
their directive power of the Civil Magistrate, and the Parliament; for if
their Churches depend not of any superior, how can they depend upon the
Parliament, or any other Civil Magistrate? I deny the Assumption, viz. that
all Churches are equal; but he proves it, because they are such for ought he
knows, or that A. S. alleges to the contrary. Ansvv. 1. This is, but to
confess your ignorance. 2. I deny the Consequence, for it may be otherwise,
howbeit he be ignorant of it. 3. Neither is his knowledge the measure of
divine, or natural verity, but to be measured by them. 4. Howbeit A. S. should
say nothing to the contrary, yet the contrary may be; for A. S. has not said
all things, that may be said upon this, or any other subject: and there be
thousands, who can say more, and better then he; yea, many have said more and
better. 5. It is an untruth also, that he has said nothing to the contrary,
for he might have seen something to the contrary in his Observations, and in
his Answers to a Libell; and if that be not enough, he has more in this Book.
6. When he says that A. S. argues so, it is an untruth; for neither has A.
S. the Assumption, nor the Conclusion, in the 38. page of his Observations
cited by him, for he destroys the Consequent to destroy the Antecedent:
whereas M. S. poseth the Antecedent to infer the Consequent.

M. S. Ob. 18. If Justice consists not in an Arithmeticall, but Geometrical
proportion, then is there no reason, that peremptoriousnesse of Vote, how
Arithmetically soever privileged, but weight and worth of Arguments should
carry it against them. But the first is true, Ergo the second also.

A. S. Ansvv. This Argument with its peremptorious censure of a pretended
peremptoriousnesse of Votes, Arithmetically privileged, seems to censure the
Parliament, which ordained, that that should be offered unto them, as the
Judgment of the Assembly, which the major part assented unto. i. e. that,
that was judged by Plurality of Votes. 2. If by peremptoriousnesse of Vote, he
means Plurality of Votes, I deny the consequence or connection; for when
things are fully balanced by reason, in any Assembly, it is more probable,
that that is most true, that is carried by plurality of votes, and that
Geometrical proportion, wherein consists distributive Justice, may be more
easily found out by Plurarity of votes, then by fewer votes; otherwise it were
a folly to vote any thing; for wherefore vote they any thing in any Assemblies,
but that it may be judged by plurality of votes? 3. And the Apostle wills,
that the spirit of Prophets be subject to the Prophets: Neither is it credible,
that the Major part will submit unto the lesser part. 4. And we would willingly
know of you, Sir, how things are ordinarily carried in your Assemblies? whether
things being debated, and every man's Reasons heard, the Major part submits
to the lesser, or the lesser to the Major? or whether that is thought truth,
that the Major or Minor part Voteth? 5. If by peremptoriousnesse of votes, you
mean a bold and imperious carrying of things by plurality of votes, without
reason, I shall readily grant you such Assemblies are unlawful; neither is
there any such established amongst us; neither has the Parliament established
any such Ecclesiastical Assembly here; neither does the Assembly arrogate unto
it self any such unjust power: if this Argument hold, it shall beat down as
well the proceedings of the Parliament; and all Civil Iudicatories, wherein
things are carried by Plurality of votes, as those of the Assembly: wherefore
all the Civil Powers in the world will do well to take notice of this
peremptorious censure of them all; for if it stand, they must fall and do
homage to the Independent Churches. Besides this, I know not what he means by
Arithmetically privileged; for it is no term either in Divinity, or in Laws,
or in Philosophy, for any thing I know: Neither heard I ever before of any
Arithmeticall privilege.

Obj. 19. M. S. What is granted to every other man in the Kingdom, cannot be
denied to the Parliament.

But a calling to judge between, the Apologists, and their Brethren, yea, and
somewhat more then a calling a special and weighty necessity to do it (though
not after the same manner, in respect of the consequence of their judgment) is
granted to every other man in the Kingdom. Ergo a calling to Judge, etc.
cannot be denied to the Parliament.

A. S. Answ. Howbeit I might say much to the first Proposition, 1. yet I deny
the Assumption, if it be taken absolutely: Or rather 2. to evite his
cavillations, I distinguish it: if by the word calling he mean a public and
particular calling, such as have the Officers, and Ministers, or Rulers of the
Church; it is false; for no man has such a calling, but he who is called, as
Aaron: if He mean a private or common calling. I grant him all the Argument,
but it is nothing to the purpose; for by such a calling they cannot judge in
Public or in Ecclesiastical Assemblies. 3. I distinguish the word judge, for
either it signifies an Official, Public, Ministerial, and authoritative
judgment; or a private common judgment of discretion, such as belongs to
women, and all Christians: if the first, the Minor is false; for what necessity
can lie upon every private man, yea, Watermen, Cobblers, and Oyster-women to
go to the Assembly, and judge between the Apologists and them? If so, the
Parliament has done them wrong, in not calling of them, or rather in excluding
them from so noble and necessary acts of their calling. And here I must pray
the Parliament to consider, whether this Doctrine of his in this point be not
seditious, and sufficient to excitate the ignorant people to challenge such a
pretended calling and liberty, or licentiousness of judgment? If every one be
a Judge to Rule, who shall be ruled? If every one command, who shall obey? how
then has the Apostle distinguished Rulers from others? If the socond, we grant
him all the Argument; but that conclusion in that sense is not the question,
that is controversed between us.

But 20. Arg. M. S. seems to prove the Assumption, if it be not a new
Argument: Would A. S. have even the meanest of men to sing obedience and
submission to the Assembly, without their understanding?

A.S. I retort the Argument: 1. Will M.S. have even the meanest of men to sing
obedience and submission to the King, Parliament, or any Civil Magistrate,
without their understanding? 2. Would M. S. have even the meanest to sing
obedience to the Independent Churches, without their understanding? 3. The
Church must use all possible means to inform such as pretend ignorance, or
conscience: having sufficiently convicted them, she must proceed against them
as contumacious, and inflict upon them such spiritual punishments, as their
sins may deserve. 4. In such a c^^e, not only the meanest, but also the
greatest must sing obedience passi^e, (...) suff^^ing the Churches proceedings
against them; pormittendo, tolerando, no^ (...); in permitting the Church to
proceed against them, in tolera^^^ nor judgment, in not resisting it: for it
is an old saying of a very wise Scoick: Tolerand^ sunt, quae emendari non
possunt: since particular persons have no public vocation or power to oppose
the Church, active, they must suffer; yet they may resist in not obeying
active, as in confessing an untruth, in case the Charch urge them thereunto:
Or, in a word, they must obey, in case they be not made Actors in things
against their Conscience; for it is no sin to suffer what we cannot mend; but
to do what we should not do, or omit what we should do, and may do.

Object. 21. If the meanest of men have not a calling to judge betwixt the
Assembly, and the Independents, then they must sing obedience and submission to
the Assembly, without their understanding. But the Consequent is false, Ergo,
so is the Antecedent also.

A.S. Answ. I deny the Consequence of the first Proposition: for to sing
obedience to the Assembly, it is not needful, that one be Judge betwixt them
and the Independents; but, that they know whether the Judgment of the Assembly
be just, or not, or rather, whether their Obedience be just, or not: for the
Assembly, and they who have power to judge, may judge justly; and he who is
judged, justly disobey: as, if a man should legally, in foro Externo, be
convicted of Heresy, or any other crime, the fact being proved by false
witnesses, and he afterward condemned to acknowledge an Heresy or crime; both
the judgment should be just, for the Judges judged justly, juxta allegata and
probata; but the Obedience to such a judgment should be unjust, and his
disobedience just; for he should sin grievously against God, and give offense
to his Neighbor, in acknowledging an Heresy, or a filthy crime, where there
is none at all. 2. By a calling to judge, either he understands a public and
particular calling to judge authoritative, in consulting in Ecclesiastical
Assemblies of matters of Religion, and deciding them, and so inducing an
obligation unto obedience; or a common and private calling, out of
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, by himself alone, or in private with a friend, to
judge by a judgment of discretion, which induces no bond or obligation to
obedience. If by a Calling he mean the first, the first Proposition is false;
neither will all the Independents, Arminians, Anabaptists, and Socinians ever
be able to prove it. If the second, all the Argument may be granted, viz. That
the meanest of men have a common calling to judge by judgment of Discretion,
(which induces no obligation) betwixt the Synod, and the Independents: but
that is not the Question in debate. 3. I distinguish the word obedience and
submission; for either this obedience is active, when we are commanded by our
Superiors, to be Agents or Actors in any thing, as to bow before an Idol, or
Religiously to adore Altars, the Bread and Wine at the Lords Table, etc. Or
permissive, when I am not commanded to be an Actor, or to do any thing, but to
permit it, not hinder it, or not oppose it, if I do it not my self; as when
men are exhorted, or commanded to assist the poor; if I will not assist them,
I am bound not to oppose the Command, or to hinder others from doing it: so, if
a Minister preach not according to my palate, whatever be my private judgment
of him, as if he preach too sublimely, too speculatively, less methodically,
etc. yet must I let him alone, I may not oppose or cross him, because that I
have no public calling to censure or hinder him. If obedience be taken in the
first way, the first Proposition is false; for every man in obeying actively,
or when he is an Actor, must know whether he does well, or ill, at least by a
particular judgment: if in the second, it is true, that men are bound
sometimes to sing a permissive obedience, without their understanding, because
in so doing, they do nothing themselves, but permit other men to do; as when
there is a Minister called by the Church to preach, it may be, that some
ordinary Mechanic will judge his Sermons to be too sublime, more speculative
then practical, happily also he will think them not methodicall: in such a
case the Mechanic has no power to hinder the Preacher from preaching, or
preaching so; he must obey in permitting, and not opposing him in preaching;
for what is unsavory to his palate, is savory to another. 4. If this Argument
hold, it shall press no less the Parliament, then the Assembly: for I put the
case that the Assembly judge, and that all the Assembly and Independents go
one way, and the Parliament another, which, I trust in God, shall never happen:
I frame the Argument thus:

If the meanest of men have not a calling to judge betwixt the Parliament and
the Assembly, then they must sing obedience and submission to the Parliament,
without their understanding. But the Consequent is false; Ergo, And so your
Independents shall neither obey Parliament nor Assembly. And the Parliament
would do well to note this.

5. I say more, that sometimes Subjects are bound to obey their Rulers, when
they know not distinctly the equity of the Command: for, put the case a Prince
undertake a War against his nei^^bour-Prince, every Cobbler knows not the
true cause of the War, or (...) it be just, or not; for he cannot penetrate
into his Princes secret Counsels, and yet if the Prince lay Assizes upon the
people, or press Soldiers, they must, in all this, obey, howbeit they know
not the secrets of his Counsels, yea, howbeit they suspect the War to be
unjust, they must obey; for it is not expedient, that every Independent Cobbler
be admitted into the Counsel of State; or if that be not granted, that
presently he resist his Prince, and raise a Rebellion in the Kingdom.

6. I pray this man to tell me, whether in New England amongst the
Independents, every man be not bound to obey what is judged in their
Assemblies, however he be of a contrary judgment?

7. And whether it be Morally possible, that every man be of the same judgment,
in things that are resolved, or to be resolved in all Civil or Ecclesiastical
Assemblies? And if not, what can be the force of this Argument?

What here he adds, The glory of a Synod lies not so much in the force of
their Conclusions, as of their premises, is impertinent; for the force of the
premises and conclusions are not to be opposed one to the other, but to be
composed one to another; for the conclusion follows necessarily of its
premises: Things are sufficiently discussed in the Assembly, and their
Conclusions evidently enough inferred out of their premises: but this is an
incurable sickness in these men, that they never think any Conclusion well
inferred, unless it be for themselves.

Obj. 22. He tells us afterward his judgment, that the conclusions of the
Assembly should not be swallowed, without showing, etc. which the Parliament
and Assembly will both grant him.

Obj. 23. M. S. In his Sect. 12. he brings in quality of an Argument, as it
seems, an Answer unto one of mine, taken ab exemplo, or a simili, which I
have answered, and afterward, Sect. 16. he has an Argument, the sum whereof
is this.

Obj. 24. Christ has not divested himself, nor made a delegation of such a
directive power in matters of Religion, as A. S. would sequester for the honor
of the Presbytery: Ergo he will not acknowledge it.

A. S. Ansvv. 1. I deny the Consequence: for to acknowledge such a Ministerial
power, as we grant unto the Ministers of the Assembly, or our Presbyteries, it
is not needful, that Christ divest himself of it, or make a delegation, but a
donation of it; for Christ was never vested with such a Ministerial and
subordinate power, for he is Lord and supreme Judge in the Church, and
therefore could never divest himself of it. 2. If he mean the supreme power
proper to Christ, we neither desire him to believe, nor believe we, that Christ
has divested, or could divest himself of it, to give it to the Church, for he
kept to himself, his own supreme or Royal Power; but gave unto his
Ministers subalterne, and Ministerial power, which derogateth no ways from
his Royal power, since this is subordinate unto that. 3. However he takes it,
this Argument is captious, and is nothing else but a plain petitio principii,
and proving the same thing by the same, or a Conclusion by a Premisse, as
uncertain as it self.

After this petty Argument he makes his Testament, resolving himself to dye a
Martyr, amongst good men, whom he has most highly offended, and who profess,
that they compel no man to profess any truth, much less untruth, against the
light of their Conscience; how ridiculous a Martyr is this? They profess that
they may undergo a voluntary exile, for fear of persecution: if you, sir,
fear any such thing, you may be gone, according to the Principles of your own
Divinity. And then he tells us, that he will allow any directive power of
man, so it be not compulsory unto men by any external violence, whether
directly or indirectly, to subscribe against their judgments and consciences
to it.

A. S. Answ. 1. Our Presbyteries attribute not to themselves any directive
power, that is compulsory unto men by external violence, to subscribe against
their judgments. 2. But if a few men differ in their judgments from all the
rest of the Church, or will needs bring in new Religions, or novelties, against
the common Tenets of the Church: then indeed they will cast them out of the
Church, or excommunicate them according to their demerits, neither is it
equitable that they abide in a Church, or enjoy a Church consociation, who will
not submit unto her Judgment and Discipline. Neither will his Quinque
Ecclesian Ministers admit unto, or receive any man into their Church, who
differs in judgment from them, or who will not submit unto their judgment:
But howbeit the Church compel you not to subscribe; yet the Civil Magistrate,
after sufficient conviction, may compel you to subscribe, or to be gone; for
after sufficient conviction, Morally, it is, and should be supposed, that ye
know the Truth, or should know it; or if ye know it not, that nothing can have
hindered you, but your own pertinaciousnesse, which cannot excuse, but rather
now accuses, and aggravates your sin, since one sin, formally, and per se,
cannot excuse another; Neither have our Churches ever gone further, as may
appear by our Confessions of Faith, and Covenants of the Churches of Scotland,
France, the Netherlands, Geneva, etc.

M. S. has some more poor Reasons in his 2. Chap. about the executive power
of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion; Here he imployeth near upon
four pages in quarto, in a very small Print, about things that are nothing at
all to the purpose. 1. In threatening the Parliament with Gods most heavy
judgments, in case they meddle themselves with any executive, or coercive
power, against his new canonized Independent Saints; He supposes them 1. to be
Saints. 2. Those little ones, Matthew. 18.6. He tells them, is were better a
Millstone were hanged about their neck, then to meddle with one of these
little ones; and that because the Holy Ghost prophesies of the putting down
of all rule, and all authority, and power by Christ; for he must reign till he
has put all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. this argumentation
will hold, if ye suppose the Independents to be Christ's little Saints, and the
King and Parliament to be his Enemies, in case they meddle with them, in
hindering them to set up their Sect: but to the contrary. Gods Saints, as
themselves, in case they suffer not Presbyterians, or any others, no more then
the Independents do in New England: so the Independents shall reign over us
all. 2. In guessing what I mean by the word Church, whether a Church in folio,
or in decimo sexto? I have fully expounded it, howbeit not in so chosen new
Divinity terms, in folio, and decimo sexto. So I come to the rest of his
Reasons.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein are answered M. S. his Objections 25, 26, 27.
Ob. 25. M.S. When Parties pretend to be offended with the Church or the
Church judge any thing amiss, the Civil Magistrate may command the Church to
re-examine its judgment, etc. What reason then has he to be so invective
against the Apologists, p. 49. and 50. for holding, that Kings, or Civil
Magistrates are above the Church?

A.S. Answ. 1. The question is not, whether the King and the Civil Magistrate
be above the Church, or not. We grant, that the Civil Magistrate is above the
Church, as having a supreme, Political, or Civil power, Imperial, Regal,
Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, yea altogether independent upon all the
Powers of this World, and only dependent upon God, according to the Laws of
the State wherein he rules; yet not Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, or
Intrinsecall to the Church, but Secular and Extrinsecall. In his Office he is
not subordinate or Vicegerent unto Christ, as Christ, but as God; not in his
Royal or Divine office whereby he rules his Church; but in his Divine Nature
or Power whereby he rules the World: not in his particular Providence about
his Saints, but in his general about all men and States: not according to the
Covenant of Grace, if he be considered only as a Magistrate; for then, only
they, who are in this Covenant, should be Magistrates; but of Nature; for if
Adam had continued in the state of innocence, we should have had Magistrates
without any Mediator, or Covenant of Grace. A. S. will easily grant you, that
the Civil Magistrate is above the Church; only he denies, that he is above the
Church by any spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, as Independents hold, but by
his Civil and secular Authority, which is not subordinate to Christ, as
Mediator, as King, or Head of his Church: His power over the Church is not
intrinsecall, as ye hold, but extrinsecall, as we confess. 2. It is also
false, that I inveigh against the Apologists, p. 49. 50. unless Reasons be
Invectives. I pray the Reader to look the place, to the end he may see how
little Conscience these men make of untruths: and if there be any Invectives
there, I am ready to suffer. 3. This Argument being put in form, will be thus:
They who may command the Church, are above the Church: The Civil Magistrate
may command the Church; Ergo, The Civil Magistrate is above the Church.

Answ. If the words, command, and to be above, be taken for to command, and to
be above Externally and Politically, I grant you all the Argument, viz. That
the Civil Magistrate is above the Church extrinsecally and Politically: But if
ye take both the words, viz. command, for an an internal and Ecclesiastical
command, that is within the Church; and the word above, for above Internally
and Ecclesiastically in a Church Way: I deny your Minor. If ye take the one
word one way, and the other another way, I deny your first Proposition.

M.S. Ob. 26. p. 44.. 7. If the Civil Magistrate has power to command the
Church to revise her judgment, when she judges any thing amiss, surely he
has power to examine and judge of her proceedings, and consequently, has a
Directive power in matters of Religion. But the first is granted by A.S. his
concession, Ergo, so must the second.

A.S. Answ. 1. I answer to your Proposition, that in the same way the Civil
Magistrate has power to judge, or a Directive power in matters of Religion, he
has power to command. Now his power to command, (as I have said, is only
Political, Civil, and Extrinsecall; Ergo, such also must be his power to
judge, or Directive power in matters of Religion, viz. Civil, Political, and
Extrinsecall to the Church, howsoever Intrinsecall to the State: for as he has
a Civil, Royal, Imperial, or Aristocraticall power to command, so has he a
Civil, Royal, Imperial, or Aristocraticall power, etc. to judge, and to
direct him in his Commands, unless he command without judgment: But I deny,
that this concludes, that he has any Ecclesiastical or Spiritual power that
is Intrinsecall to the Church, or Church Officers, who govern the Church. 2.
This Argument concludes not an Executive power, which is the Title of the
Chapter, and that which he intends to prove. This is like to Montagnes
Discourses, who sundry times has one thing in the Title, and another in the
Chapter.

M. S. Obj. 27. p. 44. sect. 7.. 3. being put in form, will be thus:

They, who may determine, and judge amiss, should not compel, or make the
people, under their Government, to swear obedience or subjection unto their
Orders, which yet, by your own confession, they do:

But your Presbyteriall Assembly may determine and judge amiss, Ergo.

A.S. Answ. 1. The Proposition is false. 2. Or if it be true, I subsume, But
the Civil Magistrate, both in Ecclesiastical, and State matters, may judge
amiss; Ergo, the Civil Magistrate should not compel the people under his
obedience unto his Order; Ergo, the Parliament should not compel, or make any
man to swear the Covenant; Ergo, The Independents should not have taken the
Covenant, because that the Parliament might determine and judge amiss. 3. By
this reason, a man must be tolerated in rejecting all Confessions or Faith,
because they, who contrive them, may err. 4. In New England, since they may
err, they can compel no man to your Religion, but must tolerate them, which
ye will never grant. 5. I deny the Assumption, 1. For our Churches compel not
the people to swear obedience or subjection unto their Order; for, Compulsion
is a principio externo, contra inclinationem agentis; it proceeds from an
External principle, against the Natural inclination of the Agent, viz. that
is compelled to produce the action, and so is exercised only against the Body,
over which the Church takes no authority, but the Civil Magistrate alone. 2.
Neither said I, to my knowledge, any such thing. 3. Neither cite you the place.
4. Only I remember, that in my Observations and Annotations upon the Apology,
p. 39.. 4 I said, That the combined Eldership, having an Authoritative power,
all men, and Churches thereof, are bound by Law and Covenant to submit
themselves thereunto, viz. in a Spiritual manner, since the power is
Spiritual. Never a word here of compulsion or violence. Our Churches neither
compel men's bodies, nor have they any Prisons, or any pecuniary mulcts: but if
any man will trouble the Church, and be disobedient, it is the duty of the
Christian Civil Magistrate to use his power, to hinder such a disorder. If we
have not a Christian, and an Orthodox Magistrate in some places, as in France,
and in some parts of Germany; or if the Christian Magistrate will not do his
duty, he who will not submit unto our Church Government, is cast out, and
punished Spiritually, by simple Censure, Suspension, or Excommunication,
according to the quality of his sin. 5. Learn also, I pray you, M.S. that it
is not fallibility, but actual failing, or ignorance, that may excuse him, who
is subject unto any Government or Authority, from obedience: Nor yet all
failing in judgment or error, but only that which is antecedent to all the
acts of our Will, which morally we cannot shun, and is invincible. 6. Neither
is it evermore expedient, that Subjects know certainly, whether their
Governors judge, or do right, in what they do; for Subjects, in some cases,
must obey, in virtue of a probable knowledge, or conjecture, that their
Governors command justly; and especially, when they are not compelled to be
Actors in that, which they believe to be unlawful for them to do. For I put
the case, that the King and Parliament take a resolution to make War against
any Foraigne Prince, and press some men to serve in such a War, It is not for
every pressed man to call the King and Parliament to an account, about the
equity of the War, neither are they bound to discover to every Soldier all the
secrets and particularities of State thereupon.

M.S. Ob. 28. Why are you not satisfied with that subjection to your
Presbyterial Decisions, that pleads no exemption, but only in case of
non-satisfaction about the lawfulness or truth of them?

A.S. Ans. 1. We are content with it. 2. And in case of non-satisfaction, our
Churches give them sufficient satisfaction. 3. But if they will not be
satisfied, when many thousands are satisfied, we maintain, that it is not
equitable, that when 20000. or 30000. are satisfied, two, or three, under
pretext of non-satisfaction, or twenty, or thirty pertinacious fellows should
have liberty to trouble all the Churches of God in the World. 4. We say
moreover, that the Church, in disputing and conferring with them, and afterward
in judging that she has given them sufficient satisfaction, has given them
sufficient satisfaction morally; and that wise men should judge it sufficient,
in foro Externo; and thereupon, that they are to be condemned by the Church in
foro Externo; for there is no other way to proceed to sentence, either in foro
Civili, or Ecclesiastico. 5. If this will not satisfy them, yet if they will
be quiet, and not trouble the Church of God with their Conventicles, we can in
Christian charity tolerate them in their weakness, yea in their malice (if
there be any) till God impart unto them more grace. But this serves nothing
for Independents, who are come over the Sea to beg a quarrel of us, and to
erect Churches in despite of the Civil Magistrate, against all Laws, yea
against their own Tenets, if they write, as they believe; for they pretend,
that Churches cannot be erected without the Civil Magistrates consent. 6. If
all this content them not, and their Conscience will not permit them to do
otherwise, the Ports are free for them, they may be gone, and live in all
liberty of Conscience in New England, and trouble no more the Country here,
then the Country shall trouble them there. 7. Or if this will not content them,
wherefore will they have more liberty here, then they will grant us in
New England?

M.S. Ob. 29. If Parties may have cause to be offended with the Church, then
have they power to judge of their actions, as well as they of theirs: But the
first is true; Ergo, the second also.

A.S. I distinguish the Consequent of the Proposition; They may judge by a
public Judgment: It is false; for every particular or private man has not a
public power to judge, nor consequently, a Public judgment: they may judge
by a private power, (which properly is not (...) potestas, authoritas, or
Authoritative power) or judgment, but a judgment of Discretion: so it is
true: but such a Judgment is not sufficient to exempt him from obedience, I
mean not an active, but a passive, or rather a permissive obedience; for
howsoever his erroneous judgment may excuse and dispense him from an act,
wherein he is Actor against his Conscience; yet can it not excuse him from
suffering the judgment of the Church: for, if he will not do what they will
according to Gods Word, they may do, and he must suffer, and permit them to
do what he wills not, and what they will according to Gods Word, whereof he
has no Public power to judge: he must no way oppose active the public
Judgment and Authority of the Church, since he has no public power; he must
not set up a new Church, but deal with the Church, according to his vocation;
and if he cannot prevail in conferring with the Church, he may appeal from a
Parish Presbytery to a Class; if there he be likewise oppressed, he may appeal
to a Provincial Synod; if there again he be wronged by their Judgment, he may
appeal unto a National Synod; if there he be oppressed (which probably will
not ordinarily fall out in all these Judicatories, rather then in first and
last instance in an Independent Church, compounded peradventure of seven or
eight idle Fellows) or pretend to be offended, he must sit down patiently; And
if he have any scruple of Conscience, he may consult foreign Divines; and if
those satisfy him not in this singularity of his opinion, I then propound my
question; Whether it be more equitable, That all the Churches of the World
submit to this particular man's opinion, or he to theirs?

Object. But what if they err all, and he be right?

Answ. When God has not given you any ordinary remedy, you must have patience;
there must be Offenses, yea Heresies; But woe unto him that is the Cause. There
was no other way in the Old, or in the New Testament; there is no other in
Civil Judicatories; there can be no other found in this world. And to end this
Argument, I ask you, What if a man be oppressed in one of your Churches, (as it
is possible a man may be, as well as in one of ours, unless ye have the power
of Piety, in a more Independent degree, yea, beyond all flesh and blood in any
juncture of time to come) and afterward he complains to Neighbor Churches, and
they oppress him by their Judgments; What other remedy can he have but
patience, and to appeal to the Judge of quick and dead, or else acquiesce to
the sentence, or at least suffer it? For a man cannot sin in mere sufferance;
for actual sin materially is ever more an action of the will, or a voluntary
omission of some action.

M. S. Ob. 30. p. 46. sect. 2. What power is Intrinsecall to Religion, it is
Intrinsecall to the Church: But the Civil Magistrates Power is Intrinsecall to
Religion; for A. S. says, That the Parliament pretends no Directive power in
matters of Religion, but an Executive power only, viz. In matters of Religion.
Ergo, The Civil Magistrates power is Intrinsecall to the Church.

A. S. Answ. What ever may be said of the Proposition, I deny the Assumption;
and to the confirmation thereof, I answer, 1. That, when I say the Civil
Magistrate has power in Religion, the word (in) signifies about; for Religion
signifies the object of the Civil Magistrate; and so we speak ordinarily, as
when we say, A rich man's heart is in his Money and Riches; so in here
signifies not an Intrinsecall, but an Extrinsecall Denomination; as when I
say, The Sun is seen, the Attribute in this Affirmative Proposition is said to
be in the Subject, not by any Intrinsecall Inherence, or Denomination, but by
an Extrinsecall Adherence, Attribution, or Denomination: This little Childish
Sophistication, is more worthy of some young smatterer in Logic then of a
Divine, or any Conscientious man: It is not possible, that M. S. could be
ignorant of this; and therefore in this Dispute, if he have any power of Piety,
I desire more Conscience and Sincerity in him: I may also say, That the Civil
Magistrate has an Extrinsecall power in the Church, if the word (in) there
signify a bare Attribution, or Extrinsecall Denomination, as it is ordinary
amongst Divines, Philosophers, and common people; and yet I confess it is more
properly said about Religion, and about the Church, as Apollonius observes,
and as I have expressed my self; but then there should have been a concurrence
of in's, which would have made my Expression obscure; for then I must have
said, The Civil Magistrate about matters of Religion, has an Extrinsecall
power, as also about the Church, as this Professor of Eloquence would have me
to speak; which kind of Expression, I believe few or none could have
understood. If the Independent cause depend upon such ridiculous puntillio's,
and be so Independent upon good reason, I know not of the two which is better,
Dependency or Independency.

M. S. Ob. 31. p. 46. sect. 11. The power of Citation is Extrinsecall to the
Church.

The power of Citation is Ecclesiastical. Ergo,

Some Ecclesiastical power is Extrinsecall to the Church.

A. S. I distinguish the word power of Citation; for it is either
Ecclesiastical, which is proper unto the Church, viz. In Church Officers
gathered together in an Ecclesiastical Assembly; And this is both in, and
about the Church or Civil, which is proper to the Christian, and in some way
to a non-Christian Magistrate, where by his Civil power he maintains the
Church; and this is out of the Church, in the Magistrate, and yet about the
Church, which is its object: And so I answer to this silly Argument, That it is
captious and grounded on an Equivocation; for it takes the power of Citation
in one signification in the Major, viz. For a Political power of Citation; and
in an other in the Minor, viz. For an Ecclesiastical power of Citation. 2. Or
if it be taken in both for an Ecclesiastical power, then the Major is false;
for Christ gave it to the Church, to which it is Intrinsecall, and not to the
Civil Magistrate. 3. Or if it be taken in both for a Civil power, then the
Minor is false; for the Civil power of Citation is not in the Church, but in
the Magistrate; neither ever gave Christ it (as Mediator) either to the Church,
or to the Civil Magistrate; but God by Christ (as God) gave it only to the
Civil Magistrate: And the Piece, whereof the Press, as M. S. says, has
been lately delivered, says no other thing then I say, if M. S. his Diana of
Ephesus can permit him to understand it, or he do not willingly dissemble his
understanding of it.

M. S. If a Classis shall cite or excommunicate a Member of a Church, against
the judgment and consent of the Elders of that Church, let all the World
judge, whether that be not an Act of External power without the Church.

A. S. This Argument is ridiculous. 1. For it proves not that which is in
question, viz. That the Civil Magistrate has an Ecclesiastical or
Intrinsecall power in the Church. 2. Only it proves, that the Church has an
Authority, that in some respect may be called Extrinsecall. 3. But to take away
this Equivocation, and many others, and to explain more fully this question,
note again, 1. That the Church may be considered, either according to its Real
and Natural, or according to its Moral being. 2. That the Church according to
its Moral being (I speak of the Representative) is either Particular of one
Parish or Congregation, or more General, as a Classical or Synodall Assembly.
3. Note, that the particular Church, may be considered either Absolutely, and
in it self alone, without any reference to a Class or a Synod, whereof it is a
part; or Relatively with a reference to the more General Church, viz. a
Classis or Synod, whereof it is a part, or in quality, and under the notion of
a part, in so far forth, as by some formal or virtuall Assent, it has once
Covenanted to be a part of such a Classis or Synod, and Stipulated to send its
Commissioners to such Classical or Synodall Meetings. 1. If then we consider
Citation or Excommunication with reference to the Church, either more General
or Particular, according to its Natural being, it may be Extrinsecall to them
both; for the Act of Citation or Excommunication is not really produced or
pronounced, according to its Natural being, by the Church considered under the
notion of its Real being, but by one man, as all wise men will grant. 2. If
they be taken morally according to their Moral being, grounded on some
Covenant, then the Acts of Excommunication and Citation are not Extrinsecall to
the more General Church, since they are exercised by Her power and consent. 3.
If they be considered with reference to the Particular Church, then if the
Particular Church be considered Absolutely, they may be Extrinsecall unto Her,
since neither Excommunication nor Citation are exercised by Her Absolutely, at
least Ordinarily. 4. If we consider a Particular Church in reference to the
more General Church, viz. under the notion of a part of the more General
Church; then we may consider Her either, 1. According to Her first Consent and
Covenant, Real or Virtuall, whereby She joined together in one Consociation
with many other Particular Churches, to make up together one Class or Synod;
the which Consent preceded the Act of Citation or Excommunication; and whereby
the Class or Synod received Power to cite or excommunicate particular Persons:
Or 2. according to Her Consent, in sending Her Commissioners to the Class or
Synod: Or 3. according to Her subsequent or concomitant Dissent to the Act of
Excommunication or Citation. 4. If then She be considered according to Her
first Covenant and consent, or in the second, i. e. in sending Her
Commissioners, the Act of Citation and Excommunication is voluntary, and
Intrinsecall to that Particular Church, notwithstanding Her subsequent or
concomitant Dissent; for that Act of Citation and Excommunication is done in
virtue of such precedent Consents, which are Her Deeds, and very Legal. 5. If
the Particular Church be considered according to Her subsequent or concomitant
Dissent, these Acts are involuntary, and Extrinsecall to that Particular
Church: But such a Dissent is not properly and formally an Ecclesiastical Act,
since it is not ruled by any Ecclesiastical Rule of Discipline, but by private
interest, or passion, which must ever give place to the Weal of the whole
Church; for as Natural bodies may be considered either Absolutely, or under
the notion of a Part, which is for the whole; and in the first notion, they
have their Particular Inclinations and Motions, whereby they decline whatsoever
is hurtful unto them, as when the hand flies from a blow of a Sword; but
under the second, they are not led by their own particular, but by the general
Inclination and Interest of the whole, since parts are not so much for
themselves, as for the whole; and so it neglects its own particular good or
interest, for the weal or interest of the whole; as when the hand for fear
least the head should be cut off, whereof might ensue the destruction of the
whole man, exposes it self to the danger in receiving the blow it self, to
save the whole: So in Political or Ecclesiastical Consociations, particular
Towns, or Churches, may be carried by their own Interests to some particular
Dissent in some Cases; but if they move Regularly, sometimes against their own
Interests, they must Consent against themselves, according to the general
Inclination of the whole Consociated body, or Church Classical, Synodall, etc.
6. If this Argument hold, it will conclude, 1. Against that which is done by
Plurality of Votes in their particular Congregations; For that which is
concluded, is against the Consent of the Minor part. 2. Against that which is
done in their Synods, by their Messengers, if they conclude against, or without
the Consent of the Churches, whereof they are Messengers: And 3. Against the
Parliament, if they conclude any thing against the particular Consent of
particular Towns; for they Consent not thereunto; And so what they conclude or
do against them shall not be done by Consent of the Kingdom; And so this man
shall destroy the Parliament, and the pretended Order of Independents, as well
as that of Protestant Presbyteries.

But M. S. tells us, that so the Classis is like to the Magistrate, who is a
Bishop without, and about the Church.

Answ. 1. I deny your Simile; for the Magistrates Power and Act, being only
Political and Civil, has no Internal reference to Citation or
Excommunication, in quality of Ecclesiastical Acts, as that of the Church, and
Church Officers, which is Ecclesiastical; and this your Quinqu' Ecclesian
Ministers acknowledge themselves, when they tell us, that the Civil Power is
of another nature then the Ecclesiastical.

Obj. But if the Civil Magistrate have this External coactive power, they
must all have it, as well Pagans as Christians: But so it is not; for A.S. will
not grant it to Pagans, Ergo, none of them have it.

Answ. The Assumption is false, for I grant it to them all, but not in the same
manner; To a Pagan only in actu signato, but to a true Christian in actu
exercito. I expound it in my Annotations upon the Apologeticall Narration.

M. S. scratches at this distinction, 1. as not good; for, says he, I never
heard of any thing belonging to a Person in actu exercito, but that belonged to
him, and that per prius in actu signato: He, to whom the principle or power of
acting does not belong, cannot stand engaged for the exercise of acting such a
power.

A. S. Sir, If you heard it not, others, yea of the best sort, and ablest, both
Divines and Philosophers, may have heard it; for we have learned in the
Category of Substantia, that Substantiae primae maxim proprie Substantiae
dicuntur: whereupon they ground this other Maxim, Prima Substantia magis est
Substantia quam Secunda: and they say, that it is magis Substantia in actu
exercito, sed non in signato; sed contra, secunda est magis substantia quam
Prima in actu signato; as all the Philosophers, who serve themselves with this
distinction, in the explication of that propriety of Substance, declare in that
place. 2. It is also an error in you, to think, that in actu signato, and
exercito, is nothing else but actu and potentia. 3. Put the case it be so, and
that whatever belongs to any thing in actu signato, belongs to it in actu
exercito, what is that to the purpose? is not that enough to found a
distinction upon? Wherever there is prius and posterius, is there not there
some distinction, at least formal, or modall, if not real? 4. Yea, put the
case, the one part were really included in the other; yet should there ever be
distinctio includentis, and inclusi. 5. And howsoever it be, that what
belongs to a person in actu exercito, belongs to him in actu signato; yet
what belongs to a Thing in actu signato, belongs not to it in actu
exercito. Neither said I, that whatever belongs to any thing in actu
exercito, belongs not to it also in actu signato. Where said I it, I pray
you? or if I said it not, wherefore beg you here a needless quarrel with me
about it?

2. M. S. desires to know, wherefore a power about the Church, and for the
Church, should not belong actually, and in effect, in actu exercito, and jure
in re, as well to a Magistrate not yet truly Christian, as to him that is such,
i. e as well to a Pagan, as a Christian.

A.S. Answ. 1. Because being not yet a Christian, he is not a member of the
Christian Church. 2. Because a Pagan, qua talis, knows not the Principles of
Christian Religion, and consequently wants the Directive power, without the
which he can never well, or justly use the Imperative or Executive power. 3.
Because without the knowledge of our Religion, he can neither direct, nor act
any thing about the Church, or for the Church, but by conjecture, or guessing
at it. 4. Because God never ordained any such External power for Pagans about
the Church. 5. To end my answer to this Argument: Where learned M. S. to desire
him that denies any thing, to prove his negation? Nonne Affirmantis est
probare? The Scripture contains not formal rules or testimonies of mere
Negations, or of things that are not, but of Affirmations, and things that are.
Now M.S. that affirms a thing to be, might more easily have found authorities
for it in Scripture, (if any such had been) then we, for things that are not:
It is enough for me to say, that the Scripture, that contains all things
needful to salvation, contains no Extrinsecall power, in actu exercito, for
Civil Magistrates, that are not Christians.

M.S. But has not then an Heathen, or Heterodox Magistrate power to do good
to the Church?

A.S. Ans. 1. The Heathen Magistrate has a Natural, but not a Moral public
power, or (...) to do good to the Church. 2. Or if he has it, he has it not
in actu exercito, as I have already proved. 3. Or if he has it so, he has it
not to do good to the Church, in quality of a Church; for neither can he know,
or love the Church, in quality of a Church, but of men, or members of the
State: for the Church, in quality of a Church, is no ways the object of his
Knowledge, or Will. He may do it, as an Ass, that carries the corn to the
Mill; or as Caiaphas, who judged, that one man must dye for the People; but
knew not what he said. He cannot do it by any power Intrinsecall to the
Church, as M.S. pretends: And howbeit I should grant unto a Jew, or a Pagan, a
Civil power to do good to the Church, both in actu signato, and exercito: yet
from thence cannot be concluded an Intrinsecall or Ecclesiastical power
belonging to a Jew, a Pagan, or to an Antichristian to rule the Church
Internally.

M. S. p. 48.. 13. of this Chapter, durst not answer A.S. what he means by
the Civil Magistrate, upon whom he would seem to bestow such a power; but in
stead of Answer, racketeth it back to him with jeering and babbling: But I
answer him, 1. that Quaestio Quaestionem non solvit, one Question satisfies
not another. 2. I answer, that the Magistrate, who I believe should have such a
power in actu exercito, must be such, as is not a professed Enemy to the true
Religion, at least, in quality of a Magistrate, or in his Laws.

And so it is false, that M.S. says of the King; for, in quality of King, he
has professed Presbyterian Discipline in Scotland, in as much as he confirmed
it by his Authority: so has he done in England, in favor of the French,
Dutch, Italian, and Spanish Churches: so did King James, by his Divines,
approve the Presbyterian Discipline, at the Synod of Dort. So M. S. sees how
much he has deceived himself, in looking for 20 Distinctions of me, to answer
him to this Question. We answer him candide, in all simplicity, and fear not
to declare to the World what we hold, as the Sectaries do.

M.S. p. 49.. 15. Was it not lawful for them, i. e. unchristian Kings, to
interpose with their Authority, that the Churches of Christ in their
Dominations, might lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and
honesty? If not, then was that exhortation, 1 Timothy 2.2. to be laid up in
Lavender for some hundreds of years, after it was given; or else the benefit
and blessing, the obtaining whereof by prayer, is made the ground of the
exhortation, must have been made over in the intentions of those that had so
prayed, unto their posterities after many generations.

A.S. 1. This Argument proves not, that any Magistrate, either Christian, or
other, has any Intrinsecall power in the Church, either Directive or
Executive. 2. It proves not, that an unchristian Magistrate has any power in
actu exercito, in the Church. 3. As for that Text, 1 Timothy 2.2. the sense of the
Text is, that we should pray for the conversion of Kings to the Gospel: which
appears evidently by the Apostles reason, v. 3. and 4. For (says he) this is
good and acceptable in the sight of God, v. 4. who will have all men saved, and
come unto the knowledge of the truth. And another reason, v. 6. For Christ gave
himself for all men. And another, v. 7. Because the Apostle is a Preacher of
the Gospel to all men. Now these words, That we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all Godliness and Piety, express finem intentum, sed non eventum; not
the Event, but the End intended by the Christians who prayed; for they obtained
not, in those times, a quiet or a peaceable life, under the Heathen Kings. 2.
Neither prayed they here, that any Nero should have had the Government of the
Church in his hand; for they obeyed him not, neither in Doctrine, nor in
Discipline.

M.S. p. 50.. 17. does nothing, but repeat what he has said, viz. That the
Civil Magistrate, in taking away Superstition and Heresy, had need of some
other security, then the Synod can give him.

A.S. The Civil Magistrate, as a Christian man, must learn Gods will, by all
the means that God has appointed him, viz. 1. By reading of Scriptures; 2.
Comparing one Scripture with another; 3. Conferring in private about
Scriptures, and of any difficulties he has, with other Christians, of whom he
may learn any thing; 4. Hearing of Sermons; 5. As a Magistrate, he must have a
Political prudence, and knowledge of Scriptures to direct him in judging about
Superstition, Heresy, and matters of Religion; 6. He must serve himself of
prayer, and all the rest of the means that God has ordained him; 7. Neither
say we, that he must be directed by a Synod alone. This is one of the means
that God has ordained him in his Providence, but not all, as this M. S.
falsely would persuade the Reader, if he be not altogether impertinent.

Whether in the Militant visible Church there should be any Subordination in
Ecclesiastical Judicatories.
CHAP. I. Containing the State of the Question.
TO the end we may the better, and more easily resolve this Question, it will
not be amiss to note concerning the word Church. 1. That we mean not here the
Triumphant Church in Heaven, but the Militant upon Earth. 2. That it is not
meant touching the invisible Church, viz. The Church of Believers, compounded
of men and women, endowed with Justifying Faith, which is invisible to us; but
of the visible Church, professing the true Faith. 3. Nor of every visible
Church of Believers, but of that which is compounded of all its Organicall
Parts, viz. Preachers, Teachers, Ruling Elders, Deacons, and Flock. 4. It is to
be observed, That this Church is either Real, or Representative; We call Real
Churches, those wherein such Church Officers, and Flocks, are really, as in
every Parish, Provincial or Nation Church: But a Representative Church is
that, wherein the Real Church is represented in Her Church Officers, as a
Presbytery, Session, or Consistory, consisting of the Preachers and Ruling
Elders, or the Deacons also of a Parish Church gathered together, for ordering
of Church business in Doctrine, Government, or otherwise, who altogether
represent the Church of a Parish: A Class, that represents that of a Class,
and judges of all the Church business of one Class: A Provincial Synod,
which consists of the Ministers, and a certain number of Ruling Elders of one
Province, representing all the Real Churches of such a Province, in judging of
Church Affairs in that Province; and a National Synod compounded of a certain
number of Ministers and Ruling Elders, deputed from all the Provinces of the
Nation, to judge of the Church business in Doctrine, Discipline, etc. which
concerns the whole Church of such a Nation or Kingdom.

2. Concerning the Subordination of Ecclesiastical Judicatories, it is to be
observed, 1. That an Ecclesiastical Judicatory is nothing else but a certain
number of men, gathered together, and endowed with an Authoritative power,
according to Gods will, to judge of Church business, for Gods glory, and the
Weal of the Church, or in a word, the Representative Church of one Parish,
Class, Province, Nation, or of all the World. 2. That Subordination in
Ecclesiastical Judicatories, is a Relation of Order, betwixt a Superior, and
an Inferior Judicatory, or Representative Church, whereby the Judgment and
Authority of the Inferior, depends upon the Judgment, and Authority of the
Superior: Such we conceive to be betwixt Presbyteries and Classes, Classes and
Provincial, Provincial and National, National and Oecumenicall Synods.

3. Here it would be noted, That this Subordination is grounded upon the
Authoritative power of Superior Iudicatories, over their Inferiors, or
Subordinated; and therefore here is to be noted, first, That this Power of the
Church is not Natural, that flows from the Nature, or Essence of the
Subject, such as are the Faculties of the Soul; nor Habitual, or an Habitude
either Naturally acquired by Custom, or Supernaturally infused by Grace; for
men may have all the Natural Faculties of the Soul, and many Natural, and
Supernatural Habitudes; yea, all those that are necessary for this
Authoritative power, and yet not have it, as any one may easily see in many
learned and godly Divines, who are not Ministers of the Church, and
consequently have no Authoritative power in the Church: But it is a Moral
power (ordinarily called (...) or potestas) whereby in virtue of Gods
Ordinance, the Superior Church has power over the Inferiors, or other
Churches subordinated unto Her, to rectify their Judgments in case of
Aberration, or to enjoin them any thing according to Gods holy Ordinance. So
when particular Churches judge any thing amiss either in Doctrine or
Discipline, a Class or a Provincial Synod may judge of that Judgment, and in
case it find it have need, may in the Name of God, command it to reform its
Judgment; and in case of disobedience, command the people not to obey their
Pastors or Presbyteries commands; or if there be any thing, that concerns the
Weal of all the Churches in the Kingdom, the National Synod has an
Authoritative power, to judge it, and enjoin it upon the Churches in the Name
of God; so may a Provincial Church do in things concerning all the Churches of
a Province. I call an Authoritative power, that which may command, and in
virtue of its command, enjoin an obligation of Obedience upon all those that
are subject thereunto; and in case of Disobedience, inflict Spiritual
punishments, according to the quality of the Disobedience, viz. Simple Censure,
the lesser or greater Excommunication.

If ye inquire further, what is this Moral power, or wherein it consists; I
answer, It is no Real, but a Moral being; it is no Real quality in the
Subject that has it, and consequently it is no Real or Natural power; but as
(...) were a Natural power; for as our Natural powers and faculties do flow
from the Essence of the Subject, or from our Essential Forms; so does this
Moral power flow from the consent and will of them who give it, and his will,
who consents to accept it; and this consent producing such a Moral power or
(...) is no less forma interne vel externe denominans, and efficaciter (...)
producens, quam forma essentialis is forma informans potentiam naturalem a se,
and in se vel in subjecto profundens. And as natural powers are for the Weal
of their Subjects, in accomplishing and perfecting of them in their operations,
convenient to their nature; so its this Moral power for the Weal of its Moral
Subject, or of the consociation in perfecting it in its operations, convenient
to its Moral being, Domestical, Political or Ecclesiastical, in Nature or
in Grace. Wherefore Amesius, and sundry Independents, that follow his opinion,
are mightily mistaken, whilst they think it flows from the Essence of the
Church. 1. For it has not its being from the Essence of the Church, but ex
instituto divino. 2. Because it is not produced necessarily, as Natural
proprieties, but freely and willingly, not as depending upon Nature, but upon
Will. 3. If it did flow from the Essence of the Church, God could not change
it; And yet howsoever this Moral power has no Real being in it self; yet may
it be called Real; 1. In consideration of its Cause, viz. Of the Real
destination of the Will, from which its produced. 2. Of its Foundation, viz.
Because it presupposes some Real qualities in him, or those, who have it,
viz. Natural faculties, and some natural or supernatural Abilities to
exercise it. 3. Of its Effects that are Real; for howsoever the power of a
Magistrate be not a Real quality, yet it is able to produce very Real Effects
in Subjects, in remunerating such as deserve well of the State, and in
punishing Delinquents, as by imprisoning their persons, or cutting off their
Heads, if the crime be of that nature.

Again it must be observed, That this Moral power is, 1. either merely
Directive, which only shows what is to be done, or Imperative, that cannot
only show, or discern what is to be done; but also commands, and in virtue of
such a command, binds those that are subject to such a Power to Obedience, and
in case of Disobedience, inflicts condign punishments. 2. That this Moral
power is either Civil or Ecclesiastical; the first belongs to the Civil
Magistrate, the second to Ecclesiastical persons. 3. That Power is either
Imperial, Royal, or Magisteriall, such as Emperors, Kings, or Lords, have
over their Subjects, as that of the Civil Magistrate; or Ministerial, such as
State-Ministers have under their Masters, or Lords, as that of Ambassadors,
Pursevants, etc.

Finally it must be observed, That as Power, so punishments inflicted by Power,
are either Civil or Ecclesiastical; Civil punishments are such as are
inflicted by the Civil Magistrate, and are often times corporal, as
Mutilation, Stigmatizing, and Death, etc. sometimes Pecuniary mulcts, sometimes
Infamy, etc. Ecclesiastical punishments are altogether Spiritual, consisting
of Censures, Suspension from the Lords Table, and Excommunication.

These things being presupposed, By the word Church here must be meant, the
visible Militant Church, and principally the Representative Church, in
Presbyteries, Classes, Synods. 2. By the word Subordination, must be meant a
Subordination of Power and Judgment. 3. By Power must be meant a Moral,
Ecclesiastical, Imperative, and Ministerial Power in Judging, Commanding, and
Inflicting of Spiritual punishments only, and not an Imperial, Magisteriall,
or Royal Power, whereby the Church may command in a domineering way, or
compel men's bodies, or punish them by inflicting any Corporal punishment on
them, or imposing any Pecuniary mulcts; as the Independents most craftily go
about to persuade the World.

The Independents then deny, That there is any Church furnished with any
Authoritative or Imperative Power, save only the Parishionall, or to speak in
their own Terms, the Congregationall Church. And therefore they renounce all
Classical and Synodicall Churches; or if they do acknowledge them, they allow
them no Authoritative or Imperative, but a Consultative Power only, or a Power
to counsel one of their little Congregations (compounded happily of seven or
eight persons) what they think fittest to be done; so that this petty
Congregation may either accept or reject their Counsel, at their own likings
and pleasure: so as in conclusion, they acknowledge no Authoritative, or
Imperative Ecclesiastical power, above that of their little Congregations; for
they maintain, that every Church, be it never so small, yea, though it be
composed but of seven or eight persons (be it never so Erroneous and
Heretical) is altogether Independent in its Judgment, upon all the Judgments
of all the Churches of the World, be they never so Just and Orthodox; and
consequently, that what ever they teach, how Heretically soever; and what ever
they do, be it never so wicked, that all the Orthodox Churches in the World,
have no Authority of God to Censure, or to Excommunicate, or so much, as to
command them, other ways then any one private man might do an other, i. e. By
way of Counsel, which they may either follow or reject at their pleasure.

The Orthodox and Reformed Churches, especially of Scotland, France, the
Netherlands, etc. on the other part hold, That there is and ought to be
Subordination amongst Ecclesiastical Judicatories, viz. That National Synods
are above Provincial Synods; these above Classes, and Classes above
Presbyteries or Sessions; and that the Superior Judicatories have a
Ministerial Authoritative or Imperative, but no Magisteriall, Despoticall, or
Imperial, Authoritative power over the Inferior, that are subordinate unto
them. Item, That they may inflict upon Inferior Churches, in case of
Disobedience, Spiritual, though no Corporal punishments, or Pecuniary mulcts,
or such like Civil punishments.

CHAP. II. Containing some imaginary and ridiculous Contradictions objected by
M.S. to A.S. removed.
BUt before I prove my Conclusion, I must pray the Reader to re-marke, in
passing the falschood and manifold cavillations whereby this M.S. saluteth him
in the entry of this Question; for this is his safest way for the present,
howbeit it cannot but prove damnable in the end; 1. He says, that
Presbyterians agree not about the Author of this subordination of
Ecclesiastical Judicatories, and Presbyterian Government, whether it be juris
Divini, or Humani: As if some of them esteemed it to be juris Divini; others,
juris Humani, Ecclesiastici; others, juris Naturalis; others, partim juris
Divini, partim Naturalis, aut mixti. 2. He says, that A.S. contradicts
himself in the same manner. For refutation whereof, I need not but to propound
our Opinion, which is thus: 1. All the Presbyterian Discipline, and specially
subordination of Ecclesiastical Iudicatories, quoad Essentialia, aut
Substantialia, in its Essential parts, is juris Divini, aut Naturalis, i. e.
authorized by Gods Divine Law, or by the Law of Nature. 2. Presbyterian
Discipline, quoad accidentalia, and circumstantialia, i. e. in its accidental
or circumstantiall parts, it may be juris Humani. Neither believe I, that there
is any great dispute amongst us, and the Independents, about these Positions,
unless M.S. make it. Neither know I what can anger him in all this, save only
this, that we give him no subject of quarrelling us; It may be, and it seems,
that he finds fault with the first Proposition, wherein I say, it is either
juris Divini, aut Naturalis: And, that he will have no Doctrine of Faith, or
Discipline, that is juris Naturalis, i. e. grounded on the light of Nature.
But, 1. What if the Scripture presuppose the truth of some Principles, known by
Nature; dare he reject them? 2. Some of them are as certain as any Article of
Faith; as, for example, this; The one part of a Contradiction is true, and the
other false: and this, Twice ten are twenty. And yet none of them has any
formal Patent from Gods Word. 3. If God be as well the Author of Natural, as
of Divine truth, wherefore will ye reject Natural truth? 4. All men are bound
to believe all Natural truths, when they are sufficiently manifested unto
them; or at least, not to dissent from them, because we must not lie, as we are
taught by the 9. Commandment, which not only forbids us to misbelieve or
contradict any Supernatural, but also all Natural truths sufficiently
manifested unto us. 5. But what reason has this M.S. to reject Natural
truths, when there is nothing in Scripture to the contrary? 6. Yea, by the Law
of Nature, I am bound to be ruled by them, in case the Scripture reveal me
nothing above Nature: yea, I am not bound to go above them, but in the cases,
that Scripture reveals unto me. 7. What Law we were bound unto in the Old
Testament, and is not abrogated in the New, that Law are we bound to follow, as
a rule of direction in the New, yea, in Church Discipline: But the Law of
Nature is a Law, whereunto we were bound in the Old Testament, and is not
abrogated in the New; Ergo, The Law of Nature is a Law, that we are bound to
follow as a rule of direction in the New Testament, yea, in Church Discipline.
8. It is holden amongst Protestants for an indubitable and supernatural
truth, that Christ's body cannot be in two places at one time; which neither
M.S. nor all the Independent wit in the world is able to prove, unless they
suppose this Principle of Nature, viz. One individual Body actually existent,
cannot at one time be in diverse total places] to be true: For the Scripture
poseth it not formally, but presupposes it to be true.


Now I pray you, M.S. show me, wherein any Presbyterians contradict these
Assertions, that I have laid down: you name none, and therefore I am not bound
to answer. Only you say, I contradict my self. But wherein? Because (says
M.S.) I say, p. 27.. 3.

1. Subordination between superior and inferrour Ecclesiastical Iudicatories,
is partim juris Divini, partim Natura lis aut mixti. 2. This Subordination,
etc. needs not any pattern expressly and formally from Christ; It suffices,
that it have one from Nature, p. 36.. 2. 3. And yet we can show a patent for
it, not only from the Law of Nature, which should suffice, but also from the
Law of Grace, in the Old and New Testaments. 4. It is only from God, that can
give power to any man in his Church, page 48. 5. Only Gods Word is the rule or
measure, in matter of Ecclesiastical or Presbyteriall Government, p. 61. 6.
Combined Presbyteries judge of Points of Doctrine and Discipline already
revealed in the holy Scripture, and give us new Ecclesiastical Laws of things
indifferent, p. 34.
Answ. In my second Proposition, he puts Pattern for Patent. 2. Here in all
these Propositions there is no contradiction, neither shows M.S. wherein it
consists here. It may be partim juris Divini, and partim Humani, 1. In
respect of its diverse parts, whereof some may be revealed in Scripture, and
some proved by Natural reason. 2. In respect of the same parts, which may be
both known by Nature, and by Divine revelation, or some supervenient Divine
Ordinance. So Divines hold, that we know God to be, both by Natural Knowledge,
and Supernatural Revelation. 3. In so far forth, as that which is juris
Naturalis, is also juris Divini, when jus Divinum supposes jus Natural: for
in such a case, jus Natural becomes Divinum, not Thetically, but
Hypothetically; not by any formal Divine Position, but by some Divine real
Supposition; as I show it clearly in that passage of my Book, that he cites,
p. 36.

These three last Propositions contradict not the rest; For in the 4.
Proposition, p. 48. of my Book, I speak not of the ground of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, nor of it all; only I say, that it is not in Church-Ministers power
to transfer the Ecclesiastical power unto the Civil Magistrate: Which
contradicts not the first three.

In the 5. Only Gods Word, etc. But, 1. Gods Word, there, must not be taken
strictly, for that which is Gods Word formally, in terminis, and Thetice; but
in a more large signification, 1. For Gods Word, formally, or by consequence:
2. In terminis, aut in sensu: 3. Thetice, aut Hypothetice, by some Position, or
Supposition.

3. If ye take Gods Word in the last sense, then Discipline, or Government must
be taken for Discipline in its essential and principal integrant parts, and
not in all its accidental and circumstantiall parts: Neither is it needful,
that we have any particular rules from Scripture, for every circumstance of
Doctrine or Discipline: As for example, That Sermons should be on such or such
Week-dayes; so long, viz. an hour, or two hours long; in the morning, or
afternoon; That Ecclesiastical Senates should sit once a day, once a week, or
once a month.

In the 6. Proposition, 1. Discipline there, must be taken for Discipline quoad
Essentialia, Substantialia, and Necessaria; and not quoad Accidentalia,
Circumstantialia, Contigentia, and Indifferentia; as appears by my words in
the last part thereof, New Ecclesiastical Laws in things indifferent, etc. 2.
Holy Scripture must be taken in a large signification, as I have already
declared: for so only is it taken by our Doctors, when we prove against the
Papists, that it is the only Rule of Faith.

In the 2. Position, when I say, Subordination needs not, etc. the word
needs must not be taken for necessarium absolute, or quoad esse; but,
secundum quid, and ad been esse; not to its being, but to its well-being: for
howbeit Christ had not given us any patent of Subordination in Ecclesiastical
Judicatories, in the Gospel; yet the Law of Nature, and the Scripture of the
Old Testament had been sufficient to direct us therein, and had bound the
Church of the New Testament to the Presbyterian Government: And this, M. S.
acknowledges himself, (howbeit not without some Comedian jeeres, more
ordinary with him then any apparent Reason) and confesses, that the words
following in the 3. Proposition, declare it.

But put the case, that Presbyterians differed (as he says) whether it be
juris Divini, Naturalis, aut Humani: as they differ not, for any thing I know,
or have read: Yet they agree in this, That it is Juris. Confess this, and ye
may live in a Fraternall communion with us, for the Difference, viz. If one
say, it is juris Divini; another, Naturalis; another, Ecclesiastici; will not
breed a Schism; for it is not a Dispute de re, sed de modo rei, to know
whether it proceeds from God, as Author of the Law of Nature, or of Grace, by
a Natural, or a Positive Law: Much less material is it to know, whether it
be in Scripture explicit, or implicit; formaliter, aut per consequentiam; in
terminis, aut in sensu, et consequenter; Thetice, or Hypothetice.

CHAP. III. Containing the Arguments, whereby we prove the Opinion of the
Orthodoxe Churches, against the Independents, borrowed from the Old Testament.
THe Arguments, that might be brought for the Orthodox Churches against all
Sectaries, are many, whereof I will touch a few, some from Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament, and others from reason, founded on Scripture; but to
proceed more clearly, I intend to prove, 1. That in Scripture there is more,
then a Congregationall, Independent Church; 2. a Subordination of Churches, and
that in Authority.

Whether in Scripture, or in Reason, we find more then a Congregationall
Church?

We affirm, and prove it thus, 1. Such a Church, and Church Government, as was
amongst the people of God in the Old Testament, and is not abrogated in the
New, may be admitted amongst his people in the New.

But a Church, and Church Government, more then Congregationall, and
Independent, was amongst the people of God, in the Old Testament, and is not
abrogated in the New Testament. Ergo,

A Church and Church Government, more then Congregationall and Independent, may
be admitted amongst his people in the New Testament.

As for the first Proposition, I believe our Adversaries will not deny it, for
if it was in the Old Testament, it was either by Gods Ordinance, or by his
Approbation; If God ordained it, how can they abolish it? If he approved it,
how can they reprove it?

And for the Assumption, I prove it; 1. For they had a National Church; God
dealt not so with every Nation, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10.13, 14, 20.23.33, 34.37. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Deuteronomy. 10.12.15.21. Deuteronomy.
26.17, 18, 19. Deuteronomy. 28.9, 10. Deuteronomy. 29.13, 14, 15. And Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 8, 9.
etc. When the most High divided to the Nations their Inheritance, when he
separated the sons of Adam; Jacob was the Lot of his Inheritance, etc. Amos
3.2. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth. Deuteronomy. 39.29.
Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O People? saved by the Lord,
the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy Encellency.

2. Because Independents define a Congregationall Church, a number of men,
Covenanted together, to participate of Gods Ordinances, viz. the hearing of the
Word, the receiving of the Sacraments etc. in some one place, every Sabbath day.

But all the Church of the Jews could not meet in one place, in such a
fashion, as every man will easily grant. Ergo,

3. Because the great Sanedrim at Jerusalem judged of all Ecclesiastical
Causes throughout all the Kingdom.

4. Because the People of God, besides their Assemblyes in the Temple (which
was an holy place, common to all their National Church) had their particular
Conventions, in particular Synagogues.

And however men may doubt of these Synagogues, whether they were exinstituto
divino, or not, and of the time, when first they began; yet can it not be
denied, but if they were not divinae institutionis, they were, at least,
divinae approbationis. 1. For they are no where condemned in Scripture. 2. But
Christ and his Apostles approved them, in that they went ordinarily to them,
disputed and expounded Scripture in them. 3. And submitted themselves unto the
order and Discipline established therein.

Answ. But the Independents will say, that the National Church is abrogated in
the New Testament.

Just. 1. Then it is their part, to point us to the place in the New Testament,
where it is abrogated.

2. It cannot be abrogated in the New Testament; for those Ordinances only of
the Old Testament are abrogated in the New, that belonged unto the Ceremonial
Law: But to have a Church, or a Church Government, more then Congregationall,
per se, or considered in it self, belong not to the Ceremonial Law. Ergo, The
Major is certain, I prove the Minor. 1. For it might have been even in the
State of Integrity, without the Ceremonial Law. 2. And so indeed it was after
the Fall, before ever Moses his Ceremonial Law was made. 3. And that is not
merely Ceremonial, whereof we may evidently give natural reason, or that
which is evidently grounded in natural reason, or at least in so far as
evidently grounded in natural reason, since it is merely Positive. But
(supposing that there is a Church of God) to have, a Church, or a Church
Government, more then Congregationall and Independent, is evidently grounded in
natural reason, or a thing where evidently we may give Natural reason, etc.
as we shall see hereafter. Ergo,

3. Only those things of the Old Testament, are abrogated by the New, which
were shadows of things to come, viz. of Christ Real, or Mistycall; But such a
Church, i. e. more then a Congregationall, Independent Church, was not a shadow
of things to come in Christ, etc. Ergo, The Major is certain, for the things
commanded, or approved in the Old Testament, belonged, either to the Moral or
to the Ceremonial, or to the Judicial Law: As for the things of the first
sort, they are juris naturalis, and consequently perpetual, which are not
abrogated, and of themselves were not shadows of things to come: As for those
of the Judicial Law, of themselves they are not shadows, but belong unto
Civil Government, which Christ abrogated not, since his Kingdom was not of
this world; and if the Jews had submitted themselves to Christ, and had been
freed from external oppression, it is probable, that they should have enjoyed
their own Government, according to the Judicial Law, so far forth as
Judicial; neither was it his aim to overthrow any worldly States, Policies, or
Political Laws: Christ's Kingdom was, and is compatible with all the Kingdoms
and States of the world, if they will not destroy it; and he will let them
reign over men's bodies and purses, if they can let him reign over their Souls.
These, that were commanded in the Ceremonial Law, were indeed shadows; but
such was not a Church more then Congregationall.

To all these Reasons some have answered, That they would have it proved by
Scriptures of the New Testament, just: 1. But wherefore prove they their
opinion by the Old Testament, if they will not permit us the same liberty? 2.
Our former Reasons have sufficiently proved, That proofs taken from the Old
Testament, should hold in all that, which is not abrogated in the New. 3. If in
this Subject they reject the Scriptures of the Old Testament, as the Jews in
all things that of the New, there will be two Errors Diametrically opposite,
the one to the other, theirs, and the Jews.

But to give them more contentment, we will prove it likewise by Texts of the
New Testament; and first, from that of the Acts, Chapters 1, 2, 4, and 5.

2. A Church compounded of 8120. is more then a Parishionall, or
Congregationall Independent Church.

But the Church of Jerusalem, Acts 1.15. Acts 2.41. Acts 4.4. was a Church,
compounded of 8120. yea, of more, as appears by Acts 5.14, 26. Ergo,

The Church of Jerusalem was more, sure then a Parishionall, or Congregationall
Independent Church.

The Major Proposition is certain; for the Independents define their Church,
which Christ in his Gospel has instituted, and to which he has committed the
Keys of his Kingdom, the Power of binding and loosing, the Tables and Seals
of the Covenant, the Officers and Censures of his Church, the Administration of
his public Worship and Ordinances. Caetus, a company of Believers, meeting in
one place every Lords day, for the Administration of the Holy Ordinances of
God, to public Edification. [The Way of the Church of Christ in New England]
The due Right of Presbyteries, Chap. 1. Prop. 1.] From hence I argue thus:

The Church, whereunto cannot be applied this Definition, because of its
multitude, is more then an Independent Congregationall Church.

But a Church compounded of 8120, is a Church, whereunto cannot be applied this
Definition, etc. Ergo.

The Major is certain: The Minor I prove it; for 8120. could not meet together
every Lords day in one House, etc. For in those times Christians had not yet
any Temples, but gathered together in particular Houses, which could not
receive them all, 1. Because they were not ordinarily spacious, as great and
rich men's Houses; for as the Apostle says, There are not many wise men after
the flesh, nor many mighty, nor many noble called, but the foolish, weak, base,
and despised things of the world, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. 2. Howbeit they had been
spacious, as rich men's houses, yet could they not have received such a number.
3. Howbeit they could have received such a number, yet could not such a number
have all heard a Minister Preaching; yea, though he had the voice of a Stentor,
such, as were not all the Apostles; for St. Paul had his voice very weak, His
Letters (say they, i. e. his Adversaries) are weighty and powerful, but his
bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.10. 5. Howbeit,
they could have all met together, to hear the Word, yet could they not meet
together, to participate of the Lords Holy Table; for in those times, the
Custom was to Communicate at Table sitting, according to the Custom of other
Oriental people, in circle, every one having his hand upon his fellows breast,
and their feet without, which 8120. could not so conveniently do in one room.
6. Put the case they could have all heard the Word, and Communicated at the
Lords Table together, yet could they not so conveniently have voted in
Ecclesiastical Senates, or Iudicatories, as they pretend every Member of the
Church has power to do, and as they do actually in case of Appeal from the
Presbytery, unto the people. For I put the case, that those 8120. should have
gathered together, to judge in some matter of Doctrine, or Censure, and that
every one of the people should have employed one fourth part of an hour in
delivering of his judgment, (whereas, I Will warrant you, some of them might
employ a whole day, and at night say little to purpose) this voting would take
up 20. or 30. hours: Put the case again, they should sit four hours every day
(which hardly every Tradesman can spare) it should amount to 507. days, which
is almost two years, omitting the Lords days; so in gathering their votes once
only, there would be spent nigh upon two years: But what if there should fall
in many (put the case ten or twelve) incidents, and that some of this Reverend
Synod would protract the business, as some do here, to spin out time, as we
understand? When should these businesses be decided?

Again, What if some of the people, peradventure some considerable number
should be absent (for appearingly they could not ever all be present) could any
judgment given in their absence, bind them to condescend unto it? If it
could, it should be but a very blind obedience; if not, there must of
necessity be matter of Schism, which per se would ordinarily fall out in such
a Constitution of an Independent Church. Many things will happily here be
replied about diverse compendious ways of gathering of suffrages, as in diverse
Senates, as amongst the Romans, Athenians, the Parliaments in France, in
Venice, etc. but to no purpose, for this extravagant fashion of voting of so
great multitudes, wherein every one pretends a liberty, or licentiousness
rather, in prophesying, whereunto such ways of gathering of suffrages can no
ways be applied.

Some will answer, 1. That this Church, Acts 1. was an extraordinary Church,
compounded of Apostles, who were extraordinary Ministers.

Inst. The Text says not, that it was extraordinary or compounded of Apostles
alone. 2. The Apostles were only twelve, but this Church was of ten times
twelve, i. e. of one hundred and twenty, Acts 1.15. and eight thousand more. 3.
The twelve Apostles could not make it extraordinary in number, in such a manner
as that they could not meet together in one place; for they were but twelve,
who might have been received in as small rooms, as other men.

Some will answer, 2. It may be said, That the Church, Acts 1. was but of one
hundred and twenty persons.

Inst. I reply. But that of one hundred and twenty persons, and that of 8120.
persons, was all one formally; and they differed only in their matter, as an
Infant, and a Man of forty years. 2. That it suffices, that a Church,
according to Gods Ordinance, may be compounded of so many persons, as are
incompatible with the Constitution of an Independent Church. 3. And howbeit it
be not Acts 1. yet Scripture, Acts 2. and 4. is no less Canonical, then Acts
1.4. and yet that passage Acts 1. does the business; for that Church provided
a Minister for all the Churches of the World, which is more, then any
Independent or Congregationall Church can do. And whosoever calls this
Assembly, or the Acts thereof, extraordinary; yet may not the Independents do
so, since that from this place, some of them, as Robinson, Insti. p. 168, 169.
proves an ordinary power in the Church to ordain, and depose Her Officers; the
which proof should be very ridiculous and impertinent, if from an extraordinary
Church, or an extraordinary Act, they should infer an ordinary Church, or an
ordinary Act of an ordinary Church; It should be all one, as if they should
prove, That Independents have power to raise the dead, because the Apostles had
such a power.

3. Arg. Act. 5. After that visible judgment of God, that befell Ananias and
Saphira, verse. 5, 10. Believers were the more added unto the Lord, multitudes
both men and women, verse. 14. The number of the Disciples were much more
multiplied, cap. 6. v. 1. in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the
Priests were obedient to the Faith, ver. 7. who could not all meet together.

Arg. 4. Act. 6. v. 1. When the number of the Disciples was multiplied, there
arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows
were neglected in the daily ministration; whereupon there were appointed 7
Deacons for all the Churches of Iudaea, and sundry others: for the Church was
compounded of people of diverse Countries, Act. 2.9, 10, 11. This Argument
proves very probably, that at Jerusalem there was more then an Independent
Church, since it ordained Church Officers for sundry Congregations, or at least
for a Church, which could not meet in one place.

CHAP. IV. The same Doctrine proved from Act. 13.14.15. and 16 chap. of the
Church of Jerusalem, and Antioch.
Arg. 5. SO Act. 15. in that dispute of S. Paul and Barnabas with some Pharisees
converted to the Faith, about Circumcision, and the Observation of the
Ceremonial Law, at Antioch; it was resolved, that the question should be
determined by the Church, that was at Jerusalem: as it was. From whence I
argue thus: That Church, to whose judgment other Churches submitted
themselves, and which gave out Decrees or Sentences to be obeyed by other
Churches, was more then an Independent Congregationall Church: But the Church
that was gathered at Jerusalem, was a Church, to whose judgment other
Churches submitted themselves, or to which they were bound to submit, and which
gave out Decrees or Sentences to be obeyed by other Churches: Ergo, The Church,
that was gathered at Jerusalem, was more then a Congregationall Independent
Church.


The Major is certain; for no simple Congregationall Church can give out
Decrees and Sentences, to be obeyed by other Churches; nor will other
Independent Congregationall Churches submit thereunto.

The Minor is certain. 1. For, The Church of Antioch determined, that Paul,
and Barnabas, and certain others of them should go up to Jerusalem unto the
Apostles and Elders, about that question, Act. 15.2. 2. Because the judgment of
the Church of Jerusalem is called a Sentence, v. 19. A burden; To lay no
greater burden upon you, v. 28. Item, Decrees and Ordinances: They delivered
them the Decrees to keep, that were ordained for the Apostles and Elders, which
were at Jerusalem, cap. 16. v, 4. 3. Because not only the Church or Churches
in Antioch, but also all those of Syria and Cilicia were bound to obey them,
since they were delivered them by the Apostles, Evangelists, and Disciples, to
keep, cap. 16.4. 4. Because the style of the Epistle, and of the Judgment,
argues authority over the Churches: As that, Act. 15.24. To whom we gave no
such commandment: Ergo, They had power to command them to preach. And the
Pharisees appearingly pretended to have had some such commandment from that
Church at Jerusalem, as some infer from this Text. Item, It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden, then these
necessary things, Act. 15.25. 5. Because they commanded the Churches some
things indifferent in themselves; as, to abstain from meats offered to Idols,
and from blood, and from things strangled, v. 29. What may be answered to this
Reason, we shall, God willing, see hereafter.

Arg. 6. The Church of Antioch is one, and yet it is probable, that there were
many Congregationall Churches there; for many of the Jews and Religious
Proselytes at Antioch followed Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13. v. 43. And the next
Sabbath day, came almost the whole City together, to hear the Word of God, v.
44. And the Word of the Lord was published throughout all the Region, v. 49. so
that there were many, that professed Christ. So there were certain Prophets,
and Teachers, as Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Manahem, Act. 13. v. 1. and sundry
others, which had come down from Judea, Act. 15. v. 1. Now it is not credible,
that where there were so many Believers, and so many Preachers, but there must
have been many Congregations, and yet they are all called one Church, Act. 14.
v. 27.

CHAP. V. The same Doctrine proved by the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 2 Cor.
1. Act. 18. and of Ephesus, Act. 19.
Arg. 7. SO, 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. the Church of Corinth is called a Church.
There Paul reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath day, and persuaded the Jews
and the Greeks, Act. 18.4. And Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue
believed on the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians hearing,
believed, and were baptized, v. 8. And the Lord spoke by vision to Paul,
saying, I have much people in this City, v. 10. Paul continued there a year
and six months, v. 11. God promised him, that no man should set on him to hurt
him, v. 10. The Jews, that had made an insurrection against him, v. 12. were
drawn from the Judgment seat by Gallio the Pro-Consul or Deputy of Achaia, v.
18. Sosthenes, the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, beaten away by the Greeks, v.
17. This Gallio was not Paul's, or the Christians enemy, as appears by all his
proceedings, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where it is to be observed, that
Corinth was the Metropolis of Achaia, so potent and opulent, that it might have
disputed the Empire of the World with any other, which the Romans reckoned only
three in the World fit to do, viz. Carthage, Corinth, and Capua. Now since the
City was so great, so rich, so populous, and S. Paul by so special a manner of
Divine providence and promise assisted there, so as that Crispus the chief
Ruler of the Synagogue was converted, Gallio the Proconsul became Paul's friend,
and peradventure not far from the Kingdom of Heaven; S. Paul's credit so great,
that the Jews were drawn from the Tribunal seat, and Sosthenes beaten away;
so many Corinthians converted, and that he abode there so long: What a number,
in all probability, must have been converted? Out of all doubt, more then could
conveniently meet together in one house, to participate of all Christ's
Ordinances: And it was not Paul's custom to stay long in any place, where the
Gospel was much contradicted, or prospered not, as we may collect from the 6.
verse of this chapter, and from chap. 19. v. 9.

Arg. 8. We may prove as much from the 19. chapter, concerning the City of
Ephesus: where I pray the Reader to consider, how Ephesus was a very potent,
rich, and populous City of Asia minor, of great Trading in regard of its
situation betwixt the South and West, it being the way to sail from Syria and
Egypt into Greece and Macedonia. For all these reasons it was very famous, as
also for the Temple of Diana, its Idolatry, and many curious Arts there
professed, as Natural, and Diabolical Magic; the profession whereof, some
Independents, as it is related by M. S. use, it should seem, now and then, to
consult about men of Letters, and their Books, in these calamitous times of
Reformation. About that time that S. Paul taught there, there was one
Apollonius Thyanaeus, who, as it is related of him, erected a School of Magic
there, who by the voice of Birds knew their very imaginations and desires, etc.
This man was Christ's, and S. Paul's enemy, as it is related of him. We have also
an Adage in Erasmus, Ephesiae literae, which were some Magic characters, and
words, which made such as carried them, victorious in all they undertook: See
more about them in that Adage, in the Title Imposturae. Without doubt, Paul
converted here more then could meet in one Congregation; and yet it is called a
Church. 1. At his first entry, by the imposition of his hands, he gave the Holy
Ghost unto 12 Disciples, or rather, it was given them by Jesus Christ, upon the
imposition of his hands, so that they spoke with Tongues, and prophesied, v. 6.
and so there was now a good number of good Instruments. 2. He disputed boldly
in the Synagogue for the space of three months, persuading the things
concerning the Kingdom of God, v. 8. which he could not have done, unless he
had had many good friends there. 3. Afterward, daily in the School of one
Tyrannus, for the space of two years, v. 9.10. which without doubt he had not
continued to do so long, if the Gospel had not had great fruits there; for so
soon as some spoke evil of it, in the Synagogue, the Text says, He separated
his Disciples from it. I know, that there is some dispute about these words,
(...) in Schola Tyranni cujusdam, v. 9. some thinking, that Tyrannus is a
proper name, others, that it is a common name, signifying some great-man, of
great credit and authority, as some great Lord, perchance: and Schola may
signify a School, is a Hall, or place of recreation, such as Noblemen use to
have: But however it be taken, this Text proves plainly, that S. Paul had
great credit, was in a high est^eme, and that the Gospel had a great progress,
and a happy success. 4. But let this Tyrannus be the proper name of some
Master, or Professor in a College, as Tyrannus Sophista, as Baronius would
have him to be, tom. 1. Annal. or any other; it is a sign, whatever he was,
that he was not contrary, but became a great friend to the Gospel, since he
permitted S. Paul to teach so long in his College, during which time, it is
probable, he might be converted himself. 5. If it be a common name, or
signifies any great Lord, and that (...) signify some great Hall, Porticum, or
spacious place, as some will have it to do; it is a sign, that he had great
credit, and access to great men, since he had such an House at command to make
a School of, and that for so long time together, as the space of two years:
Without all doubt, a Nobleman, that would endure this trouble for the Gospel,
was not far from Christ, if he was not a Christian altogether; for Noblemen
willingly never favor pretended Novelties, such as the Gospel was amongst the
Ephesians. 6. And if S. Paul made choice of such a place, to the end he might
be protected by the Lord of it, as many of the Expositors of this place are of
opinion; without all doubt, there were a great party there Christians; for
Noblemen willingly will not hazard their estates for Religion, nor suffer
public exercise of a new Religion in their houses, nor protect Novelties of so
great consequence, if they see any danger, or fear a stronger party: and
therefore in all probability, the Christians were very strong there, since they
had such public exercise of their Religion, and so many friends, and those of
the greatest. 7. This may be confirmed further, by the great apprehension that
Demetrius, and all the Silver-Smiths had conceived of their utter undoing, by
reason of the notable progress of the Gospel; and by the tumult that he made,
which, it is like, he would not have done, unless he had mightily apprehended
the party of the Christians, and the undoing of Diana, and her Temple; And by
his discourse, viz. that Paul had persuaded much people, not in Ephesus alone,
but almost throughout all Asia. 8. Because, howbeit in this tumult the people
had laid hold on Gaius and Aristarchus, Paul's companions, and rushed into the
Theater; yet did they them no harm, for fear, in all likelihood, of the
Christians party; for fear fell on them all, v. 12.9. And all this may be
confirmed, for that Paul had many of the greatest of Asia for his friends, as
appears from the 31. verse, who hindered him to enter into the tumult, for
fear he should receive any hurt: And the Great men, doubtless, drew many of
meaner condition after them. 10. Because S. Paul wrought great miracles amongst
them, to the terror of some, to the admiration of others, and to the great
contentment and profit of others: To the terror of some, as appears by the
accidents that befell some Exoreists of the Jews, the sons of Sceva, chief
of the Priests; after the which, the Text says, fearefell upon them, v. 17. To
the admiration of others, because miracles, they are admirable, and especially
those that are unimitable by others: To the contentment and profit of others,
because that the handkerchiefes or aprons carried from S. Paul's body, cured
their diseases, and chased a way the evil spirits out of them, v. 12. the
which could not but draw very many Disciples unto him. 11. Because all these
things were known to all the Jews and Greeks of Ephesus, which could not be,
without at least a toleration, and some approbation of those that were in
authority: and so the Party was great and strong. 12. Because this being known
to them all, the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified, v. 17.13. Because many
that believed, came and confessed their deeds, v. 18. So then many believed.
14. Because many of them also, which used curious Arts, burned their Books,
amounting to the sum of 15000. pieces of silver, v. 19. yet it is not said,
that they all, but that many of them burned their Books; so that besides those
Magicians who burned their Books, there must have been many other Magicians
converted; And yet those Books being of so great a value, could not but belong
to many; and indeed the Text calls them many. Now in a great City,
ordinarily, are but a small number that give their minds to Letters, but far
less, that give their minds to Sciences, and yet fewer, that apply their minds
to curious Arts and Sciences; and yet here they were many. Note yet, that these
curious Arts could not be Natural Magic, nor Judicial Astrology,
Physiognomy, etc. for these Arts being lawfully used, are lawful, and
therefore it had been no need to burn the Books which treated of them, it had
been much better to sell them for the necessities of distressed Christians;
ergo, they must have been some Diabolical Arts, such as Apollonius Thyanaus
professed, whereunto belonged those Literae Ephesiae also. Now of all those,
who are given to curious Arts, very few are given to Diabolical Arts against
nature: fince then there were so many of such Diabolical Scholars, whose
conversion, above all other men, is the hardest; how many might there have been
of other men of Letters converted? but how many more of the People? It is
probable, that Tyrannus School was a School of Magic, and peradventure,
Apollonius Thyanaus was his Second or Usher, and had the title of Professor, in
his absence; and, that the Word of God grew so mightily, and prevailed, as the
Text says, v. 20. by the means of S. Paul's Mieacles, whereby the Devil, and
all his Magicians were so mightily affronted; and that those Magicians being so
affronted and converted, many others were converted by their example. 15. It is
to be noted, that all these things, viz. Miracles, Conversion of so many to the
Gospel amongst them, their Profession thereof, and the burning of those Books,
were done publicly, which appearingly they would not have done, if they had
not had a strong Party, and had been a very great number; Durst a few men, or
many inconsiderable men so publicly have renounced the Religion of their
Country, and their Great Diana of Egphesus, if they had not been backed with
force enough? For howsoever perchance some zealous men might have done so, yet
is it searce credible, that many would have done it; for of those, who receive
Christ, many, yet the best men are sundry times tempted with fear, as we see
in St. Peter his denying his Master, and in all the Apostles in flying away;
neither is it evermore needful, that we make so open profession of Christ,
when we may appearingly suffer for him; for the sheep may fly away from the
Wolf, as the woman fled into the wilderness to hide her self for a while.

This Conclusion may be further confirmed by sundry other Texts of Scripture;
and, 9. by Act. 20.7, 8, 9. There was such a throng at St. Paul's Sermon, which
he made in an upper Chamber in the night upon occasion of his departure from
Troas, that Eutychus, and doubtless also some others were forced to sit in the
windows; note that this was in the night; what a throng might there have been,
had it been on the Day time: out of all doubt, the Chamber would not have held
them all: but certainly they could not meet every Lord's Day in any one Room,
such as were their places of meeting in those times, and consequently there
must have been there more, then one of the Independent Congregationall Churches.

10. We have also clear Texts of Scripture to prove, that the Church is taken
for a greater, then for any Independent Congregation, as Act. 8.1. And at that
time, there was a great persecution against the Church, that was at Jerusalem;
This Persecution was not against one only Independent Congregationall Church,
but against the whole Churches of Judea.

11. So in the same Chap. verse. 3. Saul made havocke of the Church. And chap.
9.1. breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord:
now of this Church some members were in Damascus, v. 2. so he says of
himself, I persecuted the Church, 1. Cor. 15.9. Phil. 3.6. from whence I argue
thus,

The Church that Saul persecuted, was greater then a particular Congregation,
or an Independent Church.

But the Church here meant, is that which Saul persecuted. Ergo, The Church
here meant, is greater then a particular Congregation. The Minor is certain;
the Major I prove it; for he persecuted not one only particular Congregation,
but that, wherever there were Disciples of the Lord, chap. 9.1. in Jerusalem,
chap. 8. verse. 1.3. and in Damascus, chap. 9. v. 1.2.

12. And, Act 12.1. Herod the King stretched out his hand to vex certain of
the Church. Here the word Church must signify more, then a particular
Congregation; for Herod did it to pleasure the Jews, which he could not have
done, in vexing the members of one particular Church alone. 2. Because here
must be meant the Church, whereof Peter was a Member, v. 3. which was not one
particular Church alone, but that of all Judea, since Peter and John had a
particular Vocation, Mission, or Commission to teach there, as Paul to the
Gentiles, Gal. 2.7. or rather of the whole Militant Church of their time, since
they were Apostles, or Universal Ministers of the Gospel. 3. Because if the
Church here signify a particular Church, whereof Peter and James were Members;
then that Church might have deposed them of their Ministry: For the
Independents grant this Authority to their Churches over their Pastors: And if
it be said, that they have it over particular, but not over universal Pastors,
as the Apostles: Ergo. If they acknowledge them to be universal Pastors, they
must have universal Flocks, or Churches; so there was an universal Militant
Church upon Earth, whereof they were Pastors in their time, which is more then
a particular Congregation. 4. Put the case they had been but Ministers of
particular Churches or Congregations, yet must the word Church there signify a
Church, whereof they were both Members, for such a Church is meant here, v.
7.2, 3. But such a Church must be more then a particular one, for it must
contain both their Churches, and Persons, since they are called some of the
Church, i. e. of one Church.

13. So verse. 5. But Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for
him, i. e. for Peter, who was in Prison; And out of all doubt this was not one
only Independent Church, but all the Churches that knew of Peter's
imprisonment, and depended upon him, as upon their Pastor.

14. Give no offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32. which cannot be a simple Independent Church, but
all the Churches we converse with; 1. for Charity binds us to give no offense
to all, or any of them. 2. Because this Church is called the Church of God,
which cannot be restrained to one particular Church, if they be all the Church
of God. 3. Because it is opposed to the Jews, and the Gentiles.

15. Because the Church, wherein God did place Apostles, and Evangelists, 1.
Cor. 12.28. was not an Independent Congregation, but more; for they were
universal Ministers of the Militant Church of their time; now if there be an
universal Militant Church through all the world, how much rather may we admit
a Provincial or National Church?

16. I had rather speak five words, says St. Paul, with my understanding in
the Church then, etc. 1. Cor. 14.19. This Church, wherein the Apostle desires
to speak, is more then an Independent Congregation; for he was not tied to any
particular Congregation.

17. The Apostle wills women to keep silence in the Churches, 1. Cor. 14.38.
and these Churches are called the Church, It is a shame for a Woman to speak
in the Church, verse. 35. which cannot be a particular Congregation; for he
wills them not to speak in any Church.

We may bring many other Passages of Scripture, and Reasons; but because they
serve both for this, and the next Conclusion, therefore to decline repetitions,
we remit them unto that Conclusion.

CHAP. VII. The Second Conclusion, concerning the Subordination of Authority in
the Church.
SEcondly I say, Conclus.
that betwixt the Churches of God, there should be some Subordination in
authority, i. e. such, as wherein the judgments of inferior Churches, and
their proceedings may be subject unto the judgment of the Superior Church,
whereunto they are Subordinate: And this may be proved sufficiently from all
the Testimonies of Scripture, aleadged for the former Conclusion; For if there
be a Church more then a particular Congregationall, viz. Provincial, or
National, out of all doubt, the particular Congregations must be subject to
them, 1. because a part is subject unto the whole, as the hand unto the whole
body; nam pars magis sui totius quam sui; item, because the part is for the
whole, as a medium for its end: now the Mediums must be subject unto their
Ends, and not the Ends unto their Mediums; and Media commensurantur finibus,
non fines Mediis; neither shape we the horse back for the saddle, but the
saddle for the horse his back; so the government of particular Churches must
not be shaped or framed according to their particular exigencies and
conveniences alone, but according to that of the whole Provincial, National,
and Universal Militant Church here upon Earth, in such a manner, that it
hinder it not.

2. Particularly, it may be proved from the Custom of the Old Testament, which
is not abrogated in the New; for therein the Judgments of Synagogicall
Assemblies were subject unto that of the middle Sanedrim; and that of the
middle, to that of the Supreme: or if there were only two, that of the lesser
Sanedrim unto that of the great one; as has been proved by Mr. Rutherford,
Gillispy, Hearl, etc. Art. 1. and 2.

3. The Representative Church, or first General Council, at Jerusalem, had
Power and Authority over all the Churches of the world; since it gave them a
Minister, viz. Mathias: Ergo, All other Churches in their Judgments and Power
of creating such a Minister, were subject unto it.

Object. If it be said, That it was an extraordinary Council, 1. Because it
was indicted and convocated by Christ; 2. Because it was compounded of
extraordinary Persons; 3. Because the Persons received extraordinary gifts
there; 4. Because, it was in the birth and beginning of the Church.

Reply. The Scripture says not, That it was Extraordinary. As for the the
Proofs; I answer to the first, 1. That howbeit it was indicted and convocated
by Christ, yet was it not indicted and convocated in an extraordinary way. 2.
That a Council may be extraordinarily indicted and convocated, and yet be
ordinary in its proceedings. 3. That the Indiction and Convocation of a
Council is Extrinsecall, and Antecedent to a Council; because that it is
before that the Council be; and therefore cannot make it Intrinsecally
extraordinary when it is existent: So, Adam was made in an extraordinary way of
Earth, and by creation; and Eva of Adams Rib; and yet they were not
extraordinary persons, in their nature, existence, conservation, or accidents.
4. Neither read we, that it was convocated in an extraordinary way. 5. Neither
can it be extraordinary, because it was convocated by Christ; for by the same
reason, all that ever Christ did to men, should have been extraordinary.

To the second, I have already answered.

To the third, I answer, 1. That the extraordinary gifts were personal only,
and belonged unto the material parts of the Council, and not to the form
thereof; and therefore could not make it formally extraordinary, in quality of
a Council; for formal denominations are not taken from the matter, but from
the form; so, if there be six or seven Ecclesiastical persons assembled to
dinetogether, we call it not an Ecclesiastical Assembly. 2. I answer, That
these extra ordinary gifts were subsequent unto the Council, or at least to
that Ecclesiastical proceeding, in the election of Mathias; Now that, which is
subsequent to any thing, cannot denominate it formally, or at least in the time
precedent; when the Subject precedeth such a subsequent Adjunct or
Circumstance. See more concerning this Argument heretofore.

To the fourth, I answer, 1. That all that, which was in the birth and infancy
of the Church, was not Extraordinary; for by that reason, the Preaching of the
Gospel, and the Administration of the Sacraments should have been
Extraordinary. 2. Things, that are Ordinary, must have a beginning. 3. And
howsoever, at their beginning, they be Extraordinary in respect of time,
because, before their beginning, they were not Ordinary, but out of the
precedent order; yet they are Ordinary, in respect of Gods Ordinance or Law,
which is ordinatio rationis, that should be ordinary in Gods Church.

Object. If it be yet said, That Mathias was an Extraordinary Minister, and his
Vocation Extraordinary.

I answer, That all that is true; and yet, in this Extraordinary Vocation,
there was something Ordinary, viz. The Nomination, and Election, or Admittance
of him to be a Minister of the Church, according to the Independents opinion,
otherwise their Argument should be very impertinent, in proving from hence,
the power of the people, in choosing their Ministers. That which there was
Extraordinary, was not done by the Council, and therefore could not make the
Council Extraordinary.

As much may be said of that Council, that created seven Deacons for many
Churches.

5. But principally we will urge that business of Antioch, in that difference
betwixt St. Paul and Barnabas, on the one part, and some Pharisees converted to
the Christian Faith, on the other. Hereupon it was resolved that Paul and
Barnabas should go up to Jernsalem, unto the Apostles and Elders, about that
question, v. 2. they were sent by the Church of Antioch, v. 3. they were
received by the Church, and by the Apostles and Elders of the Church at
Jerusalem, v. 4 the Assembly being gathered at Jerusalem, the Cause was heard,
v. 4.5. considered, v. 6. discussed, v. 7. voyced, v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 judged, v. 22. the Judgment, or Decree of the
Council or Assembly, sent to Antioch, from the 22. v. to the 30. read, and
obeyed by the Church at Antioch, etc. v. 31. Here is the Church of Antioch,
judged by a superior Church, at Jerusalem; an Appeal, formed or interjected,
from the one to the other; received by the other; judged and obeyed: And
therefore it cannot be denied, but there was some Subordination betwixt these
two Churches, and that the one had authority over the other.

To this Argument some answer, 1. That if it prove any thing, it can only
conclude an Appeal from one Parish Church, or particular Congregation unto
another, since the Church of Antioch, and of Jerusalem, were no other then
Parish Churches.

Rep. 1. This Answer cannot hold, 1. Because no such thing can probably be
collected out of this Text, or of any other in Scripture; and therefore it may
be as easily rejected by us, as it is alleged by them. 2. Because hardly can
it be proved, that in those times Churches were divided into Parishes. 3.
Because an Appeal cannot be from one Parish or Congregationall Church unto
another, since their authority is equal; but only from an inferior to a
superior Church or Judicatory. 4. Because if it was from one particular
Congregation to another, then that Congregation, from which it was appealed,
was not complete in its Judgment, but had need of some Extrinsecall power,
which is against the Tenets of Independents themselves. 5. Because if we might
appeal from one particular Congregation to another, how much more from a
particular Congregation unto a Synod, wherein the Spirit of God, and especially
that of Prophecy does more abound. 6. Because the Apostles in Jerusalem were
not members of any particular Church. 7. Because, if the Assembly at Jerusalem
had been a particular or Congregationall Church, it could not have given out a
Decree, which should have bound so many Churches to obedience, viz. those of
Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, v. 23.

2. It may be otherwise answered, That it was an Appeal, but not to any
Ordinary, but an Extraordinary Church, viz. to that of the Apostles; and that
for these Reasons. 1. Because it was Extraordinarily gathered; 2. By
Extraordinary persons; 3. It was compounded of Extraordinary persons, viz. the
Apostles; 4. Because this Appeal was to the Apostles, who were infallible and
Extraordinary Ministers; 5. Because it was in the birth, and beginning of the
Gospel.

Rep. 2. This Answer cannot hold, 1. Because the Scripture declares not, that
this Church or Assembly was Extraordinary. 2. Neither is it a satisfactory
Answer, whenever we bring passages of Scripture to prove our Opinion, that they
answer us, that they are of Extraordinary things, and practices; unless the
Scripture ^^clare them to be such, or that they go beyond the general Rules
commanded in Scripture. 3. Because here the proceedings are conform to those,
that we have in other Scriptures, as in the Old Testament etc. As for the
Reasons; to the first I answer, that it cannot be proved, that it was
extraordinarily gathered. 2. And howbeit it had been extraordinarily gathered,
yet the proceedings therein might have been, and were ordinary. 3. Because the
gathering or indicting of an Assembly is Extrinsecall unto an Assembly, and
antecedent to it, and therefore cannot make it Intrinsecally extraordinary in
its proceedings. 4. It is only circumstantiall, which cannot make it
extraordinary, quoad substantiam, sed quoad modum, and that modus also is
Extrinsecall; and not so much a manner of being of the Assembly, as of him, or
them, who indict, or gather it.

To the 2. Extraordinary Persons, who gather an Assembly, are not sufficient to
make an Assembly extraordinary. 1. For then all the Churches gathered by the
Apostles had been extraordinary, which is most false. 2. If they made it
extraordinary, they must have imparted unto it some extraordinary quality,
which they did not, or at least, which appears not from Scripture; and so it
must be holden as if it were not; for Scripture is only a Rule to us in that
which it says, and not in that which it says not.

To the 3. Because it was compounded of extraordinary Persons, viz. Apostles.

This answer satisfies not the Argument. 1. It is ridiculous to call all
extraordinary, that makes against them. 2. Because it was not compounded of
the Apostles alone, but also of the Elders, verse. 2.3. 3. Because not only the
Apostles, but also the Elders judged the business, v. 2.3. 4. Howbeit this
Appeal was to the Apostles, yet was it not to them in quality of Apostles,
neither are we bound to believe it, since the Scripture has no such thing of
it. 5. If it had been to the Apostles, in quality of Apostles, or men, who were
infallible, then could they not have appealed from Paul at Antioch, to the
Apostles at Jerusalem, since he was as infallible at Antioch, as they all at
Jerusalem. 6. The judgment of the Elders had been superfluous; for the
judgment of the Apostles alone, and their Letter alone, had sufficed as
Canonical Scripture, to direct them at Antioch in their Proceedings: What
needed they add a fallible judgment to that, that was infallible, or man's
judgment to Gods? and yet they contented not themselves with that of the
Apostles alone. 7. If this Assembly at Jerusalem had been extraordinary, and
infallible, because it was compounded of extraordinary Persons, viz. of
Apostles. Ergo. so was that of Antioch, because there was St. Paul an Apostle.
8. By the same reason, it must have been ordinary and fallible, because it was
compounded of ordinary and fallible persons, viz. the Elders. 9. If the
Apostles had been there in quality of Apostles, and infallible Ministers, what
needed they so long to consult and dispute in the Assembly, v. 10? A simple
Decision, without any Consultation might have sufficed; for Disputes and
Consultatio^^ amongst men, are not of things, which they hold altogether
certain, and out of doubt, but of things uncertain and doubtful. 10. I deny
the Consequence, viz. That if a Council or Assembly be compounded of
extraordinary Persons, Ergo, it is extraordinary; for by the same reason, if
there were seven, or eight Apostles dineing or sleeping together, it should be
an extraordinary and Apostolical dinner or sleeping. 11. Neither are all
things, that are done by extraordinary Persons, extraordinary; for the Apostles
did eat, drink, and sleep, neither yet was that Extraordinary Eating,
Drinking, or Sleeeping, but ordinary, as in other men. 12. Because the Apostles
were material parts, or members of the Assembly; their gifts, as infallibility
and offices were personal, and denominated themselves only, and not every
Assembly, wherein they were, or might be, for as the Form that denominateth
their persons, belongs only to them, so does the denomination proceeding
from it. 13. Because the parts of Assemblyes and Consociations, may have
contrary Forms and denominations, secundum entiatem, as we see in Republics;
for the whole Republic may be rich and potent, and the members thereof very
poor, because of the great Tributes they pay to the State, and the Statepoor;
and the members or Subjects rich; because of the Subjects great Trading and
profit, and their small Contributions to the State; So in the Church, in an
Ecclesiastical Assembly of Prophets, as that of Achab, there may be one
Prophet infallible, yea, if there had been 400. yet that Council had been; as
it was, fallible, because of the Plurality of the votes of the false Prophets;
so an Army of 40000000. of Pigmees and Dwarfs is a great Army, and every one of
them a little man.

To the 3. I have already answered.

To the 4. Answ. 1. It was not to the Apostles, in quality of Apostles, as I
have proved it. 2. Because it was also to the Elders. 3. I deny the
consequence; for by the same reason it should be ordinary, since it was to the
Elders, who were ordinary Ministers.

To the 5. 1. I deny the consequence, for all things that were in the beginning
of the Church were not extraordinary, since many of them continue now as
ordinary. 2. Because if it be extraordinary, because it was in the beginning of
the Church, Ergo, all that we have in Christian Religion must be Extraordinary,
since there is no thing in it, but it had a Beginning: so Faith, Justification,
the Sacraments and all the Ordinary Ministers of the Church should be
extraordinary, since they have a beginning with the Church. 3. Howbeit it was
Extraordinary in respect of Time, as all things at their first Beginning, yet
was it not Extraordinary in respect of Gods Law, which ordains it to be
ordinary.

Answ. 3. This Argument may be other ways eluded, in saying, that this
business was not judged at Jerusalem by way of Appeal, but by way of
Council, not by Judges, but by Friends, and Brethren.

Rep. But this Evaston is no better then the rest; 1. Because the Text
contains no such thing; and we cannot take it upon their word, no more then
they will take it upon ours, unless we prove it, as we here do. 2. Because
heretofore we have shown many, yea almost all the conditions necessary to an
Appeal, whereof the rest may be inferred by necessary consequence. 3. Because
S. James (who as some Divines conceive, was the Moderator or Praeses of the
Assembly) says not, My Counsel is, but My Sentence is; which is not the style
of a Counselor to a friend, but of a Judge. 4. The Judgment in the Text is
called a Decree. 5. If it had been but a Council, the Pharisees might as well,
yea more easily have rejected it, then the Judgment at Antioch, which they did
not, but acquiesced therein, for any thing we know to the contrary. 6. Some may
peradventure prove it in this manner; That, if it had not been a Synod, and a
superior Iudicatory in respect of Antioch, those of Antioch had not sent the
two Parties, but had done better, to have sent some indifferent Person; for
indifferent Persons are more proper to consult a business, then the Parties.
7. If it had been judged at Jerusalem by way of Counsel only, this Counsel
had likely been only given to the Church of Antioch; for counsel ordinarily is
only given to those, who desire and crave it: But so it is not here, for the
Church of Jerusalem not only judged so concerning the Church of Antioch alone,
but also of all others; and the Apostles, and their Disciples urged this
Judgment upon all the rest of the Churches, where they passed.

Some New England Preachers answer, That this Assembly at Jerusalem clear up
the truth dogmatically; for the word translated Decrees, is in the Original
(...) Act. 16.4. but imports not to Censure. Item, that they cannot see, why
the ultimate power of Censures may not reside in the Congregation, as well as
in the Synod Provincial, National, or Oecumenicall.

A.S. Answ. This cannot hold, 1. For whoever have a Dogmaticall power, they
have also a power to Censure; for he who may judge, that this must be believed,
and according to Gods Word, meriteth such an Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
punishment, wherefore may he not also sentence the Delinquents, who merit to be
so censured? 2. Because, in giving a Dogmaticall power to some, and a
Corrective power unto others, they divide the Keys, and give one unto one
Assembly, and another unto another, and so make one Assembly see with the
others eyes. 3. These Powers were not separated in the Church, or
Church Assemblies in the Old Testament, Ergo, No more should they be separated
in the New, since the union of these two Powers proceeds not from any
Ceremonial Law, but either from the Law of Nature, or the Political
Ecclesiastical Law, in so far forth as grounded on the Law of Nature. 4.
Because such a way were, as M.S. speaks, to make the one Iudex, and the other
Carnisex, the one to be the Judge, and the other the Executioner, 5. Because in
all States, and Civil Governments, Judges, or Senates, who have the
Dogmaticall power, have also the Corrective or Coercive power; and there is the
same reason for both. 6. The Text contains no such thing; neither can they
show us in any part of Scripture any ground for any such division of these two
Powers; Neither can that silly Grammatical observation of the word (...) serve
them; for the Apostle serves not himself of this word in the whole latitude
of all its Grammatical significations, that it may have according to its
Etymology and Derivation; but in a Legal way, as it is taken in Law, for
Placitum, Statutum, Institutum, Decretum, Edictum, as in the Civil Laws,
wherein these words signify Laws, or Ordinances: and Calvin tells us, in
Lexico Iuridico, that Dogma, est lex docens scientiam fidei, l. 2. F. F. ad
Senatus-con. Vellejan Decretum: and Senatus-consultum significat, pro quo
Modestinus (...) F. F. de excus. (...) dixit: Now (...) is nothing else, but
Decretum, Scitum, Plebiscitum. The cause wherefore the Apostle takes it in a
Court, or Law-signification, is, because that they were making Ecclesiastical
Laws, and so took it ratione subjectae materiae. 7. And this may be confirmed,
because they are not only called dogmata, but it is added (...) in the Text, i.
e. quae decreta fuerunt ab Apostolis, that were decreed by the Apostles. 8. And
what else is (...), but to dogmatize, or to bring in a new Opinion, Custom, or
Ceremony, Col. 2.20. which here was not done by any private man, but by
authority of a Council. 9. Neither can the Authors of this Evasion ever show
us, that Dogma, in Law, is taken for a power merely dogmaticall, separated from
all coercive or corrective power. And moreover, if this will not satisfy them,
we have, Act. 15. v. 24. To whom we commanded no such thing; Ergo, Those of
Antioch supposed, that that Council at Jerusalem had power to command; and
the Council denies not that they had Power to command, but the Act of the
Power, viz. that they had commanded any such thing; v. 28. It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden, then these
necessary things; Ergo, they laid a burden, but no greater burden upon them. 2.
It was laid upon them. 3. It was necessary, necessitate praecepti: But they,
who had such a power, had they not, think we, power also to censure. 12. Beza
tells us also, that in his Codex, in chap. 15. v. 41. this is added, (...),
as in some Latin codex, Praecipiens custodire praecepta Apostolorum and
Seniorum; which argues, that they had not only a Directive, but also an
Imperative power over the Churches, in virtue of that Decree of the Council.
13. The Dogmaticall power is like unto the Legislative power, and whoever has
a Legislative power, has also a Corrective power. 14. This Council had not
only a Dogmaticall, but also a Legislative power about things of themselves
indifferent, as appears here, in making a Law, that the Christians should
abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled.

4. Some (it may be) will find out this Evasion, and say, That it was not a
Council, nor an ordinary Decree of Ecclesiastical Judges, but of Arbiters.

Rep. But 1. the Text has no such thing. 2. Arbiters are either given by the
ordinary Judge, ordinarily called Iudices pedanei; or chosen by the Parties
themselves, otherwise called Compromissarii: If ye grant me the first, then
particular Churches are subject unto Superior Ecclesiastical Iudicatories,
that give them such Arbiters, which is all we look for: If the second, then if
the Word of God has granted an Independent liberty unto the Church, she ought
not to quit it, in making her self subject and dependent; for we cannot dispose
of our own liberty, granted to us by Christ, to make our selves servants, or
subject to men in Matters of Religion. 3. We cannot submit Gods Cause to
others, then to whom he has submitted it himself. How could they accept them
for Judges, who had no vocation of God to judge them?

5. Arbitrary Judges, that are given, have a Superior power over the Church,
that they judge; and so ye acknowledge, that the Church of Jerusalem had power
over that of Antioch, if that of Jerusalem was an Arbiter datus aut delegatus.
2. These given Arbiters are given by a Judge or Superior: Ergo, They
presuppose some Superior Judge over the Party judged.

6. The Compromissory Arbiter judges not according to the Law, but according
to equity: but in all Ecclesiastical judgments, he that judges must judge,
according to the Law, or Gods Word. Ergo, He that judges in Ecclesiastical
judgments cannot be a Compromissory Arbiter, who only properly is an Arbiter,
in so far as an Arbiter is distinguished from a Judge.

7. The Judgment of a Compromissory Arbiter cannot hold, nor oblige me to
obedience, since it is not grounded on public Authority, but on the will of
the Parties, who, qua tales, are private persons; But the judgment of the
Church of Jerusalem, can, and must hold, and oblige all the Churches of that
time to obedience, according to that which the Council intended, by the
Judgment.

8. Compromissory Arbiters only judge of the Parties, which compromise to
submit themselves to their judgment: But the Church, Apostles, and Presbyters
at Jerusalem judged, not only of the Parties that compromissed to submit unto
them, but of all the Churches, as the Text tells us.

9. In Arbitrary judgments ordinarily, they are the Parties that make choice
of their Arbiters, and not a third, that ordains them, as the Church of
Antioch did in this Case, in sending this Message or Embassage to Jerusalem.

10. Whether it was an extraordinary Counsel, or judgment of Arbiters; yet
follows it not, that such judgments of themselves are ill, or against Gods
Word; since God never ordained, nor the Apostles ever made choice of any breach
of Gods Law, or of any disorder, to establish any order in his Church by; for
God needs not the Devils help to do his Work; he can do it himself without
him.

11. If they were Compromissorii Iudices, then particular or Parishionall
Congregations may combine themselves together in a consociation, and give power
to Classes, and to Synods, to be their Judges, which is the practice of all the
Reformed Churches.

5. It may yet be answered, That in all this proceeding, there was no Reference
or Appeal, no Arbitrary judgment, nor any Counsel concerning the Church of
Antioch; but only an examen of a Message, sent or pretended to have been sent
from Jerusalem, viz. Of some Pharisees, Members of the Church of Jerusalem, who
pretended to have had charge from the Apostles, to urge the Circumcision, and
the Observation of the Ceremonial Law, as may be collected from verse 24.

Rep. 1. This is not true, 1. Because all this is said without Scripture. 2.
And verse. 24. it is not said, That these Pharisees pretended to have had any
such charge from the Apostles; but the Apostles say, That they gave them no
such command: But this Argument may seem somewhat weak; for howsoever the Text
have it not in terminis, yet seems it to follow of the Text by a Moral
necessity; for that expression, To whom we gave no such commandment, seems to
presuppose some pretention of a commandment on the Pharisees part. 3. And
howbeit it is said, That they went out from the Apostles, yet is it not said,
they were Members of the Church of Jerusalem. 4. Neither read we, That there
was any dispute about their Message, or Commission, but about their Doctrine.
5. Because the Sentence or Decree is only about their Doctrine. 6. Because in
that Decree, not only the Pharisees are sentenced, but all the Churches; upon
which the Observation of the Canons of the Apostles is enjoined; only there is
a word, in passing, said of the Pharisees; but however it be, that was no way
the principal Question.

Finally, here comes in M. S. in an ordinary Independent way, never proving
any thing Positively, that they believe (for in this point, they show
themselves the weakest of all Sectaries) but ever more denying what we prove,
which requires no great abilities, as is known and confessed amongst all men,
that do but pretend to learning; neither can they do otherwise; for they will
not be tied in time to come to any Positive Doctrine, no not so much as to that
they hold at this present, for any thing I can collect from the Apologeticall
Narration: only they stand stoutly to some Nego's, and will, that we prove
all, and they nothing at all.

He tells us then in the third Chapter of his Book, that before this Argument
of ours Acts 15. can hold, we have ten Particulars to prove; 1. That the
Apostles sat here in quality of Apostles. 2. That this Council had their
state and set times of meeting. 3. That they had Authoritatem Citationis. 4.
That the Members of this Synod were sent hereunto by the particular Churches,
over whom they claimed jurisdiction. 5. That only Churchmen had power to sit
there. 6. That it had as well power to make Laws of things indifferent, as to
impose things necessary. 7. That the Churches of Syria, and Cilicia, had their
Delegats sitting there. 8. That Paul and Barnabas sat as Commissioners, for
the Church of Antioch. 9. That ordinary Synods may proceed, as they did, in
saying, It seemed good, etc. 10. That these words in the close of the Epistle,
ye shall do well, verse 29. did import some intimation, That if they did not
submit, some further course must be taken with them. Item, In this Chapter he
tells us, That Presbyterians agree not about the Pedigree of their
Government; and to tell us all this, he imployeth no less, then ten Pages in
Quarto in a very small Print.

As for the first, we have already proved it sufficiently, and attend his
reply; As for that ridiculous demand of his, that we prove, That the Apostles
waved and silenced the Spirit of Infallibility.

Answ. They might have it, and not wave it, howbeit they sat not there in
quality of men that had it; for the Elders that had it not, sat there in the
same quality with them. Some dispute also, 1. Whether the Apostles, in all
times, and in all places, and upon all occasions, yea, sleeping and sick, had
the gift of Infallibility in actu secundo, so that their will could not hinder
the External Act. See the Example of Nathan, S. Peter, Thomas, etc. who had
the gift of Infallibility in actu primo; but sundry times they had it not in
actu secundo. 2. Some doubt also, what is the gift of Prophecy or
Infallibility; Whether it be liker unto an Habitude, which is a Permanent
quality, or to a Passion or Afflatus, which is not Permanent, but suddenly
flies away.

To the second: 1. It is but a circumstance of time, which follows
necessarily of the substance of the thing. 1. For if Counsels sit, they must
sit in some time; but in what time, whether once, twice, or thrice a year, that
depends upon other Circumstances, as of Church opportunities, and exigences, of
the Civil Magistrates Permission, etc. 2. In things Circumstantiall,
Discipline depends on the Law of Nature according to the Apologists own
Confession.

To the third; It may be necessarily inferred of the Authoritative power; for
where there is an Authoritative power to judge, and censure, there is evermore
an Authoritative power of citation, and calling of all those, who are within
the compass of such a jurisdiction; for citation is a medium, whereby we come
to judgment; and it is a maxim most certain, that Media accipiunt suam
necessitatem a fine; finis mediis conciliat amabilitatem.

To the fourth; Some think it very probable, that Paul and Barnabas were sent
thither from Antiochia: but Paul was not Minister of any particular Church; no
more was Barnabas, for any thing we read in Scripture; and therefore
appearingly, they could not be sent from Antioch, a their particular Ministers;
but since they were also Universal Ministers, they might receive a particular
Commission from particular Churches, since the Apostolate, the charge of an
Evangelist, and Prophet, contain in themselves virtually the charges of
ordinary Ministers.

If it be said, That they were Party, and therefore could not sit as Judges; It
may be answered, That men cannot be taken for Party, when they compear before
the Synod; and when they are taken for Party by Innovators and Sectaries only,
and persevere in the Doctrine already received in the Church; for if that were
admitted, That every man promiscuously might be taken for Party, then might a
Felon, or Traitor, take all his Judges for Party, and so never be judged: and
therefore in Judgment, when any one will decline the Sentence of his Judges,
and take them for Party, his Reasons are examined and considered, whether they
be of force and validity, or not. 2. It may be, that they were chosen to be
Members in the Synod, before that this dispute fell out. 3. It is not needful,
that we prove all singular Circumstances from Scripture: It will serve our turn
if we prove, That it was some Occumenick, National, or Provincial Synod, from
whence we may infer, by necessary consequence, that Commissioners were sent
from particular Churches thereunto. Now whether S. Paul and Barnabas were there
in quality of Commissioners, it is not needful to know. 4. This Assembly was a
General, or National Assembly, as we have proved: Ergo, Either it was a set
Assembly, as the Popes Consistory; or as a Chapter; or such as we have taken it
for: But ye deny the first two: Ergo, Ye must grant the third, or give some
other. 5. Ye your selves admit Synods, to which particular Congregations send
their Commissioners, Delegates, or Messengers, call them, as it pleases you:
Ergo, Ye cannot deny them; If ye deny their quality or power to judge, that is
another question, which is different from this.

To the fifth, I prove it, For no man has power to judge in Ecclesiastical
Causes, but they who have the abilities, such as are only Church Officers;
because no man can take this office, but he who is called, as Aaron; such as
are not every one of the people; amongst whom, as ye say, many have not
confidence enough, but are timorous, and others are rude or impertinent. If ye
had answered all my Book, ye might have found more Reasons: but of this you are
like to hear more, God willing, in a particular Question.

To the sixth, This Council imposed upon the Church some things indifferent of
their own Nature, as that of abstaining from blood, and things strangled; for
howsoever they were necessary, necessitate praecepti, in so far as commanded;
yet were they not necessary in themselves, or necessitate medii; and so they
are called in the Text, things necessary, partly necessitate praecepti, partly
of convenience, or remedy, for to avoid offense: Some call it necessitas non
facti, sed facientis, when the thing of it self is not needful, but the Agent
makes it necessary to himself, as we do, in abstaining from things, whereat
our Brethren may take offense, howbeit we give them none. 2. Your Independent
Church takes that Authority unto her self, as when she ordains a certain day,
and a certain hour, for her Sermons and meetings: Wherefore then may not a
Synod do it? 3. The Church by Gods Authority, may ordain of things Necessary;
so may she of things Indifferent, when they may conduce to a thing that is
necessary; Nam media accipiunt necessitatem a fine. 4. For howsoever some
things be indifferent in general, yet are they not such in particular, in
matter of Practice; for then they become necessary, because of some particular
determinations, and references, that they have to some good ends, in respect of
time, place, persons, etc. 5. This is but one only Point of Presbyterian
Government, and not all; and howbeit ye should gain all this, (as ye do not)
yet would it not follow, that the Presbyterian Discipline were absolutely to be
condemned.

To the 7. The Proofs of the 4. may prove this also. 1. For if it was a
Provincial, National, or General Synod or Council, every Church concerned
therein, must have had their Commissioners. 2. Ye your selves acknowledge
Synods to have a Synodicall authority, (howbeit, not as we) and thereunto ye
send your Messengers, as ye call them: and therefore, what right ye claim to
send your Messengers, the same had the Churches of Syria, and Cilicia, to send
theirs to Jerusalem; but if they did it not, the more were they to blame for
such neglect: Now it suffices me, to prove that they had power, and were bound
to send their Commissioners thither.

To the 8. I answer, 1. It is not needful we prove, that Paul, and Barnabas
were Commissioners at Jerusalem, for the Church of Antioch: It may be, that
they were their Commissioners; it may be, that they had some others. 2. It
suffices, that they had power to send their Commissioners thither, and were
bound to do it: And this binds them to submit themselves to their Decrees.
3. This Disputer is absurd, whereas he will oblige us to prove every
particular, yea individual Circumstance: It is a common Maxim, that, de
singularibus non datur scientia: The Scripture obliges us not to know all the
singular Circumstances of every thing it propounds; but it delivers us
Documents of all things necessary unto Salvation, which either contain
formally, or from whence may be concluded all that we are bound to know, either
directly, or indirectly, and per deductionem ad impossible, mediately or
immediately.

To the 9. I answer, that every particular Minister may preach, and admonish in
the name of God; for they are all Ambassadors of God: We are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; We pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. It is also said, that the Lord did work with
them, Mark. 16.20. and that they are co-operators, or laborers together with
the Lord, 1 Cor. 3.9. Since therefore they are Gods co-operators, or laborers
with the Lord, and the Lord with them, yea in their Deliberations, Judgments,
and Preachings; wherefore may they not say, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost,
and to us, viz. to the Holy Ghost, as the prime cause, and to them, as to his
Ministers and Ambassadors; yea, if it seems good to the Holy Ghost, it should
seem good to all his Ministers. 2. And I pray you, M.S. when it seems good to
an Independent Minister to declare the Doctrine, that denies Christ's Divinity,
heretical, whether think you, seems it not good to God, and to the Holy Ghost
also? and if it seem good to both, why may not the Minister say. It seems
good to God, and to me also, to declare this Heretical? 3. And if that is
bound, or loosed in Heaven, which the Church binds, or loses on Earth;
wherefore, when they bind, or loose sinners, may they not say, It seems good
to God, and to me also, to loose this sinner?

To the 10. I answer, It is altogether ridiculous; for, this one particular
expression contains not all the expressions that are used in Ecclesiastical
Judgments; the Church uses not evermore Comminations in her Judgments, but
against such as are disobedient, and that after sundry Admonitions; Neither is
every Judgment or Law evermore expressly Penal, as ye might have learned both
out of your Civil, and Canon Law.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein the same Doctrine is further confirmed by Reason.
THis Subordination of Ecclesiastical Iudicatories, may be likewise proved by
the practice of the Old Testament; for in the Old Testament, there were
Synagogicall and Synedriall Iudicatories; amongst them there was a
Subordination, and from the first they appealed to the second; neither find we
ever, that God abrogated it, since it was not Ceremonial, as I have showed.

2. It may likewise be proved from the Subordination of Civil Iudicatories, in
all great Civil States; and there is a like reason for them both.

3. If it be granted, that there are Ecclesiastical Assemblies greater in
Authority one then another, as appears by all these former Texts; either this
inequality of Greatness or Power is by Co-ordination, or by Subordination: But
it cannot be by Co-ordination; for one coordinate Power has no power over the
other, as that of Jerusalem had over the rest of the Churches, in giving them
a Pastor, Act. 1.2. and 6. chap. and Laws and Commands, Act. 15. and 16. Ergo,
It must be by Subordination; And then the power of the subordinate Church is
under that of the superior Church, whereunto it is subordinated, as in Civil
Iudicatories, subordinated one to another.

4. If there were no Subordination of Ecclesiastical Iudicatories, in matters
of Power and Authority, or their Authoritative Power; then any particular
Congregation, by an irresistible power, in despite of all the Churches of the
the World, might establish amongst themselves all sort of most damnable
Heresies, commit all sort of sin and uncleanness, and so infect all the
World with their wickedness, and no Churches, or Christians, qua tales, could
hinder them, or say to them (even as the Pope pretends they cannot say to him)
Domine, quare hoc facis?

5. But can our Adversaries, risen up of the new, show any such Government as
theirs in the Church of God, in any time, since Christ's Incarnation, yea, from
the Creation of the World to this time, wherein there was no Subalternation,
but a mere Independency amongst all Ecclesiastical Iudicatories?

We could wish they would show us the Institution of it in Scripture, where any
where Christ commanded, that all Churches should be altogether Independent, and
consequently Incorrigible? Where at any time he granted them such a
Licenciousnesse of power to go irresistably to Hell?

What an abominable Licenciousnesse is this, to plead on this manner, for all
sort of Independency, and of Ecclesiastical Impunity, in doing of all sort of
wickedness and mischief.

6. The want of this Subordination takes away all sort of remedy against the
offenses of particular Congregations.

7. It destroys the Unity of the Militant visible Church, both Provincial,
National, and Universal; which cannot appear, but in a Provincial,
National, or Universal Synod, or Council.

8. And consequently, the visibility of the Church, for she is not visible, but
in her Symbol or Confession of Faith, and Canons of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, as appears by the Symbol of the Apostles.

9. To take away such Representative Churches, as Synods, is to destroy the
External Church Communion of Saints, or the Communion of Saints amongst diverse
Churches, which cannot so well appear, as in Synods, where their Real
Communion one with another is best represented; for if particular Churches be
destroyed by persecution, and a little remnant escape, as sometimes it falls
out upon the Turks Invasion, and the Papists Massacres, as woeful experience
has furnished us but too many examples in Germany, France, England, and
elsewhere, what External Union or Communion of Saints can appear amongst you;
since in such a case ye will neither receive men in age to the Lords Table, nor
the children of such Martyrs to Baptism; and so all the recompense they can
have amongst you for all their sufferings for the Name of Christ, is, That they
are like to be utterly excluded from all Church Communion whatsoever.

10. So this is a very poor comfort for Martyrs, who having suffered much in
their own persons, lost their wives, children, and goods, for the good Name of
Christ, shall no more now be esteemed Christians after all their sufferings,
whereas they were thought to be of the very best before that time.

11. Such a Subordination of Representative Churches in matter of Government,
is a means very necessary to conserve the Churches; for by the Authoritative
power thereof Churches are kept in Order, Unity, and Union, and so preserved,
as we see in France, Holland, Scotland, and elsewhere, ever since the beginning
of the World; whereas by the contrary Independent way, consisting of disunion,
they may easily be destroyed, as we see in the innumerable number of Sects,
that in a short space of time have sprouted out of the Independent Sect; no
less opposite one to another, then to us.

12. If there be no Subordination of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, but every one
be Independent, and every member of the Church have a vote in all
Ecclesiastical matters, and be made acquainted with all that passes, as
amongst the Independents; hardly can the Counsels, and the Resolutions, that
are taken for mutual conservation, be kept secret, but they will every hour
be betrayed, and so the Church given up to her Enemies: which appearingly
cannot so easily fall out in the Synodicall way, wherein 20. 30. or 40. only,
and those of the best sort, and the wisest men, are acquainted with the
business: for, in all moral probability, it is not credible, but 20. 30. or
40. may better keep a business secret, then 20000. or 30000, whereof the
Churches that they represent, may be compounded.

13. Since Christ ordained Universal Ministers to rule over the whole Militant
Church, and all the particular Congregations thereof, wherefore should there
not be some unity of Government amongst them? and wherefore may they not all
depend on one Council, as well as on one man? certainly, there is the same
reason for both; for as the Apostles, under the notion of Apostles, and
Church-Ministers, endowed with extraordinary gifts, and namely of
Infallibility, governed the whole Church extraordinarily: so do General
Councels, endowed with ordinary gifts, govern it ordinarily.

14. I would willingly enquire of the Independents, to what Church were added
so many thousands, that were baptized by the Apostles, and added unto the
Church in one day? Whether to a Particular Congregation, or to a greater
Ecclesiastical Consociation? It could not be to a Particular Congregation, 1.
For the Reasons I have already produced. 2. Because the Apostles were not
Particular, but Universal Ministers, set over the Universal Militant Church;
and therefore, in virtue of their charge, admitted them to be Members of all
the Churches, whereof they were Ministers. 3. Because they were of diverse and
sundry Countries: neither is it credible, that to be a Member of the Church,
they were bound to quit their Countries, and to stay at Jerusalem, howsoever
so long as they did stay there, they might participate as well of all the rest
of Gods Ordinances, as of Baptism: Ergo, they were added to some greater
Consociation, viz. to that, and to all those, whereof the Apostles were
Ministers; for out of all doubt, the Apostles, who baptized them, could not
refuse to admit them unto the Lords Table, wherever they celebrated the
Sacrament.

If it be answered, That this Argument only proves a greater Real, but not a
greater Representative Church.

I reply, That directly only it proves a greater Real, viz. an Universal
Militant Church; but yet, by consequence, it proves also a Representative
Church of the same extent; for every Real Church may be represented in its
Commissioners, or Messengers (as ye call them) that meet in a Synod.

If it be yet answered, that this may prove a greater Representative Church,
but not endowed with any Authoritative power.

I reply, It is a power of Judging, which must be Authoritative, and cannot be
merely Consultative, such as is that of every Tinker, who may give counsel to
a Church; and that of one Church, which has power to give counsel to a
thousand, yea, to ten thousand, represented in a Synod; for particular
Churches, being parts of the whole Provincial, National, or Universal
Militant Church, must be subject to the whole; for it is a Maxim in
Philosophy, that Totum non subjicitur parti, sed pars toti; Item, Totum non
regitur motu partis, sed Pars Totius: And they distinguish between the
Universal, and Particular Inclination of things, and tell us, That a part does
sometimes quit its Particular Inclination, to be ruled according to the
Inclination of the whole; as when water, which according to its Particular
Inclination descends, yet to avoid the vacuum (whereof might ensue the
overthrow of the world) against its Particular Inclination, but according to
its Universal Inclination, as it is for the Total, it ascends: And so it is,
or should be in Political, and all Spiritual Consociations; for the parts
cannot be conserved, but in the whole. The Politicians also tell us, that Lex
paerticularis cedit generali; so Laws, that concern Particular Cases or
Consociations, must give place to the general Law of more general Cases, and
Consociations; for the general good of Consociations, is to be preferred
before the Particular good of Particular Persons, or Particular Consociations.

15. All the Churches here upon Earth make up one Republike, tied together by
Faith, Charity, and other Particular Christian virtues; as that in Heaven
another: Now it is a Maxim in Politics, Salus Reipub. suprema Lex esto. Ergo,
There must be one Law, common to this whole Christian Republike: If so, Ergo,
There must be some visible Judges to judge according to this Law, otherwise in
vain should we have it; Now this visible Judge can be no other, but a Synod;
For if ye say, it is Christ, then we cannot be legally Judged, according to
this Law, till the day of Judgment, when Christ shall Judge the quick and the
dead; which is most ridiculous.

16. C. C. acknowledges, That by Baptism we are made Members of the Universal
Militant Church, and consequently Subjects of some Christian Republike: Ergo,
There are some Judges to judge such Subjects: But those Judges are not in one
Particular Church; for by Baptism, as he says, They are not admitted to the
society of any Particular Church. Ergo, They must be judged by some greater
Representative Church, which must be either Classical, Provincial, National,
or Oecumenicall.

17. It is a general Rule of S. Paul in matter of Church Government, That the
Spirits of Prophets be subject to Prophets, 1 Cor. 14 32. Which cannot at all,
or at least cannot easily, and commodiously be obtained in the Independent
Opposition, or Coordination, as in some Subordination of Ecclesiastical
Assemblies or Iudicatories; for when all are equal, there is no subjection of
one to another.

18. This Doctrine of Subordination of Inferior Ecclesiastical Iudicatories
to their Superiors, with a Coordination of Inferior Iudicatories, or
Ecclesiastical Assemblies amongst themselves, is most convenient to the nature
of the Sacraments, in receiving unto them all such, as are our Brethren in
Christ; whereas a mere Opposition, Independency, or at most a Coordination of
Churches, founded on a mere will and charity, without any Law, is repugnant to
it, in so far forth, as it debarreth from them such as are worthy to be
received.

19. The Apostle commands, That all things be done decently, and in order, 1
Cor. 14.40. And tells us, That God is not the Author of Confusion, but of
Peace, Verse. 33. Now, where there is no Subordination of Ecclesiastical
Judicatories; When none of them is subject one to another, but they are all
equal; when one Church, be she never so corrupted in life and Doctrine, has
as great Authority over all the Churches of the World, represented together in
a Synod, be they never so sound in their life and Doctrine, as they all have
over her, What can be done decently and in order? I adjure you all, tell me in
Conscience, Whether ye think that God can be the Author of any such order, or
rather of so abominable a confusion.

20. I could show, how that this Subordination is most convenient, and the
contrary Independency, Opposition, or Coordination of Churches founded on man's
mere will, is most repugnant, 1. unto the perfection, that appears in all
Gods Works, both in those of Nature, and of Grace: 2. To Gods Truth and Wisdom,
in giving no better means for redressing of Offenses. 3. To his Justice, in
making of Laws, that cannot suppress Heresies, and all sort of wickedness in
disordered Churches. 4. To his Mercy, that in furnishing us so graciously so
many means, and helps to Salvation, he should have given us this Independent
Anarchy, to cross them all, yea, to lead us irresistibly to Hell. 5. To his
Providence, in providing of means, so disproportionate, and incommensurated for
so excellent an end, viz. for the peace of the Church; means more fit to
trouble, then to procure her peace, and to put all the Churches of God in
confusion, rather then in order.

21. Is it credible, that God should have given his Son to death, to purchase
us an Order, whereby all Churches might live in Peace and Unity, and yet make
them to quit all Sacramental Communion one with another, having no common
Confession of Faith, nor any common plat-forme of Ecclesiastical Government
among them?

Whether in the Militant visible Church there should be an Jndependency of
Churches.
CHAP. I. The Question Stated.
AS M. S. of the first Question made two, so does he here of the second other
two, viz. his third Question for Presbyteriall Government, whereof he treated
in the former chap. and his 4. Question of Independency, whereof he treats in
this his 4. chap. but they are not two Questions, but two diverse Opinions about
one, and the same Question; so having committed this fault, he commits again
another, much worse; for he goes on very confusedly in the beginning of his
Dispute, and without ever stating the Question, or declaring what he means by
Independency, he goes about to justify his Independent government in a
Cataskevastique, or assertive way: wherefore to the end that the Reader may the
better judge both of his Cataskevastique, and of my Anaskevastique way, I will
state the Question, and show, what he has to prove, and I to refute. 1. Note
therefore I pray thee, courteous Reader, that Independency is a sort of
Ecclesiastical Government, whereby every particular Church is ruled by its
Minister, its Doctor, some Ruling Elders, and all those, who are admitted to be
Members thereof, who, how Heterodox, and Haereticall soever they be in
Doctrine, and how wicked and damnable soever they be in their Lives, will not
yet submit to any Ecclesiastical power whatsoever, yea not to that of all the
Churches of the world, were they never so Orthodox and holy in their lives.

2. Note, that the reason, wherefore they will not submit to any
Ecclesiastical authority, according to their opinion, is not out of any
disobedience in themselves, as they pretend, but for want of authority in the
Churches; for they believe that howbeit any particular Church, or any of her
members should fall into never so damnable Heresies, or wickedness, that yet
God has not ordained any authoritative power to judge her; but that her power
is as great, as that of all the Churches in the world; and that all that they
can do in such a case, is no more, but only to Counsel her, as she may do
them; and in case she will not follow their Counsel, that they ought to do
nothing else, but only declare, that they will have no more communion with
her, as she may likewise do to them in the like case, viz. if they will not
follow her Advice, when she is offended with their Doctrine, Government, Life,
or Proceedings.

The Question then betwixt us, and them, is, whether God has established any
such Independent Government in his Church, or not.

We deny it. M. S. affirms it, and argues as follows:

M. S. Page 75. of his Book, Who then can lay any thing to the charge of this
Government? That can I, quoth A. S. in effect, page 38, 39. etc. I have 10.
Reasons or Objections against it. A. S. I confess that M. S. braggeth of this
his Independent Government, as his words express; but it is a manifest
untruth, that ever I bragged of 16. Reasons, as M. S. most foolishly
represents me here: It is A. S. his custom to bring Reasons, and not to
boast of them; as it is M. S. his manner to boast and bragg with high words,
without any reason at all: And for answer to this, I say there is no one such
word or expression in all my Book: It is but M. S. his words, and fiction.

M. S. I shall not spend time in transcribing these your Reasons, but shall
desire the Reader, though it may be some discourtesie unto you, to take your
Book into his hand.

A. S. I am bound to your courtesy, good Sir, that will not let my weak
Reasons appear in Front against your strong Answers: But since it is not M. S.
his pleasure, that they appear in his most worthy Book, I hope that the
courteous Reader shall not be offended, if I make them, together with his
Answers, and A. S. his Duplyes appear here in mine.

My Arguments then, were such as follow.

CHAP. II. Reasons against the Independency of Particular Congregations.
1. THe Independent Churches have no sufficient remedy for miscariages, though
never so gross; no relief for wrongful Sentences, or Persons injured by
them; no Powerful or Effectual means to reduce a Church, or Churches, that
fall into Heresy, or Schism, etc. All that they can do, is only to pronounce
a Sentence of Non-Communion against Delinquent Churches, as on the other side,
Delinquent Churches may do against them.

2. This Remedy is new, neither was it known to the Independent Congregations,
before that emergent Case in Holland, related in the Apologeticall Narration:
for if that Church offending had known so much, it is not credible, that she
would, against all charity, and the common Order of all Churches, have
committed so great a Scandal.

3. This Remedy is not sufficient, nor satisfactory, because all Churches,
according to your Tenets, are equal in Authority, independent one of another;
and Par in parem non habet imperium, None has power or authority over his
Equal; How then could any Church bind another to any such Account, but out of
its free will, as a Party may do to its Party?

4. Because the Churches, that are, or that pretend to be offended by a
Delinquent Church, cannot judge her, for then they become both Judge, and Party
in one cause, which cannot be granted to those who have no Authoritative power
one over another; as when a Private man offends the State, and We our God.

5. What if many Churches, yea all the Churches should offend one, should that
one Church gather all the rest together, judge them all, and in case of not
submitting themselves to her judgment, separate her self from them all? If
so, we should have Separations and Schisms enough, which should be continued
to all Posterity to come.

6. What if Churches were so remote one from another, that they could not so
easily meet together upon every occasion? Then there should be no Remedy, at
least no easy Remedy.

7. What if the Offense were small? Should so many Churches, for every trifle,
gather together, and put themselves to so great cost and trouble?

8. What if the Churches should differ in their Judgments, one from another?
In such a case, should they all, by Schisms, separate themselves one from
another?

9. This sort of Government gives no more Power or Authority to a thousand
Churches over one, then to a Tinker, yea, to a Hangman, over a thousand; for he
may desire them all, out of charity, to give an account of their Judgment, in
case he be offended by them; Neither see I what more our Brethren grant to all
the Churches of the World over one.

But the Presbyteriall Government is subject to none of these inconveniences;
for the collective or combined Eldership having an Authoritative power, all men
and Churches thereof are bound by Law and Covenant to submit themselves
thereunto: Every man knows their set times of meeting, wherein sundry matters
are dispatched, and all things carried by Plurality of Voices, without any
Schism or Separation.

10. This Government, viz. Iedependency, is a Power, wherein the Party is
judged, if he will; and so the Judgment of the Judges suspended upon the
Judgment of the Party judged; which is most ridiculous, without any example in
Civil, or Ecclesiastical Iudicatories: a Judgment not very unlike to that,
which is related of a merry man, who said, That he had the best, and most
obedient Wife in the World, because, says he, she wills nothing, but what I
will: And as all men wondered at it, (knowing her to be the most disobedient)
yea (says he) but I must first will what she wills, else she wills nothing
that I will.

11. This sort of Government is unjust, and unreasonable; for not only the
Party judges its Party, but also inslicteth the same punishment, viz.
Separation, upon all offending Churches, whatever the offense be, great or
small, in case of non-satisfaction; whereas all Punishments should be
commensurable unto the several Offenses.

12. And so ye seem to approve the Opinion of the Stoics, who held all sins
to be equal; since ye inflict the same punishment upon them all.

13. Not only this Discipline cannot be easily put in execution in great
Kingdoms, as England, wherein all the Churches offended cannot so easily meet
together: But also,

14. Because the person offended, after he has represented his grievances unto
the Church, and that Church has received satisfaction, he may go to another;
and so continually, in infinitum, to the Worlds end, evermore taking those
Churches for the Party, that judge it; which is most absurd and foolish.

15. What if the Party offended be poor, and have not the means to post up
and down from neigbour-Church to neighbour-Church, to pray them to make the
offending Church to give an account of her Judgment? Much less, to attend
upon their uncertain conveniencie? Here will be found true, Pauper ubique
jacet; Whereas in Presbyteriall Government, the Party offended may be easily
redressed, and get satisfaction, as not having need so to post up and down, to
be at so great charges, or to attend their conveniencie; for by a simple
Appeal he may bind the Church offending to appear at the day appointed.

16. What if there should fall out an hundred such offenses in a short time?
Must so many Churches evermore gather together for every one of them apart?

17. What if Churches be poor, and cannot be at so great expense? Then in that
case, it should seem, there is no Order to meet with Offenses. I may add these
following Reasons:

18. This Independencie makes all the Churches of Christ like so many Scopae
dissolutae, loose Broomes, that have no tie or band to hold them together; and
so destroys the unity of the Militant Church.

19. The very word Independencie, applied to men, how much more the thing
signified thereby, should be odious to all Christian ears, as being proper to
God Almighty. How proud and abominable is this expression; We seven men, who
constitute this Church, we will not depend on all the Churches of this World;
We will not depend on any create Ecclesiastical power, yea not upon all the
Angels in Heaven, and men upon Earth: but will be Independents, and have others
to depend upon us?

20. If so, what is the cause that ye oppose the Kings Majesty's Absolute or
Independent power in State matters? Truly, this being only Secular, cannot be
so dangerous as the other, viz. as Yours; for this only may be prejudicial to
our Bodies, or States; but Yours may kill millions of Souls: neither is the
Kings Authority more limited in the State, then yours is in the Church.

21. What? will ye, that wherever there is 7. or 8. of you combined together,
to make up a Church, ye shall depend on no man, but have an independent and
absolute power to bring into the Kingdom whatever Heresy ye please, to
blaspheme God, and so, vi irresistibili, with the Arminians, to go to Hell? If
so, God have mercy on you.

But it may be said, that the Civil Magistrate may hinder them: But M.S. will
answer, 1. That he should not punish any man for Religion. 2. That the Civil
Power is of another sort then Ecclesiastical. 3. What if the Civil Magistrate
be not a Protestant? or what if he be a profane man? 4. Howbeit he were a
Protestant, and a good Christian, yet should it follow, that the Church Power
is neither sufficient, nor perfect, in suo genere; since it must have recourse
unto the Civil Magistrates power, which is of another nature, and extra hoc
Genus.

CHAP. III. M.S. his Evasions refuted, and my Arguments made good, and first,
those that he brings against the third Argument.
M.S. answers not all, nor any considerable number of my Arguments, as he
confesses himself; but scratcheth at a few of them, whereby he weakens them
not; but overthrows the Government of all States; That of the Church of the
Old Testament, the Practice of the Apostles, and Apostolic Churches, and the
fundaments of Independent Government it self, as, God willing, we shall see
hereafter. The first of my Reasons, that he snaps at, is the 3. viz.

This Remedy, viz. of non-Communion, is not sufficient, nor satisfactory;
because all Churches according to your Tenets be equal in authority,
Independent one of another, and par in parem non habet imperium, none has
power or authority over his equal: How then could any Church bind any other
to any such account, but out of its freewill, as a party may do to its party?

M. S. 1. Suppose that course, which the Apologists insist upon, be not in the
eye of reason, a means sufficient to such a purpose, yet if it be a means
which God has authorized, for the effecting it, it will do the deed.

A.S. It seemth that M.S. would fain enter into the Lists against Reason it
self; but he must know, that Gods Ordinance, and Reason, are not opposite one
to another; since he who is the author of Nature, is the Author of Grace also:
neither as Author of Nature, sights he against himself, as Author of Grace. 2.
It is a Maxim of Popery and Lutheranisme, to oppose Nature and Grace. 3.
Christ and the Apostles served themselves of Natural Reason in Scripture. 4.
And out of the case of supernatural revelation above it, which cannot be
contrary unto it, it must be believed. 5 He supposes, that Independency, and
withdrawing and renouncing all Christian Communion with such Churches, until
they repent, is a sufficient means, authorized by God, which hitherto
appears not; yea the contrary appears by our Reasons. 6. Yet is it
something, that I have reason, for me, and he none; yea nothing but his
Independent will.

M. S. will not make good the Reasons brought for this Opinion by the
Apologists, which I have abundantly resuted, but proves, as follows; That a
withdrawing of Christian Communion from persons walking inordinately, is an
Ordinance, or means appointed by God, for the reducing, and reclaiming of
them. 2. These. 3.6.14. We warn you Brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother, that walks
inordinately, ( A. S. I add the rest) Verse. 7. For we behaved not our selves
inordinately among you. Verse. 8. Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught,
but wrought with labor and travel, night and day, that we might not be
chargeable to any of you. Verse. 10. This we commanded you, that if any would
not work, neither should he eat. Verse. 11. For we hear, that there are some
which walk among you inordinately, working not at all, but are busybodies.
Verse. 14. If any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have
no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Verse. 15. Yet count him not as an
Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother.

A. S. But this proof, is no better, then that of the Apologists; and to
Answer it, I will not serve my self with the Answer, that some men bring here,
viz. That this Testimony of Scripture is not to be taken of the great
Excommunication, which only you seem to acknowledge for Excommunication: nor
of the lesser, which you seem to call non-Communion, or with the Apostle here,
withdrawing of Christian Communion. 2. Or that it is a Commandment only given
to particular persons, to forbear such persons, who were idle, and yet
busybodies, running from house to house, living upon other men's charges,
under pretext (peradventure) of Piety: But not to the Church, to excommunicate
them; and that, because the Apostle adds, v. 15. Yet count him not as an
Enemy, but as a Brother: for this Reason is weak: and an Excommunicate person,
if he be Excommunicated Excommunicatione minori, yea and sometimes majori, may
be accounted as a Brother, so long as there is any hope of his Repentance.

I had rather say, 1. That here the Apostle speaks of Excommunication; 1.
Because he says, Note him, i. e. that he may be discerned from others. 2. He
says, Have no company, or meddle not with him. Now what is Excommunication,
but to have no Communion or company with a man. 2. I say, that he speaks not
of the greater, but of the lesser Excommunication, 1. Because, that it is not
for any great crime, but for an ordinary sin, viz. Idleness. 2. Because this
note of Excommunication, is only, that he may be ashamed.

3. Because he is not to be reputed for an enemy of the Church, but as a
Brother. 4. Because the Apostle bids only, Note him, and admonish him:
which is less then to be given over to Satan; yea it is credible, that it was
only a private Suspension from the Lords Table, not in public, in face of the
whole Church, but before the particular Presbytery. 3. He seems not to speak
directly of whole Churches, but of particular persons. 1. Since he says, From
every Brother, verse. 6. 2. Because he says, that there are some among you that
walk inordinately: Now the whole Church cannot be said to be among the Church,
or some of the Church, but particular persons only. 3. Because he says, If
any man obey not, let that man be noted; but if the whole Church were such,
there should be none there to note him. 4. That man cannot signify that
Church. 5. Because the Apostle, verse. 15. commands to admonish him as a
Brother, but a Brother is not a Church.

4. And nevertheless, howsoever the Apostle speaks principally, directly, and
formally of the Excommunication of Persons; yet must he consequently and
directly mean also the Excommunication of Churches; and that for the Reasons,
that I brought else where, viz. in the Observations and Annotations upon the
Apologeticall Narration, page 43.. 2. 1. For Churches Offenses may deserve it.
2. The Scripture has nothing to the contrary of Excommunication of Churches. 3
Because there is the same reason for the Excommunication of whole Churches, as
of particular Persons, viz. The taking away of Scandal, and the conversion of
sinners, 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Cor. 2.7. 2. These. 3.14. 1 Timothy 1.20. and that such a
contagion infect not others, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. And this reason M. S. very wisely
borrowed from me in this place, saying, There is the same reason of Churches in
this behalf, which there is of persons, M. S. to A. S. page 76. Only this I
note here, that if there be the same reason of Churches. Ergo, As a Particular
person may be Excommunicated Excommunicatione minori, by a public, or a
particular sentence of non- Communion, for a lesser fault; so may a whole
Church: And consequently, as a particular person may be Excommunicated,
Excommunicatione majori, for a very great sin, and wickedness; so may a whole
particular Church, which the Independent Sect will no ways grant. And this, I
pray the Reader to observe, and to press it against them; for I am assured
they cannot here escape, unless M. S. escape them. 4. Because 7000. Churches
may as well Excommunicate one compounded of seventeen Persons, as that one may
Excommunicate seven of its Members. 5. Because an Heretical Church is
Excommunicated in Heaven; Wherefore then shall she not be Excommunicated by
Christ's Ministers here upon Earth, when they learn it by Scripture? Must not
the Churches here upon Earth, concur as well with Gods Sentence in Heaven, as
God with theirs here upon Earth, Matthew. 18? 6. Because the Church of Jerusalem
Excommunicated that of the ten Tribes.

M. S. his second Answer to this Argument. Suppose there were no such
sufficient, or satisfactory remedy for the inconveniency mentioned in the way
of the Apologists, yet Lawyers have a saying, That a mischief is better then an
inconveniency, etc. (and afterward) Now then much better is it to want a
remedy against such an evil, which possibly may not fall out within an age,
though it be greater, when it does fall, then it is to expose our selves to
continual droppings, I mean to those daily inconveniences, which we lately
showed to be incident to the Classique Government.

A. S. 1. I accept of your Supposition, viz. That there is no sufficient, or
satisfactory remedy, etc. as it appears clearly by my Reasons. 2. To your
Maxim of Law, I grant you willingly, That ye have no remedy against mischiefs,
but your Churches must necessarily suffer them, and are exposed to them:
Praised be God, that Presbyterians serve themselves with no mischievous, but
with very holy Remedies. 3. I deny, that it is better to want a Remedy against
such a mischief: viz. If a Church Apostatize, become Heretical, etc. then to
accept of the Presbyterian Remedy against such mischief, or of the mischief it
self; for we must never in any Case accept of malum culpae, such as is the
acceptance of Apostasy or Heresy in a whole Church. 4. Neither is there any,
nor have you yet shown any Inconveniency in the Presbyteriall way: But we have
shown many, as Real in the Independent way, as those are imaginary that you
attribute to the Presbyterian way. 5. All the Inconveniency that this man
pretends to be in the Presbyterian way, is, Dependency of particular
Congregations upon Superior Assemblies, viz. Classes, Synods, etc. Or
Subordination amongst Ecclesiastical Iudicatories; for this Sect must be
altogether Independent, and every one in their Churches supreme Ecclesiastical
Judges, and their Churches supreme Ecclesiastical Iudicatories, be they never
so Heretical or profane: But this Inconveniency may be pressed home again, 1.
For there is Subordination among their particular Congregations, and their
Synods; only they hate the Authority of Synods. 2. There was a Subordination
of Authority in the Old Testament. 3. So is there in Civil Government; And
whatsoever Inconveniency they press against us, it will hold in all the rest,
as we shall see hereafter, God willing. 4. If such a Dependency, or
Subordination be any Inconveniency, then God is the cause of it, as we have
heretofore fully demonstrated it.

M. S. Delinquency of whole Churches is not an every days Case, no more in the
way of Congregationall, then of Presbyteriall Government.

A. S. 1. It may be as ordinary a Case in the Church, as that of Inferior
Iudicatories in the State. 2. And it fell out amongst the Arminians, and us; 3.
So did it amongst your Churches in Holland; 4. So does it betwixt you and us,
since ye are become Sectaries; 5. So does it among all Churches, that become
Heretical, or Schismatic, and the Orthodox Church; and the Apostle tells
us, that there must be Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.19. So it is not so extraordinary a
Case, as you M. S. make it. And therefore, there must be an Ecclesiastical
Ordinance for it, as well in the Church, as in the State; 1. Unless you say,
That God is more provident for the State, then for the Church; or more
negligent in his care of the Church, then of the State. 2. There was a remedy
for such Cases in the Old Testament, as I showed you in my Annotations;
wherefore not also in the New Testament? 3. Howbeit, it be not an every days
Case, yet the Independents have a remedy for it; viz. The Sentence of
non-Communion, whereof I may say as much, as he says of Excommunication; for
the Independent Churches could not pronounce such a Sentence, unless they had,
or pretended to have an Authoritative power to do it; for it belongs to the
power of the Keys. 4. It is, or may be more ordinary amongst the Independent
Churches, then among ours. 1. Because of their Independency, and want of
Superior Ecclesiastical power, to keep them in order: 2. Because they tie the
Members of their Churches, never to quit them, without the Churches consent,
whereof they are Members, which may breed quarrels betwixt two- Churches, if a
Member of the one, without her consent, join himself to the other. 3. And this
may be confirmed by the Examples of those most bitter quarrels betwixt two of
your Churches, and their Pastors in Holland, as it is related by Master Edwards
in his Antapologia: but according to ordinary Providence, no such thing can
fall out among our Churches; and if it should fall out, we have a present
remedy, viz. a Class, which may be gathered within the space of four or five
days: if that do not the business, we may gather a Synod or a Superior
power, which cannot Morally be contemned among us by any Inferior power, as
the equal power of Independent Churches may by their equal.

If it fall out extraordinarily amongst us, we have an ordinary remedy for such
an extraordinary Case.

And howbeit, it were extraordinary, and very rare; yet should there be a
remedy provided for it, so soon as once it falls out, for it is a Case, that
brings a very great mischief with it, viz. The revoult of a Church or many
Churches, that is an inconvenience, yea, a mischief a thousand times worse,
howbeit, it should fall out but once in an Age, then all the droppings of
Master Goodwin, or all the inconveniences, that can be alleged against a
constant remedy, were they as real, as they are fictitious and imaginary.

Thirdly, M. S. answers my first Argument: They that implead the
Congregationall way, for being defective; suppose, that God has put a
sufficiency of power into the hands of men, to remedy all possible defects,
errors, and miscarriages of men whatsoever. But that is untrue. Ergo.

A. S. I answer; They suppose not, that God has put into their hands a
sufficiency of power to remedy all defects and miscarriages whatsoever; or all
possible absolutely, but ex suppositione finis obtinendi, i. e. that may
conduce to obtain the end, that God has commanded us to intend, and to tend
unto; for since his will is, that spiritual diseases be cured, it must
consequently be, to give the remedies necessary or sufficient to obtain such an
end or cure. 2. I suppose not that God has given us all means sufficient
Physice, but moraliter, i. e. that are morally sufficient, and whereby morally
we may be convicted of sin, if we use them not; as cured of our ill, if we use
them. 3. I suppose, that they must be sufficient according to Gods ordinary
providence, whereby he governs ordinarily his Church, and not absolutely. 4.
As sufficient, as in the Civil State, or as in the Old Testament at least;
since the Government in the New Testament, is as perfect, as in the Old; and
not simply or absolutely. And so the Assumption is false.

M. S. proves, that this inconveniency presses as well the Presbyterians, as
the Independents. If your Supreme Session of Presbyteries should miscarry
(says he) and give us Hay, Stubble, and Wood, instead of Silver and Gold, what
remedy?

A. S. This is a very extraordinary Case, yea, the most extraordinary that can
be imagined, viz. That all the Churches, both in Superior and Inferior
Judicatories should so miscarry; and yet if a man have used all possible means,
and this miscarry also, which is more then any ordinary Case, we may say, 1.
that we have had all means that are morally possible, and that no more can
morally be desired. 2. We have had all the means, and if we served our selves
of them all, till we came to this extraordinary Case, we are excusable. 3. We
have had all the means possible, according to Gods ordinary Providence. 4. All
means, that they had in the Old Testament, or that they have in the State. 5. I
answer, that this Supposition may as well be propounded against Gods Providence
in the Government of the State, and of the Church of the Old Testament, as
against that of the New. Now answer me, What if the great Sanedrim had
miscarried in the Old Testament, as some times it did; or the Parliament and
the Kings Counsel in the State; what should be be done in such a Case? And
then I shall answer you the other. It is a foolery to dispute against Gods
Ordinance. 6. I answer, That in such an extraordinary Case, which goes beyond
all particular Laws, and Orders established in the Church, viz. When all the
ordinary Seers become blind, or mislead the Flock, there being no ordinary, we
must have recourse to such extraordinary remedies, as are most convenient, or
at least not repugnant to Gods Word, and attend upon Gods extraordinary
Providence. The Provincial Synods may refuse to put in execution the Acts of
the General Assembly; so may particular Churches, for they are not bound to be
Actors for the general Assembly, in any thing against Gods Word. 7. But what
if in your petty Congregations of seven or eight persons, four persons, or
peradventure all the Congregation miscarry? What shall be done? You will
happily say; 1. Seck Counsel: But if all the Congregation be corrupted, none
of them will ask counsel, but they will all rather lurk, and hide their
Tenets, as the Independents do here at the Synod: If you say again, Other
Churches that are offended, may complain to Neighbor Churches: But what if
they know not their Tenets? What if the Delinquent Church will not own them,
but Iesuitically elude all Interrogatories, as the Antinomians, the
Independents, and all other Sectaries do here? What if they own them? What can
the Churches offended do; for M. S. will tell you, they cannot be Judge, since
they are Parties; or if they judge, they can but judge, as so many Lackeys or
Foot-Boyes: They have no more Authority to command that Delinquent Church, then
that Delinquent Church has to command them all.

Object. But they will pronounce a Sentence of non-Communion against Her.

Answ. So will she against them; and what then? What remedy for all this
disorder, that is not taken away by all this, but still increases? It may be
yet said, they may go to the Civil Magistrate. A. S. But that is no
Ecclesiastical remedy; and M. S. will tell you, 1. as well as I have done,
that so the last resolution of Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Judgments should
be in the secular power, which he holds impossible. 2. Yea, in the power of a
Pagan or Antichristian Christian. 3. And I must say, That things are never
resolved, but into their own Principles, and such is not Political Authority
in respect of Ecclesiastical. 4. So you have not entirenesse of jurisdiction,
as M. S. and the rest of the Independents pretend in his first Reason. 5. So
you are put to trouble and charges, which is against your other Reason: So 6.
you are subject to Strangers, which destroys your other Reason; for you hold
for Strangers, all such, as be not of your particular Congregations, as your
Reasons hereafter following, fully declare. 7. You are not ruled within your
selves, which destroys your other Reason: So 8. you shall not be judged by
your own Pastor, which is another of your Reasons. 9. You shall be judged by
one, who appearingly cannot fall in the same Case, and so it destroys your
other Reason. 10. The party being tender Foreheaded, might be changed into a
stone before Medusa's Head, as you say, in presence of strange Faces, and of
his Betters, which destroys again another of your Reasons. I might bring many
more Inconveniences against him, which he brings against us, as destructory
to the sweet Liberties and Privileges of the Church; But I must be short:
Only I add, that to speak more humano; it is not credible, That all Inferior
Iudicatories, will or dare, be so impudent, as to miscarry in any thing, so
manifestly contrary to the common Tenets or Practices of the whole National
Church, for the Inferior Iudicatories will evermore fear, in case of their
unjust Judgment, to be condemned and censured in the Superior; and the
Supreme it self may fear, That if they judge any thing amiss, their Judgments
will not be approved, and put in execution in Particular Churches; and in all
humane probability they are like to be crossed.

M. S. asks, what if an Occumenicall or General Counsel err?

A. S. His suppositions are so extraordinary, that they cannot belong but to
Independent M. S. And yet, what I have already said, may satisfy this also.
Only this man intends to defame Gods Ordinances, and his Word, as insufficient
to rule the Church; and so he may take the Bishops and Papists by the hand.

And I ask, what if a Parliament err? What if the great Sanedrin had erred in
the Old Testament? What if the Council at Jerusalem had erred? Answer me this,
and then I shall answer you.

The rest of this Section, p. 77. contains nothing but Repetitions, big
Words, but no Reason.

CHAP. IV. The justification of A. S. his Reason, How Presbyteriall Government
is not subject to such Inconveniences as the Independencie.
Whereas in my ninth Reason, I show, That the Presbyteriall Government is
subject to none of these Inconveniences, etc.

Here M. S. answers, 1. Here is a remedy indeed against some inconveniences.

A. S. I willingly accept of this your confession.

M. S. But whether the inconveniences be not much better, then the remedy,
adhuc sub judice lis est.

A. S. So it is a doubt in M. S. his conceit, Whether it be not much better to
tolerate, yea, to admit, and permit, a thousand Heresies, and Blasphemies, and
to let whole Churches go to Hell, then to submit to Presbyteriall Government,
such as we have defined it. 1. To let a Church be Heretical, then to be
reduced to Christ by any Ecclesiastical power, merely Spiritual and
Ministerial, or any other, such as was in the Old Testament, or as is in the
State.

M. S. What if your combined Eldership, has neither footing, or foundation in
the Word of God?

A. S. What if it have foot and foundation on the Word of God? What if we have
proved it already? What if it had no foot in Gods Word, but were no way
repugnant unto it? Yet were it not in such a case to be rejected, but by a
thousand fold to be preferred before Independency, whereupon follow so many
abominable absurdities, so repugnant to Gods Word, yea unto Natural Reason.

M. S. It is not the serviceablenesse of it, against a thousand such
inconveniences, as were mentioned, that will justify it, and this he proves
by the examples of Saul's offering Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 23.9, 13, 14. Of Vzzah in
putting forth his hand to the Ark. Peter's zeal in drawing his sword; And
adds, That the Popes absolute Authority, is as Sovereign a Remedy against all
these Inconveniences as Classique Authority.

A. S. 1. I argued not from mere inconveniences, but from conveniences; and the
want of inconveniences, and repugnancy to Gods Word to justify our Government,
and from inconveniences to refuse yours; Neither can a Negative Thesis, be
otherwise proved, but by a Medium, that is repugnant either to the Attribute,
or to the Subject of the Question. So this your Censure is very ridiculous,
absurd, and impertinent. 2. I have proved it to be conform to Gods Word. 3. It
is not credible, but that Government is most convenient to Gods Word, which is
most convenient, and commensurate unto the end, That God commands us to intend,
and to tend into; neither can I believe, that God has ordained us any means,
that are not fit and proper for the end, that he intends, or commands us to
intend; for that were repugnant to his Sovereign Wisdom. 4. And as for your
Examples, they are not to the purpose; for all these facts of Saul, Vzzah, etc.
were contrary to Gods express command; neither were they convenient to the end
intended by God, or that we should tend unto, viz. Filial Obedience to the
command, and the Typifying of Christ, and his Benefits. The example of Saint
Peter was, 1. a manifest breach of the sixth Commandment, in killing a man
without public Authority. 2. It employed an act of diffidence, and of too great
confidence; as if Christ had had no other means to deliver himself, but his
sword; in this Peter trusted too much to his own sword, and too little to Gods
Providence. 3. It contained an act of Precipitation, and too great boldness,
and rashness, in drawing his sword in his Masters presence, without, yea,
against his Masters will and command. 4. It was repugnant to the end, for which
Christ came into the Word, viz. Christ's death, and the Redemption of mankind
by it, whereof Peter before that time had been so often advertised, etc. So is it
not in Presbyteriall Discipline: Neither is there any damnable Error or
Heresy in Consistoriall Government, as in the Papacy: We say not that any of
our Assemblies are Infallible, as the Pope pretends himself and his General
Council to be; neither pretend we, That our Assemblies have any despoticall or
lordly domination over the Church, as the Pope does; we say not, That our
Assemblies are above Gods Word, as they do. These comparisons of M. S. are no
less then blasphemous.

And here I must advertise the Reader, That all the Presbyteriall Assemblies
together, take no greater Authority over the Church, then six or seven
Independent Tinkers, an Hangman with them, together with one of their
Ministers, do over the flock: The Independent Preacher with his six or seven
persons, are liker to the Pope, and the Consistory of his Cardinals, because
of their Independency, then any of our Churches, which are all Dependents, and
subject to Superior Authority.

M. S. page 79.. in his second Answer, tells me, That he cannot inform
himself, 1. What A. S. means by Authoritative power. 2. Or from whence our
Churches have it.

A. S. I have 1, fully declared in my Annotations, and here above, what it is.
2. And from whence it proceeds.

It is a Ministerial power to command such as are subject thereunto, which
binds, or obliges them to obedience, and whereby, in case of disobedience,
they may inflict Spiritual punishments. It is of God, or from God; and
therefore lawful; Now whether it be of God, as Author of Nature, or of Grace,
by the Law of Nature, or any Positive Law, Natural, or Supernatural; it is
not a Question de re: sed de modo rei, not of the thing it self, but of the
manner thereof. Grant me, either that it is lawful, or deny it; If it be a
lawful power, it is of God, for there is no lawful power, but of God, Romans
13.2. Grant me the thing, and afterward I shall dispute with you, de modo rei.
They have it not of the Parliament, nor of the State, as you pretend; for
secular men cannot give any Spiritual power into the Church; they have it of
God, and by Gods Word, direct, or per consequentiam; and in some things, per
non repugnantiam.

It is an untruth in M. S. in his third Answer, whereas he says, that I seem
to imply, That the Church has this power from the Law of the State; for
howbeit, the Civil Magistrate, by his Laws put a Political Obligation upon
Christians, to obey the Churches Spiritual Authority, which is from God; yet
is not his Civil Authority the cause of the Churches Spiritual Authority, or
of the Obligation, whereby a Christian is bound to obey the Church; for
howbeit, there were no Civil Magistrate; or howbeit, he should dissent from
such an Obedience, yet should the Church have Spiritual power; and all the
Members of the Church in a Spiritual way should be bound to Obedience: But
what then does the Civil Magistrates Law? Answ. It puts a new Bond or
Obligation upon the Members of the Church, and binds them again, by a Civil
Authority, Extrinsecall to the Church, to a Spiritual Obedience, who
heretofore were only bound by a Spiritual Obligation; so he binds them to a
Spiritual Obedience, but not spiritually, as the Church Authority does, but
only materially, and that by Civil Authority: So the Ministers of the Gospel,
(or rather God by them) oblige and bind the Subjects in the State, in a
Spiritual way, by Gods Word, to obey the Civil Magistrate, or Political and
Civil Obedience, but not Politically, or Civilly; but Spiritually: so it
follows not, That the Civil Magistrate has power to form Ecclesiastical
Government: only it follows, That in a Political way, he may oblige, or
bind men to obey it. No more follows it, that I resolve Church Government
into the humors, wills, and pleasures of the World, etc. Only it follows,
That the Civil Obligation, laid upon men, to obey the Church, so far forth as
Civil, must be finally resolved into the Civil Magistrates power, and not
into his humors, as M. S. most contemptuously speaks of him.

M. S. his fourth Answer is in retorting my Arguments. 1. What if a Particular
Congregation, under the jurisdiction of your Eldership, reflecting upon the
Oath or Covenant it has taken for subjection thereunto, as likewise upon all
other engagements that way, as unlawful, shall peremptorily refuse to stand to
the awards or determinations of it, what will you do in this Case? Will you
Excommunicate this Church? The Apologists, in their way do little less; or
will you deliver them, brachio seculari? To be hampered, and taught better then
it seems you can teach them by Prisons, Fines, Banishments, etc. Churches had
need take heed how they choose men for their guardians, that will so dispose of
them, if they please them not.

2. And what if in the Session of your combined Eldership, there be no such
thing as Plurality of Votes, concerning the Excommunication of such a Church?
Is not the remedy you speak of now in the dust?

A. S. To the first Quaere, I answer, That we must do by Spiritual power in
the Church, that, that the Civil Magistrate does by the secular power in the
State, in such a Case.

2. The Ministers in the New Testament must proceed spiritually against all
Delinquent, and Impenitent persons; as the Ministers in the Old Testament did
against theirs, according to Gods Word, unless such a proceeding be abrogated
in the New Testament.

3. They must do as M. S. has taught us, as they do against particular
persons, in commensurating the punishments to the sins. i. e. They must proceed
by particular Admonitions, and Censures against lesser sins in private, or
before the Presbytery; by suspension from the Lords Table, against greater
sins; by public suspension or lesser Excommunication, against greater sins;
and by the great Excommunication, against the greatest sins.

4. M. S. confesses, That the Apologists in their way do little less.

A. S. If so, then they do a little worse then the Presbyterians, and so they
quit a little M. S. his own rule, whereby he wills them to proceed, as
against particular Persons.

5. If all this suffice not, it is the Civil Magistrates part to proceed
against them, as Troublers of the Peace of the Church, and consequently of the
Christian State, and not to permit them to erect a new Sect, as it is
ordinarily practiced amongst the Independents of New England.

6. They must be punished for their Perjury, and for the breach of their
Covenant; but none of those punishments can be inflicted, but after sufficient
conviction, at least Morally, in foro externo: And such punishments are the
fittest for them, after such a conviction, when they pertinaciously resist the
Spirit of God; for such men fear more the Gibbet, then Hellfire. What you say
of your second Chapter, it is sufficiently answered; What you say of Churches,
That they had need to take heed, how they choose men for their Guardians, etc.
If by those Guardians you mean the Civil Magistrate, it is not wisely said of
you; If Church-Ministers, they must choose such, as will delate pertinacious
sinners to the Civil Magistrate.

To your second Question, What if in the Session, etc.

Answ. 1. What if it be so in your Assemblies or Synods? 2. If it be any
inferior Ecclesiastical Iudicatory, they must remit it to a superior, ever
till they come to some, wherein the Votes may preponderate: And if in the
supreme Iudicatory, viz. in a National Assembly, the Votes preponderate not
concerning the Excommunication of such a Church, (which is very extraordinary)
she cannot be excommunicated; and yet if her opinion, or sin be condemned, the
combined Eldership may inflict some lesser Spiritual punishment; and if such a
Church continue still pertinacious, the Civil Magistrate may proceed against
her in a Civil way, as we have said. Neither is this a compliance with
Papists, in quality of Papists, but in so far forth as they agree with
Scripture; 1. For so proceeded the Church of the Old Testament; 2. So proceeded
the Church of the New Testament, in the times of good Emperors, as under
Constantine the Great, Theodosius, etc. 3. So proceed they at Geneva. 4. So in
the Netherlands. 5. So the Independents of New England. 6. So should M.S.
rather do, then to tolerate open Blasphemers of the blessed Name of God. 7.
Dare thou, M. S. so openly plead in favor of Paganism of all sorts of
Heresies, and mischiefs, and for all sort of impunitie for them all?, 8. The
Truth falls not to the dust in such a case, but sin is punished, but not in
such a degree as it should be.

To the second Inconveniency that I object against the Independents,. 4. viz.
That the Independent Churches offended, if they judge the offending Church,
they should be both Judge and Party.

M. S. replieth, p. 80.. 3. When your combined Eldership proceeds against a
particular Church amongst you, upon offense taken, is not this Eldership as
well Party, as Judge?

A.S. My Argument implies the Solution of this Objection, viz. That the
combined Eldership cannot be Party, in such a cause, because it has an
Authoritative power over the particular Church, (howbeit Spiritual and
Ministerial) as the Parliament over particular Judicatories in the Kingdom:
but Parties look one to another as par parem, and not as superior inferiorem.
2. Neither can any man, or Consociation take his ordinary Judge to Party,
unless he have some particular Exceptions against him. 3. I propound you the
same Question concerning the particular Tribes, and the Synagogicall
Judicatories amongst the people of God in the Old Testament, when the great
Sanedrim took offense at them, or at their Judgments; whether the great
Sanedrim was not both Judge and Party? Or rather, whether under the notion of
Offense taken, it was not to be considered as a Party, and under the notion of
Authoritative power, as a Judge? 4. I propound it of the State, whether the
Parliament may not be considered as Party, being offended at any particular
Consociation, and as Judge, in quality of the Representative Body of the whole
Kingdom: or if it be evermore needful, that some particular Person or Persons
compeare in quality of Party against particular Consociations or Towns. 5. In
your particular Congregations, may not your Church, under diverse notions, be
considered as Judge and Party? or may every Delinquent take your whole
Presbytery or Congregation to Party. 6. Did not the Arminians serve themselves
of this Independent Argument, against the Synod of Dort, to decline the Synods
power? and were not both they, and this their Argument condemned by the
judgment of the Synod, as very absurd and unapt? 7. This Argument concludes
against all the superior Powers of this World.

Again, M.S. 1. tells us, that this Authoritative power of combined
Presbyteries over Congregations is not from above. A. S. But we have proved it
to be from above, and from God, as Author of Nature, and of Grace. See the
Question concerning the Subordination of Ecclesiastical Judicatories. 2. Core,
Dathan, and Abiram objected no less against Moses and Aaron: yea, as much may
be objected against God himself, who is Judge and Party; and Jesus Christ, who
is Party, and yet shall judge the quick and the dead: For if Criminals may so
escape, they will not fail to take their Judges evermore for Party.

M. S. To hold, that all those that have an Authoritative Power over men, may
lawfully, in virtue of such a Power, be both Judges and Parties, is to exalt
all manner of Tyranny, etc. by Law: for so in Church, and State, men invested
with such a power, may be their own carvers, and serve themselves of the
estates, liberties and lives of those that are under them, how, and when, and
as often as they list: Add, But the Consequence is false, Ergo, so is the
Antecedent.

A.S. I deny the Consequence; for they have not an absolute, but a limited
power, according to Law, and not to their own particular, but public will, or
in quality of public persons, whose wills are declared in, or restrained
according to Law. Neither commands Carolus the Kingdom, qua Carolus, but qua
Rex, or qua Carolus Rex, and Lex viva: and under this notion, he is not his own
carver, but the Law carveth for him, and us both; neither can he serve himself
of other men's Estates, etc. but in so far as the Law permits him: But how
much the Law permits him, it is not for every particular person, nor for
every particular and inferior Iudicatory to define it; for Inferiors, qua
tales, cannot judge their Superiors, at least ordinarily; and in such a case,
they remain no more Inferiors, but become Superiors.

To the 3. Inconveniencie, which I note,. 9. M.S. retorteth it in this manner:
Tell me plainly and distinctly, what Power more your Government gives to a
thousand Churches over one, then to a Tinker, or the Hangman over a thousand.

A.S. Answ. When they are represented in a Representative Church, they have a
spiritual Authoritative power over all the Churches that they represen, both
Collective, and every one of them Distributive; which no Tinker or Hangman
has, either over many, or any one of them; for they have no Authoritative
power at all. But amongst the Independents, a thousand Churches, whether they
be taken Distributive, or Collective, representing all their particular
Congregations, have no Authoritative power at all; and consequently, no more
then a Tinker or a Hangman.

M.S. What makes you think, that the Government of the Apologists gives no more
power to a thousand Churches over one, then to a Tinker or Hangman over a
thousand? Vbi, quando, quibus testibus, did this Government, or any Son it
has, ever make any such comparison?

A.S. 1. I say not that you make any such comparison, but only I deduce it out
of your Tenets by necessary consequence. 2. Neither do you deny my
consequence, you grant it freely, and tell me, that it is no disparagement for
a thousand Churches, that a Tinker, or a Hangman have as much Authoritative
power over them all, as they have all over any particular Church. And to
confirm it, you bring me no Reason, nor Scripture, but two Testimonies; the
first of Charron; who says, That every Humane Proposition has equal
authority, if Reason make not the difference: To which I answer, 1. That this
is but an Humane Authority; 2. Of a Papist; 3. And, as many in France think, of
an Atheist; 4. And yet it may be granted in this sense, viz. That it has as
much Natural, but not so much Moral authority: for these be Maxims in
Nature, and in Reason; Magis credendum pluribus quam paucioribus, testimonio
publico quam privato, sapientibus quam insipientibus, peritis quam imperitis,
videntibus quam audientibus: Plus valet oculatus testis unus, quam auriti
december. 5. I answer, that every Humane Proposition has equal authority
according to the species of its authority, but not according to the degrees
thereof; as all white colors are equally white according to their species,
(since the definition of white belongs equally to them all; unless you say,
that Album est genus analogum respectu hujus and istius, magis and minus albi:
which no true Philosopher, to my knowledge, ever granted:) But not according to
the graduall latitude of perfection contained within the species of Whiteness.
6. And here I ask of M.S. whether he thinks that a Proposition of Indas, and
of S. Peter, or Adam before his fall, be all of equal authority? Item, Whether
a Proposition of Adam before his fall, and after his fall, be of equal
authority? Item, Whether a Proposition of Christ, qua homo, or as proceeding
from his Humane Nature, be of no more authority, then that which proceeds from
Simon the Magician. If I had leisure here to dispute about the foundation of
Authority, I might show many absurdities and impertinencies in this
Proposition, in M. S. his sense; but I must be brief. The second Authority is
of Gerson, and is this: The saying of a simple man, and no ways authorized, if
he be well seen in the Scriptures, is rather to be believed then the Popes own
determination. But this Proposition is not against me; for a man well seen in
Scriptures, qua talis, speaks according to Gods Word, and is some ways
authorized by it; but the Popes Determination without Gods Word, is merely
Humane, yea, ordinarily passionate.

M. S. confesses ingenuously, that I propound many more Inconveniences
against Independencie; but out of modesty, he will not answer them; Only here I
note, that M.S. in all this his Discourse, answers very little to my
Arguments, and objecteth rather against our Doctrine, then justifies his own:
And to elude my Arguments, pretends evermore ignorance of things that are most
easy, and obvious to all men, which nevertheless I expound most clearly:
sometimes he contemns them, as unworthy of any Solution; which is a very
odd, and new Independent way, a la mode.

CHAP. V. M. S. his first two Reasons for Independency, with the Solutions
thereof.
M. S. with other Independents, prove their Independent Government of every
particular Congregation, by some frivilous Reasons. The first is this: If a
single Congregation being solitary, and without Neighbors, has entirenesse of
Jurisdiction. Ergo, every single Congregation has it. But the first is true,
according to the Presbyterians Confession. Ergo, so must the second be also.

A. S. I deny the first Proposition, or rather distinguish it in this manner.
If a single Congregation have entirenesse of Jurisdiction absolutely, it is
true; but then the Assumption, or second Proposition is false. If a single
Congregation have it secundum quid, viz. In case of Solitariness, as it is
expressed in the first Proposition, or in case of any other necessity, that
hinders its consociation with Neighbor Churches, as distance of place,
persecution, etc. then all other particular Churches must have it, in the same
case; it is true: But I deny that such is the case of all single Congregations,
for they are not all remote from all Neighborhood of other Churches; nor are
they all hindered by persecution, etc.

M. S. But when a solitary Congregation has an entire Jurisdiction, then
certainly it has a lawful right, title, or claim to it. Ergo, She has it
evermore.

A.S. 1. She has a lawful right by a general Law of necessity, whereby it is
ordained, that when we have not all the best helps that are necessity to do the
best, we are then to serve our selves with the best we can, and such as we have
at hand to serve God by: So if we have not Wine to celebrate the Lords Supper
with, we may celebrate it with some other liquour most usual for drink; and
there is an Article in the French Discipline, whereby it is permitted to any
man, that cannot drink wine, to communicate in participating only of the
Bread: So if men be cast upon any Island, very remote from the Continent, and
have none amongst them endowed with sufficient abilities to preach, or teach
them, they may choose the ablest (howbeit he be not absolutely able enough) to
preach, rather then to live without Gods Ordinances altogether: So David,
wanting Bread, did eat of the Shewbread; and a man, in case of necessity, may
take other men's meat, and eat it, rather then starve. 2. I distinguish the
Consequent: she has it evermore, in such a cause, i. e. in case of necessity,
when she can have no help of Neighbor Churches. I grant it all, otherwise I
deny it.

M. S. desires to know, by what right Neighbor Churches, by their presence,
can take such a right from her.

A. S. Neighbor Churches by their presence take no right from her, but by
their Neighborhood give her, or rather add unto her a new right, to Rule her
self more perfectly, and to help to Rule Neighbor Churches also, which she
could not do before; so it is not Jurisdictionis diminutio, sed ampliatio, it
is no diminution, but an augmentation of power intensive, or in certitude
within her self, and extensive, in respect of other Churches: so it is a
Blessing of God, added to that Church, and no power or ability, but a lack of
power, a weakness, an unpowerfulnesse (as I may so say) and infirmity taken
away; it is not to take away what she had, but to give her a power or help,
that she had not, being alone; Even so as when two or three Regiments coming to
join with one, or two others against their common Enemy, these two or three
Regiments take no power or force from the one, or the two precedent Regiments,
but help them, and make them more able to beat the Enemy.

M. S. Those that God has put together, let not man put asunder; But God put
together a single Congregation, and an entire Jurisdiction. Ergo,

A. S. That Text in the first Proposition is to be expounded of those only
that are put together by Marriage, but if you take it Universally, it will be
found false; for God has put a Tree, and the Branches thereof together, and
yet I trow you will not say, a man may not cut a Branch off from a Tree.

2. I answer, if God has put them together in all cases, it is true, but the
Minor is false: If God has only put them together in some particular Case,
then they may be separated in an other Case.

3. I answer to the Minor; If by an entire Jurisdiction, be meant a supreme
Ministerial Jurisdiction absolutely, such as should be in Synods, to the
well-being of the Church, it is false, for it wants a Synodall Jurisdiction: If
by an entire Jurisdiction be meant entire, secundum quid, in suo genere, and
per accidens, in some way, in its own kind, and by Accident, it is true; for
such a Jurisdiction is only Congregationall or Consistoriall, and so perfect
in that kind, and supreme by accident, for want of Neighbor Churches; so it
is entire in that kind, but not absolutely, as it should be in Case of
Neighbor Churches.

Master Mather, and Master Thomson, in their Answer to Master Herle, argue
thus: The power that flows immediately, and necessarily from the very Essence
of a Church, cannot be separated from the Essence of a particular Church: But
such an entire power of Jurisdiction flows from the very Essence of a Church.
Ergo,

A. S. 1. I deny the Minor; for that, which belongs to any thing, ex
instituto, flows not from its Essence: But so it is of the entirenesse of
Jurisdiction; it belongs not to the Church by nature, but by will, and Law,
viz. by Gods Ordinance. 2. If it flowed necessarily from the very Essence of
every Church, then could not God change it; for God cannot destroy nor change
the proper Accidents, or take them away from their subjects: But the consequent
is false; for since Jurisdiction belongs to the Church by Gods freewill, he may
as freely take it away from the Church, and change it, as he bestowed it upon
the Church. 3. Yea, God has actually changed it; for all the Militant
Churches, since the fall of Adam, viz. Before the Law, under the Law, and under
the Gospel are of the same nature, and Species, or the same in substance, and
only differ in Circumstances; and yet they have had diverse sorts of
Jurisdiction, and Governments, which could not be, if it flowed immediately and
necessarily from its Essence. 4. Put the Case, it flowed from its Essence, as
it does not; yet this entirenesse of jurisdiction should only be entirenesse
of Consistorian or Parochial jurisdiction, which is entire in its own kind,
but not of Synodall jurisdiction, yea, not so much, as of your Synodall power,
in defining dogmatically the points of Doctrine.

M. S. his second Argument, If a Church, yet single, be invested with a power
of jurisdiction, within it self, and should be cashiered of this power, by the
rising up of more Churches near unto her, then that which is intended by God,
as a Table, should become a snare unto her; she should suffer loss, and have
sorrow from those, by whom she ought to be comforted. But the first is true.
Ergo.

A. S. I deny the Consequence; neither has M. S. proved it: The Reason of this
my Negation is, because she is not ensnared, but drawn out of the snare by the
rising of such Churches which can help her, and counsel her, and reform her
Judgments, conjunctly with her self, in case of aberration; neither should
this be any just matter of sorrow unto her; if she should sorrow at it, her
sorrow should be unjust, and wicked, and at Gods Ordinance.

2. I deny the Assumption, for the Consistorian power, that such a single
Church had before the rising of such Neighbor Churches, is not cashiered by
their rising, but a more eminent, viz. A Classical or Synodall Power, which
she had not, is superadded unto her Consistorian, or Parochial power, whereby
it is mightily perfected.

CHAP. VI. M. S. his third Reason answered.
M. S. THirdly, If a single Church should suffer loss of so considerable a
privilege, as entirenesse of Jurisdiction is, by the multiplication of
Churches near unto her, then cannot this Church pray for the Propagation of the
Gospel in places near to it; but she must pray against her own comfort, and
peace, which is a fore temptation upon her, either to pray very faintly, or not
to pray at all for such a thing. But the consequent is false. Ergo.

A. S. I deny the consequence of the first Proposition; for the rule and
measure of our Prayers, is not our privilege and jurisdiction, but Gods glory
and the Salvation of our souls, revealed in Scripture, which may be very well
obtained without any power of jurisdiction, as we see in Women; and it seems,
that M. S. will not pray for the prosperity of Jerusalem, unless God grant him
an Independent power of jurisdiction therein.

2. I deny the Assumption, for by the multiplication of Neighbor Churches,
that single Church suffers no loss of the Parochial jurisdiction, that she
had, for she retains it; but she receives more power in becoming a part of a
Class, and so receives in part a Classical power of jurisdiction, whereby
the Parochial power, which formerly she had, is more sure, and made less
subject to aberration, then it was before: So her jurisdiction is not impaired,
but improved; neither in it self should it be a temptation to you not to pray,
or to pray faintly, as you say, since such an Improvement to every good
Christian ought to be matter of Thanksgiving.

M. S. But entirenesse of Government, or subjection only to those, that are of
the same society, is a special mercy: And their Nobles shall be of themselves
(says God, speaking of that great Goodness he meant to show unto his people,
after their return from Babylon) and their Governors shall proceed from the
midst of them, Jer. 20.21. So as it is made a Character of the prosperous
Estate of Tyrus, That her wise men, that were in her, i. e. of her own Nation,
were her Pilots, Ezekiel. 27.8.

2. Subjection unto Strangers, is still spoken of as matter of punishment, and
sorrow; Give not thine Inheritance to reproach, that the Heathen should reign
over it, Joel 2.17. The Nation of the Jews were expressly forbidden to set
strangers to rule over them: A.S. What follows? Ergo, Entirenesse of
Government, i. e. An Independent Government in every particular Congregation,
compounded of seven or eight silly Fellows, whereof many of them are tender
Foreheaded, and bashful, as M. S. tells us, page 74. is a mercy and blessing
of God.

A. S. The Antecedent is not universally true, 1. For it is good for Families,
Republikes, and Kingdoms, that cannot rule themselves, that they be ruled by
some others; and there are some people, as Aristotle tells us, that are
naturally servile. Ergo, They have need to be ruled by others. And the
Polonians sometimes choose Foreign Princes to rule over them: The Ragusians in
Slavonia, to entertain perfect equality amongst themselves, choose evermore a
Stranger for their Bishop; and therefore hold it not evermore best, to be ruled
by one of themselves: So do they in sundry Elective Kingdoms.

2. Howbeit I should grant, that it is absolutely best, yet should it not
follow, that it is best for every sort of Society, every where, and evermore;
for then it should follow, 1. That it is not good, much less best for us, that
Jesus Christ, who according to his Manhood, or the Apostles, who were Jews,
should have been Universal Ministers over all the whole World, since they were
not chosen of every particular Kingdom; much less of every Province, but least
of all, of every particular Independent Congregation compounded of seven or
eight weak Fore-headed men, as M. S. styles them. 2. It should not be a
blessing of God, that the Crown of France should be subject to the Crown of
England; for so it should not be subject to a French man; so we loose our right
to the Crown of France. 3. It should have been a punishment to the people of
God, to have been ruled by a King of one Tribe, viz. of Benjamine, as by Saul;
or of Judah, as by David, Solomon, Rehoboam, etc. for they were not of all the
Tribes, much less of every particular Congregation of seven or eight persons.
4. This Maxim cannot stand with the State of our three Crowns; for so it else
should be a blessing to Ireland, to be ruled by one of the Irish Rebels, and a
punishment to be subject to the Crown of England. 5. By that same reason the
Kingdom of Scotland, and England, could not without some punishment or curse of
God upon the one or the other, subsist in an Union together, unless the King
were both an English, and a Scotchman. 6. The Parliament could not be a
blessing, but a curse of God, since the Members thereof are from diverse
Provinces, Shires, and Burroughes, as the Members of our National Synods. So
let the World consider how Traitorous, how Heretical, and blasphemous this
most abominable Maxim is, tending to the total subversion of the Church,
King, Parliament, State, and Kingdoms. 7. Yea, it overthrows even their own
Maxims; for their Synods are gathered of Members of different Churches, as
ours are. 8. And finally, Howbeit I should grant him his Maxim; yet, as I have
said, particular Congregations, by the increase and multiplication of Churches,
and their combination in Synods, loose not their entirenesse of jurisdiction,
which they had before, viz. their Parochial, Congregationall, or simple
Presbyteriall power, but retain it as formerly.

As for those Texts of Scripture, 1. not one of them says, that entirenesse of
Government within themselves, is evermore best, and a mercy of God.

2. Much less, that entirenesse of Government, within a petty Independent
Church, compounded of seven or eight weak Foreheaded Fellows, is best for it;
For if it were so, we must have as many little Popes in the Church, and as many
Kings in the State, as there can be Independent Churches, or particular
Iudicatories in the Kingdom.

3. The passage cited out of Ierem. 30.21. speaks of Christ, as appears by
the Text; for it is added, And I will cause him to draw near, and he shall
approach unto me; For who is this, that engaged his heart to approach unto me,
says the Lord: Now who is this, but Jesus Christ? 1. But Christ was not a
Governor of one particular Independent Church only, but of them all; so this
place concludes an Universal Church, instead of an Independent Congregation:
2. Neither can it be expounded of the people of the Jews, after the Captivity;
for after it, they had no King from amongst themselves, at least ordinarily:
For after the Captivity of Babylon, Zerobabel, and Nehemiah were, as it were
Vassals, to the King of Persia, even till Esdras obtained of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, that they should set it up again in form of a Republike.
Afterward, Alexander the Great, being pacified toward the lews, by the
Intercession of Jaddus, the High Priest, they obtained liberty to live after
their own Laws: Afterward Ptolomaeus, son of Lagus, King of Egypt, having
taken the City, used them hardly: No better usage got they afterward under
Antiochus Epiphanes, the eight King of Syria. Hitherto the Government was
Ducall, and all their Dukes of the House of David, to the number of fifteen,
from Zerobabel to Ianna: Afterward, the Royal and Ecclesiastical power was
in the hands of the Priests, in the Assamoneans Family, of the Tribe of Levi,
the which Government was extraordinary, if not unlawful; and then the division
about the Royal and Sacerdotall power, betwixt the two Brethren, viz.
Aristobulus, and Hircanus, who had recourse to Pompey, some sixty years before
the coming of Christ, made them to be reduced under the power of the Romans; so
that this great blessing of so great a Governor, as is mentioned here, cannot
be interpreted of any worldly Prince; or if it be so, it is liker to the
Presbyterian, then to the Independent Government; for the great Sanedrim was,
as it were, our National Synod; both taken from amongst their Brethren: So
were the Rulers over Thousands, Hundreds, Fifties, and Tens, answerable to our
Provincial Synods, Classes, and simple Presbyteries. Under Augustus, the
Senate of Rome, made Herod, an Idumean, King of the Jews; And he, as afterward
some of the Governors, and Proconsuls of Syria, made, and deposed the High
Priests, according to their pleasure; so that all this time almost, the
Government of the Jews was ever Tyrannical, and so a punishment rather then
any mercy of God here promised.

As for the Text, Ezekiel. 27.8. it is not said, That all things that are here
related, are mercies of God; but that Tyrus gloried in them, Verse. 3. 2.
Neither were they Governors of one Independent Consociation, as amongst the
Independents: but here there were Superior and Inferior Iudicatories, as
amongst the Protestant Churches.

To that Text, Joel 2.17. Give not thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen
should rule over them: Wherefore should they say among the people, Where is
their God? I answer, This is only a Prayer, that the Heathen rule not over Gods
people: and if there had been any of them tolerated among the people of God, as
M. S. pretends, this Prayer would as well hold, as if they had not been amongst
them, but had lived as strangers in other Countries: and it appears clearly
by the Reason that is added, Wherefore, etc. i.e. lest thy Name be dishonored
by such reproaches, as if our God could not deliver us, or as if we had not a
God to deliver us. And howbeit it were so great a blessing, evermore to have
Government within themselves, yet can it not be meant of Independent Government
in every College or Consociation, without any subordination to superior
Iudicatories, as M.S. has to prove.

To the Text, Deuteronomy. 17.15. One from amongst thy Brethren thou shall set King
over thee: thou may not set a Stranger over thee, which is not thy Brother.
I answer, 1. That this is not a Moral, but a Positive Law; for in Elective
Kingdoms they choose Strangers to be Kings, and in so doing, they sin not
against the Moral, or the Law of Nature. 2. That this Commandment is only
conditional, grounded upon the condition contained in the beginning of the
Verse, viz. That only they should establish him for King over them, whom the
Lord their God should choose. 3. Neither was this Government independent in
every Town, or particular Congregation; or without subordination, as among the
Independents: but according to the Law of Nature and Grace, with some
subordination and dependence of inferior Iudicatories upon some superior. 4. By
a stranger here, I believe, that he means principally a stranger in Religion;
and consequently, by habitation; because it is added, that is not thy Brother:
item, because he was to have a copy of the Law, to read it, and learn to fear
the Lord his God, to keep all the words thereof: which the Heathens could not
do. Or, 5. The reason may be, because God was minded to tie the Crown to one
Family, viz. to that of Judah. 6. Neither was it lawful for them to choose any
Brother, or Countryman of theirs, but him only that was of the Tribe of Judah,
at least, after the Promise made unto David; and that for a special Reason,
viz. to the end we may know CHRIST'S Descent, etc.

After these silly Objections that this M.S. has brought, he objects to
himself, But Pastors and Elders of neighbor Churches are not to be looked upon
as Strangers, but as Brethren: (And he might have confirmed it; for there is no
distinction betwixt the Jew and the Greek, Romans 10.12.) and answers, That they
are Brethren in respect of the unbelievers, and yet have more of the relation
of Strangers to them, then those that were (as it were) of the same domestique
Society with them; and therefore subjection unto them must have less of the
Blessing, and more of the Curse, then Subjection to their own.

A. S. I answer, 1. in matter of Argumentation, to prove a Categoricall and
Absolute Proposition, we use not these, as it were, or Metaphorical terms;
for they are termini diminuentes; and if it be only, as it were, Ergo it is not
really. 2. I pray you, M.S. tell me, if a man, that is not of your
Congregation, and has more Faith, or at least professes more then one of your
Congregation, What reason, that he should rather be a stranger unto you, or
less your Brother in Christ, then he who has less Faith? 3. Should not he,
that has a greater union with Christ, which undoubtedly he has by his greater
Faith, have a greater union with you? I see, that he shall be least beloved of
you, who is most beloved of Christ, and of whom Christ is most beloved. 4. And
so you esteem it a greater curse to be subject to those who have more Faith,
and a greater blessing to be subject to such as have less Faith, and happily
none at all: Siccine soles bear Amicos?

M. S. 3. Reason: The Grant of Government and Rule within themselves, unto
Towns and Corporations, was ever esteemed a matter of special Grace and
favor from Princes, and has sometimes been purchased with great sums of money
by the Inhabitants.

A. S. What follows? Ergo, so must it be in the Church: if ye conclude any
thing at all. 1. So you are the Disciples of Simon Magus. 2. That Grant of
Government within themselves was no Independent Government, as amongst the
Independent Churches; for then they must have been Sovereigns. 3. I retort the
Argument: In all such Privileges of Incorporations, there is evermore a
Subordination of Government, as among the Protestant Churches: Ergo, so should
it be among you, if you will imitate them, or will have this Argument to make
any thing at all for you. 4. Neither could it be a special Grace, if it be
independent; for Grace is only amongst the superior and the inferior, dependent
upon his superior. 5. Such a Grace should take away the Subjects subjection,
and so of a Prince make no Prince; for no man is Prince, but he, upon whom the
Subjects depend.

CHAP. VII. M. S. his fourth Reason answered.
M. S. FOurthly and lastly, Reason it self (faith he) demonstrates Entirenesse
of Government to be a sweet Privilege and Benefit to a Particular Church.

A. S. Ans. 1. As if all he had said hitherto were without Reason, he now
comes to his Reasons, which are very irrational. 2. It is sweet to the
Flesh, but not to the Spirit, if a man be lead by the Spirit of God. 3. If it
be only a Privilege, Ergo, its a clear case, you have it not by Law.

M.S. 1. Reason to confirm this Assertion. First, in case a man be questioned,
he saves a proportion both of time and labor, in respect of what he must
undergo, if he were to make his Answer at a Consistory further off.

A. S. Ans. 1. He answers first in his own Parish, in his own particular
Consistory, and so saves his time. 2. But in case he be there oppressed, it is
unjust, that he should not have liberty to desend himself before another, viz.
a Class, which happily may be holden in his own Town, or within one, two, or
three miles of it; which is more tolerable to him, then to be oppressed by
Factions, as sundry times men are amongst the Independents, as appears by Mr.
Edwards Relation of the business, touched in the Apologeticall Narration. 3.
What if there fall out six or seven such differences among your Churches, and
that particular persons desire some redress of their Grievances before a Synod
amongst you? can ye not hold one Synod for five or six such Complaints? Then
in such a case, they must all go to the Synod, out of their own Churches: and
then even amongst your selves ye find the same inconvenience that ye object to
us: If ye cannot, but for every such Grievance there must be a particular
Synod, and your Messengers of other Churches must go to the place; then many,
in stead of one, lose their time and labor. 4. This Reason beats down as well
the Government of the State; And 5. the Government of the Church of the Jews,
which was established by God himself; And 6. the Proceedings of the Church of
Antioch, as of Ours.

Secondly (says M.S.) the Proceedings against him in his own sociaty, shall be
regulated, managed, and ordered by his own Pastor, who is a Father unto him in
the Lord, and who in all reason, and according to the course of almost all
constant experience, is more tender, affectionate, and compassionate toward
him, then the Pastors of other Fhocks, and those that are strangers to him;
Ergo, every man should be judged in his own particular Congregation.

A.S. This Argument destroys no less the Civil, then the Church Government;
for so it may be said, that a man being judged by the Judge of his own sown,
shall be more tenderly dealt with then before the Kings Council. 2. The
Government of the Church of the Old Testament, as I have already declared. 3.
The proceedings of the Church of Antioch, that sent its Controversy to be
judged at Jerusalem. 4. That of the Independents themselves, who in their
Synods pretend to determine matters of Doctrine. 5. I deny the Antecedent; for
when either the whole Church, or any member thereof has any debate with their
own Pastor, or two Pastors of one Church amongst themselves, or two persons, or
two Pastors of different Congregations, or two Churches are at odds one with
another, that will not hold.

6. The Paster of the Congregation may affect more one of his own Congregation
then another, and so out of too much affection he may miscary. 7. Things must
not be carried by tender affection, but by equity. 8. If his own Pastor be more
tenderhearted toward him, he of another Congregation may be more indifferent,
which of the two is more necessary in a Judge, that judges between two
parties. 9. Pastors of other Flocks in a Synod are not altogether strangers to
him, since they are his Brethren, and his Fathers, in so far forth as they
represent all the Churches of that Province or National Synod. The Example of
Pharaoh, that knew not Joseph, is very impertinent; for he was not a Pastor:
and [know] there, is to acknowledge and affectionate a man: but all the Pastors
of the Church, as I declared in my Observations, have power to preach in all
the militant Church; and therefore are Fathers in the whole Church according to
their general Vocation; so was none of those Pharaohs. 10. In first Instance a
man has all that you desire before his Pastor.

Thirdly M.S. in substance says, that he shall be tried and sentenced by
those, who may be tried, and sentenced by him again, which will teach them
more moderation, then a Consistory of standing Judges, Ergo he must be only
judged in his own Congregation.

A. S. This Argument concludes 1. against the Subordination of Iudicatories in
the State. 2. Against all sorts of Courts, wherein he that is sentenced, cannot
sentence his Judges again. 3. Against the Ecclesiastical proceedings in the
Old Testament, wherein he that was sentenced had not evermore power to sentence
his Judge again. 4. Against the proceedings of the Church of Antioch. 5.
Against that of the Independents. 6. Such a proceeding of mutual judgment,
out of fear to be judged again, will make the Judgments partial, whereas
they should be neutrall; and it is no better, then if one should say; Sir,
look you favor me this day, otherwise expect no favor from me another day.
7. We have no Consistory of standing Judges, but the simple Presbytery, as you
have. 8. In our way we are judged by those, who if they do us wrong, may be
judged not by us, who are parties, but by higher and more impartial Judges,
viz. a simple Presbytery by a Class; a Class by a Provincial Synod; and a
Provincial by a National Synod. And as for that Maxim, Nunquam satis fida
potentia, ubi nimia, it is very true, if it be applied to your Independent
Authority in particular Congregations.

4. M. S. fourth Reason is, because it is a great encouragement to a man that
is accused, if he be tender fore-headed, before those, with whose person he is
well acquainted, and the contrary is a kind of oppression of such a man; Ergo
he must only be judged in his own Congregation, and Independently.

A. S. 1. In first instance he may be judged, as you say. 2. But if he will not
stand to the sentence of his own particular Presbytery, and afterward be
changed as you say into a stone, he gets no wrong, but what he has procured
unto himself. 3. But if his party acquiesce not, but appeal, yet may he have
his own Pastor at the Class, or Provincial Synod, to lay open his business,
and it is the duty of the particular Presbytery, Session or Consistory, to make
good their Judgment, so as he needs not to fear. 4. And it is the custom of
our Presbyteries, Classes, and Synods in such a ease, to have a care of such
persons, that they receive no wrong. 5. This Reason, as the rest, strikes at
the Kings, the Parliaments, and all Civil Magistrates Authority as well, since
they are not familiar with every Cobbler. 6. At the Ecclesiastical proceedings
in the Old Testament. 7. And that of Antioch. 8. I deny the consequence, for
these Reasons alleged.

M. S. his 5. Reason is, because in this Congregationall Government, private
Christians may see the judicial proceedings in the Churth, which will be a
School of wisdom and Experience. But it is not so in remote Consistories.

A. S. What conclude you? Ergo, (...). 1. Such an opportunity may be found in
the Presbyteriall way, in their Parochial Iudicatories, in such matters, as
require not silence. 2. Neither is it fit, that all sorts of Persons, as women,
especially young Damosells, and young men should hear all sort of businesses,
that may be discussed in those Iudicatories. 3. They have more in our way, for
they have our Confession of Faith, and our Discipline written, or in Print, and
may study it every day at home, which is not usual amongst the Independents,
who are never resolved, neither in their Confession of Faith, nor in their
Government; neither will they have any one, common to all their Churches. If
private Christians desire more then this, they may go to the Universities. 4.
This Argument strikes at the Government of the State, that of the Old
Testament, and at the proceedings of the Apostles, Act. 15. and 16.

M. S. his 6. Arg. in substance is, that the Premises, whereupon Conclusions
are grounded, cannot be so well known, and examined in Classes, and Synods, as
in an Independent Congregation, wherein the matter is passed, Ergo it should be
judged there, and not in Classes, Synods, etc.

A. S. 1. This Argument, as the rest, concludes, as well against the
proceedings in Civil Iudicatories, that of the Church of the Old Testament,
that at Antiochia, and at Hierusalens, as against the Presbyterian way. 2.
Amongst us the businesses are first examined before the Parochial Presbytery,
or Session, where all the Premises may be as well tried, as in the Independent
Congregation; and in case of Appeal they may be carried to the Class, or
Synod. 3. What if the difference be betwixt two diverse Churches, or two persons
of diverse Churches, and the premises be Actions, or Offenses committed out of
both the Churches; then in such a case, the business cannot be proved in any
of the Churches; what if the business need no proof, but be some scandalous
Doctrinc?

M. S. adds, that for brevities sake he would not strengthen his Arguments as
he might. A. S. And in this we praise his prudence, in publishing unto the
world such frivolous Arguments, yea that have not so much as any apparent
probability in them.

Whether an Independent Government ought to be tolerated in this Kingdom?
TO the end we may proceed clearly in this Question, it is to be noted, That by
this Kingdom, I mean the Kingdom of England, wherein this Government has never
yet been received. 2. It is to be noted, That a Toleration is either positive,
whereby Positively by Law, Actual Consent, Approbation, or otherwise we
receive, or give way to any thing, or negative; when neither by any Posicive
Act, Law, Actual Consent, or Approbation, we give way to any thing, but only
actually we oppose it not, make no Law against it, dissent not, reprove it not,
etc. Again, Both the one and the other, is either of particular men, or of
Churches: And again, That of particular men, either simply to enjoy, their
Consciences in not obliging them to be Actors in any thing against the light
thereof, or to give them leave freely to discourse upon all occasions, with
others, concerning their Tenets, yea, though it were to seduce them. 3. It it
is again to be noted, That by Independent Government I mean that, whereby every
particular Congregation is so governed, that every Member thereof, has an hand
in it, and all the parts of it, and so as not to acknowledge any
Ecclesiastical Power in this World above it.

The State of the Question then is, Whether such Independents should have any
Positive, or Negative; but principally a Positive Toleration, not only for
their Persons, but also for their Churches in this Kingdons, wherein they are
not yet admitted.

M. S. with the rest of his Sect, the Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Familists, Arminians, Servetists, Socinians, and other Sects in this Kingdom,
maintain the affirmative: But the Orthodoxes stand for the negative. The
Reasons for the Orthodox Part may be these that follow.

1. Such a Toleration cannot but open a door to all sorts of erroneous opinions.

M. S. denies this Assumption; for (says he) by the same Reason, he that
receives one discreet Servant into his House, must receive all Prince Ruperts
Troops, to rack and manger with him.

A. S. But M. S. understands not, or takes upon him, that he understands not my
Argument; for my meaning is not, as he misconstrueth it, That by the same
Reason all other Sects must be admitted, which is my fourth Reason^^ a pari;
but that Independency being once received into the State, it will per se, and
natura sua, of it self open a door to all sorts of erroneous Opinions; which is
an Argument not a pari, as the other, but a causa ad effectum; for if the
Independent Churches acknowledge no superior Ecclesiastical Power, and that
the Civil Magistrate in good conscience, cannot punish them; then in case any,
or many of them fall into Heresy, it will open a door to Heresy.

2. M. S. answers, That a Toleration of Independency will be an effectual
means of chasing away of erroneous opinions.

A. S. This is but a strong imagination of M. S. which may as easily be denied
by us, upon our Reason here above alleged, as it is boldly asserted by him,
without any Reason at all. As for that, which he cites out of my Book, that I
acknowledge them for men of Abilities, sufficient enough to dispute their
Opinions.

A. S. I have answered this sundry times, 1. It is but a judgment of one man.
2. But a judgment of Charity, which howbeit it be Practically true, yet
oftentimes it proves Speculatively false. 3. It is not a certain, but a
probable judgment, whereof he does not well to brag so much. 4. Howbeit, they
may not want Abilities to dispute probably, yet may they want Abilities to
demonstrate their opinions Theologically: Yea, neither all they, nor ten
thousand, such as M.S. with them, shall ever be able to bring any strong
Argument for any one of their Tenets, that they hold against us. 5. If they
have so great Abilities to dispute their opinions, the Devil has yet greater:
Cannot able Lawyers dispute very well a very ill Cause? Know ye not what is
said of a very able man, Vbi been, nemo melius; ubi male, nemo pejus? Truly,
ye dispute with such heat and ardency for the Independent learning, and
godliness, that it seems almost the only quarrel ye have against us,
whether ye be the learned, and godliest men in this Kingdom, or not? You, and
they seem to maintain the affirmative, at least concerning the last part of
this Thesis, if not both; and scarcely see we any Book of Independency set
forth, wherein we see not great complaints, that their Abilities are not high
enough prized; And what they say of their pretended piety, all the World
knows; whereas your pretended Adversaries speak never a word, but of the
Cause, unless they be provoked by the vain and exorbitant praises, that ye
ever and anon undeservedly bestow upon your selves. 6. But how able soever you,
or they be, yet for them, it is clear, the Assembly has diverse times put them
to a nonplus. 7. And if they be so able, what other reason can there be, that
they plead no better their Cause, fave only, that it is naught? It is truly a
strange thing, that men of so great abilities, should be able to say no more
for themselves. 8. And since you M.S. and they are so able, will you, or they,
I pray, condescend to some private meeting with some of the Presbyterians, that
it may be seen, who has the best Cause, and whether or no, all your deep
learning and great skill in Sophistications (wherein ye so excel) can set any
probable show, or face of reason upon your opinions, which ye hold to be no
less then Gods revealed Word.

M. S. Answer, 3. Better a door opened to all sorts of erroneous opinions, yea,
and to many other inconveniences greater then this, then that the guilt of any
persecution, or of any evil entreatings of the Saints and people of God,
should cleave unto the people or State.

A. S. this M. S. supposes, 1. That the Independents are the Saints. 2. And
that in case they be not tolerated, in establishing publicly their Church
Government, and other Tenets, in despite of Church and Parliament, both in the
Church and State, that it is no less then the guilt of persecution against the
Saints drawn upon the State. 3. That it were better, that all the Heresies of
the World, and worse should creep into the Church, then that they should not be
tolerated, but chastised, in case they trouble the peace of either Church or
state: I answer, That all that M. S. here says are damnable untruths, and
that it were better, that all the Independents of this World were in America,
and that ten thousand times worse should befall them, then that the good Name
of God should be dishonored by filthy Heresies: And if the Independents had
any fear of God before their eyes, and loved not themselves better a great deal
then Gods glory, they would rather desire with Moses to be scrap't out of the
Book of life, or with Paul to be separated from Christ, then that Christ's
Church should so suffer, or Gods blessed Name be so dishonored.

A. S. 2. Reason. It is dangerous for the State; it may breed Factions and
Divisions betwixt all Persons of whatsoever relation, betwixt the Magistrate
and the Subject, the Husband and the Wife, the Father and the Son, Brethren,
and Sisters, the Master and the Servant, when the one is of one Religion, or
Ecclesiastical Government, and the other of another, as ye, yea, to your no
very great advantage, have experimented it several times. The Son may refuse
to receive any Communion with the Father, and the Brother with the Brother, to
the utter dissolution of all natural, civil, and domestical bonds of
Society: And the reason of this may be, because the one may Excommunicate the
other, as daily Experience testifies.

M. S. The shadows of the Mountains seem Men unto you, Judge. 9.36.

A. S. So said Zebul, the servant of Abimelech, the son of the Concubine, who
by a conspiracy with the Schichemites, was made King, and afterward murdered
his Brethren; and yet they were men. viz. Wicked Abimelech with his Army, and
no shadows of Mountains. M. S. would have us live in security, and would rather
tolerate Socinianism, Arminianism, yea, Judaism, and Mahumetanism, then that
his own Sect should not be tolerated; Of so large a conscience is he.

A.S. It may breed Factions, etc.

M.S. But A. S. his may may possibly not come in an Age, no nor in many
Generations; and would he have so many Thousands of the dear People of God, as
do Apologize, to eat their bread in darkness? And he said heretofore, that May
comes but once a year.

A.S. It is subtly argued, M.S. of you with your May, but it is too much that
such a May come once a year, or once in an Age; and better were it, ten
thousand of you should perish, then God be so offended; for it is a Maxim in
Divinity, Quodvis malum Paenae, etiam maximum, eligendum potius quam minimum
malum Culpae; nam quaevis Culpa pejor quavis Poena. 2. But I pray you learn of
me, that as impossible morale in moral matters, such as this whereof we
dispute, is not that which never, but which rarely or hardly falls out: so is
possibile morale, idem quod facile, which easily and oftentimes falls out,
and not that falls out but once in an Age: And that it falls out so very
often, we may prove it by the Divisions in France, the Netherlands, Germany,
Poland, Transylvania, etc. What, I pray, transported the Crown of Swede from
the Nephew to the Uncle? What moved a King of Spain to consent to his own Sons
death? What is the cause of so great a War betwixt the Turk and the Persian?
And finally, what is the cause of this our present War, but the favoring of
Popery, the Negotiations with Rome, our Agents there, Father Con, and the Popes
Nuncio here?

2. Ye are not so many Thousands, as ye brag of, save in London, and a few
miles about it; your Sect, I think, may easily be counted by Hundreds; and as
for the remoter parts of the Kingdom, they are unknown Creatures to them.

3. If they be so dear to God, they can never, qua tales, suffer for so wicked
a cause, as for all Licentiousness in Religion.

4. They need not to suffer, if they will not be turbulent, but quiet, and
submit unto the Laws of the Kingdom, and such an Ecclesiastical Government,
as in Gods mercy shall be established in the Church. What a sauciness is this,
that they will be content with nothing, unless, in despite of Church and
State, they may do what they will?

5. As for his Rhetorications, in telling me that I am bred of Rocks, and
sucked the milk of Tigers; All that shall not hinder me to maintain, that the
Independents must be subject to Order and Authority, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, as other men are, or else suffer for their turbulent humor.

M. S. I would know of him, whether he deemeth himself to be of another
Religion then the Apologists? If so, Candorem tuum, A.S. in that malignant
expression, etc.

A.S. As for my Religion, you may know it, M.S. It is that which is declared in
the Confessions of the Churches of Scotland, England, the Netherlands, France,
etc. But as for yours, Sed vos, qui tandem? quibus aut venistis ab eris?
Quove tenetis iter?
that I know not, and consequently, whether I be of your Religion or not: Ye
will have no Confession of Faith or Discipline, but what you may change, Fidem
diariam, aut ad summum menstruam, such as you may change with every Moon.

But to come more near to the Point: I pray you, set forth a Confession of
Faith in the name of all the Independent Churches, and subscribe all of you,
that ye will stand to it, and then I will answer your Question: If ye will not,
here I will give you the best satisfaction I can, and it is this, viz. That not
long since, I heard one of the Ringleaders of the Independent Sect deliver this
Doctrine in a Sermon at the Abbey of Westminster, viz. That to a saving
knowledge of God, it suffices not to know him in the Book of Nature, or 2. as
revealed in the holy Scriptures; but that we must also know him as abstract
from his Mercy, and all his Attributes. Now if this be a common Tenet of your
Religion, I must confess, I am none of yours; My Reasons are, 1. Because that
if it be so, rude people, that know nothing of so refined Abstractions, must be
damned. 2. Because, to be saved, it is most necessary to know God as concrete
with his Mercy, or as merciful toward us in Christ. 3. If I know God evermore
under this refined abstraction from Mercy, I must be damned. 4. Because, if I
know God abstracted from his Mercy, I know him out of Christ, and out of the
Gospel; for God in Christ, and in the Gospel, is not abstract, but concrete
with Mercy. 5. Because the knowledge of God, as revealed in Scripture, is
sufficient to salvation, Ergo, it is not needful to know him any otherwise in
this life. 6. Because, if I know God out of Scripture, and abstract from Mercy,
it is a Knowledge without Faith; for Faiths formal Object is God in Christ, as
revealed in Scripture; and therefore it is a knowledge of God in Christ, as
revealed in Scripture; and therefore there must be some saving knowledge of God
without Faith. 7. If a saving knowledge of God be of God as abstract from all
his Attributes, it must be a knowledge of God without any Simplicity, and so of
God as abstract from a pure Act. 8. As abstract from all his Perfections, i.e.
without all his Perfections. 9. E. of God, as abstract from his Goodness, and so
as without his Goodness. 10. Of God as without Insinitie. 11. Without
Omnipresence. 12. Without Immutability: 13. Without Eternity. 14. Without Life,
without Knowledge, Science or Wisdom. 15. Without any Will. 16. Without any
Love toward Mankind. 17. Without Hatred of Sin or Sinners. 18. Without Power
or Omnipotency. 19. Without any Decree of Predestination or Reprobation. 20.
Without any Providence or care of his Creatures. 21. Without Creation, and so
not as Creator: For to know God as abstract from these Attributes, is to know
God as without them: Now who dare say, that to know God, as abstract from all
those Attributes, or without them, is a saving knowledge: This is indeed an
Independent saving knowledge, independent on Gods Word, on Christ, on Faith,
and all Grace; and consequently most graceless: 23. To know God, as abstract
from all his Attributes, is to know God, as abstract from his Essence, and so
to know God, as without himself, or his own Essence or Being; for Gods
Attributes are not only eadem cum Essentid ut personae, sed and de Essentia, de
quidditativo ejus conceptu, and praedicatae ejus essentialiae, and some of
them, quasi de specifico ejus conceptu; from which God can no ways be
abstracted. 24. If God be considered, as abstract from all his Attributes; it
is no more a knowledge of God, but some Idol of the Independents brains; sicque
habes meum candorem and vestrum pariteratrorem: Now let the Reader judge, which
of our two expressions is most Malignant.

M. S. his third Answer comes to this; Grant them their desires, i. e. A full
liberty, and they will bray no more then the wild Ass does, when he has
Grass.

A. S. 1. All Heretics say as much, yea, the Devil would be glad to agree
with God upon such terms. 2. But God has forbid the Church to tolerate you; 3.
In New England, they of your Party will tolerate no Sects; 4. And such a
Toleration here cannot but breed all sorts of Divisions; Whereas, if there be
one only Discipline or Church Government established, we shall have no
Distractions at all. 5. But how can (I pray unriddle it me) a Liberty granted
to contest and quarrel one with another, ever take away contestations and
quarrels? 6. If the Presbyterians be the cause of Divisions, because they
tolerate not you (as you say;) so was Moses, and Aaron, for not tolerating,
Core, Dathan, and Abiron. Your Simile of him, who murdered the Duke of
Burgundy, will hold, if it be applied to your Sect; otherwise, it is
altogether impertinent, and beside the present purpose.

M. S. his fourth Answer comes to this, That in case one Government were
established, it would breed as great, or more Factions and Divisions, then if a
Toleration were granted.

A. S. This Argument concludes, as well against Moses, in favor of Core,
Dathan, and Abiron, as against us; for if Moses had granted such a Toleration
to them, and their Sect, as the Independents are now Suitors for, it would not
have bred such Divisions; And if the non-Toleration of it breed as great
Divisions, as the Toleration of it would have done, what is the cause that this
Toleration of your Sect breeds so many injurious and calumnious Expressions
against the Presbyterians? What would ye not say and do, had ye once gotten a
Toleration?

To M. S. his fifth Answer, That sundry persons of one Family, in the City,
hear diverse Ministers, without any Division?

A.S. I answer, That those Ministers are not of diverse Sects, or if they be,
without doubt, it breeds many Divisions, and alienates their minds one from
another: Neither can any Godly good man, who is bound by duty to have a care of
his Family, but be grieved, when he sees his Children, his Wife, and Servants
separated in affection from him, and the Church, wherein he serves God, and to
eat at his Table in his House, when they will not eat at the Lords Table with
him, in the House of God.

What ye say of a House of bondage; if we were all under one Government, it is
most false; For by the same Reason, the People of God should have been in an
House of bondage, when they came out of Egypt, and were brought into the Land
of Canaan, because that there they had but one Government. So with you it must
be an House of bondage, in every State, that has but one sort of Civil
Government.

I will not answer his vain vaunting, in extolling his own Sect: Only I
wonder, that he is offended at us, that we desire but one good Government, what
ever it be; Is it ill to have but one good Government? Wherefore does he plead
for many ill Governments? Wherefore will not those of New England admit many,
if it be so good? If it be want of Mercy not to tolerate others, how merciless
were the Mercies of New England, that would not tolerate Presbyterians, no not
in a corner of their Country, when their Necks were put in the Pillories,
their Noses slitted, their Ears cut, and their persons imprisoned?

What M. S. says of distractions of minds, under Episcopal Government; it
was not for want of a Toleration of all Sects, and all sort of Ecclesiastical
Governments: Neither have I ever heard of any Petition made about it, much
less for any Independent Government.

M. S. And where Conscience is tender, a little violence is a great torment to
it.

A. S. It has been told you, twenty times; 1. That no man violateth or forces
your Consciences; 2. And all Sects bring the same pretext of tender
Consciences. 3. And we tell you again, That your ways are not ways of tender,
but of turbulent Consciences.

A. S. 3. Argument. No State in Christendom, where there is one only Religion
established, will admit the public exercise of any other, or endure a Schism
in that, which is already received: Wherefore then should it be done here?

M. S. his third Reason, 1. Supposes that malignant Supposition, viz. That
Presbytery and Apologism, make two differing Religions. 2. That there is no
State in Christendom, etc. 3. That Apologism, in case it be tolerated, must
needs become a Schism, in that Religion, which is established in the Land.

A. S. To the first I answer, 1. That neither I do suppose, nor yet can suppose
any such thing; For we see no common Confession of Faith of the Apologism;
neither will the Apologists be known or declare their Tenets; but are evermore
in the Synod, and out of the Synod, observing what is there said or done,
taking their advantage upon all occasions, and shaping their Tenets, according
to the current of the times.

2. If the word, Religion, be taken in a large signification, as it contains
in it self both doctrine and Discipline, then the Independents are of a
different Religion from us, since their Discipline is altogether different.

3. If it be taken for a potentiall part of Justice, which inclines the will
to honor God; then the Independents differ from us in very many acts of
Religion, both in those that it exercises, whether they be internal or
external, and in those, that it commands to other virtues; and consequently in
Religion it self; For they have much superstition in the Acts of their
Religion; 1. In respect of the persons, in that they make every man a Minister,
to Preach, and to Rule. 2. In their Sacraments, in that they take their selves
to be so holy, that no Protestant, yea, though he so live, as that he give no
offense to any man, is yet worthy of their Communion, etc.

If it be taken for the Doctrine of Faith; We know not the Doctrine of their
Churches, since they are all Independent one upon another; but as for that of
particular Independent Persons, Master Goodwins Religion of Coalmanstreet (who
is thought to be an Independent, and matriculated into the Independent Society)
is a Religion different from ours, as appears by his Books, which are blamed
by the best Ministers of London, whereof some of them have written against him:
So is that of that other most famous Independent, who preached not long ago at
Westminster, of some of whose Doctrines, I gave you a short relation, but even
now.

As for the second Supposition, M. S. he says, that it is manifestly untrue,
as it is notoriously known in France, the Low Countries, etc.

A. S. But it is notoriously known in France, that it is against the will of
the State, and of all Papists, that Protestants are tolerated there, as it
appears evidently; 1. By so many bloody Massacres, and Butcheries of the
Protestants there. 2. By so many Wars, whereby they obtained a Liberty of
Conscience. 3. They had many Princes of the Royal Blood for them, who were
Protestants; many Officers of the Crown; many of the Parliament in Paris; and
finally, King Henry the fourth, who in the beginning was a Protestant, to whom
by Succession belonged the Crown; for whose right they sought very stoutly in
sundry Battles, furnished him with men and moneys for the War; And he after his
external revoult, remaining evermore a Protestant in his heart, as it is
commonly believed; and fearing the Jesuiticall Faction, in recompense of their
good service, granted them Liberty of their Consciences, Free Exercise of their
Religion, and Towns of surety and security: therefore they obtained then their
Liberties by the Sword; And afterward, they were confirmed by Law, but sore
against the State, and the Papists will: And all this notwithstanding, the
Papisticall Sect evermore undermines them, and by little and little, against
all Law, cuts them short of those Liberties, so deerly purchased by them.


But if you take France, for such a Refuge for Libertinism, you would do well
to try, whether ye can settle a Colony of yours there; I believe you would
quickly experiment it, how little favor ye should receive there, in respect of
that you have already received of your own Contrymen.

As for the Netherlands, if there were but one Religion there, they would not
tolerate any other; And what they have done in tolerating many, it is not so
much will, as necessity, that has forced them to do so: And the History
testifies how unwilling they were in the beginning, to grant any Toleration at
all to the Papists, where they were already established. If yours of late have
been tolerated there; 1. It was, because ye taught not there in their Language,
but in English to English men. 2. And there ye professed not (for any thing we
know) that Presbyteriall Government was Episcopal, or contrary to Gods Word,
as ye do here. 3. They believed, that if ye could have gotten the Exercise of
Presbyteriall Government in England, ye would not have been so averse from it,
as ye are. 4. We know not whether your Religion was tolerated by the States
General; or whether it was tolerated Positive or Negative.

The third Supposition is true. But M. S. replieth, or rather answers, That
every difference in judgment does not make a Schism in that Religion, which is
professed on both sides.

A. S. Neither said I any such thing. But M. S. here gives himself much to do,
with many long and idle discourses, without any reason at all. If he desire to
know what Independency is, whether an Heresy, or a Schism? I have evermore
dealt fairly with him, I have given a Definition of both. Heresy is an error
in part, in matters of Faith, in him, who once professed it, whereof he being
sufficiently convicted, yet he continues, and pertinaciously perseveres in it:
But Schism is a breach of Christian Charity only, whereby men separate
themselves from the Communion of the true Church; and after sufficient
Conviction, pertinaciously persevere in the same.

Here I take Heresy and Schism in a strict signification, as they are taken by
Divines, both Protestants and Schoolmen, when they distinguish them, one from
another. If he admit these Definitions, which are ordinarily approved of in the
Schools; we may examine thereby the Independency, and see whether it be a
Schism or an Heresy, or not: If he reject it, I would pray him, to give us
some better one: I say not that Independency is a Schism, or that the
Independent Churches are Schismatic, for some diversity of Opinion; for that
belongs rather to Heresy, then to Schism: Nor 2. that it is a Schism,
because that it is tolerated, or not tolerated; for Toleration is a Consequent
of Schism, and Extrinsecall to it; The true Reason wherefore it is a Schism,
and they Schismatic, is because it is a breach of Charity, in that they
separate themselves from the Communion of the true Church, yea and from all the
true Churches in the World, both in Sacramental Communion, and that of
Discipline: Neither is it a Schism, because that it is a separation from
Presbyteriall Churches precisely, under the notion of Presbyteriall, but of
true and Orthodox Churches, which press them no ways to be Actors in any
thing against their Consciences.

But M. S. in despite of all reason will prove, that I cannot convict the
Independents of Schism, and that by this his most seriall Argument, which here
I put in form, with all the force it can have;

He that knows not, what is Schism, cannot convict the Independents of Schism.

But, A. S. knows not what is Schism. Ergo,

A. S. cannot convict the Independents of Schism.

The Major is certain; The Minor, he proves thus; He that knows not what is
the Church, knows not what is Schism, or a rent of the Church; For Rectum
est Index sui et obliqui: and entia privativa Cognoscuntur ex suis positivis
etc.

But A. S. knows not what is the Church; for he says, we know not wherein
consists its Essence, p. 21. Ergo:

A. S. I answer to the first Argument, that the Minor is false, as appears by
the Difinition that I have given of it, both in my Annotations upon the
Apologeticall Narration; in my Answer unto a Libell of C. C. and he retofore,
somewhere in this Book, against the which M. S. had nothing to reply.

To the confirmation of the Minor, I answer, that if by the word, knows, M.
S. means a distinct knowledge of the Essential parts of the Church, the
Major is false; for Schism is not a renting of the Essential parts of the
Church, or of its transcendentall or Metaphysicall Unity, but of its integrant
parts, and integrant Unity; for the first cannot be destroyed, so long as it is
a true Church: And Schismatic Churches may have their transcendent unity,
verity, and goodness, howsoever they loose their integrant unity, verity, and
goodness: If by the word, knows, he mean any knowledge of the Church,
either confused or distinct, whereby we may know the Church, by her external
Causes, her integrant parts, her Accidents, etc. The Minor is false, for not
only A. S. but little Children at School have such a knowledge of the Church,
which they learn in their Catechismes, And by any such confuse or distinct
knowledge of the Church by her Causes, Accidents, or Effects, etc. we may
confusedly, or distinctly know, what is Schism, howbeit not Essentially.

As for the Confirmation of the Minor; By my words, I said not there, that I
knew not what the Church is confusedly, or distinctly by her Causes, integrant
parts, her Accidents, etc. But that we know not distinctly the Essences of
things, as distinguished from their Accidents, as the Reader may see, if he
look in my Book; for there, in that page 21. I speak in formal terms of
that, which is Essential to the Church: Now if M. S. pretend to any such
profound knowledge of things, we must confess him to be an other Epistemon.
Doctor du Molin, Professor in Divinity at Sedan, holds the same Tenet, in his
Thesis de Summo Bono: So did the other Professors of Divinity there; for they
say, that no Creature, neither in this life, nor in the life to come, yea, not
the very Angels know the Essence of any thing; And from thence they conclude,
that we shall not see the Essence of God in the life to come: The which
Assertion, howsoever I confess it to be true, de hominibus viatoribus: yet can
I not believe it to be true, de Angelis viatoribus; and much less de Angelis,
aut hominibus comprehensoribus: M. S. should have done better, to have Answered
my Reasons that I bring there page 21. then so against the light of his
Conscience, to scratch at a known truth: Neither can I believe him to be so
ignorant, as not to know, and acknowledge the truth of it in himself, however
out of desire of Contestation he manifests the contrary.

But M. S. to the end he seem not altogether impertinent, proves it by an
Argument taken ab Exemplo; or by an imperfect Induction; if it be not a Pari;
or from them altogether.

I cannot believe (says he) that he should perfectly know the nature of
darkness, that is ignorant of what belongs to the nature of light; Nor that
he should know what a Schism or Rent means, that knows not what belongs to
the nature of Unity and Entirenesse of the Body; for Rectum est index sui, and
obliqui, and Entia privativa cognoscuntur ex suis positivis.

A.S. We know not perfectly the nature of Light, and consequently we know not
perfectly the nature of Darkness; if to know perfectly, be taken for a
distinct knowledge of its Essence, as distingnished from its Accidents: only
we know light imperfectly, by its external causes, by its effects, by its
subject, adjuncts, etc. and not essentially. And as for your first Maxim,
Rectum est index sui, and obliqui; it is true; sed non per distinctum aliquem
conceptum sui essentialem, as Philosophers say. Your second Maxim, whomsoever
you imitate in that Expression, is improper; for Privations are not properly
Entia privativa, but Entium privationes, not Essences or Beings, but negations
of Being; neither is Darkness any thing but a negation of something, viz. of
Light: so Poverty is not a thing, but a want of some thing, viz. of Riches. 2.
But I will pardon him this mistake: howbeit it were true, yet follows it not,
that if I know a Privation by the Positive Form which it destroys, that I
know that Form essentially, by its Essence, and in it self: I know the Form
only accidentally, or by its extrinsecall causes, or by its Existence. 3. Item,
So we conceive Privations, under the notion of Negations, or destructions of
the Existences, rather then of the Essences of things; or at most, as
destructions of the Existence primario; and of the Essence secundario, if they
be destroyed by Privations: Neither can I believe, that the Fire burns and
destroys immediately the Essence of a Man, or any part thereof; for the
Reasonable soul is spiritual, and cannot be burnt; so is the other part of
his Essence, viz. his materia prima, incombustible, yea naturally
incorruptible: and as for the Physical essence of the whole man, when M. S.
shall declare wherein it consists, I shall dispute with him: But, silly man,
with this babbling Logic, knows he not that Accidents are never defined by
their Essential differences, but evermore by their External Causes, or by
their Accidents; and sometimes by their Opposites, and Negations of some other
things: The very Apprentices in Logic know thus much. 4. But if we know the
Essences of things in themselves, as this M.S. pretends, if he say any thing to
purpose, how is it, that there is so great debate about them? as 1. about the
soul of a man, whether it be spiritual or corporal? 2. About the total
Essence of a man, whether it be the Soul alone? his Soul and Body? the Soul
and its materia prima? the union of both, the image of God, Religion, or some
other thing? And to urge this more home upon your Example of the Light; If we
know the Essences of things distinctly, and in themselves, as I said, what is
the cause of so great a diversity, yea of so great a contrariety of opinions
about its Essence or Nature? How is it, that some Philosophers hold it to be in
some Predicament, others to be in none? some, to be a Substance, others an
Accident? some, to be a spiritual substance, others, to be a Body; others,
neither, viz. neither to be a corporeal, nor a spiritual, but a spiritalis
substantia; others, the presence of a luminous body; others, a real color;
others, an apparent color; others, a spiritual Quality; some, a natural
power; others, a sensible quality? If we knew it essentially and distinctly in
it self, and not merely accidentally, we could not so doubt of its Essence,
wherein it consists. But it seems, that this Man, Doctor Holmes, and some of
that Sect, are as Heretical in Philosophy, as Schismatic in Divinity; and
so they have conspired with as little success against Natural, as against
Divine truth.

M.S. says, that my meaning may be, that if a Toleration be granted for
Independencie, the Practice of it should become a Schism from the Presbyterian
Church.

A.S. No such thing; but I maintain, that Independencie is already, at least
materially, yea Formally, ratione Formae essentialis, and in foro Conscientiae
interno, a schism from all the true Churches in the World, since they
willingly have separated themselves from them all in matter of Sacramental
Communion, as also in that of Discipline: And you should have done well to have
answered this, which no doubt you met with in my former Book; and not oblige me
to repeat it here. It will also be a Schism ratione Formae Accidentalis
externae, and in fore externo, from the Church of England, if, in Gods mercy,
any other Discipline, then Independent, be established in it. So is it also, in
respect of the Presbyterian Church, which is already established in France,
Holland, etc. yea and here in England, in the French, Dutch, Italian, and
Spanish Churches. So is it in respect of the Church of Scotland; the Discipline
whereof is approved by the King, which ye have all sworn to maintain.

But, says he, we have no Presbyterian Church among us; and so if a Toleration
be granted, before such a Government be established, it is apparently (...) out
of the reach of such an imputation for ever.

A. S. 1. It is false, that we have no Presbyterian Church among us; We have it
in the French, Dutch, and other Churches, wherewith the Church of England
professed evermore a Sacramental Communion, which the Independents break. 2.
Whether it be granted by the Parliament, or not, that hinders it not from being
a Schism; for the Toleration of the Parliament is altogether extrinsecall to
Schism; and there were Schisms in the Primitive Church, without any
Toleration of the Civil Magistrate. 3. His Supposition is impious and
ridiculous; for Toleration, according to M.S. his judgment, is evermore of
some real, or at least of some apparent Evil: Now, can the Parliament, or the
Assembly of Divines, in good Conscience, tolerate an ill Government, before
that they establish any good one? Is not that to begin with the Devil to serve
him, before that we serve God? Should not the Parliament begin with You, as the
most considerable Party?

A. S. his 4. Reason. If a Toleration be granted to our Brethren, I cannot see,
how it can be well denied to other Sects.

M.S. answers, that Bernardus non videt omnia.

A.S. But I pray you then, Father Epistemon, that sees all things, make me, by
some Reason or other, to see how it can be denied to other Sects; for there is
the same Reason for a Toleration of them all.

M.S. brings this Reason: He (says he) that keeps a door with lock and
key, and bolts to it, may let in one man, that knocks, without letting in all
comers.

A.S. But if the other knocks also, wherefore will he not open to him, and
let him in as well as the other? If he open not, there is no Reason, but Will
that keeps him out; so there is the same Reason, but not the same Will for
both: it is a mere Prosopolepsiia, or Acceptance of persons, which is not
well done.

If it be said, that other Sects differ more from us, then the Independents:
Ans. 1. It is all one; Magis and minus non mutant speciem, in matter of
Toleration: 1. For then all must be tolerated; howsoever some more, some less:
2. And some of our Brethren, viz. M. S. grants all the Argument. 3. And if we
distinguish so, they must declare and expound clearly, what Sects, and what
Opinions are to be tolerated, and what not: which will be a Question
inextricable, which no mortal man, appearingly, is able distinctly to
determine.

M. S. answers not to any of my Reasons; only he is offended, that I say, it
is a Question inextricable, etc. He says then, 1. That I prevaricate with my
own Cause: but wherein, here altum silentium. 2. He says, that I put the
Magistrate to a stand, whether he should tolerate Presbyterian Government, or
not. But I have already answered; 1. That it is already approved here in
England, in the French, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish Churches; 2. That the
English Divines, in the name of all this Kingdom, approved it in Holland. 3.
That the Kings Majesty confirmed it in Scotland. 4. That we entertain
Sacramental Communion with all the Protestant Reformed Churches; and that the
Independents alone do quit it. 5. That all the three Kingdoms, and the
Independents with them, by their Covenant and Oath, are bound to maintain
Presbyteriall Government in Scotland. 6. And they are bound to Reform the
Church of England, according to the example of the best Reformed Protestant
Churches, and namely that of Scotland, which all have only Presbyterian
Government. 7. And we have sufficiently confirmed it by sundry Testimonies of
Scripture, and other Arguments, grounded on Scripture. 8. Neither is this his
Question to the purpose; for quaestio quaestionem non solvit: I ask him what
Sects are to be tolerated in a Kingdom, wherein the true Doctrine, and true
Discipline, according to the public Judgment, both of the State, and of the
Church, are established: I maintain, that no other, according to Gods Word,
should be tolerated: The Independents maintain, that theirs should be
tolerated: I reply; if so; why not others also? To this M. S. can say nothing,
but will is the cause of it, and that Presbyterianism, according to this
Reason, cannot be tolerated: I have proved the contrary; and am ready to grant,
that if it be a Sect, as theirs is; or if the Church and State judge it to be
repugnant to Gods Word, it should not be tolerated; but so have they not done:
yea, they have declared the contrary; the Parliament in their Covenant, and the
Assembly in giving thanks to the Scots Commissioners for their Book. 9. And to
be short, I adjure thee M. S. by the relics of thy Conscience, and pray all
men, fearing God, to declare, whether or not, in taking of the Covenant, and in
swearing so solemnly, according to their power, to put down Popery, Prelacy,
and all Schisms, they intended to tolerate them all, as M. S. maintains they
should do.

M. S. asks me, what Opinions, donandae sint Ecclesia.

A. S. If the Question be, what Opinions are to be approved in the Church in
foro externo; my Answer is, only such as are approved by public
Ecclesiastical Authority, according to Gods ordinary Providence: If the
Question be, what Opinions are to be tolerated; then either you mean to be
tolerated in the Church by public Ecclesiastical Authority, or in private
persons. If the first, I answer: None but such as Gods Word tolerateth, and the
Church judges to be true, or not repugnant to the Word; If the second, I
answer, That, that depends upon the Circumstances of Time, Persons, Place, and
other, etc.

1. No false Opinions are to be tolerated by any positive Toleration, Consent
or Approbation. 2. If men err for want of light, much may be tolerated
negative, i. e. In not proceeding severely against them, till they be
sufficiently convicted, in case they give no offense to the Church of God; but
if they give offense, they must be punished condignly; and after a sufficient
moral Conviction, they may be punished condignly, both by the Church, and the
Civil Magistrate, if they continue and become pertinacious. And because, I
add, That the less the difference be, the greater is the Schism.
M. S. page 89. Answer 5. tells us, That the man [speaking of me] knows not
what Schism is.

A. S. It a strange thing, that having given so clear a Definition of Schism,
he should so doubt: M. S. Either grant my Definition to be true, and so grant,
that I know it; or deny it, and I shall, God willing, make it good: But it is
but a small matter, what I know, or know not, whether I be ignorant, or not;
for that is no ways material, or to the purpose: The less I know, and the
more ignorant I am, the more easy is it for such an Epistemon, as M. S. is, to
refute me. Come to the point I pray thee, good M. S; The reason of this my
Assertion is this, viz. The less the difference be betwixt Independency, and
the true Discipline, that is to be established, whether it be Presbyteriall
Government, or any other, the greater is the breach of Charity, and
Ecclesiastical Communion, in making so great a Schism, and Separation from the
true Church of God, for so small a matter. If it be so, ye your selves must
make a Separation among your selves, for every trifle wherein ye differ in
judgment, either in Doctrine, Discipline, or Holiness of life, one from
another, which ye do not; or if ye be minded to do so, ye must make all men in
your Churches, of your mind, in every Opinion ye have, or else, I pray, tell
me, for what Opinions ye are minded to make a Schism, and what not.

A. S. his third Reason: God in the Old Testament granted no Toleration of
diverse Religions, or Disciplines. Ergo, It is not to be granted in the New,
since the New Testament requires no less Union among Christians, then the Old
among Jews.

M. S. p. 89. Answ. 1. 1. denies the Consequence; and the Proof brought by me
he grants: So my Conclusion must hold: Only he says, it is ill applied; but
it is applied by way of Argumentation; whereof he would have done well, to have
shown the defect.

M. S. page 90. and 91. Answ. 4. yet does it not require, That he that is
stronger should cudgel him that is weaker.

A. S. God be thanked, ye need not much complain of any cudgelling, that ye
have yet received, since this Parliament; neither need ye to fear it, in time
to come, if ye force not a new Religion upon the Kingdom, against their will,
or if ye will submit unto lawful Authority; and not make your inconsiderable
number the Judges of all this business, against the Laws of the Kingdom: And
what you said in your second Chapter, we have shown, how absurd it is, and how
horrible impieties will follow upon your Tenets.

M. S. p. 89. in his 1. and 2. Answers to the Consequence, is, That it
follows not. Dare you say, in matters of knowledge, authority, and power, Ero
similis Altissimo, remember the fall of the Son of the morning.

A. S. We pretend not to be like unto God, in these considerations, in going
against the Command, as Lucifer; but in holiness, as he is holy, which cannot
be without obedience, as in the good Angels; Now ye confess your selves, That
God has only commanded one Discipline, and Government, in the Church under
the New Testament; how are we then Lucifers, in desiring this only; and no
other to be admitted of in the Church? How do ye then plead for the
Introduction of any other, then the true Discipline? If Baal be God, serve him;
but if Jehovah be God, serve him: So if Independency be the Ordinance of God,
let it be admitted, and no other; and so of Presbyteriall, and all other
Government. We impose none, but desire, that the true Discipline may be sought
for, and afterward imposed by the Parliament and the Church; by each of them,
according to their Vocation.

M. S. his second Answer, p. 89. is, That he denies the Antecedent of my
Argument, or rather distinguishes it, viz. That in the Old Testament it was not
granted in terminis, but in sensu, or by consequence (for this must be the
other part of his Distinction) because he prohibited all manner of violence,
and oppression, and charged the rich not to enslave the poor.

A. S. Reply. 1. This is no Law of Ecclesiastical Government, or of Toleration
of Heresies, Schisms, or diverse Disciplines in the Church; but a Moral Law,
and a part of the sixth Commandment, in not offering violence to the weaker;
And of the eighth, Thou shall not steal, forbidding all sort of Extortion
against the poor: Now ye are not poor, neither is there any man, either of the
Parliament or Synod, about to take your Purse.

M. S. Yet the Equity, and spirit of such Laws, extend to spiritualls.

A. S. 1. Your Argument is so spiritual, that we cannot understand it;
Theologia symbolica non est argumentativa.

2. We say, it is no violence, to oblige all to be subject unto Gods Ordinances.

3. And to deny a Toleration to them, that are contrary, for by the same reason
all Thieves should be tolerated, and it should be forbidden to punish them.

M. S. tells us, page 90. in case the Minor part in that Nation, had
dissented from the Major, about the sense of such or such a Law, relating unto
practice, and so had dissented in this practice: In case the Major part had
taken the advantage of their Brethrens weakness, and because they were fewer
in number, should have forced them against the light of their judgments to
have altered their practice, or if they refused, should have trodden and
trampled upon them, it should have been as apparent a breach of the Laws we
speak of, as any oppression in Civil Proceedings.

A. S. If the Major part, In such a case, had oppressed the Minor part, in
consideration of their weakness, or because of their weakness, it would have
been true; but if the Major part in not forcing the Minor, to be Actors in any
thing against their conscience, had hindered it from bringing in of a new
Religion, and a new Discipline, against that, which was ordained by God, it had
been no oppression, no violence, but an act of obedience to their God. And as
for that pretext of the tenderness of Conscience, it is the common refuge of
all Heretics and Schismatics of the World: Your pretended tenderness of
(...), were it never so tender, ought not to prejudice Gods Law, ye must learn
Obedience unto Gods Word, if ye pretend to be his (...); and ye must learn,
that every man must not do as seems good in his own eyes, but that the Spirit
of Prophets, in public Government, must be subject unto the Prophets;
otherwise all shall go in confusion.

M. S. tells us again, That to conscientious men, Civil Liberty, without
Liberty of Conscience, is of little value.

A. S. The greatest Liberty, that Conscientious men can desire, is to serve
God, and to obey his Ordinances; and what is beside that, is not Liberty, but
Licenciousnesse: If ye value not such a Liberty, ye are not worthy of it? You
may have Liberty of Conscience, howbeit ye establish no new Discipline in the
Kingdom.

M.S. his 3. Answ. p. 90. Though God gave no such Toleration, as you speak of,
by Law, yet he did actually tolerate for a long time together, with much
patience, not only a Minor, but a Major part of the Jewish Nation, in a manner
the whole Nation forty years, in opinions note riously sinful, Act. 13.18. So
then you must tolerate your Brethren, not only in some Opinions and Practices,
which are Dialectically and Topically evil, but even also in those, which are
Demonstratively such; if you will follow the practice of God.

A. S. I answer, 1. to the Antecedent, That God tolerated not the Israelites in
their sin absolutely; for sundry times he punished their sins, and that very
grievously with pestilence, mortality, and making of them a prey unto their
Enemies, till such time as they repented and turned from their sin unto him,
and then he turned his anger from them; yea, Core, Dathan, Abiron, and their
Adherents, for their Schism, were swallowed up quick by the Earth; and Aaron
and Mirian, stricken with Leprosy; and God kept them all in the Wilderness,
as in a Prison, for the space of forty years, and suffered none of them to
enter into the Land of Promise: Only he tolerated them, in not punishing them
by eternal death, or ex condigno. 2. Neither did God make any Law in favor of
their sin, to tolerate it, as the Independents require here. 3. Howbeit, God
himself tolerated much in them, yet ordained he not, that Churchmen and the
Civil Magistrate should tolerate them, but commanded them both to oppose,
every one according to their Vocation, and ordained sundry punishments against
such kinds of sin in^^^ Law.

2. I deny the Consequence. 1. For God is the Sovereign Legislator, or
Lawgiver, who may dispense with his own Law, and remit sin committed against
it, but so cannot we. 2. Because we are subject to the Law, and must obey it;
so is it not with God. 3. We are bound by a particular Obligation, and Duty, to
put it in execution; so is it not of God. 4. By the same reason, ye may
conclude as well, That we must pardon sins, give our Children to death for
other men's sins, or create a World, if we will follow Gods practice: 5. Gods
practice is not to be followed by man, but in that, which is conform to his
Law, and his revealed Word; For Christ's Church is a Country, wherein his people
live not, by custom, or imitation of practice, but by Law: Wherefore since
there is no Law for Toleration of Heresies and sins, they must not be
tolerated. 6. I retort your Argument; for since God punished his people
grievously in those forty years in the Wilderness, for their sin; so should
men now be punished for it. 7. And since Core, Dathan, Abiron, and their
Adherents, for their Schisms, and complaints against Authoritative Power, were
punished by death; so should such sinners now a days be so punished in like
manner. 8. And since the Israelites were not permitted to enter into the Land
of Canaan, which was a Type of the Christian Church, no more should Heretics,
Schismatics, and other sinners, have liberty to enter into the Christian
Church; for in so doing, we should imitate God. 9. If this Argument hold, all
Adulteries, Poligamies, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Idolatry, etc. must be
tolerated in the New Testament; since God tolerated such sins, those forty
years, in his people, when they were in the Wilderness: I am exceedingly
ashamed of you M. S. that you should be so absurd and impious, as to plead thus
for impiety, and all sorts of Heresy; and to hinder the Civil Magistrate, so
far as in you lies, from punishing sinners.

A. S. 6. Reason was: Either our Brethren do assent to our Doctrine, and are
resolved likewise to assent to the Discipline, which God willing, shall be
established by common Consent, or do not: If they grant the first, what need
they any other Toleration, then the rest? If the second, it would be first
discussed, wherein they are resolved to dissent; and afterward considered,
whether it be of so great importance, that in consideration thereof, they dare
not, in good conscience, entertain communion with us.

M. S. Answer 1, Scarce see we any face of Reason in it.

A. S. 1. And yet, if ye have any skill in Logic, ye may see a Disjunctive
Syllogism here.

2. M. S. here falsifies my Reason; for instead of these words, The Discipline,
which shall, etc. he puts in your Discipline, viz. Presbyteriall Authority:
which are not mine, but his own words.

3. Having so falsified my words, he distinguishes his own phancies, or words,
viz. To assent to (...) Discipline, in this manner: If your meaning be in case,
they assent to your Doctrine, and are resolved to assent to your Discipline,
viz. Immediately, when it has but the stamp of Presbyteriall Authority set
upon it, we are of your mind, but so even the Presbyteriall Party stands in
need of a Toleration, as well as ours: But if your meaning be, that a
resolution in your Brethren (the Apologists) to assent to your Discipline, viz.
When, and as soon as they can possibly satisfy themselves, touching the
lawfulness of it, it will exempt them from a necessity of Toleration.

As for the first part of his Distinction: 1. It is not true, that
Presbyteriall Discipline will stand in need of a Toleration; for what ever be
concluded, it cannot stand in need of a Toleration, since it is already
approved, as I have already showed; unless the Parliament and Assembly of
Divines recall that precedent Approbation.

2. Neither by a Resolution, mean I a precipitated Resolution to Assent, as you
mean in the first part of your Distinction; nor a Resolution to Assent, when ye
are satisfied your selves, as you mean in the second part; for God knows,
what can, or will satisfy pertinacious men; but a Resolution to Assent and
Obey, after that ye have received sufficient satisfaction Morally, by the
Synod, in all their Conclusions and Determinations: I say Morally, for God
alone, who has created the soul of man, can satisfy its understanding, and
will, Physically: And if ye Assent not to it, ye may be justly condemned, as
Schismatics, at least: And if it were not so, no Judgment could be concluded
in any Judicatory of this World, neither Ecclesiastical or Political; yea,
not in the Independent Congregations themselves: For he, that is to be
condemned, will evermore say, That he is not satisfied with the Judgment, if
he hope to escape so.

M. S. That you add, is very incongruous, etc. 1. We marvel who ye mean,
etc.

A. S. But others, who are not Independents, will not marvel: And if you be so
dull and blockish as ye would seem to be, I will help you; My meaning is this,
That if ye be not minded to assent to the Discipline, which the Assembly, God
willing, shall establish, (as it seems ye are not, as appears by your Books,
and your suing thus for a Toleration, and in declaring how ye are minded to
die in your Independency, what ever may befall you) Then the Assembly having
given their Judgment, and concluded upon some form of Discipline, must
discuss the points, wherein ye descent from their Determinations, and
consider, whether they be such, as in good Conscience, ye cannot entertain
Communion with us: and so proceed to a Judgment against you all, according as
your Opinions may deserve.

Whereas, you say, How should you resolve before hand? And yet M. S. himself,
as we have seen it under his hand, in this Book, is resolved to suffer all
things, rather then to quit his Opinion.

M. S. We grant, that men of good abilities, and conscience, may draw up a very
satisfactory Resolution, concerning such, or such a Case, or practice, about
which I am scru pled; but it will not follow from hence, that therefore this
Resolution will be satisfactory unto me, or that I with a good conscience, may
walk by it.

A. S. It will not follow, that this Resolution will be satisfactory unto you,
but it will follow, that it should be, and that with good conscience you should
walk by it: And consequently, that if you be not satisfied with that, which
should satisfy you, and in good conscience walk by that, whereby you should
walk, you should be punished; For you must learn to be satisfied with that
which is satisfactory; now it is your sin, not to be satisfied with that, which
is satisfactory; and I see not how this sin can excuse another sin proceeding
from it.

A. S. 7. They are not pressed to be Actors in any thing against their
consciences. Ergo, They need not to be suitors for a Toleration: or if they
be, it justly may be refused.

M.S. Page 92. Answ. 1. He denies the Consequence of this Argument.

A. S. But I prove it: For the Parliament being resolved, and having enjoined
the Assembly to seek out, and give their Judgments, what Discipline is most
conform unto Gods Word, which can be but one, and that we being all sworn by
Covenant to establish and preserve it, and to oppose all Heresy and Schism,
there is no door open for more then one true Discipline: And so, this
Hypothesis being granted, I argue thus; supposing we cannot have any more but
one Discipline, etc. and that thereby Independents are not pressed to be Actors
in any thing against their Consciences, they need not be Suitors for a
Toleration: But the first is true, as appears by our Covenant, and the
Ordinance of the Parliament. Ergo, The Connection in the first Proposition is
evident; For, if they stand in need to be Suitors for any such Toleration, they
consequently have need to be Suitors for Perjury, and a breach of the
National Covenant, whereby we have all sworn the contrary.

But M. S. brings his Reason, wherefore they must be Suitors for such a
Toleration, against the Covenant, and the Parliaments Ordinance, viz. That so
they may be Actors in good, according to their Consciences.

A. S. 1. So to be Suitors for a liberty, that they may perjure themselves in
breaking of their Covenant, and the Parliaments Ordinance, is to be Suitors for
good. 2. M. S. here beggeth the question, viz. That there is no good
Discipline, but Independency; and whatsoever is, or shall be concluded, that
yet the Independent way must hold, and they be Suitors for it. 3. We have
proved heretofore, that it is not good, but very pernicious, and by consequence
more dangerous then many Heresies; yea then Lutheranisme, Popery or Arminiansme.

M.S. adds, It would be a greater honor to your Presbytery, then the contrary
peremtoriousnesse is like to be, viz. To be Suitors for a Toleration of
Independency.

A. S. Oh, how much are we beholding to you, good M. S. for your pains, in
teaching the Presbytery a point of honor, to perjure themselves by violating
their Covenant, and the Parliaments Ordinance. God keep us from your greater
honor, and give us grace to perform our Vows unto the Lord.

M. S. The Apologists conceave, there is a necessity upon them, to save the
Souls of others, as well as their own.

A.S. 1. There is no necessity laid upon them to save Souls, by such means as
are not the way to save other men's Souls, but the ready way to damn their
own. 2. And is there no other way to save them, but by Independency? 3. If ye
conceive so, then if other men conceive a necessity laid upon them to save
souls, by suppressing of Independency, they must necessarily suppress it: 4.
Your conceits must not be taken for Rules, whereby the Parliament, and the
Assembly must be guided.

M. S. In his second Answ. denies the Antecedent of my Argument, or doubts
of it, and asks by what Authority I undertake to secure them.

A. S. 1. It is an untruth, that I undertake to secure them; I undertake
nothing, but tell a truth. 2. And if I lie, I pray M. S. to show me, where ever
the Parliament or Assembly has pressed them, to be Actors against their
Conscience. 3. And yet, however I have no Authority to secure them, yet have I
Reason sufficient enough to prove it; For if their Consciences be weak, or
tender, the Parliament declares, and has declared their care and resolution,
not to suffer weak or tender Consciences to be wronged, or pressed to be
Actors against the Dictats thereof: And if ye cannot believe or trust them,
how can they, or shall they trust you? 4. Because it is an ordinary Maxim
amongst Presbyterians, Not to persecute men for their Consciences, nor to
accuse them to the Civil Magistrate, unless they be turbulent, and trouble
the peace of the Church or State. As for your jeeres and injurious speeches
here against Presbyterians, we pardon Mr. Goodwins temperament; for it is not
Reason, nor the Man, but the Humor of the Man, that speaks.

M. S. p. 93. brings his 3. Answer to the Antecedent, That this Promise is
broken by A. S. seven times in his Discourse, and by sundry others of his Party.

A. S. 1. The Antecedent of my Argument contained no Promise, but a simple
Enunciation; and therefore I could not break any Promise therein contained;
for, Non Entis nulla sunt Accidentia; and what never was, could never be
broken. 2. Put the case, it were a Promise made by me, How, or wherein have I
ever, or could I press any of you to be Actors against your Consciences? 3. As
much may I say of others. 4. But to say, it is against your Consciences, is an
old shift an hundred times made use of, and as often answered. 5. We have never
heard of any that threatened you, and therefore we cannot answer this
accusation. We know of sundry extraordinary favors put upon you by this
Parliament; but nothing of so many threatenings of miseries against you; unless
you account it your misery, to receive good fat Benefices, and to be well paid
for many Lectures up and down, by very many, whom it is well known, you scarce
own for members of your Church; and so do clip the wool off the sheeps backs,
that are not of your flocks.

A.S. Arg. 8. It is against the Nature of the Communion of Saints, to live in
Sects apart, without communicating at the Lords Table; which very hardly will
be avoided, if a Toleration be granted.

M. S. reduces this my Argument unto this Hypotheticall Proposition, viz. If
it be against the nature of the Communion of Saints, to live in Sects apart,
without communicating at the Lords Table; then ought not the Apologists to be
tolerated: But, etc.

A.S. But M.S. is not so good an Analyser of Arguments, as I took him to be: he
fails here, 1. in reducing it unto an Hypotheticall Proposition, which poseth
nothing absolutely, as this my Argument does. 2. He makes the Antecedent the
Consequent, and the Consequent the Antecedent; for who sees not, that in
reducing of it to an Hypotheticall Proposition, that must be the Antecedent,
which is joined with the Hypotheticall Conjunction (if) viz. If Toleration be
granted: and that the Consequent, that is inferred upon it, viz. It will be
against the nature of the Communion of Saints. 3. But to help him, and to make
him to see its face, I will reduce it into a Syllogism, which is such:

What is against the Communion of Saints, is not to be granted:

But Toleration, viz. of Independencie, is against the Communion of Saints:

Ergo, Toleration is not to be granted.

The Major is certain; neither will M.S. deny it.

The Minor is proved thus: To live in Sects apart, without Communicating at the
Lords Table, is against the Communion of Saints: Toleration is to live in Sects
apart, without Communicating at the Lords Table: Ergo, Toleration is against
the Communion of Saints.


M.S. answers, denying the Minor of the second Argument:

But A. S. (says he) do you conceive, that men would, under Toleration, live
without communicating at the Lords Table?

A.S. But good Mr. M.S. 1. Howbeit they live not without communicating at the
Lords Table absolutely, in so far forth, as those of one Congregation
communicate, or may communicate together; yet live they without communicating
at the Lords Table, secundum quid, in some respect, viz. in so far, as
according to the Maxims of Independency, those of one Congregation amongst
you, can have no right to communicate in another Congregation; much less will
ye admit the members of our Churches to communicate in yours, or ye your selves
comunicate in ours, whom ye take up on you to reckon in the number of your
Sister-Churches. Now we conceive, that according to Scripture, it is a part of
the Communion of Saints, that all the members of the visible Church here upon
Earth, have right, in virtue of their spiritual fraternity in Christ, to
communicate one with another at the Lords Table, when occasion is offered. It
is not true, that the Communion at the Lords Table is all the breach of the
Communion of Saints that Toleration breeds, for it is also against the
Communion in Discipline, and in Christian Conversation, at least, per se, or of
it self.

His 2. Answer is: If living in Sects apart be so offensive (says he) to your
zeal over the Communion of Saints, why do you not rather mediate a Toleration
for them, then oppose it?

A.S. 1. My credit is but small, as you confess your self. 2. Howbeit, were it
as great, as it is small, yet hope I, I should never so far abuse it, as to
turn a Mediator for the setting up of Sects. 3. To your Quaere, I answer, It
should be wickedly done to mediate for the setting up of Sects; because to
mediate for it, were to mediate for the overthrow of the Communion of Saints.

M. S. If you shall suffer them to work with you, they will be so much the more
free to eat and drink with you.

A.S. We are not so careful for your eating and drinking, for ye may eat and
drink with Epicures and Pagans, as well as with us: but for your spiritual
Communion, which cannot be maintained, if ye have a Toleration to be separated
from us, and one of you from another into particular Conventicles.

A. S. Arg. 9. Because the Scripture exhorts us evermore unto Unity; which
cannot be easily procured by a Toleration of Sects; and cannot but beget new
Schisms and Divisions.

M. S. denies the Consequence; and supposes, that the force of my Reason
consists in this, viz. That if the Unity, whereunto the Scripture exhorts
us, cannot be procured by Toleration, Toleration is not to be granted.

A. S. But he is deceived, or rather treacherously deceives others; for he
should have added the rest, viz. Which cannot, etc. for if it begets Sects and
Schisms, it must destroy the unity of the Church. I say nothing to the
Hyperbolicall praises he gives to those of his Sect; They will doubtlesly do
as much for him again.

M.S. perceiving this, Answers, 2. That howbeit Toleration of Sects cannot
but beget new Schisms and Divisions, yet it is to be granted; for many
Sicknesses are in the world, that come by eating and drinking, yet are these to
be tolerated.

A. S. If Toleration, per se, begets them, it is not to be tolerated; for that,
which is in se, and of its own nature, the cause of Evil, is evil; at least,
it is not to be tolerated positively, by Approbation, Consent, etc. for we must
not approve Sin, or consent thereunto; but we are bound to hinder it so far as
in us lies. As for your Simile, it is altogether dissimile; for Sicknesses are
not Sins, but Natural Evils, which are not forbidden by Nature; neither has
God ever said to man, Thou shall not be sick; as he says, Thou shall not kill:
Neither is it in our power, to avoid Sickness, as Sin: Neither is it eating or
drinking, but too much, or too little eating or drinking, that makes us sick;
and therefore they are also forbidden, and not to be tolerated or approved.

M. S. 3. denies, 1. that they plead for a toleration of any Sect: and 2. that
they are a Sect.

But if a Sect be so called a secande, for cutting themselves off from the true
Churches Communion, as they have done, and as we have already demonstrated it,
they must be a Sect, and consequently plead for a Sect. I will not answer to
this M.S. his braggings; for I am only for to resolve his Sophistications: He
does well, not to compare the Apologisme with A. S. which is Adam Steuart; but
with Assisme; for they are liker to the one, then to the other.

M. S. 4. Whereas you say, that a toleration of Sects cannot but daily beget
new Schisms, etc. We answer, that Gods toleration or long-suffering toward
sinners, does not only lead all sinners to repentance, but also bring many
thereunto: And why should not Man's toleration expect an effect answerable
thereunto?

A. S. What shall I say to such Impieties? 1. I deny the Consequence. 2. And,
if this be true, then if Gods toleration of Idolatry, Incest, Sin against
Nature, of Sacrilege, Wars, and all sorts of violence and mischief, brings
men unto Repentance; wherefore should not Man's toleration expect an answerable
effect? 3. The reason wherefore it should not expect an answerable effect, is,
because we have not received power of God to tolerate Crimes, nor have we it in
our selves, as he has it. 4. We are bound to hinder sin, so far forth as in
us lies. 5. He has given a Law unto Men, not to tolerate, but to punish and
hinder them. 6. If so, then M. S. and his Sect must toltrate Brothel-houses,
and all sort of mischief. 7. If Gods toleration brings sinners to
Repentance, is it not of it self, but by accident, in virtue of some Mercy and
Grace annexed thereunto; which if we could give, as God can, we should not be
peradventure so much blamed, in tolerating of sin: but that can we not do.
8. Neither does God tolerate sins positively by Law, Consent, or Approbation
thereof, such as the Independents are Suitors for; but negatively, in not
hindering of it Extraordinarily, in a way out of his ordinary Providence of
Nature, or of Grace: Ergo, no more should the State, Christian Magistrate, or
the Ecclesiastical Senate tolerate it Positively: And then, where are you, M.
S.?

M.S. 5. Answ. is, That, as the Disciples in the Ship, feared Christ walking
upon the Waters had been a foul Spirit, and would have sunk them: so does A.S.
fear toleration, and it may prove the Dissolver of Schism.

A. S. 1. This Simile savoureth rather of good Wine, then of good Reason. 2.
And the things compared are as like one to another, as M. S. is to his A. S.
sisme, or an Apple to an Oyster. 3. This is but a may be; and, as he says, May
comes but once a year; but this his may will never be.

He adds, That that means, of all others, that has God in it, is likest to
do the deed. Is God then in this toleration of all sorts of mischief? What
deed (I pray) is it like to do, but to damn men eternally? The Lord preserve
us from your means, if this be it, as from the Plague. 4. I pray you, good
M.S. who told you, that the Apostles believed, that Christ was a foul Spirit,
since the Text has no such thing? The Greek word is (...) which signifies any
vain vision, appearance, shadow, image, or false representation; such, as I am
afraid, has carried you off from the true, to such a roving Exposition of the
word.

This M. S. afterward will needs force a favor upon me, and (as he says)
help my 10. Argument, by putting it in form: but because he puts but the
form, and leaves out a part of the matter, I must help him; which if he
permit me not to do, I shall con him little thanks for such a Courtesy.

A. S. My 10. Argument then in form will be this:

If there were greater Differences amongst the members of the Church of
Corinth, in the time of S. Paul; and yet they Communicated together, yea, he
exhorted them unto mutual Communion, and forbearance of Sects and Divisions:
How much more should Presbyterians and Independents, viz. who have less
Difference among them, Communicate together, and be exhorted to mutual
Communion, and forbearance of Sects and Divisions?

But so it was, that there were greate^ Differences amongst the Members, etc.
Ergo,

M. S. Seems to deny the Proposition, or the Connexum; and his Reason is, or
should be, according to his discourse, not because my Argument, as he speaks,
but because the Connexum (as he pretends) is built upon a false foundation,
viz. That the Reason why the Apologists refuse Communion with you, (You mean I
suppose in your Sacramental Actions; add, and in Government, etc.) is because
of the degree of the differences in judgment between you and them; whereas the
Reason of their refusal in this kind is the nature, or particularity of the
difference, together with your practice depending upon your Opinion in
opposition unto theirs, not the height, weight, or importance of either.

A. S. But I prove my connexum; for the ground of non-Communion together, must
either be difference of Judgment, or a breach of Charity; for these are the
two only ways, whereby Christians are united unto their Head, and are one
with another; the one in the understanding, the other in the will; the two
principal Faculties of the Soul, wherein consists the Image of God; so that
the less difference there is of Judgment in the understanding, or breach of
Charity in the will, the less reason is there for any Separation,
non-Communion, or Schism: So your Supposition is false, viz. That I suppose,
that the ground of such a refusal of Communion consists only in difference
of Judgment; for I suppose, that the ground of it may be a breach of Charity,
and in particular persons a vicious life.

2. M. S. should have done well to declare us here in particular, what is the
nature, or particularity of this difference, betwixt us, and them; for we
cannot in practicis dispute accurately, upon Generalities, so abstract from all
Particularity.

If it be replied, That it is because we admit vicious persons unto our
Communion; I have answered it in my Annotations, whereunto he pretends to
answer. He should have refuted my Reasons here; as also sundry others in Master
Rutherfords Book, whereby he demonstrates how ridiculous and frivolous this
pretext is: Neither is it needful, that I should repeal them, to swell up a
Book with them.

M. S. his second Answer: If there were so many, and great differences amongst
the Members of the Church of Corinth, as you speak of, and yet Paul no ways
persuaded the Major part amongst them, to cast our, cut off, or suppress, the
Underling Parties, but exhorted them to mutual Communion; why do not ye the
like?

A. S. We cast you not out, nor off, but ye run away; we exhort you, but ye
will not obey, ye slight, and contemn your Mother, that begot you; and when the
House of God is to be Reformed, ye will have all things according to your
fancy, or ye will be gone and renounce your Mother: O what sort of Children and
Domestics of the Faith are ye?

M. S. his third Answer: He denies the Assumption, viz. That there was greater
difference amongst the Members of the Church of Corinth, then betwixt the
Independents, and our Churches.

A. S. I prove it; for both they differed in Articles of Faith, some of them
denying the Resurrection, the Doctrine of the Law, and Sacraments; some of them
joining the Law with the Gospel, and Circumcision, with Baptism: And in
Charity, some crying up some Apostles and Pastors, and rejecting of others;
others of the same Church, being of contrary minds, and wills, without any
Separation in External Communion, either in Sacraments or Government, for any
thing we read in Scripture.

A. S. 11. Reason, in Substance is this, That the Opinion of our Brethren
symbolizeth much, jumpeth in conceit, and that they sympathize with the
Donatists, who separated themselves from other Churches, under pretext, That
they were not so holy as their own; neither is their Discipline unlike to that
of the Convents, and Monasteries amongst the Papists, which profess all one
Doctrine, but are independent one upon another, etc.

M. S. Answer 1. Symbolisa Theologia non est Argumentativa.

A. S. But this Argument is taken a Simili, and holds, quia similium eadem est
ratio, viz. In eo, in quo similia sunt; Now they are blamed in separating
themselves from the rest of those, that profess the same Doctrine, as if they
were holier then the rest: Ergo, so are the Independents to be blamed for the
same Reason.

His Instances are childish and fond; for Angels and Devils agree not in that,
which is blameable in Devils, for that agreement should be an impeachment, both
to their Holiness, and Happiness.

2. Neither agrees A. S. with Nestorius, in making way to any Heresy of his
own, as Nestorius, wherein he was blameable.

3. No more is it to the purpose, that ye are not like to Monks, for their
Paunches, idleness, or in their Buildings; howbeit, some of them be as lean,
and as busy, in their own way, as any of you Independents can be in yours:
Neither is it a sin, to be fat. Only I compare you with them, in that wherein
we all blame them, viz. In separating themselves from others, under pretext of
greater holiness.

To his Answer, to the third point: I reply, That I make not this comparison
betwixt the Donatists, and the Apologists, (as M. S. says here) but betwixt
them, and all those that are of the Independents opinion.

And so to his first Answer, I reply, That however some of the Apologists (of
whom alone I speak not) have not Churches, yet have they the same opinion,
concerning the Separation of their Churches from others, that profess the same
Doctrine, and that under pretext, that they are holier then the rest.

Secondly, M. S. answers, That neither in substance, nor truth, does it touch
any of them, or their opinion. 1. For they do not separate from other Churches,
but only in such opinions and practices, wherein they cannot get leave of
their Consciences to join with them.

A. S. I have proved, that it touches them in truth; and as for his proof the
Donatists did just so.

Whereas M. S. says, That they of the Presbytery differ in Opinions and
practices one from another.

A.S. 1. It is true; but that is in things, that are not very material. 2. Or
if they be material, they are particular Opinions of particular men, that are
not known; not of whole Churches, nor approved by whole Churches. 3. And
howbeit, some of them, though very few, differ in some practices, which are not
material; yet is it not so much they, that make these differences; as that
they are compelled by others to suffer them, as they have declared themselves
in their Letters sent to the Assembly. 4. That small difference breeds no
Schism or Sects among them; but they entertain mutual communion together, both
in Sacrament, and Government; and they admit one another unto their Synodall
and Sacramental Communion: so do not Independent Churches amongst themselves,
nor with ours.

M. S. 2. Argument for this his Assertion is, because A. S. himself and his
Party, do separate themselves from the Church of Rome, because they think not
that Church to be so holy, as their own.

A. S. 1. We separate not our selves from the Romish Church, because of
greater, or less holiness in our Church, or in particular Persons, then in
theirs; but because we conceive that the Romish Church erreth in Fundamentalls.
2. Not only commits, but also, 3. Teaches Idolatry, and 4. compels men
against their Conscience, to commit, and profess it: 5. Neither did we
separate from the Papists, but they separated from us, and did cast us out of
their Church, and persecuted us to death; so that neither, could we entertain
Communion with them, without loosing both body and soul. 6. Neither yet
separate we from any Church, that holds the same Doctrine with us. 7. Neither
believe we, that any Church holding the same Doctrine with us, can morally fall
into Idolatry, or urge us to be Actors against our Consciences in any
Idolatrous Act; And this Liberty of Conscience Independents may have in our
Churches. 8. We pray you also to declare unto us, what Heresy, Idolatry, or
great vice, you see taught or approved of amongst us, that should compel you
to quit our Churches, as we found amongst the Papists, and then your Argument
will have some force; otherwise it has none at all.

M. S. 3. Reason. If they do not think their Presbyteriall Churches more holy
then the Congregationall, they are far more guilty of Schism then their
Brethren, i. e. then Independents; For then they are at liberty in point of
Conscience, to come over and join with them, whereas the other are in bands and
fetters of Conscience, and can pass unto them. Their Brethren would come to
them, but cannot; they can come over unto these, but will not. It is the Will,
and not the Act, that makes Schism and Separation.

A. S. 1. But if they think not their Presbyteriall Churches more holy, all
your Argument is ridiculous. 2. And I must confess, that M. S. with his
Faction are very slight, who can make very few Arguments, that have any
appearance of reason, unless they be grounded upon their pretended holiness;
and that this be supposed as a Principle of Independent Divinity: What Seneca
says of Presumptuous Scholars, Multi ad sapientiam pervenissent nisi se jam
jam pervenisse putassent, may be more justly said of your ridiculous Sect,
changing only sapientiam, in veram pietatem aut vitae san^^^iatem. 3. Howbeit,
ye were holier then we, yet could we not come unto you; and that not so much
because ye are not holy, as because we find in your Opinions a great folly,
yea, by consequence more Impiety and Heresy, then in sundry Heretical
Churches, as we, and many others also have elsewhere showed: 4. But can you
think, that to pleasure every Melancholious brain, that differs not from us in
Doctrine, (if he be less vicious then others, howbeit no ways more virtuous)
but only in opinion concerning Discipline; in case, that under pretext of
Conscience, he will not submit unto our Churches, that presently all our
Churches must submit unto him? Or were it not better that he, and all his,
should be sent into America, a while, till their brains may be brought to
better temper. We cannot be so foolish, as to come unto so inconsiderable a
Party; whose opinions too, are yet unknown: And of those, that are known, some
more dangerous, then many Heresies. 5. What should we have to do with men, who
plead on this manner for impunity for all sin and Heresy; should we admit into
our Churches an Anarchy; and give power to ignorant Fellows, to Preach, and
make Ministers; shall we grant unto women the shingling, or gingling of the
Keys of the Church, to serve my self with the trim, and fine terms of
Independent Divinity? 6. It is a silly affected distinction of M. S. to say,
that it is the Will, and not the Act, that makes a Schism: It is both; for
Schism is an Act of the Will, or a voluntary Act; It must be Actus Voluntatis
elicitus, aut imperatus.

M.S. 4. Answer, That he sees not wherein the Apologists symbolize with
Convents, etc.

A. S. I have shown it, 1. In their Separation from others, under pretext of
greater Holiness, then other men have. 2. And because every Order is
Independent one of another, just as your Congregationall Churches, the Members
whereof have no more Communion with Churches amongst us, or amongst themselves,
then the Monks of one Convent, with those of another Convent.

M. S. 5. You couple your self with these Popish Convents, implying that your
Presbyterians have their Sovereign Judicatory, as they.

A. S. We have no supreme Iudicatory, but that of the living God: If we have
Superior, and Inferior Iudicatories, and the Papists also; neither we, nor
they, precisely are to be blamed in that; but so far forth, as they have the
Pope, one man, for supreme Judge, and Head of the Church, which is proper to
Christ; In that they prove, that he is the Antichrist. And as it is great
pride, in them, to make him with his Consistory supreme Judge over the
Universal Church: So is it a piece of extraordinary pride, and self-wit in
your Churches, that ye constitute sometimes seven or eight simple Fellows, how
Heretical soever be their Doctrine, and how abominable soever their life,
supreme Judges, Gods immediate Lievtenants, and Independent of all the
Judgments of all the Churches of the World, how Orthodox soever be their
Opinions, and how pious and holy soever be their Practices. But against such a
Subordination of Ecclesiastical Iudicatories, as we have according to Gods
Word, no man can take just Exception.

M. S. says, That he has answered my twelfth Reason; and I have showed, how
Absurdly he has answered.

A. S. 13. Argument. M. S. with his Logico Divinity, by a Doctorall privilege,
under pretext to reform my Argument, deformeth and disfigureth it altogether by
his Additions, and Confusions, in making it Hypotheticall, whereas it is merely
Categoricall: If he had desired to put it in Form, he needed not, but to have
added, or expressed the Proposition, which was only suppressed in this manner.

They who have but one God, one Christ, one Lord, and one Spirit, who are one
Body, who have one Faith, and one Baptism, whereby they enter into the Church,
should have one Communion, whereby to be Spiritually fed, and one Discipline to
be ruled by.

But we all, i. e. Presbyterians (as ye call us) and Independents, we have but
one God, one Christ, one Lord, and one Spirit, etc. Ergo,

We all, i. e. Presbyterians, and Independents, should have but one Spiritual
Communion, whereby to be Spiritually fed, and one Discipline to be ruled by.

And from this, he infers very well. Ergo, The Independents are not to be
tolerated, viz. In their Schism, Separation, or non-Communion.

M. S. grants all the Argument, and afterward distinguishes the Conclusion,
which is an odd manner of answering of Arguments, and proper to his Sect: But
we must take of ill pay-masters, what we may. He says then 1. My Conclusions
do not follow from my Premises.

A. S. But the Argument is in Form: If it follow not, show me, what fault there
is in the Form of it.

M. S. 2. jeereth the terms of my Argument in calling them, one, one, and one,
and my multiplied unity, and so jeereth the Holy Ghost himself, from whom I
have borrowed them, Ephesians. 4. Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. and 8. 1 Timothy 2.5. I might have
added more unities; as that we should with one mouth glorify God, Romans 5.6. we
are one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.17. we drink in one Spirit, verse. 13. we are all one
in Christ, Gal. 3.28. one Lawgiver and Judge, Jam. 4.12. Christ prays, that
we may be all one anomgst our selves, and one in the Father, and the Son, John
17.22, 23.

M. S. his first Solution then is, That we ought all to have one Communion and
Discipline, but not that, that is of Classique Inspiration, no more then that
of Papal, or Episcopal Recommendation.

A. S. 1. At least of this, viz. We should have one Communion and Discipline;
it follows, That there should be no Schism or Toleration granted, that may make
a Schism in the body, and dissolve our Communion. 2. If you cannot show any
material difference in Doctrine, and other things, (yea, ye confess your
selves, that it is not great) ye cannot separate your selves from us in
Sacramental Communion and Discipline. 3. Neither hitherto have ye shown any
practice in Sacramental Communion, wherein ye differ from us; for we have no
Idolatry among us, and men openly vicious, are not admitted to the Lords Table
among us: Neither can any particular man abstain from Sacramental Communion in
a Church, upon pretext that this or that man is vicious; for it belongs not
to him, but to the Rulers of the Church to judge of particular men's lives,
whether they be in a State to Communicate, or not: No more appertains it to one
particular Church, to judge of the Members of another particular Church:
Wherefore, that not being their Act, it cannot be imputed to them; and
consequently, they have no Reason in such a Case, to be so scrupulous.

M. S. his second Answer is, Howbeit they be bound to one Communion and
Discipline; yet would they be led to it, by light, and not by fear.

A. S. 1. There is light enough shown you, if ye will! open your eyes to see it.
And we desire you not to join in this Unity, out of any fear of men, but of
God. 2. Howbeit, you cannot see the Light, yet no Approbation, Consent, or
Positive Permission, or Toleration, should be granted you to live in Darkness,
much less to erect Schools and Synagogues of Darkness. 3. The Parliament, and
all good men, I am confident, will tolerate you in your Darkness, till Jesus
Christ enlighten you, if ye can be content to live in quality of private men,
and not erect Churches and Schools, to blind others: Neither can they grant
you any thing more; for howsoever, they cannot compel your Consciences, yet
mast they hinder you, to undo other men's Consciences in sowing of your Tares,
and wild Oats.

M. S. 3. Answer: That duty which lies upon all Christians, to have but one
Communion and Discipline among them, is no Dispensation unto any Party or
number of them, to smite their Brethren with the fist of uncharitableness, or
to dismount them from their Ministerial standings in the Church, because they
will not, or rather cannot, knit and join in the same Communion and Discipline
with them.

A. S. 1. You are very ingrate, unthankful unto the Parliament, and your
Brethren of the Assembly: Ye have experimented no uncharitableness from any of
them: Hitherto they have dealt with you in all meekness, and brotherly
affection. 2. None of you have been put out of your Ministry, for your
Opinions; howbeit, many of you have merited it, for your insolency, and
malepertnesse, in erecting of new Churches and Sects, against your own Tenets;
for ye maintain, that a Church cannot be erected without the Magistrates
Consent, and the Right hand of Association of Neighbor Churches, which ye have
not had in your Churches, here in Old England. 3. But wherefore may not
Sectaries be dismounted, who mount so high at their own hand. 4. If ye will not
join with the rest the Churches of this Kingdom, and submit to the Parliament,
and the Church of God here; but be Eus per se, Ens independens, and have
particular Privileges beyond the rest of the Subjects; ye may be gone, and
stay there from whence ye came; ye may go to New England, and mount as high as
pleases you, there; Only trouble not the Church and Kingdom here, and the
Church and Kingdom will not trouble you there. 4. The Church here does you no
wrong; only she mainteineth, that your Tenets are contrary to Gods Word: and
confesses, That if the Parliament will tolerate you, it may; but that, in so
doing, their Judgment is (since they are commanded to give it) that it is
flatly against Gods Word. And I may say, such a thing might breed ill blood, of
Friends make Enemies, and peradventure undo the State: and who knows, if it
should please God in his mercy to end this War, but it might make a Sacrifice
of all such as should have hand in it: All Christians are bound in Conscience
to oppose such Licentiousness and Libertinisme in Religion.

M. S. his 4. Answer is, that those of his Sect are kept under Hatches and
oppressed.

A. S. Unto this we have answered, and in this they do as Children that weep,
before they be whipped.

A. S. 14. If visible Churches have Disciplines or Government, different in
their Species, then the Churches must be different in their Species also. But
the consequent is false. Ergo, So is the Antecedent; So Churches have not
different Disciplines and Governments.

The Connection in my Argument is proved, because all collective Bodies, that
are governed, are differenced in their Species by their specificall
Governments, as we see in Civil Government, in the Constitution of States,
Kingdoms, and Republics.

The Assumption is proved, because the visible Church is but one Church in its
Species.

M.S. jeeres, jeasts, and flouts this Argument: he makes as though he helped it;
but it is strong enough without his help, the matter being sound enough, and
the Syllogism in form.

M. S. His first Answer is, that from hence cannot be gathered, that the
Apologisme is not tolerable.

A. S. This is not the Conclusion, that I have to prove; for I never read in
Scripture, or else where, of any Ecclesiastical Discipline, or Government,
named Apologisme: Away then with your new coined terms of Apologisme, and
Quinque Ecclesian Ministers, etc.

The Conclusion, that I have to prove, is this; Presbyterians, and your
Independent Churches have not, according to Gods word, or should not have
different Disciplines, which any Neophyt in Logic can easily deduce by the
power of Syllogismes: For it is known in Logic, that a Syllogism, that can
infer an universal Conclusion, may infer all the particulars of that
universal Conclusion, as when I conclude, that all men have reasonable souls,
I conclude that Peter, Paul, and John, have reasonable souls; so then when I
conclude here universally, that no Church has or should have different
Disciplines, Ergo, Presbyterians, Independents, and other Churches, should not
have different Disciplines or Government; I conclude, there must be but one
Church, and one Government, what ever it be.

If the Lord be God, then follow him; But if Baal, then follow him: So if
Presbyterian Discipline or Government be Gods, follow it; if Independents
Discipline be Gods, follow it, and no other: Let not the Child be divided in
two, as the false Mother, that had stolen the Child, would have had it, but let
it live, as the true Mother desired.

No more Pluralities (I pray) of Disciplines, then of Benefices; Let no man
bargain about Government; Let Gods Ordinance hold, what ever it be; and
wherever Independent Government be, whether in Aries, Taurus, Cancer, or
Capricorn, ye may go there, and enjoy it peaceably: We only speak of the
Discipline of Christ's Church in England, what it should be.

M. S. It follows not from hence, that therefore that Government, which is
more generally established and practiced in the World, should be that
specificall Government, whereby it ought to be governed.

A. S. Neither intended I to infer or conclude any such thing: Only I say,
that whatever the Assembly conclude, or the Parliament establish in the State,
yet, according to Gods Word, Plurality of Ecclesiastical Disciplines or
Governments can no ways be concluded or established; and consequently, ye go
against Gods Word, in pleading for it: And therefore all is lost that you build
thereupon. I cannot better answer your comparing of me with Herod, then to
slight it, with the rest of the overflowings of your Call. One good Argument
would help your Cause, more then a hundred Injuries: Is this the Independent
Power of Piety you talk so much of?

Unto M. S. his 2. Answer; I grant him, That before he and his Colleagues be
sufficiently informed of the lawfulness of any Government, that in Gods mercy,
shall be established, they are not bound to obey, much less ought they to be
scourged, as he speaks. But when they are sufficiently informed of the
lawfulness of it, (I mean sufficientia morali, which is all that Men can
furnish them; but not Physica, which is only in Gods hands) they must obey, and
no ways plead, with all Heretics and Schismatics, non-Conviction, and
pretended Conscience, and Toleration, and want of Authority in the Civil
Magistrate to punish them: They must obey, as well as the false Prophets, and
Schismatics of the Old Testament.

M.S. 3. Answ. The servants of Christ should not fall foul for uniformitie in
Discipline, and the greater eat up the less: God has provided other means.

A. S. If diverse Disciplines be established by Law, the good Ministers must
tolerate that, which they cannot mend; and serve themselves of all the means
they can, according to Gods Word, to reduce their Brethren to the right way:
But if they be not yet established, none, but one, should be approved by the
servants of God; and the Civil Magistrate, in imitation of Moses, or rather of
God, is bound in duty, only to admit one, and that the most conform to
Scripture; unless he will bring in Factions and Schisms both into Church and
Commonwealth: and that principally, when any of them may be dangerous for both,
as Independencie, which may prove more dangerous then seven Heresies.

But in all this, M.S. answers not my Argument formally, but most
ridiculously grants the Premises, and denies the Conclusion.

A. S. 15. Neither Christ, nor his Apostles, ever granted any Toleration to
diverse Sects and Governments in the Church; Wherefore then will ye be Suitors
for that, which they never granted?

M. S. here neither denies the Antecedent, nor the Consequence of this my
Argument; but sings his old song, That neither Christ, nor his Apostles, did
ever grant a power to a major part of Profossours in a Kingdom or Nation, to
grind the faces of their Brethren, either because they could not conform their
Judgments with them, or because they kept a good Conscience.

A. S. 1. We grant you all that. 2. Neither are your faces grinded. 3. Much
less grinded for non-conformitie of your Judgments with theirs, or keeping of
a good Conscience. 4. Your Conscience is very ill, that will not be informed of
the Truth. 5. We have told you, that Anabaptists, Separatists, and others, like
unto you, pretend the same thing. 6. Ye furnish us here an Argument against
New England men, in their proceedings with Godly Ministers here. 7. Live
quietly, and trouble not the Church, nor the State, and ye may live here a
peaceable life, without any trouble to your Consciences. 8. But it is a foolery
in you, to think, that your faces are grinded; because your Brethren will not
consent, that ye erect a Sect, and have Pulpits allowed you to beat down the
Truth: They are bound in Conscience to resist you, as ye take your selves bound
to resist them. 9. If you think your faces grinded here, you may be gone, and
live in contentment there, from whence ye came. 10. And yet, howbeit your
Brethren of the Ministeris take not upon themselves any thing, but to resist
you with the Arms of the Spirit; yet must you think, that the Civil
Magistrate has no less power over you here, then your Civil Magistrate has
over Sectaries in New England. 11. But it were better for you, Brethren, to
take a resolution to live with us in unity, under such a Discipline, as may be
concluded and settled in the fear of God. But cannot you live in this World,
unless you give a Law to all the World? What you say of Presbyterians, in
assuming of something imperious, etc. is but a Calumny.

M.S. 2. answers my Argument with a Question, Whence we have a Toleration of
our Presbyterian Discipline?

A. S. 1. It is a Maxim in Philosophy, that Question questionem non solvit,
one Question solves not another. 2. I answer, That we have its institution from
God, in his Word, as we have already demonstrated it: and He, in instituting of
it, has ordained, that it be not only tolerated, but also received and
preached through all the World, as I have already proved. 3. In France it was
brought in by Christ's Ministers, established by a Protestant King, and some
others before him, who had some taste of the Gospel. 4. It has been there
established by the Law of the Kingdom, and the Protestant Armies, which God
blessed under a Protestant King, against the Pope, the Papists and Jesuits,
who would have pulled the Crown off his head, to set it upon Don Philips; that
so fighting for his Crown, he might also fight for that of Christ Jesus, and
establish it gloriously in his Kingdom. And all this may be easily confirmed
by the French History, and sundry Edicts in favor of Protestants. It is an
untruth, that ever it was tolerated by the Romish Church; for they employed all
their endeavors to oppress it, yea against all Law: They are bound to their
King, who is also bound to them, for fighting for his Cause. In England it is
established (as I have sundry times told you) in the French, Dutch, Italian,
and Spanish Churches, by the Kings and Parliaments Authority. And how it has
been established in Scotland, it is better known, then I can declare it, viz.
by Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority.

M. S. his 3. Answer or Objection against my Reason, comes to this; That by
the same Reason, Papists will not tolerate Protestants, whom they hold for
Schismatics.

A.S. 1. This is only said, but not proved. 2. They neither tolerate Heretics,
nor Schismatics, when they can hinder them. 3. The Papists hold not us simply
for Schismatics, but also for Heretics. 4. And consequently, if your Argument
hold, That we must tolerate whatsoever they tolerate; since they tolerate us in
quality of Heretics, in their judgment, we must also tolerate Heretics, yea
Jews also, and permit them Synagogues, as they do; yea, we must tolerate an
hundred Religions, as the States of Poland do. 5. The question is not, what
Papists will, but what both we, and they should do; or rather what Gods Word
commands us to do: We take not Antichrist, but Christ and his Word for a
pattern of our duty.

M.S. his 4. Answ. Whereas you say, that they granted not a Toleration to
diverse Sects, do you not imply, that they did grant a Toleration to some one
Sect, at least: And how know you, whether the Apologisme be not that Sect?

A.S. Truly M.S. is very subtle, who of a Negative infers an Affirmative; even
as if I should conclude thus: M. S. is not diverse Schismatics or Heretics;
Ergo, He is one Heretic: This man has not committed diverse Adulteries; Ergo,
He has committed one Adultery. Have you never learned, good M.S. that old
Rhyme, wherein there is more Reason then Poetry: Syllogisari, non est ex
Particulari;
Neve Negativis, recte concludere si vis:


since it follows not. I know not at all, that Christ or his Apostles ever
granted a Toleration to the Sect of Apologisme, as you style it. 3. And since
you appeal to my Conscience in this Point, you must submit to my Judgment;
otherwise you profane the Name of God.

M. S. 5. Answer is, That Toleration is rei malae; and therefore the Apologists
should not be Suitors for a Toleration, but should be encouraged.

A.S. M.S. is minded to be merry, but I must be serious; and therefore 1. I
deny your Antecedent, and I gave you the Reason heretofore. 2. Apologisme, I
have told you, is res pessima, and more dangerous by consequence, then 10.
Heresies, as I have sufficiently proved to all men who will sit down with
Reason.

Then he adds, That if they sin in suing for a Toleration; Ergo, To prevent
that sin, it should be granted them.

A. S. By the same reason, if a man sin in suing for a toleration of
Mahumetanisme or Adultery; to the end to prevent such sins, they should be
tolerated. This Argument of M.S. is as ridiculous, as impious.

M. S. But sixthly and lastly, What do you think of Sinite utrumque crescere;
Let both grow together until the Harvest, Math. 13.30.

A.S. Since you are so desirous of my judgment, I shall willingly give it you.
1. I answer by your own Maxim, that Symbolica Theologia non est argumentativa;
Symbolicall or Parabolicall Theology furnishes no good Argument. Now this is
a Parable; for the Text says, v. 3. And he spoke many things to them in
Parables^ 2. I believe, that by both, viz. the Wheat and the Tares, our Savior
means not Heretics, but all the Good, or the Faithful, and the Wicked; so
that, if out of this you will conclude a Toleration, ye must conclude a
Toleration for Adulterers, Murderers, Parricides, Ravilliacks, and Gunpowder
Traitors, Chatells, Regi-cides. 3. If by a Toleration, ye mean a positive
Toleration or Consent, such as ye desire; then we must all positively tolerate,
or consent, to have men of such ill qualities and ill conditions, to live
amongst us with all impunity, yea, and approbation. 4. I believe, that Christ
speaks there to the Apostles, and will not that they usurp the Civil
Magistrates power, in punishing of them that are of his cognizince, yea, though
he will not do it. And so do our learned and godly Ministers; they do their
duty with the sword of the Spirit, and leave the Material sword unto the
Civil Magistrate, as proper unto him, as the Spiritual is unto them, for He
caries not the sword in vain. Neither must they meddle with the Material, nor
he with the Spiritual sword. 5. If they must be tolerated, according to Gods
Word, how have you taken the Covenant, and so solemnly sworn, and subscribed
with your hands, the extirpation of Papists and of all the Hierarchy? 6. Servet
(who called the Trinity a three-headed Cat, and denied the Incarnation of the
Son of God, and his Mediator-ship) and his Followers brought this very Argument
for him and his Sect, that you now do. So here ye bring no new thing, but what
sundry Heretics brought before you; so ye tread directly in their steps, and
have made choice of a pretty pattern.

A. S. 16. Argument is taken from the practice of the Independents of New
England; whose ways and practices (say they) are improved to a better edition,
and greater refinement, whom also they compare in their Apology with Father
Abraham, and being put in form, will be this.

That courtesy, which no man can obtain of the Independents, where they have
authority, viz. in New England; That courtesy should they not be suitors for
here in Old England.

But a Toleration of a New Religion, or Discipline, of Sects and Heresies, is a
courtesy, that no man can obtain of the Independents, where they have
authority, viz. in New England. Ergo, Toleration is a courtesy, that they i.
e. Independents should not be suitors for here in Old England.

The Major Proposition may be confirmed; for it is a pari; and such measure as
they measure with, such should be measured unto them again, for the Lex
Talionis requires it: And what reason is it, that men should be tolerated by
us in their erroneous Tenets, who will not tolerate the truth? What if they
should increase here? What more favor could we hope for from them, then our
dear Brethren have tasted already in the sorrowful times of their Afflictions?
Without doubt, being great Politicians, and Undertakers, zealous in the
Noviciate and Infaney of their Sect, and no less cunning, and politic, then
the Jesuits themselves, the Church of God, and the State also should seriously
lay to heart, what they may do here likewise; And their activity in making of
Proselytes, both in the Army, and the City, should give all men subject enough
to be diffident of them.

The Minor appears clearly, by the proceedings of New England, and the
Sectaries bred in the Independent Sect, whereof some women have been the
Ringleaders, as one Mistress Hutchinson, and sundry others, whom they would
no ways tolerate amongst them, but punished by Imprisonment, and Exiling of
their persons, howsoever they went out of Old England with them and were
Companions of the same misery, pretended Persecution and Undertaking.

No better dealt they with some Presbyterians of Old England, who being
grievously persecuted here for Nonconformity; yet would they not so much a^
tolerate them in any corner of the Country; yea not so much as in that, which
was next to the Barbarians, where they could not, but consequently be exposed
to the greatest danger; such were their mercies and bowels of compassion
toward their poor, and afflicted Brethren, whom yet they acknowledged to be
of very sound Doctrine, and holiness of life.

As for this Argument, M. S. because he cannot answer the Minor, he sends me to
New England to seek the Solution.

But I purpose not to undertake such a voyage for Independent Sophistications,
since the Argument convicts my understanding.

M. S. 2. Answers, That he would fain know, what I mean to do with this
Story.

A. S. Since he pretends so great dullness, I have put the Argument in Form
for him, and showed him, how I serve my self of it, to confirm my Minor by.

M. S. proves, that this Story cannot serve me, for, says he, i. e. A. S.
does not approve of those proceedings, viz. of the Independents of N. E.

A. S. It is all one, for I argue only ex Concessis, which makes it an
Argument ad hominem, and shows how that in so doing, and by such Suing for a
Toleration here, ye stand not to your own principles, but change them with the
Climate; whereof I say, what a very grave President of the Court of Parliament
of Paris said to the Jesuits, upon the like case: The Lord keep me from men
that have one faith on the one, and another on the other side of the Alps: So
I to you, God keep me from Men, who maintain some Principles in America, or
New England, and the contrary in Europe or in Old England. I pray you, holy
Fathers, drink together and agree, before ye come to put us here in combustion.

M. S. Is the man so full of the spirit of Reprehension, against such
practices? and yet so full of the spirit of imitation? i. e. If A. S. reprove
such practices; he should not imitate them.

A. S. I have answered, 1. That my Argument proves not, what I should do; but
what ye should not do: It is Argumentum ad hominem: 2. I Answer again, that we
persecute not Independents, as you say; but hinder them, to sow their Tares;
They have never been, nor are they, nor are they ever like to be persecuted by
the Parliament, as I hope: I hope the Independents will have more Conscience,
then to give just occasion unto the Parliament to punish them; but if they
continue in their pertinacy and the Parliament refuse then to grant them a
Toleration, it will no more be a Persecution, then it would be, to hinder men
to blaspheme Gods Name. 3. I cannot imitate them, for I have no power or
authority, as those, whose practices I refute; Only I plead for the Truth,
and show what should be done. 4. Howbeit I had authority amongst the
Dependents, as they have amongst those pretended Independent Creatures; yet
could I not imitate them, in refusing of a toleration; for the case would not
be the same, or alike. 5. And I grant you, that if the Cause ye maintain, were
as just, as it is unjust, those of New England should do well to refuse us a
Toleration. 6. And yet could they not so justly refuse us our demand, as we
refuse you yours; for the Presbyterians, who were Suitors for a Toleration in
New England, were only Suitors for Presbyterians, and those very few in
number; whereas M. S. and his Colleagues plead for a Toleration of all sorts of
Independents, yea of all the Sects of the World, for any thing we know.

In the same Sect p. 103. He condemns such practices in his Brethren of New
England, in saying, that in such proceedings, they justified not themselves in
the sight of God, viz. justitia causae.

7. Neither does either God, or our Conscience judge us in such proceedings. i.
e. Condemn us, for we judge according to Gods Word, that diverse Sects, which
ye would have Tolerated, are not to be Tolerated, but that they are all to be
suppressed. 8. Whereas he says, that I am more of the Opinion of the
Independents of New England, then the Apologists, I am glad, that he is ashamed
of his Fathers.

And I agree with them in this, that Heretics, Schismatics, and Idolaters,
are not to be Tolerated by the Church of God, which the Independents of Old
England deny most boldly.

What ye say of the Independent Apologists, that they profess not persecution
merely for little differences in point of Discipline; I Answer, 1. They do well
to profess it, since their power, as yet, is very small; But what they may
profess, if they can get any power into their hands, we know not. 2. Only we
say, that the American Independents, who are Ejusdem speciei with you, so soon
as ever they had authority, did other ways, then ye say the Apologeticall
Independents do profess without authority. 3. And it may be, that they being
Ministers, will profess it; but will you assure us, that your Magistrates, who
are Independents, shall profess the same?

M. S. Adds, if they did so for want of light, must this be a band of
conscience upon them to bow down their backs, and to suffer Presbyterian
greatness to go over them, as stones in the street?

A. S. In a word, this is to deny the consequence of my Major, which I have
confirmed. But I Answer, 1. The Question is not of Presbyterians; neither did I
speak of them in my Argument. 2. The Presbyterians, yea their National
Churches inflict none, but spiritual punishments, which every Congregationall
Independent Church, compounded, peradventure of seven, or eight, idle Fellows
only arrogate unto themselves. 3. What you say of the want of Light in the
Independents of New England, it is ridiculous; for they say, that they have
more Light, then all the Quinqu' Ecclesian Ministers, and will hold you, as
blind, as ye hold them: No wonder, that so Independent Lights be so
contradictory one to another. 4. I wonder how ye can call that rather a
Presbyterian greatness, wherein the Spirit of Prophets submit unto Prophets,
and the less unto the greater Light, then that, wherein six, or seven, silly
Fellows, and a little Independent Minister, be they never so erroneous in
their Opinions, and execrable in their lives, will not submit unto the whole
Christian World.

M. S. Again, he says p. 104. that out of fear they are Suitors for a
Toleration, if they do not bestir themselves by some means or other to prevent
it.

A. S. This is not Metus justus, sed injustus, qui non cadit in virum
constantem, It is not a just, but an unjust fear, that becomes not men, but
Children, who fear their own shadows at Noonday; Some men do fear flies,
and such is your fear, for it is a Maxim of our Discipline, that men should
not be compelled to be Actors in any thing against their Conscience; and this
might suffice to put you out of fear; which if it cannot do, we cannot cure
Pisanders fear: What ill usage have you received here of the Parliament, that
should make you so fearful? What you mean by your means to prevent it, I
know not, unless they be those, that some of the People offered, who were so
capable of new impressions, that the 5. Apologists mention in their Apology,
or that other, viz. That the Independent party did offer to entertain 4000. men
in these Wars, provided they might have had liberty to have made choice of
their Commanders.

What he says in the rest of this in his 4. Answer, is but a tale, and is
sundry times answered.

As for that he says in the next of my fear, it is a just fear, grounded
upon experience.

But M. S. Replyeth, 1. That some Independents hold, that all Sects and
Opinions are to be Tolerated, as A. S. relates. Ergo, In that case, his Sect
may be secured also.

A. S. I Answer to the Antecedent; And that We fear also, viz. That ye would
Tolerate all Sects, which we will not Tolerate. 2. We cannot be secure among
all Sects; for there be some that will not Tolerate us. 3. Ye speak so but for
the present; but if ye had power, we know not what ye would do; It were better
not to Tolerate Sects, when we can hinder them, then to bring them in amongst
us, to tolerate us, and to give us so just a cause of fear. 4. I said only,
that there be some of you, who would Tolerate all Sects, who peradventure are
the far lesser part, and should not prevail in their Voices. 5. And we know
not upon what terms they would tolerate us, if they were the strongest. 6.
Neither can your pretended probity secure us; we see the Examples, and have the
experience of your merciless Pity in New England, ye are all ejusdem farinae,
and Caelum, non animum mutat, qui trans mare currit.

And what I said of your Piety, it can serve you little. 1. For I spoke but of
a few of you, viz. of the 5. Apologists. 2. Because, it was but a judgment of
Charity, wherein I may be deceived, yea wherein I have been deceived. 3. Good
men sometimes may, for want of light, be dogged enough (to use your own
terms) as ye grant your self of your New England Independents.

Unto his 3. Reply, That a poor Toleration is far from Superiority; it is
true: But from a Toleration, it is to be feared, ye go further: And if ye can
get the Civil Magistrate drawn into your Faction, as in New England, ye may be
as dogged in a short time, as they are.

To the 4. Reply, That he thinks not that I know any such Island; It is a
wonder that he knows it not, as well as I: but it is little to purpose; No
more is his Answer, for it is but a currish jeere, and touches not the
Argument at all. He puts in 5. a Jeere for a Reason; God have mercy on the
silly Argumenter.

A. S. My 17. Argument was, That the Scripture forbids all Toleration of
Sects, Revel. 2.20. 1 Cor. 1.12. and 3.3. and 11.16, 18, 19, 20. Heb. 10.25.
Gal. 5.12.

M. S. his 1. Answer; The Scripture does not forbid all, nor any such
Toleration, as the Apologists desire; And remitteth us to his Answer unto my
15. Reason: And I remit the Reader to my Reply.

To the Text of the Revelation, 2.20. he says, That by the Toleration of
Jezabel, is not meant ^ Civil or State-toleration, but an Ecclesiastique or
Church toleration.

A. S. Howbeit formally there only be meant an Ecclesiastique Toleration; yet
by Consequence it reaches to a State Toleration. 1. For whatsoever the
Ecclesiastical Senate or Presbytery is bound not to tolerate, but must
suppress in the Church; that the Civil Magistrate or Senate is bound not to
tolerate, but must suppress in the State, since he is a Nurse of the Church,
and a Keeper of the two Tables. 2. And so did the Judges and the Kings of Gods
people. 3. And so do the Christian Independent Magistrates in New England. 4.
Neither is the Christian Magistrate less bound to put it out of the State,
then the Presbytery to put it out of the Church. 5. And I would willingly know
of the five Apologists their judgment upon this Point: neither believe I, that
they dare say, or at least do believe, that he is not bound to suppress all
sort of Sects, that creep in into the Church, when the whole Kingdom
professes the true Religion and Discipline. 6 However M. S. say, that they
desire only a toleration for themselves and their Churches in the State, yet he
pleads for a toleration for all Schismatics, Heretics, and Idolaters, that
may spring up, either in their own, or any other Church. 7. Neither can the
Civil Magistrate, if he follow Gods Word, grant a Toleration without the
consent of the Church, if he judge it is not corrupted. 8. And a Magistrate
should be worse then mad, that should permit a Sect to come into the Kingdom,
to preach down the Gospel, which he believes. 9. Neither can he be Orthodox,
and tolerate a new Sect, unless he tolerate us to believe, that he is either
corrupted by moneys, or some other way, so to do.

M.S. his 2. Answer ( p. 105.) is, That since only the Church of Thyatira is
here charged with this Toleration, evident it is, that the power of redressing
emerging enormities in a Church in every kind, is committed by Christ to every
particular Church respectively within it self; and so that they must be cut
off only by the particular Church, which is troubled by them, if there be no
remedy otherwise.

A.S. 1. At least then, thus much I gain by this Argument, as you confess;
That a particular Church must cut off such as trouble her, and consequently is
bound not to tolerate them. 2. For the same reason, other Churches must not
tolerate them, since they are all sister-Churches; Ergo, no Church must
tolerate them; Ergo, no member of the Church must tolerate them; If no member,
Ergo, the Civil Magistrate in quality of a member of the Church, must not
tolerate them, or he must tolerate them against his Conscience: And what he
cannot tolerate in the Church, as a member of the Christian Church, that can he
not tolerate in quality of a Christian Magistrate in a Christian State, if he
can hinder it: And if he has power to punish such as trouble one particular
Church, how much more has he power to punish such, as trouble all the Churches
in the Kingdom, as Schismatics, and Heretics? The Civil Magistrate then by
consequence may cut them off from the State. As for that Question which M. S.
moves here about the Independent power of particular Congregations, it is not
to the purpose; and we discuss it more at large in its own place.

A.S. There must be no such speeches among us, as I am of Paul, I of Apollos,
etc.

M.S. We join heart and hand with you.

A. S. And I with you; so they must not be tolerated, when they can be hindered.

M. S. adds here a But: 1. Every man that says, I am of Paul, or I am of
Apollos, is not to be taught to speak better by fining, imprisoning,
un-Churching, or the like; but by soundness of Conviction.

A. S. I answer, as I have sundry times done: Sinners, according to the
Doctrine of our Churches are, 1. To be heard; 2. To be sufficiently convicted;
3. After sufficient conviction, if they be pertinacious, to be punished
condignely by Ecclesiastical Censures, viz. suspension from the Lords Table,
or Excommunication: And afterward the Civil Magistrate is to do his duty, as
a Nurse of the Church, in compelling them by the Civil power, to obey the
Church: But in both these punishments, viz. Spiritual and Temporal, it is not
for the Sinner to judge whether or no he be sufficiently convicted, since he
being a Party, cannot be Judge in his own cause; but it is the part of the
Ecclesiastical Senate to judge, whether he be sufficiently convicted in foro
Ecclesiastico; and of the Civil Magistrate to judge, whether he be
sufficiently convicted in foro Civili, in that, whereof he is to judge.

To your 2. Answer; I reply, That by Brownists, Independents, Anabaptists, etc.
I mean not the names, but the things signified by such names.

A.S. Neither has the Church of Goda custom to be contentious, 1 Cor. 11.16.
This I brought to prove, that Schisms are not to be tolerated; for they breed
Contentions in Churches.

M.S. 3. But he does not say, that these Churches of God had any custom to
erect a Presbyterian throne, or a combined Eldership amongst them, to keep them
from Contentions.

A. S. I answer you M. S. that I must endure your impertinencie; 1. For if you
had frequented our Presbyteries, you should have seen, that they have no
Throne. 2. You might have seen, that by this Argument I intended not to prove a
combined Presbytery, as you call it; but the intolerablenesse of a toleration
of Sects. I prove sufficiently elsewhere, what you can desire about the
subordination of Ecclesiastical Judicatories.

A. S. Neither permits the Apostle Schisms.

M. S. says, that he has already answered this.

A. S. says, that he has replied to M. S. his Answer.

A.S. We must not quit our mutual meetings, as others do, and as must be done
in a public Toleration, ( Heb. 10.25.)

M. S. We understand not your words.

A. S. But they are the Apostles words. 2. And my Argument may easily be formed
by any Logician, against Toleration; It will be thus:

What makes us to quit our mutual meetings, as others do, is not to be
tolerated:

But Schisms and Heresies make us to quit our mutual meetings: Ergo, They are
not to be tolerated.

M.S. We do not know, what quitting of meetings there is like to be more under
a public Toleration, then is for the present.

A.S. So he seems to deny the Minor; but I prove it; for in tolerating of
Schisms, we see, that men, being deceived by the Schismatics, do quit the
meetings of the Church, to which before they were joined: And we see, how the
Independents frequent not willingly our Churches, and will not all join with
us in our meetings at the Lords Table: Neither believe I, that any of the five
Apologetick Ministers have ever communicated in our Assemblies, since this
Parliament.

A. S. 18. Because that M.S. charge my 18. Reason with Atheism, I will put
it in form:

That which per se, gives offense unto Papists, and others, or that exposes
the Protestant Churches unto the calumnies of Papists, should not be granted by
us:

But, the Toleration of many Sects does so; Ergo, it is not to be granted.

The Major is certain; for it is scandalum datum, which all Divines do
condemn.

The Minor, I prove it; for it gives, and the Papists thereupon take too just
a cause of Scandal or Offense; and indeed it cannot but be a just subject of
Offense, by to open to be reproached with such an innumerable number of Sects,
to the renting of Christ's Churches in pieces.

M. S. to this answers not, but propounds some Questions.

1. Will you, says he, redeem your self out of the hands of the Papists
calumnies by symbolizing with them?

A. S. I Answer, 1. That it is no symbolizing with Papists if we tolerate not
Heretics and Schismatics; for you have already confessed, that in your
particular Churches you tolerate them not; and yet you believe that your
Churches symbolize no more with them then ours. 2. It is a strange thing, if my
Argument be Atheologicall, if it prove, that Atheists and such as deny the
Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, are not to be tolerated; If
such an Argument be Atheologicall in your judgment, I am assured that all
Theologues will conceive better of it, then of this your Theological Answer.
Neither have I forgot my 11. Reason, for you symbolize with them in their
Popery, and I in true Theology, viz. in maintaining the Unity of the Church
with Saint Paul, as you symbolize with Sectaries in maintaining the renting of
the Church by Schisms: If you had shown any Contradiction in my words, I had
either answered it, or, if I could not, I should have rendered my self to the
truth: But M. S. will not prove it, but terrifies me, as a Child, with his
great words; It seems, (says he) Contradictions, Inconsistencyes,
Impertinencyes, Vn-intelligibilities, sense, nonsense, any thing, nothing,
etc. A. S. All this is no sense, nothing, but words and wind of Goodwin.

As for the 19th. Reason, he remitteth us to the former Question to seek an
Answer.

A. S. 20. If it (i. e. Toleration) be granted, it cannot, but be thought, that
it has been granted, or rather extorted by force of reason, and that all the
Assembly were not able to answer our Brethren, whereas indeed their Opinions
and Demands are against all Reason, as sundry of themselves could not deny, and
had nothing to say, save only that it was Gods Ordinance, which yet they could
never show out of Gods Word: On the contrary, if it be refused, it will help to
confirm the Churches, and the people in the truth.

M. S. In substance, 1. denies that a Toleration will seem to be extorted, if
it be granted.

A. S. But if a thing so absurd, and against all Piety be granted by so
venerable an Assembly, wherein things are carried by Reason, it cannot seem
but extorted by Reason.

M. S. says, that I tell the Assembly, that howsoever their Consciences might
savor the Independents in point of Toleration, yet their credits and
reputations would suffer by it.

A. S. It is false; there is no such expression in my Book, it is not my
expression, but M. S. his fiction and imposture.

Neither should the Assembly (in my poor Opinion) so easily suffer themselves
to be entreated for ill; neither is there any mercy in tolerating and not
suppressing of Schisms and Heresies, as M. S. believes.

M. S. denies, that their Opinion and Demand is against all Reason, but I have
sundry times proved it, viz. Because, by such a Toleration of Independency, all
sorts of Heresies will creep into the Church; and it is most absurd, that
there should be no Ecclesiastical power to repress the Heresies and
abominable sins of seven or eight wicked Fellows, whereof a particular
Independent Church may be compoed, in case they fall into Heresy, or such
abominable sins.

Whereas M. S. says, that it is not like, that so very learned men, etc. such
as are the 5. Apologists, should rise up to defend an opinion so contrary to
all reason.

A. S. It is more like that learned men of great abilities should do so, then
ignorants that have not the abilities. The Devil is learneder, then they all,
and yet susteineth as absurd Opinions: Divine Plato as learned, as they,
defended the Community of Wives, of Children, and Goods: Zeno did maintain,
that there was no moving at all: So did sundry great Philosophers maintain
great Errors; and great Divines, as Origin, and sundry of the Fathers
strangely mistook sundry things. If-they be so Learned, I may say of them,
what an other said of a very Learned man, Vbi been, nemo, melius, ubi male,
nemo pejus, where they do well, no men do better; where they do ill, no man
does worse: For, Optima, cum degenerant, fiunt pessima, as the Philosophers
tell us. If formerly I gave them so great praises, it was out of Charity, which
they should not take in rigore justitiae: And I must tell you, that I have been
grievously censured for that my Charitable judgment, and that by very learned
and godly Divines, both here by word of mouth, and by some others abroad by
Letters, which I could easily show, if occasion required. What if my Charity
gave them as great praises as they were capable of? However it be, great men
may have great Errors; what if there be a great Pride with great Learning,
since it is most certain that Scientia inflat?

Neither, for all their Plea for the power of godliness amongst them above all
the World, and that they do what Flesh and Blood can do in any juncture of time
to come, must they plead, that they are without sin.

I thought not, that such praises would so have puffed them up, as to have made
them thus bragging in their Writings; For if they answer not my commendations
of them, they affront me; and then I shall pray them not to be proud of my
praises, but to merit them: And I shall entreat others to pardon my mistaken
Charity; Bring not my Charity by any means for an Argument against me:
Believe, I pray you, that praises signify rather the virtue, that should be,
and that we expect of men, then that, that evermore is.

If you, and they, will not be such, as I take you to be, you must give me
leave to take you for such, as ye are.

As for the Protostants in France, their example of Suing for a toleration of
their Religion, serves you nothing; 1. For they have obtained it, as I told
you, by the sword, in fighting for their Protestant Prince, against Papists; 2.
And their Discipline opens not a gate to all Heresies and Licenciousnesse, as
yours. 3. And if they had had no greater difference with the Papists, then the
Independents say they have with us, they had never been so mad as to have
either fought, or sued so long for it. 4. They were compelled to Idolatry, and
to be Actors in the damnation of their own souls, against the light of their
Consciences; but ye can say no such thing for your selves; neither is it more
reason, that such Protestants, as ye are, should be rather tolerated by
Protestants; for your Discipline, as I have sundry times said, opens a door
to all Heresies and Corruptions, that Satan can invent; it is worse by
consequence a hundred times, then either Popery or Arminianism are formally.

As for your eminent deserts and merits, 1. I know them not. 2. As some
Independents may merit, and deserve well of the State; so may others demerit as
much. 3. But no man can merit a licentiousness to be wicked, and to bring a
mischief upon the State and Church both, such as a Toleration of all Sects and
Heresies would bring: If you cannot submit unto a common Government of the
Church, as others, and live more humano, it is against all reason, that ye
should be tolerated; neither must Religion be framed according to your
Accommodation, as you pretend, but your Accommodation rather according to
Religion. To your Demand about those that are of my Judgment; they needed not
to be suitors for a Toleration; for the Discipline, that they suffered for, was
already established by Law; As for the rest of this Section, it contains
only his proud Judgment of my Reasons, and some fooleries, which I hold it
not worth the while, to take notice of.

To your secondly, I answer, that those, of whom I say, that sundry of
themselves could not deny it, etc. are not the five Apologists, but others
Independent Ministers, and some of the ablest among them, whom I did entertain
upon that discourse: And M. S. himself tells us, Suppose that course or
means, which the Apologists insist upon, be not in the eye of reason or humane
conjecture, a mean sufficient for such a purpose; yet if it be a means, which
God has authorized for the effecting, it will do the deed. Here he mistrusteth
the reason, and appealeth to Gods Word, whereof we see nothing here.

3. M. S. says, that they have shown it from Gods Word; but God and men (it
seems) are not yet agreed to have it so generally seen, as is to be desired.

A. S. Neither is it shown, neither can it appear, Nam non entis nulla sunt
accidentia, things that are not, have no Accidents, neither can they be seen;
And what men can agree unto, I know not; for some times they dream, that they
see things, that are not: But sure I am, that God will never agree, that it be
according to his Word. And what you say of your hope, all the Kings of the
World cannot hinder you to hope; for no man is without all hope, but the damned
souls in Hell: Only this I say, That of your hope, you may say, O spes inanes.

M. S. To that, where I say, the refusal of a toleration will help to confirm
the Churches, and the people in the Truth: He answers, That he knows not in
what truth: Therefore I tell him, that I mean the Truth of our Discipline, and
the Truth; how intolerable is a toleration of Sects, and of so dangerous a
Sect: And the reason is, because, that if ever the rest of the Churches or the
People, see so venerable and learned an Assembly condescend to such an absurd
Opinion and Demand, they will not believe, that it is so absurd, as it is; For
many men are led by Authority, and take many things upon the trust of great
men; or when they see such an Assembly condescend unto such errors, they will
not be so diligent to enquire for the Truth, as otherwise they might be.

A. S. 21. Argument. Neither can it, viz. Toleration, but overthrow all sort of
Ecclesiastical Government; for a man being censured in one Church, may fly to
an other; and being again suspended in that other, fly from thence to another;
and so scorn all the Churches of God, and their Censures; and so this Order, by
necessary consequence, will breed all sort of disorder.

M. S. Answers, 1. That he joyeth, that I Prophecy, that the Independent
Government will overthrow all other Government, and adds, Faxit Deus.

A. S. 1. My words contain no prophecy, but a consequence. 2. I said not, that
the Independent Government, which is no Government, but aequivoce, as canis
coelestis is canis; but that the toleration of Independent Government would
overthrow all Government. 3. In the 2.. of that Page 110. he acknowledges his
mistake, because of my following words: And so this Order by necessary
Consequence will breed all sort of disorder.

To this M.S. answers, 1. That it will not breed the disorder of oppressing
Conscientious men, for Conscience sake.

A. S. 1. All sort of disorder must not be taken pro singulis generum, sed pro
generibus singulorum.

2. The Syncategorema, all, there signifies only a great number of disorders.

3. No more does the Presbyterian Order oppress Conscientious men, or do any
thing, that you tell there.

4. Howbeit it breed not those disorders, which you mention there, yet it
breeds sundry other disorders, which we have already demonstrated.

5. It oppresses Conscientious men, 1. In hindering them to get their
Consciences fully satisfied in a higher Indicatory. 2. By an absolute authority
of seven or eight idle, yea, peradventure debauched Knaves, who howbeit their
Opinions were never so Heretical, and their practices never so tyrannical,
will not submit, but oppress men better then themselves, compel them to be
gone from their Congregation, and so undo them, 3. In making them to attend,
peradventure a year, or two, before they will meet with other Churches, to have
their unjust Judgment judged and reversed; of which practices, see sundry very
strange Stories in Master Edwards Book, who knows them intus and in cute;
which one of their Sect, writing in their favor not many days ago, does
ingenuously confess, They make not (indeed) men to walk sundry miles, for what
they might have at home; but they sundry times oppress them at home, and undo
them, for what they might have gotten within a few miles, for the hundred part
of the loss that they suffered at home; whereof see Master Edwards his
Antapologia.

2. M. S. denies, that they may run from Church to Church: But I prove it, for
if other Churches be Independent of all Authoritative Power, they may admit
them; and howbeit, they could not run from Church to Church, yet could they set
up a Church themselves, compounded of seven or eight debauched Fellows like
unto themselves, as they do here in London.

M. S. scorneth to answer the rest of my Reasons, amounting to the number of
seven, under pretext, that I say, that I omitted them; but however I omit them,
the judicious Reader will do well to take notice of them.

M. S. in all this Chapter brings but one only Text of Scripture for his
Opinion, and that not by way of Argument, but of Answer to one of my Arguments;
but in the beginning of it, he has some ten frivolous Arguments grounded on
the corrupt Reason of his own brains, which I will here set down in order, and
answer them; hoping through Gods Mercy, that the very weakness of the
Independents Reasons, (howbeit we brought no Reasons at all against them) would
evidently show, how slight their Opinions, and how fond their conceits are.

M. S. Suppose the Opinion, maintained in the latter part of the second
Chapter, were waved, and such a Coercive Power, in matters of Religion, as A.
S. contends for, allowed in the Magistrates hand; yet, that any man should
plead for the drawing of his sword against those men, etc. And a little after,
that any (I say) on this side of malignancy, should consult the sorrow,
trouble, disgrace, suppression, ruin of men so holy, so harmless, of such
eminent desert in the Cause of Religion, State, Kingdom, me thinks should
exceed the line of Humanity, and be thought some Inspiration or Suggestion from
the great Enemy of mankind.

A. S. 1. This Discourse seems to imply two Arguments.

First, Men very holy, very harmless, of very eminent deserts in the Cause of
Religion, State, Kingdom, should not receive sorrow, trouble, disgrace,
suppression, or ruin.

But we the Independents are such. Ergo.

M. S. his second Argument, They who plead for the drawing of the sword,
consult sorrow, etc. against so holy men, etc. have some Inspiration from the
Devil, or great Enemy of mankind.

But A. S. pleads for the drawing of the sword, etc. Ergo.

To the first Argument I answer: 1. In general, That I am sorry, that this M.
S. will hazard the Independents honor in so weak an Argument; for if I deny
the Minor, they will presently cry out, that I offend their pretended Power of
Piety, their harmlessenesse, etc. And therefore, not to offend them, I will not
say, that they are not such: Only I say, that whosoever pleads for a
Toleration of all damnable and most detestable Heretics, (such as deny the
Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God, his Mediatorship, who call him a
Knave, and an Impostor, who died for us all) as this M. S. does here in his
Book, can neither be holy nor harmless.

2. I deny the Major, if it be taken absolutely, without any distinction; for
if the Righteous turn from his righteousness, and do the thing that is wicked,
he shall die therein, Ezekiel. 33.28. So they are not to suffer for their
harmlessenesse, and eminent gifts, but for something worse.

3. I must say, That the Minor smells somewhat the Pharisee, who seemed just
in his own eyes: And to say nothing else, we can produce you a great number of
Independents, and Independent Ministers no better, then other mortal men.

To the second Argument, I answer to the Major. 1. They have some inspiration,
etc. if they consult sorrow against them for their holiness, it is true: But
the Minor is false; for I never pleaded any sorrow against them, for their
holiness; neither am I minded to plead any sorrow, or the drawing of the sword
against them; but only against such who are turbulent, and trouble the Church
and State; who erect Churches in despite of the Parliament, or overthrow the
Kings, the Parliaments, and all Civil Magistrates Authority, about the Church
and Religion.

I will not answer unto this Independents Injuries, when he calls all those,
Malignants, who plead for the Civil Magistrates Power, as I do, and men
inspired by the Devil. Only this I say, That if such men who curb so the
Kings, the Parliaments, and all Civil Magistrates Authority, in such a manner,
should be protected and maintained by them, as they pretend they should be, and
vaunt they will be, (which yet I hope shall never be) that turdus sibi malum
cacat, and that they are worthy to drink such, as they brew.

M. S. The Independents have such a considerable strength, if not of evidence,
yet of reason for what they practice and profess: A. S. Ergo, I know not what.
I think he would infer, they should not suffer sorrow, but be tolerated.

A. S. 1. I know not what M. S. means by his strength here, for he seems to
say, That it is strength of reason, and then we deny the Antecedent; for if
they had any, they should do well to show it, and not to vaunt of it. 2. He is
not confident to call it evident: Ergo, It is inevident and obscure: Ergo, It
is uncertain, if these reasons or strength be taken from Nature; for in Nature,
all Reasons that are inevident are uncertain; if he means Reasons taken from
divine Authority, then he needed not to doubt, in saying, if not in evidence;
for all Arguments, taken from divine Authority, are inevident: And the meanest
Logicians know, that Argumentum ab Authoritate ductum, est inevidens and
inartificiale: And Faith, which is evermore inevident, is such, because that it
is grounded upon Authority, Heb. 11.1.

M. S. 2. They, i. e. Independents have a like, if not a more considerable
strength against that way of Government, which they cannot submit unto. A. S.
Ergo, What follows? They must be tolerated?

A. S. 1. Is this to argue, to assume the Antecedent in both these Arguments so
peremptoriously without any proof? Truly a Midwife might have argued every jot
as well: I deny it; and let the Reader judge of both our Reasons.

2. I deny the Consequence; for howbeit they had as considerable a strength of
Reasons, as the other way; yet should not their way be admitted; for if the
other be already approved by Authority, and the Independent way not yet
admitted, the old way, which is as probable as theirs, is not to be put away
for yours; For all Changes in Church, and State, are very dangerous, unless
some urgent necessity press it.

3. And there is something in their way, which may easily overthrow all States
and Churches, wherein it may be admitted.

M. S. 3. They are by their fiercest Adversaries, and Opposites themselves,
acknowledged ten times over for very pious, godly, and learned men. Ergo, They
must be tolerated.

A. S. These men are almost mad, in praising, and in hearing of others praise
their Piety, Godliness, and Learning, as if this were the finis ultimus of
this Sect: Neither ever heard I of any Sect so foolish, as this, that is ever
more trumpeting abroad its own praises. We are holy; we are pious; we have the
power of piety: And all the World acknowledges us for holy men; And there is
none, that have the power of piety, or like to have it in any juncture of time
to come, as we have it. These seem rather the Expressions of some distempered
brain, or at least of a man very vain, then of any wise or godly Christian:
Wherefore, instead of sparing of you, and concealing some of these weaknesses
of yours, which I thought to have passed over in silence; since I am put to it,
hear what I say to the Argument.

1. I deny then the Consequence; for howbeit some acknowledge you for such, yet
they are but very few, who acknowledge you such; 2. And yet it is but
Tostimonium humanum, which is only a Topic, or probable, and no certain or
necessary Argument. 3. It is but the Testimony of one man, viz. of A. S.
whereof (for any thing I know) ye make little esteem. 4. I deny, That if A. S.
commend you for some good. Ergo, Ye should be tolerated in your foolish, and
pernicious practices, which cannot, but in all moral probability, overthrow
the State, and the Church of God: There must only be one Government admitted
in the Church, what ever it be, whether yours, ours, or any other, and that for
fear of Divisions. 2. As for the Antecedent, indeed it was my judgment of
Charity, which suffers long, and is kind; envieth not; vaunteth not it self,
as ye do, is not puffed up, as ye are; that is not easily provoked, thinks
not evil; bears all things, believes all things; hops all things; endures
all things, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 7. But since that time having read M. S. his Book
(licenced, doubtlessely, by some Independent, or some other disguised person)
so stuffed with these his impious Maxims against the Church, the State, and
all Piety, and with mine own ears, heard some very dangerous Expressions of the
Sectaries, who pass under the name of Independents, I have at least changed
much, or suspended my former judgment of them; For Charity rejoyteth not in
Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth.
I will not speak ill of your persons; but if Master Edwards have such things
under the Independents hands, as his Book mentions, as in Charity I am bound to
believe he has, I am bound to think otherwise, then I have done, of your
Opinions. And howbeit, I had never heard, or read any such things of the
Independents; yet it is too much for you (Sir) so proudly to insult upon a bare
judgment of Charity; Know you not, that praises and great commendations of
virtues, are rather to show what men should be, then always what they are.
Wise and godly men rest not so much upon other men's Testimonies, as upon that
of a good Conscience.

M. S. 4. Argument: Independents have been (at least the generality of them)
and so continue, men of the most affectionate, and with all the most effectual
activity and forwardness, to promote the great cause of Religion, Parliament,
and Kingdom. Ergo, Without all doubt they must be tolerated.

A. S. 1. It is a wonder, how this man is not ashamed, bringing so little
reason for his Conclusion, so to vaunt. 2. This Antecedent is odious,
containing nothing else, but a proud and impertinent comparison. I should be
sorry to go on upon this foolish way with him: God knows, who have most
advanced the business, or retarded it: Truly, it is the common speech of wise
men, that none but the Independent Faction retards Businesses in the Assembly.
3. If the way to promote the business, be to plead for impunity, in favor of
Gods Enemies, of all Heretics and Schismatiques, this M. S. indeed then
promoteth it, as much as any man. 4. As for the activity of your Faction, ye
are all but too active in those things, wherein your pains were a great deal
better spared.

M. S. his fifth Argument. Independents are as deep in, or (if you will) as
much out of their Estates rateably, for the support of this Cause, as any other
sort of men whatsoever. Ergo, They must be tolerated in their Religion and
practices.

A. S. 1. And yet will he continue, as the Pharisees did, to publish with sound
of Trumpet, the Works of Supererogation of the Independent Sect. 2. Yea, but
what if many say, that many of them have bettered their Estates by this War? 3.
I will not enter into contestation with this man, about men's disbursements in
this Cause; for I never reckoned with them, what was in their purses, or how
much they are now out of purse: But it seems, that M. S. has calculated to a
Farthing every man's Estate, and what he has laid out in this War: If so, I
pray you M. S. tell me, what Soldiers and Officers; whether of the
Independents, Presbyterians, or others, have been best paid? 4. I deny the
Consequence; for they must not buy a toleration of their odd ways and
practices with Money; for that were no better, then Simony; if they laid it out
with aim at any such thing, they are worthy to be deceived.

M. S. his sixth Argument. They have many of them, such as were meet for such a
Service, adventured their Persons and Lives in the face of the rage and fury of
the common Enemy, continuing still in the same Engagements. Ergo, They must be
tolerated.

A. S. 1. Will you never desist from bragging of your Independent merits, and
from making of these odious comparisons. 2. It is a strange thing, that this M.
S. who, as I hear, is but a Minister, having no other Calling, can judge so
peremptoriously of all men's Estates, Piety, and Valor: Men, who knows him
not, in reading of such Stories, would think, that he had been evermore in the
Field; and had seen a proof of every particular man's valor in all these
Fights. 3. But did not many others, that were but mercenary, yea, eightpeny
Soldiers, as much? 4. And yet will ye not infer, I trow, from thence, that
they merit a toleration in their wicked ways. 5. It is a poor advantage for
you, to compare your selves with good men, in that wherein many ill men, yea,
wicked men may compare with you both, yea, and perchance go beyond you. 6. They
have indeed done well; but it was for the maintenance of their Estates, for
their Country, and for their Liberties, etc. But the French, yea, others also,
and those Presbyterians, came out of their Country, that had no Estates, or
Liberties here to lose; and yet did what they could for the Cause; and yet will
not I compare them with any others, for fear least I should offend them both.

M. S. his seventh Argument. Some of them have exposed themselves to more
danger, and harder terms from the Adverse Party, then ordinary (in case they
should prevail) by a public vindication of the Cause of the Parliament in
Print, from the Scriptures, and that before any man of differing judgment from
them in Church Affairs, appeared in the Cause, upon such terms. Ergo, Men so
holy, so harmless, of such eminent desert in the Cause of Religion, State, and
Kingdom, should be tolerated.

A. S. 1. But what a Braggadochio is this? Its pity, but he had been a
Spaniard; What is there in all these Arguments, but bragging, boasting,
vaunting, and proud, and odious comparisons? I will say nothing here of this
Sect, yet must I say of this M. S. and the rest of the Ringleaders of it, That
I have never read of any Divines so self-conceited. 2. No man can say, that any
of these Arguments have any other medium or ground, save pride, and
self-conceit: It is for ought, we know, or that appears in writing, the
likest to Lucifers, that ever we saw. 3. If such cracking merit any Answer at
all, the Antecedent is notoriously false; for the Scots appeared before that
any of your Independents ever showed their Heads, yea, before that the
Parliament was called here. Master Prynne also, who is no Independent, appeared
from the beginning, and yet continues a man in Learning, Piety, and Reading, as
I believe, inferior to none of you all; as appears by his writing against
Arminians, Episcopacy, yea, and the Archb. of Canterbury, in the most dangerous
times, having put him down by Scripture, and invincible Arguments grounded
thereupon; and afterward by his Law, so involved him in Premunires, that what
ever Counsel he could take, he could never Extricate himself. Neither did he,
as your pretended Martyrs, when he was in prison; he scorned to live upon other
men's purses, or to make himself rich by his Martyrdom, in taking, what ever
good Christians could offer them; he was chargeable to no man; and yet I am
assured, as I am well informed, he might by his sufferings have become rich:
Neither say I this to flatter him, or to depresse you, (for I never frequented
him much; neither, according to ordinary Providence, can I in time to come,
have much to do with any of you) but to beat down that insupportable and proud
Argument of yours, grounded upon your merits of Supererogation. It would seem
by your Discourse, that neither Heaven, nor Earth, is sufficient to recompense
so deserving men. 4. I deny the Consequence; for your Sect is not to be
tolerated for any service you have done to the State, if it be not conform to
Gods Word. 1. For I Will warrant you, if Jews could obtain such a Toleration, as
ye aim at, they would appear upon the same terms, as you do. 2. And the Popish
Rebels of Ireland propound the same Argument to the Kings Majesty, that ye
propound here. 5. They deal a great deal fairer, who press every man to keep
his Covenant with God; in pulling down of Popery, Arminianism, all Sects and
Heresies, according to their solemn Oath, for a Toleration whereof you are here
a suitor, against your Oath. Ergo, I will say nothing but this, That it is just
with God, that he never tolerate them, who will tolerate so many Sects, to
dishonor him: As for my self, if all the World should subscribe such an Oath,
I hope in Gods Mercy, I should never be drawn to subscribe it: 7. Neither think
I, that any man can do it, without perjury, and manifest breach of that solemn
Covenant, already entered into. The Lord preserve us from playing thus fast, and
loose with Oaths. 8. If such a Toleration of all Sects, which this man disputes
so hard for, were granted, what could it be, but the utter dishonor of this
Parliament, the Church of God, and all the three Kingdoms? 9. Should not the
Jesuits have just subject to jeer at all the Books we have formerly written
against their Equivocations, if we our selves should so equivocate with the
living God? 10. Should we not justify the Bishops, who have so calumniated,
and cried down the Parliament, for bringing in, and tolerating of so many Sects
and Heresies, Tub-Preaching? etc. 11. Is the Religion of Oxford, yea, of the
Rebels of Ireland, worse then this? 12. What had we to do to undergo such a War
against the Malignants, if we were minded to tolerate all the Religions, we now
fight against? yea, and many others ten times worse? What were that, but to
show our selves more Malignants then they are? yea, to declare them just, and
our selves, perfidious Rebels? Sure he, that would subscribe such a Toleration,
must be out of his wits, worse then a Papist, yea, then a Pagan. 13. Neither
know we any such Toleration, but amongst the Turks, who yet tolerate no man to
speak against Mahumet. 14. And I must say, that it were better living amongst
the Turks, then amongst such Christians; for the less their light is, the more
excuseable are they; and the greater ours, the greater is our sin, and the more
inexcuseable are we. 15. And if the Parliament should follow your Counsel,
good M. S. it should be to be feared, they should be ill obeyed, and that many
good men would rather take the Bishops and Cavaliers by the hand; and in case
of necessity, tolerate them both, and let themselves be plundered, then consent
to such an abominable perjury; and I am assured, the one is much more
tolerable, then the other is; and then what should become of the Parliament,
and us all? 16. But tell me, I pray thee, M. S. Is it not a Maxim of State,
laid down, as indubitable by those, who have written in favor of these
Defensive Wars of both the Kingdoms, That the King in Temporal and Civil
Matters has not an absolute, but a limited Power, and that because, that
Sovereign Power is originally in the People, but subjective, or quoad usum, and
exercitium in the King. If that hold in the King, wherefore not also in the
Parliament? But how much more in matters of Religion, that depend not either of
King, or Parliament; but of Gods Will? All power here, is originally in Christ,
and quoad exercitium Ministeriale in his Officers, but from Christ. What Power
has either King or Parliament, to intrude and force upon the Kingdom new
Religions, or a Toleration of all Sects? 17. The Parliament assumes no such
power to it self; wherefore then will Independents be Suitors to them for any
such things, which they declare themselves, they have not power to grant? Away
with thee, M. S. and all thy Independent Sect, and all your unhappy Maxims of
State, so pernicious to all States of the World.

After all this, this M. S. tells us, that they will, with Isaac, patiently
suffer themselves to be bound, and offered in Sacrifice, if need be.

A. S. It is easy to offer your selves to be Sacrificed, when there is no
Priest, and when no man offers you any violence, but only prays you to live
amongst us, as Brethren; and not to trouble the Church, State, or Kingdom: If
you be minded to become such a Free-will-offering, in good earnest, ye would do
well all of you in the first place, to quit the good fat Benefices ye have in
the Church? But so long as ye keep them, we cannot believe, that ye speak
sincerely: Always, it is a pretty Compliment, and a painted Sacrifice, not
with red, but in white and black.

And to close up his Reasons, he concludes thus; Better a thousand times is it,
that such distempers as these, though found in millions of men, should suffer,
were it never so deep, then that the least Hair of the Head, of one of those
men, should fall to the ground. i. e. Better that millions of us, who desire
the suppression of all Sects, should suffer, then that any of them should loose
but one, yea, the least Hair of their Head.

A. S. To this I can say nothing; But if we in your Opinion, be so distempered,
for the desire we have to see Sects suppressed, whereby God is offended, the
Lord be judge betwixt us; How precious in your eyes, one little Hair of your
Head is, which ye prefer before the sufferings of so many millions, the Reader
will do well to take it into his consideration, and accordingly to judge of
you; what a high rate you set by your selves; and what an undervalue ye put
upon all the World besides. I am assured, that servata proportione, one of your
lives is better then the Kings, and all the Parliaments, put together; for
there is none of them, but rather then that one man should dye, they would part
with the Hair, of their Heads, and Beards both.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
M. S. in the second Chapter of his Book, Section 28. has some Arguments
against the Power of the Civil Magistrate, to punish Idolaters, Heretics,
and Schismatiques, which seem also to make for a Toleration; for these two
Questions have a great Affinity together: Wherefore I thought it fittest to put
off my Answer unto them, to the last place.

The first is; God has anointed his Word, and the Ministry thereof, For the
casting down imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and for the bringing into captivity, every high thought
unto the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. And he gave some to be Apostles,
etc. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. etc. Ergo, The Civil Magistrate has no power to punish
Heretics, Schismatiques, etc. but must tolerate them.

A. S. 1. I deny the Consequence; For the Ministers of the Church are anointed
to beat them down by Spiritual means, viz. The Word, etc. whereof alone those
Texts speak: But the Civil Magistrate is anointed, or called to beat them down
by other means, viz. by Civil Power, and Civil Laws, which he is bound to
make thereabouts, and to see observed.

2. If this Argument hold, the Civil Magistrate cannot beat down, by his
Civil Authority, Sins committed against the second Table, as Adultery,
Murder, etc. because, that the Ministers of God, in the Church, beat them down
spiritually by the Word. And this Text is, as well to be understood of Sins
against the one, as the other Table.

3. Howsoever, the power of the Ministry, or Ecclesiastical Power be able and
sufficient to beat down all sin spiritually, yet is it not sufficient, or able
to beat it down politically.

4. Neither say these Texts, that God has anointed, or ordained the Word, and
Ministry alone, and no other means, or Ministers, as the Laws of the Kingdom
and the Civil Magistrate, in a Political way, for such an effect.

5. It is true, as M. S. says, that God gave not some in the Church, to be
Kings, Princes, Judges, and Justices of Peace, Pursevants, Jaylors, etc. For
Christ, and his Apostles erected not any Civil Government in the State, but
supposed it already constituted in the Old Testament: And that the Civil
Magistrate therein, was endowed with Civil Authority, to punish such as
trouble the Peace of the Church.

6. Howbeit, that in this Text, there is no mention made of the Civil
Magistrates Power to punish such persons; yet is it declared in other Texts, as
Romans 13.1. There is no power, but of God. Ergo, It is for God, since God is
both the first Efficient, and the last, or ultimate Final Cause of all things,
if he be for God. Ergo, He is to revenge his Cause, since he is his Minister,
Ver. 4. And when he makes a Political Ordinance concerning Gods service,
Whosoever resists his power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that
resist, shall receive to themselvet condemnation, both eternal and temporal,
Verse. 2. if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the
sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, as well in the State, as the
Preacher in the Church, a revenger to execute wrath upon him, that does evil:
Here there is no distinction or restriction in the Law. Ergo, It is not for us,
to distinguish, or restrain it: He is the Minister of God for good, Verse. 4.
Ergo, For this good, viz. to have a care of Religion, and to punish such, as
trouble it by their Schisms, and Heresies.

And therefore, 6. I deny the Consequence; For Posito uno Medio, non negantur
reliqua; It follows not, That if God serve himself of some means in the
Church: Ergo, He serves himself, of any other means, viz. of Civil Authority
about the Church, and out of the Church: That were, as if I should say; The
internal Causes, as Materia and Forma, are necessary to the Generation of a
man; Ergo, The External, as the Efficient and Final, viz. God and man are not
necessary.

M. S. 2. The Ministers of the Church must perform their Office with meekness,
2 Timothy 2.24. Ergo, They must not threaten men with delivering them over to the
Civil Magistrate.

A. S. I answer to the Antecedent; They must perform their duty, not only with
meekness; but also with severity, when necessity requires it, as we see in
Saint Paul. 2. The Text, 2 Timothy 2.24. speaks only of meekness in teaching;
In meekness (says the Apostle) instructing those that oppose themselves, if
peradventure God will give them repentance. 3. It only says, that they must
use meekness, when men are docilo; when there is any hope of Repentance; and
not with pertinacious Heretics, and Schismatiques, of whom we cannot expect
Repentance. 4. I deny the Consequence; When the Ministers of the Church
threaten them, to deliver them over unto the Civil Magistrate, they may do
that also with meekness: Neither is such a proceeding contrary to meekness;
for the meekest man of the World may accuse his Party before the Civil
Magistrate; and yet not be thought inhumane, or cruel. 5. Thus, All being
beaten down, all that he builds upon this ruinous Foundation, must needs fall
to ground.

M. S. his third Reason: That which is a special gift of God, and whereof no
man is capable, by his own industry, the want of it (being in it self a
judgment of God, and withal, no ways prejudicial, or hurtful unto others)
should not expose him to further punishment and misery: But Repentance to the
acknowledgement of the Truth, is a special gift of God, and the want thereof,
a judgment of God; etc. Ergo.

A. S. 1. I deny the first Proposition; For if he be bound to have it, and had
the faculty, and sufficient means to have had it, and to keep it after that he
had it, or might have it; and if by his own fault he want it, he cannot excuse
himself neither from the Obligation to have, nor from the Punishment due to him
for the want of it, as our Divines teach against the Arminians.

2. I deny the Assumption; for it is prejudicial to others, by the ill example
he gives, and by the malice proceeding from thence, that induces others to the
same sin, to false Doctrines, Schisms, and Heresies.

3. This Argument proves not M. S. his Thesis, viz. That the Civil Magistrate
should not punish Heretics and Schismatiques, or that they should be
tolerated in the State.

And therefore, 4. we may grant him all the Argument. Neither does the Civil
Magistrate punish any man for want of Repentance, or for his ignorance, which
are in the mind and will, and consequently unknown to him; but for the
pertinacious External Profession of them; in so far forth, as they trouble the
peace of the Church, and the State. Neither refuses he to tolerate ignorance,
or want of repentance; yea, if there be nothing worse in them, both the Civil
Magistrate, and the Ministers of Christ, must pity them, and travel for their
instruction and amendment. This is far from proving either a Toleration of the
Public Exercise of Heretical Doctrines, or of Schisms, or that the Civil
Magistrate has not power to punish them.

M. S. his fourth Reason being put in Form, will be thus; That which makes men
worse, and Hypocrites, to profess outwardly, what they believe not in their
Consciences, is not lawful: But External Compulsion of Heretics,
Schismatics, etc. in matters of Religion, made by the Civil Magistrate, is
such: Ergo, It is unlawful, and consequently not to be tolerated.

A. S. I answer to the first Proposition; If it make men worse per Accidens,
not of it self, but in virtue of some Accident, annexed to the person, that
becomes worse; it is false: If it do it per se, by its own virtue, and
efficacy; it is true: But then the Assumption is false; for the Civil
Magistrate, in punishing Heretics and Schismatics, etc. makes them not worse
per se; for neither is it finis Operantis, or Operationis; since neither he
intends to make them worse, but better; nor tends his Operation; i. e. his
Judgment and Command to make them at all ill, much less to make them worse;
since the effect of it per se is only to imprison their bodies, to fine them,
or, if they merit it, to exile them, or take their lives; which produces no
moral ill, but a great good, viz. a hinderance of them to vent abroad their
Heresies and Schisms. So it makes them not Hypocrites per se; but only they
per se make themselves Hypocrites: They are bound to suffer themselves to be
taught the Truth, so to believe it, and so they shall not be Hypocrites.

M. S. replieth, That he stands already engaged in a greater band hereunto,
viz. His peace with God, and the safety of his Soul, then suffering temporally
from the Civil Power.

A. S. Your erroneous Conscience can breed no true, and real Obligation, or
Engagement against God: 1. For you are bound, and obliged to God to cast away
your Ignorance, and ill Conscience: 2. What if your Erroneous Conscience
dictate you, that you must kill the King, as that of Ravalliack did to him in
France, to kill Henry the fourth; and that of the Jesuits and Priests in
England did them, to blow up the Parliament, and many Papists of their own
Religion; Must you I pray, obey the dictate of such a Conscience? 3. Away with
such wicked Consciences; and to the Law, and Prophets, if you be a Protestant.
4. Either that band is laid upon you by God, or the Devil: But it cannot be
laid upon you by God; for he cannot lay a band upon you, to serve the Devil,
or to despite himself, for so he should be the Author of sin; nor by the
Devil; for then the band laid upon you to serve him, should be greater then
that, which God has laid upon you in his Word, to serve him.

It may be said, That so long as my Erroneous Conscience lasts, I must obey
it.

A. S. I answer, you must obey it, as he, who is captive under sin, must obey
sin, being a slave unto sin, that has voluntarily rendered him such; but he
unjustly rendered himself a slave to sin, and unjustly, in virtue thereof,
remains a sinner, and obeys it.

Some will Answer, 7. That Conscientia erronea ligat, sed non obligat, an
erroneous Conscience binds a man so up, that it hinders him to do the good,
but it obliges him not to do the ill, that it dictateth.

Neither is this the Question, Whether an Heretic is bound to believe what the
Magistrate wills him to believe; But whether he should have power to erect
Churches against the Orthodox Religion, as the Independents would; And whether,
or no, the Civil Magistrate can hinder him by his Civil Power, from so doing.
Now the Argument proves not the Negative part; neither does the Civil
Magistrate compel private men to believe, but not to trouble the peace of the
Church, in setting up of others without his permission.

M. S. his fifth Reason; If the Civil Magistrate has an actual Coercive
power to suppress Schisms and Heresies, etc. because he is truly a Christian;
then Christianity changes the property, and tenor of his Magistracy, and
that for the worse; for in virtue thereof he acquireth a power to crush his
Subjects for the exercise of their Conscience, yea, to persecute the Saints,
which he had not before; If so, Christians have little reason to pray for his
Conversion: But the Consequent is false. Ergo.

A. S. 1. I deny the Consequence of the Proposition; for both the Christian and
Unchristian Magistrate have the actual Coercive power, howbeit, they have not
both actually the act of that Power; for both the one, and the other, has that
Moral power in actu signato, or the Remote power; but the Christian Magistrate
only has it in actu exercito, i. e. The immediate Authority to exercise it,
because he has, or should have, or is supposed morally to have all things
requisite to the exercise thereof: So is it not in a Pagan; for he has not the
knowledge of the Gospel, whereby he should exercise it, nor the will to
exercise it justly, which is presupposed to it: so he has, as it were,
potestatem, sed caret usu potestatis, as a Child, that has a reasonable Soul,
and all the reasonable Faculties, that a man has, but he has not the use of
Reason, or of those reasonable Faculties; he has facultatem, quasi ligatam, as
he, who cannot see for a tie that he has in his eye. 2. I deny that
Christianity changes his power to worse; for it is not, as you say, to crush
good, but to mend and reform ignorant, and ill men, and to chastise them, Nulla
enim potentia ad malum, the Apostle tells you, that he is the Minister of God
to thee for good, Romans 3.4. Rulers are not a terror to good works. Will thou
then not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, Verse. 3.

M. S. his sixth Argument. That power is very dangerous to a Magistrate to own,
in the exercise whereof, he may very easily run an hazard (at least) in
fighting against God, or in plucking up that, which God has planted, or in
pulling down that, which God has built. But such is that power of suppressing
Schisms, Heresies, etc. Ergo.

The Assumption, he proves it, because the Opinions that he sees by other men's
eyes to be schismatic, may be the ways of God. 1. Because the judgments of
these men are not Apostolical. 2. Frequent experience shows, that a Minor
part, yea, an inconsiderable number of godly Persons in a Church, may have the
mind of God in some particularities, before the Major part have it. 3. It
seldom, or never falls out, that any truth, which has for a long time been
under Hatches, and unknown to the generality of Ministers in a Church, has
been at the first, and on the sudden revealed, either to the Generality, or to
the Major part of them. Ergo.

A. S. I answer, 1. to the first; It is no more dangerous, then the Magistracy
it self: so as if it be dangerous to own the Magistracy; so is it likewise to
own that part of it, whereby, in virtue of his Civil Power, he rules the
Church civilly; and so all the Argument may be granted; and the greater that
the danger is to own it, the greater a great deal should his circumspection be.
2. If this Argument hold, it will conclude no less against the Civil, and
Ecclesiastical Government of the Old Testament, and that of the Civil
Magistrate of New England also. 3. I may deny the Major; for if he accept of
the Magistracy, it is a far greater danger not to accept this part of the
charge; for there is a necessity laid upon him in virtue of the Magistracy, to
accept it, as the principal part thereof. 4. The greater that the danger and
difficulty be, so much the greater is the virtue in exercising of it, and the
greater will the retribution be for it. 5. It is not very dangerous to own the
charge, but not to exercise it faithfully. 6. To the Assumption I Answer, That
it is but one of M. S. his may be's, quod nihil ponit in re; The Confirmations
of it also contain but may be's.

Their judgments I grant you, are not Apostolical: 1. But no more are the
judgments of your particular Congregations. 2. Or those of the King and
Parliament, or of any mortal men, at least ordinarily, and yet notwithstanding
they are lawful. 3. Neither is it needful, that they be infallible, but
without fault only.

To the second proof. 1. It is but a may be, which yet may not be. 2. And it is
extraordinary. 3. And howbeit it were so ordinarily, yet follows it not, that
your Independents are such. 4. If it were so, Gods truth Ordinarily should not
prevail. 5. All Schismatics and Heretics, who are few in number, may say as
much; So Mistress Hutchinson in New England, I Will warrant you, said no less.

To the third. 1. I deny, that the truth, whereof we dispute, has been under
the Hatches, as ye pretend. 2. All Heretics and Schismatics say the same. 3.
And in all these his Reasons, he argues evermore a facto ad jus, from the Fact
to the Law; and from that which is, to that which should be; and from that
which may be, to that which is. The Authority of Gamaliel, Act. 4. is but of a
profane Politician, who would rule the Church and Religion, according to
Political Ends.

M. S. 7. Reason. That Power, which was never attributed to the Civil
Magistrate, by any Christians, but only by those that had very good assurance,
that it should be used for them, appertains not to him by divine right. But
that Coercive Power in matters of Religion, for the suppressing of Errors,
Schisms, Heresies, etc. was never attributed to the Civil Magistrate, by any
Christian, but only by those, that had very good assurance, that it should be
used for them. Ergo.

A. S. I answer; That if the word Power in the Major, and Minor be taken for an
Ecclesiastical Power, which is intrinsecall to the Church, I grant you all the
Argument; neither concludes it any thing against us: But if it be taken for a
Political Power, that is extrinsecall to the Church, whereby he punishes
Heretics and Schismatics, by Civil punishments, the Minor is false, as I
have already showed by my Arguments; And what he says of my tenderness, etc.
it is but Language instead of Reasons. 2. If the Extrinsecall power be taken
for a remote power, or in actu signato, the Minor is false; neither proves he
it; but we have proved the contrary; for both Pagans, and Christians have it:
If it be taken for a nearer Immediate power, or in actu exercito, the Minor is
true of the Unchristian, but false of the Christian Magistrate, as I have told
you again, and again, and proved it. 3. But is not this Power granted to the
Civil Magistrate, by the Christians of New England? 4. And was it not granted
him in the Old Testament?

M. S. 8. Argument. The exercise of a Coactive power of the Civil Magistrate,
against Heretics, Schismatics, etc. in matters of Religion, tends directly to
prevent, hinder, or suppress, the growth of the Knowledge of God, and Jesus
Christ, in the Church, and State, and the Reformation of Doctrine, and
Discipline. Ergo, It is not of Divine Institution.

A. S. I answer, 1. I deny the Antecedent, or I distinguish it; if it do all
that per accidens, I deny the Consequence; if per se, the Antecedent is false.

But M. S. proves his Assumption in substance thus: When the Civil Magistrate
holds any thing in Religion, it is a great temptation, and discouragement upon
the Subject, to search out the Truth in Scripture; for if he find it, against
the Tenets of the Civil Magistrate, one of two things must follow. Either out
of fear of punishment, he withholdeth the truth in unrighteousness; and so
has God and his own Conscience, for his Enemy; or else he professes it; and
so has his bones broken for it: So these two dangers may tempt him not to read
the Scripture.

A. S. 1. This proves not that thing which is denied. 2. I deny that the power
of the Civil Magistrate, since it is only to good, Romans 13. can per se cause
any such Temptation. 3. Howbeit, a man discover any Truth in Scripture against
the Tenets of the Christian Magistrate, that he needs to fear any such thing;
for the true Christian Magistrate will not be so barbarous against the Truth,
howbeit he think it to be an error; for he may be curious to learn it; and if
he that has found it, be prudent and not turbulent, he needs not to suffer for
it.

M. S. 9. Argument; The exercise of a Coactive power in matters of Religion,
which A. S. and many others, pin upon the Civil Magistrate, tends to the
gratification of Satan, and of carnal and profane men: Ergo, It is not of God.

A. S. I deny the Antecedent; for then it should be a gratification of Satan,
to punish Heretics and Schismatics; and so to destroy his Kingdom, which is
mainly up held by them.

But M. S. proves it, 1. For many of those, that are like to suffer by it, are
men of good Conscience, and truly fearing God, as the Apologists, and men of
their Judgment.

A. S. 1. We see no appearance, that those your men of good conscience are like
to suffer, howsoever they have very highly offended against the Civil
Magistrates Authority; and some of you, as one M. S. in the first Edition of
his Book, writes, that the name of Steuart has been funest to England, in King
James, and King Charles.

2. If they suffer, I Will warrant you it will never be for their good Conscience,
but for some worse thing.

Again, M. S. for fear that we should deny them to be men of good Conscience,
proves it by two Reasons.

1. Because A. S. confessed it: But this has been sundry times answered. 2.
Because it is not ordinary, that men of loose, or no Conscience, should delight
to swim against the streams of greatness or plurality in matters of Religion.
A. S. But the Devil has his own Martyrs, as God has his: And one Vaninus,
an Atheist in France, chose rather to die, then to renounce his Atheism; and so
was drowned for his thus swiming against the streams of greatness and
plurality.

M. S. proves the second part of the Assumption, viz. That such a Civil Power
in the Civil Magistrate, about matters of Religion, is a gratification of
ignorant and carnal men; because they desire always, Sects, and Opinions in
Religion to be suppressed, save only that, which shall be authorized and
practiced in the State; for so they shall not be much troubled to seek it, they
know not where, or amongst whom.

A. S. 1. And if the true Religion be to be established in the State, wherefore
are they not to be gratified therein? What greater crime is it in them, then in
good men, to desire the true Religion to be established in the State; and all
Sects and Heresies to be suppressed? 2. Are they ignorant and carnal, who
desire one only, and that the true Religion to be established; and they only
learned, and spiritual, that desire many Sects, and Heresies, whereby the good
Name of God is blasphemed, to subsist? 3. If that be ill; I am afraid the next
word will be, that you will say, God did not well in establishing the true
Religion amongst his people, and in suppressing of Sects. 4. And no better do
your Independents in New England, in suppressing of all Sects, save their own.
If this be a crime, I pray God we be all criminal, and that God have no
greater crime to charge us with. 5. But desire you, M. S. to have many Sects
and Heresies in the Kingdom, to show your great Learning in refuting of them,
as the Soldiers would have the War to continue, to show their valor, and
therein to find their preferment? I pray you not to be offended with us, if we
desire to be gratified with the most ignorant, in suppressing them, and in
establishing the true Religion: So the Parliament and Synod are ignorant, for
this is their desire.

M. S. 10. Argument. That power, which in the use of it, directly tends to
defile the Conscience of men is, a power from beneath, and not from above.

But such is the Coercive power in matters of Religion, wherewith A. S. would
fain befriend himself with the Civil Magistrate. Ergo.

The Major, I grant it. The Assumption, if it have any sense, is this in
substance: When a man is deeply threatened, in case he shall not comply with the
State, in their Religion, against his Conscience, 1. Either God leaves such a
man's Conscience to it self, and it is hardened; 2. Or by reflecting upon what it
has done, it brings it self into grievous Agonies, of which, it never recovers
afterward.

A. S. This is a very strange Case of Conscience, viz. That M. S. his, and such
like Independent Consciences, are so tender and delicate, that they are sorely
wounded, if they may not have a liberty to become Heretical, and go to the
Devil.

But I answer, 1. The Assumption is false; for the External Coactive Power,
that A. S. grants unto the Civil Magistrate, is only to repress Heretics,
and Schismatics, after that they are sufficiently convicted by the Church, in
an ordinary way; or by others, in an extraordinary way, when the Church is
negligent in her duty.

2. Neither does M. S. his Confirmation, or Case of Conscience conclude any
thing against that, which A. S. says: And as for his Supposition, either that
Conscience, whereof he speaks, is right, or erroneous: If it be right; the
Civil Magistrate should not press it against its light; or if he happen to do
so, it is not by Power, but by abuse of Power; And in such a case, he, who has
his Conscience well informed, must resolve himself to be quiet, in case the
Civil Magistrate oblige him not to be Actor in any thing against it: But if
such a man, any other, or others with him, will rise up within the Kingdom, or
come from Foreign Countries, and urge their Religion upon the State, and
establish it, without permission of the Magistrate, or against his Laws, then
their Consciences cannot be right; for wherefore should the King, Parliament,
and State, be rather bound to admit such men's Religion, without sufficient
conviction, then they to admit his Religion? And in such a Case, the Civil
Magistrate, so long as such persons as urge their Religion upon him, convict
not sufficiently his Conscience, may with a good Conscience punish them
severely, yea, with good Conscience cut off their Heads. If such a man's
Conscience be erroneous, the Civil Magistrate does him no wrong to endeavor,
that he, who has it, be sufficiently convicted; and, if after sufficient
conviction, he will not be quiet, (especially, when he is not obliged to be
Actor in any thing against his pretended Conscience) but will still trouble
both Church, and State; wherefore, on Gods Name should he not be punished? 2.
Is it not better, that such a man should perish, then that he should make
thousands to perish? 3. Ravalliack in France, and the Monks, and Friars, that
kill Kings, pretend evermore Conscience, as the Independents do; and yet the
Civil Magistrate puts them to death. 4. If any man's Conscience, (which God
forbid) should dictate him to kill the King, and blow up the Parliament, should
such a man be tolerated, under pretext of his tender Conscience? 5. Is it not a
sin to have an erroneous Conscience? And is not he, that has it, bound to
reform it, and to suffer for it, in case he reform it not, when he has
sufficient means to do it? 6. But must every man, that does ill, be presently
believed, when he says, that he has such a Conscience? 7. All this long
Sermon of M. S. proves not, that the Magistrate directly, and per se, but
rather that the man himself hardens his own Conscience; for there is no
created Power, that directly, per se, and Physically, can work upon a man's
Conscience; it can only move it morally, in propounding of Objects to it, or
in Reasoning; and yet every true Christian has a sufficient power to resist
such motions, which is sufficient to make him in-excusable. 8. Neither can his
erroneous Conscience excuse him, unless that its Error be Invincible,
Antecedent, and he no ways the cause of it; but if it be Vincible,
Concomitant, or Subsequent, and he himself the cause of it, then it excuses
him not, but is a sin, and aggravates the sin that proceeds of it, at least
extensive, if not intensive; For in such a case, it is not his erroneous
Conscience, that is the cause of the sinful action of his Will, but his
sinful Will, that is the cause of his erroneous Conscience. 9. The Civil
Magistrates threatening, per se, and directly, makes not his Conscience
erroneous, but found it such. 10. Neither is it the cause, that he goes against
it; For whether ye consider the Civil Magistrates Intention, his Judgment, or
the Execution of it in such a case, they cause no ill, but good; for his
Intention is only, that they be gained to Christ, and that they seduce not
others; His Judgment condemns only their Opinion, and commands a punishment
answerable to their Sin, whereby only they are hindered to continue in their
Heresies, or Schisms, or to seduce others: No more does the Execution of his
Judgment. Ergo. 11. And I pray this new Casuist to tell me, whether in some
Cases it were not a lesser Sin, for a man to go against his erroneous
Conscience, then to follow its Dictates? Whether it were not better for him to
sit at home, against the Dictate of his Conscience, then to go to a Pagan
Church, and there to adore a Crocodile, or a Toad, according to the Dictates of
it.

So we see, how licentious and detestable this Conscience is, that Independents
plead so much for, that thinks, that it cannot sufficiently enjoy its
liberty, unless that all Schismatics, Heretics, Jews, Mahumetans, and
Idolaters, have a free liberty of their erroneous Consciences, to adore a
thousand Gods, yea, a thousand Devils, a Jupiter, a Bacchus, a Venus, a blind
Fortuna, and to Preach such Abominations; and that the Civil Magistrates power
be ever curtaled, or rather altogether taken away in matters in Religion.

I will not call this a madness, but I am well assured, that many are
recommended to the Churches Prayers, that are not half so sick, either in Soul
or Body, as these men are in their Consciences; Wherefore all that I have more
to say unto them, shall be only this; The Lord have mercy upon them.

Christian Reader,
HAving been desired by some Friends, to give a short Discourse of the
Independent Government, I am resolved to present thee with this following
Epitome; which sundry have oftentimes required of me.

The Independent Church is so called, because that no particular Congregation
amongst them, how small, how Heretical, and vicious soever it be, will depend
upon, or submit to the Judgment of any other Church, yea, not to that of all
the Churches of the World, how Orthodox, and holy, and how true and just soever
their Judgment be.

They define it, Coetus Fidelium, a Company of Believers, meeting in one place,
every Lords Day, for the Administration of the Holy Ordinances of God, to
public Edification.

So according to this Definition, neither the Catholic Church, which we
believe in the Creed, nor any National Church can be a true Church, since they
cannot meet together, every Lords Day in one place.

In the Efficient Cause of the Church, I see no great Difference betwixt us,
and them, save only this, That they hold it necessary to the Constitution of a
Church, and of every Member thereof, that they all join in a particular
Church Covenant (as they call it) different from that of Grace, revealed in
Scripture, wherein they all swear to live in the Faith, and in subjection to
all the Ordinances of God, cleaving one to another, as Members of one Body, and
not to depart from the said particular Church, whereof they become Members,
without the consent thereof.

The Antecedents of this Covenant are: 1. Sundry Meetings together of such, as
are to join in it, till such time, as they may all have a sufficient proof, and
trial of the spiritual estate, one of another. 2. The Civil Magistrates
Consent, to set up their Church. 3. The Consent of Neighbor Churches. 4. They
ordain a solemn Fast; and after Prayers, and Sermons, one in the name of all
the rest propounds the Covenant. 5. And they all take it.

The Consequents of it are, 1. The Right hand of Fellowship, which is given
them by the Neighbor Churches. 2. Those, who join in Covenant, are exhorted to
stand fast in the Lord. 3. Follows a Prayer made to God for pardon of their
Sins, and acceptance of the People.

We condemn not all Church-Covenants; but we cannot approve this of the
Independents, 1. Because it is not commanded in Scripture. 2. We find no
example of it in Scripture. 3. And therefore it is nothing else, but an humane
Tradition. 4. Because all, or almost all the Covenants concerning Religion,
that we read of in Scripture, are of those, that are already, and not of those,
that are to be Members of the Church. 5. Because we are in Covenant with God
before ever we come to be of Age; I shall be thy God, and of thy Seed, Genesis
17.7. Item, Be baptized; for to you and your Children the Promise is made, Acts
2.38. And from hence all Protestants prove the Baptism of Infants against
Anabaptists. 6. Because, those that were Circumcised in the Old, and that are
Baptized in the New Testament, are Members of the Universal Church, without
any vocal Covenant, as double C, who is one of these M. S. ses, as I hear,
confesses freely: Ergo, They must be Members of some Particular Church; for
how can they be in the Universal Church, and out of all Particular Churches?
So a man might be in the World, and in no part of it, or out of all the parts
of it. 7. Because if Children Circumcised or Baptized were not in the Church,
their condition should be no better, then that of Jews and Pagans, which can be
no great Consolation to any Christian Parents. 8. If a man of one Church should
take to Wife one of another, a hundred miles distant from him, she must adhere
to her Husband, live with him, and so quit her own Church, and be out of all
Churches, like a Pagan; for she cannot be admitted to the Church, whereunto she
goes, but after a long trial: So to be married, she becomes as a Pagan. 9.
Such an Oath or Promise is not lawful; for a man may have just Causes, which
are not evermore to be declared to a whole Church, that may oblige him to go,
and live elsewhere in an other Church. 10. Because the Apostles, Evangelists,
and their Followers, could not lawfully enter into any such Covenant, since
they were Universal Ministers, and consequently Members of all the Churches of
the World: 11. Neither could they make such a trial of three thousand persons,
that in seven or eight hours time were added unto the Church, Acts 2.12. Such
a Covenant includes a tacit Schism, and Separation from all the Churches of
the World. 13. Neither did the Apostles, and other Ministers of the Church, for
the first three hundred years, require the Civil Magistrates Consent, to set
up their Churches: 14. Neither is it necessary to the Internal Constitution,
or Conservation of it, since it is Extrinsecall to the Church. 15. And some
times it is impossible to be had, as when he is a Pagan, or an Antichristian
Christian.

The Final Cause of their Church, they pretend to be, 1. Gods glory. 2. The
Salvation of the Church, and every Member thereof. 3. The Internal and
External Acts of mutual Communion in Faith and Charity.

The Matter of their Church, they hold to be such Persons, as can give some
particular Evidences of saving Grace, and of their Election, and who enter into
Church Covenant together; such as may be Arminians, as Master Goodwin, alias M.
S. And as for the Members of other Churches, whether they be Dependents, or
Independents, they will not admit them to the Lords Table, nor Baptize their
Children, upon any Letters of Recommendation, that they can bring from other
Churches; yea, howbeit they give a sufficient account of their Faith, and live
without giving any offense at all to any man; and so they hold them little
better then Pagans.

The Integrant p rts of this Church, are the Flock or People, and the Rulers,
viz. Preachers, Teachers, Ruling Elders, and Deacons.

They admit none to be Ruling Elders, but such as Preach; yea, to the People,
they give liberty to Preach also; and so quite confound the Offices of
Preachers, and Ruling Elders, which the Apostle distinguishes, Romans 12. 1 Cor.
12. Ephesians. 4. 1 Timothy 5. Matthew. 18. So they confound the charge of the Pastor,
with the duty of the Sheep, and a Ruler with him that is ruled.

The Form of their Church seems to consist in their Church Covenant.

The Accidents of it, are, 1. The number, viz. the smallest, seven Persons; and
the greatest, as many, as can conveniently meet in one place, for the
Administration of the Holy Ordinances of God.

2. Their Doctrine, which may be Arminian, as appears by M. S. alias Master
Goodwin, who holds very many Arminian Tenets, as Justification by Faith, as it
is an Act, or Quality, etc. Item, As some testify of him; A sleeping of the
Soul.

3. They have no common Confession of Faith, or Platform of Discipline in their
Churches; neither will they have any; yea, they will not have any constant
Confession of Faith, or Platform of Discipline in any Particular; such is the
Liberty, or rather the Licenciousnesse of their Faith, and Discipline.

4. The power to Teach, which they gram, as I have already said, not only to
Preachers, but also to Ruling Elders, and some of the People.

5. The power of the Keys, which they put in the hands of the People; yea, of
the most ignorant, impertinent, and insufficient of them, who have power to
create their own Ministers, to examine their Doctrine, and sufficiency, and
afterward to admit them to the Charge.

But whether they have, 1. Abilities. 2. And prudence enough to do it. 3.
Whether Christ have committed the Keys unto them. 4. Whether they can do it
without confusion. 5. Whether they had it in the Old Testament; I leave it to
any judicious Readers consideration.

6. Yea, some of them in the Synod, grant unto Women, some sprinkling; I
believe, as some corrected them there, they would have said, the gingling of
the Keys; but of this spinking, sprinkling, or gingling of the Keys, we read
nothing in the Word of God.

7. They hold the Object of Excommunication only to be errors of the Mind,
against the common, and uncontroverted Principles; and of the Will, against the
common, and universal practices of Christianity; and both against the Parties
known light. So hardly can any man be Excommunicated. 1. For we cannot well
know, when a man goes against the common Principles of Christianity, since no
man can well define them. 2. Muchlesse, when he goes against the light of his
Conscience; or 3. against the common practices of Christianity, which are not
well known. 4. According to this Tenet, we cannot Excommunicate Socinians,
Arminians, and other Heretics; and therefore M. S. is admitted to be a
Minister in one of their Churches. 5. Howbeit, they acknowledge no man in their
Parish to be a Member of their Church, yet can they very well, and in good
Conscience, take a Benefice, were it never so great, yea, of 300, 400, or 500
l. a year. 6. They believe, that the Civil Magistrate should not, and
consequently has no power to punish Idolaters, or Heretics, were their
Heresy never so great: And first, so (be it said without Blasphemy) God should
have been in the wrong, in commanding it in the Old Testament. Secondly, And it
were very strange, that a man should be punished for offending a man, and not
for blaspheming the good Name of God. Thirdly, So he should be punished, for
calling some Independents Knaves, but not for calling Jesus Christ the Sun of
God, and the Redeemer of our Souls a Knave.

FINIS.

