Zerubbabel to Sanballat and Tobiah: OR, The First Part of the DVPLY TO M.S.
alias Two Brethren.

BY ADAM STEVART.

Whereunto is added, The Judgment of the Reformed Churches of France,
Switzerland, Geneva, etc.

Concerning INDEPENDANTS, who condemn them with an unanimous consent.

Published by DAVID STEUART.

EZRA 4.1, 2, 3. The Adversaries of Judah came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief
of the fathers, and said unto them: Let us build with you, for we seek your
God, as ye do, and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of Esarhaddon king
of Assure, which brought us up hither.

But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the fathers of
Israel, said unto them, You have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto
our God, but we our selves together will build unto the Lord God of Israel.

March 17. 1644.
Imprimatur

JA: CRANFORD.

London: Printed for John Field, and are to be sold at his house upon
Addle-hill, near Baynards-Castle. 1645.

To their EXCELLENCIES The Lord William Boreel, Lord of Duynbeck, chief
Syndicke, and Counceller of Amsterdam. The Lord John de Reed, Lord of
Reinswond, Deputy in Ordinary in the Assembly of the States General of the
united Provinces for the Province of Utrecht. The Lord Albert Joachimi, Lord of
Oostende in Oedekenskercke, Secretary for the Republic of Ter-Goes. Lords
Ambassadors of the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the united
Provinces of the Netherlands.

THe World, happily, will conceive, that Personages so Noble and Eminent for
Place and Employment, are much too High to be solicited to undertake for, or be
Godfathers to a Child of so mean a Birth and quality, as is this that now
presents it self unto Your Excellencies for that purpose. Every one will be
ready to say, that I, in making choice of Your Honorable Names, for Protection
of this Treatise, have erected too stately, and augustuous a Portall, for so
low and mean a Building, as mine is: It may not be denied, but that such a
construction may very justly be made of my enterprise, if either the Authors
inferior quality and condition, or the frame and structure of his work should
be strictly eyed, and regarded. But on the other side, if the matter and end of
it, be well taken into consideration, scarce any man can think other, then that
it is most worthy Your Patronage; as that, that has no other aim, save only
the glory of God, the Edification of the Church, the Vindication of the Truth,
against the illusions of Sectaries and Novelists, and the reduction to the
bosom of the Church, of such as are strayed from it. Now, what can there be
more suitable, and fitting for Children, and Servants of the great God, such as
as You are, then that which makes for the advancement of his Glory? What can
there be more proper for such as are Members, yea Nursing-Fathers of the
Church, then that which tends to the gathering and Uniting together of the
Members of her Body? What can there be more worthy such Eminent Personages,
professing the true Religion, then that which is for the defense of the truth
of such opinions as are Orthodox? What can there be more corresponding with the
duty of Chistian Magistrates, then to that which is intended for the reduction
of such as are strayed to the Sheepfold of the great Shepherd of our Souls, and
that They should assist the Work by their Political Authority, whilst the
Church contributes (which is all she can do) her best Reasons for their
conviction. I have further Grounds and Motives for the Dedication of this
Treatise to Your Excellencies: to wit, For that You represent here the Persons
of the High and Mighty States of the United Provinces; some of whose
Territories and Estates are infected with this Venom: Howbeit, God be thanked,
it gains not ground so fast there as here, nor the Gangreen proves hitherto so
dangerous: Concerns it not us therefore, being infested with the same Malady,
and Disease, the one as the other, that we should testify our mutual sense
and apprehension thereof; and that we should make it appear to all the World,
that however we are divided in Body, we are yet notwithstanding strongly united
in Heart; as also in an Harmony of Opinions: You labor likewise, how You may
Establish here a Peace, both in Church and State; and this Treatise is a good
Means, conducing to the former of these: You endeavor to procure a General
Council; and this Treatise maintains the equity, and proves the necessity of
it.

But yet there is one Reason more which more particularly obliges me to present
this Treatise to Your Excellencies; and it is such as I may not at any hand
pass over, without incurring the Crime of highest Ingratitude: Which is, Most
Excellent Lords, That great Honor Your Famous University of Leyden, the very
Athens of our Age, has put upon me, in vouchsafing me so honorable a Call to
be one of its Members; Truly to this Head give me leave to say, I cannot
sufficiently admire Your great love to good Letters, and Your unparalled care
for the advancing of them; so as it seems, that in Your Provinces, and in them
alone they flourish and show themselves in their perfect Luster and Beauty. For
this purpose You from time to time, make choice and Election of the most Famous
men of all Europe) Notwithstanding, that You have very able men of your own) as
though You meant to gather into one Place all the most radiant Stars in the
Firmament; so as You despoil all other Kingdoms of the fairest flowers of their
Crowns, and with a kind of sweet violence do, as it were, draw their Eyes out
of their Heads, and so quite darken and eclipse their Luster and shine. I say
not this, that I would be thought to rank my self in the number of those Great
and Eminent Personages: I know well, that there are some Stars that shine by
their own light; That there are others again that show not themselves, but by a
borrowed light: But I will not enlarge my discourse upon Your Praises, nor
undertake to describe at large Your Heroic Virtues; for this is not the place
for it; and it has already been done by far better Pens then mine is; I should
by such an untertaking fear to sully the brightness of their Luster, and to
draw a cloud over their Orient and vivid Colors; And if I should go about it,
I should at the same time resolve, to imitate that Excellent Painter, who, when
he had done all that his Art enabled him to do, for the drawing of an exquisite
Pourtaicture, and had set out its beauty with the most lively colors he could
devise, drew a curtain over it, mistrusting the goodness of his Workmanship,
and intimating thereby, that there was much more to be conceived of the Piece,
then he was able to express.

Notwithstanding, I cannot tell how to contain my self, but I must take notice
of Your great Actions, and Your many Noble Achievements by Arms: How You were
They, that first opposed Your selves to the Tyranny of the proud Spanyard; and
that first of all others, stayed the violent course of his Conquests, that like
an impetuous Torrent, was wont to bear down all before him: So as from a very
mean and low beginning, of a sudden He was become so excessively great by
possessing himself of the most commodious and considerable Estates of the
World, as that he was come to reckon his Crowns by Hundreds, and Thousands. Yet
You, that were but the least part of His Estates, and that were accounted no
better then Beggars and Gueux, in comparison of those vast Treasures that He
drew from Peru; You I say, were They that first blunted the edge of His
Conquests, and knapt in sunder the Bonds wherewith he would have enslaved You,
setting Free, and at Liberty together with Your selves multitudes, of others
whom He out of an insatiable Appetite, not knowing how to set limits or bounds
to his over-swelling Ambition, had fully purposed to make his Vassalls.
Moreover, You constrained him, though much against stomach, to acknowledge You
for Sovereigns, and such as depended not at all upon upon His Jurisdiction. And
not contenting Your selves with all this, You went and found him out in his own
Hereditary Estates, and pursued Him with fire and sword, even to his own
doors. Yea, You Traversed God knows how many Seas, as well toward the East, as
the West, setting at liberty those poor Barbarians, over whose Bodies he
exercised so many cruel and new devised Tyrannies; and all this under the
pretext of a false Donation by the Bishop of Rome. And as if You had not an
Adversary at home, that would cut You out business enough, nor an Object
sufficient to entertain You, You set Your selves on work to discover several
Lands, that were altogether unknown to former Ages the which You subjected to
Your own Dominions: But yet all these Political and Martial Virtues, are
nothing in comparison of Your Christian Virtues, and Your Zeal to the Reformed
Religion; For no sooner had You freed Your selves from the Yoke of the
Spanyard; but You willingly submitted Your necks to the service of the Son of
God, and made Your Country a Sanctuary, and Refuge to the poor Protestants,
whether persecuted in France or elsewhere.

And those Barbarians, that You subjugated in Asia, and America, You subdued no
less to the Kingdom of the Son of God, then to Your own Signory; so joining
the glory of God together with Your own Interests, and enlarging the Empire of
his Son with Your own; and marrying (which is rarely seen, and therefore seems
almost impossible) the Maxims of State, and the Principles of Religion
together; Evidencing it to the whole world, that You are no less good
Christians, then great Politicians.

These are the Reasons, Most Excellent Lords, that moved me to Dedicate this
small Treatise to Your Excellencies: to wit, Your great Zeal for the glory of
God, and the Edification of his Church; Your present worthy Employment and
Embassy, Your Troubles in Religion alike with ours; and particularly, the Honor
which one of Your Universities has lately conferred upon me.

Now I beseech God to give You length of days, with all sort of Temporal
Happiness in this World; and to heap upon You Eternal Blessings in the World
to come: To power out the most benign and precious influence of his Grace upon
Your flourishing Estates and Provinces; to bless all Your worthy undertakings;
to make You proceed as You have begun, and to give You evermore Victory over
all Your Enemies, both Spiritual and Temporal, to the end Your Signories may
continue as firm and stable as the Heavens. So prays he, that is ever Obliged
to remain,

Your EXCELLENCIES Most humble and obedient servant, ADAM STEUART.

To the READER.
Gentle Reader
THou have here two Treatises; the first concerning the Judgments and Opinions
of the Reformed Churches, touching the business of Independency, which may
very well be equipollent, if not preferable to an Oeucumenick Coun^^^; For in a
Council, it is no such matter of wonder, that men that are continually
together, and evermore conferring one with another, should agree in their
Opinions: But this seems rather a thing altogether admirable, that These
several Churches, notwithstanding they are so separated, and divided in regard
of the distances of their Places, should jumpe so harmoniously in the Unity,
and Consent of their Opinions. The second is the Duply of Doctor Steuart, to a
Book of M. S. alias, of two Brethren, who for very shame thought it their best
and safest way, to conceal their Names, expressing only their fond, and
erroneous Opinions, and conceits. Now, good Reader, I shall entreat this one
favor at thy hands, that thou will confer diligently Doctor Steuarts
Observations, and the pretended Answer of M. S. and thou shall find, that they
have answered nothing at all to the purpose; for that they omit wholly many of
the most important Questions, as that Touching the Power of the Members of the
Church, etc. and of those few they do cull out here, and there; they answer not
all the Arguments brought by the Doctor for making of them good, but only those
they find to be the weakest; And those Arguments they do attaque him upon,
they do but only scratch at them, and never give them any solid, or
substantial Answer; contenting themselves with their jerkes of Language, their
ralleries, injuries, or with some Rhetorical Digression from the business in
hand, the which thou will easily perceive, if thou please to confer Page with
Page, Question with Question, and Argument with Argument, which I instantly
desire thee thou would do. So as it was no way needful, that Doctor Steuart
should have written any Confutation at all, or vindicated his Observations. And
in very deed, these last Pieces that he has written, were not undertaken so
much for the making good of his own Arguments, or the Refutation of M. S. as
that he might treat more largely and fully some Questions, which he had only
briefly touched at in his Observations; As also that he might draw those Foxes
out of their Holes, bringing light out of their dark Writings, and so give
some satisfaction to weak Brethren, who ordinarily suffer themselves to be
carried away with the stream of Language, rather then with force of Arguments.

Now I have entitled this Treatise, Zorobabel to Sanballat, not so much, to
compare the Persons, as the Causes one with another, betwixt which there seems
to be very great Affinity, and resemblance; For 1. The Jews at that time were
about the re-building of the material Temple, and we at this present upon the
re-building, or the Reforming of the spiritual Temple. 2. That People served
the true God, but were Schismatics, that refused to sacrifice in the Temple at
Jerusalem; These men in like manner serve the true God, whom we serve, and
have the same Doctrine with us; but are Schismatickes, that refuse to join
themselves in Synods with us. 3. They came from a far Country to dwell at
Jerusalem, so these are come too from far, from America, etc. 4. They made
as though they would build the Temple together with the Jews; but in effect
they had not the least intention so to do, as not acknowledging them at all:
So, These here make fair semblamces, as though they meant to build with us;
They are Members of the Synod, but yet are loath to acknowledge them. 5. The
Jews were ready to have received them, had they found they had proceeded with
sincerity; And so should we be ready to receive these, could we find they
proceeded sincerely. 6. They discouraged the Worke-men, and retarded the Work;
so do these, as is but too apparent. 7. They accused the Jews, that they
purposed to rebel against the King; So these men in like manner charge us,
that we give not power enough to the Magistrate. 8. Maugre all the impediments,
that they cast in the way of Gods people, to hinder the Building of the Temple,
it came at last, though not till a long time after that, to be finished and
completed: So, we well hope, that in despite of These the spiritual Temple
shall at last be built up to Gods glory.


Thine in the Lord Jesus, A. S.

Clarissimo, virtute and doctrina praestantissimo V. D. Davidi Buchanano, amico
plurimum honorando.
SAl. pl. Vir clarissime and praestantissime, D. and amice honorande,
venerandus. Ecclesiae nostrae pastor, D. Breitingerus, literis tuis acceptis,
propter senii incommoda, quibus laborat, mihi in mandatis dedit, ut suo nomine
respondeam, illam Consistoriorum Independentiam, de qua scribis, Ecclesiis
nostris non probari. Venerand. Synodum Ecclesiarum nostrarum ordinem and
politiam non ignorare, Si tamen illarum sententia requireretur, suo officio non
defuturas. Dolendum maximopere, viros Ecclesiasticos faederis and juramenti
religione posthabita, ab Ecclesiarum Scoticanarum ritibus recedere, quibus hac
in part transmarinae omnes congruunt. Apud nos Conventus minores maioribus non
quidem serviliter subjici, sedita tamen subordinari, ut Ecclesia veluti acies
ordinata, suos in ordine and officio contineat simulque hostibus formidabilis
existat. Vt libertatis Ecclesiae nostrae sunt studiosissimae, it a licentiam
omnem Synodica censura reprimere and prohibere. Ita Consistorium vel Collequium
Antiochenum a judicio and censura Synodi Hierosolimetanae dependisse, spiritus
prophetarum prophetis subjici debere. Haec vir optimus and reverendus senex cum
plurima amoris ac benevolentia significatione tibi priuatim significari voluit.
Deus Ecclesiae laboranti benignus adsit, and Synodum spiritu pacis dirigat ut
Ecclesiae formam optimam, Iuramenti Religione sancitam (...) stabiliat. Vale
vir praestantissime.

Data Tiguri 18 Iul. 1644. Tuus omni obsequio and cultu, Joh. Rodolphus
Stuckius.

To my much honored, virtuous, and learned friend, Master Buchanan.
SIR:
THe reverend Pastor of our Church, Mr. Breittinger, after the receipt of your
letters, being himself much indisposed, by reason of his great Age, has
charged me to return you Answer in his name, that that Independencie of
Consistories, whereof you write, is not approved by our Churches, and that the
Synod was not ignorant of the order and Discipline of our Churches; yet
nevertheless, that these Churches would not be wanting to the discharge of
their duty, if it were required of them to declare their Opinion hereabouts;
It is very much to be lamented, that Churchmen neglecting the religious
reverence due unto a solemn Oath and Covenant, should depart from the Rites of
the Church of Scotland, with which in such things, the Transmarine Churches do
agree; That amongst us, the Inferior Conventions are not in any servile manner
subject, but only subordinate unto the Superior, that so the Church of God, as
a well disciplined Army, might the better keep her own people in order and
duty, and so be more formidable to her Adversaries; That howsoever our
Churches are very careful to preserve their Christian liberty, they be no
less to repress by their Synodicall Censures, all licentiousness and
Libertinisme whatsoever: That just so the Consistory, or Colloque held at
Antioch, depended upon the judgment and Censure of the Synod held at
Jerusalem; That the Spirits of the Prophets ought to be subject to the Prophets.

Sir, These are the things that the good Reverend old man enjoined me,
together with his best love and affection to you, to acquaint you with apart.
The merciful God be present with, and assist his afflicted and distressed
Church, and so direct your Synod by the spirit of peace, that they may
unanimously agree upon it, to establish the best model and frame of a Church,
such an one, as by Covenant they stand obliged to seek after.

Farewell, dated at Zurich the 18 of July 1644. Sir, yours, Rodolphus Stuckius.

A Monsieur, Monsieur Buchanan Gentilhomme Escossois a Londres.
Monsieur:
IAy faict voir a nostre Compagnie l'Escrit qu'il vous a pleu luy adreser par
mon Entremise, ou nous ayant deduict les causes de vos troubler, and ies diverse
obstacles qui retardent la Tranquillite Public, vous nous demandez nos advis,
particulierement sur l'opinion de quelques uns des Members du Synod, qui
tiennent. que toutes les Eglises peuvent estre suffisament gouvernees par leurs
Consistoires, chascune a part, sans despendre des Assemblees plus grandes, and
plus authorisees, comme sont les Colloques and les Synodes Provinciaux and
Nationaux; Sur quoy say eu charge de Vous escrize que comme nous avons tous
jours deplore vos mal-heurs avo^ des entrailles de Compassion, senti la
froissure de Joseph, and considere le triste spectacle de vos Eglises, comme
une calamite, qui nous touch de pres, encores que nous la regardions de fort
loing; Aussi ne pourons nous que redoubler nos gemissements, lors que nous
apprenons, que Satan some son yvroye durant les tenebres de vostre affliction,
and qu'il s'esleve diverse Esprits, qui par un zele sans Cognoissance desehirent
la rob, qui na point de cousture. Mais ce qui nous a le plus touch, c'est de
voir, qu'en une Assemblee, quine doibt avoir aultre but, que celuy d'une
Saint Paix, il se glisse des differents, and des malentendus, qui ne
debroyent jamais naistro parmi les serviteurs de Dieu, ou que la Prudence
Christienne y deburoit au moins estouffer des leur naissance, suivant
l'authorite de l'Escriture Saint, l'usage de Eglise Primitive, l'Histoir de
tous les fiecles, and l'experience de nos jours. Car, pour ne nous arrester
point a ce nom d'Independants, qu'ils prennent, ou qu'on leur done, bien qu'il
merit d'estre a jamais banni du milieu des Orthodoxes, and d'estre laisse aux
Conciles, ou a l'Evesque de Rome; ne soavons nous pas, que le Regne Interieur
du Seigneur Jesus, Sonverain Monarque de l'Eglise, qui va tout a l'unite, pour
nous consommer tous ^n un, comme Il est Un avec son Pere, ne peut enter ternoi
son Union sans Communion d'Esprit? Et ceste Communion n'est elle pas
extic-mement affoiblie par la distraction des parties du Corpse, and par
l'obstruction des Vaisseaux, qui luy deburoyent servir de vehicule? Comment
pourra passer cest Esprit d'une party a l'aultre, pour l'entier assortiment du
corpse des Saints par son influence, si la singularite de la Discipline, comme
une hay espaisse, luy serme le chemin? Ce Corpse comment pourra-il croistre en
homme parfaict a le mesure de la parfaicte statuere de Christ, par toutes les
Ioinctures du fournissement, si le Pied n'a point besoin de l'Oeil, fi les
moindres parties se destachent des Nobles, and si les Nobles mesprisent les
basses, qui sont les plus necessaires? Comment l'Edifice du Templespirituel
peut il estre advance, si les ouvriers font chascun leur fonction (...) part,
and s'ils ne s'entendent les uns avec les aultres par une estro ite
correspondence? Ou ceste Armee Celeste comment pourra-elle vaincre ses Ennemis,
quand on verra ses Esquadrons des files, and ses bands mal arranges?
L'Escriture conjoint souvent la Force de l'Eglise avec sa beauty; mais ny l'une
ny l'aultre de ces gracet ne peut conserver sa vigueur, si l'on vient a
negliger ce grand appuy, and cest exquis ornement, qu'elle try des Assemblees
Generales. C'est la que ses forces se rallient, and qu'elle est redoutable
common un Camp qui march a Enseignes desployees en une Saint Pomp. C'est la
que son visage paroist en une donlce gloire, ayant efface les tasches, and
estendu les rides, don't les opinions, and les passions particulieres auoyent
terni son luster. C'est la que su test reluict, comme Couronnee d'Estoiles,
and quelle port en sa main les deux Verges de plaisances and de liaisons. Et
pour n'alleguer point icy la police de l'Eglise Judaique, ou neantmoins il est
evident, que le grand Conseil de Sanhedrim avoit une direction authentic;
Paul and Barnabas en leur dispute touchant les Ceremonies, eurent ils recours a
quelque homme, ou a quelque Consistoire particulier, ou deciderent ils se point
chascun comme il l'entendoit d'Authorite privee? Ils assemblerent un Concile,
qui doibt servir de patron and de Mirouer a taicte la posterite des Fideles,
jusq' a la fin du Monde. Quand la celebration de la Pasque fut mis en
controverse, laissa-on la liberte a chascune des Eglises de la celebrer a sa
post: On assembla je ne scay combien de Synodes, ou on ordonna, qu'on auroit a
la celebrer le Dimanche. Ainsi Constantin voyant les Evesques and les peuples
bands les uns contre les aultres, comme des Symplejados, pour user du term
d'Eusebe, assembla le Synod de Nicee, comme s'il eust leve une Armee a Dieu,
protestant, mesmes au raport de Theodoret and de Socrate, qu'il n'avoit, point
trouve aultre moyen d'establir quelque chose de ferme and d'asseure. Mais il
faudroit fair un tissu de toutes les Epoches de l'Eglise, si nous voulions
alleguer icy tout ce qui pourroit servir a nostre subject. Ce sont chooses si
claires and si cogneues, qu'il seroit inutile d'en parler, si cela ne
justifioit la procedure tenue aujourdhuy dans toutes les Eglises Orthodoxes:
Car nous n'en cognoissons point, qui conformement a l'Eglise primitive ne
s'estime heureuse, quand elle peut voir les serviteurs de Dieu en Saint
Congregation, reiglants d'un co^mun accord ce qui regard ou la bien-seance du
service, ou mesme les poincts de Doctrine, par la raison, and par l'Escriture,
qui est au dessus de toute Raison. Et quand a nous puis quil vous a pleu nous
demander nostre advis, nous protestons haut et clair, quelques Ennemis que nous
soyons de la Tyranny, que nous ne le so^mes pas moins de l'Anarchie: nous
detestons avec l'usurpation du Pape les fureurs des Anabaptists: nous prisons
aussi bien, que nos Peers un Concile libre, convoque au nom de Dieu, ou son
Esprit and sa Parole president; and ne doubtons point, que les moindres
Compagnies ne doibuent du respect et de la deference aux plus grandes, comme
nostre practique le tesmoigne. L'exemple du Synod de Dordrecht, ou nous avions
nos Depetes, est un illustre monument de la benediction, que Dieu verse sur ces
Assemblees generales: Il est vray neantmoins, que les circonstances des temps,
and les interests des Princes, chez qui l'Arche repose, n'en donnent pas
tousjours la permission: Mais dans les Royaumes, qui jouissent de ceste
precieuse liberte, ceseroit une ingrate felony, de se priver volontairement,
and sans necessite, d'un advantage inestimable. Tandis que ceux, qui le
possedent font scrupule de s'en servir, ceux a qui on le desend, le soubaitent
avec une just passion. Avec quelle joye pensez vous, que les Eglises de France
souspirent apres ce bon-heur, de se voir assemblees, en Synod National,
suivant l'Octroy, qu'elles en ont eu ceste annee? Il faut advouer neantmoins,
qu'il s'est trouve de grandes Assemblees, cu il y a eu moins de defenseurs de
la Verite, que de Partisans du Mensonge. Mais aussi nous ne parlons, que de
celles, ou l'Esprit de Dieu and sa Parole tiennent le timon, and qui
n'establissent rien de contraire aux lumieres and aux persuasions, que ce mesme
Esprit, and ceste mesme Parole forment dans les coeurs de tous les Fideles.
Quon attend done, que Dieu, laschant la bride a la persecution, en sa just
cholere nous oste le moyen d'assembler des Colloques and des Synodes. Mais
tandis que sa bonne Providence nous accord ce privilege, ne nous rendons point
indignes d'un effect si raze de sa bonte. C'est ce que j'avoye a vous dire,
Monsieur, de la part de Messieurs mes Colleagues, and par un consentement
unanime. Nous prions Dieu de tout nostre cocur, qu'il regard Sion en sa pity,
qu'il resveill^ sa i^lousie, and l'esmotion bruyante de ses entrailles sur vos
Eglises, and qu' Il nous done bien tossed subject de glorifier son Saint Nomen
vostre delivrance. Amen. jesuis, Monsieur,

Vostre tres-humble serviteur, Morus.
Geneve 18. September. 1644.
To Monsieur Buchanan, a Scottish Gentleman at London.
SIR,
I Have showed our Consistory the writing which you were pleased to address to
them by my means; whereby, after you have deduced the Causes of your Troubles,
and the diverse obstacles, that keep back so long the public peace, you demand
of us our Advice, and particularly as to the Opinions of certain of the Members
of your Synod, that maintain, that all Churches may be sufficiently governed
by their Consistories, every one a part, without any dependence at all upon the
greater Assemblies, that have fuller Authority, such as are the Colloques, and
the Provincial, and National Synods; To which Head I have direction from them
to write unto you, that as our bowels have ever earned in compassion toward
you, as concerning your misfortunes, having been very sensible of the
Afflictions of Joseph, and considered the sad face of your Churches, as a
calamity, that touches us very near, however we beheld it but at such a
distance: so we can do no other then redouble our sighs, to understand how
the Devil sowes his Tares during the dark night of your Affliction, and
stirrs up such diversity of Spirits, who through a zeal void of Knowledge
tear in pieces that seamelesse Coat of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But
that which touches us yet nigher, is, that into an Assembly, that should have
no other level, or aim, save such a peace as may be Holy, such differences,
and misunderstandings should glyde, and insinuate themselves, as ought not to
spring up amongst the Servants of God, or that Christian Prudence ought, at
least, to stifle in their very birth, and first Rise, following the Authority
of the Holy Scripture, the Custom of the Primitive Church, the History of all
Ages, and the Experience of our own Times. For not to stay my self upon the
name of Independents, which they take, or others call them by, though it
deserve for ever to be banished from among those that are Orthodox, and to be
left to the Counsels, or to the Bishop of Rome, know we not that the internal
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, Sovereign Monarch of the Church, which tends all
to unity (to consummate all in One, as He is one with his Father) cannot
possibly entertain an Union without a Communion of the Spirit? And is not this
Communion extremely weakened by means of the distractions of the several
members of the Body, and by reason of the obstruction of the Vessels, which
should serve her as so many Conduit-pipes? How should this Spirit freely pass
up and down from one part of the Body to the other, for the entire aggregation
of the Body of the Saints, by its influence if a singularity of Discipline, as
a thick Hedge, interpose, and choke up its way? How should ever this Body grow
into a perfect man, according to the measure of that perfect stature of Christ
in all its joints, if so be that the Foot have no need of the Eye; if the
inferior members disjoynt, and loose themselves from the noble parts, and the
noble despise the less honorable, which yet are the more necessary? How can
the Building of the Spiritual Temple be advanced, if the worke-men will needs
do their work every one a part, and will not maintain a close
correspondence, and understanding the one with the other? Or this Heavenly Army
how shall it ever be able to vanquish its Enemies, when we see its Squadrons
break thus their Files, and that its Bounds are so badly ranged? The Scripture
often ties the Power of the Church, and her Beauty in one band together; But
neither the one, nor the other of these Graces can ever preserve its strength,
if men come once to set at naught that exquisite prop, and ornament, that
General Assemblies afford it. There it is, that the Church still re-inforces
her self, and where she makes her self formidable, as an Army, that marches
with Banners flying, in a kind of Holy Triumph. There it is, where her
Countenance appears glorious, after she has gotten out the stains, and
filled up the wrinckles, wherewith particular Men's Opinions, and passions had
eclipsed her luster. There it is, that her Head comes to shine as bright, as
though she were Crowned with Stars, and that she bears in her Hands those
two staves of Beauty, and Bands. And to save my self the labor of alleging
here the Policy of the Church of the Jews, wherein notwithstanding it is
evident, that the great Council of the Sanhedrim had an authentic direction;
Paul and Barnabas in their Dispute touching Ceremonies, had they their recourse
to any private man, or particular Consistorys, or decided they the point in
controversy every one by his private Authority, as he conceived of it? No,
they assembled a Council; w^^ should serve as a Glass, and pattern to all
the posterity of the Faithful, even to the end of the world. When as the
Celebration of Easter Day was so much controverted, was every Church left to
its liberty to celebrate it after its own guise and fashion? No, here were
assembled I know not how many Synods, wherein it was ordered, that it should be
celebrated constantly on the Lords Day. So when Constantine saw how the
Bishops, and the People banded themselves one against the other, like to
Symplejades, to use Eusebius his term, he convocated the Nicene Synod, as
though he had leavyed an Army for God, protesting thereupon, (according to the
report of Theodores and Socrates) that he had not found out any other means,
to settle any thing that might be firm and holding. But we should be forced to
interweave all the Epoches of the Church, if we should bring here all that
might be brought to this purpose. These things are so clear, and so well
known, that it should be unusefull to speak of them, did they not justify the
proceedings held at this day every where in the Orthodox Churches; For we know
not of any one, that in a Conformity with the Primitive Church, accounts not
her self happy, when she can see the Servants of God gathered into an Holy
Assembly, regulating with common consent that, which appertains either to the
Decorum of the service, or else the points of Doctrine, by reason, and by
Scripture, which is far above all Reason.

And for our selves, since you are pleased to demand our Advice, we protest to
all the world, how great Enemies soever we are of Tyranny, that we are no whit
less of Anarchy; We abominate and detest together with the usurpations of the
Pope the madness of the Anabaptists: We prize as high, as ever did our
Fathers, a free Council, convocated in the name of God, wherein his Spirit,
and Word may preside, and have the casting voice; and we are clearly of
Opinion, that the lesser societies owe respect, and depend upon the Greater, as
our Practice witnesses with us. The Example of the Synod of Dordrecht, where we
had our Deputies, is a famous monument of the Blessing God powers out upon
General Assemblies. We may not deny notwithstanding, that the circumstances of
Times, and Interests of the Princes, with whom the Ark of God rests, admit not
evermore such Meetings. But in those Kingdoms, that enjoy such a precious
liberty, it should be a most unthankefull Felony against God, that men should
voluntarily, when there is no necessity at all, deprive themselves of such an
estimable Advantage. Whilst as those, that are in possession hereof, are
scrupulous to serve themselves of the occasion; those that have a Restraint
upon them desire this happiness exceedingly. With what joy think you, do the
Churches of France long after the happiness to see themselves once assembled
in a National Synod, according to the Grant they have obtained to this purpose
this year? It must be confessed notwithstanding, that some Councels a man may
meet with, where he shall find fewer Defenders of the Truth, then Champions for
Error. But we speak not but of those, where the Spirit of God, and his Word
hold the rather; and of such, as use not to establish any thing contrary to
those lights, and persuasions, which the same Spirit, and the same Word do
frame within the hearts of all the Faithful. Let us therefore stay the time,
till God, letting out the raynes to a Persecution, in his just indignation
deprive us of the means of Assemblies, Colloques, and Synods; But as long as
his good Providence grants us this Privilege, let us not make our selves
unworthy of so rare an Effect of his Bounty.

Sir, This is that, which I had to say unto you from an unanimous consent of
all my Colleagues. We pray God with all our hearts, that he will look upon Sion
in much pity, that he will rouse up his Jealousy, and those yearning
compassionate Bowels, wherewith he uses to be moved toward his Churches, and
that he will be pleased speedily to give us occasion to glorify his Holy Name
in your deliverance. Amen.

Your thrice humble servant, Morus.
Geneva the 18. of Sept. 1644.
Extraict des Acts du Synod National des Eglises Reformees de France assemble
par permission du Roy a Charanton l'an 1644, le 26 Decembre and iours suivans
Envoye de Paris 17/27 Ianvier 1645/4. a D. B.
SVR ce qui a este rapporte par quelques Deputez des Provinces Maritimes que
plusieurs venans de pays estrange and qui s'appellent Independans, parcequ'ils
enseignent que chaque Eglise Particuliere se doibt gouverner par ses Propres
Loix sans aucune Dependence de person es Matieres Ecclesiastiques, and sans
obligation a recognoistre l'authorite des Colloques and Synodes pour son regime
and conduicte establissent leur demeure en ce Royaume, and y pourroyent cy
apres causer de grands inconveniens, s'il n'y estoit de bonne heure pourveu. La
Compagnie craignant que la contagion de ce venin gaignant Insensiblement ne
iette la confusion and le desordre enter nous: and iugeant la dicte Sect des
Independans non seulement prejudiciable a l'Eglise de Dieu, entant qu'elle
tache d'y introduire la confusion, ouvrant la port a toutes sorts de
singularites and extravagances, and ostant tout moyens die apporter remede, mais
aussy tres dangereuse a l'estat, ou (si'elle avoit lieu) il se pourroit former
autant de Religions qu'il y a de Paroisses ou Assemblees Particulieres: enioint
a toutes les Provinces and specialement aux Maritimes de prendre guard que le
mal ne prenne pied es Eglises de ce Royaume, afin que la paix and l'uniformite
tant en la Religion qu'en la Discipline y soyen inviolablement entretenues and
que rien ne s'introduise parmy nous qui puisse alterer en aucune maniere le
service qui est deu a leur Majestez.

Garrissole Moderateur. Basnage Adjoynt. Blondel and Coq. Secretaires.

An Extract of the Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of
France, assembled by the Kings permission at Charantoun, Anno 1644. 26. December.
and days following.
Upon what has been reported by the Commissioners of the Matitime Provinces,
that diverse coming from foreign countries, and who go under the name of
Independents, because they teach that every particular Congregation ought to be
governed by its own particular Laws, without any depending of any in
Ecclesiastical matters, and without any obligation to acknowledge the
Authority of Colloques, or Classes and Synods, for its government and conduct,
settling their abode in this Kingdom, and hereafter they might cause here
amongst us many great inconveniences, if in due time there were not order
taken, the Assembly fearing least the contagion of this poison gaining ground
insensibly, should throw trouble and disorder amongst us; and judging the said
Sect of Independents to be not only prejudicial to the Church of God, in so
far, that it endeavors to bring in Confusion, opening a Gate to all kind of
Singularities and Extravagancies, and taking away all means of any remedy to
the evil, but also most dangerous to the State, where (if it had place) there
might as many Religions set up, as there be Parishes or particular
Congregations, does enjoin to all the Provinces, and particularly to the
Maritimes, to take heed that the evil take no foot in the Churches of this
Kingdom, to the end that peace and Uniformity as well in Religion as in
Discipline, may be inviolably preserved, and that nothing be brought in amongst
us which may alter in any kind the service due unto their Majesty's.

Garrissole Moderator. Basnage Adjoynt. Blondel and Coq. Secretaries.

Sentiment de l'Eglise de France, touchant l'Episcopat, and l'Independance,
extraict d'une Letttre escrite a Mr. Buchanan, par quelques Pasteurs.
1 NOs Eglises ont tousjours creu, and constanment enseigne; que l'Ordre des
Evesques n'est nullement de droit divin. 2. Si quelques Docteurs Protestants
ont employe ce term de Divin, c'est avec la mesme Impropriete, and le mesme
abus de Language; que quelques Anciens ont appelle Diuini Canones, les Canons,
que leurs pres avoient faits, and qu'ils pouvoient changer, ou abroger. 3.
Solon l'Escriture Saint, Prestre, and Evesque designent une mesme charge,
mais a diverse esgards; l'un de ces noms, qui semble derive de l'age, denote la
gravite convenable aux Ministres de Jesus Christ, and l'autre exprime leur
office, qui est de veiller, sur le troupeau, qui leur est commis. 4. Il est
clair comme le jour, que selon l'Eseriture, Prestre, and Evesque designent une
mesme charge; car il y avoit Plusieurs Evesques en une mesme ville Philippiens
1. Et de mesmes persons sont qualifiee indifferement, and Prestres, and
Evesques, Acts 20. and Tit. 1. 5. Ainsi nous croyons, que le plus seur est, de
se tenir a ceste simplicite Apostolic, que l'Eglise de Dieu soit conduite par
les Pasteurs, Anciens, and Diacres. 6. Mais nous apprenons de toutes parts, and
les Escrits de ces Messieurs (c'est adire des Evesques) le justifient, qu'ils
ont fait, jusques icy un corpse a part, distingue des autres Pasteurs; qu'ils
s'attribuent sur les autres conducteurs de l'Eglise une autori^e, and
superiorite, qu'ils disent estre de droict Divin; qu'ilt se croient estre eux
seuls l'Eglise representative de leur Nation; qu'ils se vendiquent la
connoissance, and la disposition absolve des affairs importantes; qu'ils
exercent Empire sur leurs freres, que la form de leur Discipline leur a
soubmis; and traitent les Pasteurs, non pas comme freres, and egaux de droit
divin; Mais comme sujets, and serviteurs: Ce qui estant pose, ils ne peuvent
estre excuses, d'exercer une Espece de Tyranny, en la maison de Dieu, and d'y
maintenir les restes de l'Antichristianisme. 7. Cest pour quoy Plusienrs des
nostres, confiderants l'estat de l'Eglise d' Angleterre, que Dieu avoit
delivree des erreurs, and de l'Idolatrie Roman, and qui cep^n dant avoit,
retenu la pomp de la Hierarchy, and les Ceremonies: Ont eu just subjet de
dire, que le corpse de la grande paillarde en avoit este este: Mais qu'elle y
avoit laisse sa rob. 8. Nous, nous sommes grandement resjouis, lors que nous
avons veu les chooses disposees en Angleterre, a une saint Reformation, ne
doutans point que la puissance des Evesques, tell qu'ils ont usurpee, and
quelle leur a este attribuee, jusques a present ne doibre estre entierement
supprimee, and abolie. 9. Mais nous sommes fort affliges d'apprendre, que
d'entre ceux qui mettent la main a un oeuvre si saint and si necessaire, il y
en ayt qui passent d'une extremite en l'autre: Voulaus que chaque Eglise soit
tellement souveraine, quelle ne depend de qui que ce soit, pour sa conduite,
and ne soit obligee de render au^ autres Eglises, aucun conte de son
Gouvernment. 11. Nous estimous que c'est mettre en pieces non pas soulement la
rob: Mais le corpse mesme du Seigneur, and son Tabernacle Spirituel: Oster a
l'Eglife le tiltre de Communion des Saints: Divider ce que Dieu a conjoint, par
son Esprit, qui estant l'Esprit de paix, inspire par tout ouil souffile la
paix, and la concord, and la communication fraternelle, and charitable, and
nous port a nous entredonner la main, a nous maintenir tous ensemble, par une
Sympathy Spirituelle, and un secours, and assistance reciproque. 11. Joint que
soubs pretexte d'exclure la Tyranny, c'est introduire l'Anarchie, and la
confusion en la maison de Dieu, and ouvrir le port a tonte sort de malheurs,
ils sont apparenment inevitables, si chaque Eglise particuliere seccue toute
sort de joug, and refuse de render conte de sa conduite, a l'Assemblee de ses
freres, sattribuant un pouvoir absolu de fair tout ce quelle trouve bon, sans
en respondre qu'a Dieu seul: Car si on ouvre la port a une, tell License, les
Sociniens, les Anabaptists, and generalement toute sort d'Heretiques de
Fanatiques and de brouillons auront bien tossed trouve le moyen de seduire les
peuples, d'occuper les chaires, and de perdre les Eglises de Dieu. 12. De plus
ceste pretendue Independance, engage ceux qui la soustiennent, a une
contradiction evidente, car puis qu'ils confessent, que l'Eglise Anglicane est
un corpse, il faut necessairement qu'ils advouent, que ces parties doibvent
estre liees and joinctes ensemble, ce qui seroit absol^ement impossible; si
chaque Eglise est obligee de fair band a part, and de se tenir Independente
des autres. 13. Depuis la naissance de l'Eglise Christienne jusques a
maintenant, il n'y a jamais eu de tell est ablissement que coluy, qui se propose
aujourd huy, Aucontraire la Dependence mutuelle and reciproque des Eglises, and
l'adstriction de toutes ensemble, a un certain order, and police
Ecclesiastique, ayant este concerteepar une deliberation commune, a este
volontairement acceptee de tous and a tous jours este jugee absolument
necessaire. 14. Mais pour m'arrester a l'Escriture Saint, il nous est
formellement command, sans aucune exception de nous submettre les uns aux
autres en la crainte de Dieu, Ephesians 4. and de nous prevenir les uns les
autres par boneur, Romans 12. Dieu veut que toutes chooses se facent en sa maison
honestement, and par order, and comme les Esprits des Prophettes sont sujets
aux Prophets, aussi ceux qui prophetisent se doivent assubjectir, les uns aux
autres, se souvenants, que Dieu n'est point Dieu de confusion, maiis de paix,
Cor. 14. 15. L'Apostre St. Paul avoit este appelle a l'Apostolat immediatement,
par nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ, de sort qu'il n'avoit receu n'y appris d'ae
ucun homme, and ne differoit en rien, de ceux qui sembleient estre quelque
chose, and ne reconnoissoit point que ceux qui estoient en estime luy eussent
rien apporte, Gal. 1. and 2. Neantmoins il ne se croit point Independent, mais
apres avoir durant l'espace de trois ans presche l'Evangile, and faict diverse
miracles, il ne des daigne point d'aller a Jerusalem visiter Pierre and
recevoir de luy, and de Iacques la main d'Association, and mesme par
Revelation, il monte dix ans apres a Jerusalem pour conferer avec les Apostres
tonchant l'Evangile afia dit il, qu'en quelque sort que ce soit, je ne
courusse ou n'cusse couru en vain, Galates 2. Enfin apres avoir devore un monde
de travaux, sestre rendu celebr^ par une infinite de signs, and de miracles
and avoir fait abonder l'Evangile depu^ Jerusalem, jusques en l'Illyrie,
Romans 15. Il ne fait nulle difficulte de st sub. mettre au conscil que luy
donna l'Eglise de Jerusalem, encare qu'il ne l'en eust point requis, Acts 21.
17. St. Pierre qui estoit le premier en order an College des Apostres nese
croit point Independent; lors qu'il apprend que l'on soffensoit de sa conduitte
il se present franchement a l'Assemblee des ses freres en Jerusalem, and leur
rend la raison de ce qui s'estoit pass par son Ministere, en la vocation des
Gentiles, Act. 11. and lors qu'il ne cheminoit point d'un droict pied selon la
verite de l'Evangile, il souffrit d'estre repris publiquement, par l'Apostre
St. Paul, Galates 2. 18. L'Eglise d' Antioche avoit este honoree la premiere du
Titre de Chrestienne, and elle avoit de grands hommes Inspires immediatement du
St. Esprit, enter autres St. Paul and Barnabas, and cependant lors qu'il y
survint un debat d'Importance elle n'entre prit point de le decider elle seu
le: elle n'eust point la presumption de se dire Independente, au contraire elle
envoia Paul and Barnabas, and quelques autres a Jerusalem, ou on assembla un
Concile compose des Apostres, and des Anciens a Jerusalem, and la question qui
avoit este premierement meue and debatue a Antioche fut examinee and decidee a
Jerusalem a la gloire de Dieu and l'Edification de l'Eglise, Acts 15. 19. 'Pour
de tres grandes, tres importantes, and tres justes raisons, l'on a arreste
d'abolirle grade Episcopal: Mais il y avoit moins de mal, and moins
d'inconvenians a le souffrir, apres en avoir corrige les exces and aboli la
Tyranny, qu'a introduire cette horrible confusion qui se couure du nom
d'Independance. 20. Dieu mercy, il n'est pas besoin d'en venir la, car si
l'Eglise a' Angleterre veut observer l'ordre, qui est heureusement establies
nostres, and en celles d' Escosse (comme je crois) elle en receur a beaucoup de
fruict et d'Edification and verra plus que jamais regner, and fleurir au milieu
de ses Enfants l'Evangile, de Jesus Christ and la uraye Piete. 21. En chaque
Eglise Particuliere il y doit avoir un corpse compose de Pasteur, ou de
Pastors, d'Anciens and de 'Diacres, qui s'assemblent en Consistoire a de
certains jours reigles, pour adviser d'un commun accord, aux, affairs, and a
la conduitte de l'Eglise. 22. En ces Consistoires, s'il n'y a qu'un Pasteur, il
y preside tousjours, and s'il y en a l'lusieurs, ils y president tour a tour.
23. Es grandes villes, comme a Londres, ou il y a Plusieurs Paroisses, chaque
Paroisse peut avoir son Consistoire particulier, compose de ses Pasteurs,
Anciens, and 'Diacres, and neantmoins pour entretenir l'union and la concord
Christienne and fraternelle, qui doit estre les fideles d'une mesme ville, nous
estimons que chaque sepmaine, ou pour le moins chaque mois il se do ibttonir un
Consistoire General, ou les autres Consistoires se trouvent, ou en corpse, ou
par Deputes, sils sont en trop grand nombre, que la les Pasteurs des Paroisses
president, ou tour a tour, ou selon qu'il sera avije par un choix commun, et
que les affairs qui y seront proposees y soient decidees a la pluralite des
voix. 24. Outre cela il est necessaire d'establir l'ordre des Colloques, and
des Synodes Provinciaux composes de Pastenrs, and d'Anciens deputes, par les
Eglises Particulieres, and des Synodes Nationaux compose's de Pasteurs, et
d'Anciens deputes par les Synodes Provinciaux, et que l'on puisse aller en ces
Saints Assemblees de degree en degree, selon la qualite, et le merit des
affairs. 25. Les Colloques se peuvent tenir, une ou deux fois l'annee, ou plus
souvent, sil y a des affairs, qui le requierent; les Synodes Provinciaux se
doivent tenir au moins une fois l'an; quant aux Synodes Nationaux il nous
semble qu'il suffit de les tenir de deux on de trois en trois ans. 26.
L'assemblee Ecclesiastique, qui est sur pied, peut-dresser des reiglements
touchant les chooses, don't les Consistoires and les Colloques jugeront
definitivment, and celle's qui pourront estre portees par apres, jusques aux
Synodes Provinciax and des Provinciaux au National, comme lors qn'il est
question de la doctrine and de l'Introduction ou Deposition des Pasteurs. 27.
En tous ces C'ollo ques et Synodes, tant Provinciaux, que Nationaux, apres
l'invocation du nom de Dieu, le President l'Adjoint ou les Adjoints and les
Secretaires se dovient estire, a la pluralite des voix, and apres la Closture
de l'Assemblee, se soubmettre aussi bien que tous les autres de la Compagnie, a
la Ceusure de leur freres. 28. Ceux qui se consacrent au St. Ministere, apres
avoir fait paroistre de bons and suffisants tesmoignages de leur vie, and
moeurs, doibvent estre examinees es Synodes Provinciaux, ou du moins es
Colloques, qui les ayants iuges capables les envoient, avec des Lettres de
recommandation aux Eglises, qui les demandent, ou apres, avoir par quelques
actions (c'est adire Sermons) done des preuves de leur dons, and de leur
dexterite, a de tailler la parole Dieu, and recen l'approbation des peuples,
Ils recoivent l'Imposition des mains par le Ministere des Pasteurs, qui sont
deputez a cet effect. 29. C'est un order fort utile, que tous les Pasteurs a'un
Colloque, y preschent tour a tour, and que leurs Sermons soiext sujeets, a la
Censure charitable de leurs freres. 30. Veu qu'apres que les Assemblees sont
terminces ceux qui y out preside, n'ont non plus de pouvoir qu'avant qu'elles
fussent convoquees, afin qu'il y ait toujours, enter les Eglises quelque order
subsistant, avaunt que l'Assemblee se separe, elle doit charger une certain
Eglise, de donner, and de recevoir les aduis des doutes les autres Eglises du
Colloquee, ou de la Province, and le pouvoir, en cas de necessite de convoquer
extraordinairement le Colloque ou, le Synod Provincial, le Synod National
doit aussi donner a un Synod Provincial, la charge de fair la convocation du
Synod National suivant. 31. Il nous semble, que par le moien d'un tell
establissement, on remediera a tout; car d'un cost, il n'y aura point de
primaute n'y de domination des Eglises les unes sur les autres, and de l'autre
ou bannira de la maison de Dieu le desordre, and la coufusion. 32. Si pour nous
estudier a la briefvete, nous nous sommes rendus obscurs en quelques endroits,
de ce petit discourse nous sommes tous prests a l'esclaircir, and a fair
paroistre, combien nous sommes sensibles de vos interests, and le plaisir, que
nous prenons en ceste communication fraternelle. 33. Nous ne scavons pas,
quelles peuvent estre les raisons de ces Messieurs, que vous appelles
Independants; and nous ne doubtons point, que vous n'ayez en Angleterre, et en
Escosse, assez d'excellents Esprits pour les refuter; neantmoins s'il vous
plaist de nous en fair part pour tesmoigner l'Vniformite de nos sentiments,
nous en receurons la communication avec respect, and tascherons die respondre en
Charity: Or le Dieu de patience, and de consolation; vous done de sentir tous
une mesome chose enter vous selon Jesus Christ, a fin que tous d'un courage,
and d'une bouche vous glorifies, le Dieu and Pere de nostre Seigneur Jesus
Christ, Romans 15.
AMEN.
IL est uray que considerant, que la pretendue Indepeudance, que l'on veut
introduire en Angleterre est pour ouvrir la port a une confusion
espouvantable, and que par la, le Diable travaille a demolir tout ce que vous
cdifiez. I'ay dit en l'Art. 26. que pour de tres grandes, tres importantes, and
tres Justes raisons, L'on a arreste d'abolir en Angleterre le grade, Episcopal:
Mais qu'il y avoit moins de mal and moins d'inconvenient a le souffrir, apres
en avoir corrige l'exces, and aboli la Tyraunie qu'a introduare cette horrible
confusion, qui se couure du uom d'Independance.

Je vous confess, que jc suis encore dans le mesme sentiment, nonobstant
vostre raisonnement je dis 1. Que quand il y auroit quelque chose a apprehender
d'une tell Tolerance, les maux qui en pour royent arriver seroyent beaueoup
moindres sans comparison, que ceux, que, pourroit Introduire ceste Effreues
license des Independants, or de deux maux il faut choisir le moindre. 2. Je ne
prevois pas, qu'il y eust tant de danger a Tolerer des Evesques, pourveu qu'ils
fussent ranges dans l'ordre dis autres Pasicurs, qu'ils u'eussent point de
Domination sur eux, mais seulement quelque preseance, and quelquel Commission de
veiller sur leurs freres, que ceste Commission leur fut donnce par le Colloque
ou le Synod de la Province, and que ces Assemblees la eussent le pou voir de
les eu priver, and d'en metare d'autres en leur place. 3. Il y a Plujieurs
chooses establies dans le Regimes de l'Eglise, qui ne se touvent point
formellement, and expressement en la parole de Dieu: 4. Il a pleu a Dieu de
donner, cette Saint Liberte, a ceux qu'il appelle a la conduite des
ttoupeaux. Il veut que toutes chooses se sacent en sa maison avce order, and a
Edification. 5. Vous mesmes Mr. n'Essisez vous point d'entre les Pasteurs, des
personnages qui President en vos Colloques, and en vos Synodes? Cela est il
formellement, and expressement en la parole de Dieu, une presidence de quelque
mois, ou de quelques annces, est elle de soy ylus crimtnelle, que celle de
quclques jours, ou de quclques Septmaines. 6. Vous considereres, s il vous
plaist, que Parkerus, and les autres Docteurs de vosire Nation; qui out Escrit
contre la Hierarchy, declarent que si les Evesques d' Angleterre, nestoyent
que comme les Pasteurs d'Alemagne, and de Suisse, que l'on appell Inspectcurs,
and Sur-intendants: ils n'entreprendroient pas de les choquer: 7. Poser cet
order la, enter les Pasteurs; N'est pas proprement establir une charge, qui ue
soit point en la parole de Dieu; car au fonds ces Inspecteurs n'ont point en
l'Eglise de Dieu une autre charge que les autres Pasteurs: Mais seulement, ils
sont delegues par leurs freres, and compagnons en Charge; and ont par leur
order une Commission a temps de veiller sur eux, and sur leurs deportements.
Tout ainsi que si en une famille bien reiglee, des freres s'accordoyent, a
donner, a quelques uns d'entreux la Commission de veiller, pour un temps, sur
la conduite des autres: and cela sans domination, and sans Empire: 8. Enfin Mr.
Il est bien aise de nous accorder sur cet Article, "car vous croycz cstre
obligez a abolir abjoluement les Evesques d' Angleterre, and a fermer la port
a la confusion des Independants; je su is dans le mesme sentiment, and approuve
vostre dessein, tout ce qui se peut, en priant Dieu de bon, coeur qu'il benisse
louevre de vos mains, and que nous puissions voir les jours bienhcureux,
esquels les Eglises d' Angleterre: Durment Reformees jouissent du mesme order
qui est sainctement establie en celles d' Escosse.

Il vous plaist d'adjouster a vostre lettre, quclque chose des Independants,
mais puisque vous ne faictes qu'alleguer ce qu ils eroyent, sans deduire aucune
des raisons, sur les quelles ils se fondent: je n'auray qu'a donner un traict
de plume sur chacun de ces Sept Articles: Don't vous par les. Quant au premier,
je vous remercie tres affect ueusement des exemplaires de vostre Covenant; Le
quel j'a vois desia veu, and avois love Dicu, qui est l'Autheur de ceste paix
Christienne, and de cette Saint concord, de la quelle j'espere de grands
fruits, a la gloire de Dieu, and a l'Edification son Eglise.

2. Les Independants se moquent, lors qu'ils, difent qu'ils reconnoissent les
Synodes, et les Colloques estrc de Droit Divin, and cependant leur desuient
toute Jurisdiction, sur les Eglises Particulieres: C'est ruiner d'une mesme
main, ce qu'ils edifient de l'autre; car ie ne compren pas quel pcue estre
l'usage des Colloques, and des Synodes, s'ils n'ont aucune Jurisdiction, sur
les Eglises Particulieres; and moins encore, comment une Eglise particuliere,
peut refuser de se submettre a une Assemblee generale, quelle reconnoit estre
de droit divin.

3. Or quand ace quils ne veulent point admettre aucun, pour membre de leur
congregation, qui n'ait quelques marquis signalees and notoires de la
Regeneration, je ne prevois pas que ceste opinion doib ve avoir de grandes
suittes, parce que les Members de l'Eglise consistent, ou en Enfants des
fideles, ou en persons qui sont en age parfait?

Pour les Enfants des fideles il ny peut avoir de difficulte; car l'Apostre les
appelle Saints, eu Esgird a l'alliance de Dieu qui les sanctify, and quant aux
autres, ou ils sont nes enter nous, ou ils s'y rengent par conversion: quant a
ceux qui se convertisent; Il est uray qu'on ne les doibt point admettre
legerement au corpse de l'Eglise, and qu'il est bon d'avoir des preuves de lear
connoissance cala Religion, and des tesmoignages de leur saints conversations:
afin que l'Eglise de Christ ne soit point souillee de leurs erdures: Mais en
cet examen il y a faut proceder en charites and n'estre point par trop severes,
de peur de rebuter and destriurre celuy qui est encore foible, and debile en la
foy^ Quant a ceux qui sont desja, dans nostre communion, les reigles de la
parole de Dieu y sont expresses: Ceux don't les pehcz ne sont poine deeuulues,
nous les devons reprendre and censurer en particulier, autrement ce seroit
Espandre un scandale, and pecher coutre la Charity, qui couure une multitude de
pecbez. Ceux qui pechent publiquement, and don't les fautes font connues de
touts, ou de la plus grande party du peuple, nous les debvons reprendre
publiquement, and fair que les scandales publies soyent reparees par une
repentance public; en cax que cela, son requis, pour l'Edification de
l'Eglise: Se les pechez sont enormes, ou fi les pecheurs fout endurcis and
obstines cumel: Il les faut retrancher par excommunication, and oster du milieu
de nous le viel levain; de peur qu'il n'enaigrisse toute la paste, and que
interdit, ne face tourner le dos a Israel: Mais le pecheur (pour quelque grand
pecheur, and enorme qu'il soit) s'il se repent appes avoir esprouve sa
repentance, pour un temps convenable, il luy faut tender les bras, and
l'admettre, a la paix de l'Eglise; depeur qu'il ne so it englouti, par la
tristesse, and precipite au desespoir: il faut eviter la trop grande rigeur,
and severite des anciens, and la trop grande indulgence, qui a aujourd'huy la
vogue.

4. Quaut a ce qu'ils veulent, que chaque membre particulier, soit present a la
deliberation de leur affairs, sans avoir droict de suftrage and authorite; je
trouve que cela merit une grande Difiniction: Car il y a de certaines
occasions, ou je leur accorderois plus quils ue demandent, comme lors quil est
question des assaires. Extraordinaires, qui regardent le general de: l'Eglise
pour Exemple, lars quil sagit de la Vocation, on Admission d'un Pasteur en
quelque Eglise: Jestime que touts le Chess de Famille de ce troupean, non
soulement doibuent estre presents a la deliberation: mais quils dutbuent avoir
leur voix and leur suffrage. Mais qu'ils soient presents a toutes sorts de
Deilborations, il n'y a nulle appearance: Calaue se peut and n'est pas
expedient: Il ne se peut; car ayant san^ cesse des affairs Ecclesiastiques,
sur les quelles il y a, a deliberer commant, est il possible ^'assembler toute
l'Eglase? Cela aussa n'est pas expedient; car il y a de certaines affairs, qui
ne dothuent peint estre divulgees, and ou le prudence and le secret est
necessaire; S'il faut censurer quelque particulier de quclque fante, qui est
cognue de peu de persons, and qui estant divulguee texposc^ott a un danger
tout visible, faudra il deliberer. sur sa censure devant tout un pcuple? Ne s'y
rencontre il jamais d'affaires done le simple peuple n'est pas capable de
comprendre les raisons, ne de garder le silence? Faut il abandonner les affires
de l'Eglise a la diseretion d'un chacun? Si le peuple assiste a toutes les
Deliberations; que de bruits, que de contestations, que de divisions, que de
scandales? Car eneor qu'il ne die point son advis, il ne laissera: pas au
sortis de l'Assemblee de syndiquer l^^ advis des autres, and de murmurer contre
les chooses arrestees, si clles ne sout selon son goust, ou si clles nc sout
appuyees sur des raisons qu'il judge admissibles.

5 Quant a ce qu'ils permettent, que qui que ce soit, estant capable presche
publiquement, dans l'assemblee, quoi qu il nay acune order, cest l'un des plus
grands desordres, qui puisse arriver an monde, cest introduire toute sort de
Fanatiques and d'Enthusiastes, and exposer la Religion Chresiienne a la risee
des adversaires de la verite and de la maison de Dieu, qui est une maison
dordre, en fair une cobue de desordrt, and une confusion horrible. Et ne sert
d'alleguer l'exemple de l'Eglise Chrestienne du temps des Apostres; car alors
touts les fidelles avoient des graces extra^rdinaires, and le don de Prophetie,
and eneor falloit il que ces Saints Prophets attendissent qu'on les fit
parler, and qu'on leur dat comme a Saint Paul and a Barnabas hommes freres si
vous (...) quelque parole d'exhortation dites; la ce qui estoit une espece de
Vocation. Aujourdbuy que les hommos n'ent point de dons infus and qu'ils
n'acquicrent les Sciences and la faculte de prescher, que par lestude, and le
travail, Dieu y espendant sa Benediction, cest se moequer de Dieu and des
hummes de vouloir que toutes persons puissent prescher indifferemment, sans
un examen prealaole de leur dons, and de leur dexterite, a detailler la parole
de Dieu a Edification.

6. Quant a ce que plusieurs maintienent, que chacun doibt avoir la Liberte de
fair profession de la Religion qui lny semble la meilleure (quelque mauvaise,
quelle soit) pourveu quelle ne face rien contre lestat: Cest un libertinage
insurportable eu^la maison de Dieu, and directement contraire a sa parole; Car
en l'ancien Testament il n'estoit pas permis de fair profession d'une autre
Religion, que de celle que Dieu avoit instituee, and vous scaves que Dieu
ordoune an 13 du Deuteronomy; contre les faux Prophets, qui destournent le peuple de
son pur service: Et qu'an Nouvean l'Apostre Saint Paul veut que nous prennions
guard a ceux qui font des partialites, and scandales contre la Doctrine que
nous avons apprins, que nous nous destournions deux Romans 16.1. and que si un
Apostre, ou un Ange du Ciel nous Evangelise outre ce qui nous a este
Evangelise, il nous soit Anatheme, Gal. 1. Jusques La que Saint Jehan la
douceur, and la charity mesme, ne veut point, que nous recevions en nos
maisons, n'y que nous saluions seulement ceux qui ne nous apportent la Sancte
Doctrine de l'Evangile.

7. Quant a ce qu'ils ne font aucun cas du Jugement n'y du Consentement des
autres Eglises Reformees, ayns le rejettent comme un Argument Humain je trouvc
qu'ils ont fort peu profit en l'Escbole de Saint Paul, qui veut que nous nous
submettions les uns aux aulrres, en la crainte de Dieu que nous nous prevenions
les uns les aultres par honneur and que les esprits des Prophets soient
subjects aux Prophets: A Dieu ne plaise que nous metions en un mesrus rang les
Ordonances de Dieu et les constitutions Ecclesiastiques: (...) ce que Dieu nous
dit nous est une Ley invialable, and (...) aux bommes. Nous esprouvons toutes
chooses and retenons ce qui est bon. Pour le fonds et l'Essence de la Religion,
il n'y a que Dieu seul, qui en puisse Orda^ner: Mais quant a l'ordre Exterieur,
and a la police de l'Eglise, ce sage pere de famille se contrute de nous dear
en general que tout se face en sa maison honnestement, and par order, il laisse
le detail a la saint Prudence de ceux quil appelle a conduire son peuple
c'est a eux lors quils sont Assembles au nom du Seigneur de le supplier
ardenment de presider au milieu d'eux et de leur mettre un coeur les chooses qui
seront les plus expedientes pour s^ gloire and l'edification de ses Enfants. la
conduite des autres Eglises Reformees ne nous impose pas un jong necessaire and
ne nous peut estre proposee comme une loy infallible, mais elle nous doibt
servir d'Exemple que nous devons imiter si nous ny recognoissons, des
repugnances manifestes a la parole de Dien, que s'il y a quel qu'un qui ponse
estre contentieux nous a avens pas une tell constume ny aussi les Eglises de
Dieu. 1 Cor. 11.16.

6. Nous tenons pour constant, qu'il n'y a, and n'y doibt avoir auoune charge
pour paistre and conduire l'Eglise qui ne soit fond en la parale de Dieu,
ainsy les charges du Ministre Pasteur Evesque, Ancien and Diacre sont fondee
simmediatement for mellement and expressement dans la parole de Dien, bien que
quelques nus venlent que la charge d'Ancien tell qu'elle anjour dhuy dans les
Eglises reformees, n'est fondee dans l'Escriture que par analogy and tiree par
consequence necessaire comme ils parleut. qui au fond est un and de mesme: car
ce qui est tire par consequence necessaire de la St. Escriteure y est autand
comme ce qui est en te^^es expres. Tout cecy est conform aux articles 29 and
30. de confession de Foy, au il est dict, que nostre Seigneur a establic'este
police and government dans l'Eglise par Pasteurs, Sur veillants ou Anciens and
diacres, and que les urays Pasteurs en quelque lieu qu'ils soient ont le ^esme
authorite and esgale puissance s^ubs nostre Seigneur l'Archi-pasteur and grand
Evesque des nos ames. Act. 6.4. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Timothy 3.1. Tit. 1.5. Math. 20.26,
18, 2. 2 Cor. 1.27. 1 Pet. 5.3.

The Judgment of the Church of France concerning Episcapacy and Independency,
extracted out of Letters written to Master Buchanan by some French Ministers.
1. OUr Churches have ever believed, and constantly taught that the Order of
Bishops it not at any hand of Divine Right. 2. If some Protestant Doctors have
used this term, Divine, it is with the same impropriety, and abuse of
Language, that some of the Ancients called those Canons, which their Fathers
had made, and which themselves could at any time change and abrogate, Divine
Canens. 3. According to the Scripture, Priest, and Bishop point out but one and
the same Christ, howsoever in diverse respects; one of those names, which seems
to be derived from their age, or years, denotes such a gravity as befits
Christ's Ministers; and the other expresses their Office, that is, to watch
over the Flock which is common to them both. 4 It is as clear, as the day,
that in Scripture Priest, and Bishop mark out one and the same Charge; for
there were many Bishops in the same Town, Phil. 1. and the very same persons
are qualified indifferently, both Priest and Bishop, Acts 20.1. 5. So as we
take it to be the surest way, to hold our selves close to that Apostolic
simplicity, that the Church of God be governed by Pastors, Ancients, and
Deacons. 6. But we understand on all hands, and the Writings of the Bishops
themselves make it good, that they have hither-to made a Body a part,
distinguished from other Postors, likewise that they take an Authority upon
them, and a superiority over the other Pastors of the Church, which they will
needs have to be of Divine Right. Likewise that they believe, that they alone
are the Representative Church of the Nation; that they challenge to themselves
the cognizance, and absolute disposal of all the Affairs of importance; that
they exercise a dominion over their Brethren, whom the Form of their
Discipline has put in a kind of subjection unto them, and treat the Pastors
not as their Brethren and equals by Divine Right, but as Subjects and
servants; which being granted, it cannot be avoided but they must be accounted,
as those that have exercised a kind of Tyranny in the House of God, and
maintained the arts of Antichristianisme. 7. Wherefore many of our men
considering the state of the Church of England, which God had delivered from
the Errors and the Idolatries of the Church of Rome, how notwithstanding she
still retained the Pomp of Hierarchy, and Ceremonies, had just cause to say,
that the Body of the great Whore was indeed taken away, but that her Vestments
and Apparel still remained with her. 8. We were much joyed, when we
understood, that things were so well fitted and disposed toward an holy
Reformation in England; being well assured, that the power, which the Bishops
had usurped, and which, till this present, was given them, ought to be entirely
suppressed, and abolished. 9. But we are much afflicted that among them that
put their hand to so holy and necessary a work there, there are some that pass
from one Extreme to another, willing, that every particular Church be so
absolute and sovereign, that it depend not upon any other for its direction,
nor be obliged to give an account to other Churches of its Government. 10. We
conceive, that this is not only to pull in pieces the garment, but even the
Body of our Lord, and his Spiritual Tabernacle; and to take away from the
Church the title of the Communion of Saints; to divide that which God has
joined together by his Holy Spirit, the which being the spirit of peace
inspires; where ever it blows, peace, concord, and brotherly and charitable
communication, and leads us to lend each other of us the hand to maintain the
whole together in a spiritual sympathy, and a reciprocal ayding and assisting
one of another. 11. Besides, that under the pretense of casting out Tyranny, it
is to introduce and bring in an Anarchie and confusion into the House of God,
and to open a wide gate to all sorts of disasters, which are apparently unavoy
dable, if every particular Church shake off all manner of Yoke, and refuse to
give an account of its behavior unto the assembly of his Brethren, attributing
unto itself an absolute power to do whatsoever it self please, without
answering unto any therefore, save to God only: For if we open a gare to such a
licentiousness, the Socinians, the Anabaptists; and generally all sort of
Heretics, Fanatics, and Enthusiastsshall quickly find the mean of seducing
the people to possess themselves of the Pulpits, and so to make havoc of the
Churches of God. 12. Moreover, this pretended Independence ingageth them that
maintains it, in a manifest contradiction, for since they confess, that the
Church of England is a Body, they must necessarily avow that its parts ought to
be united and tied together, which should be absolutely impossible, should
every Church be obliged to make a combination a part, and to stand Independent
upon another Church. 13. From the very birth of the Christian Church unto this
present, there has never been such a Government established, as these men at
this time propound: on the contrary, the mutual and reciprocal dependence of
Churches, and the uniting of them all together to a certain Ecclesiastical
Order and Polity, having been debated by a common deliberation, has been
accepted voluntarily by all, and has ever been judged absolutely necessary.
14. But to rest my self upon the Scripture alone; we have it formally enjoined
without any exception, to submit our selves one to another in the fear of God,
Ephesians. the 4. and to go one before another, Romans 12. God would have every thing
in his House decently and in order, and as the spirit of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets, so those that Prophecy ought to subject themselves
one to the other, remembering, that God is not the God of confusion, but of
peace, 1 Cor. 14. 15. The Apostle, Saint Paul, had been called by our Lord
Jesus Christ unto the Apostleship immediately, so as that he had neither
received, nor learnt any thing of any man, and yielded not in any thing to to
those, that would seem something, and acknowledged not that those that were in
place had added any thing unto him; notwithstanding he took not himself for
an Independent: but after that he had three years together Preached the
Gospel, and wrought diverse miracles, he disdaines not to go to Jerusalem to
visit Peter, and to receive the right hand of fellowship. And like wise he went
up ten years after by Revelation to Jerusalem, to conserte with the Apostles
touching the Gospel, to the end (says he) least by any means I had not, or
should have run in vain, Gal. 2, In conclusion, after that he had undergone a
world of troubles, and was become famous for many signs and miracles, and had
made the Gospel of Christ to flourish from Jerusalem unto Illyricum, Romans 1.17.
he makes no difficulty or scruple to submit himself unto the Counsel, that
the Church of Jerusalem gave him, although he had never required any Counsel
at their hands, Acts 21. 16. Saint Peter, that was the first in order in the
College of the Apostles, believes not himself to be an Independent, when he
perceives that they were offended with his manage of the affairs, he presents
himself boldly to his Brethren, as they were assembled in Jerusalem, and gives
them an account of what had passed by the means of his Ministry in the
Calling of the Gentiles, Act, 11. And when he went not the right way to the
truth of the Gospel: he endured himself to be reprehended publicly, by the
Apostle Saint Paul, Gal. 2. 17. The Church of Antioch was the first, that was
honored with the Title of Christian, and it had famous men immediately inspired
by the Holy Ghost; Amongst others, Saint Paul, and Barnabas: And yet
notwithstanding, when there happened amongst them a Controversy of importance,
it presumed not to decide it of it self alone; it presumed not to show it
self Independent; but contrariwise, it sent Paul, and Barnabas with some
others to Jerusalem, where a Council was called, consisting of the Apostles,
and Elders; And the Question that was first of all moved, and debated at
Antioch, was examined, and decided at Jerusalem, to the glory of God, and the
edification of the Church, Acts 15. 18. For very great, important, and just
reasons, it is decreed to abolish the Episcopacy, but it were less mischief
and inconvenience by far to suffer it, after that the Excesses of it were
corrected, and the Tyranny abolished, then to bring in such an horrible
confusion, as is veiled under this name of Independency. 19. God be thanked,
there is no need to come to that; For if the Church of England will observe the
order already happily established in ours, and the Churches of Scotland, if I
mistake not, it shall receive much profit, and edification thereof, and shall
see the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and of true Piety reign, and flourish more
then ever in the midst of her people. 20. In every particular Church, there
ought to be a Body, made up of Pastors, or of Pastors, Ancients, and Deacons,
that may meet in Consistory upon set, and appointed days, to advise by common
consent, of the Affairs, and the Government of the Church. 21. If there be but
one Pastor in these Consistories, He presides there evermore, But if there
chance to be more, they preside by turns. 22. In great Cities, and Towns, as
in London, where there are many Parishes, every Parish may have its particular
Consistory, made up of Pastors, Ancients, and Deacons; And yet notwithstanding
to entertain an holy, Christain like, and Brotherly union, and concord, such
as ought to be among the Faithful, that are of the same Town, we are of
Opinion, that it would do well, that every week, or Month at least, a
General Consistory should be held, where the other Consistories should meet
either in their Bodies, or by their Deputies, if their number be too great; The
Pastors of the several Parishes may preside by turns, or as it shall be agreed
upon by a common choice; And the businesses, that shall be there propounded,
shall be there decided by plurality of voices. 23. Over and above this, It will
be needful to establish the Order of Colloques, and of Provincial Synods,
consisting of Pastors, and Ancients, deputed by the particular Churches; and of
National Synods, consisting of Pastors, and Ancients, deputed by the
Provincial Synods; And that there may be a proceeding in these holy Assemblies
from step to step according to the quality, and merit of Businesses. 24. The
Colloques may be held once, or twice a year, or oftener, if there be
businesses, that require it. The Provincial Synods ought to be held once at
the least in a year; As for the National Synods, we conceive it will be
sufficient, that ye hold them from two to two, or from three years to three
years. 25. The Ecclesiastique Assembly now sitting may make Rules touching the
matters, which the Consistorie^, and Colloques shall judge definitively of, as
also of those, which shall afterward be carried to the Provincial Synods, and
from the Provincial to the National; As when there is a Question that touches,
either the Interdiction, or Deposition of Pastors. 26. In all these Colloques,
and Synods, as well Provincial, as National, after the invocation of the Name
of God, the President, the Assessor, or Assessors, and the Secretaries should
be Elected by plurality of voices, and after the end, and shutting up of the
Assembly, they are to submit themselves, as well as all the rest of the Company
to the Censure of their Brethren. 27. Those that are consecrated to the Holy
Ministry, after they have given good, and sufficient testimony of their lives,
and manners, ought to be examined in the Provincial Synods, or at least in the
Colloques, who having judged them capable are to send them with letters of
Recommendation, to those Churches, that demand them; where, after they have by
some Exercises or Sermons given a proof of their gifts, and the dexterity they
have individing a right the Word of God, and received the approbation of the
people, they receive the Imposition of Hands by the Pastors, that are deputed
for that purpose. 28. This is a very profitable order, that all the Pastors of
a Colloque Preach there in their turns, and that their Sermons be subject to
the charitable Censure of their Brethren. 29. For that after the breaking up of
the Assemblies, they that presided in them have no more power, then they had
before the Calling of them, To the intent there may always be some constant,
and set order between the Churches; Before such time as the Assembly part, it
ought to enjoyne some one certain Church to give and receive the Advice of all
the rest of the Churches of the Colloque, or of the Province, and to give it
power in case of necessity, to convocate a Colloque, or Provincial Assembly
Extraordinarily. The National Synod ought also to give it in charge to the
Provincial Synod, commit the care to call the National Synod that is next to
be, to the Provincial Synod. 30. We are of Opinion, that by the means of such
an order once settled, you will be able to remedy all that is amiss; For on the
one side there will be no primacy, nor dominion of some particular Churches
over others, and on the other side you shall by that means chase out of the
House of God all disorder, and confusion. 31. If whilst we studied to be
brief, we be found obscure any where in this Discourse, we are all ready to
explain our meanings, and to make it clearly appear, how exceeding sensible
we are of your Interests, as also what great contentment we take in this
Brotherly Communication of yours with us. 32. We know not, what may be the
Reasons of these Gentlemen you call Independents, and we doubt not but you have
both in England and Scotland gallant wits, that are able men enough to refute
them; nevertheless, if you please to acquaint us with them, we, to testify in
testimony of the uniformity of our Opinions shall receive the communications,
as a respect unto us, and will endeavor the Answer thereunto with charity.
Now the God of Patience, and Consolation grant you all to think one, and the
same thing according to Jesus Christ, to the end that you may all with one
tongue and mouth glorify the God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

IT is true, that considering that the pretended Independency, that some would
bring in in England, is the way to open a wide gate to a most fearful
confusion, and that by the means thereof the Devil is so busy to pull down
whatsoever ye build up: in my nineteenth Article I said, That for very great,
very important, and most just reasons, it was resolved upon to abolish, and
pull down the Episcopacy, but that there was less mischief, and
inconvenience to permit it, after a due correction of the Excesses of it, and
an abolishment of its Tyranny, then to bring into the Church of God such an
horrible confusion, as seemed to be conched, and vayled under the name of
INDEPENDENCY.

I freely confess unto you, that I am yet of the very same Opinion,
notwithstanding your reasoning to the contrary. I say then 1. that though such
a Tolerance might give somewhat to many to apprehend, and suspect, yet the
Evils, that could possibly thence arive, would be without comparison, far
less, then those that this unbridled Licensing of Independents might introduce
among you; Now of two Evils, you would do well to choose the lesser. 2. I
conceived not, that there was so great danger in tolerating the Bishops,
provided that they were ranged within the order of other Pastors, so as that
they might not have dominion over them, but only a certain Presidency, and
Commission to watch over their Brethren, and that this Commission were given
them by the Colloque, or the Synod of the Province, and that those Assemblies
had the power in themselves to deprive them of it, and to substitute others in
their Places. 3. There are many things established in the Government of the
Church, which formally, and expressly are not to be found in the Word of God. 4.
It has pleased God, to give this in charge to those that he has called to the
guidance, and Government of his Flock. His Will is, that All things in his
House be done in order, and to edification. 5. You your self, use ye not to
choose from amongst your Pastors some persons to preside in your Colloques, and
in your Synods? Is this formally, and expressly in the Word of God? A Presidency
for certain Months, or for certain Years is it of it self more faulty, or
criminal, then that of yours for certain days, or certain weeks? 6.
Consider, if it please you, that Parker, and other learned men of your Nation
that have written against the Hierarchy, declare, how that were the Bishops in
England but as the Pastors in Germany, and Suitzer-land, which they usual
stiley Inspectors, and Super-intendents, they would never go about to put them
down. 7. Put the case this order were established amongst the Pastors, it were
not properly to establish an office, that is not in the Word of God; for if it
be well thought on, these Inspectors have not any other Office in the Church of
God, then the other Pastors, they are but only delegated by their Brethren,
and Fellow Ministers, and have from them and by their order a Commission for a
time, to watch over their Brethren, as their Brethren may have a like
Commission, when their turn comes, to watch over them, and their behaviors.
Just so, as if in a well governed Family, Brethren should make an agreement to
give some one amongst them a Commission to watch for a certain time over the
deportment of the rest; and this without any domination, or command. 8. To
conclude, sir, you and we may easily agree upon this Article; For you believe
you are bound absolutely to abolish the Bishops of England, and to shut quite
out of doors the confusion of the Independents, my thoughts are the same, and
I approve your design wholly, beseeching God with all my heart, that he would
bless the work of your hands, and that you may see those happy days, wherein
the Churches of England being purely Reformed, may enjoy the same Discipline,
which is holily established in those of Scotland.

You are pleased in your letter to add something concerning the Independents,
but you do but only allege that which they believe, and touch not upon any
of the Reasons, upon which they ground themselves; wherefore I shall but only
give a slight touch with my Pen upon every one of your sven Articles.

As to the first, I thank you most affectionately for the Copies of your
Covenant, the which I had seen before, and had praised God, who is the Author
of this Christian peace, and of this holy agreement, of which I expect great
fruit to the glory of God, and the edification of his Church.

2. The Independents do but make sport, when they say, they acknowledge that
Synods, and Colloques are of Divine Right, and deny them notwithstanding any
manner of jurisdiction over particular Churches. This is to pull down with one
hand what they build with the other. For I cannot comprehend, what use at all
there can be of Colloques, and Synods, if they have no jurisdiction over
particular Churches, and less yet, how one particular Church can refuse to
submit it self to a general Assembly, the which it acknowledges to be of
Divine Right.

3. Now to that, that they will not admit any one for a member of their
Congregation, that has not some notable, and conspicuous marks of
Regeneration, I conceive not that this opinion can have many Followers; for
that the members of the Church consist either of the Infants of Believers, or
of persons of perfect Age. As for the children of Believers there is no
difficulty at all, for the Apostle calls them Saints in regard of the Covenant
of God, that sanctifies, and makes them holy; And as for the others, either
they are borne amongst us, or they come to our party by Conversion. As for them
that are converted, it is true, that they ought not hand overhead to be
admitted into the body of the Church, and that it does well to have some
prooses of their knowledge in Religion, as also some testimonies of their holy
Conversation, to the end that the Church be not defiled with their
unsoundnesse. But in this Examination we must proceed with charity, and not be
over severe, for fear of casting back, and destroying of him, who is yet
weak and feeble in the Faith. For as much as concerns those that are already
in the communion of the Church, the Rules of the Word of God are express
concerning them; They, whose sins are not public, and notorious, we are to
reprove, and censure them in private, otherwise it were to spread a scandal,
and to offend against charity, which covers a multitude of sins. These that sin
publicly, and whose sins are notoriously known to all, or the greater part of
the people, are to be reproved publicly, and the business is to be carried
so, as that an amends be made by a public repentance for public scandalls,
in case that it be requisite for the edification of the Church. If the Offenses
be enormious, or if the Offenders chance to be hardened, and obstinate in their
wickednesle, we are to cut them off by Excommunication, and so to take from
among us the old leven, that it sour not the whole lump, and that the accursed
thing cause not Israel to turn her back. But the Offender (how great, or
enormious so ever he be) if he repent, after a convenient time of trial of the
truth of his repentance, we are bound to have compassion of him, and to readmit
him to the peace of the Church, that he be not swallowed up with sorrow, and
cast headlong into Despair. It were good, we should avoid, as the too great
severity, and rigidity of the Ancients, so likewise the over great levity, and
indulgence, that is in vogue amongst us at this day.

4. As to that, that they will have every particular member present at the
deliberation of all businesses whatsoever, without having any right of
suffrage, or Authority, I conceive this stands in need of some good
distinction; for certain occasions there are, upon which a man may grant them
more then they demand, as at such times, when there is any debate touching
businesses, that are extraordinary, and that concern the whole Church in
general; for example, then, when as the question is touching the vocation, or
admission of a Pastor into a Church. In such a case, I am of opinion, that all
the Masters of Families, that belong to that Church, not only ought to be
present at the Consultation, but also that they are to have their voice and
suffrage therein. But that they should be at all kinds of debates, there seems
to be no color for it; this neither can be, nor indeed is it expedient. It
cannot, I say, be; for the Church having continually businesses, whereon to
deliberate, how is it possible, the whole Church should so often be
congregated? Again, I say it is no ways expedient; for there are certain
businesses, which ought not to be divulged, wherein Christian Prudence, and
secrecy are very necessary. If some particular man were to be censured for
some particular offense, that few know of, and which, if it were known, would
in all likelihood expose him to a visible, and apparent danger, were it fitting
now to debate, and deliberate touching the censuring of this man, before the
whole Congregation? Meet we at no time with businesses of such a nature, as
wherein the simple people are neither capable of understanding the Reasons, nor
yet able to hold their peace? Must we needs abandon all Affairs of the Church
to the discretion of every particular man? If the people were to assist in all
Consultations, what a noise, what contestations, what divisions, what scandalls
should we have? For however some men perchance would forbear to deliver an
opinion, yet they would be sure at the rising of the Assembly to murmr at and
condemn the Judgments, that were passed, if either they were not to their
good liking, or that they found them not to be grounded upon such Reasons, as
themselves approved of.

5. As to that, that they permit any one whatsoever, if he have the ability, to
Preach publicly in their Assemblies, notwithstanding that he have not Orders,
This is one of the greatest Disorders, that can possibly happen in the world;
This, what is it other, but to bring in all kind of Fanatiques, and
Enthusiasts, and to expose Christian Religion to be made a laughing stock to
the Enemies of Gods Truth; And to make of the House of God, which is an House
of Order, a Babell of Disorder; and horrible Confusion? It will serve them to
little purpose to allege for themselves the Example of the Ancient Church in
the Times of the Apostles; for in those times all the faithful had
Extraordinary Graces, as also the gift of Prophecy, and yet, for all that,
were those holy Prophets to stay till they were bidden to speak, and until
such time, as it was said to them, as to St. Paul, and Barnabas; Men, Brethren,
If you have any word of Exhortation, speak on; which was a kind of Vocation.
Now a days, when men have not such Infusions of Gifts, but that they acquire
the Sciences, and abilities for Preaching by study, and pains, God pouring
forth his blessing upon their industry, it were to mock God, and men, to
require that all men should Preach indifferently, without any praevious Examen
of their Gifts, or the dexterity they have to divide the Word of God to
Edification.

6. As to that, That many maintain, that every man ought to have liberty to
make profession of whatsoever Religion himself thinks best (how bad soever it
be) provided, that he attempt nothing against the State, wherein he lives; this
is a Libertinisme, not to be endured in the House of God, and it is flatly
against his Word; For in the Old Testament, it was not permitted to any to make
profession of any other Religion, save that which God himself had instituted;
And you know, what God ordained against false Prophets, that turn away the
people from his service, Deuteronomy. 13. As also in the New Testament, how St. Paul
wills us to take heed of such, as make Divisions, and raise scandalls against
that Doctrine, that we have learned; and that we turn away from them, Romans 16.
And that if an Apostle, or an Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel unto
us, then has been preached, that he be accursed, Gal. 1. yea St. John (very
sweetness, and Charity it self) will not at any hand, that we receive into our
houses, no not that we so much as bid God speed to those, that bring us not the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

7. As to that, That they make no reckoning either of the Judgment, or Consent
of other Reformed Churches, but reject them, as an humane Argument, I see they
have profited little in Saint Paul's School, whose Lesson is, that we submit
our selves one to another in the fear of God; and that in giving honor, we
go one before the other; and that the spirits of the Prophets be subject to
the Prophets. God forbid, we should ever place Gods Ordinances, and the
Ecclesiastical Constitutions in the same rank together. Whatsoever God says,
should be unto us a Law inviolable; But as for men, we are to prove all things,
and to hold that which is good. For as much as concerns the Foundation, or
Essence of Religion, there is none, but God alone, that can ordain any thing in
it: But as to the Exterior Order, and Policy of the Church, That wise Father
of his Family is content to leave with us his General Word of direction, That
in his House all things be done decently, and in order; He leaves the
particulars to the pious prudence of such, as he has called to the guidance,
and Government of his people.

It is their duty, when they are met together in the name of the Lord, to be
earnest Suitors, and Suppliants unto him, that he will please to preside in the
midst of them, and put in their hearts to do those things, that shall be most
expedient for his Glory, and the Edification of his Children. The Government of
other Reformed Churches lays no absolute yoke upon us, nor can it be
propounded as any infallible Law; But true it is, it ought to be a Pattern and
Example for our imitation, if so be we find no manifest repugnancies in it to
the Word of God. But if there be any, that is resolved to be contentious
hereabouts, we have no such custom, nor yet have the Churches of God, 1 Cor.
2.16.

We hold for certain, that there neither is, nor ought to be any Office for
teaching, and governing the Church, which should not have its foundation and
ground in Gods Word; And so the Office of Minister, Pastor, Bishop, Ancient,
and Deacon, are founded immediately, Formally, and Expressly on the Word of God;
howsoever some there be, that will needs have the Office of Ancients, as it is
now practiced in the Reformed Churches, to have no other ground at all in
Scripture, save only by Analogy, and as it is drawn thence by necessary
Consequence, as they speak; which in conclusion is one and the same thing; For
that which is deduced by necessary Consequence from Scripture, is every jot as
much in Scripture, as that, what ever it is, that is there in Express Terms.
All this is agreeable, and conform with 29. and 30. Articles of the Confession
of Faith, where it is said, That our Lord has established this Policy, and
Government in his Church, viz. by Pastors, Overseers, or Ancients, and
Deacons; And that those that are true Pastors, in what place soever they
inhabit, have the very same Authority, and equal power under the Lord Jesus
Christ the chief Pastor, and Bishop of our souls, Act. 6.4. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Timothy
3.1. Tit. 1.5. Matthew. 20.26.18.2. 2 Cor. 1.27. 1 Pet. 5.3.

Sentiment d'u grand Theologien de France Touchant l'Independence declare en
une Lettre addressee a Mr. Buchanan.
UN mien amy homme vertueux and craignant Dieu, m'a adverti que quelques
persons trouvent mauvais l'ordre establi en nos Eglises, par le quel les
Consistoires sont subjects aux Colloques, and les Colloques aux Synodes
Provinciaux, and les Provinciaux aux Nationaux. Ils voudroient que chaque
Consistoire eust une authorite absolve, and qui ne dependist d'aucune assemblee
superieure: la dessus ce mien amy me demand quel est mou seutiment: la chose
est de tell nature and de tell importance, que je nay peu luy refuser ce
qu'il requiert de moy.

Je dis donc, que ceux qui font tells Propositions, ne doivent estre creus: si
on suiuois leur advis il ne s'en pourroit ensuiure que le renversement de
l'Eglise and une extreme confusion: souvent advient que deux pasteurs d'une
mesme Eglise s'entrequerellent, and divisent le troupeau en deux factions
contraires. En ce cas il faut par necessite avoir recours a une compagnie and
puissance superieure: que si l'Eglise na qu'un Pasteur, and que ce Pasteur soit
vitieux, and vive a'une vie scandaleuse, and soit supporte par le Consistoire
entier, ou que le Consistoire soit divise, il n'y a point de remede a ce mal
que par les Colloques and Synodes ayants puissance de suspendre ou deposer un
tell Pasteur: n'y ayant qu'un Pasteur en ceste Eglise, and iceluy meritant
d'estre depose, qui est ce qui le deposera? Les Anciens du Consistoire seuls
prononceront ils contre luy sentence de deposition? Que si quelcun du peuple
est injustement suspendu de la Saint Cene ou excommunie, a qui aura il
recours pour estre restabli? and a qui formera il ses plainctes si le
Consistoire qui l'a injustement condamne a une Authorite Independante and
irrefragable.

Que si une nouvelle Heresy s'espand and que quelques Pasteurs and Eglises en
soyent infectees quel moyen d'obvier a un si grand mal, que par un Synod qui
puisse deposer les Pasteurs obstines en leur erreur, and Insectants le troupeau
sans le Synod de Dordrect, l'Arminianisme sespandroit par tout le pays, si
chaque Consistoire eust este absolu and Independent, il eust peu mespriser la
decision du Synod, en disant nous ne sommes subjects a aucun Synod, and avons
une authorite absolve and Independante.

L'es Synodes sont principalement occupes a ouyr les plainctes des Eglises
particulieres, and a juger des appels si vous ostez cela aux Synodes, ils nont
plus rien a fair, and leur Convocation sera inutile: Car aussi eu vain
prononceroient ils des jugements don't l'Execution ne seroit en leur puissance.
Chasque Consistoireise gouvernezoit a sa fautasie: comme si en un grand pays,
de chaque village, on faisoit une Souverainete. Cela est vouloir introduire un
order qui depuis le temps des Apostres jusques a maintenant n'a jamais este
practique.

Il y a plusieurs petites Eglises Champestres, don't le Consistoire est compose
d'un Pasteur qui na pas beaucoup de capacite and de quatre ou cinq paysans, qui
sont Ancicus de l'Eglise: donner a on a une tell Eglise ou Consistoire, une
authorite Independante? and ce Pasteur venant a mourir, ees payisans auront ils
le pouvoir d'en choisir un autre? ou de luy imposer les mains, sont ls Juges
suffisants de la capacite d'un Ministre?

Que si a cause de l'affliction de l'Eglise il est besoin de celebrer un jeusue
par toutes les Eglises du Royaume, qui ordonnerace jusne? qui assignera le
jour. S'il faut representer au Prince Souverain les plaintes de toutes les
Eglises, qui esce qui deputera? qui est ce qui presentera les requests de tout
le corpse des Eglises du Royaume?

Si pour quelques occasions survenues il est besoiug de changer quelque chose
en la Discipline Ecclesiastique, and fair des nouveaux reglements qui obligent
toutes les Eglises, cela se pourra il fair par des Consistoires Independants,
and nm subjects a aucun reglement general?

Bref faut tenir pour constant que la Dependence des Compagnies inferieures
subjectes aux Superieures, est le lien qui entretient l'Vnion de l'Eglise, le
quelestant couppe il ny auroit plus de correspondance, and on verroit une
horrible confusion. Null ne peut estre Juge eu sa propre cause, s'il y a de la
contention enter deux Eglises Particulieres (comme cela advient fort souvent)
pas une de ces Eglises ne peut estre Judge, and faut avoir recours a quelque
authorite superieure.

Ie ne veux croire que ces Independants, ayent Intelligence avec les
Adversaires, and que leur but soit soubs ombre de Reformation, de nous jecter
en vne confusion qui nous expose en risee a ceux qui nous sont contraires:
I'aime mieux croire qu'ils errent par fault d'experience, and de cognoissance,
de ce qui est possible ou profitable a l'Eglise de Dieu.

P. D. M.

The Judgment of a great Divine in France concerning Independency, declared in
a Letter directed to Master Buchanan.
A Friend of mine, a virtuous man, and fearing God, has advertised me that
certain persons find fault with the Order established in our Churches; by the
which, the Consistories are subject unto Colloques, and the Colloques unto
Provincial Synods, and the Provincial Synods, unto National Synods: They
would have every Consistory to have an absolute authority, and not to depend
upon any superior Assembly: My Friend asks me thereupon my judgment; The
thing is of such a nature, and of such weight, that I could not deny him his
request.

I say then, That those that make such Propositions, ought not to be believed:
if men followed their advice, there could nothing follow but a turning of the
Church upside down, and an utter confusion. It falls out often that two Pastors
of one and the same Church fall out amongst themselves, and divide the flock
into two contrary Factions; in this case of necessity we must have recourse
unto a Company, and Power Superior. But if the Church have but one Pastor, and
he be a vicious man, and of a scandalous life, and be supported by the whole
Consistory, or that the Consistory be divided, there is no remedy for this
evil, but by Colloques, and Synods, that have power to suspend and Depose such
a Pastor. There being but one Pastor in this Church, and he deserving to be
deposed, who is he that shall depose him? The Elders of the Consistory alone,
Shall they pronounce Sentence of Deposition against him? What if any one among
the People be suspended from the holy Supper, or excommunicated, To whom shall
he have his recourse to be received again into the Church? And to whom shall he
make his Complaint, if the Consistory, which has unjustly condemned him, have
an Independent, and irrefragable Authority?

What if a new Heresic be sown abroad, and that certain Pastors and Churches
be infected with it? what means is there to meet with such an evil, but by a
Synod, that has power to depose Pastors that are obstinate in their Error,
and infect the Flocks? Had it not been for the Synod of Dordrecht, Arminianisme
had spread it self over the whole country; If every Consistory had been
Independent, it had contemned the Decision of the Synod; saying, We are not
subject to any Synod; We have an absolute and Independent Authority.

Synods are chiefly busied about hearing of the Complaints of particular
Churches, and to judge of Appellations; If you deny that Power unto Synods,
they have no more to do; and their Convocation shall be to no use; for in vain
should they pronounce Judgments, which were not in their power to put in
Execution: Every Consistory should govern it self after its own fancy; as if
in a great Country one should make of every Village a Sovereignty; that were to
introduce an Order, which since the days of the Apostles was never practiced
until this time.

There are many little Country Churches, whereof the Consistory is composed of
one Pastor, who is of no deep understanding, and of four or five Persons, that
are Elders of the Church; shall we give to such a Church or Consistory an
Independent Authority? And that Pastor happening to die, these Persons shall they
have power to choose another? or give him Imposition of Hands? Are they
competent Judges of a Ministers sulficiency?

What if because of the Affliction of the Church, it be necessary to Celebrate
a Fast throughout all the Churches of the Kingdom, who shall ordain this Fast?
Who shall appoint the Day? If the Complaints of all the Churches must be
represented to the Sovereign Prince, who shall Depute? Who shall present the
Requests of the whole Body of the Churches of the Kingdom?

If for certain Emergent Occasions, it be necessary to change something in the
Discipline of the Church, and to make new Ordinances to bind all the Churches,
can that be done by Independent Consistories, not subject to any general Rule?

Briefly, we must hold constantly, that the Dependence of Inferior Companies,
being subject to Superious, is the Band, that entertains the Union of the
Church; which being cut asunder, there should be no more Correspondence, and we
should see a horrible confusion: No man can be Judge in his own Cause: If there
be a strife betwixt two particular Churches (as it falls out very often) not one
of these Churches can be Judge; They must address themselves to some superior
Authority.

I will not believe, that these Independants have intelligence with the
Adversaries, and that their Aim is, under color of Reformation, to cast us
into a Confusion, which might expose us to be laughed at by those, who are our
Opposites: I would rather believe that they err for want of Experience, and
knowledge of that which is pessible, and profitable for the Church of God.

Sentiment d'un grand Theologien de Hollande touchant l'Independence, declare
en une Lettre addressee a Mr. Buchanan.
UN voyage, que j'ay faict au nom de nostre Academie, est cause du retardement
de ma Responce a celle, que vous m'aves faict la faveur de m'escrire. Ie vous
suis oblige des tesmoignages de vostre affection, et vous pry de fair estat
reciproquement de la mienne. Ie ne vous seaures asses representer, comme nous
gemissons pour les confusions de vos Royaumes; Ie souhaite avec passion, que la
Reformation de l'Eglise d'Escosse soit suivie de celle d'Angleterre, et que vos
Ordres aussi bien que vos Armees leur soient rendues salutaires, ie ne hesite
nullement, ains crois, que ceux, qui veulent introduire l'Independ: des
Eglises, introduiront, l'Anarchie, confusion, et toutes sorts de license a
remplir les Chaires de Fanatiques, and vos Eglises de Schisms. Ie ne doubt
point, que nombre de persons ne soient portees a ce parti de bon Zele, and ne
croient bien fair: Mais la consequence de ceste Indep: ne se pouroit jamais
suffisamment descouvrir, qu'apres quelle auroit este establie: autant presque
que vous auriez d'Eglises, autant auriez vous dautel contre autels et l'un
seroit pour Paul, et l'autre pour Cephas le 3 pour Apollos: Dieu vous guard de
ces horribles confusions on veroit un beau mesnage si chaque Famille estoit
Independ. sans police et sans dependence d'un order public et que seroit ce del
Eglise Iaurois mis la main a la plume pour en fair une dissertation estendue
si je neusse estime, quil seroit plus a propos, que ce jugement soit demand a
nostre faculte: il auroit par a moyen plus de pards que procedent dun
particulier.

Aoust 1. 1644.
The Judgment of a great Divine in Holland concerning Independency, declared
in a Letter directed to Master Buchanan.
Sir,
A Journey that I was put upon by our University is the cause, why I had not
answered sooner those Letters you were pleased to write unto me: I am much
beholding to you, for the testimony of your Affection, and I pray you
reciprocally to make account, you have mine. I cannot sufficiently represent
unto you, how much we take to heart the confusions of your Kingdom: Learnestly
wish that the Reformation of Scotland may be imitated by the Church of England,
and that your Church Government, as well as your Brotherly Assistance by Arms
may be serviceable unto them. I doubt nothing, but firmly believe, that they
that would introduce Independency of Churches, would bring in an Anarchie, a
confusion, and all sorts of License to furnish all Pulpits with men of Fanatic
Spirits, as also your Churches with Schisms; I make no question, but many of
them are carried to these opinions with a good meaning, that they think therein
they do well; But the dangerous consequence of such an Independence, should it
be established, would discover more then we believe can ever sufficiently be
discovered, till it be established: As many Altars should you then have erected
one against another as you have Churches; One Church would side it self with
Paul, another with Cephas, a third with Apollos: God preserve you from these
horrid confusions, you should see a sweet Oconomie if every particular family
should, once come to be Independent without any Policy, or Dependence upon the
public; and what then would become of the poor Church of God; I should have
been much larger in handling the point more accurately: had I not thought it
had been more expedient for you to have had the Judgment of the Divines of
this University jointly, being that it would have carried more authority with
it, then possibly any thing can do that proceeds from a private man only. (...)

Quod foelix, faustumque sit;
THe first period of this Book is a manifest untruth; There is no such thing in
all my Book, as that my heart with discontent is rent in two pieces to hear the
innocent bleatings of that wronged Lamb, the Apology, So as I may here use
your admirative Interrogation; Is this the use men make of pressing Sermons?
Your following Injuries non sunt dignae ira Caesaris; I must be fain to bear
with this Epidemicall Disease of you Independents, and shall show hereafter,
that ye are not Separatistae nominales, but reales: If the Church lie now
gasping, as you complain, who (I pray) can be the cause of it, but your selves,
that vex and torment her more, then Papists, Arminians, Anabaptists, Socinians,
and all other Sects and Heresies besides ever yet did.

P. 2. sect. 4. Thou art a strange Divine, that consultest Astrologues, about
the Horoscope of my Book. But to that I say no more, but what the Prophet
says, Stand up with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
sorceries, if so be thou may prevail; Let now the Astrologers, the
Star-gazers, the monthly Prognesticators stand up. Jer. 10.12. I am not
dismayed at the sign of the heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them; I
tell thee with all thy Chaldeans, and Sorcerers, I fear you not all.
Christians fear not such Prophets; God has raised us up a Prophet like to
Moses, whom we must hear, and Moses tells thee, that they who do these
things, that thou do, are an abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15.

After this sect. 6. in the same page he gives out his judgment upon the
title of my Book, but without the least judgment or reason at all.

P. 3. Sect. 1. He accuses me to be too peremptorious in determining the
question, and so anticipating the judgment of the Assembly.

Answ. 1. If I anticipate, so, I must tell him, does he, with the rest of the
Sectaries of his Faction, in determining the question for his party. 2.
particular men's Determinations cannot anticipate the judgment of the Assembly,
or take it out of their hands, as most ignorantly he pretends; for particular
men's private Determinations are evermore subject to public Determination. 3.
Neither is it necessary, that when ever Sects or Heresies creep into the
Church, we should presently all begin to suspend our judgments in things
revealed in Gods word, and already determined by the Church, as this is, as we
shall God willing hereafter make appear, and so stand ever gaping after new
Decisions. I should do my self wrong to answer the 2 Sect. Which contains
only his unreasonable judgment against me, who say nothing of Independents,
but what I prove by evident Reasons; And the judgments of Protestant Churches
abroad, here printed, will decide this Controversy. But what he says from the
rest of the third page, till page the 6. Sect, 3. it shall be an swered in a
particular question.

P. 4. Sect. 2. A.S. his Observations are like a man with a Pole-ax, knocking,
a man on the head to kill a fly lighting on his heard. Answ. What this man
means by his Pole-axe, I know not: I strike at no man's head; If I strike at
any fly, it must be some Wasp, and then either a Hornet that stingeth to death
the Horse of whose dung it is bred, or a Wasp with which Tertullian not unfitly
compares Sectaries, faciunt favos vespae, faciunt and Ecclesias Marcionite;
quid ni and Donatista?

P. 6. Sect. 3. He propounds himself for a pattern to me in writing; But he
must excuse me, if I tell him plainly, I hold him not worthy the imitating,
neither may I ever so much reverence any of his party, as to quit my Christian
liberty to refute their extravagancies, where ever I meet with them, especially
when they appear to be of so pernicious a consequence. As for the title of
Most revenend, that I gave them, I learned it in part, of themselves, that they
are reverend; and since their reverence is independent, what else could I take
it for, but most reverend that acknowledge no superior Reverence.

Sect. 5. Howsoever of his liberality he bestow the lie on me, I must pray him
permit me to return it home again; for what I said before, by his good leave, I
must say again; it is most true, that in your particular Opinions, ye differ
from all true reformed Churches, at least so far forth as they are
distinguished from Conventicles, and Schismatic Assemblies: And as for your
Reformed Churches in England viz. Independent, from which ye differ not, 1.
they are invisible, 2. they are Schismatic, 3. and erected without the
Civil Magistrates consent; and such Churches your selves hold unlawful,
turbulent, Schismatic, and punishable, in N.E. And if in N.E. wherefore, I
pray, not in old England also?

Sect. 6. And as for that his conjecture, that I will object some Manuscripts,
and Master Parkers letter from N.E. and another from Zeland, it is his mistake;
for it was not my intention to dispute in a liminary Epistle, only I say of
Master Parker, (since he puts me upon this subject) that if he were at his
liberty in O.E. as he is in servitude under that oppression of N.E. he might
happily say more, then he will be allowed to say there.

P. 7. Sect. 1. It is also a great mistake in him, to think that their
Discipline can be abused to ill: it cannot be abused but to good.

P. 8, Sect. 1. It is an abominable accusation and a black calumny, that he
lays upon the Reformed Churches of Zeland, viz. that there are in their
letters many high passages, seeming so prejudicial to our worthy Magistracy,
that it justifies that of the Apology; 2. for that letter speaks not at all
of the Magistrate, or Magistracy of England. 2. It speaks only of their own,
whereof this little Independent Minister is too bold to think himself a
competent Judge; Neither will they depend of him, howbeit he should a spire to
be as Independent, as Lucifer himself. 3. They speak not of all their
Magistrates, but of some, and especially of those who joined with the Arminian
Sect; The Arminians crying up their authority in the Spiritual government of
the Church; and these unworthy Magistrates crying down the Doctrine. 4. Because
the Government of Holland, and the Magistrates power there, is not like to that
of England; the one being Monarchical, or rather mixed of Monarchical,
Aristocraticall, and Democraticall, as it is commonly holden here; and the
other Aristocraticall, or mixed of Aristocracy, and Democracy: and therefore the
rules of the one Government cannot be well drawn in consequence for the other.
5. This M.S. cognomento Calumniator, in this matter, should have done well, and
gone more honestly to work, if he had cited those high passages, so
prejudicial to our worthy Magistracy, but he shows himself more cunning,
then so to discover his calumny. 6. As for his sententious conclusion of this
point with Verbum sapienti sat est, a man very well affectioned to the
Zelanders, in reading of it, added in the margin of the Book, sed non
insipientis, nedum decipientis. It is as great pity so good men should have
harbored so ill and so unthankful Guests.

P. 9. Sect. 3. He speaks, as if he were a Prophet, sent to reform all the
Churches of the world; (so did Bur Jesu) and brings us in (I know not what) a
Master Davenport (like another Solomon) in the way of N.E. casting out his new
proverbiall Sentences, viz. a. Classical Presbytery is 13. Bishops. O witty
and weighty Sentence, if any man understood it, worthy only such an
Ecclesiastes as himself to be Register of What praise merit ye not both? Vunlo
tu dignus, and ille. In the the end of this sect. he gives out his
metaphorical judgment, to grind the Idol of half Reformation to powder; and
yet professes, that he will not, (or which a man would rather believe,) cannot
tell what it is. O how ridiculous a Judge is this without judgment. Only this
I will say, that 1. if it be Episcopacy, as this new Master of Sentences, and
C.C. say. 2. if an Idol that must be grinded into powder, as M.S. says: and 3.
if Episcopal Government must be extirpated, as the Covenant says, and as we
all in swearing the Covenant say, sure then the Scots are come in upon very
worshipful terms, to assist the Independents, viz. upon this Condition, that
when they have fought for them, they shall extirpate them, and grind them all
into powder: Is not this a very quick Independent conception? and yet
notwithstanding all this (which is worthy the noting) these good men in taking
the Covenant have sworn the preservation of the reformed Religion, in the
Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, i.e.
(according to their judgment) good Prelacy, or Episcopacy: jura, perjura. And
here like a little Pope he tells us, that all Churches generally, purtly by
Tyranny, and partly by security are grown so corrupt, that to apologize for a
through Reformation seems to reprove all, and so all will be offended. None (it
seems) shall be reformed, unless they become Independent, so that they, and
they alone may vaunt themselves.

Et nos ergo manum ferulae subduximus, and nos Consilium dedimus Syllae.

To his 4. Sect. I maintain, that Independents dissent from all Christian
Churches, since no Christian Church holds it self Independent but yours: and
whether they be any Churches, that are not Protestant, we shall see in a
particular Question; howbeit it be an untruth, that ever I said, that Papists
were Christian Churches: He and his fellows do well to dissent from Papists;
but not in dependency: His Observations are false, where he says, that we run
to the Popish marks of visibility, succession, and universality: and I have
refuted this calumny in my Answer to C.C. When I argue from visibility, and
number, I do as the Apostle does in bringing many visible Saints, as a great
number of witnesses of our Doctrine, Heb. 11. and not as Essential marks of
our Church. P. 10.

Because I say that the Quinqu-Ecclesian Ministers are but men, as I am, and
that they may err; out of this he infers, that I think I have more
knowledge then they, since they are not yet condemned by the Assembly. Answ. I
deny the consequence; for by the same reason, every particular man, that
condemns Anabaptisme and other Schisms, and Heresies, before they be
condemned by the Synod, should think themselves learneder, then they are. But
is it such a crime to say that they are but men that may err? I pray you sir,
if ye be any other thing then men, what are ye? if ye be men, who pretend ye
cannot err, you must either be Sancta Matter Ecclesia Romana, or else lead by
Anabaptisticall Enthusiasines, as with an ignis fatuus. And pretend ye that by
reason of your great learning ye are privileged from error? I tell thee, man,
that amongst the very Angels, Lucifer; and amongst men, Adam in the state of
integrity, and since the Fall, Achitophel, and Solomon erred, and yet every one
of them were learneder then ye all. I hope there is no man makes the least
question, but the meanest of them was learneder then any of you, yea then you
all in cumulo. And therefore vaunt not so much of your learning; No learning,
but visio beatifica (which ye want) can privilege a man from error, according
to Schoolmen.

P. 11. Sect. 1. I have answered, it is no Popish Argument, when I oppose so
great a number of Witnesses unto him; for then the Apostles Argument, Heb. 11.
should be Popish: what is thy mopish argument I know not, for I never read
mopish in the Index of my Bible, nor amongst the terms of Divinity or
Philosophy: whether it be an injury or not, I know not, and care as little.

2. It is an untruth to say, that I would conjure him to yield any thing upon
plurality of voices; for I have learned of some of his own party, that they are
no ways minded, upon plurality of voices, to submit themselves unto the
venerable Assembly of Divines, neither can it well agree with the independent
Spirits of their Divinity, that the spirits of Prophets be subject to Prophets:
They will, that all be subject unto them. Sect. 4. Neither are his 4. silly
Arguments, which are but one, drawn up ab Exemplo, of notorious Sinners,
Malignants, Papists, and Prelates, who argue from the multitude of those of
their way, to the verity and equity of it, any thing to the purpose. First, we
cite but a number of reformed Divines, and reformed Churches, which he
acknowledges with us to be such, so does not he of his Examples. 2. And if I
have erred in this, wherefore did the Apologists show me the way, in citing the
Examples of those of N.E. etc? 3. My Argument concludes ad Hominem, since they
argue so. 4. I ground not my self on this Argument alone, but on a great
number of others in my book, whereuuto he answers not, nor can answer.

P. 17. Sect. 1. What he tells us of the number of their Churches, they are but
Churches of Sectaries, and Schismatic, since they have cut off themselves,
and are separated from all Protestant Churches union, and communion, as I have
oftentimes declared, and I speak not of such Churches.

Sect. 3. He says, that W.R. condemns the Apologists for agreeing with the
Churches of N.E. and A.S. condemns them for dissenting from them; He should
have done well to have coted the places of our Books; and to have told at the
same time in what points we condemn them, in their consent and dissent; for
W.R. may condemn them for their consent in one thing, and A.S. for their
dissent in another: If I condemn them for any dissent, I may safely swear,
that either I have read it in their Books, or heard it of Independents
themselves: What I say p. 17. sect. 4. I say it again in my conscience, that I
verily believe that Independency cannot but prove the root of all Schisms and
Heresies; yea I add, that by consequence, it is much worse then Popery. And
all this I have sufficiently proved in my Book, whereunto he answers nothing.
And whereas he says, I would do well to confer with some of them I write
against, I had thought I had sufficiently declared my readiness in that kind
formerly; and I again now declare unto you, Sir, in particular, that I desire
to confer with you, if I may know who you are; you shall herein do me a
singular pleasure, to teach me better; which if ye do not, or make me know, who
ye are, I cannot think this counsel to be given in sincerity.

Whereas I say, ye sue for a Toleration, and consequently for a Separation; it
is most true, in the sense, that I take a Separation, viz. for a Separation
from our Discipline, and Sacramental Communion, as I have fully proved in this
my Book, whereunto all the Independent Churches in the world cannot answer; for
if ye be not separated from us, but entertain union and communion with us, what
need ye more a Toleration, rather then the rest of the members of our Church?

P. 18. Sect. 3. What I say of your undervaluing the Parliaments favor, it is
true: and howbeit ye have not been yet accused before the Parliament, or the
Assembly, yet does not that justify you, but highly commend their great mercy,
singular prudence, and charity, in not taking notice of your indiscretions (to
say no more) in calumniating, nick-naming the Protestant Churches, and
publishing unto the world such unworthy Books against them, yea against those,
whom ye acknowledge for your Benefactors; Is not this I pray thee M.S. an
undervaluing of so great favors? is not this an extraordinary ingratitude to
ward the Churches of the Netherlands, who so lovingly received you, and
cherished you in the days of your affliction? Well, good men, if ye esteem it
not so, they both may think their favors to have bin very ill bestowed upon so
unthankful men. But this M.S. and C.C. tell us, that they have done nothing,
but by Ordinance of Parliament. What, wretched men, the very shame of this
Kingdom, (I pray thee Reader pardon me, if I give them not the titles, that
just anger would extort) dare ye in face of Parliament, and all the world so
impudently father this indiscreet Book, farced with little else, save
Calumnies, upon the two most honorable Houses of Parliament? Have ye, I pray,
any order from either of the Houses to publish it unto the world? Have ye any
order from them, to calumniate on this manner, and to put nicknames upon the
most orthodox Churches? to call the Presbyterian an Episcopal Government?
Shall Protestants abroad read all this? If they read it, what I pray can they
judge of this Parliament, and their affection toward them, unless they judge
you to be liars? Well M.S. and C.C. ye speak both boldly and sawcily of the
Parliament: And as if all this yet were not enough, thou M.S. to be sure to
outrun C.C. tells us that the name of Stuart in four men, has been fatal to
England, and Scotland, viz. in King James, King Charles, Doctor Stuart, the
Divine, and in Adam Stuart here. Page 22. Sect. 3. Hare-brained Fellow that
thou art, what has King James, King Charles, or Doctor Stuart to do with this
Dispute? can thou not dispute calmly with me, unless thou be snarling, and
biting, like a mad Dog, at every one that stands necre thee, at Kings,
Parliament, and all the best reformed Orthodox Churches of the Christian world?
I will not cast Horoscopes, or consult Astrologues and Deviners, as thou do,
but if the Laws of the Kingdom be consulted, God knows what a sad account
thou may ere long be called unto for such wild expressions.

P. 19. Sect. 1. I am sorry, that ye vaunt your self, that the Parliament
resolved with a general acclamation, that your Apology should be left
unblamed, and that ye threaten so many sorrows, that should have befallen the
Churches, if it had been condemned. If it be so, it is a pity, but they
should make great acclamations to so great and mighty Independent Ministers,
that think none of them so much as worthy to communicate with their Churches,
but will, that they depend upon them. But I believe, that this is like to the
rest of your vain braggings. All that thou say P. 19. Sect. 3. they are but
mere calumnies: It is not I, but the Independents themselves, who sow the seed
of Division, betwixt themselves on the one part, and the Parliament here, the
Scots, and all Protestant Churches, on the other; only I declare what they are,
and I am glad, if any of them have the grace to blush or be ashamed of it, Nam
pudor est virtutis color, And so I answer thee in thine own words, nec oleum,
nec operam perdo, Those 6. things, Proverbs 6.16. belong not to me, but to thy
self; and as others say, they are the very Essential notes of your
Independent Churches. Thou tellest also thereabout that thou divinest, I wish
rather thou were a sound Divine, then a Diviner.

To what thou say P. 20. Sect. 1. Because I have found thee, and those, who
write against me, such notorious liars, I must tell thee, I cannot believe
thee, being my Adversary; and I believe, that no man will believe thee, till
that they have it from a better hand.

Ibid. Your Minister, who preaches us a tale, beginning with, In the name of
God, and ending with a Goose, seems to have been some Independent Minister,
like your self, happily your worthy self, for that you take so great pleasure
to fill up your Book with so worshipful authorities. Sect. 2. The Nicknames
you take on you not to know, they are 1. Calvinians, Apolog. Nar. p. 20. 2.
Bishops, which ye your selves pin upon our Ministers, p. 9. 3. An Idol, that
must be grinded to powder, etc.

What ever ye say, page 20. sect. 4. I maintain that first in Conventickling
your selves in Assemblies a part. 2. In taking particular resolution a part, 3.
in taking of it against the resolution of the Assembly of Divines, and 4.
finally, since in the thanksgiving to the Scots Commissioners, such
proceedings have been most clearly (howbeit indirectly) condemned by the Synod
it self, no rational man, to speaking truly, can call it other, then an
Assembly in the Assembly, and against the Assembly; And to say, that particular
Members of the Assembly may print, what they please against the common opinion
of the Assembly, who ever says it, he knows little or not at all how
Ecclesiastical Assemblies are to be governed.

What you say p. 21. sect. 1. I see, it is not reason, but anger, that makes
you to speak so; And this may excuse you a tanto, sed non a toto; if now at
length you be sorry for it.

To your 2. sect. where you give out your judgment, in comparing another man's
discretion, and mine together; he may be a man, whose discretion I honor more
then yours and mine own both: but as for you, I cannot but tell you,

Judicium praeceps, insaeni judicis index.

Sect. 6. To show his great skill in Philosophy, he quarrelleth with me for
saying, that the will is a blind Faculty; and will needs persuade me most
imperiously, that the will of it self understands; wherefore then I pray
shall not the understanding likewise will? Prudence choose, and virtue direct?
Charity believe, and Faith love? the Sense desire, and the Appetite feel? It
is utterly false, that hereupon it follows, that the will is an unreasonable
Faculty; for howbeit, it be not a reasonable directive, yet it is a reasonable
imperative Faculty. And this I pray you, most considerate Philosopher (as you
call your self) to learn of me; for however you inconsiderately judge, that we
take our Principles up upon trust, yet could I have helped you with a dozen of
Arguments more probable, then that ridiculous one that ye have brought us.

P. 21. Sect. 8, He says that I contradict my self in these following
Propopositions, viz.

1. The five Ministers Discourse is most learned. 2. The five Ministers
Discourse comes very short, weak, and slender, and no ways satisfactory. 3.
The five Ministers discourse is error. 4. The five Ministers are most learned.
5. The five Ministers are less learned then I am.
A Contradiction is between two propositions, consisting of the same terms,
the one affirmative, the other negative, both singular, or the one universal,
and the other particular. If any such Propositions be found in my Book, he
says true, and I will confess it; if not, he is bound to acknowledge himself
a liar.

Now in all these five Propositions, see, whether there be any such thing, yea
or not. As for the first which he imagines to be contradictory to the next
two. 1. They are all affirmative. 2. Never an one of them has the same
Attribute. 3. In the second he omitteth some words of mine, viz. these, to
their Arguments. 4. The third Proposition is not mine: In the 4. and 5.
Propositions, which he calls contradictory. 1. They are both affirmative. 2.
The fifth is not mine, but falsely attributed by him unto me: So see, courteous
Reader, whether, he has more reason to say of me; The man makes nothing of
Contradictions, or I, to say of him; This man, with the power of piety, makes
nothing of falsifications and lying.

What he says more to my Epistle, it meriteth not an answer, since it
contains nothing else, save only some stories of his Independent Gossips,
more fit a great deal to be told to old wives, mislead by prejudices, then to
be read by men of judgment. As concerning the 3. sect. page 22. I repent not
my self at all, but thank my God that I have written against your Sect; And I
promise you, God willing, to continue all my life long so doing, if he call me
not to some other employment, wherein I may glorify him more.

Only here, I pray thee Reader, to observe this man's vanity and madness, who
thinking it but a small thing to offend me all along hitherto with his
injurious Pen, has run out of the links to pursue His Majesty, because of the
name, which he hates in my person; and therefore, that all the world may take
notice of him, how courageous he is, he concludes; All that I have to say to
A.S. here is only to sigh over this name S. (in four men) as fatal to this
poor England and Scotland, etc. Well, I will not say the rest, for fear, that
if ever thou be exalted, thou say not that I have been the cause in accusing
thee, Only I know not what Schools of Magic thou have frequented, or curious
Arts thou have learned, or what occult virtue thou conceivest to be in Names,
none but Magicians, and they who are given to curious (but unlawful Sciences)
are of thy opinion; My name, I thank God, is no shame to me, I pray God thou be
not a shame to thy Name, and thy Profession both.

And so much for the justification of my Epistle, consisting of half a sheet
of paper, in a very fair letter; in the pretended refutation whereof, what
with language, jeers, injuries, etc. this man has employed no less then 22.
pages in quarto, of a small Print, if the ciphers mark well. All which I have
fully refuted with sundry Reasons, (howsoever I found none at all, or very few
in his writing) in less then three leaves in 4o. as I believe. Now let us see
what he will say to my Observations.

Consideration 1.
A.S.

Whether in any Ecclesiastical, or Political Assembly of the Christian
world, wherein things are carried by Plurality of voices, it be ordinary for
any inconsiderable number of men to join in a particular combination among
themselves, and therein to take particular Resolutions, and to publish them unto
the world; and so to anticipate upon the Resolutions of the whole Assembly.

Answ. 1. M.S. We have heard of some Parliaments in Europe, that the House of
Peers is so constitute, that if a Vote pass, where som's Consciences amongst
them cannot yield to, they may modestly enter in the House their dissent from
it.

Rep. A.S. But your five Ministers have not done so: there was no Vote at all
passed, upon all the Articles, that are debated in their Apologeticall
Narration. 2. And therefore neither entered they, nor could they enter their
Vote of dissent. 3. If the House of Peers be so constitute, it follows not,
that the Assembly of Divines should be so constitute. 4. The Apologists have
not contented themselves with these Privileges of the Peers, or that are
granted to any Parliament, or Synod men, viz. to enter modestly their dissent
from it, but they have gone further; for before that ever things were Voted,
they published them to all the world. 5. They did it not modestly, but with
great insolence, insulting over all Protestant Churches, as if they alone had
the power of piety, or as if they in their Churches had it in a higher degree,
then all other Christian Churches. 6. When the Peers do so, they do it not as
your Quinqu-Ecclesian Ministers, viz. by Conventicling themselves in secret,
and a part, not imparting their design to their Brethren, and subscribing an
Apology together. 7. If it was not to cross the proceeding and Disputes of
the Assembly, wherefore, I pray could it be? 8. Neither could it be to tell the
Kingdom de facto, what they held and practiced: 1. For if it be so, wherefore
are they Petitioners in the last page of their Apology for a latitude and
Toleration in Religion? 2. Wherefore travail they in all their Book, to refute
the Presbyterian Government, received in the best Reformed Churches? 3. If you,
Sir, can procure of your five Ministers to swear, that what you say of them
here is true, you may be better believed, then yet you are. 4. And I pray you
tell us, if they have told you, that they had no other draught in all their
Apology, then what you declare here. 5. If they affirm it in Conscience,
certainly their mind has not been like to their Book. 6. If it be so, what is
the reason, that they declared not themselves, before that they were Members of
the Assembly, or before such time as these matters were debated there? 7. I ask
you whether, in that Book, they declare not, what was their opinion, and what
they were resolved to maintain. 8. And whether it was the duty of those that
were to be judged, before that ever matters were propounded or debated in their
Assembly, to propound them and debate them themselves before the people, before
all the Watermen, Mid-wives, and children, yea, and the whole Kingdom? Was
there ever any such way taken in any Synod, or Assembly in this world before
this time?

M.S. But they declare themselves, to close nearer with the Assembly, were they
all Presbytortans (as we know the contrary) then thousands ever thought they
would.

A.S. This is but your fiction; for if I should tell you some men's judgment,
and mine own concerning you before the beginning of this Assembly, I must say
we never thought, that your Opinions could have been so absurd, as we have
fince found them in your Books: we believed, that ye were all to-gether conform
with the rest of the Protestant Churches; and that what ye did in separating
your selves from Episcopal Government, it was merely out of necessity, because
of their persecution: And I can assure you, that this was the charitable
construction, that thousands of the Scots, and French Protestants made of your
proceedings. 2. This your pretended Fact, is grounded upon a Supposition,
contrary to your knowledge, as you declare in your Parenthesis (as we know the
contrary) and therefore is de ente possibili, non de actuali.

M.S. they do profess themselves so unwedded to their former prastises, that
upon discovery of more light, they are most willing to let it in.

A.S. This is the common tone of all Sectaries; so did the Arminians say; would
to God, that they and others of that Sect were so minded, and thought not it
rather derogatorie to the honor of so Independent Spirits, to receive any
light at all from others, whose Spirits are subject to the Spirits of the
Prophets; But ye receive honor one from another, etc. But all this is not
satisfactory to my Question, in this Observation.

M.S. Seeing all he has said to be little or nothing to purpose, and not
answering to my Question, he brings here his pretended Achilles, his main
answer. The Assembly is not, says he, to conclude things by plurality of
Votes, if you dare believe the Ordinance of parliament, whose words are, to
confer, and treat touching Doctrine, Discipline, etc. and to deliver their
Opinions and Advices, as shall be most agreeable to the word of God; And in
case of difference of opinions among the said Divines, they shall present the
same, together with the Reasons thereof, to the Houses of Parliament. This
takes away in his conceit plurality of voices, and does more then allow so
much, as is done in the Apologeticall Narration.

A.S. I deny, that the Assembly is not to conclude any thing by Plurality of
Votes, for they conclude by Plurality of Votes, even those Opinions and
Advices, that they are to deliver to the Parliament; and if it were not so,
they could not at all conclude their Opinions and Advices. 1. And as for the
Ordinance, it commands one thing, viz. to confer, etc. but it forbids
not the other, viz. to conclude things by Plurality of Votes. 2. Howbeit it
should forbid them, in some manner, to conclude some things by plurality of
Votes, yet should it not follow, that it forbids them absolutely, and
altogether. 3. If any thing can be indirectly inferred of against concluding of
things by pluraelity of voices, it is only this, viz. That the Assembly, in
case of dissent amongst themselves, shall conclude nothing, before that they
present it, together with their Reasons, to the Houses of Parliament; and the
reason is, because howsoever the Church may conclude things by Ecclesiastical
authority, yet cannot her Authority make it to be received in the Kingdom by
Law; and it is the Magistrates duty, before that he establish it by Civil
Authority, and make it to pass as a Law, that may oblige his Subjects in foro
civili, that he first inform himself thoroughly, and know well, upon what
ground he passes it: and this may be clearly proved by the practice of the
Primitive Church; for howsoever there the Ministers of the Church concluded
many things by their Canons without civil Authority, in foro Ecclesiastico;
yet the Civil Magistrate afterward, after due information, concluded the same
things, in foro civili, as we see through all the first 14. Titles, of the
first Book of the Code. But out of this it cannot be inferred, that after they
have delivered their Advices to the Parliament, they cannot conclude it, if
they have the power of a Synod. 4. Yea I may say more, that the Ministers of
the Primitive Church, in the first three hundred years after Christ, exercised
this Authority against the Civil Magistrates will, in foro Ecclesiastice. But,
praised be God, our Ministers have no cause to do so. 5. Neither is it
credible, even according to the Independents their own Tenets, that those they
hold to be Laymen only should by their lay-Authority build us up a Confession
of Faith, create, and depose Ministers, exercise the power of the Keys in
Censures, and Excommunications, etc. Neither read we of any Prince, or Civil
Magistrate, that ever usurped that power. Neither remember I any, that ever
maintained it, besides Sectaries. 6. Ye your selves will not admit them to be
ruling Elders, how then admit ye them to be Supreme Ecclesiastical Judges,
in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual matters, viz. in matters of Doctrine, etc.

Some will object, but what, if a Ministers Conscience cannot assent to that,
which the Assemby passes by plurality Votes? in such a case may he not oppose
himself to the rest?

Answ. He may oppose himself in reasoning the business all along till it come
to be concluded by Plurality of Votes: but after that it is once concluded, he
must in foro externo, according to Gods ordinary providence let it pass, yea
subscribe unto their Judgments, for in such a subscription, he subscribes not,
that it is his particular judgment, or according to his private Conscience;
but that it is the public Judgment of the Assembly. 2. And if ye will oppose
the whole Assembly, because, that it is against your particular judgment, and
Conscience; so shall they all oppose you, silly man, and so nothing at all
shall be concluded. 3. Yea, were it not, as I say, no Senate, no Council, no
Parliament, no Ecclesiastical, or Political Assembly could ever conclude any
thing; for very hardly will ye find any, wherein some man does not dissent
from the rest. And finally, how ever one man in an Assembly, dissenting from
the rest, might oppose the Judgment, before it be given, or after the
Judgment, for some scruple of Conscience, which yet is not lawful; yet might
he not at any hand do it, in writing of Apologies, against their Judgment,
much less, before that they give out their Judgment, and for fear they judge
otherwise, then he would have them judge.

10. All this Answer is only against a Syncategorema of my Observation, viz.
this, where things are carried by Plurality of voices, which asserts nothing at
all, as all Logicians know; but nothing to the whole Demand, 11, Put the case,
that this Syncategorema were omitted, yet this Interrogation should stand in
its full force; so as the Reader may see. 1. That this Pamphleters aim is not
so much to answer, as to elude this Demand. 2. That the Ordinance has nothing
against Plurality of voices. 3. That it justifies not your Apologists, being
members of the Assembly, to publish Apologies, as they have done. 4 Much less
does it, more then allow, so much as they have done; or if it do, it should
consequently allow all such, as have the gift of writing, to fall upon you all,
and pay you soundly.

A.S. 2. Obser. Whether, in taking such resolutions, they should not
consequently resolve themselves, to quit the Assembly, and to appear, as
Parties.

M.S. 1. Denies the Antecedent, in the first consideration; But A.S. has
abundantly proved it,

2. M.S. tells us, that he utterly disliketh my Consequent, viz. that the
five Ministers quit the Assembly, and appear, as parties: for then the worthy
Commissioners of Scotland should likewise quit the Assembly, for, that they
replied to the Apology.

A.S. 1. I know well, ye utterly mislike my motion. 2. Neither believe I, that
this Argument proceeds of any great good will ye have, that the worthy
Commissioners of Scotland should sit in the Assembly. It may be ye wish them a
fair wind to carry them home safe to their Country. 3. I deny your
Consequence, for it appears not, that they did reply to the Apology: neither
name they the Apologists. 4. And howbeit they had written against them, yet
should it not follow; for they writ in defense of a Discipline, already
received in Protestant Churches, whereunto the Parliament and Synod intends to
conform theirs. Item, of a Discipline, already approved by the Church of
England. and no ways condemned by any lawful public Authority, either Civil
or Ecclesiastical. 6. And against a new Sect, never as yet received or
approved in this Island. 7. If that should follow, it should likewise follow,
that all they, who did write against Antinomians, or in case any of the Divines
of the Assembly should write against Anabaptists, and other Heretics, who
should be condemned by it, that they, in such a case, should quit the Assembly:
but perchance you will deny the Consequence. E. you must deny the Antecedent.
8. Foreign Churches have complained to the Assembly of your Apology, but not
of the Reformation cleared; and therefore the Synod is bound in conscience,
either to avow and make good the Apology, or to censure and punish the Authors
of it condignly, at least if it be minded to entertain Brotherly correspondence
with them. It is not needful to fill up my paper in observing of all this man's
impertinencies, and absurdities; this may suffice. Only I am sorry that he
should so indiscreetly defame his own Nation, under pretext of praising of our
Commissioners: Sir, neither will the Commissioners, nor any Scots-man praise
you for this: their honor consists not of other men's dishonor; and this is
sufficient to make your Book to be condemned in quality of a Libell, if good
men pity you not: but whoever has to do with such Spirits as yours, had need
of much patience.

A.S. His third Consideration, Whether such an inconsiderable number in so
doing may not be refused by the parties, as in competent Judges.

M.S. will needs have this Consideration to vanish upon his answer to the first
and second.

A.S. To that I reply, that since I have confirmed the two former, follows
from them most necessarily.

A.S. 2. M.S. answers not this Consideration, for that, as he says, he had
formerly answered it, the which is an handsome, but an ordinary evasion, when
men are at a nonplus, and know not what to say. How should he have answered
it, considering that the Question was not as yet so much as propounded, viz. in
the two first Considerations? For they only show, that so small, and
inconsiderable a number should not oppose themselves to so great, and grave an
Assembly, and that in case they do it, they must quit, and renounce the office
of Judges. But now the third shows, that if they fail in this, the Assembly
ought to eject them from being any longer of her Body, and take them for
parties. Wherein the difference of this from the two former Considerations, is
clear and evident; and consequently it is as cleete, that M.S. has answered
nothing at all. But it seems it is all one to him, provided that he can
escape. And I wish he had done so throughout, or rather that he had held his
peace, then to have made semblances, as though he had answered, and so
hud-winked his Reader. It had been fairer dealing by far, not to have spoken at
all, then to have spoken so little to the purpose.

A.S. his fourth Consideration. Whether this Apologeticall Narration was
necessary, when you found the Calumnies, etc. begin by your presence to
scatter, and vanish without speaking a word.

M.S. answers, that these serene Spirits (oh abominable flattery!) were the
Beams to scatter these mysts. But they begun only, as he says, to scatter
them, and that therefore it was expedient, that they should have written that
Apologetick Narration to scatter them altogether.

A.S. Experience has sufficiently shown the contrary; For their Writings were
so far from scattering those mists, that they have increased them rather, and
have evidenced it to all the world, that the conceit, that men had of their
Opinions, was not Calumnies, Mistakes, or mis-apprchensions, (as they would
feign have it believed) but an apprehension very well grounded; and moreover
they plainly show, that their opinions prove to be far worse, then ever we
thought.

And admit, it should have been expedient, they should have written at the time
those mists began to scatter, yet notwithstanding, it should have been more
expedient, that they had written when the mists were at the thickest, when
there was no figne at all of scattering. One would have thought it had been
more seasonable, that they had written, whilst they were under the cloud, then
when they were now gotten out of it, Whilst they were yet unjustified, then
when they were already justified.

I spare him in his sublime Conceptions, and pass over his Proverb, which
however it may a little poor Rhyme in it, has yet no reason, and serves as
little for the purpose he brings it; as also in his Assinine Allusion, of
brayed, or breathed.

A little after, not content to have set upon me, he accuses two learned
Divines, one an English man, another Scottish, that they have written to stir
up the people against the Independents.

A.S. In the same Consideration says; The honor the Parliament showed you in
calling you to be Members of the Assembly was sufficient enough to justify
your persons from all aspersions.

M.S. denies it, and pretends, that their private writings are more effectual,
and sufficient, to persuade the world of their innocent, then the Declaration
of the Parliament.

A.S. For me, I believe, and take it for certain, that the public Declaration
of Parliament is more authentic, then the particular writings of them, that
are accused: yea, the very Election, and Admission to the Synod by the
Parliament suffice to justify the Members from any public accusation
whatsoever in matter of Doctrine, and Discipline; For sure so Wise, and
Religious a Parliament would never admit into a Synod, called together for the
Reformation of Religion, any Heretic or Schismatique, stained, and deformed
with Error. Notwithstanding M.S. brings Reasons for himself.

1. For that the Parliament being indulgent chose Episcopal men. To which I
answer, That the Bishops at that time were Morally Orthodox, being not then
accused, or condemned by any public Authority. As to that he adds, that there
are some Members of the Synod ejected out of the Assembly, and cast into
prison; I answer, That this was for Delinquencies of theirs, that happened
after their Election; But for that the Independents were not so handled, they
were held as Innocent men. 2. M.S. says, that two worthy Parliament men of a
County may not know at first all the Faults in every Town, etc. A.S. To this I
answer, that no more is there any necessity, that they should know every
particular man in a County. But it suffices, that they know two Ministers, that
are Religious, and of good report, and it should be very strange, if they
should not know such a number. But besides this I shall answer more fully in a
particular Question.
5. Consideration, whether this your Apol. Narration, wherein ye blame all
Protestant Churches, as not having the power of godliness, and the Profession
thereof, with difference from all carnal and formal Christians advanced and
held forth amongst them, as amongst you, be seasonable, when the Church of God
in this Kingdom stands in need of their Brotherly Assistance; and particularly
of that of the Scots (against whom it is commonly thought to be particularly
intended) who at this very time so unseasonable, according to their duty,
hazard their lives, and estates for Gods Church, all this Kingdom, and you
also.

Here note, that M.S. answers not to this principal Question, or
interrogative Preposition, viz. (if this Apologeticall Narration be seasonable,
when the Church of God in this Kingdom stands in need of the Brotherly
assistance of Protestant Churches) but only biteth at the Syncategorema, or
adjacent term thereof, viz. not having the power of godliness: so that his
silence seems clearly to grant the principal Question, which we willingly
accept of. As for the Syncategorema, it cannot receive the sense, that he puts
upon it; for the Quinqu-Ecclesian Ministers speak here of themselves, as
contra-distinguished, or opposed to all other Reformed Churches, both abroad,
and within this Island, as appears by the beginning of the 2. Sect. p. 4.
where they say, We were not engaged by education, or otherwise, to any other
of the Reformed Churches; And afterward, we could not but suppose, that they
could not see into all things about Worship and Government, their intentions
being most spent ( as also of our Reformers in England) upon the Reformation in
Doctrine. And afterward; And we had with many others observed, that although
the exercise of that Government had been accompanied with more peace, yet the
practical part, the power of godliness, and the profession thereof, with
difference from carnal and formal Christians, had not been advanced, and held
forth among them, as in this our own Island, as themselves have generally
acknowledged. Here they oppose themselves, and those of their own profession,
to all other Reformed Churches whatsoever, yea, to the first Reformers here in
this Island, if England, whereof they speak, be in this Island. It is likewise
false; The words of the Apology are; 1. That they, and many others had but
observed touching the non-advance of the power of godliness, etc. They are
verbatim as I have set them down: Neither cited I those words, all, and among
you, as the Quinqu-Ecclesian Ministers words, since I put them in a different
Character from theirs: and yet the sense is most true, as I have proved:
Neither said I that they say, that other Churches had no power of godliness:
Neither by this phrase, This our Island, understand you, or can they understand
any Reformed Churches, different in Government from themselves, as this M.S.
will persuade us, unless he hold our Reformers of England, to be out of this
Island, since they oppose themselves to all other Reformers, and Reformed
Churches, both within, and without this Island. So if this speech be intended
against all other Reformed Churches, except their own, it must be intended
against that of Scotland, unless ye deny, good Sir, that of Scotland to be a
Reformed Church: neither serves it you a pin, that they call them dear
Brethren, for that must either be by dissimulation; or they conceive that men
may be their dear Brethren, without the force of Piety; or they contradict
themselves; choose ye what please you, Sir. So this is not my ill eye, as you
say, but your ill eye brought home to your own door; fie upon thee, give glory
to God, and render thy self to truth, for fear thou render thy self to worse.

It is likewise false, that I said, it is intended against Scotland; only I
said, it is commonly thought to be particularly intended against the Scots,
which appears clearly, because sundry Independent Ministers, and others
travel to prove it, by the confession of some Scots Ministers. So judge, I
pray Christian Reader, whether this man with this his power of piety, or I,
whom he makes so impious a Machivilian, speak more like his Machiavilian? I am
assured, what ever be thy power of Piety, thou have no practice of Piety here.
No truer is it, that their Proposition is but Indefinite in a Contingent
matter, and therefore it may be construed of some Particulars only; for as the
rest of the Independents save ordinarily their absurd speeches with mere
Possibilities: so does M.S. which here cannot hold, for, the Apologists say,
that they were not engaged by Education, or any other ways, to any other of
the Reformed Churches. i.e. Nullo modo, and Nulli Ecclesiae Reformatae; so it
is altogether Universal, both in regard of the Subject or Matter, and of the
Manner; and of such Churches they speak, in all that Discourse, in that
Paragraph, and it may appear by this their proof, viz. as they themselves
generally acknowledge.

6. Consid. Whether (as it is observed by sundry men of learning, and as ye
have noted your selves) ye should not have done better, to have set down your
Opinions by way of Theses, and so manifested unto us, wherein ye agree, or
disagree with us, or from us, the Brownists, Anabaptists, and those, whom ye
pretend to hold the same Tenets with you, in Old and New England, and the
Netherlands, then in a Rhetorical, and Oratorious way, endeavor, in the most
part of your Book, to publish your great Sufferings, and extraordinary Piety,
and so to move us all to compassion, and ravish us all into admiration, as if
ye meant rather to persuade, then to prove them?

He answers, that he cannot answer, since here is no sense; And wherefore I
pray? Because the Interrogatory point is put after these words, or from us?
Truly, As the word, agree, or differ may by a certain Figure in Grammar, called
Zeugma, be understood to be joined with all those words, so is the point of
Interrogation; But it should be at the end, as it is in the Observations; And
whereas it is in the beginning in stead of a Comma, it is either the Printers
oversight, or mine. But to say, that this great learned Clerk could not
perceive this, wherein the most ignorant finds no difficulty, who can believe
him? It is a pretty evasion to elude my Question. Whereas he says that the
Interrogation should have been after Anabaptists as if the Reformed
Protestants, who refute Brownists and Anabaptists, should say, we Brownists and
Anabaptists, it is but his foolery, which yet we could easily endure, if he
answered the Question; Which since he cannot do, I take it for granted, that in
this they have not proceeded well, or at least not so well as they might. If I
should serve my self of such poor advantages, or shifts rather (as easily I
might up and down in his, and C.C. Books) I should answer nothing at all, as
this Gentleman does. But good men know, that when ever I doubt of sense in
them, what ever I do, I deal ingenuously with them, and consult with sundry to
find out their meaning; and when neither others, nor I my self can find any
sense in their writings, I pass it over in silence, not reproving that which I
understand not, or that cannot be understood: But if others understood it, it
is a great shame for this great Divine, to have been so dull.

7. Consid. A.S. Whether the Apol. Narr. be published in the name of the Five
Ministers, or of all those also, or a part of those, whom they pretend to hold
their Tenets? If in the name of you Five only, whether ye Five can arrogate a
power unto your selves to maintain these Tenets, as the constant opinion of all
your Churches, having no general confession of their Faith thereabouts. If in
the name of all the rest, we desire you would show your Commission from all
your Churches, etc. These Questions have much vexed M.S. and put him to his
wits end: he would not answer, but turns them over unto me, and will have me
to answer; To which therefore I do answer. 1. Quaestio questionem non solvit.
2. I answer directly, 1. that this Answer I have made to the Apology, I have
done it of my self; and have done it by Authority, since I have a License
granted by him, that by Authority Licenceth Books. 2. I write in defense of all
the best Reformed Protestant Churches, and specially of that of Scotland,
France, and the Netherlands, to whose Judgment, and Authoritative power in
Synods, I acknowledge my Book to be subject; so I arrogate nothing but with
due Dependence and subjection: but the Five Ministers are as Independent, as I
am Dependent; as imperious, as I am subject, and odedient to my Superiors. If
they will answer, as I, we shall no more contest; They have gained me to them,
if I have not gained them to the Church of Christ.

Besides this, These Questions cannot reasonably be propounded to A.S. 1. for
A.S. is no Sectary, neither Independent, Brownist, Anabaptist, Arminian, etc.
condemned, or rejected by the Church of England, or any other well Reformed
Church. 2. He is no minister, much less an Independent Minister. 3. He is not
a Suitor for a Toleration of any not tolerated, or intolerable Religion, as the
Quinqu-Ecclesian Ministers. 4. He has not written against the common Faith of
Reformed Dependent Churches, as they have. 5. If he had done so, he should
judge himself bound to give Reason both of his Faith, and answer all those,
who would ask for an account thereof. 6. However you turn and return the
Interrogation, yet are you bound to answer.

1. M.S. takes upon him to answer, but answers not, as we shall, God willing,
hear; His first answer is, It is no arrogating, for any Christian, upon just
occasion, to make his Confession of faith.

But to what Question, I pray, answers this? I grant you this, but answer you
to my Question, In whose name, etc.

His second Answ. The Confession of Faith in Doctrine, that is in all the best
Reformed Churches, is theirs.

A.S. As wide as before, the Question is not of the Confession of Faith, but
about the Apology, in whose name it is published? etc.

2. M.S. For one touching pure Discipline, it was not found in Scotland, whiles
the Tyranny of Bishops prevailed.

A.S. 1. Here he seems to acknowledge, that being freed from Episcopal
Tyranny, we have pure Discipline, which I acknowledge to be true. 2. If by
pure Discipline he understands Presbyteriall Government, we had it, when
Bishops prevailed, howbeit oppressed by Episcopacie.

3. There is no Confession of Faith (if it be taken strictly) but of some
points of Discipline in the Apology, but we cannot know of them, in whose
name: I am not angry at their Confession of Faith, as M.S. says; but sorry for
their Schisms and want of Charity: neither is it true, that I have opened
other men's mouths, but God Efficiently, and your Calumnies against the Church
Occasionally have opened good men's mouths against you, Turdue sibi malum
cacat; and ye must be content to drink, as ye have brewed for your selves.

3. M.S. 3. The godly learned Fathers, Tertullian, Justin Martyr, etc. produced
no Authority from men, to Apologize for the truth; The Scripture, they
Apologized for, bore them out.

A.S. 1. It seems by this Answer, that they Apologize only for Scripture, and
can produce no Christian Church, that they Apologize for.

2. Tertull. Justin Martyr, and all the Fathers apologized in the name of all
the true Christian Churches of their time, and acknowledged themselves, and
their Apologies to be subject to the Judgment, and Authoritative spiritual
power of Synods; and they were, as Dependent upon them, as ye are Independent.

3. Howbeit their Apologies had no Authority of men, yet were they able, sure,
to tell from time to time, in whose Names they did Apologize.

M.S. 4. The Parliament allows the five Ministers more, viz. to show their
Reasons; therefore the less, to show their Opinion.

A.S. 1. This answers not yet the Question. 2. But the Parliament allows
them not a particular clandestin Assemby, separated from the General Assembly.
3, It allows them not to print Apologies against all the best Reformed
Protestant Churches, when they are sitting, in quality of Members of the
Assembly, and against the Opinion of the most part of the Members thereof. 4.
The Parliament allows them not to show their Reasons a part, without
imparting them first to the Assembly, and that without their Consent. 5. Much
less to be Suitors for a Toleration, or allowance of their Sect: or if it
allow them any such thing, I would pray them to show us an Ordinance for it. 6.
What reason, that your extraordinary Sect should have more allowance, then the
rest of the Synod? We pray you, in the name of God, to live as Brethren, more
humane, as other mortal men, and if ye can or dare, to answer my Questions, as
I do yours.

M.S. 5. A thousand good Christians were glad to hear, how the Five Ministers
dissented from the rigid Separation, and closed with the best Reformed Churches.

A.S. Note here, that M.S. says not that the five Ministers dissented from all
the Separatists, but only from the rigid Separation. 2. They close not with the
best reformed Churches, unless by the best Reformed Churches be meant the
Independent Churches. For he calls all our Churches in Scotland, France, the
Netherlands, and Switzerland, Episcopal Churches, our Presbyteries, Idols that
must be grinded. 3. He and his Party dissent not, in effect, from
Separatists, in point of Separation in general; for they separate themselves
from our Discipline, and Sacramental Communion, as well as they do. 4. All
this answers not my Questions: I will not reply to his injuries against my
Person, for they touch not the Cause. Neither envy I him in ill doing.

A.S. 8. Consid. Whether ye desire a Toleration for you Five alone, in your
Religion; or for all the rest. Item, If a Toleration, in public, in erecting
of Churches apart? or to live quietly, without troubling of the State? As for
the last, appearingly, ye may have it unsought: but for the rest, the
Parliament is wise enough, and knows what is convenient for the Church of
God, and the State. My Adversary finds these Questions so newhat too hot for
his fingering, and therefore takes it for a point of Prudence, not to touch
them, for fear to be burnt. Now then, that he may not seem to have said
nothing, he falls to quarrelling with me about the signification of the word
Toleration, and the Parliaments wisdom, because I say, It is wise enough,
etc. which he calls a Contradiction to what I say afterward.

M.S. Toleration, says learned Cappell, is of things unlawful.

A.S. Toleration or Toleratio in Latin has many significations; 1. Sometimes
it is taken for Patience, and so it is an Act or integrant part of Fortitude,
as Thomas, and the Schoolmen speak. 2. Sometimes it signifies a permission
of things, that we cannot mend; Toleranda sunt quae emendari non possunt, And
so the Magistrate tolerateth sometimes many things against his Laws, when he
cannot make men obey. 3. Sometimes a permission of things indifferent, that are
not forbidden by Law. 4. Tolerabilia Tributa, in the Roman laws, are moderate
Tributes. Tolerabilia says Calvin, sunt, quae vetus consuetudo comprobat, Call.
in Lexico Juridico. And we have in Tacitus, tolerare vitam, which is not a
thing unlawful: So that Cappell, if he say so, appearingly, he speaks not of
Toleration, in the whole latitude of its signification; for things indifferent
may be tolerated.

Afterward M.S. he says, that he will not yield the one, nor beg the other.
i. e. if I understand him, yield, that their Religion is unlawful, or beg a
Toleration: what then will he have? an allowance and approbation? will nothing
content him, unless we confess, that Independency is lawful; and
consequently, that Dependency upon Counsels and Synods is unlawful? This is
close home; and so to content you, the whole State, and all the Protestant
Churches needs nothing else but that, without any further reason, they come
hither and cry, peccavimus omnes.

The other quarrel is my pretended Contradiction in these two Propositions; 1.
The Parliament is wise enough, and knows what is convenient for the Church.

2. The Civil Magistrate arrogates not to himself any directive power in
matters of Religion.

1. But tell me, my good Trifler, what Contradiction can there be here? Is not
a Contradiction, an Opposition between two Propositions, the one Affirmative,
the other Negative, both singular; or the one Universal, the other Particular,
having both the same terms?

Now is there here the same terms, viz. the same Attribute in both these
Propositions, are they both singular? or the one Universal, and the other
Particular? where are thy eyes? where is thy judgment? where is thy Logic?

2. Howbeit the Parliament be wise enough, and knows, what is convenient for
the Church, will it follow, that the Parliament, and every Civil Magistrate
has a directive power, whereby Intrinsecally they may rule, and teach the
Church, which is that, whereof I spoke there? 3. By the same reason, any good
Scholar, who lives a private life, and knows what is convenient for the
Church, should have the like power. 3. Learn they here, that it is not simply
wisdom or knowledge, but Gods calling, that can give any such power to any
mortal man. 4. What if the Civil Magistrate were a Papist, or a Professed
Atheist, should his bare knowledge give him any directive power over the
Church? I cannot believe thee to be so absurd, or wicked, as to say it.

The rest of his Discourse here, is his ordinary injuries, and words of
contempt against my person, which I slight and pass by as unworthy of an
answer.

A.S. 9. Consid. And because the whole draught of this Book tends evermore to a
Toleration, and consequently to some Separation. 1. I would willingly know of
you, what Things are to be tolerated, or not tolerated in Religion. 2. Not in
private persons, but in Consociacions. 3. And particularly, when the whole
Kingdom is joined in one Religion? 4. What sort of new Consociations of diverse
Religions it may in good Conscience tolerate, and receive into it? 5. Item,
upon what ground Churches may, in good Conscience, make separation from other
Churches, that desire union and communion with them? 6. Whether they, that aim
at a Toleration and Separation, be not rather bound to tolerate some small
pretended Defects, not approved by those, from whom they desire to separate
themselves; (and especially when they, that are so desirous of Separation, are
not pressed to be Actors in any thing against their consciences) then to
separate themselves from a Church, that testifies a great desire to reform
the defects pretended to be in it? 7. Whether it were not better for them, that
aim at Toleration and Separation, to stay in the Church, and to join all their
endeavors with their Brethren to reform Abuses, then by their Separation, to
let the Church of God perish in Abuses? 8. Whether they do not better, that
stay in the Church to reform it, when it may be reformed, then who quit it,
for fear to be deformed in it?

The Adversary, to Elude these 8. Questions, tells us, that they answer
themselves, and yet promises an Answer,

M.S. his first Answer is, that the Five Ministers aim at no separation, but,
as their Brethren the Scots did, from Prelaticall coaction.

A.S. If it be only from Prelaticall coaction, wherefore separate they
themselves from their Brethren the Scots their Sacramental Communion, and the
Scots from theirs? if they separate not themselves from us, wherefore are they
suitors for a Toleration, or approbation of their Religion, since ours is
already tolerated, and approved, as appears in the French, Italian, and
Spanish Churches in this Kingdom? Neither are you compelled to be Actors in
any thing against your Consciences, as your Brethren were by Bishops.

M.S. He says the Church, from which the five Ministers would separate,
testifies a great desire to reform Defects: yet says he, those Defects are
but pretended.

A.S. Our meaning is to reform Defects, if any there be, such as we
acknowledge to be in manners, as amongst you also: or in the administration of
Discipline, as may be amongst us all; But as for any Defects in the principal
parts of our Ecclesiastical Discipline, we see none as yet, that we travel
not to reform, but believe such, as he objects us in them, to be rather
pretended, then Real: Neither can we, or shall we judge them to be any other
thing but pretended, till he make it appear, that they are Real. Will He,
that we believe them to be Real, because, that he only says so? but it is not
the first untruth has fallen from his pen.

M.S. He would have the Five Ministers quit the Assembly.

A.S. This M.S. supposes, that this last Proposition crosses my Supposition.
But they may stay in the Church to reform Abuses, if there be any really, (as
it is pretended by the Independents) and live out of the Assembly, as many
others, who are no ways their Inferiors. Neither said I, that I wished them
to be out of the Assembly, only I propounded a question; whether in consequence
of the publishing of their Apology, they should not resolve themselves to quit
the Assembly?

Now, courtcous, and conscientious Reader, be thou judge, I pray thee, whether
this man has answered any of my Questions, yea or not, which are all the main
points here to be debated.

Quest. I. Whether it had not been honester, and fairer dealing, to have added
the Author and Licencer's Name to M.S. his Book, then to have omitted them.
I Affirm it.

1. because it testifies a greater sincerity, especially in these Times. 2.
Because it makes it appear more probably to the world, that it is not a Libel.
3. And that it contains nothing against the Law. 4. Because the Name of the
Author gives authority to the Book, if he be either learned or honest; and the
omission thereof may cut off the Authority of it, and bring discredit unto it,
especially when the Law for this effect ordains it to be added. 5. Because
when it is suppressed, and the Book a Libell, it gives too much ado to the
Magistrate to find out the Author, to censure and punish him condignly,
according to his demerits. 6. Because the Holy Writers did so; and if their
Names be omitted in some Books, we know not, whether it was with their consent,
or whether they did not put to their names, howbeit not in quality of
Canonical Scripture: or peradventure it was, because they were not the
Authors, but as it were Gods Secretaries, or Scribes; for the Holy Ghost
dictated them what they had to write. 7. Because it hinders men from being
deceived in their moneys; for sundry times men because of specious Titles put
before Books, buy them, and afterward find nothing worth their money. 8. The
adding of the name of the Author, and of the Licencer, with the License, will
hinder the common people to be deceived in reading of heretical and unsound in
stead of Orthodox and sound Books; So that this being confidered, this Author
should have done better that he had added his name and the License to his Book.
Quest. II. Whether Mr. Cranford might not justly License A.S. his Consid, and
Answer to the Libell, etc.
I Sustain the first part of the Question, and deny the second.

As for the first it is evident.

1. Because it is conformed to Gods word, as we shall see hereafter. 2.
Because, that Answer is nothing else, but an Apology for the Discipline of the
Reformed Churches. 3. Because, it contains nothing, contrary to the Doctrine
of the Church of England, or any other true Reformed Churches, only it has
some new Sectaries for Enemies. 4. Because, the Church of England evermore
entertained Union with the Reformed Churches, that were ruled by that
Discipline; and they refused not one another to the Communion of the
Sacraments. 5. Because, that a Bishop, and the rest of the Commissioners from
England, at the Synod of Dordrecht, approved that Discipline, in the name of
the Church of England. 6. Because in England it self, it has been evermore
approved by the King, and Parliament, who granted the Exercise thereof unto the
French, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish Churches, in this very City of London, and
sundry other parts of this Kingdom. 7. At this present, Episcopal Government
being put down, it stands by Law approved, both by State and Church, as
conform unto Gods word. 8. The Kings Majesty likewise by consent of Parliament
Licenced it in Scotland.
The second part of the Question may be proved by the contrary Arguments.

1. Because, it maintains a Discipline, that is not conform to Gods word,
which has not one word of particular Churches, Independent one from another;
of particular Church-Covenants, distinct from that of Grace; of not Baptizing
Christians Children; of not admission of Faithful men, and women, who are
without Scandal, unto the Lords Table, etc. 2. Because, the Discipline it
maintains, is repugnant to all other Disciplines of all other reformed, yea
of all Christian Churches. 3. It contains many things contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, as they confess themselves. 4. Because the
Church of England never entertained any Union or Communion with any Church
ruled by that Discipline. 5. No Commissioners from England ever approved it. 6.
It has never been received in England by King or Parliament. 7. It has never
been put up here, nor stands here Legally, as the other.
And therefore the first Legally might have been Licenced, and the other could
not be Licenced.

QUEST. 3. Whether any man may not state and determine Questions agitated in
Synods, before the Synods Determination.
M. S. BLames me mightily for stating some Questions now in agitation in the
Synod.

To the contrary, I conceive, that herein I have done nothing amiss; But for
the better stating and determining of this Question we must observe:

1. That there are two sorts of Questions, some that are already determined in
Gods Word, and his Church also; Others that are not. 2. That there are some
Determinations by public Authority, as Laws, Statutes, Ecclesiastical
Canons, etc. and others particular, proceeding of private or particular men's
Judgments; The first binds and obliges them, who are subject unto them: the
second cannot oblige any man to obedience; and so I say 1. That in Questions
already determined in Gods Word by his Church, every man may determine, as God
and the Church have determined.

1. Because God obliges us to determine our judgments, according to the
Determinations of his Word; especially in things that are necessary to
Salvation, for the very publication of the Gospel obliges us to assent. 2. If
every man determines not, according to Gods Word, he sins. 3. If particular
men determine not their Judgment according to Gods Word, and because the thing
believed is conform to Gods Word, it is not an Act of Divine Faith.
In these Determinations, according to the Word, I say that the Church
Determination is public, 1. Because God has endowed her with public
Authority, to determine according to the Determination of his Word. 2. Because
she Judges not by private authority, as private men. 3. Because Suspension from
the Lords Table, etc. are not Acts of private but of public Judgment and
authority. This Authority of the Church is not Imperial, or Magisteriall, but
Ministerial, because the Ministers of the Church be nothing else but Gods
Ministers, or Servants, and not Lords in the Church.

The Determinations, and Judgments of particular Persons are only particular,
and a Judgment of Discretion. 1. Because they proceed not from public, but
from private and particular persons, even when they proceed from a Minister. 2.
Because they have not public authority to oblige Congregations, but themselves
alone. 3. Their principal and intrinsecall aim is not to be directions for
others, but for themselves, and they do not help to direct others in
particular.

This M. S. objecteth, that if A. S. determine it, he anticipates upon the
Assemblies Judgment; but that he must not do so.

Answ. I deny the Consequence; 1. for the Assemblies Judgment is public and
mine particular. 2. It is already Judged by the Church of this Kingdom that
Presbyterian Discipline is not contrary to Gods Word; for if it were, it had
never permitted it, to be practiced or approved in England; as I have already
showed.

2. To the Minor I answer, That either by anticipating upon the Synods
Judgment, he understands an anticipation by a public Judgment, and that is
impossible to me, for my Judgment is not public, but particular; or by a
particular Judgment, and then it is not properly an Anticipation; or if he
will needs have it to be so I answer; that if I or any other Christian have
learned any truth in Gods Word, we are all bound to determine our particular
Judgments according to it.

Neither can the long Examination of businesses in Synods, which proceeds
from Heretics, Sectaries, and others their crafts, malice, or infirmities,
hinder us from determining the truths according to our particular Judgments;
for if it could, then whenever any Heretic should start up, and dogmatize
against the first Articles of our Faith, denying Gods Infinity, Simplicity,
Perfection, Eternity, Immutability, his Wisdom, Decrees, Power, or Providence,
and his opinion were to be examined in a Synod, we must begin to doubt and
suspend our Judgments, as so many Pyrrhonians about all those points, which
already we believed by Faith, and stand gaping for some new Determination of
the Articles of our faith from Synods; And so Synods should be most pernicious
in making us to lose our Faith, which before we had.

In a word, we have received already the Determination and Resolution of the
Independents questions in Gods Word in other Protestant Churches, and the
approbation of those Determinations here by the Church of England. And the
Discussion of them in the Synod, is not to change Gods Ordinance, but to give
contentment unto weak Consciences, if they can receive it.

Again, If this Argument be strong, I retort it against his Sect: If the
Quinque Ecclesian Ministers, M. S. and C. C. determine these Questions, as they
do in their printed Books here, and Sermons also, as we are credibly
informed, they also anticipate upon the Assemblies Judgment: But the First is
true, Ergo, so must the Second also be.

Again, Either this man with the rest of the Sectaries are minded to acquiesce
to the Determination of the Synod, or not: If the first, it is well, it is more
then I expect of them, I pray God they deceive me: if not, what needs he to
sight so much for the Determination of the Synod, which he is determined not to
stand unto? would not this seem to be said in derifion of the Synod?

2. Obj. A. S. In determining the Question, takes it out of the Assemblies
hands.

Answ. I deny the Consequence, for it is in their hands by way of public
Authority, public Judgment, and public Determination; Now A. S. or any
other particular Determination takes not away the public, and Authoritative
Determination, Judgment, or Authority.

As for the stating of the Question, this man will not permit me, and
consequently no particular man, so much as to state it in particular, and that
for the same reason: But if we may according to our particular Judgment
Determine it, how much more may we state it, since it can no waiess be
Determined, unless first it be stated? Can the Synods stating and Determining
the question, free us of the obligation whereby we are bound to state it, and
Determine it according to Gods Word.

QUEST. 4. Whether the Quinqu' Ecclesian Ministers publish this their
Apologeticall Narration seasonably, yea or not, against M. S. p. 24, 25. etc.
that affirms it.
I Maintain the Negative part of the Question; his Reasons are; 1. Because,
before the publication thereof, the Calumnies, mistakes, misapprehensions of
their Opinions, and many of those mists that were gathered about them, or
rather cast upon their Persons in their absence, began by their presence
again, and the blessing of God upon them, in a great measure to scatter and
vanish, without speaking a word for themselves and cause, as the five Ministers
say in their Apologeticall Narration.

M. S. p. 24. of his Book Answers 1. That that scattering of mists does but
relate to the people, and only to some of them, viz. Those that profess or
pretend the power of godliness, as appears by the precedent period.

A. S. Reply 1. The precedent period has no relation to this, for it ends
with a full point. 2. It is not the precedent period, that should interpret the
subsequent, but rather the subsequent that should serve for interpretation to
the precedent, unless ye put the Explication before the Text. 3. Because it
is said absolutely. 4. They themselves believe now at this present, that this
relates to others, as ye may see, p. 15. where they speak of those, who
incited the State, not to allow them a peaceable practice of their Conscience;
and of some others, who did write Books against them, whom they accuse also of
mis-apprehensions, and mistakes of their opinions. 5. Put the case it were so,
yet was it not so seasonable for them then to write, as before.

M. S. Answers 1. That many of these mists and not all. 2, That they did but
begin to scatter.

A. S. Just, but it was not so seasonable to write, when any of them, as when
none of them begun to scatter, or after, as before they begun to scatter: so to
speak Morally, that Apology was not seasonable, since it was less seasonable,
then it would have been formerly.

M. S. Their motions were like the lowrings of an unconstant morning, in which
the mists ascend, and anon descend, and by and by ascend, and turn into a
Scottish mist, that will wet an English man to the skin, as our usual Proverb
is.

A. S. 1. This is but a Simile, Quod nil probat. 2. It is to be noted here, how
he notes this Proverbiall jeer of a Scottish mist in a different sort of
letter, as containing some particular mystery, and consequently worthy of the
Readers particular observation. 3. Yet I may say, that the Independent mist is
more able to drown all England, Scotland, and Ireland, then a Scottish mist the
outward part of an English man's clothes; and so will all true English, and
Christian hearts judge.

If any thing have befallen you since the change of the time of your Exile
(more imaginary then real) it was your own fault, in seducing the people, in
a clanculary way, and in making of clandestine Assemblies and Conventicles,
which good Ministers could not endure, seeing that nothing could content you,
unless that all should stoop under you.

Neither has your Apology any ways diminished any ill, but rather taken away
the good opinion they had of you.

Afterward M. S. accuses not only the people, but also Mr. Rutherford, and
Mr. Herle, and sundry other Ministers.

A. S. his second reason is, They who are called by the Parliament, and
admitted by the Assembly of Divines into the Assembly (howsoever that calling
was to find them good, and not to make them so) are supposed by them to be
innocent, and not culpable (and especially after that they have sat long in
the Assembly of Divines, with honor and good respect) and consequently they
are sufficiently vindicated from all false Accusations, and have no need to
Apologize for themselves, that being far away more sufficient to justify
them before the world, then any Apology whatsoever, that they can write for
themselves.

But the Apologists were so called, etc. Ergo.

This is the sense, and form by me intended of my Argument in the fourth
Observation, and not that that M. S. puts upon it.

As for his instance of the Bishops against the first Proposition, that they
were called by the Parliament to the Assembly, and yet they were not for all
that supposed to be innocent, or vindicated, I Answer 1. That the Bishops were
not admitted into the Assembly of Divines, as they were. 2. If they had been
admitted, and continued as long as they, without reproach, how can any doubt
but that their sitting there should have served them for a sufficient
justification and vindification of their honor, in foro externo, before men,
since it is not morally to be presumed, that such a grave Senate will call, or
such a holy Assembly of such Learned and Reverend Divines will admit and
retain so long together any scandalous persons in their Assembly; So this
being testimonium alienum, non proprium, and publicum non privatum, without all
doubt it was sufficient to justify them, and more then any thing they can say
in their own behalf; since they cannot speak as Judges, but as Parties, who
are evermore justly suspected.

A. S. 3. Reason. He, or they, who are sent by authority of Parliament into
Scotland, with the Parliaments Commissioners, to treat of an extraordinary
great Reformation of Religion in England and Ireland, and for the preservation
of the Religion in Scotland, in bringing them all to uniformity according to
Gods Word, and the Example of the best Reformed. Churches, and have ended the
business with them, are not morally to be presumed, to be culpable, but
sufficiently freed from all filthy aspersions, in matter of Religion, that can
have been laid upon them, at least in foro externo, wherein only they can be
justified by men in this life; for it is not Morally to be presumed, that the
Parliament would have employed any, but Orthodox men, and good men in a matter
of so high a concernment, and consequently they needed not to Apologize for
themselves, or if they do so, it was unseasonably done. But the Apologizers
are such men.

If it be said, only one of them was such a man:

Answ. It is all one; 1. For in matter of Religion, they lie all under one and
the same notion. 2. At least that one needed not to Apologize as he did.

4. Because, being minded to make an Apology, they should either not have made
it at all, being Members' of the Assembly; or have done it before their
Admittance thereunto, or after the Dissolving of the Assembly. This had been a
great deal more seasonable; for it is not fit for a man, to Apologize for
himself in a cause, wherein he sits as Judge, or when he sits as Judge.

5. We can find no ordinary Example of such proceedings, either in Scripture
or Ecclesiastical History.

6. Because they did it in a season, when the Church and State stood in need of
the Brotherly assistance of all the best reformed Churches; and in that very
nick of time, they under-valued them all, as not having the power of Piety, as
they themselves; censured their Ecclesiastical Discipline, as not agreeable
unto Gods Word, and called them Calvinians; whereof we have a sufficient
proof, in a Letter sent to the Assembly, from the Synod of Walachria, wherein
it complains much against this Book, because of the offense, that the
Reformed Churches received thereby.

7. Because it was published against the Scots Discipline in that very nick of
time, most unseasonable, when they were invited to come into England, and when
they came to hazard their lives for the Church and State of England, and for
the lives and states of these very men, who in the mean while were writing
against their Discipline.

QUEST. 5. Whether the Quixqu' Ecclesian Ministers should not have done better,
to have published their Opinions by way of Thoses, or in some other Didactick
way, rather then by an Apologeticall Narration.
IMaintaine the Affirmative part; 1. Because that of all other, is the most
accurate, and easiest way, to manifest clearly their Opinions by, both to the
learned and ignorant.

2. Because all other ways of teaching beget confusion; for in them we cannot
discern that which is Substantial, from that which is Circumstantiall; as we
may see in Comedies, Tragedies, all sort of Verses, long Speeches, Prayers,
Dialogues, etc.

3. Because in this Apologeticall Narration it self many things are inserted,
which touch not the Business at all.

4. Because in all other Synods in our Times, Divines proceeded evermore in a
Didactick way.

5. Because this their proceeding keeps us in perpetual perplexity, so as we
can never come to know their Opinions; and what ever we can say, we can never
bring them to any Declaration of their Opinions, but that they have ever-more
some Evasions and complaints, of great mistakes in us, whereof, if any such be,
they are the cause themselves; the which sort of dealing is not worthy of the
man of God, but proper unto Heretics and Schismatics, no ways desirous of
the Truth, but of strife and contention.

6. Because in it there is much fraud in relating a part only of their story
and Opinions, and not the whole, in hiding the black side of the Cloud; yea it
conteyneth some manifest untruths in their Relation, and that even where God
and man are called to witness; All which a very learned and Godly Divine
makes appear in his Anrapologia, and offers to show under the hands of the
Independents, yea and of some of the Quinqu' Ecclesian Ministers themselves.

QUEST. 6. Whether the Independents or Quinqu' Ecclesian Ministers come near
to Anabaptists, and Anabaptists to them.
C. C. and M. S. deny it.

By Anabaptists I understand not all sort of Anabaptists, as those, that be
also Arminians and Socinians, but those who differ from them only in delaying
and reiterating of Baptism (as the word it self implies) who are very many
in number, and make up the greatest Sect amongst them here in London, and in
other parts of England; for this Proposition is Indefinite and in a contingent
matter, which is taken by Philosophers to be equipollent to a particular one;
and so I cut off the Objection of C.C. who brings me an instance from them,
who are Arminians and Socinians, of whom I propound not the Question.

And the Question being stated, I maintain the Affirmative part; 1. because
they differ only in this one point; neither can any of these two Divines, viz.
M. S. or C. C. show me any further difference.

2. Because these Anabaptists themselves of whom I speak deny it not, but avow
it constantly.

3. If it were otherwise, the Independents would not so highly commend them,
for Holy men, as they do in their Sermons, as I shall make it appear, by good
and sufficient Witnesses, Auditors of their Sermons, to any man, that desires
to be further informed, or to whosoever will call it in question.

4. Because, however they were oftentimes desired to join with the
Presbyterians to condemn them, they would never do it.

5. M. S. in answering my sixth Consideration, where I accuse them of that,
seems by his silence to cry guilty; yea C. C. seems to acknowledge it, p.
10. 3. of his Book, when he says, That some London Anabaptists hold
Universal Redemption, and that with a doubting Adverb, if information may be
believed; Ergo he supposes, that some of them here about London believe it not.

He Objecteth, that some Anabaptists here do question, and scruple the lawful
War of the Parliament, which the Independents do not.

Answ. This is not Question juris, but facti.

2. Not of any point of Doctrine in general, but of this particular War,
which some here, yea of the same Doctrine with you, and us also scruple at.

3. Because sundry Independents have scrupled at the Covenant; from whence may
be inferred, that they scrupled at the lawfulness of this war grounded upon
the Covenant; and nevertheless ye own them for yours.

4. Because you say, that some only scrupled: But some neither scrupled at it,
nor believed the Universality of Redemption, who are more in number and
Authority; Ergo At least this great number of Anabaptists, differ very little
from you; since they differ from you in this only point; And so I have done you
no wrong. Neither say I, as you untruely will make the world believe, that ye
are Anabaptists, but that ye come very near up to them. As for that Question,
which he propounds, whether every one that scruples at the Baptizing of his
Child, be to be Excommunicated out of a Presbyterian Church, or to be
accounted solely for that Opinion unregenerate, and in state of Damnation.

Answ. This Question is not to the purpose, and yet to give some contentment to
this Scruple, if he can receive it, I Answer 1. That here is Fallaciae plurium
Interrogationum, whereby he propounds many Questions as one, to the end that
giving but one Answer, he may entangle me, by his sophistications: and
therefore I answer to every one a part, 1. To the first that the Anabaptists,
whose cause he pleads, scruple not, but define it, as certain. 2. If after
sufficient conviction, and their scruple abundantly satisfied, they remain
pertinacious, and will not be baptized amongst us, it is no more a real but a
pretended scruple, accompanied with a real pertinacious breach of charity, and
a Schism, which meriteth the sentence of Excommunication. To the 2. it is not
to us to judge absolutely that he is not regenerate or that he shall be damned:
but well thus, that the way, wherein he is, qua talis, is not the way of
Regeneration, or of Salvation: but of damnation, according to the ordinary
course of the Gospel, so long as he continues unpenitent, and so contemns
the Church of God, instructing him according to Gods Word: And that if he be a
visible subject, or Citizen in Gods Church, which is his Kingdom, and City, he
must be subject unto the Laws and Government thereof, otherwise be gone to
some other.

QUEST. 7. Whether the whole Church, and every member thereof has the power of
the Keys, or full Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
LEast as blind men, we should quarrel one with another, not knowing upon what
grounds, or wherefore; it will not be amiss that we expound the terms of the
Question, then state it, and afterward we shall easily perceive, what is the
force of our Reasons, and those of our Brethren, and of the two which be the
weightiest, and bear down the scale.

As for the terms; As in all others, so in this Question there be two, 1. the
Subject, and that is the whole Church, and every member thereof. 2. the
Predicate, or Attribute, and that is power of the Keys, or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

As for the word Church, or Ecclesia, I take it, 1. generally for any Assembly,
or company of men, or Angels evocated or convocated together. 2. More strictly,
for any Company of men any ways gathered together upon whatsoever occasion, or
for whatsoever end, Act, 19.39. 3. for a holy company of men, and Angels: so it
is taken by Divines, and it may be defined, a Company of Angels and men, called
out of their natural estate, by convenient means, to supernatural felicity.

The words, Men and Angels express the material part of the Church, viz.
intellectual Creatures, which are only capable of calling, and of
supernatural Glory, whereunto they are called.

The words following declare the form of the Church.

By their natural estate or condition, I understand either their estate of
integrity, as that of the good Angels, who continued in their Original purity,
and of the wicked, who afterward apostatized, and of Adam and Eve before their
fall; or of corruption, such as is that of all mankind after our first sin.

By the word, called, here, must be understood the act of vacation by Gods
word, either internal, speaking unto Angels, or men's Consciences, by the light
of nature, or supernatural Inspirations, 1 Cor. 1.9. 1 Pet. 5.10. 1 These.
2.12. and 4.7. or external, such as is the vocal, and written word of God, or
any other external sign, presented to our outward Senses by him; as 1 Jo.
1.3. 2 These. 2.4. Heb. 1.1. And therefore the Elect, before they be borne. and
called, are not properly or actually, but merely, potentially, and vertually
members of the Church, 1. For how can he be a member of the Church who is not
yet in Rerum natura? 2. By the same reason, the Church should have been
actually before the Creation of the world, and before she was created, from all
eternity; for God elected his Church, from all eternity: 3. Men of age should
be actually members of Christ's Church without Faith; for they have not actually
Faith by Election, but by their efficacious Vocation. 4. And howsoever the
Decree of Predestination, or Election, be requisite, and be the first cause of
the Church, and of all the members thereof, and it being put, all the second
Causes must needs be: yet makes it not them to be, when it is its self, but in
their own time and in due season, when it is put in execution by some external
act of Gods Almighties power, which can not be eternal, as his Decree; but
temporal. 5. Because Gods Church is an House, a Family, and a City, which can
not be built of stones, that are not, or composed of Domestics, and Citizens,
that are not in this world. 6. A man cannot be the Brother of Christ and member
of his church, before he be regenerate, or born again, how much less, before
he be generated, or born; unless ye will say, that he may have his second
birth or generation before he have the first?

Out of this natural estate, etc. here is expressed Terminus a quo, et ad
quem, from whence, and whereunto the Church, or the members thereof are called;
Terminus a quo, or from whence, is from the estate of Nature pure and
incorrupt, not incorruptible as was that of the Angels, and of man before his
Fall: or of corrupt nature, such as has been that of mankind since their Fall.
Terminus ad quem, or whereunto they are called, or which can intend, is Grace
in this life, and supernatural Glory in that to come.

By supernatural Glory must be understood supernatural Beatitude, or
felicity, which is the last aim, their summum bonum, or greatest good and
perfection, whereunto they tend, or which they can intend: And this, in respect
of entire and pure or immaculate Nature, is absolutely called Beatitude or
Felicity: but in regard of corrupt Nature, Salvation; for it is not a man
without sin, as Christ, or Angels that never sinned, but Adam and his
posterity, that are said to be saved from their sins, and misery whereunto by
sin they are subject.

Means are called convenient, when they are fit to effect that which by them is
intended; such in respect of Angels was the Law of Nature, printed in their
Understanding, answerable to their spiritual Nature; some Supernatural
Precepts also, for they were bound to believe the Trinity: answerable in Adam
before his Fall was the Law, and such respect to the spiritual and corporal
nature, whereof he was compounded, as the Moral Law, and some supernatural
Precepts to believe the Trinity, etc. proportionate to the end and aim, viz.
supernatural glory, whereunto he should tend, and which he should intend; And
in regard of all mankind since our Fall, is the Covenant of Grace, and the
means to fulfill it, as Faith, Hope, and Charity.

The Church in this vast and large signification contains 1. in it self the
company of Angels, 1. because the Scripture says so, Heb. 12.22, 23. 1 Pet.
1.12. 2. because they are our Fellow Servants and our Brethren, Apoc. 19.10.
and 22.9. and they belong to one society with us, 3. because the Angels are our
Con-disciples in studying the Gospel with us. 1 Pet. 1.12. 4. Because they are
Subjects with us of one Celestial Republike, and Citizens of one Celestial
City: 5. Because we aspire to the same Beatitude and Felicity with them, viz.
to the vision of Gods face, and ardent Charity: 6. Because, in respect of our
spiritual part, and the Faculties thereof, our Intellect and Will, we are
capable of the same union with God. 7. Because Christ is head of the Angels; as
well as of Men, Col. 2.19. Ephesians. 4.15.8. Because he is their Creator,
Conservator, Mediator. God gathered in one, all things in Christ, both which
are in Heaven, and which are in Earth, and every thing in them, Ephesians. 1.10.9.
Because the Angels adore Christ, Hebr. 1.6.10. Because all things, yea, the
Angels are subject to Christ, Hebr. 1.7.

2. It contains men in Heaven and in Earth; for the Church in Earth and in
Heaven differ only, as a man traveling, and one arrived to his Port or home.
All these that are, or shall be saved, those that are already born, and to be
born; regenerate, or to be regenerate, howsoever they that are not yet born, or
regenerate, be not actually members of the Church, till they be born and
regenerated.

This Church in regard of its material parts, integrity, and quantity, may be
distinguished, 1. into the Catholic or universal, and particular Church.

The Catholic Church is that, which before we defined, composed of all the
Elect, Angels and Men.

2. Again it is to be observed in passing of this Word, Catholic Church, that
it is not a term of Scripture; nor was any man called a Catholic in the
Apostles time, if we believe Pacianus epist. 1. Ad Sempronianum; neither in
their time was the Christian Faith spread Catholikely, or Universally through
all the World: and hence many Protestants infer, that the Creed, I mean that of
the Apostles, was not framed by them: Nevertheless we have some terms in
Scripture equivalent unto it, as that of (...), Heb 12.23. that signifies a
general Assembly; Item the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem,
ver. 22. the Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven, etc. The
Church then is called Universal, 1. in respect of her Intrinsecall, and
Essential form, viz. internal virtues. viz. Faith, Hope, Charity, and the
Spirit of Christ, which be all, and the same in all the members thereof; for
howsoever the Church, in respect of some Gifts, otherwise called (...), and by
the Schoolmen, gratia gratis data, is distributed by Christ unto some of her
members, not so much for their own, as for other men's use and salvation to be a
corpus heterogeneum dissimilare, an Organicall Body composed of diverse parts of
different names and natures one from another, and from the whole Body having
different functions, and operations, as of prophecy, government, of Miracles
etc. as a man of his head, legs, and arms, whereof the one is not of like
nature or like name with an other, or with the man; for the leg is not the
head, nor a man as the Apostle declares: nevertheless in regard of her
spiritual and saving gifts, as Faith, Hope, Charity, etc. wherein consists her
intrinsecall form, conferred upon the Elect, for their own use, otherwise
called by Schoolmen, gratia gratum faciens, Grace that makes us acceptable to
God it is totum homogeneum, or similare, a similary Body, Composed of the like
parts, whereof every one has the same name, and nature one with another, and
with the whole Body; for all the members of Christ have the like Faith,
inclining to the like Acts of Belief; the same Mysteries; and a like Charity,
inclining to the like Acts of love to all men, and especially to the Household
of Faith: So every particular Church is a Church, one as another, and as the
universal Church, I speak here of the redeemed Church; for the Church of
Angels, and of men, before their Fall, be not parts homogeneall, with the
redeemed Church, because of their dissimulary Covenant, and intrinsecall forms
and virtues.

Item, the Church may be denominated universal, in regard of her extrinsecall
and accidental form, consisting 1. in the external profession of her
intrinsecall Christian virtues, by confession of her Faith, Hope, and exercise
of Charity, and holiness of life. 2. In her participation of the holy
Sacraments, according to Gods Word. 3. In her extrinsecall sound Discipline,
and Government, which should be in every Church. Again, the Church may be
universal, in respect of some Circumstances, viz. of time, place, persons, and
Ages; 1. of time, because the Christian Church from her first institution by
Christ till the end of the world shall never decay; 2. of place, not
positively, as if it were in all places, but negatively, because it is not
excluded from any place, as that of the old Testament, limited within the
confines of the Holy Land, but spread through all the world, Psalm. 19.5. Mat.
26.13. Col. 1.6.3. of Persons of all Ages, Sects and Conditions, for no man is
excluded from the Gospel; neither Jew, nor Greek; neither Servant, nor
Freeman; neither Male, nor Female, Gal. 3.28.

2. And it may be distinguished according to her material, or integrant parts,
into the Church of Angels, and of men: But the Scripture has very little of
that of the Angels, so as we may let it pass.

3. That of men may be distinguished according to the state, and condition
thereof into that, which is Militant here on earth, fighting against Satan,
and Triumphant and victorious in Heaven, reigning eternally with God.

4. The Militant, according to the state thereof and Covenant, is distinguished
into that, which was before the Fall, and that after the Fall: The Church
before the Fall was composed of Adam and Eve alone, and governed by the Law of
Nature, and some supernatural Precepts: and called to supernatural felicity,
I say composed of Adam and Eve alone, viz. actually; for howsoever before the
creation of Eve, God or Christ was his head; yet could he not be his Head as of
a Church, 1. For a Church is a company not of the Head and one member, but of
the Head and many members, Romans 12.5. Ephesians. 1.22, 23.2. Because before the
Creation of the Woman, there was no symbolicall Law, nor Sacraments of the
Covenant, ordained by God, as the Tree of Life. 3. Because the Church, is a
Family, a City, a Kingdom, which cannot consist of one member, Col. 1.13. Romans
14.17. 1 Timothy 3.15. Apo. 21.2. Matthew. 13.11. Item a body composed of sundry
members, 1 Cor. 12. a flock, 1 Pet. 5.2. which is not composed of one sheep;
yea, after the Creation of Eve, it was not a perfect or complete Church: but in
fieri, tending to perfection, by the propagation of mankind, and perfected in
its fieri when it was breeding; for to a perfect Church, is requisite a Ruler
or Rulers; and some to be ruled, and not one alone. 2. Because the Church is a
Society, like to that of a Kingdom, or a City, which can not consist of two
persons only. 3. Because howsoever three may compound a College, yet can they
not make up an Ecclesiastical, or political Society. 4. Because in a Church
there must be power of Excommunication, which cannot subsist in two; for if the
one should Excommunicate the other, the Church should perish, which is
repugnant to the nature of Excommunication, which is not given to the
destruction but to the conservation of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Because it was
imperfect in its aim, in respect of man, for it brought no man to felicity or
glory. 6. Because to every Real Church correspond some Representative Church,
which is a sign of the Real, and not altogether the same, but there could be
no representative Church before the Fall, correspondent to it, different from
it self, because these were but two persons not differing from themselves,
notwithstanding it might have been represented by an Ambassador, but not by a
Church.

The Militant Church after the fall is that, which is redeemed by Christ,
called in him, to the forgiveness of their sins, and eternal Glory.

5. This in regard of time and state is either before Christ, as that of the
Old Testament, wherein Christ was obscurely revealed, or of the New, since his
coming, wherein he is more clearly revealed, which for this cause is called
the Christian Church; partly because it is since Christ, partly because Christ
is more visibly revealed unto her; partly because he in Person revealed
himself and his Gospel, for the Law was given by Moses, but Grace was given by
Jesus Christ, John 1.

The particular Church is only a part of the Universal or total Church; And
as the universal is universal, 1. In regard of Time, which comprehends all
the Churches of all times. 2. Of place, which comprehends the Churches of all
places, or through all the world. 3. Or of Persons, which comprehends all forts
of persons: so the particular, is either 1. in regard of time, which only
comprehends in its self, the Churches of a certain time, as that of the Old
Testament, which was before the coming of Christ in the flesh; and that of the
New, which is since his coming: So we call the Church, Primitive, that which
was before our times, immediately after Christ his coming, and some time after.
2. Or in regard of places, as when we say, that a Church is National, which is
in one Kingdom or Republic; Provincial, that is in one Province; and
Parochial, which is confined within the limits of one Parish. 3. Or in regard
of Persons, which comprehends a certain number of persons, of one or diverse
places.

Here it is to be observed; 1. That the Church may be denominated universal,
or particular, either absolutely, or respectively in relation to another bigger
or less: so Absolutely the universal Church comprehends in its self all the
Churches of all times; of all places; of all forts of Persons, Angels and men;
of all Estates, or conditions and Covenants; As that in the Covenant of
integrity; natural, or supernatural, as of Angels and men before their Fall,
and that in the state of sin under the Covenant of Grace; and in the state of
Glory. And according to this consideration, the Church of the Angels, is one
particular Church; That of Mankind, another; The Triumphant, and Militant, two
others; and in a word, all the parts thereof, may be called particular Churches.

Respectively the Church of Mankind, is an universal Church, in respect of its
parts, as of that before and after the Fall; the Triumphant and Militant: so
the Church after the Fall, is universal in respect of that of the Old and New
Testament, which be its parts: and the Christian in respect of its parts in
Heaven and on Earth; of the Primitive, and that of subsequent times: that which
is in all the world in respect of its parts, in diverse Kingdoms, Provinces,
etc. But that which is most to the purpose in this our Discourse, is the
Catholic Christian Church here upon earth.

6. Again, the Militant Church (whether she be considered, according to her
universality and totality, or particularity in her several parts, and
Assemblies) in respect of her internal and external form, is either visible,
or invisible. The invisible Church is that which cannot be seen, but only is
believed by Faith. The visible is that which we see or behold; where it is to
be observed: 1. That the word visible, is not to be taken here strictly, for
the object of the sight alone, or the word, see, or behold; for the act
thereof; but in a more full signification, for that which any ways is
perceptible by the eye, or any external, or internal Sense, or by natural
Reason; such as are the confession and profession of Christian virtues, the
exercise of their external Acts; whereof some be apprehended by the sight and
Eye, as the acts of Charity; some by the hearing and Ear, as the confession of
Faith; some by feeling, as the assistance and attendance upon the Sick; some
by the internal Senses; some by Act of Reason only: and the reason of this is,
because the word visible must signify all that, which, is denied by invisible;
now invisible signifies a negation of all, that can be apprehended by any
Sense, or Act of Reason, Ergo the word visible must signify that, which can be
apprehended by any Sense or Act of Reason, so that it belong to the External
Form of the Church, which represents the internal Form thereof.

2. Besides that, it is here to be observed, that the visible Church of it self
is evermore visible and conspicuous, but by Accident becomes sometimes
invisible, latent, obscure, and unseene; and that 1. either because of the
persecution She suffers by her enemies, when She hides her self in the
Wilderness; or 2. by reason of her slitting from one place to another, as when
She went from Jerusalem to Pella; or 3. because of the weakness of the sight
of the Seer, as in Eli, 1 King. 9. verse 4. for want of sight, as to those, to
whom, as the Gospel, so the Church professing the Gospel, is hid and
invisible, 2 Cor. 2, 3, 4.

3. Finally, It is not to be omitted, that this is not a Division of the
Churchinto two Species, or two integrant parts, or any ways into parts really,
but Accidentally distinguished; For a Church altogether one, in the same time,
and place, and according to the same parts may be, howsoever according to
diverse considerations, and Forms, which be the grounds of diverse
considerations, it may be Visible and Invisible, as the Church of Geneva, which
is visible in respect of her external form, viz. Confession of the true
Christian Faith, the profession thereof and other christian virtues; Item in
respect of her Discipline, etc. And the same Church in respect of her internal
Form, viz. Faith, Hope, Charity, the Spirit of Christ, etc: which be
spiritual qualities altogether invisible, in the sense before declared, is
altogether invisible.

7. The Militant Church, both in her totality, and partiality, may be divided
into two integrant parts, viz. into the Overseers, that preach, teach, rule,
etc. and the Flock, which is over-seene: And they be the two principal parts,
concurring to its integrity, without the which it cannot be a total or whole
visible Church: and therefore a Church without Oversseers is not a whole
visible Church: I say a whole or total Church; for without Pastors it may be a
totum essentiale, i.e. essentially a Church, for Pastors are not absolutely
necessary for the essence, but for the integrity of a Church. Item, I say
without Overseers; 1. All Overseers, for it may be, that a Church may subsist
without Pastors alone, or Doctoss alone, or Rulers or Elders alone; or Deacons
alone, but not without all.

8. The Militant visible Church, whether it be conceived in its universality
and totality, or in its particularity in several Congregations, is either
Real, or Representative.

The Real Militant Church is any visible Church here upon Earth, composed of
all its real Professors of the Gospel.

The Representative Church, is an Assembly of certain Persons, or
Church Officers, in an Ecclesiastical Iudicatory, chosen out of the whole Body
of the Real Church, to represent it, as it is; such be the Sessions, or
Consistories, the Synods, Provincial, and National.

As for the Real visible Church, some think that it is very probable, that it
is never altogether without Justifying Faith: but it is probable, that where
there be very small Congregations of seven or eight persons, they may be all
without Faith, and especially, where the Church is corrupt, or where the
Members are all vicious and dissolute: Their conjecture will hold more
probable, in great Congregations, in Provincial, and National Churches. But
in a Representative Church, composed of very few Church Officers, it is very
probable, that sometimes, they may all be without Faith, howsoever they
represent a Church of Real Believers; for to represent Real Believers, it is
not absolutely necessary, that they, that are to represent them, be Believers,
or have the same essential and internal Form with those, whom they
represent; but that they have the external confession and profession of their
Faith, whereby they represent them; nor represent they their Faith, but their
profession of faith: So the Image of Caesar represents really Caesar, without
any humane nature, such as is in Caesar: and so may men without Faith represent
them, that have Faith.

By the word Church we must understand the Militant Christian, particular, and
real Church, consisting of one Congregation; These being presupposed, I put
this Conclusion: All Persons in a Church, or the whole Collective Body thereof
have not Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

1. They have not the power to exercise it.

1. Because, we read no such thing in Scripture, viz. that ever God committed
the Government of the Church to every idle Fellow, that is a member thereof. 2.
Because, it is contrary to the general Ordinance of God, 1 Timothy 3. that all
Church Officers be examined and tried before their Admission; And to the
practice of the Old Testament, in the religion of the Levites, that served five
years in their Apprenticeship. 3. Because every particular member of the
Church has not the Ability to Judge, or Rule, because of his ignorance, and
want of learning, for every one in the Church cannot be learned; for some there
be that needs are spiritual, some that be carnal; some Babes in Christ, some
men: some have need of milk, some of meat, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. 4. Because of
their imprudence, for some of the vulgar are somewhat precipitate and rash in
the examination of matters, others very slow in their judgment, some in their
speech, and some in all: which is not convenient in so grave matters, in
Judging the Judgments of the Lord. 5. Because some are vicious, and culpable
of the faults, or crimes, that are to be Judged and condemned in others, and
therefore are not fit Judges, to Judge them. 6. Many in the Congregation may be
friends, Kinsmen, or allied with the party that is to be Judged; and so
partial: wherefore some of the Congregation, at the least in that case, are to
be excluded: and by Consequence, the simple Title of Christianity, and
profession thereof, or to be a member of the Church, gives not all christians
this right, but some other thing. 7. If every one of the Church may Judge, or
exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, then women also, whom Saint Paul
commands to hold their peace in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34. and to be subject in
obedience without Jurisdiction. 8. All distracted men, and babes should have
power to Judge; and so those that are without Judgment should Judge since they
are members of the Church.
It may be answered, that they admit not babes, but those only that are in age,
and apparently regenerated.

Inst. But then every member of the Church has power to Judge; but men
distracted are in age, Ergo they have power to Judge. It may be answered, that
they understand that those only, that are in age, and have the use of reason
should be admitted.

Inst. 1. But when has a man the use of Reason? how shall they define that? It
is commonly defined by Philosophers and others, the age of seven years, which
will make no very able Ecelesiasticall Senator: here the Scripture is
desicient, and they will admit nothing in Discipline, but that which is
commanded by Christ. 2. What if a man in his old age, begin to dote, they may
answer, that then he is excluded because reason fails him. Inst. Then he must
be declared not sitting, which may breed division. Jnst. Item, a man may be in
age, and yet little skilled in Divinity, for to Judge in matter of Heresy, and
be more vicious then when he was a child. And if a man be Judged by babes,
children, fools, and doting old men, it is to be feared, especially if the
Judged be rich, that the Judgment be the cause rather of division, then
concord, so this Discipline being established, all Schisms may break forth
controversies and contentions. They may answer that they establish, these that
are really, or apparently in judgment of charity Saints, as it may be
collected from the Romans c. 1.2. 1 Cor. 1. Ephesians. 1. Phil. in the beginning of the
chapters.

Reply. But every particular man, in every particular Congregation of the
Visible Church, whereof we only dispute, is not, nor can in speaking morally as
falls out ordinarily be a Saint; 1. Because the Church is compared to a
Ground, whereof one part is by the way side, the other stony, another thorny,
another good; To a Ground, wherein grows Wheat, and Tares; To a Draw-Net,
receiving good and bad fishes, Mat. 13. to a Society of wise, and foolish
Virgins, Mat. 25. And to a House, wherein there are Vessels to honor and
dishonor. There must be Offenses, or slanders, says Christ. Math. 18.7. 2.
Howbeit they were all Saints, yet should it not follow thereupon, that they
are, all learned, prudent, judicious, and endowed with other gifts to judge,
either in matters of Doctrine in Creating of Ministers, and in Excommunicating
of Heretics; or of Discipline, which sometime requires some knowledge of the
Civil law, as in Cases of Matrimony, etc.

As for the Passages of St. Paul; 1. I deny, that he calls all the Members of
the Church, Saints Formally; but the whole Body of the Church is so called or
denominated, because of the holiness, which is really or apparently inherent
in some Members or parts thereof, which denominates the whole Body, as when a
man is said to see, because of the sight, which is not inherent in all the
parts of his Body, but only in his Eye; or wise for his wisdom, which is
inherent in his Soul alone.

2. If it were otherwise, the Apostle should have written untruths in these
Texts: for Romans 16.17 18. he says; Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them,
which cause divisions and offenses, etc. For they that are such, serve not our
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly: and 1 Cor. 5. It is known, that the
Incestuous man was not excommunicated. Some of them were also Schismatics,
saying, that they were, of Christ, of Paul, of Apolloes: And what the
Galathians were, the whole Epistle testifies; so that according to our
Brethrens grounds, there was no visible Church here, and nothing could have
been judged.

3. It is not sanctification, or holiness of life, but Political, or
Ecclesiastical prudence, that furnishes their Abilities: for 1.
Sanctification is Gratia gratum faciens, one sort of Grace or gift of the
Spirit, that renders us gracious, or makes us acceptable to God: But the
faculty of Ruling, and exercising of Jurisdiction in the Church, is Gratia
gratis data, given graciously only, but makes us not gracious or acceptable to
God, as the Gift of Prophecy of Tongues, Intepretation etc. 2. The first is
given us, principally for our own benefit: the other principally for other men's
benefit: and therefore 3. the first is for to save a man himself: the second to
save others, when peradventure he may be damned himself, as we see in Judas,
who had the grace of Prophecy, whereby he saved others, but damned himself,
and did preach salvation to others believing, but damnation to himself
unbeleeving. 4. The first makes one a good Christian, the other a good Citizen
in the exterior Society of the Church alone; yea, 5. I may boldly say, that a
man may be a good Preacher, or Prophet, or Ruler in the Church, and an ill
Christian, if he preach the truth, and with edification, or rule well, and
believe not, which may be done by a very wicked man, Mat. 7.19, 20, 21, 22,
23. and another may be a good man, but an ill Preacher, Prophet, or Ruler, if
he have sanctifying grace, and have not so great abilities to preach, or to
rule, as an other, who perchance is an Atheist; or if he be somewhat negligent
in the exercise of his charge; The Apostle says not that all, that were in
their Churches were Saints either really or appearingly, but to all the Saints.

4. It is probable also, and some of them grant it, that all the Members of the
Church in those texts of Scripture are called Saints, or holy. 1. because of
the holiness of the Covenant. 2. Or holy, because of the holy Confession. 3. Or
holy Profession. 4. Or of the holy Sacraments of the holy Covenant, whereunto
they were partakers; or finally, because of their external Vocation to
salvation: But all this makes them not learned, prudent, judicious, nor
furnishes them with other abilities, which are needful for the exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

5. But put the case that we should grant them all this, yet can they not
escape thus, saying that in so doing, they admit not all those that are
actually received in the Church, as her Children, and members, to the exercise
of Ecclesiastical Discipline, but the lesser part, for there are more ignorant,
then learned, and ill men, then good in the Church; or at least, that have not
the gifts required thereunto, and so in rejecting, they are forced to admit some
Election, and establish some representative Church by the admission of some,
and the exclusion of others; so that in this point they differ not from us, in
not admitting a Representative Church, but in admitting a greater and more Vast
Representatative Church, then we; and the members thereof of less Abilities.

6. Hence it follows, that men have not right to exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in quality of Christians professing Christ (since women and
others have it not) but in some other consideration, which we desire to know,
viz. whether it be not for their Ability; and so it is not to be found in all.

7. This rejection of some (yea of the greater part of the Church, as women,
children, old men, ignorants, Vicious men, and others that have not the
ability to judge, as all unholy and profane men) and admission of others,
that are the lesser part as sanctified men, in whom only consists the Church,
is capable to breed Divisions in their Church, if the people have power to
judge; For, accordingly, they will judge in favor of themselves to be
admitted, and so procure a schism and quarrel; for the taking away whereof,
the Government accordingly is established, let them take it into consideration,
how hard it is for any man, yea for the most part of the Church, to be declared
ignorant, imprudent, young, of an unripe judgment, and doting, etc. and to the
Church, and see the less part, which pretends to be the only Church, declared
apt and fit to their own exclusion, and what thereupon may ensue, in a
Democraticall Government, upon such filthy and infamous aspersions; in checking
the greater part as profane, it may peradventure stir up a bellum servile,
more dangerous to the Church, then that amongst the Romans.

8. The Doctrine that destroys Gods holy Ordinance, viz. the Distinction,
which he has put betwixt the Rulers of the Church, and them that are ruled, and
are to obey, cannot be admitted, as our Brethren will confess.

But the Doctrine that gives to every Member of the Church power and
administration of Jurisdiction, in ruling and governing the Church, is such;
For God has ordained some to rule, and others to obey, Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.
Ephesians. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17. Obey them, that rule over you,
and submit your selves unto them.

Now then, if some be Rulers, and others to obey, we cannot all be Rulers, as
it appears. 1. Cor. 12.28, 29. And God has set some in the Church, Apostles,
and Governments, etc. Are all Apostles, etc? Where he says that one gift is
not given to every Member of the Church, Note that he speaks here of those
gifts, or (...), that are called gratia gratis data, not for our own, but for
other men's use. Ergo, this order cannot be admitted.

9. No confused Discipline or government of Gods Church can be ordained by God;
for God is not the God of Confusion. 1. Cor. 14.33.

But that wherein every one of the people has Jurisdiction, or juridicall
power, is a confused Discipline or government. Ergo, It cannot be ordained by
God.

The Major will be granted, since it is Gods word:

The Minor is evident; For I put the case, that in a Church composed of some
20000 persons, there be some point of Doctrine to be decided, what disorder and
confusion should it not breed, if every one of that huge multitude, yea, every
illiterate, and idle fellow should come, and propound his idle thoughts? By
what wisdom of man could this many-headed beast be reduced to order?

It may be answered, that they should be wise;

But we reply, they are not, nor can that be hoped, or expected in this life:
nay, do any believe it, either Donatists or Anabaptists; and howbeit they were
all wise to salvation, yet follows it not, that they should all be wise for
Government, and Examination of all Church Officers.

10. The exercise of the Discipline of the Church is morally possible; for God
will not that his Church be governed by an order that is impossible.

But this Democraticall, and Plebeian exercise of Discipline, is not morally
possible, for if there were 20. or 30. points to be judged by such a huge
multitude certainly they could not easily discuss, and judge every point. For
if every one of 20000 should give his advise, and peradventure be interrupted
by some, and then begin his discourse again, which ordinarily falls out
amongst rude people, when should the Examen and discussion of the business be
ended? Grant to every one of them but half an hour, whereas, I warrant you,
some should take half a day, or half a year, and say little to the purpose,
and yet make (...) of one business only employing 12. hours a day counting
the Lords day also, should amount to two years, and four months or
thereabouts; so that here, there is too much delay; for a business should
scarce ever be judged or ended? what should become of all other business? What
if in this one question there should fall out 20. or 30. Incidents, whereof
every one should take up as much time as the principal Question, which quick
witted men may easily procure; when then should a Question be ended?

It may be answered, that there may be some order taken for deliberating and
consulting, which may hinder this, as at Rome, where there were 1000. Senators;
and in Paris, where at the Parliament there are 200. Senators. But they permit
not every man to discourse, as was ordained by the old fashion of Rome, whereby
every one of the Senators had power to tell out his opinion by word of mouth;
Senatoribus quibusque in Senatu sententia^ dicere, jus esto, Aulus Gellius,
lib. 3. cap. 8. Neither to give their voice in writing, because of the
weakness of their memories, and to avoid all dispute, and contention, which
falls out in discourse, which they call, deliberare ex libello, ex
pugillaribus; but holding their peace, and assenting to two, three, or four of
the wisest, who discuss it in the beginning, which the Romans called per
Discessionem; and therefore they were called Agipedes by Lucilius, because they
went on foot toward one of them, whose Judgment they followed; The French
call it opiner en Bonnet, because in assenting they only take off their Bonnet;
Sometimes they say nothing, but Idem, or; Et moy, or, de mesme; or, as the old
Romans did, by little stones, writing on them, C.A. or N. to signify
Condemned, Absolved, or, Nonliquet, I know not: such almost as the French use
in some Cases, and in some places, Par Balotes, and Buletins en l'Election des
Officiers and Beneficiers, by Bills or Tickets in the Election of Officers and
Incumbents or beneficed men: So did the Areopagites, and now the Venetians, or
per (...), or the stretching out of their hand, as the Athenians did; and
sometimes the Romans.

A. 1. I approve the Answer in not permitting all to speak; for many of them
cannot speak to the purpose; nor by writing; for many of them cannot write at
all.

If the third way be used, then you must choose a certain number to speak,
whose voices must be followed; and 1. that is no less to tie them to an
implicit Faith, then a Consistory does. 2. It is to diminish their power in
speaking; for their tongues are their own. 3. It is to contemn them, and
judge, that some have more authority, then others. 4. What, if some of the
people be of an other judgment then any of the rest, how shall they discover
it?

The Suffrages cannot be given by little stones, or Ballots; for Writing cannot
be used, because many of the people cannot write; and yet all this would take
up much time; and if there should fall in many incidents, there should never be
an end.

No more that external Sign, in stretching out the hand, or touching the
Bonnet; for so great a multitude should breed confusion; and besides that,
howbeit it might be useful in a Simple Affirmation, or Negation; yet in a
great diversity of judgments it cannot hold.

11. Besides this, the Discipline of the Church may be exercised in all times,
yea, in times of Persecution, as in the Primative Church.

But this Democraticall sort of Discipline cannot be exercised in all times,
and specially in time of Persecution, which is most ordinary to the Militant
Church; for if all the People should so meet together, it could not be without
great danger, under an Antichristian Prince; and principally in consulting
about her own conservation, her Counsel might easily be discovered, and the
Church of God betrayed by some men's wickedness, and others folly and
imprudence, whereas 10. or 12. or 50. of the most wise and prudent may easily
meet together without any eminent danger.

12. If a Congregation were great, as of 20000. or 30000. there could not be
found a commodious Place to contain them; and this I say by experience, for
being at one of their Conferences, there were so many, that we were like to be
smothered. And, there happened such a confusion, such partiality and jangling
by reason of the pretended equality, that we could reap no profit thereby.

13. Again, I pray, Is it fit, that for all particular businesses,
peradventure some of them very idle, and of small importance, that such a great
Congregation should be gathered together, and taken away from their Callings;
or that every particular fault should be made known to every particular man in
the Congregation? Should all the particularities; or circumstances of most
wicked and vile crimes, be examined, discussed, and voyced by so many of the
people; what should that be, but to teach them most execrable sins, whereof
they had never heard before; for it is certain, that many sins are learned in
hearing them. God forbid, that in the Christian Church (wherein any
Uncleanness should not be once named; Let no corrupt communication proceed out
of your mouth, Ephesians. 4.29. Let not uncleanness be once named amongst you, Ephesians.
5.4. Neither filthiness, ver. 4.) Children in their tender age, should hear
of such odious Sins, from which their very nature abhorres: And that young
people before they know well what is virtue, should hear all sort of vice;
That were worse, then the Jesuits Auricular Confession, and abominable Cases of
Conscience; In reading or hearing whereof the Conscience is either offended, or
infected.

It may be answered, that it is not needful to admit them in these Assemblies.

Reply. But the Assembly (say they) is open to all, to the end that all may
learn, how to exercise the power of Ecclesiastical government: If it be open
to all, how shall they be kept out? If to the end all may learn, how shall
they obtain this end if they be kept out?

It may yet be answered, that there is no less publication of odious Sins,
in white sheets at the Pillar of Repentance in Scotland.

A. That pain is only inflicted on some sins, 2. Neither are the
particularities or circumstances of the sins, declared which should be
scandalous. 3. Only the pain is published in general, but the particularities,
that may give offense are concealed.

14. In no Society, neither in the Government of a Family, nor of Schools,
or Academies, nor in Kingdoms, or Armies is it permitted to every man
promiscuously, without distinction, to judge and vote, but only to the
Overseers in their Societies: Wherefore then should that be permitted, yea
ordained in the Church of God, which is Gods house, Christ's School; Shall
there be no place for foolish, and impertinent fellows to judge in, but only
in Gods house, and Kingdom, the holy City, and his Kingdom? For what
inconvenience and Absurdities presses the one, the same follows on the other.

This Argument so proposed ab Exemplo must hold, because of the paritie of
Reason in both.

It may be proposed in Form of Syllogism thus:

There is no Society ruled by Law, wherein every man exercises the power of
Judge.

The Church of God is a Society ruled by Law: E. In the Church of God every
man cannot exercise the power of Judge.

The Minor will be granted: The Major may be proved by Induction; for so is it
not in Academies, Armies, Republics, Kingdoms, etc. E. It may be excepted
that it is not so in the Church; But it is unreasonable after a perfect
Induction, and Enumeration of all other Societies, that you should except only
against that which is in question: As if I should go about to prove that
Christ, according to his humane nature had a Body, his due dimensions, or
qnantitie, because all men have so; But you should except Christ; for so no man
can prove any thing; for evermore my Adversary shall except that which is in
question.

15. If all the people promiscuously may judge, then they may judge without
their Presbyters, and Church Officers.

But the Consequent is false. E. The Antecedent, from whence it is inferred, is
false also.

They will not deny the Assumption, and it may be proved thus; For without
their Pastors, and Seniors, the Congregation cannot make a complete Church, the
People being but one half thereof, and their Rulers the other: Besides, that
there may be some Cases, wherein the People cannot judge alone, as in point of
Heresy, and touching the capacity of Ministers, admitted to Preach.

The Consequence of the first Proposition may be proved thus; For if they be
all Judges; and of four hundred or five hundred, four or five, or fifteen
chance to be absent, the rest may judge, the number of those that are absent;
being no ways considerable, in respect of that which is present; But so is the
Case in the first Proposition.

Item, Because, if of the people, two, three, or four, yea 20.30. or 40. be
absent, the Church Officers, with the rest, will judge without them: Why shall
not then the People have the same power also in absence of the Church Officers,
fince they have all alike power to judge, viz. every man one voice? This
Argument arises out of our Brethrens Supposition, viz. that every one has
power to judge and rule.

16. I Would willingly ask our Brethren, whether or no they think that an
Ecclesiastical Judgment can hold without the Peoples presence and voices? If
it can hold, then the peoples voycing is not absolutely needful, nor ex
instituto divino; For it cannot hold, nor be just, without that which God
requires to make it just.

If it cannot hold without the Peoples voices, I ask again, whether all the
peoples voices be requisite: or that the major part suffice.

If all; it is impossible Morally; neither see we ever almost, that in a great
Congregation all can meet together: or if they meet together, that all consent
together, yea, nor in lesser Assemblies,

If the major part suffice, as it must be said, then can it not hold; for if
many be absent, and of those that are present, the major part surmount the
lesser, by 4.5.6. or 7. voices, then the lesser part may complain, that all
the people were not present, and so desire the business to be remitted to
another meeting; so that in conclusion no business should ever end, unless
all the people were present, which ordinarily never, or rarely falls out.

Item, they fall into that very inconvenience, which they press so hard
against their Brethren, viz. that they that are absent, shall be led by the
nose, and consent by an implicit Faith to a Judgment of Doctrine, or of
Discipline of great consequence, for other men's judgments sake, whereunto
Formally they dissented; For if Judgments of Consistories, composed of
Church Officers alone cannot hold, because then the People should be led by the
nose, and assent thereunto by an implicit Faith: no more should the Judgment
of the People in this present Case.

The same inconvenience, or worse, should fall out in voycing; for if there
were in the Assembly of 20000. 10000. for one part, and the rest for the other;
Here all the rest should be led by one implicit Faith to consent against their
own explicit Faith; for here things are carried by plurality of voices, which
are not weighed, but accounted.

If only the Masters of Families, or all Servants have power to voice, and if
that may not procure partialities, when a Father may draw his sons and servants
to his opinion, to voice with him, as he will.

19. Besides this, our Brethren must determine, how many they require to
accomplish the Assembly, to the end that the Judgment may hold, and be
valeable. How many for the discussion and voycing of the business? and after
it is voyced, and judged, how many to draw up the Sentence, or Judgment; for
in this all Nations do not agree, neither one Senate in the Kingdom with
another, in another Kingdom; nor one Senate in the same Kingdom with another;
nor one Senate with it self in diverse times. And if they determine it, we pray
them to draw their Determination thereof out of Gods word, since they will
admit of nothing concluded by natural Reason, or drawn from the Law of Nature.

20. We may bring many more Reasons to show the impossibility, or at least the
very great difficultic, that is in this sort of Judicatory, as the Case there
should fall in many incidents; as about refusing of some of the Judges; some
witnesses; the Protestation of the nullity of the Judgment for sundry Reasons;
that all the Judges were not well informed of the matter, some of them having
given their Judgment beforehand, some having promised to the party to judge
so or so, some of them having solicited others to judge so or so; if all these
Incidents should be discussed, and pass by the voices of 20000. men, when
should it be ended?

We might also bring other Reasons, to show how that sundry things in this
Government are altogether repugnant to Ecclesiastical Government, as

21. That a man should be borne a Judge in Christ's Church without any Election,
or Vocation to such a place; But no man takes this honor unto himself, but
he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. And truly there is no reason,
that a man, yea that all men should rather be borne Judges in Gods Church, then
in the State.

22. The Hangman, and the most ignominious persons in the world should be
Judges here.

23. Nothing could ever be decided: for in case there were 5. or 6. diverse
Opinions, you could decide according to none: for if you followed that, which
had most voices with it, all the rest would voice against it, if that which had
fewer, they that had more would not suffer it: so what ever should be said, or
done, it should be controlled.

24. We only add Christ's Command, Math. 18.17. Tell it unto the Church. 1.
Unto the Representative Church, and not to every one of the People; for that
should be impossible. This passage our Brethren bring for them, but surely it
makes rather against them; for Christ here establishing an Ecclesiastical
Judicatorie, alludes to the order of the Jews in their Synagogicall
Judicatories, and Sanedrim, in Censuring of Vice, and redressing of the
grievances, that Brethren received of Brethren in the Church; for he abolishes
not such Judicatories, Quoad substantiam, since they are grounded on the Law of
Nature, but quoad Circumstantias, in so far as they are ordained by Moses,
Captain, and the leader of the people of God, or did only bind the people of
the Jews, and had for Object the transgression of the Political Law of Moses,
etc. yea it is probable, that they were not abrogated at all by Christ among
the people of the Jews, since they were Juris Naturalis, quoad substantiam and
Politici, quoadmodum, for he came not to abrogate, but to fulfill the Law: And
so has all the Christian world hitherto understood this Passage, whose
Judgments we cannot easily reject, without some solid ground; and so much the
rather, for that since Jesus Christ his time, till some forty, or fifty years
ago, or thereabouts, never any man of esteem did ever dream of such a
Popular, and confused Government, if ye except Morellies; And so is the word,
Ecclesia, taken, Deuteronomy, 31.28. (...), as the Septuagint translates it, gather
unto me all the Elders of your Tribes, and Officers, and Deuteronomy. 23. v. 1, 2, 3.
it is commanded, that he that is hurt by Bursting, or has his privy members
cut off; that is, a Bastard, an Ammonite, or a Moabite, shall not enter into
the Congregation, or Ecclesia, even to the Tenth Generation: Here Ecclesia, or
Congregation cannot signify the Real, but the Representative Congregation;
For it had been unjust, to exclude any man from the real Church, and
consequently from Gods Covenant, that desired to be therein. If it had been so,
they could not have received any Proselytes, which is against Gods Law, Exodus
23.48. where it is commanded, to admit unto the Passover all Strangers, that
would be circumcised: so that which was said to the Elders of Israel, that were
the Representative Congregation, Exodus 2.16. is said to have been said to the
Sons of Israel, that were the Real Congregation, Exodus 14. and the Text
confirms it; for Moses had not charge to say, that the Lord would bring up out
of Affliction the Elders only, but also the People.

25. This Doctrine at once condemns all the Martyrs, and Counsels, and all
their practice in Ecclesiastical Government.

26. Our Brethren hold, that the absent part of the Church may give over, or
remit their power of Judging to them, that are present, and that the lesser
part are bound to acquiesce with the major part in voycing; wherefore then may
not all the People give over, or remit their power of Judging to a certain
number of the wisest, such as the Representative Church is, or acquiesce unto
their Judgments?

27. To whom the Apostles, in the first Constitution of the Church, at their
last Farewells committed the power of Jurisdiction, and Ordination, to those it
is to be committed at this present.

But to Church Officers, or to the Representative Body of the Church alone, did
the Apostles, in the first Constitution of the Church, at their last Farewell
committed the power of Jurisdiction, Ordination, etc. Acts 20. 1 Pet. 5. Ergo.

But our Brethren reply, that we cannot show any Place in all the holy
Scriptures, or profane Authors, where the word, Church, is taken in this
signification, viz. for the Representative Church, or Congregation.

A. Whereunto we answer, 1. That the style of Scripture must not be sought in
profane Authors, but in Scripture it self.

2. Some give some Examples in profane Authors.

3. In Scripture our Adversaries will never find any place, wherein the word
(...) is taken for all the Real Parochial Church, to the exclusion of
children, women, all those that have not the use of Reason, and that are
notoriously vicious, as it is taken by themselves.

4. We on the other side, to confirm the signification, wherein it is taken by
us, viz. for the Representative Congregation, present them with these places, 1
Exodus 3. v. 14. Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, i. e. unto the
representative Body of the children of Israel, viz. the Elders of Israel
gathered together, as it is expounded, v. 16.2. Exodus 12. In the institution of
the Passover, v. 3. Speak ye unto all the Congregation of Israel, i. e. the
Elders, which were the Representative Body of Israel, as it is expounded, v.
21. and Reason confirms it; for they could not in so short a time speak to
all the Real Congregation, composed of so many thousands; neither could they
easily be gathered together into one place, nor could it be done without
apparent danger.

Item. Numb. 35.24. in speaking of Murder through ignorance, the Revenger of
the blood, and the Cities of Refuge, It is said that the Congregation shall
Judge between the slain, and the Revenger of Blood, according to those
Judgments; without doubt the Congregation here cannot signify all the Real,
but the Representative Congregation; i. e. the Elders, 1. Because, so it is
expounded, Deuteronomy. 19.2. and Joshua 20.4, 5, 6. 2. because it was not for every
one of the people, or the Real Congregation, but belonged to the Elders, that
were the Representative Body thereof, to Judge of the Blood.

And Deuteronomy. 31.28. Gather unto me all the Elders of your Tribes, and your
Officers, the 70. turn it (...). Now if (...) signify to congregate, By the
Rules of Conjugata it follows, that (...) signifies a Congregation, that was
congregated or gathered together from amongst the rest. But the Ecclesia, or
Congregation, that was here gathered together, was not all the Real, but the
Representative Congregation, consisting of Elders, etc. as appears by the
Text; Ergo.

So it is said, that Solomon assembled the Elders of Israel, and all the Heads
of the Tribes, etc. 1 Reg. 8.1.

And that David assembled all the Princes, etc. 1 Chro. 28.1. so the word
Congregation, is taken for the Representative Body thereof, 1 Chro. 13.1, 2, 3,
4 for David could not speak to all the Congregation, but to the Captains, and
Chieftaines thereof, as it appears v. 1. and 4. 5. neither could they all go
with him.

Deutrinomy, 23.1, 2, 3. It is commanded, that neither he who is bursten, or
that has his privy members cut off, or that is a Bastard, an Ammonite, or a
Moabite, shall enter into the Congregation, or in Ecclesia, even to the tenth
Generation; here the word Ecclesia, or Congregation must not signify the
Real, but the Representative Congregation; for it should have been unjust and
cruel to have excluded from the Church, and consequently from the Covenant of
God any of those, that desired to be admitted thereunto. 2. For then they could
not have received any of those Nations for Proselytes, to the tenth generation.
3. Because this is repugnant to another Law of God, Exodus 23.48. where it is
commanded to admit unto the Passover all Strangers circumcised.

28. If every member of the Church should have power, to Govern, or a power of
Jurisdiction in every Ecclesiastical Cause, Ergo of teaching also, and of
Deaconship; for there is a parity of reason in both; for there be some points
of Controversy as hard to be Judged, as it would be to master a Sermon: and it
is much difficulter to rule, then to exercise the charge of a Deacon.

But the Consequence is false, as is granted by all; neither can every one of
the People assist and give their voice touching every Alms, that must be given
to the Poor; yea it were very dangerous that every Poor man should Judge; for
then all the Poor should Judge one for another, and hunt after the Deaconship,
that they might keep the purse, or give their advise upon every point of
Doctrine taught, or to be taught; nor should they then need to learn at the
Sermons; And before the Pastor should teach the People, they must consult
whether his Doctrine be sound, or not; As in governing, we consult whether
this, or that is to be done, censured, or not censured.

29. If every man has power to rule, we need no Ruling Elders; for every
member of the Church is a Ruling Elder, since he may exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as the Ruling Elders do. But they hold the Consequent to be
false. Ergo.

They may answer, that Elders are needful to debate things before they be
propounded to the People; But that is only the duty of a Committee, and less
then to Judge; and he who may have a deliberative and decisive voice may debate
the matter; yea the matter being debated by the Elders, may be debated again
amongst the People; so that their Debate should besuperfluous.

30. Here to confirm this, we may bring in all those passages of Scriptur,
which our Brethren bring against it as Christ's Command, Mat. 18. etc.

1 Cor. 5. and 2 Cor. 2. They only have Jurisdiction and power of
Excommunication in Christ's Church, whom St. Paul in those passages commands to
cast out from amongst them, and to admit the Incestuous person; But not every
one of the promiscuous multitude, but those only, that are of the
Representative Body of the Church, those only whom St. Paul commanded to cast
out from amongst them, and to admit the Incestious person, Er.

The first Proposition is granted by our Brethren; the second is certain; for
that which is in the Text cannot appertain to every one of the people; This is
written to all the Church of Corinth, which was very great, and consequently
could not meet together as it is commanded, verse 4. neither could every one
of them deliver him to Satan, as it is commanded. 5. neither can it be showed
from the Text, that this is only said to grown men, that have the use of
Reason, that doat not, to the exclusion only of Children, of those that
doat, that want altogether, or in part the use of Reason; and of women.
Neither could every one comfort him, forgive him, etc. as it is commanded, 2
Cor. 2.7. and 15. Chapter. For further proof hereof we shall by and by bring
the rest of the passages, that they allege, for evidence against them.

CAP. 2. Where the Independants Opinions are refuted.
THey object 1. some Passages of Scripture, to prove that the Exercise of
Jurisdiction belongs to all the People promiscuously, as Mat. 18.17. Tell the
Chnrch all, i. e. the People.

Acts 1. where the People did choose Matthias to the Apostleship.

Acts 6. where Deacons are chosen by the people.

Acts 14.23. where Priests or Elders are said to be chosen of the People, i.e.
by the Peoples suffrages, signified by the stretching out of their hands.

Acts 15. in the difference about the Observation of the Ceremonial Law.

1 Cor. 5. and 2. Cor. 2. where the Incestuous person is excommunicated by the
People, and admitted again to the Communion by the same People.

To all these I answer in order, and 1. To that of Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church,
Ergo, all the People; I deny this Consequence; for our Brethren themselves, at
least one great, or the greatest part of them denies, that we should delate
every Offender to all the People, as 1, to women. 2. to children. 3. To
distracted Persons, howsoever they be members of the Church. 2. Neither can
they produce any Passage of Scripture, where the word Church is taken in this
signification, viz. for the collective Body of the Church, to the exclusion of
the greatest part thereof, viz. all women, children, distracted persons, and
vicious men, or notorious sinners; But of this we have said enough before.

To the second Passage, Act. 1.15.1. Put the case that the word, Disciples,
signify the promiscuous multitude, yet 2. I answer, that it is not there said,
that every one of them gave their voice, but only that- Peter stood up in the
midst of the Disciples, the number whereof was about 120.3. If every one of
them voyced; Ergo the women, and Mary, who are named, v. 14. voyced also, which
is contrary to St. Paul's command, that women are to keep silence in the Church.
4. Only therefore those did voice, that had power to voice, viz.
Church Officers, and not every one of the promiscuous multitude, for the
Reasons already alleged.

And it may be confirmed, 5. because it was not in the Peoples power to choose,
or not to choose an Apostle; for he shows from Psalm. 9. that another man must
take his Bishopric, v. 20. Item, he binds them in another point, that some
must be chosen of those men, which had accompanied with the Apostles, all the
time that the Lord Jesus went in, and out among them, beginning from the
Baptism of John, unto the day he was taken up from amongst them.

Obj. But wherefore then says Peter, v. 22. One must be ordained?

Answ. To show them, that necessitate Praecepti, of Gods command, or rather to
accomplish this Prophecy, Psalm. 9. some man must be put in Judas his place:
but hence it follows not, that he was to be chosen by the People.

Obj. But wherefore then says the Text, that the People appointed two; viz.
Barnabas, and Matthias?

Answ. The Text says not, that the People, but that they, viz. the Apostles
and other Church Officers, peradventure they that accompanied with them at the
time, that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst them.

2. Besides this, it is not for us to answer all these Questions, or wherefore
the Holy Ghost speaks so, or so; It suffices us to believe that which is
spoken; These things are written, and said, to the end that we should believe
them: It is our Brethrens part to prove from the Text, that which they say;
otherwise we neither can, nor will believe them.

6. To give them more satisfaction, and to answer sundry other Questions, that
may be proposed, we distinguish in the Creation of a Minister two things. 1.
His Vocation to the Charge; 2. His Admission unto the actual Exercise thereof:
The 1. contains, 1. the examen of his Life, 2. the examen of his Doctrine. 3.
the act of Ordination, or (...), As for the first of these three, it may be
done by the Pastors and Ruling Elders, by power of Jurisdiction, and by the
People by way of Accusation, in declaring to the Assembly of Pastors, and other
Church Officers, what impediments they find, if so be that the Person, that is
to be created Pastor, be of a vicious and scandalous life. The second belongs
not to every one of the People, but only to Church Officers, who are presumed
capable to judge of Doctrine, and of his ability for the Ministry. Now whether
this belongs to Pastors alone, or to the Ruling Elders also I will not dispute:
only they say, that they only can examine his Doctrine, that have the capacity
to judge of it.

To these two may be referred the voycing of his probitie, and capacity for his
Doctrine, which belongs to the Pastors and Elders, or to the Representative
Church; for howsoever the People may assist at the Action, to accuse the
person, that is to be received, of ill life, or false doctrine, or of
ignorance: yet for the Reasons above proposed, they are not to be accepted in
voycing either of his life, or Doctrine, but that belonging to the Pastors
alone, 1 Timothy 3.15. and chap. 5. v. 11, 22.

The third, viz. the right of Ordination, or (...) seems only to belong to the
Pastors; neither do our Brethren deny it; and it may be proved from 1. Tim.
3.14. Tit. 1.5.

As for the Admission, or Acceptance of a Minister into a particular Church,
it belongs to the people, or to the whole Congregation; for as a Husband is not
to be urged upon a woman against her will, but it being not Concubitus,
consensus, qui facit matrimonium: no more is a Pastor upon a particular Church;
and howsoever he may go to the Pulpit, and preach among them, yet unless they
consent, he is not their Minister.

Now to apply this to the present Passage, I say, that the examen of life and
Doctrine, in this Election of Matthias, belonged to the Apostles, and other
Church Officers, (whereunto might be admitted such of the People as had the
capacity) so did the Deliberative and the Decisive voycing, as likewise the
power of Ordination belonged to the Church Officers alone; And yet the People
were there. 1. to propound, if they knew any impediment against his Vocation.
2. to know that he was chosen. 3. to admit him as a Minister of the Universal
Militant Church upon Earth; and in this they might voice (...), i. e. by giving
their consent in stretching out their hands. Neither can they, or any man
living draw any more from this Text: But note here, that the Vocation of a
Minister, Essentially, and Formally consists in the Decisive voycing, and in
his Ordination: The examen of his life, and Doctrine, are only Antecedents, and
the Admission of the people only Consequents of the Vocation; and so
Accidentally it belongs to the People, but Essentially to Church Officers only.

But, what if the Congregation will not admit the Minister, that is ordained?

A. I answer 1. That the Representative Church should not ordain a Minister,
till they be assured of some Flock, or Congregation, that will admit him for
their Minister. 2. That if after they have promised to admit him, they admit
him not; they do wrong to the Church: He is their true Pastor, and they are to
be commanded to admit him: even as a woman, that has lawfully consented to
marriage, by her contracting of her self to such a man. 3. If they will not
obey, nevertheless he is a Minister, yea, their Minister, and has power to
teach, though he cannot exercise it for want of a Flock: But it concerns the
Church to provide him of some Flock.

7. Others answer, that the People may have a hand in the Election of their
Church Officers in Ecclesia constituenda, such as this was, but not in
constituta.

The Passage which our Brethren bring out of Acts 6.2, 3. and 5, 6. prove not,
That every one of the people had power of Jurisdiction, and of the voycing in
the Election of the seven Deacons, to the exclusion of children, young men, men
of weak Judgment, notorious Sinners, and women; for the Text has no such
thing in it.

2. It may be doubted, whether the multitude of the Disciples, v. 2, 3.
signify the promiscuous multitude, or the multitude of the seventy Disciples,
chosen by Christ.

3. But suppose it signify generally Christ's Disciples, and not precisely
those seventy, yet it is not said, that they created, or ordained the Elders.

4. The contrary may be concluded from the v. 4, 5. Then the Twelve called the
multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, Look ye among you seven men
of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint
over this Business; where ye see, that the Apostles appointed their Deacons,
and not the People; only the People sought out those seven men, as knowing
better what kind of men were among them, then the Apostles; And they presented
them to the Apostles to be examined in their lives, and Doctrine before the
Church Officers, and to be ordained by them; So that the Apostles 1. ordained
the Office. 2. commanded the People to seek out honest Men. 3. examined them.
4. and appointed or ordained them, The people only had the power to inquire of
their lives, and to admit, or approve them by their consent and (...), v. 5.
After that, They were ordained by the Church Officers, that were present in the
whole Action, and had seen all things passed without partiality, as I have
above declared.

5. If the People had had any voice here, which cannot be collected out of this
Text, yet it should only follow, that they had this power in Ecclesia
constituenda, but not in constituta, i. e. in the first Institution of
Churches, or Church Officers: but not in a Church already established, and
furnished with all her ordinary Church Officers, say others.

The Place, Acts 14. verse 22. whereon they insist so much, has (...), and
when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, Here they conceive, that
the word, signifies to create Ministers by Suffrages of the People, who had
voice in the creating of Elders.

A. To this some answer, and that very probably, that the word (...), has
three diverse significations. 1. that it signifies the same, that the latin word
suffragari, or porrectis manibus suffiagia far, to give their approbation by
lifting up, or stretching out their Hands. 2. to choose in any fashion
whatsomever, Acts 10. verse 41.3. for the imposition of Hands commonly called,
(...), and so it is taken in some of the Fathers Writings: so they say that the
word (...), here, may be taken either in the second, or third signification,
and that it cannot be proved from the Text, that it is taken in the first: But
they take that for granted, which they are not able to prove.

2. Put the case it signify here to ordain by the Consent of the Peopte; yet
follows it not, that this Consent of the People was a Voice, because it was
not asked of every man a part; neither has the Text that; nor can it be sought
in great Congregations.

3. Put the case; they had Voice; yet follows it not, that they had voice in
the Examen, and Judging of the Pastors sufficiency, since they had not the
Judgment, or sufficiency themselves to Judge thereof: but only, as I said
before, in the Examen of his life, if they knew any thing, that might hinder
his Reception; or in the acceptance into a particular Church, or rejection
from it, which only belonged to the Congregation, wherein he was to exercise
his Office; which they called (...) and (...). And therefore as Tilenus
observes in his Dispute, De Vocatione Ministrorum, the Church of old times was
wont to write in a Table, or Placard, in some public place, the name of him,
who was destined to the Ministry: or in case that could not commodiously be
done, they named him publicly in the Ecclesiastic Assembly, to the end that
if any man knew any thing, which might hinder his Reception, He might advertise
the Church within such a time, as She prescribed for that purpose; And thus
much we grant, and this Text proves no more.

Our Brethren triumph much also of the Place, Acts 15. where they pretend, that
in that famous Controversy betwixt Paul, and Barnabas, on the one part; and
some Pharisees on the other, about the observation of the Ceremonial Law, and
of Circumcision, the People Judged, and had voice, as well as the Pastors, and
Elders, both at Antioch, and at Jerusalem, which they prove; 1. because v. 2.
the Brethren determined to send Paul, and Barnabas to Jerusalem, unto the
Apostles, and Elders about that Question.

I answer 1. That the Text says not, that the Brethren and People determined
to send them; but that they determined; which, probably, were those of the
Representative Church.

2. Put the case, that all the Church, and every member thereof determined to
send them: yet could they not determine that, but as they could, viz. the
Representative Church, composed of Church Officers, by power of Jurisdiction in
voycing, and giving of Judgment; And the People by consenting to their just
Judgment explicitly, or implicitly.

3. It may be, that the Church was divided into two Factions of equal force,
which made a great Schism; for the Text says, v. 2. that Paul and Barnabas
had no small dissension with the Pharisees; and in such an extraordinary case
the Consent of the people might well have been sought: Howsoever the Text says
it not. 4. But, howbeit it were so; Extraordinary Cases are not to be drawn
into consequence. 5. Howbeit, the People had determined; yet did they it not in
an Ecclesiastical, but in a Political way, viz. in furnishing them their
Charges, and in that they might have Voice or Power to consent, or give
suffrage in furnishing money, which was accidental to this Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual Power. 6. To send Deputies, or the parties to Jerusalem, or to a
Synod, to debate the question, is not a proper act of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction: but the Voycing, and Pronouncing of Sentence in Ecclesiastical
Causes.

2. They prove it from this Text; because, they were brought on their way by
the Church. E. What follows? That every one of the People in the Church, except
Women, Children, Distracted men, and Sinners had Voice in this business?

A. 1. I deny the Consequence; for how know they, that there were no Women,
nor Youths, that brought them on their way? 2. How know they, that all the
Real Church brought them on their way? 3. To bring them on their way, is not
an Act of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but of Christian Charity, or of Civil
Humanity; Neither belongs it to every one, that convoyes a Commissioner a
part of his way, to have a Decisive Voice in that, which his Commission
contains. Truly, This is so ridiculous, that I am ashamed to answer it, or
that the world should believe, that so good and so learned men, should be moved
to make a Schism in the Church of God, for so frivolous Arguments.

3. They prove it from the fourth verse, because, they were received of the
Church, and of the Apostles and Elders. E. Every one in the Church had power of
Voycing, and of Jurisdiction, except Women, Children, and Sinners.

A. 1. I deny the Consequence; For he who receives a Commissioner, or a party
has not evermore Power, to hear his Commission, much less to judge thereof,
as we see in State-Businesses. 2. The Text says not, that they were received
by all the Real Church, excepting Women, Children, etc. 3. Neither says the
Text, that they that received them, received them immediately in the Peoples
name. 4. Or, that they were received by them, in quality of
Church-Commissioners from Antioch. But rather in quality of Apostles, by
Apostles, by whom God had done great wonders in the Conversion of the Gentiles,
as it may be concluded, from the 3. and 4. verses; For in declaring this, they
rejoiced. 5. Neither was this Reception an Act of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
and it seems that those that were so received were not all the Commissioners:
but those only, that had converted the Gentiles, viz. Paul and Barnabas.
Ans. I answer; the Antecedent may be denied, that the word, Congregation, or
Church, here signifies, all the Members of the Real Church, as above we have
clearly proved, because our Brethren confess, that it signifies not Women,
Children, etc. 2. Put the case, it signify all the Church, or the whole
Church, yet can it not signify it wholly, Significat totam, sed non totalis,
but every part according to the matter in hand; The Epistle then was written by
the whole Church; but by their Representative Body, as having power of
Jurisdiction; and by the rest, as consenting directly, or indirectly.

Ob. But in this Church is comprehended the Brethren, who are distinguished
from the Apostles, and Elders; E. they signify the People.

A. 1. It may signify the Evanglists, the Prophets, and those, that had the
Gift of Tongues, etc. 2. I grant it, according to my former declaration; only I
deny, that they had Power of Jurisdiction, or a Decisive voice in this Company.
3. What if it be denied, that the word Brethren here, signifies every one of
the promiscuous multitude, and I should say that it signifies the Deacons; or
men of the better sort, that had a Deliberative voice. 4. Our Brethren
themselves deny, that it signifies all Brethren, as Children, and Women, who
are accounted under the word, Brethren.
2. Ans. I deny the Consequence of the Argument. 1. Because the Letters were
also written to children, women, young men, and notorious Sinners, and yet even
according to our Brethrens confession, they had not Power of Voycing, or of
Jurisdiction in this, or in any other Ecclesiastical cause.

2. Because, that all the Scriptures are written to every Christian, yea that,
which touches the day of Judgment, and yet never any one of them shall judge
thereof, but be judged thereby.

3. Because, howbeit their Letters, or this Judgment was written to all; Yet
was it not written to all in the same fashion, but to every one according to
his Vocation, as the Kings Edicts, viz. To some, merely to be obeyed by them;
To others, that have Jurisdiction, as to inferior Judicatories, to obey them;
and to cause them to be obeyed by others.

Ob. They prove it from this Chapter, v. 3. because, S. Paul and Barnabas being
come back from Jerusalem to Antioch, they gathered the multitude, and delivered
the Epistle written from the Apostles, etc.

A. I answer, 1. That the text says not, that they delivered the Epistle to
the Multitude, but when they had gathered the Multitude, they delivered the
Epist.

Ob. But it is said, v. 31. when the Multitude had read the Epistle, they
rejoiced.

A. I answer; it is not said, that the Multitude had read the Epistle; but that
the Apostles delivered it; which when they had read: This they, may signify
some other, then the Multitude: 1. Because, it is not the custom in any
Assembly, that all the Multitude read Epistles. 2. Neither is it possible
without very great confusion.

Ob. But, how could the People then rejoice for the consolation?

A. 1. Because, the Letter was read in their presence by the Church Officers.
A. 2. But, put the case, that the Letter was read by the People, it could not
be, till after it had been read in the Representative Church, or by the Elders,
and after that it had been published. A. 3. Howbeit, it had been received, and
read by the People, or to the People, yet was not that an Act of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but of obedience of an inferior Ecclesiastical
Judicatorie to a Superior. A. 4. It might have been read, to all the People;
yea, to Children, and women, that were to obey; And yet it follows not
presently, that they had Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. A. 5. It might have been
read to all, or, by all, Tanque subjecto Denominationis, Et ut quod; But not,
tanquam subjecto, ut quo; as when the whole Kingdom is that, which is named
rich or potent, howbeit their Riches and Power be not in every man, but in a
few: So a man is said to be judged by the Kingdom, who is only judged by the
Kings Counsel, or by the Parliament, or Representative Kingdom; and
nevertheless, what the Parliament does is said to be done by the Real
Kingdom; or it may belong to the whole Body, but not wholly, but to every
part, according to the exigence thereof.
Ob. They say, that 1 Cor. 5. and 2 Cor. 2. The Apostle commands all the People
to Excommunicate the incestuous man, when they were gathered together: and
after his repentance, to receive him to the peace of the Church again.

A. We deny, that the Apostle gives any such Power to the People, or
promiscuous multitude by that passage, but only to Church Officers, that
represents the Church.

Inst. But they prove it on this manner; They among whom the Fornicator was,
that were puffed up, when they should have sorrowed, and from out of the midst
of whom he was to be put, who had done that thing; Item. They who had to purge
out the old leaven; that were not to company with Fornicators, Covetous men,
Drunkards, etc. received Power to judge, and to Excommunicate that incestuous
man.

But the Fornicator was not amongst the Elders alone; neither were they alone
puffed up, etc. E. He was not to be judged by them alone, but by the Church
with them, though governed by them.

A. 1. This Argument fails mightily in form, 1. Because it contains two, or
three Conclusions, viz. 1. He was not to be judged by them alone. 2. He was to
be judged by the Church with them. 3. He was to be judged by the Church,
governed by them. 2. This Syllogism is either Categoricall; and so fails,
because of the Assumption Negative in the first Figure; or, Conditional
because of the Major Relative; and so it fails, because it destroys the
Antecedent in the Assumption.
A. 2. It fails in Matter; For the first Proposition, being taken Universally,
is false, because the Fornicator was among Women, and Youths, etc. who were
puffed up, etc. and yet our Brethren grant, that they had not power to Voice,
or to Excommunicate. 2. Because, 2. Cor. 2. v. 6. This punishment is said to be
inflicted by many; and not by all; for many are opposite to all, as ye may see
in Arist. 1. Top. c. 1. sect. 7. 3. Because, in the Text, there is (...), and
not (...), as Beza observes, which is more then (...); for (...), as others
observes; it is only the greater part in number, as in that passage of Arist. 1
Top. 1. sect. 7. but (...), as those that are greater in dignity, which are
but few, viz. the Church Officers, that rule the Church, as Beza observes upon
this place.

A. 3. That howbeit this be said, and written to them all; Yet is it not said
to them all, always, but according as they were capable to obey; Now some were
capable to obey by Judicial Power, as the Representative Church in
Excommunicating him, and so binding themselves, and others by Authority to quit
his company; Others only, as private Persons, or Christians, in obeying the
Sentence of the Representative Church; And so this was said, and commanded to
private Christians.

But they Reply; As it was not enjoined the Levites, and Elders alone in
Israel, to purge out of their Houses the material Leaven, but it belonged to
the People also: so is it in the Spiritual Leaven.

A. This we grant: that it was the duty of every Israelite, by obedience, as he
was a Private person, to put away the Material Leaven out of his own house:
And so it is every private Christians duty, to put away the Spiritual Leaven:
But neither among the Israelites, had every private, or particular man a
public Authority, and Jurisdiction, to put it away out of his own, and all
other Houses; nor among Christians, to put away Spiritual Leaven: Every
particular man in his own house may command; but not in another man's without
public Authority.

They bring another Text. 1. Tim. 5.20. Those, who sin, rebuke publicly, that
others also may fear. But what infer ye from hence? E. Every one of the
People have Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to rebuke publicly?

A. We deny the Consequence; 1. For, this is said to Timothy, who was a
Pastor, and an Evangelist: and not to every one of the People. 2. Because,
every one of the People has not the gift, to robuke publicly, at least
pertinently: or, 3. If some of them meddle with this charge, I think they will
deserve more to be rebuked themselves, then he who is rebuked by them. 4. If
this belong to every one of the People. E. That which is said, Cap. 4. v. 11.
These things command and teach. v. 12. Let no man despise thy youth. v. 14.
Neglect not the gift, that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Item, That which is said, c. 5.
v. 21.22. About laying on of hands, and drinking of wine: But all this should
be ridiculous, and superfluous.

The truth is, that here, as in other Epistles, many Duties are commanded; but
not all, to all, but some to Public persons, as to Pastors, to Church-Rulers:
Some to particular Persons: And others are common to all; And this here is
commanded to Timothy a Pastor, and in his name to all other Pastors, as the
same common Duty of them all.

After Scripture, they bring Reason, but against both Scripture, and Reason.

1. What concerns all, ought to be done by the consent of all: But the
Government of the Church concerns all. E.

A. If by the word, Consent, be here meant Formal, and Actual explicit
Consent; it is false; 1. Because, our Brethren crave not the consent of Women,
and young Men; and yet the Preaching of Gods word, the Administration of the
Sacraments, and the Government of the Church, concerns them all.

2. Because, scarsly is it possible, or at least it falls rarely out, that
every one, whom every Act of Ecclesiastical Government concerns, consents
thereunto; for Voices and suffrages sometimes are divided, yea among our
Brethren in their voycing; So that this is against themselves.

3. In our Churches, it is done by the consent of all, either Formal, or
Virtuall, since our Ecclesisticall Discipline, and Government is established by
all; and our Church Rulers have the Power to rule according to Gods word, by
consent of the People, so far forth as they actually consent thereunto, or
contradict it not.

4. Either they understand here the general Form of Government, and the power
of Jurisdiction; or the exercise thereof in actual judging; or the execution
thereof after the matter is judged; which they will to be done with the consent
of all; The first is established by God without our consent, as they avow; The
second we deny it; for in the Political Government, the Judges do Voice, and
judge without the consent of all, whom it concerns; As for the third, if it
concern all particularly, as Excommunication; then it is published; and if
none contradict the Judgment, they are thought to consent, at least
interpretative, since they contradict it not; or if any man dissent, his
Reasons are to be heard; which if they be just, the proceeding is to be
hindered; if not, he is to rest contented, according to Gods word; And if after
sufficient satisfaction he acquiesces not, he is to be punished according to
the quality of his Fault.

Ob. If your Ecclesiastical Senate judge alone, as the Representative Church,
as ye call it; then must it judge according to the Judgment of the People, or
Real Church; otherwise it shall no more represent the People, or the whole
Congregation, then an Assent represents a Dissent; or Black represents White.
But that can it not, unless it know the Judgment of the People, which cannot
be known, but by their Voycing, and hearing of them. E.

R. I answer. 1. to the Major; it must be conform to their actual Judgment
formal; I deny it for the reason here alleged: to their vertuall Judgment,
I grant it; for they profess actually, that they will follow Gods word,
wherein vertually is contained, and they may be deduce, if they will, that the
Representative Church judges not according to their erroneous, formal and
actual judgment; and so the Assumption is false. R. 2. To their actual
Judgment, whatsoever it be; I deny it: To that whereby they will judge truly
according to Gods word; I grant it; and then the Assumption is false. R. 3. To
all their Judgment; I deny the Major, for it is impossible to follow the
Judgment contradictory of diverse Persons; or those of one man, which actually
and formally, or virtually may be contradictory to themselves. R. 4. I answer,
the Representative Church must judge according to the actual Judgment of the
Real Church, or People; it is false; For what if the People be infected with
Heresy? Shall the Ministers and Rulers of the Church in that case become
Heretics, or judge in favor of Heretics, according to the Judgment; Such as
it should be according to Gods word; it is true; for the Representative Church
is not so called, as if it represented the Churches Judgment, such as it is;
but such as it should be according to Gods word, that rules them both; yea, if
that should represent this actual Judgment, it should do more, then 20.
diverse Judgments, which oftentimes are to be found amongst the People upon one
subject; And so we deny the Assumption of the Syllogism. To the confirmation
thereof, I answer; that it should no more represent their actual Judgment; I
grant it: but it should represent their Potentiall Judgment, such as they are
bound to have, howsoever their actual Judgments be contradictory.
Ob. But, what if the Judgment of your Ecclesiastical Senate, or
Representative Church be wrong, and that of the Real Church sound?

A. That Case is extraordinary, in respect of the order established in Gods
Church; for when it is said, Tell it unto the Church: and if he hear not the
Church, etc. It is supposed, that the Church will judge the judgments of the
Lord, or according to his Law; neither has She any other order from God, but
in that extraordinary Case supposed. I answer, that neither the People, nor
any particular man is bound to obey the Representative Church, but every one
has power of God, to contest lawfully the Judgment of the Representative
Church, and She is bound to admit them in their contestations, and to hear
them according to the Scripture, and to amend their Judgment: And if all the
Church, or the greater part of the Real Church, or Congregation oppose it
self to their Judgment, it cannot stand, nor be put in execution; yea, I dare
say, that the Representative Church, showing her self pertinacious in her
error, after sufficient conviction, or refusing to hear her conviction, is
really Schismatic, or Heretical (according to the matter contested) in Gods
account; And howsoever particular men cannot right themselves, but are bound to
suffer injustice, so long as they stay in such Churches (since they are not
Ecclesiastical Judges;) or to retire themselves out of the society of such
Oppressors, to the end they may more easily defend themselves: nevertheless
the Collective Body of the Real Church, or the greater part thereof, if it
have the Ability, is bound to refute them, to make them ashamed, yea, to
contemn their Judgment, and by all lawful means, oppress such Oppressors:
And this is the Doctrine of our first Reformers, oppressed by the Roman
Antichristianisme, against Papists, which holds also in Reformed Churches; For
it is all one to me, to find Antichristian Tyranny at Rome, or at Edinburgh,
London, Paris, or Amsterdam, It is not the place, but Antichristian Tyranny, or
Doctrine, that makes an Antichrist.

And to be quit with them here, I ask again, what if the Judgment of the
Consistory be right, and that of the People, which ordinarily falls out,
wrong: or if the Judgment of the greater part of the People be wrong, and that
of the lesser part right: what then is to be done or followed? Here they shall
find themselves in no less straights, then they think to draw us unto.

Ob. They say, it is a thing never heard nor seen in any Kingdom of the
world: or, in any Ecclesiastical Judicatorie before Calvin, and Beza, that all
the People should be secretly (as it were in a Chamber of Meditation) judged
out of all men's presence by six or ten Ecclesiastical Persons.

A. They, that say so, have not seen nor heard much of that which passes in the
Christian world: it is a thing very ordinary, to see some civil Causes, in
civil Judicatories Pleaded with the doors shut, by the consent of the Parties:
yea sometimes, by the will of the Judges. 2. And I would pray them (to go no
farther) to tell me, if every man has liberty to enter in at the Parliament,
here at home. They cannot deny, but that the door is kept close, and that
ordinarily, only the Members of the House have entry.

3. And nevertheless; if the Parties desire to plead their Causes in the
presence of so many as may enter, I doubt not but the Reformed Church will
grant it them; yea, there is an Act of the French Discipline to that purpose;
commanding that the Parties desiring their Causes to be discussed openly, the
doors cast open, it should be granted.

Yea, we maintain; that in such Cases, when parties complain of such secret
Ecclesiastical oppression, the Church is bound by law and Conscience to
proceed publicly, and to justify to the world her Proceedings; otherwise,
she is no ways to be believed.

And this Argument I had willingly passed over, if it had not been urged
against me; and that I had been prayed to answer it by some of our Brethren
that thought it so strong, that it could not be answered.

But to answer ad hominem; may not such faults fall out amongst them that
object this Argument, as we have Examples of it? Our Question is not so much
what is done, as what should be done; How to establish a Law against Abuses in
the Churches, and not, How men abuse their own Authority.

FINIS.

