The good VVomens CRIES against the EXCISE Of all their Commodities.

SHOWING, As the business now stands, they are in no Case able to bear such
heavy Pressures, and insupportable Burdens, occasioned by the Iuncto's new
Impost on their Wares, whereby they are like to fall into great want of
Trading. and putting off their Commodities at the prizes formerly, to the utter
undoing of their dear Husbands and Families for ever.

Therefore having a Fellow-feeling of one another lamentable and languishing
Cases, (notwithstanding any Act to the contrary) have put forwards themselves
to seek redress of their aggrievances, and inabilities of their
over-burthened Husbands insufficiencies, and unsatisfying performances in their
several Occupations; have convened together in a Feminine Convention in
Doe-little-lane, and tendered their aggrievances and complaints to the
consideration of the Commonwealth; desiring speedy redress therein.

Written by MARY STIFF, Chair-woman, in Vinegar Verse.

WESTMINSTER: Printed at the Sign of the Horns in Queen Street, near my Lord
Fairfax's House, and are to be sold at the Dildoe in Distaffe-Lane. 1650.

The good VVomens CRIES against the Excise, on all their Commodities.
Good People all that hear our Cries,
Pity poor Women's Miseries.

WE cannot now set on the Pot, with a Sheeps-head dye of the rot, Oynon nor
Oatemell use God-wot; (pox take them:) When that we go to salt our meat, or to
make Pyes to bake and eat, this damned Excise lies in the heat that bakes them:
We cannot wash our Smocks or Shirts, when we have gilded them by squirts, but
straight in an Excise-man blurts, and smells to it. Excise for Soape the Knave
requires, Excise for Log-wood used by Dyers, to maintain Rogues, Knaves,
Flooles, and Liars, pray look to it. Tobacco two shillings the pound, the
Devil sure will them confound, good people pray come curse them round, and
spare not. Excise on Ale, Excise on Salt, Excise on Cloth, Excise on Malt;
Excise on what so ere you called, and fear not. All Linen fine or course must
pay, Excise, or else they will take it away, Lord who ere thought to see this day,
in England? for Feather-beds, for Chairs, for Stools; for Childrens Babyes,
Caps for Pooles, and for all handy-crafts-mens tools, these Knaves stand:
Excise for Paper I must pay, or else my Muse must pine away; they care not what
I write or say, in anger. Excise they have-for Pots and Pans, for Pigins,
Noggins, and for Cans, yet Harry Martins ware free stands, to bang her Excise
strong as Aquvaita the Juncto has to make them mighty; and when they are warmed,
O then they will fight ye, with ten Whores; Excise on Sugar brown and white,
Excise on Candles that we light, but when King Charles comes, then we will
fight, and quit scores. Excise on Spirits they do lay, but from such Spirits
Lord we pray, deliver us and chase away, these vermin; they do Excise Wine by
the Tun, and all the Liquors that do run, a Halter catch them, or a Gun, that
harm men: Sweet Sugar Candy cannot escape, no more then can the juice of Grape;
Ferriting, Shoostrings, Laces, Tape, they get by: Hatbands, Ribands, Gloves,
and Hats; and for our Beds the very Mats, Tinder-Boxes and Rat-Traps, they live
by. Excise for Pepper, Currants, Figs; for Capons, Rabbits, and for Pigs, for
Childrens Tops and Whirlygigs, pox rate them. For Earthen Ware and Skins of
Leather, a Halter tie them fast together, that they may hang in wind and
weather, to state them: Excise on Cheese and Butter too, the more for to
augment our woe, good God what will these Rebels do? to begger's. Excise on
Glasses brittle Ware; Excise on all save of our care, we must lie hard, and
hardly fare, guds doggers: Excise on Pewter, Tin, Lead, Brass; to furnish out
each ignorance Ass; and Assessments for Sir Thomas, and Cromwell: thus do
they rack, thus do they rave; the more we give, the more they crave; else
plundered by each Rogue and Knave, and Rake-hell. The Bishops Lands and all
their store, they have lately sold, and yet are poor, and like the Horse-Leach
cry more, more, and threaton. But if all things hit but aright, and Charles the
second comes to fight; the Rebels will be hanged downright, or beaten: Tom
Ladle then will rue his folly, and Bradshaw Jack be melancholy, the Loyallists
be brisk and jolly, to hear i; Though these have murdered the King, they
must not think to escape the string; a joyful sight to see them swing, never
fear it. The roguerie that these Knaves have hatched, in all the world cannot
be match d, but in their snare they will be caught, in halters: We Will Bonfires
light with Cromwells Nose, and Tyburne deck with Charles his foes, and Gregory
shall have all their Clothes, when it aliers. Then will the Sisters snot and
snivell, and all the Saints make pittious drevil; when Cromwell marches to the
devil in earnest. Corbet will close Mourner be, and Mildmay swing in a
whimsie; Hie then quoth Leuthall, up go we, intrue jest. Such Hypocrites can
never escape, that murder, steal, and commit Rape; for them the mouth of hell
does gape, wide open; were ever people deceived thus? was ever King so glorious?
or Religion reformed thus? by Poper Gun powder Traitors did but intend, to
bring their King to such an end; but that the Devil was not their friend,
betrayed them but these have in an open Hall, with impudence gone beyond all;
nor did those blondy Traitors fall, dismay them. They butchered Charles at his
own gate, they took his Jewels, Money, Plate; and call themselves a Free
State, by plunder: They sold his Hair, his Blood, and Crown; they keep the
Prince too from his own, were ever such damned Traitors known, O wonder! They
sold his Household Stuff and Goods, his Manors, Forests, Chases, Woods; yet
seek to shed his Childrens bloods, like Devils: They damned their souls by
treachery; sacrilege, and perjurie; of covetousness no end we see, of
evils. Our Husbands they no work can get, our Children starve for want of
meat, and all we earne must make Knaves great, in bravery; whilst Cromwells
Trull sits like a Queen; in Cloth of Silver, Satin green, eats all the
dainties can be seen, by slavery: Then does her Stallion feed his fill, and of
his Last then has his will; Morley must make, and Noll must kill, it is pretty:
each stinking Pusse, that the other day, served the Hogs, and went to hay, now is
clad in the Queens rich array, 'th'City Whilst Fairfax with his bable-Nose, wears
the Kings rich Gloves and Clothes, and of his Hangings does dispose, God save
us: his Fro that came from Rotterdam and makes the simpleton a R -- as proud as
is the Devils Damme, out-brave us: whilst Mistress Pride, that stinks of
grains, must have two maids bear up her trains, although her legs be full
of Blaines, and itchie. These be the Nobles of our Land, greatest in power and
command; for which you work, you fight, you stand, they will fit ye. When
Bradskaw's Doxie does lie in, she has the Queens Childbed linen, as if the
Brat to Charles were Kin, ber Bastard: That great Lollpoop's no sooner up, but
has his Caudle in the Kings Cup; and like his blood, does swallow't up, base
dastard: Then does he unto White Hall hie, with brace of Pages hanging by, to
invent more tyranny and treason: but if good women, you will be ruled, we will be by
him no longer fooled, and that his courage should be cooled, is reason. Ione
Barnet then upright did stand, and silence with her voice command, would take
the business in ^and, to pox him: to Westminster straight she hies, under the
Cloister where he lies, and all her cunning there she tries, to cross him
pretending great business she had; of which he said he should be glad, but in
the end it proved so to Bradshaw into a room he took her then, and soon
commanded out his men; and stoutly they fell to it then, without Law. Ione
Burne^ then came back a pace, when Jack had quibl'd her Law-Case, and shriv'd
Ione like a-Babe of Grace, and after, to the Committee Ione back did come, and
told them the great work was done; they gave her thanks, and home she run, in
laughter. The Women then did choose a Crier; and so adjourned unto the fire, and
did Jones witty trick admire, with wonder; this was the business of that day,
they all adjourned and went their way; and met again the next Thursday, like
thunder. The first thing that they took in hand, was the abuses of the Land,
and how in baste they might disband, the Army; Then up stood Dell, and Sis, and
Sue; and said, that Women the Lurdanes slew, that robbed good people of their
due; and harm ye Quoth Iudeth then, one of my name killed H^l^fernes of great
fame; and Iael did do the same to Sisera: did not Ester the Jews preserve;
when Haman did from Justice swerve? more lies upon us when we starve, O
Merdecay. Hang Haman up again I cry, that has sentenced us Jews to dye, revenge
is fit for tyranny, a Gallows. Jack Bradshaw shall the same fate feel, and so
shall Cook, Wild, Iermin, Steel, all drunk into perdition reele, what
follows? I dare not them with Hell affright, the Worm of Conscience so does
bite, they cannot rest by day nor night in quiet: and when that they do go to
eat, they still fear poison in their meat, their jealousy is wondrous great
in diet. When they do think to rest in bed, some bloody vision frights their
head, of righteous Charles they murdered at White Hall; but if we do not end
the strife, which must be with their cursed life; of Children, Father, Son
and Wife, be hanged all. The Independent race we know, hold Tenants rending to
our woe, and Englands fatal overthrow, do study: but if we cannot understand,
how they have late o recome the Land, and now have all at their command, we are
muddy. No Law but th'Sword they will rule by, their boundless wills and
tyranny; good women all their Acts defy, and curse them: their Father Lucifer
and Pride, with Cromwell that damned Regicide, and the City has them
supplied, and nursed them. The Common Cuckolds of Guild Hall, with Atkins, sob,
Tychburn, and all, that Canaans Grapes has turned to Gall, and Worm wood;
Caryl, Carter, Gouge, and Nigh, that can swear, forswear, fawn, and lie, to
every wind their sails they will try, were nere good: Then in come Meg and loyal
Doll, and bid a pox of God take Noll, and all the Rebels in White Hall,
confounded; quoth Meg the Devil take them all; quoth Doll I hope to see them
fall, or else be hanged before White Hall, each Roundhead. Quoth Sis, a plague
take Bradshaw Jack, quoth Sue, the devil take the pack; Heaven grant they
never may hanging lack, nor curses: and when they are at the point to die; Heaven
nor Physician hear their cry, all Ministers comfort them deny, and Nurses.
Quoth Moll, some plague give them their hire, that they may dye like Pym their
Squire, like Dortslaw, or like Macquire, be hanged: quoth Besse, a while I Would
have them stay, till Destruction makes them way; and when the King shall win
the day, be banged, Quoth Kate, my wishes they shall have, each perjured
Rebel, Fool, and Knave, may hang in Chains and want a grave, to bury: quoth
Ruth, profess I do not think, but that the Knaves begin to stink; being even
now at Destructions brink, to ferry. Quoth Prue, Charon will surely take then
in, and Furyes whip them for their sin; not sparing Weaver, not Evelyn, nor
Grimston: quoth Deb, may Fairfax, Pride, and Rich, Hewson, and Joyce, that
lousy stitch, have fire and scorpions at at their breech, and Brimston; quoth
Peg, good Sisters I could curse, but 'twill but make them worse and worse, like
Foxes they thrive better thus, in Treason: give them but Rope, they will hang
themselves, and wrack their hopes on Rocks and Shelves, and that's the end of
all such Elves in Reason. Lets all set forward's and redress our grievances,
quoth Madge and Besse, and snatch these Sons of Wickedness, in sunder:
content (quoth Meg) my Distaffe shall upon their pates so heavy fall, that I Will
go near to beat them all, with wonder, Lets choose a General (quoth Kate) and
we their Pride will soon abate; it is not done with talk and prate; but
action: they then proceeded to a Choice, and every Woman had her Voice, and so
they chose them lusty Joyce, called Blackston. A Virago strong and stout that
had bin tried full many a bout, and never would turn tail, nor give out, but
forward: she would made an Ass of many a man, that none before her long could
stan: when she but drew, away they ran a full yard. They all agreed to raise
new force, Side-saddles, Pistols, women, Horse, with Spits, and Fire-forks, to
take course, with the Army. This news came quickly to White Hall, and did so
fright the Rebels all, that they to Counsel straight did fall, to harm ye:
one said 'twas fit that women should, take the Engagement, if they would, or
else they should by them be fooled, and floured. Their Members too, that were
but weak, would be disabled to speak, and then their Trade must surely
break, when ^^ted. Let Bradshaw be made High-Constable, and Denby President of
State-Table, and then, come women we are able, to stand to it: quoth Denby, I
accept the place, 'cause the black patches in my face, will make the women run
apace, and never do it* Quoth Harry Meldmay it is fit, that straight we do new
forces get, one beat me in the Gravill-pit, and crazed me: quoth Martin, I will
never turn, although they did my weapon burn, and once in fight my heart did
earne, they mazed me. But let them come, I Will fight again, and so I hope will
Harry Vein, it is not fit such queans should reign, and vapor: and though my
Body be not sound, I still have force to keep my ground, and with half weapon
can them wound, then caper. Quoth Weaver, pray be not dismayed, I fear we are
all on's betrayed, the plot's discovered by my Maids great belly: Alack quoth
Bradshaw, as you are men, lets make an Act to banish them, ten miles from
London, surely then, I Will tell ye: we may sit still by free consent, gather
Excise and Assessment, and all live Kings by Praliament ev'rlasting. Pray here
me though, quoth Baron Wild, Mr. Weavers Maid that seems with Child, I searched
her and my shirt defoyl'd, 'twas fasting: I sent her then to Justice Louder,
lest in her breech she carried powder, and he got her a place to shroud her,
till laid. But if you take it for a plot, refer her case to Mr. Scot, least
the House and Tower should God-wot, betrayed. A general fear surpised them
all, they do like Babels builders call; who says that Pride will not have a
fall? deceive us: now they have robbed us of our Gold, murdered our King and
his Goods sold, they will it is thought run from their Hold, and leave us.

Pray stop them not, give them free way to goo,
The longer they stay here, the more's our woe.

Mary Stiff, Cler. to the House.

FINIS.

