AN Historical Discourse, Briefly setting forth the nature of PROCURATIONS, And
how they were anciently paid, with the reason of their payment; and somewhat
also of SYNODALS And PFNTECOSTALS: With an APPENDIX in answer to an Opposer.

By J. S.

(...).

LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinson, and are to be sold at the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

Vltimo Octobr. 1660.
PErlegi Libellum, cui Titulus [ An Historical Discourse, Briefly setting
forth the nature of Procurations, etc. By Jo. Stephens] quem fieri publicum non
indignum censeo. Imprimatur modo intra tres menses.

ROBERYUS PORY S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino D.
Archiepiscopo Cant. Sacellanus Domesticus.

REVERENDISSIMO in Christ^ Patri, ac Domino D. GULIELMO, Providentia divina
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati, and Metropolitano.
REVERENDISSIMO etiam in Christo Patri, ac Domino D. ACCEPTO eadem providentia
Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, Angliae quoque Primati, and Metropolitano. Nec non
Admodum Reverendis in Christo Patribus ac Dominis D. GILBERTO, divina etiam
providentia Episcopo Londinensi, and D. BRIANO Episcopo Wintoniensi:
Caeterisque Reverendis Episcopis, and Praesulibus utriusque Provinciae in
Ecclesia Anglicana constitutis.
ANnus praeteriit vigesimus (Reverendissimi and Reverendi Partres) ex quo
Tractatum hunc Historicum de Procurationibus Synodalibus and Pentecostalibus in
Usum publicum composui: sed priusquam ederetur Procella appropinquante manum ab
editione retrahere cogebar, and chartulas abdere a Plagiario qui in sequente
Tempestate aperta front grassabatur. Sub spe tamen fore tempus, ut hae
meditationes qualescunque (si (...) non obstarent) in lucem emitterentur. Et
nunc tandem for as exiturae Patrocinium vestrum. Honorabile (vigilantissimi
Navarchi qui ad Clavum Ecclesiae sedetis) humiliter implorant. Dentem invidiae
non reformido (tenuitati non invidetur, sed sublimitati) Contemptus est quem
potius vereor a quo sub umbraculo tantae authoritatis and eminentiae, velut sub
Aegide Minervae (venia submisse petita) me recipio, and abscondo. Orta fuere
annis anteactis dissidia quam plurima, Lites etiam and velitationes de tempore
in tempus non paucae inter Archidiaconos Glouc. and Clerum ibidem de Re
solutionis Procurationu and Censuum Ecclesiasticorum; Ad quas componendas, and
ne Ecclesia quicquam detrimenti caperet, ne etiam flamma dissentionis inter
Ecclesiasticos de integro exurgeret aut erumperet: Egomet ipse inter mill
minimus lubens surrexi. Et quid in his conatibus meis praestiterim in medio
reliqui a peritioribus pensitandum.

Est quadam prodire tenus si non datur ultra. D. Opt. Max. qui potest rependat
vobis quicquid a me rependi non potest; Et benedictiones in sinus vestros
amplissimos magis magisque cumulatissime refundat. Faxit insuper, ut peracto
hujus vitae curriculo, a terrenis ad seeds sempiternas inter Coelites post
seros annos feliciter transferamini. Et haec, ex intimis ipsius votis qui est.

Paternitatum vestranum Servulus humillimus Jo. Stephens.

To the Candid and ingenuous READER
WIth little encouragement to undertake, and less abilities to perform a task
of this nature; I have out of my respect to the Clergy (whose calling I much
honor) adventured to run the hazard of a Censure. But as he that observes the
Wind shall not sow, as the Wise man speaks; Eccles. 11.
And as he that fears oblatration must not travel, as all men know: (...).
Act. 27.15.
So must he resolve to cast away his pen that will not resolve (...) (to use
St. Lukes Metaphor in another sense) to bear up against the Wind of detraction.
Thus much I can truly say, that Peace disturbed, only that, (my self being
therein sometime a Patient) has set me now on work, and made me here an Agent,
endeavoring by the discovery of an erroneous cause (the ground of such
disturbance) to remove for the future (as much as in me lies) a very ill
effect arising thence. And albeit the light be dim, that forces it self through
a cloud of such imperfections, as I must needs acknowledge: yet is the Greek
Proverb true (and I apply it only to the unstudied in the present argument)
(...). Better a little light, Michael Apostol. Proverb. Cent. 11.
though but a very little, then none at all, better then to be altogether in
darkness. For my part what I have received I freely communicate: the greater
burdens I leave to the greater bottoms. All that this little Tractate has to
pride it self in (were it lawful for it to boast) is that it is (...) (not an
innovation but,) a Novelty. Which being so, Act. 17.21.
it may happily take an Athenian ear (so much in former times delighted with
news, is the Greek Orator observes, Demosthen. (...). Epist.
and after him St. Paul;) yea an English one too, if it be with the English now
as it it was in Gildas his time. Patria mea novi semper aliquid audire volens,
etc. says he. But what it is, how and with whom it will take, I have not to
say. This only I know, that it has proved (weak as it is) to my dull
apprehension, the issue of more than ordinary labor, some part of it, there
being none de cujus lumine, lumen accenderem meum; None whose footsteps I could
find (though I thirsting sought) to follow in so unfrequented a desert as I
wandered through. -- qua nulla priorum,
Castaliam molli divertitur orbita clivo. Virgil. Georg. 13.

In a word, what I have here done, my thoughts have wrought within me this
persuasion, that the same by the ingenuous Reader will be taken in good part.
For the vulgar and unknowing persons (who are least able to judge, but most apt
to censure) I fear not their Arrows.

J. S.

De Procurationibus.
LOCVTVM fuisse poenituit aliquando, siluisse nunquam, Simmidis dictum apud
Plutarch. de tuenda Valetud.
said one, and truly, it being referred to unseasonable and inconsiderate
speaking; else the Wiseman Solomon will teach us another Lesson, That as there
is a time to be silent, so is there also a time to speak; Eccles. 3.7.
and whosoever shall spare either Tongue or Pen, when in probability he may do
good, omits a necessary duty, and doubtless incurs deserved blame. How nearly
this Case did once reflect upon my self, they best know, whose opposition to
payments (just as I conceive) has stirred me up to strive (...), (as they wont
to say) to the uttermost of my power, as well to give them satisfaction that
pay, as to procure ease to those that receive. An opinion has of long time
possessed some of the Clergy, That Procurations are only due Ratione
visitationis, and that without respect unto such Act of Visiting, no demand, of
that nature, can be in Conscience warranted or payment by Law enforced, and
therefore Archdeacons to be excluded in the years of Episcopal Visitations:
Upon this mistaken ground (for so I take it) suits have formerly been
commenced, and much time and money spent, and yet the point remains
unsatisfied, the Clergy (most of them) paying this due (whilst the same was
payable) to the Archdeacon (especially in the Lordbishops Triennials) with a
kind of reluctance, mixta voluntate, as I may say, and many desiring (...), a
time to deliberate. The ttuth is, and I find it so, That payments, how
necessary and just so ever, yet are they not at all times pleasing to those
upon whose shoulders they lie; they being of such a nature as to the nature of
man is unpleasing, to wit, burdensome, mainly opposing the principal object
of the natural desire, (...). Theogn. sent.
namely Ease and Liberty. They are in the Law called Onera; and by so much the
more Onerosa burdenous and unpleasing they are, by how much the more the reason
to evidence the true ground and original cause of them is unknown to some that
pay. To lighten therefore this Load, what I may, and for the ease of such as
being pressed with the burden of their Ministerial functions, and
Ecclesiastical employments; their thoughts busied and their Studies taken up
and conversant in the Sphere of higher speculations) have not leisure to look
into things that move in a more inferior Orb: I have put my self forward (but
to speak truth actus eg^) to search into the nature of some of those
Church-payments, and dues Ecclesiastical, namely Procurations, Synodals, and
Pentecostals, and have endeavored to find and discover the true reason of their
pay, begun so long ago in the Church, and continued to this day; which how far
forth I have performed in this little Tract I leave to the judgment of the
judicious Reader; Euripid. in He raclid. pa. 287.
reflecting upon my self, and seriously wishing in this particular task, what
the servant in Euripides wished to old Iolaus ((...) says he) that I also
were as able to perform, as I have been willing to undertake the same; however
I proceed, and begin with Procurations. In the handling of which point I shall
necessarily fall upon the several enquiries following, namely, First 1 What a
Procuration is, Whence so called, And how, And in what manner it was anciently
paid? 2 Whether due ratione Visitationis? 3 Whether only, so due, and no
otherwise?


Concerning the first, we have two things to consider of, to wit, the quid
nominis, and the quid rei. For the quid nominis, I have not found much written,
somewhat I have; That the word has its derivation a Procurando, there is no
doubt of that, but procuring what, there is the (...).

Whether it should be for procuring the Visitor to come to each particular
Church in his own person, and to Visit Ecclesiatim, 10 q. 1. c. E^i c^pum. E.
council. Toletan. 4. ca. 35.
per cunctas Dioeceses parochiasque suas, which was the ancient custom; Or
from procuring of him to come to a certain place in several Divisions or
Deaneries, where the Clergy within the said distinct Deaneries were to give
meeting, as now they do, they being overcharged with his coming home to them;
each man may please himself with his own opinion? For my part, I cannot
satisfy my self with either of them. My reason against the former is;
Visitation is a principal duty that belongs unto every Bishop (derived from
the Apostles, who were Visitors, Act. 15. Act. 16.
and did pertransire Ecclesias and Vrbes) it sticks in his very name (...),
which comes from a word that signifies to Visit (...), So also from (...) to
visit comes (...), a Bishop.
and is frequently used in that sense, not only in the Scripture, but also by
Ecclesiastical and Profane Authors, obvious every where to be met withal.
Episcopus deb^t visitate singulis annis Parochiam, nisi dimittat propter
gravamen Ecclesiaru^, and tunc mittat Archidiaconum, etc. Ab. Sic. su^er 2.1.
de Ossi^. Archid. c. ut Archidiaconus. 10. q. 1. c. Decrevimus etc. Episc^pum.
2 Coke. 15. D. Spelman. Council. pa. 238.
Now to procure the Visitor by way of stipulation and contract, to do that
which by his calling and place, either in his own person, or by others (himself
being hindered) he ought to do, is a plain (...), and stands with no reason or
congruity, if I may judge.

And as weakly built (if I mistake not) is the other opinion, to wit, That
Procurations should have their denomination from pocuring the Visitor to come
to a certain place in every Deanery or Division, whereas it is evidently
manifest, Ext. de Censibus c. Cum Apostolus etc. Foe icis recordationis eod in
6.
that the word Procuration was then used when the Visitor visited Ecclesiatim,
as may be seen in diverse Chapters in the Canon Law.

Another reason then is to be sought for to give the word its true genuine
interpretation, as it relates to the present business; and that is, not from
procuring the Visitor by way of contract to come; no, but from procuring of
victuals for him and his attendants, when they come in Visitation. Thus it was,
and this indeed comes near unto the nature of the word Procurare, (which among
other significations it has) signifies to nourish, and to make provision in
diet for; Dua^en. de sacris, Eccl. Minister. and Benefic. l. 7. c. 5.
Hoc autem munus ideo Procuratio vocatur quia Ecclesiae Episcopum Procurant, id
est Curant, alunt ac tuentur; sicut pueri dicuntur Procurari a Nutricthus and
equus a Domino apud Plautum and al^os Authors Latinos qui proprie and emendate
locuti sunt. Thus Duarenus: But here now comes a Cloud in our way that must be
a little cleared before I go farther, lest I should hold the Reader (the
Reader I say unversed in this study) too long in a mist of suspense. And
objection may be made thus. Were victuals anciently the Visitors pay, for and
in respect of Visitation? why then does the second Council, Council. Bracar.
11. Can 2. Council. Toletanum 7. Con. 3.
held at Bracar, above a thousand years ago, and the seventh Council held at
Toledo in Spayn, a little after, expressly forbid by their Canons, That no
Bishop per suam Diocesim ambulans, should receive ought from the several
Churches within his Dioces, Praeter honorem Cathedrae suae, that is to say, two
shillings; 10. q. 3. ca. inter caetera ^bi glossa in c^su.
To this I answer, out of the Gloss upon the Decree where the Canon of the
seventh Council at Toledo is recited. The Case there is This. The Bishops of
the Province of Gallicia, when they visited their Diocesses, hardly pressed
upon their visited Clergy: Bringing with them a great Train of attendants (100
vel 200 Equitaturas) and exacting from them not only, ultra duos solidos pro
Cathedratico, but also costly provision in esculentis and poculentis; upon
complaint made of this grievance the Council decrees a moderation in the money
receipts (Ne ultra duos solidos exigant pro Cathedratico) and for the number of
Attendants they are reduced to fifty at the most, and the time of their stay at
each Church limited to one day, and no more, So that this Canon is no bar at
all to our Procuration payment in money now, it is I dare boldly say a mere
(...), a very nothing to that purpose: For it was many years after this time
that money had warrant to pass for visitation Procurations, as I shall
hereafter, God assisting, make evident: so that the Objection being answered,
and the Quid nominis in some sort explained, I proceed to enquire, desirous
more exactly to know what a Procuration is in the Quid rei. Vallens. Paratit.
de censibus,. 3.
And to this enquiry Vallensis makes answer, and tells ut that it is
Necessariorum sumptuum exhibitio quae ratione Visitationis debetur ab Ecclesia,
vel Monasterio ei cui ex officio incumbit jus and onus Visitandi, sive is sit
Episcopus, sive Archidiaconus, sive Decanus, sive Legatus summi Pontificis. I
hus Vallensis; and well for the ground of this Procuration due, but not fully
enough for the growth thereof, there being now other reasons not included
within the circumference of this description, that enforce the payment of
Procurations without visitation, as I shall in the prosecution of this
discourse (I doubt not) make appear. Wherein for further explication of
Vallensis his description, I shall be bold to assert that the Quid ret of
visitation Procurations in ancient time, this exhibitio necessariorum sumptuum
was victuals. In the Council of Lateran (I do not mean the great General
Council under Innocent, the Third, but that other under Alexander the Third,
Exe. de Censibus c. Cum. Aposto^u^.
somewhat above 30. years before, and about the year of our Lord 1180.)
Visitors are directed so to proceed in the dispatch and execution of their
Visitations as those that minded not their own things, sed quae Jesu Christi.
And it follows there, Nec sumptuos^s epulas quae^ant, sed cum gratiarum action
recipiant quod honest ac competenter illis suerit ministratum. Thus there: so
in the Sext there is a constitution made by Innocent the 4. (who came in Pope,
Anno 1243.) and ratified afterward by a General Council held at Lions in the
time of Gregory the Tenth, about the year 1273 peremptorily; C. 1..
Procurationes, etc. ^xigit ^od in 60. and ^bi Glossa in (...).
(yea sub poena maledictionis aeternae) forbidding the receipt of money in lieu
of Procurations (vel a volentibus sic solvere) adding moreover, that if any
Visitor should presume to receive them in such sort, and otherwise then in
victuals: Duplum ejus quod receperit Ecclesiae a qua id receptum suerit infra
mensem reddere tenebatur; which if accordingly (be ing Patriarch, Archbishop,
or Bishop) he failed to restore, he was forth with liable to an Interdiction,
ab ingressu Ecclesiae: But for Visitors of inferior rank, suspension ab
officio and beneficio was their penalty in this case. This then was the ancient
manner of paying Procurations till the time of Boniface the Eighth, who
succeeding in the Popedom about twenty two years after the death of Gregory,
and finding multa incommodorum dispendia, Gloss. in ver. dispendia c. Foelic^s
recordationis cod. in 6o.
many inconveniencs in the Constitutions of his predecessor touching this
particular, did himself make a Constitution about the year 1295. that it should
be lawful to any Visitor whatsoever volentibus visitatis, and not otherwise,
to receive in lieu of victuals money (not to exact it) toward the defraying of
their visitation charge. The Constitution runs thus, Quoniam rerum experientia
perientia nos instruxit ex hoc tam personis visitantibus quam l^cis and
Ecclesiis visitatis multa incommodorum dispendia provenire. C Foelicis
recordat. (...) supra in 6.
Concedimus ut Patriarchae, A chiepiscopi, and al^i quibus ex officio competit
visitare a volentibus Ecclesiarum and locorum Visitatorum Rectoribus, seu
personis pecuniam licite recipere valiant pro sumptibus moderatis faciendis in
victualibus di^bus quibus visitationis officium personaliter exercebunt. Now
the reason of the making of this constitution was out of question this, namely
in respect of the great charge that the visited Clergy were put unto in giving
entertainment to the Visitors in those times, who in their visitations came
attended with a troup of men and horses so excessively great, F^t. de Censibus
c. Cu^n Apostolus
Vt interdum Ecclesiastica ornamenta subditi exponere compellebantur. The poor
Clergi were eftsoons constrained to sell even their Church-ornaments to make
provision for them, as it was declared openly in the aforesaid Council of
Lateran. And thereupon in that Council all Visitors came to be stinted to a
certain number of Visitation Attendants, according to their several qualities,
as namely the Archbishop to 40. or 50. men with their horses, the Bishop to 20.
or 30. Cardinals to 25. (though it stick in their stomachs so to be
undervalued) Archdeacons to 5. or 7. Deans, Gloss. in v. Decani. Ext cod. c.
Cum Apostolus. Ext. av. Com. de Censibus c. Vas electionis.
(that is to say Archipresbyteri rurales, as the Gloss expounds it) to two
only, which qualification of number eased a little, and but a little, the
burden that was still heavy upon the Clergy. For though Bomface did tolerate
the receipt of money in heu of victuals, and made it lawful for the Visited to
compound with their Visitor for their entertainment, yet the composition in
money was oftimes upon such hard terms, that the remedy proved as bad as the
disease. Little the better were the Clergy for having the Visitor limited to a
certain number of Attendants, whilst he was left unlimited in the sum of his
receipts to make his composition as it pleased himself: Yea, we shall find that
the exorbitances of the Visitors in this particular were such, that they gave
occasion to Pope Clement the Fifth to complain bitterly of them in the Council
at Vienna (which began in the Calends of October, Ca. Ad nostrum eod in Clement
Antiquit, Britan. pa. 172.
Anno 1^11, and ended upon the sixth of April, Gloff in v. Imsosterum c. Cum sit
in Clem. de Censious
the year following, as the Gloss precisely sets it down) namely that the
Prelates and other Visitors did exact Procurations, yea even from exempt places
and Orders privileged (the Cistertians themselves could not go free) that
they carried with them Hounds and Hawks contrary to a Prohibitory Canon of the
aforesaid Council of Lateran, yea that they so far forth proceeded with them,
that unless their intemperate appetite were satisfied, and that they had
readily ministered unto them as much as they unreasonably required; down went
the doors of Monasteries, Church doors were broke open, and what they could lay
hands on (the ornaments of the Church not excepted) should away, Intolerabilia
gravamina eisdem cumulantes. Now these grievances were in effect but complained
of in this Council; and altbeit they were prohibited under pain of Gods
indignation; yea and of the Popes too, Ca. Ad nostrum cod. in Clement.
yet were they not thoroughly redressed until the time of Benedict the Twelfth,
who next succeeded Clement, save John the 23. that came between them. He, I
say, taking into consideration the abuses of the Visitors toward the Clergy
visited (notwithstanding many good Laws made to the contrary) namely that they
became so burdensome to them in the exaction of Procurations, Vt oppressi
subditi hujusmodi onera nequeant supportare, to use the very words of the
Constitution. E^trav. Com de Censibus c. Vas I lict onis.
In the second year of his Popedom, and about the year of our Lord, 1337.
makes a Canon or Constitution, and in the same proportions a rate in money in
lieu of Procurations in victuals, a certain sum payable out of Monasteries,
Priories, and other Churches visited, and requirable by the Visitor according
to his quality and the conditions of the parties visited, more or less,
leaving it still to the liberty of the visited, either to pay so much money or
victuals as before, if they thought better. And this constitution of Benedict
the Twelfth, put an end to that troublesome business even throughout the
Christian world (where the Pope had sway of jurisdiction) that before that time
groaned under the burden of intolerable exaction. Hither all Visitors are
directed to have recourse for their pay, where custom has not limited the
sum of their receipts. But for Archdeacons Procurations, Lindewood tells us
that the usual sum of their receipts in money was in his time (and that was
in the reign of Hen. 5. somewhat above 200. years ago) seven shillings and six
pence, that is, according to the number of his Officers and Attendants to each
man 12. d. and to the Archdeacon himself 18 d. And so I have done with the
first Quaere, and do now proceed to the second, and that is.

2. Whether Procurations be due, Ratione Visitationis?

Out of doubt they are, and great reason that they should be. The voice of
nature in an Heathen man spoke thus, and persuades to yield (...). Phocy^id.
And not only the voice of nature but the God of nature pronounces, Luc. 10.7.
1 Cor. 9.
that Dignus est operarius mercede, Luc. 10. And St. Paul reasons thus. Who
goes to warfare any time at his own cost? who planteth a Vineyard, and eats
not of the fruit thereof? who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the
flock? If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we
reap your carnal things? Thus the Apostle excellently, and by way of Analogy
to the equity of this due, brings arguments such as the wit of man cannot move,
much less overturn them: For what are Visitations other then laborious
travelings from place to place, joined with an industrious vigilance and
circumspection in the Visitors, and for this very end, Ne quid detrimenti
capiat Ecclesia; to keep Christ's Vineyard from havoc and spoil, to see unto
as well the building and holding up of the spiritual Temple, as the fabric of
Gods material House. He plants, he sows, he feeds, his labor is painful, and
his care great, and all to eradicate sin, and to encourage virtue. In a word
Schismata componere (...), 1 Cor. 12. Caetera disponere, that all things may be
done (...), 1 Cor. 14.14. In a word thus, Act. Council. Trid. sess. 24. cap. 3.
Visitationum omnium istarum praecipuus sit scopus sanam orthodoxamque
doctrinam expulsis haeresibus inducere, bonos mores tueri, pravos corrigere,
populum cohortationibus and admonitionibus ad religionem, pacem, innocentiamque
accendere. So the Trent Council (I would in all things so) right and well. And
long before that Council, Innocent the Third our of the aforesaid General
Lateran Council declaring the right use of a Visitation, Ext. de Censibus ca.
Procurationes.
sets it down thus: Porro visitationis officium exercentes non quaerant quae
sua sunt, sed quae J^su Christi, praedicationi and cohortationi, correctioni
and reformationi vacando. So then this being, as you see, a burdensome and a
toylsome task, a labor of pain so necessary, and withal conducing to so good
an end. It is but just that some answerable compensation should be made, some
exhibition yielded to the Visitor, by him or them who principally are
interessed in the good of his travel. Neither stands this payment or
exhibition upon convenience only, but necessity also. There is a debetur in it,
says Vallensis, upon which the Visitor founds his claim, and such a debetur as
admits of no opposition or stop in Law to cross it; for the argument holds
strong, Gloss. in ver. Consuetud. c. Cum ex ossicii, Ext. de Praesc^iptionibus,
Ext. de Censibus c. Cum Venerabilis.
Episcopus cum visitare jure communi debuerat, de jure communi debet habere
tune Procurationem, quia nemo suis stipendiis cogitur militare. Here is the
reason of the due! And it is a rule in Law, that Accessorium sequitur naturam
sui principalis. And if ex debito principaliter the Bishop or Visitor ought to
visit, then ex condigno accessorie he ought to receive, no man will deny; for a
nearer relation there seems not to be between work and wages, then is between
Visitation and Procuration; yea, so near they are, that no negative
prescription, to wit de non solvendo has been held available in plea or proof
at Law against the right of Procuration, especially as it relates to
Visitation, except in the case of Papal privilege or extreme poverty of the
visited. Gloss. in c. venerabili v. rationable, Ext. de Censious.
In the Decretalls mention is made of a certain Archbishop, namely the
Archbishop of Sens (Senonensis) a ^rench Prelate, Exteod. e. ex Offic^i.
that visiting of his Province, he came unto the Churches of the Abbot of St.
Maglore, and of the Prior de Castres, and of some others in the Diocese of
Paris, which he visited, and earatione demands Procurations, which were denied
him for this cause, namely for that they had not formerly been yielded to the
Predecessor of the said Archbishop. Hereupon the Archbishop proceeds, and
suspends all that stand out, and refused to satisfy his just demands; and
afterward upon their further contempt excommunicates them, and so acquaints
Pope Innocent the Third with what he had done: Who presently writes to the
Bishop of Paris, letting him to know, that forasmuch as against Procurations
due ratione visitationis no praescription ought to be admitted, as neither
against a visitation it self, although both might happily in respect of time be
prescribed against. Ideoque mandamus (says the Text) quatenus sententiam quam
in bujusmodi contemptores de antiqua Metrapolis consuetudine tulit
Arthiepiscopus memoratus usque ad satisfactionem condignam factas observari.
Thus Pope Innocent. And after the same manner did Honoriu^ the Third write on
the behalf of another French Bishop (to wit the Bishop of Maine (Cenomanensts)
which Bishopric, Gloss. in v. non solverunt c. Venerabili, Ext. de Censibus.
and ibi textus.
as I suppose, is within the Duchy of Anjow) complaining against the Abbat and
Covent de Cultura of his Diocese that refused to pay him Procurations in his
visitation, alleging this for their reason, Quod ipsi hactenus Procurationem
non solverunt, which being not admitted for a good plea, the said Pope
rescribes thus: Discretion^ vestrae (writing to the Abbats de Tyron and
Josaphat, his delegates in that cause) Mandamus quatenus nisi aliud and
rationabile ostenderint, vos eos ad exhibendum eam sicut jus dictarverit
compellatis. To this effect Honorius; Ext. de Censic. cum nuser.
and after him Gregory the Ninth sends out his Mandate to the same purpose
throughout the Province of Benerventum in the Visitation of an Archbishop
there. We may conclude therefore out of the Canon Law, that Procurations are
due, and ought to be paid ratione visitationis. And so I have done with the
second Quaere. The third and last is,

3. Whether Procurations be only due Ratione visitationis, and no other wise?

I answer, not so only, though principally so. The Canonists ex hypothesi
propound this question, namely, that if a Church be so near unto the Visitor
that there needs no travel, and so little or no labor is bestowed in the
visitation thereof whether a Procuration may lawfully be required from that
Church? And albeit the question be negatively held by some, yet by the most it
is affirmatively answered, Gloss. in ver. peragrando.. ulterius apud
Lancellotum Inst. juris Canon. l. 2. tit. 21. ubi de Censibus. Hostiens. sum.
de Censibus,. a quibus.
namely, That Procuratio solius laboris in tuitu non exhibetur, sed etiam in
signum superioritatis, and ut facilius Praelati ad visitandum inducantur: So
that howsoever the visitors pains be but little, and his charges nothing at
all, yet is not the Procuration for that cause to be lessened, it must be
yielded notwithstanding, in signum superioritatis. But to come nearer to the
point, Boniface the Eighth, of whom mention is made before, writing to a
certain one whom he had appointed his Collector, to gather up a Tenth from all
Ecclesiastical Livings, and persons throughout Jtaly and elsewhere, for the
maintenance of a war he prosecuted in the Kingdom of Sicily, and intimating
to him whom he would have charged, and whom excused, says thus, De illis autem
Proourationibus quas Praelati in pecunia numerata rite percipi^nt ab antiquo,
and quas perciperent, ettamsi non visitarent decimam praestare tenentur. And
again, Extrav. commun. de Decimis c. Declarationes.
Praelati autem qui Procurationem quam sine visitatione potuit de jure
percipere in pecunia numerata, etc. By which it is manifest that there is
Procuratio sine Visitatione; Ext. de Censibus c. quanto. Gloss. in. v.
Visitationis c. Piocurationes, ext. cod. C. Ad nostrum eod. in Clem. C. vas
electionis cod in Fxtravagant. Gloss. in v. non solverunt, c Venerab. ext. de
Censibus.
But what Procuration is here praecisely meant may fall into question. To which
I answer, that I find mentioned in the Canon Law diverse kinds of Procurations,
arising from different reasons; as namely first from Visitation, secondly Pact,
thirdly Privilege, fourthly and lastly Custom; all which, as they did arise
from different reasons, so were they paid at the first in a different manner.
Victuals were anciently and solely the visitation Procuration till this Pope
Boniface his time who made money passable in lieu of victuals for that payment.
The rest, as I conceive, were all paid in money; so then the Procuration from
whence the Pope was to have a Tenth, being in pecunia numerata, and being then
ex antiquo, et de jure, in that sort due, as in the Text is evident: And money
for visitation Procurations, but even newly tolerated to pass: both Visitation
and Custom too as prescribed from that right, are quite excluded from the
causality of this pay in this place, as i take it. It is probable then, that
from one of the other Reasons of Procuration the Tenth before spoken of was
requirable, but for which of them, as it is not much material on my part
curiously to seek after, so neither is it of consequence for any to know, there
being at this time no Procuration from any such cause, to wit, of Pact or
Privilege, in use of receipt in this Kingdom, that I know, or have yet heard
of. That which I intend, and aim principally at in the solution of this third
and last Quaere (and is of frequent use in these times) is to set forth the
claim that Custom makes, and the right that surely it has to this
Ecclesiastical payment of Procurations sine Visitatione. To make good
therefore the receipt of Procurations by this reason, we are first to set down
the special properties required in a prevailing Custom, which, in short, are
chiefly two: The first is, that it be rationabilis: The second, that it be
legitime praescripta. Now that Custom is said to be rationabilis, and so
consequently inviolabilis, Gloss in v. Rationabilis. c. Cumtanto. Ext. de
Consurtu^l. Distinct. 11. c. Consuetud. etc. Eccles. Constable tutionum.
quae nec diviuo juri contradicit, nec obviat Canonicis institutis, that
contradicts not the divine Law, nor meets the Canonical Institutes in the
front of opposition. And that is said to be legitime praescripta, Gloss. in
ver. usque ad boc tempus, c. servitium 18. q. 2.
when bona fide it is prescribed for the space of 40 years, If these two, to
wit, Reasonableness and sufficient continuance of time do meet together in a
Custom, they make that Custom (...), impregnably strong. As on the contrary,
upon the want of Rreason it is as easily overturned, though never so ancient by
that known rule in the civil Law. Paulus l. 29. H. de Regulis juris.
Quod initio vitiosum est non potest tractu temponis convalescere; and that in
the Canon Law, C. non sirmatur 18. de Regulis juris in 6o and Din. ibi.
Non firmatur tractu temporis quod de jure ab initio non subsistit, there being
no Custom of such praevaling authority, ut aut Rationem vincat, In l. 8. tit.
32. C. Quae sit longa Consuetudo.
aut Legem, as the Emperor well determines. Now they that turn upon this hinge,
I mean that receive Procurations upon the ground of Custom, must look that
their receipt or claim be both rationabilis and legitime praescripta. And this
appertains especially to such Archdeacons that receive Procurations in the L.
Bishops Triennials, and yet visit not, whereof there are diverse in this
Kingdom. Certainly the time was, that Archdeacons had jus visitandi quolibet
anno, and did accordingly visit, and ea ratione receive Procurations, Gloss.
Lind. in c. 1. in ver Visitation. Provinc. Constitut. de^ssic. Archid. l. 1.
the Gloss upon the Provincial Constitutions intimates as much. And in the
Decretals de officio Archidiaconi, we read that Pope Alexander the 3. wrote
unto the Bishop of Coventry, and to the Abbat of Chester, and commands them to
forbid the Archdeacon of Chester to visit the Churches within his Archdeaconry
above once a year, Ext. de offic. Arch d. c. Mandamus and Gloss. ib. in v.
soepius visitare.
Nisi talis causa emerserit propter quam ipsum oporteat praefatas Ecclesias
soepius visitare. Once a year and no more, Nisi talis, etc. which implies that
once a year at least he might; surely in ages past he might do so: (...).
But Time that turns all things upside-down, and makes them seem to be what
they were not, has altered the course of former days, and brought it now to
this issue, namely, that the Archdeacons (not all, but of many places) must one
year in three suffer the light of Archidiaconall authority to be eclipsed by
the greater light of Episcopal power, and content themselves with their
Procurations only, which yet the Clergy in many places think much to pay, in
respect not only of the many payments that lie heavy upon them (wherein those
of the meaner rank are much to be pitied) but especially because the
Archdeacons demands at that time doing no service at all, seem to them to be
altogether unreasonable. For the receipt then of Procurations by Archdeacons in
the years of Episcopal visitations, when some of them visit not; and to make
the Custom by which they receive them firm and good. They are first, as before
is said, to show sufficiency of cause and reason for this receipt, to make it
rationabilis; and next to set forth sufficiency of continuance to make it
legitime praescripta. In explication whereof, and application to our present
business, I intend to be very brief, beginning with the former part or property
of a good Custom, namely Reasonableness. But with serious protestation in the
first place, that I labor not by any argument to introduce a payment that has
not formerly been, or to impose a burden heretofore not known or born; for that
were in effect to go about (...), and to meddle with things that ought not by
any private fancy to be moved or meddled withal, that were little else then
(...), Isocrates.
foibidden by the Orator as perilous in a well settled State. No, but my
endeavor shall be to offer such reasons as I can for paymets now in use in
places where they are used, and to stretch out the line of my discourse no
further; which if they prove to be of weight, it may happily fall out, that what
formerly the Clergy (to their great charge) contradicting this payment, have in
contradictorio judicio been forced to pay, and what at this day they pay,
though discontentedly, as being conquered rather by Law, then fully satisfied
in point of reason, they will with a willing mind (...), as the Apostle, 2 Cor.
8.12.
readily, cheerfully, and peaceably tender to their Visitor. I o proceed then;
Procurations are in effect the Living of the Archdeacon valued to him in the
Kings books, for which he pays yearly Tenths, and Subsidies also, as they
fall out to be due. And should a man yearly pay, and not yearly receive? No,
for the contrary to be the intent and meaning of the Kings and Queens of this
Land may evidently be demonstrated: Et ulterius de ampliore gratia nostra
exoneravimus etc. praefatnm -- de omnibus and om nimodis Corrodiis, Reddit.
feod. annuitat. pensionibus, portionibus, etc. Praeterquam de -- de eadem
Rectoria de -- exeun', ac Archidiacono de -- and successo^bus suis pro
Procurationibus and Synodalibus Annuatim solvend. etc.
For that in such Grants, as I have seen from the Crown of Impropriate
Rectories, those payments (annual payments) of Procurations, and so of
Synodalls too, are continued and left as a charge (though many other burdens
are taken away) upon the Proprietaries. Again, whereas many other
Ecclesiastical Livings, since the Certificate of their value into the
Exchequer about the 26 of H. 8. are improved and made better; Procurations are
like the Talent hid in the napkin, they continue without one farthing
improvement. Improvement do I say? Nay, I am persuaded that few Archdeacons
receive in Procurations to the sum of their valuation: Poverty sometimes of
the Incumbents death, and such by blows, cuts them short of many, and makes
them heartless, to seek where little or nothing is to be found. And yet are
they charged with full payments of Tenths and Subsidies, which are high upon
fruits of this nature; for valued by the penny as these Procurations are, 5 l.
out of 50 l. goes out for Tenths alone: And shall a man pay, pay thus, and not
receive? surely he that is necessitated to pay, should necessarily receive (and
doubtless with good conscience he may) that which occasioneth and is the sole
reason of his pay; yea, the receipt of Procurations in this case is so far
from being unconscionable in the Archdeacon, though he visit not, that the
detaining of them seems to me to be unreasonable; For in that the Archdeacons
some of them (I say some of them, Ab. sic. super 2^ 1^ i de officio Archid, c.
Vt Archidiaconus.
for all are not excluded) visit not in the L. Bishops Triennialls, the fault's
not theirs, when not out of wilful omission, but Canonical submission, they
forbear to visit, and strike sail to the commandment of their superiors: And
shall they for their obedience be deprived of their accustomed rights? I leave
that to the judgment of indifferency. The Rule of Law, and surely of Reason
too, is, Ca. Imputari 41. de reg juris in 6o.
that Imputare non debet ei per quem non stat, si non faciat quod per eum
fuerat faciendum. A man in the Law is not held to be faulty for omitting to do
what by his superior he is not permitted to do. Nither is it of weight (as I
conceive) that some urge, That forasmuch as all Archdeaconries, or the most
part of them have their corpse, to wit, some spiritual dignity or promotion
appendant to them, the Archdeacon that has such Corpse ought to live upon it in
the years when he visits not, and out of the profits arising thence (poor and
jejune perhaps) to sustain and defray the whole charge of the Archdeaconry. It
is true that many, yea most Archdeaconries have their Corpse annexed to them,
but none that I know sine sarcina, none but has its peculiar payments and
charge of Tenths, Subsidies, or Pensions, or all together appendant, even to
the full, as much, or rather more then any other Ecclesiastical Living of that
nature. And to charge them with more then their own burden (which is found of
times heavy enough) would be ahard imposition, to speak the least. But
especially, if it should so happen that the Archdeacon had no other means (as
such there have been as well in this Kingdom, which I could name, as in foreign
parts, Duaren. l. 2. c. 4. de sacris Eccles. ministeriis and benesiciis.
as Duarenus does remember) then were it indeed intolerable, and the rather in
two respects especially: First in respect of his Order, for therein considered
he is a person of special and remarkable Quality. Seconly, in respect of the
Office that he sustains, Ab. sic. super secunda prim. de offic. Archip^e b. c.
ut Archipresbyter.
which is Dignitas principalis post Episcopum in Ecclesia: and upon which there
is, at least in former times there was, so much dignity appendant in regard of
the amplitude of power and jurisdiction that he had under the Bishop, that
Philip, a fifth Son of Lewis the Gross King of France, Pa^lus Aemilius Tilius.
disdained not to take upon him the Office of an Archdeacon in Paris, as
Stories tell us. And for such a one to want correspondent accommodations is
(...), Ext. de Office. Archid. C ut Archidiacon^^, etc. Ad bae^. Onuphr.
Pantan. Int^rpr. vocum Ecclesiast. in sine Chron^ci ^ui ad Platin. de vitis
Ponus. p. 61.
a most unseemly and absurd thing. He is called Oculus Episcopi, Diaconus
circumlustrator and perscrutator. Vicartus post Episcopum ad quem in omnibus in
Clero omnis cura pertinet, with such like Titles of eminency. Now should he be
deprived of his just rights, it would come to pass that his care would be so
much to provide necessaries for himself at home, that he should find little
leisure circumlustrare, to look into the field of the Church, and to take care
for others abroad. But I know with whom I have to do, they are Scholars whose
readiness to apprehend a reason and ingenuity to acknowledge a right, I trust
will prove such, as that I shall not need to beat more ground for reasons;
which yet were there cause, I could easily add to give them satisfaction in
this point, namely of the Reasonableness of the Archdeacons receipts of
Procurations in the L. Bishops Triennials. I descend therefore to the other
property of a prevailing Custom, namely, Sufficiency of Continuance, whereof
in a word.

It has been Vltra hominum memoriam, and so equivalent to an Imperial
Privilege or Constitution; F. de aqua quotid. and costiva l. 3.. Ductus aquae.
for it is an hundred years since the Certificate upon the Commission of Melius
inquirendum concerning Ecclesiastical Livings was returned into the Exchequer,
at what time it was certified what particular payments were yearly then made to
the Archdeacons of the several Diocesses in this Kingdom out of
Ecclesiastical Livings; and thereupon their receipts became accordingly valued
in the Kings Books, and so stand unto this day. And lest the Church by means of
the suppression of Monasteries, and other Religious Houses (from whence
Procurations, and such like dues before that time had been usually paid to
Ecclesiastical Governors) should receive detriment, and be impeached in its
former accustomed receipts and rights, when all the Lands and Possessions of
those Religious Houses were settled in the Crown, and came into the Kings hand
by Act of Parliament, there was afterward another Act of Parliament in the 34
of H. 8. by which a strict provision was made for the due payment of all such
Ecclesiastical rights, as namely Pensions, Portions, Corrodies, Indemnities,
Synodies and Proxies, that were payable to, and in the possession of any
Ecclesiastical person. Ten years before the Dissolution, no preceding
visitation, or other causall act or motive inducing thereunto, more then that
such due had accustomably been paid out of the said Religious Houses.

And thus have I run through, and given answer briefly to the third and last
enquiry, wherein I have endeavored to prove: First, that there is Custom for
the receipt of Procurations without visitation: And secondly, the same (from
the grounds of Reason and Continuance as to that point) to be warrantable and
good. And to make the matter clear, I have thought good to subjoyn, as most
pertinent and satisfactory (such in my opinion) to the present business, the
subsequent Case of Proxies; which (divested and stripped from its ancient Norman
dress, and clad in plain English) presents it self to the Readers view as
follows, viz.

Trin. 2 Jacobi in the Exchequer.
The Case of Proxies Between the KING and Sir Ambrose Forth, Dr. of the Civil
Law, and one of the Masters of the Chancery. The Case was this.
THe Bishop of Meth before the dissolution of Monasteries had a Proxy of 15 s.
4 d. payable yearly out of the Commandery of Kells in the County of Meth,
parcel of the possessions of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem in
Ireland, and another Proxy of 20 s. payable yearly out of the Impropriate
Rectory of Trevet in the same County, parcel of the possessions of the Abbey of
Thomas-Court in the County of Dublin.

In the 33 year of Hen. 8. the said Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, and the
said Abbey of Thomas-Court were surpessed and dissolved, and the possessions of
both the said Houses were vested in the actual and real possession of the
Crown by Act of Parliament. But in the same Act there is an express Saving of
Proxies to all Bishops and their successors. After that the Bishop of Meth and
his Clergy (for that Bishopric has no Dean and Chapter) did by Deed
enrolled, dated 16. Martu 36 Hen. 8. grant the Proxies aforesaid (inter alia)
to K. Henry the eighth, his Heirs and Successors, the said King being at the
time of the Grant and after in actual possession of the said Commandery and
Rectory, out of which the said Proxies were payable.

Afterward Q. Eliz. by her Letters Patents dated 1 Novembris in the 33 year of
her reign, did demise the said Commandery and Rectory to Dr. Forth, rendering
rent without any reservation of Proxies. And whether he shall be now charged
with the said Proxies, and with the arrerages of them incurred since the
commencement of his Lease was the question? and it was adjudged that he should
be charged: and three points were stirred, and debated in the argument of that
case.

1. Whether the Proxies were utterly extinct by the suppression and dissolution
of the said Religious Houses of St. John of Jerusalem, and Thomas-Court,
notwithstanding the Saving within the Act of Dissolution?

2. Whether the Bishop can grant the Proxies to the King?

3. Whether the Proxies were extinct in the hands of the King by the unity of
possession.

For the first point it was objected by the Counsel of Sir Ambrose Forth, Et
cessante causa cessat effectus. For those Religious persons being deraigned and
dispersed, were not after that subject to Visitation; and then when the
Visitation ceased, the Proxy being also an exhibition given to the Visitor,
for his traveling charges shall cease also. For Procuratio, (as the Canonists
define it) est exhibitio sumptuum necessariorum facta praelatis qui dioeceses
peragrando Ecclesias subjectas visitant.

Yet they agree that the Visitation cease not immediately by the surrender,
or by the Act of Parliament which gives those Religious Houses, and their
possessions to the Crown: for by that their Corporations were not dissolved, as
it is held in the Case of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich, in the third part of
the Lord Cokes Reports, 15. Ass. p. 8. 32 Hen. 8. Br. Corporations 78. But when
those Religious persons were deraign'd, and had relinquished their habit, rule,
and order for which they were visitable, then the Corporation was utterly
dissolved, and upon that the Visitation ceased.

And they resembled the Proxy due for Visitation to an Annuity pro consilio,
or pro servitio impendendo. If the Counsel or Service be withdrawn, the Annuity
is determined. So if a rent charge be granted for a highway: stop the way and
the Rentcharge shall be also stopped. 9 Edw. 4.19. 15 Edw. 4.2. 21 Ed. 3.7. 45
Edw. 3.8. Dier 6. Hen. 8.2. and 6 Ed. 6.76. So also where a Corodie is granted
for certain service to be done: Omission of the service determines the Corodie,
20 Edw. 4. fol. ultimo.

'Twas also said, that this duty was not annual, but contingent, and payable
only at every visitation; as Escuage for every journey Royal; or as Aid for
marrying of a Daughter, or for making a Son a Knight. In which last Cases, if
an Avowry be made for Aid, it is a good plea in bar thereof, to say that the
Avowant had not such son or Daughter alive at the time of the Aid levied, N.
N. Br. 82. g.

And for the Saving they said, that the same was a Flattering Saving, which
could not preserve the Proxies in being which the Law had extinguished, as it
was held 14 Eliz. Dier 313. That the Tenure of Obit or Chauntry Lands held of
Subjects are extinct by the Act of 1 Ed. 6. notwithstanding the Saving in the
said Act propter absurditatem: So the Proxies in like manner shall also be
extinguished proptor absavditatem. For as it is absurd that the King should be
subject to attendance in respect of Tenure, so it is absurd that the King
should be subject to Visitation, or to any duty in respect thereof. And of the
same nature are many Savings, put in Walsinghams Case, Plow. Com. 563. which
are there called Flattering Savings.

For the second point, Proxies to the King for two Reasons: The one deduced
from the person of the King, the other from the person of the Bishop.

First for the King, Proxies in respect of Inconveniency and Indecency, and
also Impossibil^ty; for it is not convenient or decent that these poor
Religious persons should bear the charges of the King, and it is also
impossible: for by the Canon Law Procuratio exhibenda^est secundum qualitatem
personae visitantis. And the Majesty of the Kings person, and the greatness of
his Train is such, that by praesumption of Law no private person can bear his
necessary charges, or make entertainment for him correspondent to the quality
of his person. And therefore it is held 27 Henr. 8.10. b. That where Common sins
number was granted to an Abbat, and his Successors out of the Manor of Dale,
that after the Dissolution the King shall not have the Common sans number; for
it is there said, that if the King have it he may surcharge the Land, which the
Law will not suffer. As if a Villain purchase Common sans number, the Lord
shall not have it for the reason aforesaid, for then the Ter-tenant may lose
the profit of the Land.

For the Bishop, of three kinds. 1. Subisdium Cathedraticum, which is a duty of
Prerogative and Superiority. 2. Quarta Episcopalis, which is given to him for
the Reparation of Churches. 3. Procurationes for his visitation, ut supra,
which is a perquisit or profit of his Spiritual Jurisdiction: as Creation
money given to a Duke or Earl for maintenance of his honor, cannot be granted
over: 6 Hen. 8. Dier 2.2.

For the third point they said, Proxy be a personal thing, payable only in
respect of the persons visitable; yet admit that these Proxies are become
real, and that the Commandery and Rectory be charged with the same Proxies:
then the unity of Possession extinguisheth them in the hands of the King. As a
Lordship, Rentcharge, Common, and the like are extinguished by the purchase of
the Tertenant, if he has equal estate in the Land, and in the thing which
charge the Land. And to this purpose the Case of 2 H. 4.19. a. was put; where
2 Prior had an Annuity out of a Parsonage by Prescription, the Parsonage is
appropriate to the Priory and the Annuity is extinguished for ever.

But on the other part it was answered by the Kings Council, and resolved by
the Court.
1. THat the said Proxies were not extinguished by the Dissolution of the said
Religious Houses, but were well preserved and saved to the Bishop.

2. That the Bishop had well granted them to the King.

3. That the unity of possession in the Kings hand did but suspend, not
extinguish the Proxies.

As to the first point it was observed: First that Proxies had not their
original in the primitive Church; for St. Paul visiting all the Churches which
he had planted in Asia and Europe, demanded not any Proxies, but labored with
his own hands for his maintenance, that he might not be burdensome to the
Churches. Yet long after the Canon Law, which declares that Proxies are due to
the Bishops in their Visitations, says, Inslit. Juris Canon. l. 2. ca. de Cens.
that it is agreeable to the doctrine of St. Paul; Vt a quibus spirit^alia
recipimus eisdem temporalia communicemus.

Secondly 'twas noted that the same which we call Proxy or Procuracy, is
termed by the Canonists Procuratio, because that in overy Visitation the
persons visited procured necessary provision for the Visitors, which provision
at the first was in victuals, viz. in Esculentis and ^o^ulentis; and that was
do be received with moderation and temperance, Distinct. 35. c. Eccles.
Ne jejuniorum doctrinam rubentibus buccis praedicent, as it is said in one of
the Canons.

But afterward, when the pomp and excess of the Visitors required so great
Provisions as were grievous and intolerable to Churches and Religious Houses,
then every Church and Religious House was reasonably taxed; and thereby Proxies
reduced to a certain sum of money payable yearly in the nature of a Pension to
the Ordinary, who had power of visitation merojure, as it is said 10 Eliz. Dier.
273. b.

And this was aptly resemble to Socage in our Law, of which littleton says,
That in ancient time a great part of those Tenants which held of their Lords by
Socage, did come with their Sokes [their Ploughs] certain days in the year to
plough and sow the Demesnes of the Lord; and because that such works were done
for the livelihood and sustenance of their Lords, they were acquitted against
their Lords of all other services.

Afterward these services were changed into money by consent of the Lords and
desire of the Tenants, that is, into an annual rent. And as the Tenants in
Socage after the said change paid their rents yearly to the Lord, although he
had aliened his demesnes, and had no land to be ploughed or sowed; so the
Churches and Religious Houses, after the Procurations of victuals were reduced
to a certain sum, paid them yearly to their Ordinary though he made no
Visitation; and so the Rule of Cessante causa^cessnt effectus holds not in
these Cases. And to this purpose directly is Sir William Capels Case put in
Luttrels Case, in my Lord Coke his fourth Report, where it was resolved, That
Land being holden by a Rent payable for the keeping of a Castle, that though
the Castle be demolished or decayed, yet the rent must be paid: For it is there
said, That where the Tenant holds of the Lord to keep or repair the Castle of
the Lord, and afterward such service (as Littleton says in the Case of Socage)
was anciently by mutual consent of Lord and Tenant) changed into an annual
rent, although the said rent be pro warda Castri, yet the Lord cannot have the
keeping of the Castle back again when he will; for after the composition and
change made, the keeping of the Castle is utterly gone. And Pro imports no
condition, as in the Case of an Annuity granted pro consilio impendendo, but a
plain and perpetual recompense and satisfaction. By the selfsame reason in our
Case, albeit that the Parsonages impropriate are now made layfee, ad are come
into the hands of lay Gentlemen, which are not visitable; and though that the
Religious Houses are suppressed, dissolved, and overthrown, as the Castle in
Sir William Capels Case; yet the said certain sums of money which came in
lieu of Proxies, and retain the name of Proxies, and by ancient composition are
become parcel of the certain and settled Revenues of the Bishop, shall remain
for ever, and shall not be subject to exinguishment, no more then Annuities,
Pensions, or Portions of Tithes, which are paid to this day out of many Abbeys
and impropriate Rectories, and the original causes for which they were first
granted or paid, shall not be now examined or brought into question. And at
this day the King himself does pay and allow Proxies out of all Impropriations
which he has in his possession; and therefore in every Lease made by the King
of an impropriate Rectory, the Lessee does covenant to discharge all Proxies,
Synodals, Pensions, etc. And Sir Humphry Winch then chief Baron (at the hearing
of the said Cause) said, That before the dissolution of Monasteries, where a
Rectory was Appropriate to an Abbey immediately the Visitation ceased as to the
Rectory; for the Abbat was not visitable as Rector for his doctrine, but as
Abbat for his rule and order: And yet without question the Ordinary had his
Proxies out of all Parsonages appropriate to Abbeys as well before the
dissolution as after.

And for the Saving in the Act de 3^ Hen. 8. ca. 5. the same is no idle or
Flattering Saving, but real and effectual: for it is agreed before, that
those Proxies were in being at the time of the making of the Act, and not
extinguished by the surrender of the Religious Houses; for their Corporations
were not dissolved until the Religious persons had relinquished their houses,
and were dispersed. And then such things as were in Esse at the time of the
making of that Act might well be preserved and saved by the Act, though the
things extinct before could not be revived by a Saving without express words of
Grant and Restitution. And this difference appears plainly in the Case of
Kekewich 27 Hen. 8. Brook Parliaments 77. And in Sir John Molins Case in the
sixth part of my Lord Cokes Reports.

2. As to the second point it was resolved, That Proxies in their original
nature, being duties payable for visitation, were grantable to the King, and
the King was capable of such grant, especially when the said duties were
converted to a sum of money certain, in the nature of a Pension or Annuity:
for by the ancient Law of the Realm the King has power to visit, reform, and
correct all abuses and enormities in the Church; and by the Statutes made in
the time of Hen. 8. the Crown was only remitted and restored to its ancient
jurisdiction, which was usurped by the Bishop of Rome 33 Ed. 3. Fitz. Aid del
Roy. 103. Reges sacro oleo uncti spiritualis jurisdictionis sunt capaces. And
Proxy is a profit of Jurisdiction, 10 Hen. 7.18. Rex est mixta persona cum
Sacerdote: Also by the Common Law the King might have Tithes, of which no
[meer] lay person is capable: 22. Ass. p. 75. 21 H. 7.1. The King himself shall
visit his Free Chapels and Hospitals: 8. Ass. p. 29. N. Br. 42. a. And
Cassaneus in Catalogo Gloriae mundi, part. 5. consider. 24. cites a text of the
Canon Law, viz. Quod omnes Reges dicuntur Clerie^; and another text that says,
Quod causa spiritualis committ^ potest Principt latco.

And where it was said, that in respect of the greatness of the King and his
Train, competent Proxies could not be ministered to him, and by consequence
could not be granted to him. This objection is taken away, in that the Proxies
at the time of this Grant were reduced to sums of money certain: As also the
Rule of the Canon Law is not plainly cited before, for the Rule is Procurat^o
exhibenda est secundum qualitatem personae visitantis and substantiam
visitatorum.

It was further resolved, That the Bishop with the assent of his Clergy might
well grant these Proxies to the King for that the Law has qualified the person
of the King to receive such Grant, albeit the same be such a Prerogative of the
Bishop that cannot be assigned to any other. As the Creation money of a Duke or
Earl may be granted and surrendered to the King, though it cannot be granted to
any Subject. Also Proxies being now reduced to a certainty in money, and so
made parcel of the certain settled and perpetual revenue of the Bishop, might
be as well granted by him as a portion of Tithes, or an annuity, or any of his
Rents, Services, or other Hereditaments temporal.

3. And as to the third point, it was also resolved and adjudged, That the
unity of possession of Proxies, with the Rectories impropriate and Religious
Houses, out of which Proxies were payable, did not extinguish the Proxies in
the hands of the King, but suspend the payment of them only pro tempore
quousque, the King by his Grant should sever the one from the other.

For the finding of the Law in which point, the nature of these things was
considered, which in any fort might be subject to drowning, or extinguishment
by unity of possession. And they were said to be of three kinds, as

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly and lastly,

Estates in land are properly drowned or confounded, Terminus and feodum non
possunt constare simul in una eademque persona; and a pregnant reason thereof
is put in the Case of Bracebridge, Piowd. Com. 3 9 b. because Term is a time
finite, and Fee-simple is a time infinite; of necessity then the finite must be
drowned and confounded in the infinite. Ob. But that's confounding, and not
extinguishment: for if a particular Tenant grant or surrender his Estate to
another in Reversion, the particular Estate is not extinct, though it be
drowned and confounded; and if a particular Tenant has charged the Land with
rent or other encumbrance, the Estate shall remain in being to this intent. And
in truth Estates in Land, and right to Land, are things of such substance which
cannot be extinct, or penitus interire. And therefore Littleton says, that if
a Disseisee, when his entry is taken away, releaseth to the Tertenant all his
right, that that shall not enure by way of Extinguishment; for the right that
he had passed to the Tenant by his Release. And it were inconvenient that such
ancient right should utterly be extinct: For, droit ne poet pas morier.

But things that issue out of the Land, as Lordship, Rentcharge, etc. are
subject to extinguishment to all intents. As if a Lord grant his Seigniory or
Lordship to a Tertenant and a Stranger, there shall be no joyntenancy or
survivor between them, for the moity of the Lordship is extinct to all intents
and purposes: Plowd. Com. 4.9. a. And if a Lord release to a Tenant all his
right in the Lordship or the Land, such release passes by way of
extinguishment against all persons: Littleton 112. b.

Secondly, Real actions also, are subject to extinguishment, and that is quasi
by unity of possession. As in all cases of Remitter, There, he that has right
of action for Land, has also the possession of the Land it self; so that there
is not any person against whom he can bring his action, and for that cause the
action is extinguished for ever.

And upon the same reason, Condition which gives title of reentry in Land is
extinguished by purchase of the Land, or part of it: 8 H. 7.8. b. 33 H. 8. Br.
Extinguishment 49. So warranty is extinguished by Reinfeoffment or Descent of
Land to the same person that had the Warranty: 40 E. 3.13.

Thirdly,

If things have their original and commencement out of Land, and no otherwise,
and are due in respect of Land only, and are part of the profits of Land, such
things shall always be extinguished by unity of possession; if a man has
equal estate and right in both together. Of this nature is Seigniory and real
services: 3 H. 6.1. a. 40 E. 3.40. b. Littleton 49. a. 122. b. 34 Ass. p. 15.
Rentcharge: Littleton 48. b. Dier 140. b. Common 11 H. 4.5. a. 24 E. 3.25. b.
Chimin. 21 Ed. 3. a. 11 Hen. 4.3. a. And two reasons of this rule were brought;
one, For that the thing that is extracted out of Land, when it comes back again
to the Land, will be naturally extinct; for there is Revolutio ad materiam
primam, from whence comes natural extinguishment as well of man as of all
other terrestrial things. The other more legal reason, is, That he that has
all profits entirely, shall not be said to have part of the profits, for part
is confounded in the whole; and therefore a man cannot have Seigniory, Rent,
Common, or High way in his own land.

But on the other part, yet unity of possession does not extinguish such
things. Of this nature are all Franchises; as if a man has a Warren or Purlieu
in the land of another, and afterward purchases the same land, this unity of
possession does not extinguish the Franchises, but he has them in his own
land: 28 H. 8. Dier 30. b. 16 Eliz. Dier 327. a. 35 H. 6.56. a. So is it of
Waif, Stray, Wreck, Leet, etc.

Also, Annuities, Dismes, Proxies.

If an Annuity be granted in fee by apt words to charge the Heir or Successor,
land, that entry neither suspends nor extinguisheth the Annuity; for the land
is not charged, but the person in respect of the land; for if the land were
charged it should not be an Annuity only, but a Rentcharge, and should be
recovered by Distress and Avowry, which remedy the Law yields not for a mere
Annuity. Also upon assignment over of such Annuity, Attornment should be
necessary, which needs not upon the assignment of an Annuity, as is noted by
Yaxley 21 H. 7.1. b.

This point is made more clear, 10 E. 4.10. a. An Abbat brings a Scire facias
against a Vicar upon judgment in an Annuity, being against the Vicars
Predecessor. The Defendant said that the Annuity issued out of the Manor of B,
and the Tithes, Oblations and Obventions of the Vicaridge, which Manor and
Tithes make the Vicaridge: and that the Plaintiff had made entry upon 43 acres
parcel of the manor, and had taken the Tithes. Hereupon judgment was desired,
whether he ought to have execution. And the whole Court held that it was no
plea, because that this recovery was upon a Writ of Annuity: for in the Writ of
Annuity the person only is charged and not the land; and to say that he had
made entry upon that land, where by his suit it appeared that the rent issued
not out of the land, is no plea. And it is also there resolved, that in an
Annuity against an Abbat upon the title of Prescription, it is no plea, That
the Plaintiff had entered into parcel of the possessions of the Abbey. And in
an Annuity against an Heir, though he shall not be charged if he hold not by
Descent, yet it is no plea to say that the Plaintiff had entered into the land
descending.

But 21 H. 7. the case is more strong. A Parson of a Church was charged with an
Annuity to another Parson by Praescription. The Parsonage out of which the
Annuity was payable was appropriate to the Priory of Aliens, which Priory being
suppressed by Ed. 3. was granted by Parliament to H. 5. Afterward E. 4. grants
the Parsonage Impropriate to the Dean of St. Stephens against whom a Writ of
Annuity is brought by the Parson that had the Annuity by prescription. And the
Opinion of the Court was, That the Annuity was not extinguished by the grant of
the Parsonage to H. 5. by Act of Parliament, though there be no Saving thereof,
and that this Annuity is not given inclusive with the Rectory; for the Rectory
was not charged with the Annuity, but the person of the Rector only. And albeit
the payment of this Annuity might be suspended in the hands of the King, yet
when the King had passed a Grant of the Parsonage, it should revive.

As to Tithes, claims not Tithes in respect of land, but in respect of the
person of his Parishioner. And that unity of possession does not extinguish
Tithes: Vide 30 H. 8. Dier 43. 32 H. 8. Br. Dismes 17. And this Case of Dismes
is a parallel of the Case of Proxies with which in all points it does concur.
For even as Instruction was the cause of payment of Tithes, so Visitation which
was always accompanied with Instruction ( Littleton ca. de Frank almoigne 30.
b.) was the cause of Proxies: and as ^yths are now due, and payable to Lay
persons who have purchased impropriate Rectories, though they give no
Instruction: So Proxies are due and payable to Ordinaries out of Impropriations
and Religious Houses dissolved, though their Visitation cease. And as there can
be no Praescription de non decimando, as it is commonly said in our Books. So
the Canon Law has a Rule, Quod nulla est adversus Procurationem Praescriptio.
Instit. juris Canonicil. 2. de Censibus. And therefore Proxies which resemble
Tithes in other points, may well be compared to them in this point, viz. that
they shall not be subject to extinguishment by unity of Possession.

Thus have I imparted the whole Case of Proxies, which happily came into my hands
after I had penned for my own private use the foregoing Treatise, which I the
rather have set down at large, to the end that any party grieved at this
payment might (by weighing all circumstances in the Case) either receive
information for his satisfaction, or advantage (if there it be to be found) for
his ease. And having thus far forth traveled in the business, I leave both
my self and my labor in this particular to the charitable censure of the
discreet and courteous Reader. For my part I hope there is no man suspects me
partial, nor shall find me so: this knowing age will soon discover such a
fault, and being found not suffer it to pass without touch of reprehension. To
be (...), equally balanced, inclining neither to this or that hand, but with
my uttermost endeavor to press, and facilitate the way toward Truth and
Peace, was the resolution IN brought with me when first I settled upon this
argument. I say Truth and Peace were before mine eyes as my principal objects;
which if I be not so happy as to find, it will excuse that I have cordially
sought. To speak it in a word; what I could gather up at the shoars and
shallowes ( Littus enim legi, not adventuring to launch into the Ocean) I have
faithfully to my power communicated concerning the point of Procurations. And
now what shall I more say? (...), Council. Nicen. Can. 6.
let not any private spirit (by overmuch curiosity and study of Innovation)
causelessly go about to move things well settled out of their ancient places,
nor (without evident inconvenience discovered, and judged by the eye of
authority) so much as think of the word Alteration, but let ancient Customs
stand. The wisdom of all times giving us to understand (from the nature of man
so pronely addicted to change) of what evil consequence such attempt may fall
out to be by the difficulty (...), c. F^^dar. Pyth. Od. 4. p. 112.
that is found oftimes to follow in the resetling of things (hastily and
inconsiderately distrubed) in their former station and place. But I have done
with this point, and do now descend to enquire after another Ecclesiastical
payment, namely Synodals.

De Synodalibus.
FOrasmuch as I have here taken upon me to treat of this Synodal due, I think
it not incongruous to say (however little yet) something of the Synod it self,
because at that time it was usually paid. Now of Synods there are found sundry
kinds, Occumenical, National, Provincial, and Diocesan: Oecumenicall is a Synod
out of diverse Nations; National out of diverse Provinces; Provincial out of
diverse Diocese; Diocesan out of one Diocese only. The Ecumenical and National
Synods were ever assembled by authority Imperial, Regal, or Papal. The
Provincial by Metropolitans or Patriarchs; The Diocesan by the Bishop of the
Dioces. I recite them briefly, for to make a long Narration or Story of the
manner of assembling, order of session, and form of proceeding observed in each
particular Synod were to trifle out the time, and to waste Paper, yea overmuch
to trespass upon the patience (as I fear I have already done) of the judioious
reader, especially in this place, where the discourse upon that subject can be
little else then a (...), a work by the by, as we vulgarly say. Duarenus will
briefly satisfy such as desire information in the point of Synods, Duarenus.
unto whom ( l. 1. c. 11. of his book de sacris Ecclesiae ministeriis and
beneficiis) I refer them. This only I would intimate, and I will do but
little more then so (reserving a few words for Diocesan Synods only) how
careful and how circumspect religious Emperors and godly Bishops in former
times have been, by the often assembling of Synods and calling of Councels (the
frequent celebration whereof as it was praecipua agri dominici cultura, as the
Council of Basil expresses it: Consil. Basil Bin. to. 4. sess. 15.
So the neglect thereof was found to be very much disadvantageous to it, Novel.
Constable. 123. ca. 10.
as the Emperor long before that Council in his Novel-Constitutions seems to
complain) to prevent as well the overspreading poison of Heresy wherewith the
field of the Church was in those times much infested; as also to allay (as much
as in them lay) such tempests of contention as were oftimes stirred up by
seditious and factious spirits to disturb the Common peace. The famous
Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon, Council. Chalced. can. 18.
in the time of Martian and Valentinian Emperors, graced with an Assembly of
630 Bishops, and before that a Council at Antioch, Council. Antioch. c. 20.
Cmcil. Nicen. c. 5.
and before them both the Council of Nice (all cited in the volume of the
Decrees) made several Acts, That a Synod of Comprovincial Bishops should be
celebrated in every Province twice a year ((...) say the Apostles Canons too)
and once of that twice (as the Nicene Council has it, Canon. Apostolo rum, ca.
38.
differing in point of time from that of Antioch) ante dies quadragesimae; C.
de Council. 18. Distinct. etc. propter ibi, etc. habeatur. eod.
yielding this for the reason, (...), that all grudge and malice taken away,
both Priest and People might offer an holy gift, and perform a pure Fast to
God. But this being found in progress of time a task and travel too hard for
Bishops (being for the most part old men) to continue, especially where their
Provinces were of large extent (to instance Germany amongst the rest) the cause
also of such frequent meetings being lessened, time saw an end of that custom;
for near about the middle of the 5. Century, at what time Justinian's Novel
Constitutions were first published and sent abroad. The Emperor finding a
neglect of the observation of the double yearly Synod, commands thus (which the
rather I set down in the very words of the Constitution out of the Greek
original, for that I cannot find it in any Latin copy, Novel. Justin.
Constitut. 123. c 10. impress. Parisiis 1542.
Gothofred or else) (...), etc. (...), sortasse.
which constitution of the Emperor (receiving further strength by the sixth
General Synod, Council constantinop. ca. 8. Council. Nicenum ca. 6 Council.
Lateran. ca. 6.
held at Constantinople about the latter end of the sixth Century: as also by
the seventh General Synod celebrated at Nice about the latter end of the
seventh Century: and long after by the Council of Lateran under Innocent the
third, Anno 1215.) continued the course of a single (not interdicting or
interrupting (in places where it was used) the custom of a double) annual
Provincial Synod for diverse hundreds of years within the Empire. August. de
Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 21.
But. Quid manet ex antiquis morthus (St. Austin thus breaks forth) quibus
Ennius dixit rem stare Romanam, quos ita oblivione obsoletos videmus ut non
modo non colantur, sed etiam ignorentur? So here, this Custom though never so
good, and so long continued, has long since been buried, as it were, in
oblivion, and so worn out of common use, as that it is now as a thing unknown (
quaereliquiae? quodve vestigium? Flor. l. 1. c. 11.
as the Historian of the Veientes) and as if it had never been. And yet not so
as that it suffered utter abolishment: No, (...), Sueton. in Domitiano.
a shoot from the same root sprung forth, and up it came again, but somewhat
altered from what it was before: For in the Council of Basil (that troublesome
Grantz. Saxon. l. 11. ca. 20. Consil. Basil. Sess. 15.
Council) in the time of Eugenius the fourth, about the year 1433. it was
there decreed (upon neglect, I doubt not, of the annual Provincial Synod) and
an Act passed, that a triennial Provincal Synod should thenceforth be observed,
which if the wisdom of those times, and thence downward, had thought meet to
have continned and transmitted to posterity, it might have been a means of
producing many profitable Constitutions, that the modern and after ages must be
content to want and wish for. But blessed be God for those we have. The present
times do, and must thankfully acknowledge the singular benefit they receive
from them, which (without question) would have been enlarged and augmented, had
there not been found cause sufficient of a cessation, at least of a longer
intermittency of time for their Synods then is limited in, or warranted by the
Council Act. For as when the prey is taken, the Huntsman cease to pursue; and
host debellato the Trumpet sounds a retreat, and the Soldier returns
triumphantly home. So here, the storms of Heretical fury which for a long
time disquieted the peaceable state of the Church, being at the length well
aswaged, differences and distractions about Ecclesiastical affairs composed,
and all things in some good sort settled abroad. The Bishops (not called upon by
their Metropolitans) repose themselves within the limits of their own Dioceses,
where, according to an Act made in the said Council of Basil each Bishop was
to convocate his Clergy, and celebrate also a Synod in the same his Diocese at
least C. annis singulis 18. Distinct. Abb. in c. Conquerent. de officio
Ordinarii. C. Episcopus 18. Dictinct. Council. Basil. Sess. 15.
once a year. In this Synod (being most usually held in the Cathedral of every
Diocese) the Bishop himself ( nisi gravi necessitate, vel canonico impedimento
detentus, in which case some other by delegation from him) sat President; who
being there sat, and having his assembled Clergy about him, with such other
of the Laity whom necessary cause called thither; after earnest invocation for
the assistance and direction of Gods Spirit, and the further accomplishment of
such accustomed rites as were necessarily requisite and preparative to the
business. The Bishop or his Substitute, selected or called forth septem e
plebe, C. Episcopus in Synodo 35. q. 6.
says the Decree, de qualibet parochia, adds the Gloss; Men grave, and of
ripe years, fearing God, and for honesty such as were of best repute amongst
the people. To each of these men the Praesident of the Synod delivered an Oath,
the form whereof was as follows, viz. Amodo in antea quicquid nosti aut
audisti aut postmodum inquisiturus es quod contra Dei voluntatem and rectam
Christianitatem in Parochia factum sit, aut futurum erit, si in diebus tuis
evenerit, tantum ut ad tuam cognitionem quocunque modo perveniat. Si scis, aut
tibi fue^it indicatum Synodalem causam esse and ad ministerium Episcopi
pertinere; quod tu nec propter amorem nec propter timorem, nec propter pretium,
nec propter parentelam ullatenus celes Episcopum aut ejus missum cui hoc
inquirere jusse it quandocunque te ex hoc interrogaverit, Sic te Deus adjuvet,
and istae Sanctorum reliquiae. By virtue of which oath, and office thereupon
depending, the extent of their authority and enquiry stretched very far, namely
into all businesses cognizable, and punishable by jurisdiction Ecclesiastical,
Consil. Basiliens. S^ssio 15.
viz. Simony, Heresy, Usury, Sacriledg Sorcery, Divination, Enchantments,
Superstition, Alienation of Church Livings, Fornication, and many other things
besides. All which, and whatsoever else they found to fall within the compass
of their inquisition (as cause required) those seven men, called in the Law
Testes Synodales presented either in writing, or otherwise interrogated in the
open Synod, delivered by way of information viva voce to the Bishop or his
Substitute, which was received by Notaries then present appointed for that
purpose; that accordingly things amiss might be reduced to reformation, and
amended, the parties found remiss might be stirred up to better performances,
and the persons peccant in any sort condignly punished. And so surely they
were: For albeit on the one hand there was tenderness used toward sin
secretly acted, especially where scandal might probably fasten it self upon
some eminent calling; and so a secret and gentle animadversion ((...), Isocrat.
Orat. 2. ad Nicoc. p. 28.
as the Orator expresses it) out of the wisdom of the Synodicall Magistrate,
was answerably inflicted upon the offending party (yea for smaller
misdemeanors, Spelman. Council. 3. p. 362.
and the first a pecuniary punishment was in favor imposed) yet on the other
hand, when a fault committed became so manifest, that a connivance or private
satisfaction might cause a public offense, then no intercession; Tacit. annal.
l. 14. p 314.
no pecunia ob delicta, as Tacitus in another case could exempt from censure
and shame; but as the offense was manifest, Antiquit. Britan. p. 197. Extr. de
Officio Jud. Ordinarii c. l. resragab. finali.
so should the punishment be as notorious: be the person high or low his
calling could not quit him free; which if he refused to undergo being a Clerk,
he was turned out of his Ministry, and deprived of his Benefice; If a Laick, he
was thrust out of the Church by Excommunication, and debarred of Christian
society, no man suffered to keep him company. This was in effect (so I take it)
the manner of holding of Synods in particular Dioceses, at least a
representation of some part of the form of proceedings and censures therein. At
which meeting I doubt not to say there was a Synodale, a Cense, or Tribute in
money paid to the Bishop, or to some other to his use from the inferior
Clergy.

Now Synodale among writers is found (if I mistake not) to yield more
especially a two fold signification: For it signifies not only Conventus a
meeting, as Synodus does, but likewife the Acts of that meeting. Concerning the
former signification we have an instance out of an Epistle of Gregory the
Third, cited by Cardinal Baronius in the 8. Tome of his Annals about the year
738. Catholica (says he, Baronius.
writng to the Bishops of the Provinces of Bajory and Almany) Sanctorum Patrum
authoritas jubet ut his in anno pro salute populi Christiani seu exhortatione
adoptionis filiorum Synodalia debent celebrari, etc. Here Synodale is taken for
the Meeting or Synod it self.

Touching the latter acceptance, Histor. Tripartit. l. 7. sol. 452.
I find it in the Tripartite History, where mention is made of a Synod of
Bishops assembled at Antioch out of diverse Provinces concerning the Heresy
broached by Acasius, and upheld by his and his adherents against the
consubstantiality of the Son of God. Which point being there disputed by the
Bishops Orthodox and Heretical, it was at length discussed, and this Acasius
with his Associates being thoroughly convinced with the evidenceof truth
consubstantialitatem professi sunt, says the Story, they were constrained to
give glory to God by the acknowledgement of their errors, and in subscribing to
the Orthodox Tenets and Creed of the Church: which done the Bishops of that
Synod sent the same Profession together with a copy of the Nccene Creed to
Jovinian the Emperor, to the end the said Emperor might have knowledge of their
proceeding with this Acasius, and be made acquainted with the uniformity of his
and his adherents belief touching that Creed. Hunc libellum (says that Synod,
meaning the Nicene Creed) in collectione Synodalium Sabini conscriptum
invenimus. In this place I take Synodalia to mean the Acts of that Synod which
were collected and digested by this Sabinus, Histor. Tripartit. l. 5. p. 392.
as a little before in that Story the Reader may find written. So now here is
Synodale, the Meeting, and Synodalia too, the Acts of the Meeting. But what is
all this (will some say) to Synodale, the payment being the very thing
principally in pursuit of inquisition in this place? To which I answer, that I
have found yet another Synodale, which (as I conceive) will come near to our
purpose, yea and must necessarily be taken for this very payment that now we
are upon.

In the Appendix to the 3. General Lateran Council, and in the second part of
that Appendix there is an Epistle of Pope Alexander the 3. to certain
Archdeacons and Deans, reproving them for extorting of moneys from the Clergy
sub diversis nominibus in a fraudulent kind of way. Et hujusmodi exactionem
(says the Pope in that Epistle) ut eam liberius videamint exigere, quandoque
consuetudinem Episcopalem, quandoque Synodalia, quandoque Denarios Paschales
appellantes. The Archdeacons and Deans the rather as it should seem to obtain
their unjust demands, shrouded them under such specious Titles of dues as they
knew were currantly warrantable, and would not be denied. This I take the sense
to be. And admit it comes not off so clear but that some dregs of prejudice in
respect of the Exactors, might in some sort obscure the equity of this Synodal
demand: yet this I hold to be a clear truth, that as the abuse of a thing ought
not to take away or abolish a necessary or convenient use; so neither can, or
ought any unjust receipt impeach or make void a just demand: For it will be
granted (I suppose) that no Archdeacon or Dean has right of claim Jure communi
Ecclesiastico to the Synodal payment, but only by composition with, or
prescription from the Bishop: so that if under color and pretense of such
right, the Archdeacon or Dean shall require Synodalia as a due by Law peculiar
and appropriate to themselves, it may well be accounted extortion in them,
which, bona fide, by them demanded in the right of the Bishop, or in their own
names and right by lawful prescribed custom from the Bishop, would be a just
demand: so that hence I conclude there is Synodale a payment, and that Pope
Alexanders reprehensive Epistle (as to the equity of that due) to be in no
particular repugnant or contradictory. But I will stay no longer upon this
point; let the judicious Reader examine the place and satisfy himself. I
proceed.

This Synodal and Synodical due had anciently two other names whereby it was
known and distinguished, which time has now worn out from common use: The one
imposed from the original cause and reason of the pay being ob honorem
Cathedrae Episcopalis, and so termed CATHEDRATICUM: The other assuming a name
from its time of payment, and is called Synodaticum, (both one and the same
thing, excepting the nominal difference) and so are they taken in the Law,
being found ofttimes to go together, (...) the one expounding the meaning of
the other. Instance hereof I shall not need to insist upon in this place as a
matter of principal proof, but pass it over, intending in the solution and
answers to certain questions following ex incidenti to speak something of it.
The questions are I. What this payment, (couched under the terms of
Cathedraticum and Synodaticum) anciently was? II. The reason why paid. III. The
time when it was first imposed? IV. The time when it was usually paid? V. How,
and by what Law it came to be imposed upon the Church, and paid by the Clergy?
VI. and lastly, What relative neerness our Synodale now has unto this ancient
Cathedraticum?


To each of these questions a brief solution. I begin with the first, namely,
What this Cathedratick payment was: and to this I answer; That as well by the
Acts of certain Councels before mentioned, to wit Bracar and Toledo, as by the
Constitutions and Rescripts of Popes, Cathedraticum appears to be a cense or
sum of money of two shillings paid to the Bishop by the inferior Clergy.
Illud te volumus modis omnibus custodire ne qui Episcoporum Siciliae de
Parochiis ad se pertinentibus nomine Cathedratici amplius quam duos solidos
praesumant accipere. 10. q. 3. c. Illud. etc. placuit. ibi etc. inter caetera
eod. 1.
Thus Pope Pelagius to Cresconius the Illustrious: So in a difference that fell
out bewteen the Bishop of Ascisi, (Assisinatin. the Decreatals read, which
Ortelius from Leander gathers to be Assisi, a Town within the confines of
Vmbria in Italy) and the Governor of St. Benet not far from thence, about
Episcopal rights. Honorius the third, Ext. de officico Judicis Ordinarii c.
conquerent. and Gloss. ibid. in v. Duos selidos.
upon complaint made unto him against the Bishop, sets down what dues and
duties did of right appertain unto the Bishop from the Churches and Chapels
belonging unto the said Monastery, and amongst the rest expresses seth Two
shillings nomine Cathedratici, which is a Pension paid to the Bishop a qualibet
Ecclesia socundum loci consuetudinem, Abb. c. conquerent. de officio Judicis
Ordinarii.
as Panormitan upon the Text there. Two shilings then was the usual sum
paid, but why paid, the reason is yet to render.

Hostiensis answers to it, and says, II. Hostiens. insum. de Censibus.. Ex
quibus, ver. Cathedraticum autem.
that it was paid in argumentum subjectionis and ob honorem Cathedrae; so he:
And the Council of Bracar cited in the Decree, Placuit ut nullus Episcoporum
per suas Dioeceses ambulans praeter honorem Cathedrae suae, id est, 10. q. 3.
c. Placuit.
Duos solidos, aliud aliquid per Ecclesias tollat. Thus there; for honor then
of the Episcopal Chair, and in token and argument of subjection to the Bishop
was this sum anciently paid: And no marvel if we rightly weigh the dignity of
his person, the amplitude of his power, and the great authority that he had in
former days: For considered first jure ordinis, Ext. de Religiosi^ Domibus c.
Constitutos.
he had the Ordination of Clerks, Consecration of Altars and Churches with such
like Prerogatives. Secondly considered respectu 10. q. 1. in casu.
jurisdictionis; and so he had the power of correcting and excommunicating, yea
unto him belonged Institution and Destitution of Clerks: in a word, the
jurisdiction of all causes by Law appertaining ad forum Ecclesiasticum. Ext. de
Officio Judicis O^dmarii c. Conqu^rent.
Lastly considered, with respect to the power that he had Lege Dioecesana, as
he was the 10. q. 1. in casa.
Dioecesan; and so he had Jus Census and Cathedraticum exigendi, to leave other
Privileges unnamed, and Jus imponendi too, as Hostiens. de censibus.. Quis
imponere potest. Duaren. de sacris Eccl. ministeriis and b neficiis l. 7. c. 5.
Hostiensis adds, which shows that the Bishop in time past was (to say no more)
(...). But Duarenus explains the reason of this payment a little further; for
thus he writes: Dicitur hoc jus vulgo Cathedraticum, quod Cathedrae, id est,
honori Episcopali debeatur. Cathedra enim in jure Pontificio pro honor, ac
munere Episcopali saepe accipitur, propterea quod olim Episcopi quorum munus
prop^ium ac praecipium est docere, sedent^s in solio, and Cathedra docebant.
Thus he, which shall be the close of my answer to the second question. The
third follows, to wit, The time when is was first imposed.

To this question I bring Duarenus again, Postquam (says he) reditus Ecclesiae
(qui antiquitus erant communes, Duaren. ut supra and l. 2. c. 1. fol. 53.
and ab Episcopo distribuebantur divisi erant, and singulis ministerits
attributi: Episcopis singulis vectigal quoddam ab inferiorbus Ecclesiis pendi
coeptum est. Hujusmodi imprimis illud est quod in Synodo a singulis Curionibus
and inferiarum Ecclesiarum Gubernatoribus exigunt. Nam duos solidos singuli
Episcopo dare jubentur. This is plain for the time; I say plain so far forth
as it relates to, and points upon an act or business done of remarkable
observation. It was when the Revenues of the Church came to be divided (this
was the Act) and allotted to several Ministeries, then began this Cathedratick
payment to the Bishop from the beneficed Clorgie within his Dioecess; even then
says Duarenus. And it may seem not unlikely that this Division of the Church
revenues here spoken of, and the distinguishment of Paroecial bounds were in
time not far asunder: which if so, the antiquity of this Cathedratick
imposition may somewhat nearly be guessed at. For as touching the
distinguishment of Parishes, it is evident in Story, that Euaristus the Pope,
otherwise called Anacletus Gracus, about the year 110. entered first upon that
business; Et titulos urbis Praesbyteris divisit, says Volateran. Volateran. l.
22. Anastas. Biblioth.
He assigned certain Houses set apart and consecrated for divine worship
(wherein the Christians of these times as a distinct Congregation were wont to
meet) to the Priests of the City to exercise their ministry in; Baron. annal.
ad ann 112. nu. 4, 5, 6.
I say certain Houses, yea, and sometimes also Delubra Gentilium, the very
Paganish Temples too were by Imperial Edict and Destination mancipated to such
religious services. But I doubt whether I may adventure the founding of this
Cathedratick payment so high as this particular act of distinguishment by
Euaristus, being only bounded within the City. It may be conceived rather to
acquire its being by occasion of some more general act of the same nature in
the time of the Churches better rest, for now it was under persecution, and no
time then for such setlements. The Church indeed was now (even in Trajans time,
otherwise so good an Emperor) in much distress, persecution being hot and
pressing: And yet Christianity (such is the nature of Gods seed) was still
Neque enim Civitates tantum sed vicos a^que etiam ag^os superctitioms ^stius
contagio perv^gata est. Plin. l. 10. Ep. 97.
growing, insomuch that the Pagauish Temples in some places of the Empire were
left almost unfrequented, as Pliny notes in an Epistle of his to Trajan; yea,
and so great were the numbers of Christians in Bythinia, that, as the same
Pliny confesses (being Irajans Lieutenant Cum Hispaniarum Praesecturam gorere]
si^ annotat Funccius l. 5. Commentariorum in Chronologiam suam ad annum 110. Et
innuit idem Author hanc ^p^stulam Plinianap^ ex Hispania suisse scriptam. Sed
Plinium Hispaniarum Praesecturam gessisse, nusquam apud proba^^^, Authore,
praet^r Fanccium (^cri^torem ^lioqui satis oculotum and perspica^^m) memini me
legisse. Proconsulatum in Bythi^ia se eoercuisse ex Epist. Plin. l. 10. Epist.
28. Et ejusdem vita operi suo p^aefixa per Catanaeum hand diffi^^le est
colligere. Et inde hane suam 97. Epist^l^m ad Trajanum transm sisse Author est
Chron^graphorum sui temporis (quos equidem vidi) sacile princ^p^, doctissimus
Sethus Calvisiu^.
there) that they had well nigh spoiled the Pagans market, Victimarum
ra^^ssimus emptor, says he. Persecution did nothing at all advance their
cause, (...), the Gospel got ground of Paganism, and though fire and sword
opposed, the people would after Christ by any means. Thus, as also by such poor
Privileges of liberty, as the Christians could obtain by Imperial
dispensations (being but few and narrowly confined for the most part) they
multiplied apace. Nor yet were those Privileges constant and continuing. But
even as it is with the Moon, that sometime is in the Wax and sometimes in the
Wane; so was it with the Church in these times; one while under Lee sheltered
from the tempests of Paganish immanity, a while after exposed to the whirlewind
of tyrannical rage. What the favor of one Emperor built up, the fury of
another pulled down: And thus was it with the Church from Nero, (in whose time
Satan being enraged against the Woman, Revel. 12.13. Sucton in vita Neron. pa.
148. Sect. 16.
the first of the Ten bloody persecutions began) till Constantine the Great,
during which time I seek not for the settling, nor read not of the mentioning of
this Cense. Albeit I find toward the latter end of Galtenus his reign, about
the year 260. and somewhat above 40 years before Constantine, that the work of
distinguishing Paroecial Limits was then undertaken again by Dionysius the
Pope, who laying hold upon the opportunity of a favorable I dict of Galienus
(affrighted, and forced to remorse toward the Christians by many prodigious
tokens of Gods apparent indignation) and beginning in the City of Rome, where
his Predecessor Euaristus left, he again divided, reduced, and settled what by
reason of persecution lay confusedly waste, assigning to the several Parishes,
Baron. annal. ad a^n. 270. n. 17. lege et^am notas ad S^xtum tom. 1. Council
Bin. edit. pa. 20.
by him distinguished, several Priests to instruct the people, and to each
Church its Coemiterium; yea, moreover Paroclias and Dioeceses fo^^s distribuit
quo quisque finibus limitibusque suis contentus esset, as Funccius out of the
Decree has collected. Func. Comment. in Ch^enniog^am suam ad an^um Christ^; 68
13. q 1 c. Ecclesias singulas.
Thus proceeding with endeavor to accomplish abroad also what Euaristus had but
only began at home: but death or other impediments preventing, that business,
was left in diverse places uneffected, as a work for posterity to finish and
complete. To make the matter short: the work concerning the distinguish^ng of
Paroec^all bounds, being thus far forth carried along (and all happ^nning in
the time of persecution, or rather when the Church enjoyed its Lucida
intervalla, and had purchased some Halcyon days) Constantine the Great, about
the beginning of the 4. Century, took upon him the Government of the Imperial
Scepter, stayed the then Persecution, shut up the doors of Paganish Temples,
and restored peace to the Church, and liberty to the Christians; yea, and
Councels (few before that time) then began to be rise abroad. Parochial
distribut on in England was ^erformed by Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury,
about the year 668. Spelin. Council. 152. But Speed says by Honorius the 5.
Archbishop also of Canter. about the year 636.
About this time it may be supposed that the division of Church revenues spoken
of by Duarenus was made, and this Cense then fixed. Though I confess as yet I
have not observed it mentioned before the second Council of Bracar, held a
little after the middle of the 5. Century, about the year 570. which Council I
find does only limit, not constitute this payment, and therefore it must be
sought for a little higher, wherein I crave the Readers patience for a further
inquisition. And so I pass away to the 4. Question, namely?

When this Cense or Pension was usually paid?

And this I find to be, in Synodo; and that therefore it was called
Synodaticum, quia in Synodo frequentius dabatur, says Hostiensis. Hostiens in
sum de Censihus.. Ex qu^bus.
I say it was usually but not always so paid: For in the Decretals there is
somewhat that seems to oppose the limitation and restriction of this payment to
Synodicall Meetings only. Extra de Censibus c. Olim.
The passage there is this: There arose a question about the payment of this
Synodaticum, and afterward a Suit between a Bishop of Spoleto in Italy and
certain Clerks Plebis Rupinae within his Dioecess: The Bishop required Tres
denarios Papienses, which according to an ancient Custom, the Clergy were wont
to pay at the Feasts of the Nativity and Easter, to wit, at each Feast so much
pro Synodatico. Now the said Clerks or Clergy having for thirty six years
altered their payment, and rendering to the Bishop and his Predecessors for so
long time only Tres denarios Lucenses at each Feast, being a kind of money of
far less value then the former) endeavored to prescribe against the Bishop,
who thought himself safe enough to avoid the danger of their Prescription by
receiving of it sub protestatione, and that in so doing his right could not be
impeached, wherein he had like to have been deceived. A great deal of ado
there was, and much bickering between the Bishop and his Clergy, and at length
the matter was brought to Pope Innocent the Third to be decided, who examining
the cause, and finding the prescription of the defendant parties to be only
four years short of a full prescription, Quadragenalis praesiriptio tollit
omnem actionem. Ext. de verb. signisicat. c. Cum inter, ver. per 40 annos.
namely of forty years (to which time, if the Defendants could have brought
their prescription, the Bishop had been gone notwithstanding his protestation)
and having also the Defendants and their Advocates answer, non revocatum, that
Papiensis moneta was formerpaid: The Pope thereupon passes a definitive
sentence for the Plaintiff Bishop against the Defendant Clergy, and condemns
them ad solutionem Dena^iorum Baptensium: thus there. So that hence it is
apparently evident, that albeit the Synodatick payment receive its denomination
a Synodo, as being the usual time of ^ts payment, yet under the same name it
was also paid extra Synodum (namely at the Feasts of the Nativity and Easter) I
will not affirm absque ratione Synodi; for that before this time Synods, I mean
Provincial and Dioecesan afterward I doubt not, were held (occasion requiring)
twice a year, correspondent whereunto by prevalency of custom the Synodatick
payment might either be doubled (which is less probable) or divided (which I
rather incline to think, for so I find the ancient course to be in the Dioecess
of Gloucester) namely the payment to be divided into Synodalia Aestivalia, and
Hiemalia. Extat. in quadam vetustissima membranula quam penes me habeo.
Nor do I think that this Synodatick payment (taken to be the same with the
Cathedratick, as I do here and elsewhere) was constantly at all times paid
either in Synodo, or at the two Feasts abovenamed.: For it was sometimes, and
very anciently paid also at Visitations. I refer the Reader to the seventh
Council at Toledo mentioned in the Decree, 10. q. 3. c. Inter caetera, and
Casus ibi.
where he shall find a Canon against the exacting of more money then Two
shillings only pro Cathedratico in Episcopal visitations. And so have I done
with this Question, and pass to the fifth, and that is

How, and by what Law this Cathedraticum came at the first to be imposed upon
the Church, and path by the Clergy?

To this Question Hostiensis makes reply, Authoritate Episcopi, by the
authority of the Bishop, within the sphere of whose Quondam activity the
Lawyers have found a power to move, Gloss. per Lancelot. super Instit. juris
Canon. De immunitate Eccles.
which they call Lex Dioecesana; a term by them invented (because not
explicitly found in any Text in Law) for the clear and distinctive expression
of Episcopal power in that particular, as the same relates to other Laws and
Privileges annexed to, and inherent in the Office of the Bishop, to wit, Lex
jurisdictionis, and Jus ordinis. And therefore it is that Panormitan says, Abb.
in ca. Dilect. de Offic. Jud. Ordinar. ubi plura de lelege Dioeces.
that they are vocabula Magistralia magis quam juris. But to stand no longer
upon the term. Thus much I find that this part of Episcopal power thus
distinguished and actuated by this Law, did formerly yield the Bishop a large
extent of command over all the Churches and Clergy within his Dioecess; all, I
say, none Gloss. in ver. Episcopus c. Episcopus non delet, Did. 18. Ext. de
Majorit. and obed. c. 9. Quod super and gloss. ibi in ver. Dioecesana.
excepted but the Cistertians, who by virtue of their order had some
Privileges of immunity more then ordinary, as namely to be absent from
Synodicall Meetings assembled by the Bishop within his Dioecess, and from
payments then made to him by the other Clergy with such like. This then was the
Law, and by virtue of this Law founded in the Bishop (or power settled upon him
by special donation or dispensation) this Cense was by him 10 qu. 1. in. Casu.
received, and the payment thereof fixed, and imposed upon the inferior
Clergy, which now is become a charge perpetual annexed to their Benefices, and
thence annually to be paid (if greater authority interrupt not the ancient
course) as an Onus Ecclesiasticum a Church burden or charge: yea, and to show
that it is no strange and unheard of burden no innovated payment. It is said to
be (besides its imposition by Law) Onus Ordinarium. The Gloss upon the
Provincial Constitutions de officio Vicarii makes it good, C. Quoniam in ver.
Onera Ecclesiastica.
where the Reader may find those words. Solutio Cathedratici, Synodatici and
Procurationum ratione visitationis, and alia hujusmodi de quibus non dubitatur
quin sunt onera ordinaria suum capiunt effectum ab impositione legis. But this
place of Lyndewoods Gloss gives occasion to a question namely, Whether
Procurations be imposed and due by the same Law that Cathedratica are: To which
I answer, that (questionless) they are not. For Cathedraticum, 10. q. 1. in
casu.
Synodaticum, tertia vel quarta pars Decimationum and Oblationum, etc. are
Census, and exacted or imposed as I conceive Lege Dioecesana. Gloss. in v.
Census, Ext. de Censibus, c. Prohibemus.
But Procuratio is not properly Census, but Pensio. And as it is so, and
reduced to a certainty of sum, that Pension has its ground, as before
intimated from Papal Constitution, and that Constitution also its root and
footing from a principle in the very Law of nature. And so much Hostiensis is
bold to assert, when speaking of Procuratio as it is due ratione visitationis,
Host. ubi supra. A quibus danda sit.
he says that it is Adeo debita quod quamvis nullas expensas faciat Episcopus
propter visitationem nihilominus eam recipit. And the reason he urges is out
of St Paul, and St. Paul out of the Law of Nature; Qui seminat spiritualia
metere debeat carnalia. Thus Hostiensis, who propounding the Apostle in bare
positive terms, does not so fully (as I conjecture) press the duty and scope of
the Text: For these are the words; 1 Cor. 9.11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, (...); is it a great thing if we
reap your carnal? The Interrogation seeming vehemently to enforce a redition
or retribution on the one hand, especially upon the performance of the
conditional proposition on the other: (...); as much to say, Is it a great
thing? No, in comparirison of the duty, the charge is not worth naming. But
this is an excursion, I return. We see the Law, that is to say, the Law
Dioecesan carries the authority of this Cathedratick imposition, which
therefore is said to be Episcopale, because founded originally in, or settled
solely upon the Bishop, to whom in honorem Cathedrae, and in token of
subjection and acknowledgement of superiority to him, as before is expressed,
it was by the Clergy anciently rendered, and may now by him be lawfully exacted
from them, as I conceive. And this is my answer to the fifth Question. The
sixth and last is this.

What relative nearness our Synodale now has unto this ancient Cathedraticum.

To this I answer in a word, Cathedraticum our Synodale seems to have but small
or no relation, because they so much differ in literal enunciation, yet not so
to Synodaticum; to which both in sense, signification, and literal likeness it
does very strongly refer. That being a payment of Two shillings; ours for the
most part the same: that paid most usually at Synodicall Meetings, and
anciently sometimes at Visitations; our Synodale (since Synods discontinued)
paid at Visitations altogether, at least in many places so. Take them then, and
wynd them up in one clue or bottom, and all of them make (as I conceive) but
one payment. One I say, and that very identicall one, that now is in use of
receipt in this Kingdom, known and distinguished by the name Synodale, or the
Synodal payment, Rastal. tit. Pensions, etc.
or (which is the same) the Synody. The Synody I say, which by Act of
Parliament of 34 H. 8. is reckoned as a Church due; for the recovery whereof in
case of denial, a sufficient provision is by that Act made: And upon great
reason too, for that the said Synody, or Synodal being a Pension certain, is
valued in the Kings Books, and his Majesty receives an yearly Tenth out of it.
And this is all that for the present I have to say touching this Synodale: In
which discourse if I have erred, I humbly implore the charitable censure of the
learned Reader, and

-- praebeat Alcinoi poma benignus ager. Let others better studied this way
reform, or suffer with patieene till time and further industry shall discover
to me my mistakings, which if happily once I find, I shall hastily retract. In
the mean time I leave the point, as now it stands, and pass unto another
Ecclesiastical due, namely Pentecostalls.

De Pentecostalibus.
AS he that travels in a mist, or in parts unknown calls upon every one he
meets withal for direction; and as he that seeks passage through a dark room
catches at every hand that may lead him to the light; so am I constrained to
do in the disquisition and search after this ancient Church-due, Pentecostals.
For the Canon Law, and Provincial Constitutions, so much as I have read, they
make no mention of them under this Title. I have heard some roave at them (as
he in the holy Story that drew his bow in incertum) and to say, 1 Reg. 22.34.
that surely they were those Peter Pence anciently sent to Rome out of this
Land, and continued to the Church unto this day under another name, and I know
not what. But Peter Pence they cannot be; for if we examine the antiquity of
the one and the other of them, so far as I can discern, we shall find a
great deal of difference between them. It is certain (for ought that ever I
have read or heard to the contrary) that until the time of Ina, Polyd. Virgil.
Aug. Hist l. 4. p. 89. and 90.
King of the West Saxons, who lived about nine hundred years ago, Peter Pence
were never heard of in this Land; but our Pentecostal (if I may have liberty to
conjecture) was in use some hundred years before that time. Again, if we
consider the manner of their collection and payment, Polyd. ubi supra p. 90.
it was (says Polydor Virgil, who was Collector of them in this Kingdom)
domesticatam, from every house a penny; I say, every house that had but five
groats worth of living Cattle, Stow in annal. Edvard. 3.
of one manner of Cattle; as Stow: But 30. denariatus vivae pecuniae in domo
sua de suo proprio, Lambard. Ar^hai^n in l^g. Edv. Regis fol. 128.
belonging unto it, as by (the Laws of King Edward before the Conquest) may
appear. In our Pentecostal no such matter. Lastly (if I may not be thought
nugas agere) there is yet another difference, and that is in the time of
payment: for Peter Pence were usually paid either at the Feast of the Apostles
Peter and Paul, Lege Polyd. ubi supra.
or ad festivitatem quae dicitur ad vineula, commonly called Lammas day.
Pentecostals seem to be paid upon, or about the time that does chiefly
denominate the pay, namely Pentecost. But that they have no relation the one to
the other; yea, that Peter Pence are not in rerum natura at this time, it is
evident: For that by a Statute made in the 25 of H. 8. and revived upon a
Repeal 1 Eliz. 1. those Peter Pence amongst other Papal exactions had their
doom, and suffered deserved extinction by Act of Parliament. Deserved, I say,
albeit the Cardinal is pleased over hastily, and thanks be to God, as untruly
to collect, that a judgment fell upon this Land, when first it fell off from
Romescot pay. Baron annal. ad an^. Chr. 740.
Mirandum illud accidit ubi cessavit pendi No Vectigal, but Eleemosyna mera.
Eliens. ad bellarm. Apolog. respons. p. 83.
vectigal istud utcunque male redemptum Haeresium allu vinne Anglicana Ecclesia
absorbetur, says the Cardinal. But to leave excursions, and to come home unto
our business, this Pentecostal payment seems (to me it does) to be (at least in
the nature thereof to have reference to) an Oblation; which amongst the
Christians in the elder times of the Church was most frequent, and yielded much
in matter of yearly revenue to it; devotion carrying in with a full hand what
might well be spared to holy uses, 2 Cor. 8.3.
and spurring on the people (...) (to use the Apostles phrase) even beyond
their power to munificency, as conceiving the Churches Chest to be the safest
Treasury. When the Tabernacle of old was to be built, see, the people came on
to the work with such zeal, Exodus 36.6.
that Moses was fain to proclaim a Sufficit, before the people would leave off
to offer. So in the Acts of the Apostles we find what the Christians in those
times did, they even sold their possessions, Act. 4.
and left them at the Apostles feet. And the manner in succeeding times of the
ancient Christians also was, they offered not the price, 12. q. 1. c. Videntes
autem.
but even their Fields and Farms Matricibus Ecclesiis, from whence they only
received livelihood, and left the rest to be employed to sacred uses. To
Monasteries and Et nimio plus obtulerunt Majores nostri nec ullum sibi modu^
statuer u^t vel finem Monastesteria donis accumulandi. Eliens. ad Apolog.
respons.
Churches nothing was thought too much, nothing too good to be offered; such
was the devotion of our Ancestors. And that works of mercy and charity were
eternal, and that there could not be any deed more beneficial to the soul,
more meritorious, then bounty to the Church; this was their persuasion. So that
as all rivers hasten into the Sea, Eccles. 1.
as the Wiseman speaks, so all went to the Church; yea there seemed to be a
kind of pious contention in the people ( Certatim Ecclesiae populus offerebat,
Duaren. de sacris Eccl. ministeriis and Benef. l. 2. c. 1.
as Duarenus) who should be first to bring in their offerings to this sacred
Gazophylacium: even Kings and the Great-ones of the world, not only the common
people brought in liberally this way. Of Ethelwulphus King of the West Saxons
it is thus written, that he gave the Tenth of his Kingdom free from all
tributary charge to the Church. Antiquit. B^it, pa. 73.
And how liberal his Successors diverse of them were, till the exorbitant
excess, and inordinate luxurious living of the Monks in this Kingdom,
accompanied with the extreme neglect of Religion, did abate the edge of their
dovotion, may be seen, Antiquit. Britan. p. 86.
as in an Oration that King Edgar delivered in much passion and grief for such
abuses to Dunstan then Archbishop of Canterbury; Mecum obsecro animadvertat hic
Lector si velit sequentia apertius intelligere, cujus devotionis ac regularis
observantiae suerunt ab antiquo Winchelcumbienses Monachi, quando ob little
vitae sanctitatem, integritatemque quotquot sere in circuitu nostro ruri
manebant, aliquam portionem de suis frugibus and terrae nascentiis sibi a Deo
co^cessis Ecclesiae nostrae quotannis in Eleemosynam offerendum voverunt. Ve^um
quorum in curia tantae dev^tionis Census sive redditus primo neglectus sit, aut
cur illud revocaverint, seu amplius non solverint, haud uspia^ mihi consta^e
potuit. Arbitror save, quod postquam in coeperit fervor religionis atque
devotionis apud ipsos Winchelcumbienses torpere atq^e srigescere sicut accidit
(uti reo^) tempo^e Willielmi de Shcurburnia, and Roberti de Upwella, o'im
nostri loci Abbatum. Tepuit etiam erga cos aliorum Christianorum devotio.
Illius igitur rei ob illud ^am m^mini ut posteri videant quantum damnum and
jacturam rerum juslo Dei judicio in rebus nostris temporalibus tunc passi sumus
quando incoepimus remissio^es esse erga sacram observantiam regularem. Simulque
and nobis timendum ne majora mala sint futura si (q^od absit) in talem
remissionem aliquam recidaverimus. Eam quoque ob^em sent^o, ^^a vivendum, ita
elabo andum ut novo devotion^s spiritu concepto, ob vitae ipsorum
Winchelcumbiensium sanctitatem and sacram a^ud eos observantiam regularem little
predia ac possessiones oblationesque angeri potius quam diminui de catero
mer^antur. Quae autem erat illa Oblatio seu Eleemosyna le Church-seal oli^n
nuncupata sequens litera de clarabit, etc. -- Lieger book of Winchcomb. fol. 43.
so also by a digressive animadversion that I find in an ancient Manuscript
containing the Antiquities of the Monastery of Winchcombe, and the principal
Occurrents and Acts of that Abbey for diverse hundred of years, wherein the state
of the Abbey is much deplored in respect of the irregularity of the Regulars
there. This at home; and to look a little abroad, it is recorded of Charles the
Great, that he offered whole Saxony, that he subdued, Baron annal. ad ann. Chr.
804.
to St. Peter at Rome, and twelve hundred pounds yearly he brought in elsewhere
ad servitium Apostolicae sedis, besides what he bequeathed at his death to the
Metropolitan Bishops for Church and Poor, Registr. Chronicorum in vit. Caroli
magn^
being two parts of his goods, if Registrum Chronicor. report truth. And what
Licinia, a very rich and wealthy Matron in the Primitive time did, the
Tripartite Story tells us, Histor. Tripartit. l. 1. c. 9.
that she gave all her goods to the Church of Rome. This in foraign parts, and
to go no further. Can. Apostol ca. 40. and ca. 41. 12. q. 1 c. videntes etc.
Praecip^mus, Et c. Episcopus, and q. 2. c. Vobis 10 q. 1. c. Quae cunque res.
Now all these Oblations the Bishops after the Apostles times had sub clave
potestatis to dispose of, they being thought the fittest instruments to be
entrusted with the goods of the Church, to whom the charge of the souls of Gods
people was chiefly committed. And into Can. Apost. ca. 40. Beda Eccl. Hist.
Angl. l. 1. c. 27.
four parts or Canonical portions they commonly were (by Deacons first under
the Bishop in imitation of Apostolical institution, and afterward by a Clergy
Steward, called in the Law Distinct. 89. c. quia in qu^busdam. 16 q. 7. c.
Quoniam in etc. In nova. E. Council. Chalced. ca 26.
O^conomus always accomptable to the Bishop) divided, and accordingly
distributed one part to the Priest or Clerks that did service in the Church to
which their offerings were brought. A second part to the A (...). A^^sto^h.
Schol. in Pl^t. Hisunt Th^sau ^i Ecclesiae, and vere. Thesauri in quibus
Christus ^^^, inquibus Christi fides est. Dict. S. Laur^ntii Martyris de
pauperibus ex Ambros. l. ^. Offic. c. 28. Distinct. 82 in Princip. c.
Episcopus. Duaren l. 2. c. 1 de sacris Eccles. ministeriis and benef. 12. q. c.
1. Praecipimus.
Poor, who were in the Primitive times called the Ch^uches Treasure, and of
whom the Bishops had an especial charge and regard. A third toward the
Fabric or repair of the Church. And the fourth and last part the Bishop did
usually assume unto himself hospitalitatis exercendae causa, and sometimes a
third part too, which when he took, he also undertook the repair of the Church,
Gloss. in ver. Tertius 10 q 3. c. u^io. 10. q. 1. c. De bis etc. Antiquos
Canones.
Onus fabricae; so the Gloss, which otherwise rested upon the Priest or Clerks
of that Church to do from the allotted divident. By this means, I mean of
munificent offerings, and from Altaragies, that is, offerings made upon the
altar (whereof the Bishop had sometimes a third part, and sometimes a moity) as
likewise from Oblations brought unto the Sepulchers and Shrines of Martyrs,
with such like in-comes; the Church doubtless became at length wonderfully
enriched; for even the vessels that they used in their Temples in ancient and
aftertimes, Op^at. l. 1. ad Parmen^anum. Au^ust. Epist. Epist. 165.
being in great abundance (besides ornaments, wherewithal they were
plentifully stored) were of gold and silver: yea, and it is not improbable to
conjecture that many goodly Temples whose curious work and costly materials do
yet after so many ages past give cause of admiration to the beholders, were
even hence raised from the dust, and diverse Monasteries, Priories, Religious
Houses and Hospitals were by this means founded and plentifully endowed. But to
leave to speak too much of that, that has so long ago for the most part left
the world, namely liberal devotion toward the Church. In this little
Pentecostale there is somewhat that tends that way, if the original thereof
could be exactly found out. In ancient time the Bishop was to visit
Ecclesiatim, as before is mentioned. When he came to visit, his manner was to
celebrate the Mass ((...), Novel. Justinian, Constit. 123. c. 10.
as the Emperor phraseth it) in the Church that he visited, which he did by his
Episcopal authority, every Parish within his Dioecess, being Paroechia sua;
Ext. de Rap^o ribus c. de ill^s.
and therefore is the whole Dioeces in respect of the Bishop by the Law called
Paroechia; 10. q. 3. c. Quia and Duarenus passim.
as likewise the whole Kingdom (the Province at least) in respect of the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury is so called. Antiquit. Britan. pa. 28. and pa. 64.
Lyndewood Duarenus.
At this Mass the people made an offering to the Bishop (as at other times
their manner was to do to the Curate when he said Mass on Sundays and
Holidays) which he received. But upon this Custom I cannot fix the original
of this due, forasmuch as the act of Massing quolibet die dominico being too
general in circumstance of time (to which our Oblation or Pentecostal has
special reference) does not fitly denominate the pay. Now as all Offerings were
usually divided into four parts, Gloss. in v. Oblatio de jurejurancto c.
Presbyteri.
as before is declared: so the Gloss upon the Provincial Constitutions
observes a fourfold cause or reason for which the people in ancient times were
bound to bring their Oblations to the Church: As namely first ex praecedenti
Conventione; a man's house or land being tied by a preceding contract for a
certain Oblation to be made at a certain time or times. Ext. de verborum
significat. c. Cum inter in Rubrica 12. q. 1. c. videntes lege Levitic. 27. v.
28.
Which kind of Oblation, albeit it be of the nature of a Cense or Imposition,
because it proceeds e contractu, yet being a thing settled upon the Church, it
bears the name of an Oblation, as generally whatsoever is offered to, or in
that way settled upon the Church does so. Secondly, propter praecedentem
promissionem sive deputationem: As when a man inter vivos engaged himself by
promise of beneficence to a Church, Instit. l. 2. tit. 7. de Donat.
or causa mortis, did depute, destinate, or lay aside any moveable thing for
that purpose ( stante tali voluntate unrevoked) it ought to be performed (every
man in Law being presumed Gloss. in ver. Perdurare ca. Majores Ext. de
Baptismo. 13. q. 2. c. Qui Oblatione etc. Clerici and 16. q. 1. c. Statu^mus
and Gloss. 161. Council. 2. Turenens. c. 18.
Durare in voluntate in qua decedit) yea, the party or parties entrusted
failing in the performance of the trust in them reposed tanquam egentium and
pauperum necatores so are they accounted) to be excommunicated. Thirdly,
propter necessitatem, as when the Minister had not wherewith to sustain
himself, the people were bound to supply. Gloss. in v. Vacuus distinct. 1. de
Consecrat. c. Omnis Christianus.
And Bartholomaeus Brixiensis his Gloss upon the Text is, That if they refused
so to do, the Minister being poor might cut them short. Officia divina
subtrahendo. The fourth and last is propter consuetudinem, according to which
the faithful were tied certis festivitatibus, to make their accustomed
Oblations. Now amongst the Festivals the Feast of Pentecost was, and worthily
is a most special one. At which Feast there was even in many places here in
England anciently an Oblation made by inferior Churches and Parishes: to the
principal mother Churches, which in probability may originally cause the
denomination of Pentecostalia or Whitsun-farthings (for so also are they
called) they being the issue perhaps of a devout Fast and abstinence, that
about that time was by a Council decreed to be kept; or of that great Sacrament
of Baptism yearly celebrated with much solemnity at this Feast, and Easter
only; at what time the people brought their children turmatim, by troops at it
were, unto their Baptismal Churches to be baptized, which Custom continued not
only to the time of Lotharius the First, as Beatus Rhenanus, but long after,
Rhenani observat. in Tertul. fol. 154. Abb. Vrspergens. Chronicon.
even to the time of Lotharius the Second (that lived about four hundred years
ago) as Abbas Vrspergensis observes: Or rather peradventure they allude to
those Oblations in the time of the Law which the Jews made at their anniversary
meetings in the Temple of Jerusalem at this Feast. To the which Oblations they
held themselves bound by that place of Scripture, Exodus 23. Exodus 23.15. Deuteronomy.
16.16.
Non apparebis in conspectu Dei vacuus. So then, the Temple of Jerusalem being
the Mother Church of the Jews, to which at this Feast they brought their
Offerings: And our Cathedrals being (in a special manner though not only) the
Mother Churches of particular Dioeceses (to which at the same time Offerings
have bin anciently brought, as before is mentioned) this custom of
Pentecostall Offerings may in some probability have its original derivation
thence. And in this guess Gulielmus Durandus runs along thus far in agreement
with me. Ritus igitur (says he) Synagogae transivit in Religione^ Ecclesiae,
and sacrificia carnalis populi mutata sunt in observantiam populi spiritualis.
Durand. Rationale divinorum Offic. l. 4. c. 30. Numb. 34.
Thus he, writing about the offerings of the old Law. And surely it is not
vainly conceived, the Jews might be the Authors of this Custom. Nor needs any
man to be ashamed to follow their steps in so good an example, though the worst
of men, Gens sceleratissima, Aug de Civit. Dei^ 6. ca. 11. Synes. in Epist.
Epist. 4.
as St. Augustine out of Seneca, (...), as Synesius pleases to style them. But
to come back to our business. To the principal Mother-Churches then, these
Oblations were especially made, and being thither brought, the Bishops as
before is set forth and declared, had them solely to dispose of, as whatsoever
else were offered in or brought unto other Baptismal and Parochial Churches,
16. q. 1. c. Statuimas.
yea and Chapels too (for in such also Oblations were made consentiente
Episcopo, and not otherwise) came within the compass of his distribution. So I
find that Eugenius the Third did by his Dipl^ma or Letters Patents grant the
fourth part of the offerings made upon the greater Altar of the church of St.
Peter in Rome, Baron. annal. ad ann. Chr. 1153.
to the Archpriest and Canons of the same church. This of the Bishop of Rome.
12. q. 3. c. Episcopus.
And that the Bishops elsewhere did or might do the same, I see no cause to
doubt, though the Pope whose power and authority in this Kingdom and elsewhere
was once so great as being (forsooth) Caput omnium Pontificum a quo illi
tanquam a capite membra descendunt, as Durandus overlasheth; Durand. Ratioona^.
de min^str. and ordin. Eccl. l. 1. fol. 31.
and as having within the compass and limits of his jurisdiction above an
hundred and twenty Archbishopricks, and above a thousand Bishoprics, as
Stapleton vaunts, Stapleton de Magnitud. Romans Eccl. l. 1. c. 3.
did ex plenitudine potestatis sometimes interpose, and order and dispose
things in the Church according to his own will, giving to this body, or that
member as he saw cause; but ever to the Clergy to whom, and to those uses
before expressed by the Canon Law these Offerings were and are only due, and
otherwise interdicted to the Laity sub districtione Anathematis. 10. q. 1. c.
Quia Sa^erdo^es, and e. Sanct. Patrumibi.
And hence it may be that in some places the Deans and Praebendaries of
Cathedral Churches have them. In other places Praebends are founded upon them
to instance two (if credible report deceive me not) in the Cathedral Church of
Salisbury, a greater and a less distinguished and known by this difference of
Major and Minor pars Altaris. And in some Dioeceses again they are settled upon
the Bishop and Archdeacon, and made part of their Revenue, for which the King
has Tenths and Subsidies. An instance hereof: The Cathedral or mothrr Church
of Worcester was anciently before the dissolution a Priory; and among other
Revenues belonging to the same Church it had those Pentecostalia or
Whitsun-farthings yearly brought unto it, under the name of Oblations or
spiritual profits tempore Pentecostes. And after the Dissolution: when King
Henry the eighth, about the 33 year of his reign did found anew and reendow the
said Church, he returned these Pentecostalia (after he had kept them about a
year in his own hands) in express terms back again to the said Church, which
the Dean and Prebendaries there receive unto this day (as I am informed) and
appears due by the Henricus Octavus, etc. Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra
special, ac ex certa scientia, ac me^o motu nostris dedimus and concessimus,
ac per praesentes damus and concedimus Decano and Capitulo Ecclesiae
cathedralis Christi, and beatae Mariae Virginis Wigorn. omnes illas Oblationes
and Obventiones, sive spiritualia p^oficua vulgariter vocat Whitsun-farthings
annuatim, collect. sive recepta de diversis villatis in Comitat. nostris
Wigorn. Warwic. and Heref. infra Archidiaconatum Wigorn. and tempore Pentecost.
oblata dicto nuper Prioratui b^atae Mariae Wigorn. modo dissolut. dudum
spectan. and pertinen. etc. Ex Arch^v^s Decani and Capit. Wigorn.
Letters Patents. But in Gloucester it is otherwise; for there the Bishop and
Archdeacon only receive them; neither can the Dean and Prebendaries that now
are of the Cathedral, nor could the Abbat and Monks of that Church before them
ever make just claim to them: For before the suppression these Pentecostals,
inter alia, were valued to the Archdeacon in the Kings books, as part of the
revenue of the Archdeaconry, even when Procurations and Synodals were, and for
ought I know to the Bishop too; but I leave that to the Record, and would here
end. But as he that after a long night desires to behold the appearance of the
morning Sun; so my self, not yet sufficiently satisfied with what has been
formerly produced in this obscure passage, and desirous vel in minutioribus to
behold the brightness of truth, then which nothing can be more desirable. Upon
the apprehension of some conceived light beginning to discover it self in this
particular. -- (...) Euripid. in Phoeniss.
Hope to find gives me encouragement, and makes me yet eager to seek. Fabianus
a certain Bishop moves two questions to Pope Gelacius, which, as I conceive,
do somewhat concern our present business. The former of the two was, 10. q. 3.
c. Nec numerus, and Gloss. 161.
Whether a Bishop might require pro Cathedratico, ultra antiquam consuetudinem?
To this the Pope answers no, he might not. And the later was this, What part
of Oblations he ought to receive? And the Pope refers him to the Custom
observed in other Churches, whether a moytie or third part: Not the moity or
third part generally of all the Oblations made (that questionless is not the
question in this place) but only of such as were brought in, Polydor. Virg. de
Invent. ^erum l. 6. c. 8. 18 q. 2. c. Fleutherius ^e consec^. Distinct. 1. c.
Slennit. Dedicat^onum.
in die ann^versariae dedicationis (for this solemnity was annual, and all upon
that day, vicatim made holy day, as Polydor has it) vel alterius solennitatis,
as the Bishop and Founder, or Priest did covenant and agree at the time of the
Dedication of that Church; so the Gloss explains the Case. And surely this is
it that Hostiensis specially aims at, if I mistake not, when writing of the
time of the imposition of Church Censes, he thus says, That their imposition
was aut fundationis tempore, aut donationis, aut consecrationis, Host. in summa
de Ce^s. Siquis Census.
aut tempore immunitatis indultae. His enim temporibus, vel imponitur, vel
offertur says Hostiensis. And probable it is, yea doubtless so it was: 16. q.
1. c. Quicunque.
For as besides the Bishops knowledge, Platin. Volater. l. 22. Et Polyd.
Virgilubi supra. Bale^s de Romans Pontis. de actis 18. q. 2. c. De Monachis.
and consent praeter Praesulis conscientiam no Church could be consecrated
within a Dioecess ( Faelix the third having made a Constitution to that purpose
about the year 484) so neither could any Church or Monastery be founded or
built in a Dioecess without the concurrence of Episcopal approbation, except
in places privileged, De Privilegiis c. Authoritate in 6o.
exempted from the Bishop, and appropriated to the Pope. So that when the
Bishop did yield his consent to the founding, or his pains in consecrating or
dedicating any such Church, he reserved somewhat to himself and to his See
Episcopal nomine Pensionis. Ext. de Religiosis domibus c. Constitutus.
Sed nec illud insolitum aut novum habert debet, ut cum Episcopi Ecclesias piis
locis rite concesserint, aut exemptas fecerint aliquid sibi in iis pensionis
nomine reservent. Not that the Bishop did stipulate or contract with any,
either Founder or Priest, to receive so much in recompensationem, Gloss. in v.
Recompensationem. Ext. de eodem.
for such his concession, consent or pains taking any way before hand, and that
he would not do it, nisi prius aliquid ex pacto detur, vel promittatur: No,
that was held abominable as downright Simony, a sin (of any other detestable)
and not only against the Decree of the Pope, Ext. de Symonia c. Tanta. 1. q. 4
c. Ecclesia Council. Bracar. 4. Can. 5. Aug. Epist. 75. ad Aux^ntium.
but the Canon of a Provincial Council (such consecration had been execration,
as St. Augustine somewhere.) But when the business came to be effected that was
pursued, then was the reservation made, it seems then. But here now falls in
a question, vtrum in spiritualibus interveniat Pactio? Oblations being
spiritual Profits, it might be demanded, Whether they were settled at the
first, where now for the most part they stick (namely in the Bishop) and are
rendered and paid under the name of Pentecostals, by a contract yea or no? To
this I answer. Videtur quod sic. For in the Decree I find ^ Chapter (to name
but one) to this purpose. An Oratory was founded by the Mother of Eleutherius,
18. q. 2. c. Eleutherius.
a Bishop in the Dioecess of one Cardellus a Bishop; at the Dedication of which
Oratory there was a Convenisse, says the Text, between the Foundress and the
Bishop, that such a proportion the Bishop should have out of the Oblations made
at such a Feast. It seems then that contracts of this nature might be made.
But whether this Convenisse, this Contract ought to be before or after the
Dedication may admit another question. If after, the Gloss upon the Chapter
Ecclesia warranteth that post dedicationem pacisci Episcopo suggerente
permittitur: 1. q. 4. c. Ecclesia.
so then the Bishop might after Dedication by way of pact require a Pension.
But might he not before? Yes, It is not doubted by the judicious, but affirmed
that he usually did and ought to do so, which by no means he might do if any
corruption were in this contract. But contract I cannot so fitly call it: For
albeit there be a kind of (...), a semblance or seeming show of a con^^act
between the Bishop and the Founder or Priest in this Act, yet in truth it
cannot properly, and in strictness of Law be termed a contract. And so much the
Gloss upon the Chapter Eleutherius does plainly deliver in these words: Dic^s
quod hic non vere, dicitur pactum, quia and sine pacto tenetur Ecclesia aliquid
dare Episcopo in signum subjectionis. Thus then the Bishop did reserve a
Pension at the time of the foundation or dedication of the Churches within his
Dioecess; and this he might lawfully do without any the least suspicion of
corruption. And his Episcopal authority did not only warrant him to make such
reservation to himself out of the church oblations, but to impoese a Cense upon
any Church under his jurisdiction to the use of the Patron thereof, if need did
require. Imo Episcopi authoritate potest aliquid constitui Patrono, as the
Gloss above mentioned has it. And now at length to draw to a conclusion, the
sum of all is. This Pentecostal that I have been so long in seeking after, and
is in common receipt here in England at this day, is nothing else (as I
conceive) but the annual commemoration, continuation or repetition of an
ancient payment, or pension, issuing out of the oblations brought by the people
so long ago at the time specially of the foundation or ded^cation of their
several Churches, or at some other solemnity, to wit, the moity or third part
of the oblations then made. The same being reserved by the Bishop, and by a
contract (seu quasi) between him and the Founder of such Church or Priest,
assigned to attend the same, settled in and upon the Episcopal See, and payable
yearly at or about the Feast of Pentecost; S^pra 10 q. 3. c. Nec numerus.
for Alterius solennitatis will warrant such a conjecture. This I say is, at
least I take to be the same that we now call by the name of Pentecostals or
Whitsun-farthings. And so now, if truth fall out here also to be the issue, as
it has certainly been the object of these my weak endeavors, then have I that
by Gods favor performed to me, Matthew. 7.7.
that sometimes in Evangelical words was promised to a servant (whom Clemens
Abexandrinus makes mention of) consulting the Oracle how he might please his
Master (...). If thou seek thou shall find says the Oracle. Clem. Alexand. 4o.
Strom. statim. ab initio.
But if misapprehension or species recti instead of truth, misinforming
judgment has run me into error (as it is easy for a stranger traveling in
parts unknown and unfrequented sometimes to step aside, and to be out of his
way) My suit to the Reader then is -- si quid novisti rectius istis Candidus
imperti: Horat. Epistol. l. 1. ad Numid.
which if he fail to do, and my self not able to rectify things amiss, The
Jewish extremity must be my refuge, Buxtorf. de abr^vtaturis, pa. 182.
Tishbi solvat.

An Appendix to the former Discourse, setting forth the reason of printing that
and post-scribing this.
THe precedent Treatise that now at length presents it self to public view,
has lain written by me for diverse years, and importunity that occasioned the
being that it has could not fully effect what it willed, till an opportunity
also (not expected) imposed a production. Some few years ago I had the
collection of Procurations, and such other rights and duties as have been
anciently belonging unto, and are vested in the Archdeaconry of Gloucester, for
the Archdeacon that now is there, as for many years I had before in his
Predecessors time, my very dear Friend. The harsh entertainment that I found
from some of the Clergy upon the demand of Procurations for the Archdeacon in
the year of the Metropoliticall visitation of the L. Archbishop of Canterbury
that now is, when by Sir Nathan Brent his Vicar General he visited the Dioeces
of Gloucester, put me forward seriously to enquire after the reason of that
payment, but especially of its due in the years of Episcopal triennial
visitation, which though for many years it had been yearly without intermission
or interruption paid (acquittances to that purpose I have by me of above 60.
years antiquity, and have seen some more ancient) yet was it then, even then
vehemently oppugned. The Visitation ended, and my self gotten out of the storm,
I adventured with such poor faculties ad I had to make trial how far forth I
could be able to give satisfaction to those that for the time to come should
require a reason of the payment, and traveling a while in this study, at last
I cast up the reckoning of my labor, and found it to amount to this
Qualecunque sit (call it what you please) that goes before. And albeit in
respect of the subject matter it may fall out to displease some (I cannot avoid
it) it comes so near the purse: yet as of the Fig Tree it is observed, that
though it be very bitter ((...)) produces notwithstanding sweet fruit: Plutar.
5o. Sym^os. Probl. 9.
so if the groundwork of this Discourse lie right (be the superstructure as it
may) it will in the end doubtless prove profitable, how unpleasing, how bitter
soever it may seem for the present, by forewarning those that are ^^able to
such payments to avoid opposition that will necessitate both expense of time;
time, I say ((...), Lat^tius in vita Theophras^i.
a precious and costly expense, as Theophrastus was wont to say) yea, and
somewhat else, though far less in value, yet of no little account (especially
in these days) Money too; and if so, I shall be, I hope, distastefull to none,
nor (to speak in the Apostles phrase) become his enemy to whom I tell the
truth. Galat. 4.16.
For my part I thought it sufficient (praise I seek not) to endeavor toward
the way of Pacification, it was, and is my only proposed end. And however I may
fall short of the scope I aimed at, yet as in all acts Civil or Religious, or
whatever else, velle, to be willing only (where ability is wanting) amounts to
a performance in acceptance; so I nothing fear the censure of the ingenuous
and candid Reader whose charity receiving information, but from the rules of
natural reason, has learned him to excuse imperfections with a Si desunt vires
tamen est laudanda voluntas. But I wheel too far about. The occasion of that
Postscript is briefly this, to wit a certain Manuscript that is carried up and
down, and passes through many men's hands (I had only a cursory view of it, and
that by chance) upon the same subject with this of mine, but directly in diverse
material passages opposite to it. The Author of this book is or seems to be my
friend; betwixt us for three or four years last past there has continued an
intercourse of much familiarity, so far forth that each from other might
challenge ordinary Courtesies. Now that which to me herein relisheth ill, and
in him indeed seems absonum, untunable and out of square, and friendly
compass is; First, that he having had the perusal of those Papers of mine so
many weeks together, till he had transcribed them, and taking advantage,
belike, from the insufficiency or surmised partiality of my arguments which yet
lay hidden and hurt no man) he, I say, should without provocation write, and
undertake to defend upon supposition of wrong (so it is presented) such a cause
as neither has, or ever shall wittingly, and de industria be impeached by my
tongue or pen, namely the cause of the Clergy. I fear not to say (because I can
truly say) I know not, I thank God, to prevaricate, and hope never to be so
unhappy as to learn. Secondly, and that which indeed is the All (if I may not
be thought (...) to meddle in a business wherein I have so little to do, for
now indeed I have not equal cause, nor like encouragement to write that
formerly I had) is this, That he goes about by this book of his to alter, yea,
utterly to a abolish a course of payment so long continued, by suggesting out
of the Canon Law, and Provincial Constitutions, that injury is done by
Archdeacons (not visiting and yet) requiring and receiving Procurations in the
Episcopal years of Visitation; wherein I confess he has done the Clergy either
much good, or very bad service. If his arguments be as prevalent as the title
of his book is plausible, Clergy grievances discussed, etc.
I envy not unto him the praise of his good demerits (God forbid that error
committed should be either countenanced or continued, he deserves recompense
equivalent that discovers it) but if otherwise, those that are persuaded by him
may happily suffer by him (by his labor I mean) how zealous soever he seems to
be in the Clergies cause. For the man, to give him his due, he is ingenuous,
and not (as Calvin said somewhere of Osiander) futiliter, vainly or
unprofitably. No, the contrary sure, dexterous also in his employments, and of
ready dispatch. But I wish in this particular, being a business of moment and
importance, that more consideration had been taken before he had made it so
public, as it is, or importuned toward the Press to make it more. The Greeks
amongst them had a Law against (...), U^pian in argument. Orat. An. d^ogit. p.
380. apud Demosthe^
and that no Decree should go forth inconsiderately. So also had the Emperor
Augustus a Speech which he frequently used (...), Sueton. in August. c. 25.
implying that no determination could be unquestionably current, that had not
its settlement upon the basis or bottom of mature and deliberate counsel. Had
these or such other lessons to the same purpose (whereof there are many, which
the wisdom of former times has advisedly recorded, and recommended to
posterity for imitation) been seriously thought on, this hasty onset of my
friend might have been forborne. Doubtless in this case he might have done
better to have spared his pains, I say in this case wherein, except error
certain had been found (and then, as in civil broyls and discords facto potius
quam consulto opus esset, Tacit. 1. Hist^r.
so down with such a mischief the faster the better, A^isloph. in Equil. (...).
(...) then) there was no cause of opposition (on his part none) nor cause of
haste that I know. But to give my friend some little satisfaction, such as I
may, (and I hope he will not prove like him in the Comedy, not persuaded though
persuaded; (...). Aristoph. in Plut.
I conceive better of him then so) thus much I must ingenuously acknowledge.
That in the Canon Law and Provincial Constitutions, from the letter of some
few Texts and Glosses, such a sense, seeming at the least, as he asserts does
result; namely, that Procurations are not otherwise to be required but upon the
duty of Visitation performed. Extr. l. ^tit. 30.
As for example, Procurationes quae ratione visitationis debentur Episcopis,
etc. absque manifesta causa nullatenus exigantur, nisi quando personabiliter
officium visitationis impendunt. And again, Archidiaconis districtius inhibemus
ne aliquo modo Procurationes recipiant sine causa rationabili, nisi illo die
quo personaliter visitant. Provin^. Constable de ossicio Archid
Such passages the Reader of our Laws will now and then meet withal. And from
hence (doubtless) it is, and from axioms not well understood (as that of
Cessante causa cessat effectus, L. adigere Quamvis de jure Patron. c. Cum
cessante ^xtr. de appellat.
and such like) that the apprehensions and conceits of many (diving no deeper
into the sense and meaning of the Law then the superficies or bare letter,
Gribald. de Rat. Stud. l. 1. c 5.
nor framing to themselves any doubt which they ought to do before they can
peremptorily decide) are invaded and whirled away with error. And such I take
this to be, That no Procuration can warrantably and with good conscience be
demanded without the act of Visitation first performed by or in the person of
him that makes such claim. But if more could not be said then this, that the
Living of an Archdeacon consists of Procurations, for which he is accountable
in respect of yearly payments to the King (and this is said already and seems
not to satisfy) I suppose there were reason enough to plead a Custom for the
payment of them in the Bishops triennial year sine visitatione on his part;
otherwise it would fall out that the omission of an act which he is forbidden
to do, would destroy an Office which the equity of the Law will not permit to
be. Let the Case be paralleld. A Mortuary is not properly and originally said
to be due to an Ecclesiastical Incumbent Parson or Vicar from any but those
only of his own Parish to whom he ministers spiritual instruction, and has
right to their Tithes: C. Statu^um v. ut insra de consuetud in Gloss. But see
Sir H. Spelman his judicious conjecture upon this point of Mortuaries in his
Treatise de sep^ltura. p. 35.
Lyndewoods Gloss upon the Provincial Constitutions, discovering the ground
and reason of that payment to be this, namely, That when through ignorance, and
sometimes through negligence and unjust detention of Tithes and Oblations the
Parishioner was found tardy and faulty, etc. Ideo statuit [Archiepiscopus] quod
compensatione sic subtractorum secundum melius animal defuncti Ecclesiae damno
debuit applicari. But all this notwithstanding, we know the prevalency of
Custom to be such, that in some places of this Kingdom they are paid to the
Incumbents of other Parishes that perform no ministerial duties at all to the
deceased party, nor living nor dying. 21 H. 8. c. 6.
And the Statute does nothing at all control the course, but makes the usage
of payment only to be the Law thereof. Thus then, if the parallel come any
thing near the point, if it prove but argumentum a simili that known and common
axiom of Bartolus may be pertinent enough, which is this; L. illud. ad l. Aquil.
ubi militat eadem ratio, idem jus statui debet; and that other Rationis
identitas, non patitur decisionem similium casuum esse diversam. But yet the
mound is not made fast enough, cavil will find or make way through. Lets look
back again and examine the places above quoted against this payment, where we
shall find the constitutions set down in terms of qualification; Procurationes
quae etc. sine manifesta causa: And what needs all this if there were not yet
another right besides the reason of Visitation that inforceth this payment. But
concerning this particular, having written something in the foregoing Treatise,
I resolve in this place to say no more. Thus much only I will intimate to my
friend, because he shall wait no longer for my opinion in this point. Let the
places by him urged out of the Common Law and Provincial Constitutions, C. 1.
distinct. 11.
and Glosses, carry with him as much strength as those Laws may be imagined to
be capable of, to prove and uphold his assertion; yet as the Canonists say of
the Civil Law, that where it opposes the Canon it is not to be regarded, that
must give place to this, as they say: So, if any Canon or Constitution
whatsoever is with us of such force (though I will yield them their due to the
full) to annihilate and overthrow National Laws or Customs; Eut^op. l. 8. p.
119.
That any Popes Decree or Rescript should be like those Edicta Praetoria, as
the Laws of the Medes and Persians, Dan. 6.12.
perpetual, unalterable, and irrefragable; that he should say, and all should
hearken and obey, Diodor. Sicul. l. 1.
as it was said of Isis Queen of Egypt, Quae ego legibus statui nullus poterit
solvere: I profess it comes not within the compass of my Creed, nor have I
faith to believe it. Thus much I have learned, which I also believe, 25 H. 8.
c. 19. 1 Eliz. c. 1.
that such and only such Canons and Constitutions as have been allowed by
general consent and custom within the Realm, and are not contrariant or
repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of the Realm, Coke de jure Regis
Ecclesiastic^, p. 32.
nor tend to the damage or hurt of the Kings Prerogative Royal, are in force
within this Realm; as the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of the same, and none
other. Now that such Canon or Constitution Papal or Provincial that necessarily
ties the receiving of Procurations to the Act and duty of Visitation only is
repugnant, first to a Custom grounded and prescribed from a Record of good
antiquity, and observed in diverse Dioecesses of this Kingdom. And secondly to
an Act of Parliament almost as ancient, that warrants such a receipt without
mention of any Visitation, is evident as by that which in the precedent
Tractate has been briefly intimated, so also by that which here follows,
wherein both Record and Act are more fully delivered. The Record is this.

Archidiaconatus Glouc.

Valet clare in Proxis, Cenag. and Pentecostal ibid. 26 H. 8. Extract. e
Record. Primitiarum.
per annum ultra lx. s. solut. pro feud. Raphael Rawlins Collect. dict. proum,
Cenag cum Pentecostal.

64 l. 10 s.

x2 inde 6 l. 9 s.

Here is plainly set down the true worth and full value of the Archdeaconry of
Gl. in Procurations, Synodals and Pentecostals, to wit 64 l. 10 s. And for
prevention of future cavil (as if the present opposition had been so many years
ago foreseen) it is expressed per annum too (for that's the matter of
grievance) so much yearly worth. And what would we more to make the matter
plain? He does in my opinion little other then Nodum in scirpo quaerere, and
consequently beat the air, that uses means to evade a payment so apparently
clear and evident. Add to all this continual perception and collection of these
duties by Archdeacons, even from the time of the valuation of them in Anno 26
H. 8. unto this present, and tenths, as before I have said, paid out of them
yearly to the Crown for all that time (I suppose there is none alive that can
contradict it, et quod non disprobatur praesumitur) such Books and Acquittances
as I have seen (and I have seen some that are ancient) all testifying the same.
Besides I never heard of any that stood out a suit against this payment, that
upon a judicial hearing or trial ever prevailed in the principal cause and
point of right, but was always overthrown in the litigation, and comepelled to
pay charges.

And as for the Act of Parliament, Thus much I find conducing to my purpose in
Anno 34 Hen. 8. c. 16.

IF any person or persons being Farmer or Occupier of any Manors, Rastal.
Abridgment. Pensions.
Lands, Tenements, Parsonages, Benefices, or other Hereditaments of any of the
said late Monasteries or Ecclesiastical houses or places, or belonging to them
or any of them by the Kings Highness gift, grant, sale, exchange or otherwise,
out of which premises any such Pensions, Portions, Corrodies, Indemnities,
Synodies or Proxies or any other profits have been heretofore lawfully going
out, answered or paid to any of the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and
other Ecclesiastical persons abovesaid; do at any time after the first day
of April next coming, wilfully deny the payment thereof, at the days of
payment heretofore accustomed of any of the said Pensions Portions, Corrodies,
Indemnities, Synodies, Proxies or any other profits, whereof the said
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, or other Ecclesiastical persons were in
possession at, or within ten years next before the time of the Dissolution of
any such Monastery, or other Ecclesiastical houses or places: that then it
shall be lawful for the same Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, or other
Ecclesiastical persons aforesaid, being so denied to be satisfied and paid
thereof, and having right to the same thing in demand, to make such process as
well against every such person and persons as shall so deny payment of the same
Pensions, Portions, Corodies, Proxies, Indemnities, Synodies, or any other
profits which of right ought to be paid, as is aforesaid, as against the Church
or Churches charged with the same, as heretofore they have lawfully done, and
as by and according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm they may now
lawfully do for the true payment and recovery thereof. And if the party
Defendant be lawfully convict in any such suit, cause or matter, according to
the Ecclesiastical Laws, then the party Plaintiff shall have and recover
against the party Defendant the thing in demand, and the value thereof in
damages, with his costs for his Suit, etc.

By this Act it is plain that all such payments as issued out of Parsonages,
Benefices or other Hereditaments of the said late Monasteries to any
Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon, etc. at or within ten years next before the
time of the Dissolution, should be still continued and duly paid as before. Now
the Procurations or Proxies were yearly due, The Record has its ground from an
Act of Parliament of 26 H. 8. The suppression of Abbeys follows in 31 ejusdem
Regis.
and paid within less then six years before the Dissolution, appears plainly
by the preceding Record. Therefore yet to be paid according to the fore-recited
Act.

But perhaps it will be objected, Why was there a Provision made by Act of
Parliament for payment of these duties out of Parsonages, etc. belonging unto
Monasteries, and not out of others in like manner in the then possession of
spiritual Incumbents? I answer; It seems to me that this Proviso was made by
the clemency of the King, and the indulgency of the Parliament to secure the
rights of the Church to the true owners thereof, that happily might be passed
away, and in hazard to be utterly lost by the Kings Grant to Lay-persons. And
this to be the ground and reason of that Provision is clearly demonstrated in
the latter part of the same Act of 34. Hen. 8. where there is a course
prescribed how such persons in such Cases should have remedy, and in what Court
they should commence suit for the recovery of their subtracted rights, viz. in
the Court of Augmentation of the Revenue of the Kings Crown, and not elsewhere.
These be the words of the Act whereunto I refer the Reader. Now there needed
no such Act or caution as before is mentioned; no such Proviso to secure the
Visitors duties from the invasion of spiritual Incumbents, of whose Promotions
or Benefices the King made no sale, nor meddled withal, but left them entire,
reserving to himself upon the return of the Certificate of their true value
only an yearly Tenth, but with an exact deduction first of all such sum or
sums of money, Procurations, or whatever else he then found them yearly
charged withal: which being so allowed to the spiritual Incumbent, I conceive
that those that the Laws and Statutes of this Realm have qualified and made
capable of such receipts (and such are Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, etc.)
may lawfully at their respective accustomed times, according to the
fore-recited Act, require, and so ought to receive them, till authority shall
alter the course. But to this point I hope there is enough said already.

To draw now toward a conclusion. These Reasons that I have here urged,
together with those formerly mentioned, make me to think that Procurations are
not payable, as my friend thinks, Ratione lummodo visitationis; no, but
sometimes Custom has its place, as all Canonists that I have read upon the
point do unanimously acknowledge: yea, those or suck like reasons moved a very
learned Civilian, Dr. Cosens, sometime Dean of the Arches, writing of the
quality of rights Ecclesiastical, and how they became due amongst other things,
says, D Cosen. Polit. Ecclesiae Angl. ^ab. 8.
Pensiones indemnitatis Procurationes ratione visitationis PLERUNQ.
praestandae. He does not say as my friend says, that they are only so due, but
Plerunque so. Now what Plerunque signifies is a little to be enquired after:
That it comes near to the signification which corresponds to his fancy, no
Grammarian I am sure will allow. Plerunque is never found to carry the sense
that solummodo does; but that it yields the same sense and signification that
interdum does, Civilians well know, Vlpian. l. Falsus ff. de Furt^s.
and I acknowledge. And in so doing I render him but small advantage, and my
self as little prejudice. I hold my assertion still. There is jus
consuetudinarium, a right of Custom by which Procurations are sometimes, and
ought (as I suppose) so to be. And the sole reason of that payment depends
not upon the Act of Visitation only, and always as my friend would have it. I
have done with this business. God grant that what it aims at it may effect.
Peace, peace I say, either by submitting to Truth, or convincing by Truth.
Amen. Amen.

(...).

LEt the Reader be pleased to take notice (as fit to be known) that the
aforegoing Discourse and Appendix were written in the time of Dr. Robinson,
late Archdeacon of Gloucester deceased, and not altered in this Impression from
what they then were (examined and prepared in Order to the Press) except the
mistakes in Printing, of which the most material I have here noted; others of
mispointing and misaccenting, with some other literal escapes; I pray the
courteous Reader to make use of his Pen to amend, or his Patience to forbear
what is amiss.

Page 7. line 4. read came Pa. 9. l. 11. r. us. Pa. 10. l. 21. r. Lions. Pa.
19. l. 3. 1. (...). Pa. 23. l. 16. r. Praelatus. Pa. 24. l. 16. r payment. Pa.
26. l. 8. r. subsistit. Pa. 26. l. 15. r. praescripta. Pa. 31. l. 13. r. is.
and l. 24. r. imputari. Pa. 85. l. 21. r. Parochial, and so elsewhere. Pa. 90.
l. 6. r. rise. Pa. 126. l 6. r. Nathaniel. Pa 128. l. 15. r. this. Pa. 132. l.
24, r. personaliter. Pa. 136. l. 6. r. Canon.


