Strange and Terrible News from Sea. Or: A True Relation of a Most Wonderful
Violent TEMPEST OF Lightning and Thunder. On Friday, the 18th. of this Instant
Jan. 1678. Whereby the Mainmast of a Ship, Riding at Anchor off of Cows was
split from the top to the bottom: Fourteen Men upon the Upper Deck, and Three
between Decks struck, and Five of them left for Dead, their Eyes and Teeth
being Immovable, and their Bodies stinking so of Sulpher, that none could
endure the smell. With several other Lamentable Passages Communicated in a
Letter from a Gentleman on Board, to a Friend in Cheap Side.

With Allowance, To. L'Estrange.

Printed by A. P. and T. H. for John 'Clarke, at the Bible and Harp, in
West-smith-field, 1678.

Strange and Terrible Nevvs from Sea. etc.
It Is generally known what exceeding rough and tempestuous Weather we have had
of late; and I presume few parts of England have escaped the Notice. I wish all
may have avoided the harms of that prodigious Storm that happened on Friday the
18th, instant, about three a clock in the morning: at London it was very
surprising and dreadful, coming with so sudden and impetuous a violence like a
Hurriance, that it generally affrighted people, making many leap out of their
Beds in astonishment, as if Doomsday had been at hand, to inform themselves
better of this unexpected occasion of terror; it being followed with such an
excessive Volly of Hail, that the like has hardly been known in our Age; and
several of the Watchmen have assured me, That diverse of the Hailstones at
their first descent were very little inferior to Pigeons (nay, some say
Pullets) Eggs in Magnitude; The Thunder and Lightning that proceeded, was very
considerable here, but nothing so extraordinary as in parts remote, and
especially at Sea, of it is strange and lamentable effects there; we have one
very remarkable instance, faithfully Communicated from a Gentleman on Board, as
follows.

ON Tuesday last we sailed to Cows, the wind coming up at West, we cast Anchor
there, intending to take the opportunity of the first fair wind, but it
continued not only contrary, but also extreme high blustering and outrageous,
and on Thursday a prodigious mixture of so much Rain, Hail, Wind, Thunder, and
Lightning, as if the Element had been Involved in civil Wars, and Factious
Meteors had took a solemn league to depose the Sun, and huddle the World into
it is primitive Chaos of Darkness, Confusion and Horror: but this was still but
a suitable Prologue to a more dismal tragedy; for behold! about three a clock
on Friday morning, (the very time of the mighty storm at London) there brake a
Clap of thunder so dreadful into our Ship, that we all Imagined one of our Guns
had casually took fire, and went off, but were soon taken off from that
Imagination, when we perceived the hideous flashes of lightning which
acccompanied it: so dreadfully as if all the Planets descending from their Orbs
had with United fires set the Hemisphere into a general and continued Blaze;
Nor was the terror of the sight all the effect it had upon us, but in a moment
it split our main mast, as easily as you would peal a rush, from the very top
to the bottom in the Hold: Nor did other parts of our tackle speed much better:
for our main topmast was shivered into small pieces, and the pendent at the
Main-top-mast-head burned to Ashes, but what was still more sad: it beat down
by its violent impetuosity Fourteen men upon the deck, and had like to have
hurled several into the Sea, nay it cast down three that were betvveen the
Decks: for its force was so great, and with all its operation so subtle, being
as it were a Spirituous body that nothing could withstand it.

On these poor men that had the ill fortune to be hurt by it: Five of them for
a considerable time after were taken for dead, having no Simptomes of life
left: for there was not the least Perception of Breath or Pulse, and both their
Eyes and Teeth were Immovable, and yet had no visible wound, bruise, or hurt
about them, but stunck so extremely of Sulpher (or Brimstone) that we could
hardly endure to go near them. In this desperate condition they continued half
an hour or thereabouts: But at last by rubbing them, forsing open their mouth,
and pouring down spirits and other restoritive Cordials, we recovered them to
some operations of Vitality, and do hope to preserve all their lives, but they
are so strangely Crazed in their senses that it is feared they will scarce ever
enjoy the exercise of their reason and understandings so fully as formerly.

Besides these, there are 6 more that are miserably burned through their
clothes, I mean their flesh scorched, and yet their garments not consumed, nor
so much as singed as far as we can perceive; their Skin is much discolored,
and looks as it were burnt to a Coal, but the doctor does not doubt to cure
them perfectly. By reason of this disasterous Accident, we are forced to return
to Portsmouth for reparation, etc.

Dated Jan. 20th. 1677.


By this most certain and plain Relation, we may perceive the wonderful strange
force of Lightning, how strong it is, and how penetrating, how sudden in its
Approach, how terrible in its Execution. Philosophers have treated largely both
of the Generation of thunder and lightning, as also of their dismal effects:
But methinks none has described it with a more happy mixture of Judgment and
Fancy, than the Noble Du Bartas, whose words with some small variation I shall
presume here to repeat.

-- Hark! Hark! methinks
The Worlds wall shakes, the Earths foundation shrinks;
And sure the Furies in black Erebus,
Transport their Hell between the Heaven and us:
Thunder! what is that? they say a vapor moist,
Which both from fresh and from salt water's hoist:
In the same instant with Hot Exhalations,
In the aerie Regions secondary Stations;
Where fiery Fumes besieged with the Crowd,
And keen cold thickness of that dampish cloud;
Strengthen their strength, and with redoubled Vollies,
Of joined heat on the cold Leaguer sallies:
And without resting, loud it groans and grumbles,
And rouls, and roars, and round, round, round, it rumbles:
Till having rent the lower side a sunder,
With sulph'ry flash it does go off in thunder.
This Lightning of a purer Fume is framed,
Through'ts own hot-dryness evermore inflamed;
Whose power past credit, without rasing skin,
Can bruise to powder all our bones within;
Can melt the Gold that greedy Misers hoard,
In closebarr'd Coffers, and not burn the Board;
Can melt the Blade, and never singe the sheath,
Can scorch an Infant in the Womb to Death.
And never Blemish in one sort or other,
Flesh, Bone, or Sinew of the amazed Mother:
Consume the shoes, and never hurt the feet,
Empty a Cask, and yet not perish it, etc.
These properties we have in part seen verified in this Narrative: May all
people lead their lives in sobriety and godliness, Working out their Salvation
with fear and trembling; that guarded with faith and a good conscience, they
may either avoid, or with a Christian Resolution meet all such sudden
calamities. Certainly he that seriously considers the Majesty and Power of our
Creator Manifested in the amazing Voice of thunder can never be an Atheist:
those that would know more of the nature of Lightning, let them read Fulle of
Meteors.

Finis.

