A Strange and True RELATION Of a Wonderful and Terrible Earthquake, That
happened at HEREFORD on Tuesday last, being the First of this present October,
1661.

Whereby A Church-Steeple and many gallant Houses were thrown down to the
ground, and several of the Inhabitants slain; with the terrible Thunderclaps
and violent Storm of great Hailstones that then fell, which were about the
bigness of an Egg, many Cattle being thereby utterly destroyed as they were
feeding in the Field.

Also, The prodigious and wonderful Apparitions that was seen in the Air, to
the great amazement of all Spectators, who beheld two perfect Arms and Hands:
In the Right Hand, being graspt a great broad Sword, and in the Left, a Bowl
full of Blood, from whence they heard a most strange and loud Voice, to the
wonderful astonishing of all present, the fright whereof causing diverse Women
to fall in Travel, amongst whom the Clerks Wife, named Margaret Pelmore, fell
in labor, and brought forth three Male-Children, who had all Teeth, and spoke
as soon as they were born, and presently after gave up the Ghost and died
together, the like having never been known before in any Age!

The Truth hereof is witnessed by Churchwardens.
Francis Smalman, and Henry Cross,
Peter Philpot. Constable. Nicholas Finch, Gent. James Tulley, Gent. George
Cox, Robert Morris, Thomas Welford, etc.


London, Printed for J. J. 1661.

A True and perfect Relation of the terrible Earthquake, great Claps of
Thunder, and mighty Hailstones, which happened at Hereford, on Tuesday last, the
first of this present October, etc,
Before I mention any further concerning this strange and sudden Accident,
which has so lately befaln at Hereford, and that this Re^l and Authe^tiq^e
Truth may not seem doubtful, I shall put the Read^r hereof in mind to take
notice and remember the several Disasters that has befaln, not long since in,
and about London, which I need not here to declare, yet none so wonderful, or
worthy of observation as this; but let it not seem strange, for we know, and
often read, that the Lord does sometimes manifest his will unto the World in
Wonders and Signs, thereby in some part to show his Omnipotency, and let them
know that he is still the Almighty God, and that he sees and knows all our
ways, how slight so ever we make thereof: Then how can we praise him
sufficiently, when he hear of this strange Disaster that did so lately befall at
Hereford, in that he was pleased to keep the like from us here in London, we
being as sinful as any: But he that is all Mighty and all Powerful, is also all
Goodness and all Merciful, whereon depends the best hopes of all good
Christians.

And now to descend to the subject I was before speaking of, which was of the
violent Tempest and terrible Earthquake, etc. that happened at Hereford, be
pleased to observe the true Relation thereof, which is thus:

ON Tuesday last, being the first of this present October, 1661. about 2 of the
clock after Noon, there happened a great and violent storm to arise, to the
amazing and astonishing of all the inhabitants: The first beginning was with a
most terrible Wind, which continued for the space of 2 hours, with such
vehemence, that it forced the Tiles off the Houses, insomuch, that none durst
come out at their doors; in the midst of which storm, was blown down the
Steeple of a Church, and many brave Houses, the falling whereof has killed
some persons, but what they are, or whom we yet know not.

Then the Air began to be darkened, but suddenly clearing again the people began
to look ab^oad; and so continuing for a while, all assuredly thought the storm
to be over, but contrary to their hopes, about 6 and 7 of the clock in the
Evening, their Ears were solicited with unwonted Claps of Thunder; and, more to
augment their fear, presently fell such Hailstones, that the like was never
seen in any Age before, each Hailstone being about the bigness of an Egg,
which several Gentlemen of quality affirm, ^ere present in London, who
certify, that they destroyed the Cattle in the Field, and did much other harm.

Then followed a terrible and fearful Earthquake, which continued almost for
the space of half an hour, which so amazed the inhabitants* that they thought
the last Day had been come; and immediately appeared a great brightness, as if
it had been Noonday, but was presently overcast with a thick Black^ (...), out
of which appeared a perfect Arms and Hands; in the Right Hand was grasp^d a
great broad ^word, and in the left a Cup, or Boul, as they conc^ived, full of
Blood.

Having glutted their eyes with am^zement, and filled their hearts with great
fear with be^olding these prodigious App^rit^ons more ^o astonish both them and
us, appeared to their eyes a piece of Corn ground, ready to mow, and a Sithe
lying by, from whence they heard a most strange and loud voice, which sa^d;
Woe, ^oe to thee, and to the inhabitants thereof, for he comes that is to
come, and ye shall all see him

At the conclusion of these words, the people made a grievous cry, as indeed
they might, and many Women that were wi^h Child, through extreme fear, fell in
travel, but none so wonde^f^l to be taken notice of, as M^^ Margaret Pesm^re,
the Clerks W^fe of the To^n who for the space of twenty Weeks, wanting her
bodily ^ealth, had sought for cu^e of the Doctors: This Margaret Pelmore at
that very instan^ ^ell in travel, being exceedingly affrighted, and brought
forth 3 Male Children, who had all t^eth and spoke as soon as they were born.
The first said, The Day is appointed which no Man can shun. The second
demanded, Where would be found sufficient alive to b^ry the Dead? And the 3d
said Where will there be Corn enough to satisfy the Hungry and n^e^y.

As s^on as they had spoken these words, they all immedia^ely gave up the Ghost
and died, to th great astonishing and amazing of all present, and the Mother of
the said Children does at this time lie Distracted and raging in such extreme
manner that none can tell, as yet, whether she will live or die!

The truth whereof is witnessed by Churchwardens.
Francis Smalman, Henry Cross,
Peter Philpot, Constable. Nicholas Fanch, James Tulley, George Cox, John
Groom, Robert Maurice, Thomas Welford:
And diverse others.

FINIS.
depiction of earthquake


