The two last Speeches of Thomas Wentworth, late Earl of Strafford, and Deputy
of Ireland.

The one in the Tower, the other on the Scaffold on Tower Hill, May the 12th
1641.

New revised by the perfectest Copy, with some Additions, which was formerly
omitted; with his private prayer, or ejaculations to Almighty God.

woodcut portrait of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, bordered in
black with memento mori

Printed for Francis Coules. 1641.

His speech in the Tower to the Lords, before he went to execution.
Right Honorable, and the rest, you are now come to convey me to my death, I
am willing to dye, which is a thing no more than all our Predecessors have
done, and a debt that our Posterity must in their due time discharge, which
since it can be no way avoided, it ought the less to be feared; for that which
is common to all, ought not to be intolerable to any: It is the Law of Nature,
the tribute of the flesh, a remedy from all worldly cares and troubles; and to
the truly penitent, a perfect path to blessedness. And there is but one death,
though several ways unto it: mine is not natural, but enforced by the Law
and Justice: it has been said that the Laws vex only the meaner sort of
people, but the mighty are able to withstand them: it is not so with me, for
to the Law I submit my self, and confess that I receive nothing but justice:
for he that politikely intends good to a Commonweal, may be called a just
man, but he that practices either for his own profit, or any other sinister
ends, may be well termed a delinquent person; neither is delay in punishment
any privilege for pardon. And moreover, I ingenuously confess with Cicero,
That the death of the bad is the safety of the good that be alive.

Let no man trust either in the favor of his Prince, the friendship and
consanguinity of his Peers, muchlesse in his own wisdom and knowledge, of
which I ingenuously confess I have been too confident. Kings, as they are men
before God, so they are Gods before men, and I may say with a great man once in
this Kingdom, Had I strived to obey my God as faithfully, as I sought to
honor my King diligently, J had stood, and not fallen. Most happy and
fortunate is that Prince, who is as much for his justice feared, as for his
goodness beloved: For the greater that Princes are in power above other, the
more they ought in virtue to excel other; and such is the royal Sovereign
whom I late served.

For my Peers, the correspondence that I had with them during my prosperity,
was to me very delightful and pleasing, and here they have commiserated my
ruin, I have plentifully found, who (for the most generous of them) I may
boldly say, though they have detested the fact, yet they have pitied the person
delinquent; the first in their loyalty, the last in their charity:
ingenuously confessing, that never any subject, or peer of my rank, had ever
that help of Counsel, that benefit of time, or a more free and legal trial
than I have had: in the like whereof, none of my predecessors has had so much
favor from his prince, so much sufferance from the people; in which I
comprehend the understanding Commons, not the many headed monster, Multitude:
But I have offended, am sentenced, and must now suffer.

And for my too much confidence in my supposed wisdom and knowledge, therein
have been the most deceived: For he is wise to himself, that knows by
others faults to correct his own offenses: to be truly wise is to be
Secretaries to our selves; for it is mere folly to reveal our intimate
thoughts to strangers: wisdom is the most precious Gem with which the mind can
be adorned, and learning the most famous thing for which a man ought to be
esteemed, and true wisdom teaches us to do well, as to speak well: in the
first I have failed, for the wisdom of man is foolishness with God.

For knowledge, it is a thing indifferent both to good and evil, but the best
knowledge is for a man to know himself; he that does so, shall esteem of
himself but little, for he considers from whence he came, and whereto he
must go, he regards not the vain pleasures of this life, he exalts God,
and strives to live in his fear; but he that knows not himself, is wilful
in his own ways, unprofitable in his life, unfortunate in his death, and so
am I. But the reason why I sought to attain unto it, was this: I have read
that he that knows not that which he ought to know, is a Bruit beast amongst
men: he that knows more than he ought to know, is a man amongst beasts: but
he that knows all that may be known, is a God amongst men. To this I much
aspired, in this I much failed; Vanity of vanities, all is but vanity.

I have heard the people clamor and cry out, saying, That through my occasion
the times are bad, I wish that when I am dead they may prove better: most true
it is, that there is at this time a great storm impending (God in his mercy
avert it.) And since it is my particular lot, like Jonah, to be cast into the
sea, I shall think my life well spent, to appease Gods wrath, and satisfy the
peoples malice.

O what is eloquence more than air? fashioned with an articulate and distinct
sound, when it is a special virtue to speak little and well, and silence is
often the best oratorie; for fools in their dumbness may be accounted wise: It
has power to make a good matter seem bad, and a bad cause appear good: but
mine was to me unprofitable, and like the Cypress trees, which are great and
tall, but altogether without fruit.

What is honor? but the first step to disquietnesse, and power is still waited
on by envy, neither has it any privilege against infamy. It is held to be
the chief part of honor, for a man to join to his office and calling,
courtesy and affability, commiseration and pity: for thereby he draws to
him with a kind of compulsion, the hearts of the multitude. But that was the
least part of my study, which now makes me call to mind, that the greater the
persons are in authority, the sooner they are caught in any delinquencie, and
their smallest crimes are thought to be capital, the smallest spot seems
great in the finnest linen, and the least flaw is soonest found in the richest
Diamond. But high and noble spirits finding themselves wounded, grieve not so
much at their own pain and perplexity, as at the derision and scofs of their
enemy: but for mine own part, though I might have many in my life, I hope to
find none in my death.

Amongst other things which pollute and contaminate the minds of great
spirits, there is none more heinons than Ambition, which is seldom
unaccompanyed with Avarice: Such, to possess their ends, care not to violate
the Laws of Religion, and Reason, and to break the bonds of Modesty and
equity, with the nearest ties of Consanguinity, and Amity; of which as I have
been guilty, so I crave at Gods hands forgiveness. It is a Maxim in
Philosophy, that ambitious men can be never good Counselors to Princes; the
desire of having more is common to great Lords, and a desire of Rule a great
cause of their Ruin.

My Lords, I am now the hopeless President, may I be to you all an happy
example: For Ambition devoureth gold, and drinks blood, and climbeth so high
by other men's heads, that at the length in the fall it breaks its own neck:
therefore it is better to live in humble content, than in high care and
trouble: For more precious is want with honesty, than wealth with infamy: For
what are we but mere vapors, which in a serene Element ascend high, and upon
an instant, like Smoke, vanish into nothing: or like Ships without Pilots, tossed
up and down upon the Seas by contrary winds and tempests. But the good
husbandman thinks better of those ears of Corn, which bow down, and grow
crooked, than those which are straight and upright, because he is assured to
find more store of grain in the one than in the other. This all men know, yet
of this, how few make use: The defect whereof must be now my pain: may my
suffering prove to others profit.

For what has now the favor of my Prince, the familiarity with my Peers, the
volubility of a tongue, the strength of my memory, my learning, or knowledge,
my honors, or Offices, my power, and potency, my riches, and treasure, (all
these the especial gifts, both of Nature, and Fortune) what have all these
profited me? Blessings I acknowledge, though by God bestowed upon man; yet not
all of them together upon many: yet by the Divine providence, the most of them
met in me: of which had I made happy use, I might still have flourisht, who now
am forced immaturely to fall.

I now could wish, (but that utinam is too late) that God with his outward
goodness toward me had so commixed his inward grace, that I had chused the
medium path, neither inclining to the right hand, nor deviating to the left;
but like Icarus with my waxen wings, fearing by too low a flight to moysten
them with the Waves: I soared too high, and too near the Sun, by which they
being melted; I aiming at the highest, am precipitated to the lowest: and am
made a wretched prey to the Waters: But I who before built my house upon the
the sand, have now settled my hopes upon the Rock my Savior: by whose only
merits my sole trust is, that whatsoever becomes of my body, yet in this bosom
my soul may be Sanctuaried.

Nimrod would have built a Tower to reach up to heaven, and called it Babel; but
God turned it to the confusion of Languages, and dissipation of the people.
Pharaoh kept the Children of Israel in bondage, and after having freed them, in
his great pride would have made them his prey; but God gave them a dry and
miraculous passage, and Pharaoh and his host a watrie Sepulcher. Belshazzer
feasted his Princes and Prostitutes, who drunk healths in the Vessels taken
from the Temple, but the hand of God writ upon the wall, Mean, Tekel, Phoras,
and that night before morning was both his Kingdom and life taken from him:
Thus God lets men go on a great while in their own devices, but in the end it
proved their own ruin and destruction, never suffering them to effect their
desired purposes: therefore let none presume upon his power, glory in his
greatness, or be too confident in his riches: These things were written for
our Instruction, of which the living may make use, the dying cannot; but wit
and unfruitful wisdom are the next neighbors to folly.

There can be no greater vanity in the world, than to esteem the world, which
regards no man; and to make slight account of God who greatly respects all
men; and there can be no greater folly in man, than by much Travel to
increase his goods, and pamper his body, and in the interim with vain delights
and pleasures, to lose his soul. It is a great folly in any man to attempt a
bad beginning, in hope of a good ending; and to make that proper to one, which
was before common to all, is mere indiscretion, and the beginning of discord,
which I positively wish may end in this my punishment.

O how small a proportion of earth will contain my body, when my high mind
could not be confined within the spacious compass of two Kingdoms? But my
hour draws on, and I conclude with the Psalmist, not aiming at any one man
in particular, but speaking for all in general: How long will you Judges be
corrupted? how long will ye cease to give true Judgment? etc. Blessed is the
man that does not walk in the Council of the wicked, nor stand in the way of
sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful, therefore they shall not stand
in the Indgement, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous, etc.

About the hour of 12. a Clock the aforesaid Lord of Strafford was conveyed
to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, where was a Court of Guard made by the several
Companies of Soldiers of the City of London, and the Hamlets of the Tower on
each side as he passed to the Scaffold: before marched the Marshalls men to
make way, then the Sheriffs of Londons Officers with their Halberds; after
them the Kings Guard, or warders of the Tower: Next came one of his Gentlemen,
bare headed, in mourning Habit, the Lord Strafford following him clad in black
cloth, with diverse others in the same habit, which were his attendance; then
the Lord Bishop of Armagh, and other good Divines; with the Sheriffs of
London, and diverse honorable parsonages.

The manner of his going from the Tower, to the Scaffold.
woodcut showing the procession, with armed guard and clergy, of Thomas
Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, from the Tower of London to the scaffold on
Tower Hill

When he came to the Scaffold, he there showed himself on each side in full
view to all people, and made this short speech, with as much alacrity of
Spirit, as a mortal man could express, viz.

The Earl of Straffords laft speech on the Scaffold, and the manner how he
showed himself and spoke to the people.
woodcut showing the execution by beheading of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of
Strafford, on the scaffold at Tower Hill

MY Lord Primate of Ireland, (and my Lords, and the rest of these Gentlemen) it
is a very great comfort for me to have your Lordship by me this day, in regard
I have been known to you a long time, I should be very glad to obtain so much
silence, as to be heard a few words, but I doubt I shall not, my Lord. I come
hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty God to pay that last debt I
owe unto sin, which is death, and by the blessing of that God to rise again
through the merits of Christ Jesus to eternal glory. And he being disturbed
by the people, he said, What is the matter? and sat down in a chair: some
replied, The Soldiers kept most stir: If they, said he, would be quiet, all
the rest would be quiet. I wish I had been private, that I might have been
heard, my Lord, if I might be so much beholding to you, that I might use a few
words, I should take it for a very great courtesy: my Lord, I come hither to
submit to that judgment which has past against me, I do it with a very quiet
and contented mind, I do freely forgive all the world, a forgiveness that is
not spoken from the teeth outward (as they say) but from the heart; I speak it
in the presence of Almighty God, before whom I stand, that there is not so
much as a displeasing thought in me arising to any creature, I thank God, I may
say truly, and my conscience bears me witness, that in all my services,
since I have had the honor to serve his Majesty in any employment, I never
had any thing in my heart, but the joint and individual prosperity of King
and people; if it have been my hap to be misconstrued, it is the common
proportion of us all, while we are in this life, the righteous judgment is
hereafter; here we are subject to error, and apt to be mis-judged one or
another; there is one thing I desire to clear my self of, and I am very
confident, I speak it with so much clearness, that I hope I shall have your
Christian charity in the belief of it, I did always ever think the
Parliaments of England, were the happiest Constitutions, that any Kingdom, or
any Nation lived under, and under God the means of making King and people
happy, so far have I been from being against Parliaments; for my death J here
a quit all the world, and pray God heartily to forgive them: and in particular,
my Lord Primate, I am very glad that his Majesty is pleased to conceive me,
not meriting so severe and heavy a punishment as the utmost execution of this
sentence; I am verse glad, and infinitely rejoice in this mercy of his, and
beseech God to turn it to him, that he may find mercy when he has most need
of it; I wish this Kingdom all the prosperity and happiness in the world: I
did it living, and now dying it is my wish, I do now profess it from my
heart, and do most humbly recommend it unto every man here, and wish every man
to lay his hand upon his heart, and consider seriously whither the beginning of
the happiness of a people should be written in letters of blood, I fear you
are in a wrong way, and I desire Almighty God that no one drop of my blood may
rise up in judgment against you.

My Lord of Armagh, I profess my self a Protestant, and a true and obedient
Son to the Church of England, to that Church wherein I was borne and wherein I
was bred; prosperity and happiness be ever to it: and whereas it has been
said that I have inclined to Popery, if it be an objection worth answering, let
me say truly, that from the time since I was one and twenty years of age, till
this hour, now going upon nine and forty, I never had thought in my heart, to
doubt of the truth of my Religion, nor to my best memory durst any ever profer
it any kind whatsoever; and so being reconciled to the mercies of Christ Jesus
my Savior, into whose bosom I hope shortly to be gathered, to enjoy those
eternal happinsses that shall never have end. I desire heartily the
forgiveness of every man, both for any rash or unadvised word or deed, and
desire your prayers; And so my Lords farwell, farewell all things of this world,
Lord strengthen my faith; give me confidence and assurance in the merits of
Christ Jesus. I desire you that you would be solent, and join in Prayers with
me, and for me; and I trust in God that we shall all meet, and live eternally
in Heaven, there to receive the a complishment of all happiness, where every
tear shall be wiped from our eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts: And
so God bless this Kingdom and Jesus have mercy upon my Soul.

Then turning himself about, he saluted all the Noblemen, and took a
solemn leave of all considerable persons on the Scaffold, giving them his hand.

And after that he said, Gentlemen, I would say my prayers, and I entreat you
all to pray with me, and for me: then his Chaplain laid the book of Common
Prayer upon the chair before him, as he kneeled down, on which he prayed
almost a quarter of an hour, then he prayed as long or longer without a book,
and ended with the Lords Prayer; then standing up, he spies his brother, Sir
George Wentworth, and calls him to him, and says; Brother, we must part,
remember me to my sister, and to my wife, and carry my blessing to my eldest
for, and charge him from me, that he fear God, and continue an obedient son of
the Church of England, that he should approve himself a faithful subject to
the King, and tell him that he should not have any private grudge or revenge
toward any concerning me, and bid him beware that he meddle not with Church
livings, for that will prove a moth and canker to him in his estate; and wish
him to content himself to be a servant to his Country, as a Justice of peace
in his County, and not aiming at higher preferments: carry my blessing also
to my daughters, Anne and Arabella, charge them to fear and serve God, and he
will bless them, not forgetting my little infant, that yet knows neither good
nor evil, and cannot speak for it self, God speak for it and bless it.
Then said he, Now I have nigh done, one stroke will make my wife husbandlesse,
my dear children fatherless, and my poor servants masterlesse, and separate
me from my dear brother and all my friends, but let God be to you and them all
in all.

After that, going to take off his doublet, and to make himself unready, he
said, I thank God I am no more afraid of death, nor daunted with any
discouragement rising from any fears, but do as cheerfully put off my doublet
at this time, as ever I did when I went to bed. Then he put off his doublet,
and wound up his hair with his hands, and put on a white cap, with his hair
under it.

Had the Deputy lived till Friday following, which was the 14 day of May there
had dyed two Noblemen in the same month, and the same place, though not for
the same fact, which was the Earl of Caflle Haven, ten years since.
Then he called, Where is the man that should do this last office? (meaning
the Executioner) call him to me. When he came and asked him forgiveness, he
told him he forgave him and all the world. Then kneeling down by the block,
he went to prayer again himself, the Bishop of Armach kneeling on the one
side, and the Minister on the other; to the which Minister after prayer, he
turned himself, and spoke some few words softly, having his hands lifted up:
this Minister closed his hands with his; then bowing himself to the earth, to
lay his head on the block, he told the Executioner that he would first lay
down his head to try the fitness of the block, and take it up again, before
he would lay it down for good and all, and so he did: and before he laid it
down again, he told the Executioner that he would give him warning when to
strike, by stretching forth his hands; and then laid down his neck on the
block, stretching out his hands, the Executioner struck off his head at one
blow, then took the head up in his hands, and showed it to all the people, and
said, God save the King.

His private Ejaculations.
BEhold, O my Lord, I place my self before thine eyes, kneeling at the foot
step of thy mercy seat, begging pardon of thee for the forgiveness of all my
sins; and O my good God, what sinful soul can perform this act without the
help of thy Divine Grace: It is thy mercy which now I crave, who am at the
last period of my life.

Lord therefore let thy hand of mercy be so fatre stretched out to me, that it
may reach to the forgiveness of all my transgressions, of what nature,
condition soever they are or have been, whether they have been sins to please
my self, or others: Hear me O Father of all pity and compassion, and that
for Jesus Christ's sake, who at this time makes intercession for all true
penitents; Lord into thy hands I commend and commit my Spirit.

FINIS.

