A PARAPHRASTICALL EXPLICATION of the Prophecy of HABAKKUK; WHICH IS A
PROPHECY THAT MAY supply us with fit matter of Meditation for these TIMES.

JAMES. 5.10. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, for an example of suffering
adversity, and of long Patience --

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 164^.

The Preface to this Paraphrasticall Explication, and to what may follow in
this kind, (...).
LIght is so generally beneficial, so comfortable, so attractive of love, so
communicative of it self to all; that the holy Scripture does often choose to
express Almighty God by the notion of Light. And this, not in reference to us
only (which makes St James call him the Father of Lights. i. e. the Giver of
all knowledge, Jam. 1.17.
comfort, glory, or whatsoever else we understand by Light) but in respect of
himself too.

And that does often convey the more emphaticall expression to our weak
capacity, being delivered in figurative words, borrowed from the parts of our
own bodies. Not those parts only, that in us partake of light and splendour:
but other parts too, that have no such Privilege.

We have an instance in this Prophecy of Habakkuk, where a glorious luster is
said to come out of his very hands. In the hebrew it sounds thus, Hab 3.4.
(...) horns. i. the rays, or beams of a glorious light.
He had horns coming out of his hands. But my task being only to deliver the
meaning, without any strict tie to the words, I shall make no other mention,
when I come at it, but of a glorious Appearance. For the Jews by horns there,
and elsewhere, do understand Light, or (as our Translators express it well,
Exodus 34.35.
Exodus 34.) a bright shining. Though from some mistake of the Hebrew Verb in
that place, our Painters were put upon a fancy of portraiting Moses with
horns, which should rather have been some radiant splendour and glory in his
face, which he contracted by his familiar and often conversing with God, who is
the true Light.

And what has been said of the Hands, might be said of the Feet, Rev. 1.14, 15.
likened to fine brass, burning, as it were, in a furnace, and of other parts,
and of his Throne, and of what not about Him. 1. Ioh. 1.5.
For, He is all Light. In him is no darkness at all. 1. Tim. 6.16.
And, He dwells in a Light inaccessible.

Now these figurative expressions taken from Light, are not only used to set
out God himself, but those Persons and those ways wherein he is wont to
manifest himself to men. He is pleased they should also have the name, and
character of Light, to show whence they come.

The Children of Isael might have read this first in the countenance of Moses,
their Lawgiver, who had such a Light in his face, as they were not able to
behold. After him their Prophets, and other Teachers were their Lights, or (as
they called them) the Seers of Israel.

And as their Persons had such Titles to distinguish them, so had the ways
also by which they were guided. For, what the Wise man says of the Laws and
Commands of Fathers to their Children, must eminently be understood of their
Law, Prove. 6.23. (...)
which they received from God, Lex Lux, The Law was the Light, from which they
were to take their direction. Or (as the Wise man had been taught by his Royal
Father) The word of God was a Light to their feet, Psalm. 119.
and a Lantern to their paths.

Yet all this while. Moses him self and their Prophets, and that word of God,
and those Laws which they had, were but lesser Lights, Mal. 4.2.
forerunners of the Sun of Righteousness, that enlightens every man that
comes into the world. His Doctrine was the true Light, Ioh. 1.9.
and his Disciples the Light of the world indeed, Mat. 5.14.
(which they in the Law did but shadow out,) and their Successors are our
Stars of the first magnitude. St John calls the Bishops of Asia, Rev. 1.20.
that he writes to, by the name of Angels and Stars. Though we now, instead
of giving such Titles to our Bishops, would fairly pull them out of their
higher Spheres, and take into their places some bold Phaetons, that would
quickly do their best to set all the Christian World in a Combustion. Or, some
wandting Planets, that make every place their Diocese, and prove but (...), to
as good purpose in every place, as in any one. Or, some blazing Comets, that
may easily presage the fall of Kings and Princes, if it must be effected by the
malignity of their influence upon the People. Or lastly, some flashing Meteors,
that know what use to make of their ignis fatuus, and therefore appear like
Angels of Light, and under the pretense of a discovery of the clearer light of
the Gospel, dare venture to mislead their Followers into intricate mazes of
Error, and thence into places of little less danger then utter destruction.

But now I have somewhat else to say, not only of the best and brightest of
those Stars, that we spoke of before, but of the clearest Light of all: which
does not appear to us in this world, without mixture of shadow. For, when we
hear of the glorious, and gracious Apparition of God himself, how often do
we hear of some Clouds and interpositions of somewhat that qualifies the
receipt of that Light. So in the clearest Vision that was made to Moses, he saw
only his back parts, which we commonly expound by a knowledge, a posteriori,
which is not the clearest way of knowing.

And yet, what Moses saw of God, or of the will of God, and left unto
Posterity, was not so perspicuously apprehended by them. 1. Cor. 3.14.
Which makes St Paul say, To this day remains the covering not taken away in
the Reading of the Old Testament.

Nay, what speak I of Moses and his Veil, and of the obsecurity of the Law?
when our blessed Savior himself came into the world, Luc. 2.32.
to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of his People
Israel, though his Appearing be called by the Greek Fathers (...), an Epiphany,
which is the clearest of all: yet he came not without a Veil. Heb. 10.20.
That Veil was his flesh, says the Author to the Hebrews.

And his Doctrine sometimes had a Veil too, as appears by the reason given by
himself for his speaking in Parables, Mat. 13.13.
that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not hear, neither
understand. Nor do I yet see any cause, but that I may say of many passages in
the New Testament, what St Peter says of St Paul's Epistles, that many things
in them are hard to be understood, 2. Pet. 3.16.
which they that are unlearned, and unstable, wrest, as they do also other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction.

For the Light of the Scripture is not unto all, and in all places equally
manifest. And therefore, in what is so necessary to be known, all the helps
that may be had, should in good reason be welcome unto us. Plus vident eculi,
quam oculus, we use to say. The more help, the better. And, as we should be
willing in all Humility, and Christian Charity, to impart unto others what we
know, in this kind, out of any discovery, that our own pains can make: so
with the same love should we partake of that, which others are enabled to
impart unto us.

For, though the word of God, be in it self, full of Light, yet all Light is
diversely comprehended, according to the diverse disposition of our sight, and
the several ways of the manifestation of that luster unto us. Therefore in
many places, it may appear full of mystery and obscurity; veiled and clouded
with that which we must study to remove. So that every Age may give down some
more light to those which succeed: as good men, in former Ages, have been
careful to do, in our behalf.

Now of all pieces of holy Scripture, the holy Prophets of the Old Testament
have in them a more constant difficulty; specially for hard words and phrases
in hebrew, and short and dark sentences. In that, not much unlike the Chorus
in many Greek Authors, where a few lines of that Greek does often require more
pains, then some whole leaves in other places.

This Difficulty in the holy Prophets, bred in me an earnest desire and
intention, (for the public use, as well as for my own) to frame some way of
Explication of some of the hardest of those Prophets.

And the likeness of our wicked times to those wherein the Prophet Habakkuk
did live, might be Motive enough toward the divulging of my pains upon his
Prophecy, at this time, for their use, that never had more need then now to
apply it to themselves. For, in the times of the Prophet Habakkuk, (as now in
ours) besides a general decay of Religion, there was an excess of barbarous
cruelty and oppression, and neglect of all good Laws, and Discipline; which
drew on a crowd of other Vices. But with this difference from our Times (which
makes little for our credit) that the Jews were then under Manasses, the worst
of their Kings: but we are so wicked, if not much worse, under the best of
ours, our gracious Sovereign Lord Charles, the first of that Name, and the
first that sees almost a general defection and Rebellion of His late most
flourishing, and now (by our own default) most miserably distracted Kingdoms.

Now in this Prophecy, I shall endeavor as clear an Exposition, as in such a
hard task may be expected: not tying my self close to every word, where there
is no need, but, as a Paraphrast, in more liberty and compass of speech,
delivering that which I take to be the chief intent, and meaning of the Place:
and best agreeing with other passages of holy Scripture. And I pray God it may
yield that ease and profit to the Reader, which is heartily desired.

In which hope, I shall now fall to my task, if, for the better understanding
of the whole, you will first please to take a view of that, which is contained
in the Three sevetall Chapters of this Prophecy. Which will supply us with some
matter of Meditation, not unusefull for the present Times, wherein we live.

The Sum of the three several Chapters of this Prophecy.
The Sum of the first Chapter.
THe first Chapter sets out the sins of the Time, wherein the Prophet
Habakkuk did exercise his holy Function, and the heavy punishment which they
pulled upon both the Nations, Jews, and Chaldeans.

Their sins made up their full measure by neglect and contempt of the very
Laws: of Kings and Governors: and of God himself. These were strange
enormities, and they were answered with a punishment, that had matter of as
much wonder, if it were well observed

For that of the Chaldeans, though it came slowly on, yet it fell the more
heavily upon them, to their utter ruin and destruction, when they were in the
height of all their glory, and of the confidence, and presumption in their own
strength.

That of the Jews, came with more speed and more favor. For, though it were
very sharp for the time, yet it spent it self in the compass of 70 years,
and left them in a fair and easy pursuit of their former Peace and Liberty,
when their Enemies supposed them to be so low, that there was no hope of
recovery.

And the greatest wonder and terror in their punishment, was in respect of
those, to whom the execution was committed. For, being inflected upon them by
the Chaldees, a fierce and cruel Nation, and far worse livers then the
Jews, it startled the Prophet a little at that way of Divine dispensation,
that suffered God's peculiar People to be so handled, by such lewd and
notorious finners.

And besides (which might trouble them as well as the other did the Prophet)
the Chaldees that were intended for their scourge, and executioners in this
Calamity, were now (in Manasses his time, when this Prophecy came out) in the
number of their good Friends and Confederates. Whom, of all other, they as
little suspected for the Authors and Contrivers of their ruin, as we should
have imagined that our Neighbour-Nation would have opened the way for ours,
owing their Allegiance to the same King with us. Which Allegiance of theirs (to
name no other more peculiar obligations of their Duty) must needs make the
first coming of their Armies, as great a wonder, to our sorrow: as their
second coming would be to the honor of that Nation, if God should please to
make them the Authors of our Peace.

The Sum of the second Chapter.
THe Prophet's Queries in the former Chapter, were followed so eagerly in the
behalf of his Countrymen, that Saint Hierome, and some others, are almost
angry with him, and think he may take the name of Which opinion of their
^rymologie is capable of some advantage (beside the nature of the Verb (...))
from the Daghes, and the other gemination of the radical Letter, which adds
much vehemence to the signification, according to the use and idiome of the
Hebrew congue.
Chabakkuk, from his touching so near, and wrestling so boldly with Almighty
God. Not only in his Prayer for them (like an other Jacob) in his third
Chapter: but in the former Chapter too (like a close Disputant) in his pressing
so hard upon God himself, and his Divine Providence, and disposal of humane
afflictions. But, whether that name was given him in any such respect or no, I
doubt not but we shall easily acknowledge, that his open and patheticall
delivery of his Questions did put them upon that conjecture: and so, upon the
point, that those learned Men were as well troubled at his expression, as
himself was at the apprehension of that strange course of divine lustice. Now
this second Chapter resolves the holy Prophet (as it may do us) in the former
scruple, and shows him the progress of God's divine lustice, overtaking the
bloody, profane, sacrilegious Chaldeans, (in the height of their security) and
falling the more heavily upon them, for their abusing the Power that was put
into their hands, when they were permitted to be the scourges of men, that were
far better then themselves. Which seems to read a Lecture to them, who
contribute too much to the Malignity of these wicked days of ours; and to
advise them (while they have time of Repentance) to make asad, and serious
examination of themselves, and their own cause. This being a Truth, that is
evidenced by this passage of Holy Scripture, and this example in the Jews and
Chaldees, That God may be so angry with the sins of his own People, or so
willing to have their Piety and Virtue made known to the World, that it may
produce some effects, that are little expected. So that either for the severe
punishment of some, to whom it is likely he means to show the more mercy in a
greater and more terrible day: Or, for the Fatherly correction of others, that
by outward Calamities he will hasten to a better amendment of life: Or, for the
exacter Trial of the Faith, and Obedience, and Patience, and Perseverance of
others, for whom he resolves a weightier Crown of Glory in everlasting
Mansions: For these, and the like respects, it may please God to give way to
the doing of many things, which may well seem strange and wonderful in our
eyes.

And while such things as these are in agitation, the most wicked men, and the
greatest Enemies of the Church of God, may perhaps (as these Chaldeans now did)
see their cruel and malicious, and sacrilegious Designs, seconded with as
prosperous successes, as their own evil hearts could wish. And they may be
enabled to say truly, that God goes in and out with their Forces; that He
fights for them in the head of their Armies, Micah. 2.15.
and Crowns their Actions with Triumphs and Victories over far more innocent
and Religious undertakers then they are. Joel. 3.11.
All this being no more then the Prophet implies here, and God himself speaks
in effect, in the like case, by the mouth of his holy Prophets. And yet this
Chapter may inform them, that all this is not enough to secure their vain
confidence, and excuse the idle boasting of their strange and fortunate
attempts: which may happily end in as sad a Catastrophe, as that of the
Chaldeans did, after all their Plunder and effusion of blood.

The Sum of the third Chapter.
THe third Chapter, in a devout Prayer, or divine Hymn, set to an Instrument of
Music, admires the Justice, and Providence, and goodness of Almighty God. And
teaches us, by the holy Prophets example, to trust and repose our selves in
the will, and mercy of God, whatsoever it pleases him to bring upon us.

Wherein we cannot but observe, that the devout Prophet made no scruple, either
at a set Form of prayer, or of putting that prayer into a Song, and having
that set to a Musical Instrument, which conteines in it, not a Prayer only,
but a Prophecy of much sadness and calamity to his whole Nation. I believe,
it cannot be said, that any were more truly and compassionately affected with
it, then himself was, and I think he was never the less affected with it,
when he had made it a part of his solemn Music.

Shall I add this too? that though his Prayer could not move God any thing the
more, by the advantage of the rarest skill in Music, wherein it might be
delivered: yet if the Prophet, or others, that used it after him, by the help
of those solemn and harmonious Tones had their own Devotion any thing the
more affected in the delivery: then was there Motive enough, why he should (for
theirs, or his own sake) commend it to some Artist, that could fit it to a
Musical Instrument. As it appears he did, if not by the Shigionoth in the
front, (which admits of another construction) yet at least by the Musical
Selah in the body, and again by his Neginoth in the foot of this Excellent
Song and divine Ditty.

A PARAPHRASTICALL Explication of the Prophecy of HABAKKUK.
CAP. I.
1. THe sad Prophecy, and Vision of that burden, Onus.
which Habakkuk foresaw, as a heavy punishment, would shortly fall upon the
Jews, and Chaldeans, and which the heavier weight of their own grievous
sins had brought upon them. Or, The Sum of that which the Prophet received
by divine Revelation, (...)
and gave occasion to what he delivered amongst his own Countrymen to this
effect, as follows.

2. OLord, how long shall I make my humble addresses unto thee, without any
answer? How long shall I continue my heavy Cry and Complaint against Injustice
and Oppression (the crying sins of these sad times) while thou refusest to
relieve us?

3. Why have thou reserved me for such wicked days, wherein my eyes cannot but
(with tears) behold the injurious and violent dealing of Men, in those sins,
which now walk openly and impudently without any disguise, without any shame
or care of being concealed? Above all, the unjust oppression of their
Neighbors, even to desolation, presents it self unto me, whithersoever I cast
mine Eyes. And yet (...) and lis est, vel sunt lites sub Judice.
where there is so much cause of Complaint, and calling for Justice, (...)
aufert processus, actiones, vel litigationes forenses. i. Efficit ut optatum
successum non habeant. Reticetur hic nominativus, ut in eodem verbo. Mal. 2.3.
(...) and auferet vos, and Luc. 12.20. auferent animam tuam. Et Genesis 48.1. In
(...) and dixerat quispiam. (...) vero, and omnia a (...) derivata proprie
referu^tur ad Judicium, and actiones in Judicio. Inde (...) Jurisdictio,
Praefectura (quod Praesides plerumque Juri dicundo vacare solerent.) Inde and
(...). Mat. 5.21. pro Auditorio Judicum qur in portis cujusque Civitatis Jus
reddebant. Et hine etiam (...). i. (...) 1. Cor. 6.7. going to Law: ut recte
Anglic: nostra Translatio, omnium in plerisque S. Scriptutae locis felicissima.
somewhat still there is that obstructs, and hinders, or rather takes away the
course of Justice.

4. Hence is it, that the (...) Proprie de vena pulsatili intermittente, etc.
Sunt autem ex Viris doctissimis qui (...) hoc loco exponunt de Lege divina:
Illis enim Propheta videtur inducre personam ignarae plebis, quae Legemipsam
divinam remissam putat, ubr poena non sumitur de peccatis gravioribu, etc.
Pulse of the Law beats so slowly, as if the life of the Law (which is the
execution of her Edicts) began to draw to an end. And therefore, either Justice
cannot appear at all, but with too many demurtes, and tedious suits: or if she
do, all is not right. For while the wicked (with his malicious plots)
encloseth and besets the righteous man, on every side, and so domineers over
him, that he has not liberty to follow the Dictate of his own understanding.
All this while Justice seems to tread inward, and comes out lame, and distorted
(by bribes and other by-respects, that turn her quite awry.) And so is she
made altogether unlike her self.

5. But if Justice can hear no better amongst men, let them hear the voice of
divine Justice from Heaven. And she will tell them a wonder (if that can get
her Audience;) For thus says she, Behold and wonder, you that make so sleight of it in your high Pride, and scorn and security. Wonder and admire at what I
shall tell you of the Gentiles: by whom I shall bring such a strange work to
pass in your days, that if it were plainly told you now before hand, you
would by no means be induced to believe it.

6. For (whatsoever your thoughts are of Me and my Mercy and Protection over
your Land) I shall raise up against you the fierce and nimble Chaldeans (that
are now your Confederates, and whom of all other, you would least suspect to be
engaged in such undertakings.) And they (according to their innate cruelty and
agility) shall suddenly, and barbarously overrunne this Land; stretching their
Victorious Armies into every corner, and, where they please, possessing
themselves of those fair Habitations, that are none of theirs.

7. Whatsoever you now conceit of them, Cruel and Terrible will they then
appear to be, as they are indeed, and the rather, because Hebr: ex seipso
Judicium ejus.
their will shall be their Law, and (...) ex superbia ejus (satis pro imperio)
and (...) decretum hic Chaldaeo.
out of their proud mouths shall proceed those imperious Commands and Detrees,
that you shall not dare to control.

8. When they are once mounted on horseback to set upon you, the nimble pace
of the Leopard shall not have more speed then theirs. And (to add fury to
their speed) their hungry Appetites shall be more eagerly bent upon the prey,
then you have seen the greedy Wolves, that steal out in the Evening to
satisfy their hunger. So shall their Horsemen spread and diffuse themselves
over the best of your Country, and from the remote parts of the Babilonian
Empire, fall upon you with that have and suddenness, that you would think,
neither the Ravening Wolf, nor the hungry Eagle her self should be able to
exceed.

9. No otherwise shall they encourage one another, and proceed to their violent
and mischievous attempts, then with such fury and unhappy success, as if a
Ventus orient: in illis regionibus pestilentior.
Pestilent East wind did help to drive them on, and consume all before them.
And when all is done, if you would know the number of them, that shall be
carried into Captivity, and reserved to a further misery, you may as well
desire to have the number of the Sands on the Sea shore.

10. All this while there is little hope of opposition to be made against them
by King or People. As for your Kings first (if such shall be your Commanders
abroad) the proud Chaldean does rather scorn and deride, then any way dread
that sacred Name. And for your People, or any strong Forts and Bulwarks at
home, that you conceive them able to make by way of resistance: in as much
scorn will he look upon them, and never doubt by the raising of a Muddy
frontcer against it, to make a sudden surprisall of your strongest hold.

11. Which done, his haughty spirit will be the readier to (...) spiritus
transibit.
pass all the bounds of moderation (with as little difficulty as he brake
thorough your military works) and so to go on to a further degree of
wickedness: Hebr: hae vires ejus (...) sunt pro Deo suo, unde and sibi
plaudir, and ^^ut ver 16. ubi totus versiculus est hujus expositionis
confirmatio.
ascribing all this goodly success of his bold Enter prizes to no other Diety,
then his own Valorous Policy, which is the (...), that he will magnify above
all that is called God.

12. But, O my God, (the true Diety, whose power and wisdom is over all) the
Holy, the only Lord, Antiqua lectio (non morieris) ut Vatablus, and alii
affirmant: nostra (non motiemur) ego utrumque complector.
from all eternity to all eternity; and by whom only we hope to be preserved
from death and destruction: Have not thou set up the Babylonian Tyrant, as the
Executioner of these thy Judgments upon us? Have not thou enabled them thus to
chastise us, and thus to Hebr: ad increpandum petram.
prevail over the Rock of our strength (that power of ours, that we accounted
to be most impregnable?)

13. Surely thou art of purer Eyes, then to see and approve the wicked designs
of our cruel and malicious Enemies (that entitle their own prowess to all
their Trophies and Triumphs over us.) Why then do thou seem (by their
prosperous atcheivements) to favor so great Sinners: and to keep silence, and
wink at it, while the wicked Chaldeans do thus consume thy own People, that
are far more righteous then they?

14. Were we but only as other Men, yet shall we not, as Men, have a more
peculiar aspect of thy Providence? But we are thy People. And while we are in
the troublesome Sea of this world (where the greater Fishes are ever ready to
devour the less.) Shall there be no more regard had of our lives, then is of
ordinary Fishes, and other inferior Creatures, that have no such ready
address as we have, to the Guide and Lover and Defender of Mankind?

15. Shall Nebuchadnezzar, and his rude Soldiers, have, liberty to fish where
they will, and take all for fish that comes to their Net? And shall such cruel
Fishers of men (that pursue their ruin and destruction) have so good success
attending their Nets and Hooks (their projects and devises) that therein they
shall go on to triumph, and appland themselves?

16. And that therefore they shall be encouraged to sacrifice to their own
Nets, and impute all their Victorious Successes to the Virtue of their own
Power and Policy, by which they are enriched with so many fat booties, that
increase upon them, while they devour us, and our substance, and feed greedily
upon that, which is none of theirs?

17. And for all this, shall they be still suffered to expose, and extend their
nets more and more? And, while they make no spare, will thou also defer to
revenge our slaughters, and oppressions, by the deserved punishment of that
barbarous People, guilty of so many, so gross sins, as they are?

CAP. II.
1. AFter these sad, and scrupulous Queries, and Objections, which presented
themselves unto me, I could do no other, then (as a Prophet, a Watchman, a
seer of Israel) betake my self to my Watchtower, and with all Reverence and
Patience expect, what the Divine Oracle would discover unto me, and make me
able to return to others, as the best solution of those Doubts and (...)
argumentum, vel argumentatio, ut (Job. 23.1.) nostra Transl. recte habet.
Interrogatories of my former Discourse.

2. And such did the Solution prove to be, that others have as much reason to
observe it, as I have. Therefore was I commanded by God himself, so clearly to
deliver and explain the Vision, which I shall now relate: that it might be
given down to Posterity, as a thing written in fair and Capital Letters, so
that he that runs might read it, and see Or in tables of some durable
substance. ut antiquitus in buxo, cedro. etc.
in it, as in a little Map, or Table, a draught of those ways of God's
Divine Wisdom, and Justice, in the ordering and disposing of things below,
far beyond thereach of our weak judgment, and apprehension.

3. And beyond the little compass of our time too: for, it looks Heb. in
tempus determinatum.
farther then our short and evil days. Yet, as they that live to see it
accomplished, will account the hardest part of it to be slipped over, as in a
dream: so we that (by the eye of Faith) can look forward, and fix our thoughts
upon that end (which will prove the end of our Miserte, and the end of our
Enemies Prosperity) may see it posting on, as all our Times do, with such
speed. (...) in notione sufflandi.
as if it were carried upon the wings of the wind. For all which speed,
nothing that is foretold of it, will fail, or come short of the truth.
Therefore let no seeming delay, take off our expectation, and hope in Gods
Promises, which will come at last, and Hebr. veniendo veniet.
cannot come stowly to a Heart, that is ready and prepared for it: and wants
not that solace, wherewith it may, in the mean while, support it self.

4. But, that heavy, faint, distrustful soul, that Ita exponitur hic locus (
Hebr. 10.38) ubr in (...), and (...) apparet vestigium antiq: lect. (...) and
(...) Qui autem malu^t adhae^^e (...) apt possunt exponere de superbia, and
confidentia in propriis viribus, quae Nebuchad: and Chaldoeos ad interitum
produxit, cum fides interim in deum pros Israelitas, and vivos conservaret, and
pristinae etiam Paci restitueret.
draws back, with fears, and sad apprehensions of danger, faster then
affiance in divine promises can incite it forward: that soul is not yet in the
right posture, wherein it should be. Nay, it wants that which is the very life
of a Soul, that is in the right indeed. For, it is by a (...) fidem veritatem
and constantiam complectitur, ex natura vocis (...).
true constant Faith, that the righteous (...) hold upon Life. It is his Faith
and Confidence in the truth of Gods word and Promise, which makes him Quod
refertur ad [(...)] Heb. 10.38.
accopted in the sight of God: and is a good means, both to keep him a
constant fervant of God in all Piety and Obedience, (which prepares him the
more for the ways of his present deliverly) and to fornish him with a modest
security of happiness hereafter. For, he that is made righteous, or Sic Romans
1.17. [(...)] construitur cum [(...)] and idem est quod (...), ut apparet ex
scopo and mente totius Epist: ad Romanos.
justified by Faith shall live for ever.

5. Now he that labors for such a Faith, is a fit Auditor for such a Prophecy
as this, which (after this Preface) I will now proceed to declare: that you may
with me (in this Vision, and divine speculation from my Prophetical
Watchtower) plainly foresee, what our common enemy, the Chaldaean, will
prove, after all the insolences, and presumptions upon his own fortunate
successes, and our sad afflictions. You might see him then This may allude to
proud Baltassar and his Chaldeans, that in a drunken fit, made bold with the
sacred Vessels of the Temple, and were that night, showed the uncertain estate
of humane greatness: falling then from their former height of glory and
command, to little less then slavery under the Medes and Persians.
drunk with wine, and drunk with Pride. And as a drunken man, Our English
Translation expresses all very well in one word [he shall not indure] i. he
shall not hold out in that condition, not continue in that prosperity he was.
The hebrew signifies properly, he shall have no sure mansion (he shall be like
one turned out of his house, to seek his fortune, as we use to say.) And this
word is well put into this Ital: by Diod: Non dimorera in casa sua.
so shall he afterward be: tottering in his fortunes, various and inconsistent
to himself, and to what he was, every way; reeling, and wavering, and tumbled
about from his highest, and most prosperous estate, to worse and worse. It was
his own covetous and ambitious desire, that set him on work, and thrust him on
forward, till he got up at last, to that high pitch of Honor, and abundance of
Wealth: from which he must begin his heavier ruin and downfall. For the
longing of his greedy Soul, in his filthy Avarice, was enlarged like Hell
(as if he would have the Devil and all) and in his Malice, and cruelty, he
gaped after our destruction, like Death and the Grave, that will never be
satisfied. The Addition of whole Nations, and several sorts of People, either
slain by his sword, or subdued and united to his former too vast Empire, could
not work so much upon him, as to make him think that he had enough, either of
their blood, or of their wealth.

6. Will you see, after all this, how he shall be exposed to the scorn, and
derision of them, whom he has rifled and plundered, and abused at his own
pleasure? The time is coming on apace, when they shall take up a gibing taunt
and Tarable against him, and say, Woe to him, that had too much of his own,
and yet would never leave scraping, and heaping more and more together, out of
others little store. How long will he thus toil and bustle in the World, to
take from them? And how little a while shall he live to enjoy it? His heaps of
gold and silver, which he studies to multiply without end, are but heaps of
Earth, a little more refined then that thick mire and clay, that shall, after a
while, stop his own greedy mouth.

7. For, as he lies gaping after us, and ours, so shall others arise up from a
place, (...)
he little suspects, that shall gape after him, and his. Nay, they shall more
then gape, and threaten, and show their teeth. It shall not be long, before he
feels, that they can bite too. And well might I say, that they should arise.
For though (in his supine ease and security) he may conceive them to lie still,
and have no such intentions against him, unless it were in a dream: yet shall
they suddenly (...) commoventes, exagitantes, laterantes.
rouse up themselves, and him too, muster up their Forces, make toward him,
shake him in pieces, and divide him as a rich Prey.

8. Thus will they do, and thus will they speak of thee, and thy just doom,
thou proud Chaldean. And as Thou have preyed upon many Nations, and enriched
thy self with their spoils: so shall all they that are left about thee, help
to expose thee to the like spoil and rapine. All which may justly come upon
thee, for thy bloody cruelty, and other most injurious acts of thine, which
ever attended thy too-furious execution of God's anger upon ours and other
(...) sing. pro plur. ut v. 11, and 17.
Cities, and Countries, and them that dwell in them.

9. Woe be to his covetous and foolish Ambition, that longs for that, which
cannot but prove the ruin of himself, and his own house. For, while he
thinks of building his nest so high, as may set it Hebr: de manu mali.
out of the reach of all danger: that very rise does not only expose it to the
greater hazard, but make the fall so much the more fearful, when it does come.

10. Whosoever thou art ( Chaldean, or other) that could entertain a fancy
of such a vast and high building, Hebr: consilium iniisti ad ignominiam.
thou were not well advised, to take this for the best course of advancing thy
self, and thy Posterity. This was not to make way to your honor, but to your
shame. And know this, that while thou resolvest to raise thy Self and Thine,
by ours and others ruins, thou sinnest against thy own Soul, and make thy
self the greatest means of thy own downe-full, and ours, and their rising
again.

11. For, rather then such crying Sins shall not be silenced with the
execution of Justice, the very stones out of the wall will help on the Cry, and
the beam out of the Timber work will answer, in as loud, and true a testimony
against such cruelty and oppression.

12. And the joint Cry of all together will be nothing but Woe. Woe to him that
lays the foundation of his walls in blood, (...)
and most injuriously makes preparation of raising a City to himself out of
others ruins.

13. Upon this Cry of the Wood and Stones, that they have heaped together,
mark, if this Sentence proceed not from the Lord of Hosts; That, This wicked
warlike People have, in all their great toil to get from others, (...)
but only labored to kindle a fire, wherein all they have shall be consumed.
Or, at least, all that they have so unjustly gotten, if it be not justly taken
away, shall serve them, and theirs for some other use, which shall show them
the vanity of their own dangerous Attempts. (...)


14. For ere it be long, as the immense waters do fill and cover the bottom
of the vast Sea, so shall their gracious Land be covered and overflowed with
that which is more unruly then any waters, with innumerous Troops of several
Nations, and People that shall come against the Chaldeans, and (...) ut
agnoscant gloriam dei.
let all the World know (in the final recompense and revenge of our Enemies)
what cause they have to join with us, in giving all Praise and Glory unto God.

15. And that glory to God shall be accompanied with another Woe to our
insulting Enemies. Woe be to him that gains so far upon his Friend and
Confederate, or any that have near reference unto him, as first to besot him
with his strong and enticing liquor: and then to make use of that time of
infirmity, for the discovery of his nakedness, and the disclosing of any
secret, which he knows is best gotten out of him, when the warm drink has
sweetly washed away the remembrance of his Duty.

16. This Woe is for thee, o Chaldean, that art so ready to discover and deride
the weakness of others. For thou shall Bibes tu quoque and nudaberis.
meet with thy reward at last in a worse Cup, whereof thou shall be forced to
drink with shame enough, when (...)
thy turn comes. So shall thy nakedness also come to be discovered, when in
the midst of thy Pride and Gallantry, the right hand of the Lord (which cannot
be resisted) shall hold out that Cup unto thee, and make thee drink deep of it,
though thou art forced to cast it up again to thy further disgrace. (...)
And so shall divine Justice repay thee with that shame and affliction, which
thou have abundantly deserved for thy insolent opprobrious dealing with others,
whom thou have laid open and naked to all kinds of injury and reproach.

17. And deserved again (if thou had no other fault) for thy base,
sacrilegious, and scornful abuses of the Per Libanum alii Terram sanctam,
alii Templum intelligunt.
Temple, to which the whole Forest of Lebanon, did contribute her best Timber,
and therefore gave it also the name of an other more sacred Lebanon; but thy
violent profane hands have now turned it again into the likeness of a ruder
Forest, that the Milites qui, ferarum instar, ubique grassabantur.
wild Beasts have had to do withal. That Impiety of thine, in the desolation
of my holy House (says the sacred Oracle) shall overwhelme thee with a worthy
punishment, and thy own Houses and fairest Structures, shall therefore be laid
as wast and desolate, as that which is the openest and vastest habitation of
the wild Beasts of the Forest. The rather because of thy imitation of those
savage Creatures in the effusion of blood, and ransacking of so many Civitatum
and habitantium in iis. ut v. 8.
Persons and places, as do now in their ruins give a testimony of thy
barbarous proceeding against them all.

18. All which Sacrilege and cruel Barbarism, was accompanied with other
ways of Irreligion and Idolatry: and what fruit or advantage did any of them
gain? What profit can you show for your graven and moulten Images? He that
made them, and he that Preached them up for Dieties, were both of them
Inventers and Dispersers of Lies. Yet could that Maker and Raiser of them add
this folly to the other, to trust and repose a confidence upon such mute and
false Gods, as could not so much as make Answer unto their Prayers.

19. And this calls for another Woe upon that sinful Nation. Woe to him, that
commenceth his Prayer for releife to a piece of wood: and calls to the dumme
idol of stone to awake, and give him audience. The Idol it self might teach
him, that another Diety would be looked after, if he look for help. For, who
cannot see and observe, that though it be fairly gilded over with silver and
gold, to seem glorious to the Eye, yet there is not so much as breath and
spirit within yet, that can add life and vigor to that glittering outside.

20. But Jehovah, the true God is not so. Heaven is the glorious Temple,
wherein he dwells, and whereof all other Temples are but figures. And the
Reverence we show in them, is a Copy of that Hebr: explicatur per silentium.
Fear and Reverence, that is due to him from all the ends of the Earth.

CAP. III. The Title.
1. A Prayer of the Prophet Habakkuk, wherein he expresses his content, and
acquiescence in the solution of his former doubts, from the divine Oracle:
comforts himself in the Examples of God's Love and Providence over his Church:
puts his own Pious Thoughts and Resolutions into a divine Meditation: and
referres all to be set to a Musical Tune. And (as appears by the Affinity of
Shigionah and Shiggaion) to the same Tune that the sweet Singer of Israel made
choice of, in the Title of the seventh Psalm, which is a Prayer of his, made
upon occasion of the words of Chush, the Son of Je^^^i.

But some learned men think this to be a Prayer concerning errors, and I have
said before, that the word may bear that construction. Which as I easily
grant, because it is derived of a Verb, that signifies to err: so may I, with
as good reason, yield to others, that take it here for some erraticall,
various, delightful Modulation, because Shiggaion (derived from the same
Verb) does so signify, and only so, and therefore by our own learned
Translators, as well as others, is rendered by a Musical Tune, in the Title of
the Psalm above cited.

I should take the place, wherein here it stands (the Title of this Psalm
compared with the Close) to be another very probable Argument, that it is here
so to be understood, being found no where else in holy Writ.

And, if all this were not to be said of the Front, yet will the Selah and
Neginoth that follow after, be enough to make good the Music of this place.

For Selah first, it is a Musical Note, that serves as a direction for the
raising up of the voice in that place wherein it is fixed. And I like that
which Kimchi joins with it; the elevation of the heart too. We never meet with
it, but in the Psalms of David (in whose time it seems to have been first
taken up as a word of Art) and, after Him in this Prayer of Habbakkuk.

Then, for the word Neginoth. It is properly referred to Instruments of Music,
specially those, that were played upon with the fingers, and had the Voice
joined with them, as in the solemn Hymns, and other Musical Service of the
Jewish Church.

And he that had a more extraordinary skill in that way, and was the chief in
composing, or overseeing that kind of Melody, is called here, by the Prophet
Habakkuk in the Conclusion of this Prayer, and by the Royal Prophet, in the
Title of the fourth Psalm, Menarseach Binginoth.

One thing more I have to say, before I come to the Prayer it self, that in
this Chapter, ( as it may well be expected, where such Music is) the holy
Prophet, in the expressing of his Meditations, seems to use a kind of divine
Poetry. And he must follow that kind of Poetical expression, that will follow
the Prophet, in this Musical Chapter.

The PRAYER.
2. WIth fear and reverence have I heard that answer, o Lord, wherein thou art
pleased to reveal the execution of thy Justice. First, upon the Jews by
Chaldeans, and then, more heavily, upon the Chaldeans themselves, by other
Nations: when thy own People, after the expiration of 70 years, shall be
graciously delivered from Captivity. In the interim of those years of their
Captivity, be thou the life and comfort of thy Church, the special work of
thy own hands; and let thy People feel the benefit of thy presence. In that
sad compass of Time, o make thy self known to them that need Thee most, and
in the midst of thy Anger and Justice, remember Mercy.

3. Remember thy tender Mercies showed unto us of old, in our miraculous
delivery from the Egyptian bondage, when, after our safe conduct into the
wilderness, out of the reach of our Enemies, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
Thou came in such Majesty from Teman, and made thy Holiness shine forth
in such beauty from Mount Paran. When the This the Scripture often expresses by
the name of Heaven.
Air above was filled, after an extraordinary manner, with Thunder, and
Lightning (the forerunners of thy divine approach) and the Earth below was made
happy with thy glorious presence, the occasion of our best Praise and thankful
acclamations.

4. For Heb: brightness in his very hands.
in Light and Splendor, and Glory, were all the ways of God's most gracious
appearance (a figure of that greater light and glory, which is altogether
invisible, and inaccessible to poor Mortals:) But for our weakness, they
were so (...) absconfio majestatis.
shadowed, and qualified, as might best fit the Eyes of them, that were then
entertained with those wonders.

5. And as such Lustres were a pledge and testimony of comfort to his own
People: so (as a terror to their Enemies) Hebr: pestis and febris ardens.
Death and Destruction went before Him, and He left behind Him the footsteps of
Horror and Consumption, to tame, and amaze the Nations, that might rise up to
oppose them.

6. At last, when he rested (in his holy Arc, in the Land of Promise) he
divided that Land, by lot, for their inheritance. At his appearance, the
Nations were sore troubled. They that had dwelt so long in those Hebr: the
Mountains, for them that had dwelt in them, time out of mind.
Mountanous Countries were much distracted with the sad apprehension of their
likelihood, to be now roused, and expelled out of those ancient Scares, and
forced to submit to new Lords and Masters: brought thither by Him, in whose
Power are all the Hebr: the ways and passages of the World.
Actions, and Alterations of the World.

7. It was not for any good deserts of ours, but for the wickedness of those
Nations, that they were so rooted out by the hand of Justice. That removed the
Cananites out of their dwelling, as (besides them) it did Number. 25.
the Midianites for their sin. When it troubled the Cush and Cushan, the same
with Midian. For which see Sir W. Raleigh's Discourse of Cush. l. 1. c. 8. Alii
exponu^t de liberatione a Cushan. Iud. 3. vel a Midianitis. Iud. 7. per
Gedeonem.
tents of Cushan, afflicted their whole Land, and made them content to remove
their portable houses, to other places of mansion, where they might be found.

8. But still, as the way of thy Justice was observable over them, so was that
of thy Mercy, o Lord, over us, to the very alteration of the ordinary course of
Nature. We found that in our passage thorough the Red Sea, and thorough the
River Jordan. The waters seemed to start aside, at our coming toward them,
and, for very fear give way to us. Was it thy Anger, o Lord, against the proud
Waves, that forced them thus to shrink back? Was the Sea afraid of thy
triumphant approach? Was it the noise of thy Chariots, and the prancing of thy
Horses, that shrunk up the Rivers with this terror, and drove them out of
their wonted Station? For, in such triumph indeed did thou seem to draw
near the waters of Jordan, when the Arc was thy Chariot, the Chariot of our
Salvation, and thy Glory seemed to be carried upon the holy Cherubims.

9. After that glorious and miraculous passage over Jordan, an Josh. 5.14.
Angel showed himself for a Captain of the Host of the Lord. And thy self,
o Lord, as the great Lord of Hosts, preparedst for the Battle. Thine Arrows
were drawn out of their Quiver, and thy Bow out of the Case, to be in
readiness against thine Enemies. The several Tribes of Israel, as thy
Soldiers were mustered up to their Quidam intelligunt de promissionibus
Patribus factis interposito Juramento.
military Sacramental Oath. And the very Earth and the Waters, and all the
Elements, did seem to divide themselves into their several ranks, at thy
command, and for thy service.

10. And, when thou beganst to set forward, The Mountains, o Lord, (as if,
standing highest, they had made the first discovery of thy coming afar off)
were sore troubled at it: like a woman that is in labor, (...)
and longs to be delivered. Presently whole Rivers of waters gushed out (as the
Issue of that birth.) The noise and murmur, which they made at their breaking
forth of the hollow earth, was like the cry of this newborn Creature. And the
diffusion of those waters into several courses, and rivulets, was like the
stretching out of his Arms (which thou can bind and lap up in his
swadling-cloutes, Job. 38.9.
as it pleases thee.)

11. And, if the Hills can thus discover, and express thy powerful approach,
how can the two fair eyes of the Firmament (the Sun and the Moon) but see
it, and give some acknowledgement of it? As they did to all the World, when the
Sun stood still over Gibeon, Jos. 10.12.
and the Moon over the vallie of Aialon, as if then indeed they had come to
their (...)
Houses, wherein they should rest. And shall we not say, that other, and more
unusual Lights have acted this readiness of Service, and Duty? When Thunder,
and Lightning (at thy command) flew as swift as Arrows about the firmament,
and the pillar of Fire directed the way to thy Servants in the Wilderness.

12. This was the obedience every where tendered to our Lord, when he brought
us, and our Armies out of the land of Canaan. At whose coming the Inhabitants
of the Land quaked for fear of his anger. As if they had foreseen what would
follow, when the Heads and Commanders of so many united Cities should be
trampled on, by the feet of the Conquerors. Ios. 10.24.


13. This was thy doing, o Lord, and thus have thou often gone out with our
Armies, to save, and defend thy People, and thine Anointed, whom thou have set
over them. Thou have often wounded the Heads of those wicked Families that
oppose them, and discovered their Foundations: so that from the highest to the
lowest part of their best hold and confidence, (...) Proverb. heb:
they were laid open to ruin.

14. Thou have pierced the Heads of those Peasants, that sought our
destruction, with the same weapons, that they used against us (might Israel
then say) and taken them in their own Inventions. When they had thought,
suddenly, and violently, like a Whirlewind, to have set upon us, scattered us,
and blown us away. When their Triumph before the Victory was like the
exultation of those, that have (in their hopes) already devoured the poor and
innocent, that hides himself from their fury and persecution.

15. So did our enemies perish in that passage, where they purchased their own
death in the pursuit of ours. Exodus 14.
While the triumph, which they hoped for, was thine own, and not theirs: but
thy Chariots, and Armies prevailed in the Red Sea, and went safe through the
unusual paths, and heaps of many Waters.

16. Such has been thy Providence over us in our former calamities, for our
delivery; And shall it not be such, in thy good time, from the Babylonian
slavery, as it was from the Egyptian? But, alas! I have heard and seen so much
in my former Vision, of the long sad time of our Captivity, that my Bowels do
earne with compassion of my poor Countrymen. My inward parts are so wholly
possessed, and troubled with sorrow for them; that my lips quake for fear,
when they should express it. And my bones are consumed with rottenness, while
I labor to conceal my selfe-devouring fears and perplexities, that I have
within me. And so much the rather, because I must be still and silent for the
day of their affliction. For, it seems, the doom is now past, no prayers can
avert it, or hinder him, that shall bring his Troops of Soldiers, to prey
upon the poor People of our distressed Land.

17. To this most heavy, but most just sentence I humbly submit; with this
Prayer, that they may endeavor, as I shall, to make sure for some inward
solace, when all outward helps, and comforts shall be taken away. For, though
the Fig Tree shall not flourish and give her wonted sweets; nor the Vine-tree
prosper, and yield her comfortable Wine; though the Olive shall deceive our
expectation of her fatness, and the Corne-fields shall not continue the
provision of their food to strengthen us; though the Sheep shall be plundered
out of their foldes, and the Oxen out of their stalles:

18. Yet will I resolve to solace my heart in the Lord, and to rejoice in the
God of my Salvation.

19. And it shall be my Prayer, and my Hope, that the Lord my God, will be my
strength and my safeguard: supply me with Patience, and Obedience, and Courage:
make my feet as nimble as Hearts feet, and so conduct me cheerfully, in the way
to those high places and Sanctuaries above, where I shall be set out of the
fear of all danger, in everlasting bliss.

And as a Testimony of my Joy, and Solace in that, I will take order with the
chief Master of the Music, to have this Prayer set to some Instrument, that
may help to rouse up my spirits, and my solace in God my Savior.

A farther enlargement in contemplation of the Melodious Music here defended,
and the sad Discord of these Times.
THe Honor and Praise of that our gracious Lord and Savior, is the
everlasting Joy, and Song of the holy Quire above. Where that it may be ours
(after the more-then- Babylonish Confusion, and Captivity, that we may live to
see here, in the persecution of our Souls, as well as of our Bodies) Let us
use the Prophet Habakkuk's Prayer, with his Spirit, and labor, as he did, to
place all our delight and content in God alone, and in his Glory. And, as men
desirous to join with that heavenly Quire, and add our Music to theirs
(which seems to be the sum of the Royal Prophets earnest invitation in the
last Psalm) Let us follow that Prophets advice that says, Praise him in his
Psalm. 150.1. Our latter Translation does well express (...) by Sanctuary, as
it is taken, Psalm. 68 24. and 78.55 and elsewhere.
Sanctuary. In his holy Temple above all other places (whatsoever some begin to
say) let him have those solemn melodious Praises. And praise him there (while
we may) Not only upon the Neginoth, as the Prophet Habakkuk does here: (...)
and calls for him that excels in that kind: calls for him at the
commemoration of a heavy, and public calamity (for such was the occasion of
the Prophets Prayer.)

Not only so. But, if you will go on with the sweet Singer of Israel, that put
all his doleful Penitential Prayers, into Musical Psalms, and therefore,
sure would leave out none of his Church-Musick, for any other occasions.

Praise him in the sound of the Trumpet: Psalm. 150.3.
praise him upon the Lute and Harp. Praise him in the Cymbals and Dances:
praise him upon the Strings and Pipe. Praise him upon the well-tuned Cymbals:
praise him upon the loud Cymbals. Let every thing that has breath praise the
Lord.
All this may well befit the Service of God in his material Temples here
below. And, in that above, not made with hands, (where all make but one
Congregation, and one Quire) if they do any thing else then praise God, yet
they do nothing more willingly. We may find them busy at it, in sundry places
of the Apocalypse.

In the 4th Chapter after the Doxologies of the four Creatures, Rev. 4.8, 10.
we have the 24 Elders casting their Crowns before the throne, and falling to
their Acclamations of divine Praise.

And, Chap. 5.8, 10, 11.
in the next Chapter, we have them every one with Harps and golden Phiales full
of odours, which are the Prayers of the Saints ( Prayers there again
accompanied with heavenly Music.) And at the Close of their Song, Ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thousand thousands, have no other task but that.

In the 7th Chapter: C. 7. 11.
All the Angels round about the throne, fall down upon their faces with the
like joyful worship.

After all this. C. 14. 2, 3.
The 14th Chapter acquaints us with the sweet voice of Harpers, and their
Angelical Harmony, accompanied with a new Song in the mouth of a hundred forty
four thousand, which were bought from the Earth.

Then again in the 15th Chapter, C. 15. 2, 3.
there is another great number, that have the Harpes of God, and sing the Song
of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb.

And lastly. C. 19. 1, 3.
The 19th Chapter tells us again and again, of a great multitude at their
several Halelujahs.

Now, if we must fly to mystical expositions, somewhat may be seen out of
what has been said. They specially cannot but see it, that can understand
greater mysteries of this Revelation, if they please. Therefore, after all this
Music in Heaven, and Earth, in the Prophet Habakkuk's Neginoth, in King
David's Psaltery, in the Angels Harpes and Voices (in all which Music and
Prayers, as well as Music and Praises are put together:) After all this, let
us leave our vain Scruples, obey the Dictates of our Mother Church, and with
so good Company, desire to join all together, both in our Prayers, and in our
hearty Praise, and Service, and Glory to God, which is the happy and welcome
employment of the glorious Angels and Saints above. They cease not, day nor
night, inviting one another, and saying; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts,
Rev. 4.8.
which was, and which is, and which is to come.

I Have said the more of Celestial Music, in this kind, because I desire we
should all fall in love with it, or at least, with that sweet Accord, and
Harmony and Consent, which is most eminent in that.

For, we are a miserable distracted Nation, out of all Tune, and out of all
Order, even to the wonder and astonishment of those that are about us, who not
long since, were as much taken with the admiration of our Conformity, and our
happy Peace. But we are now so much, or rather so all for Jarres and Discords,
that we are for nothing else. We are grown such Strangers, or rather such
deadly Enemies to Unity and Concord, and Uniformity, that we cannot endure a
motion for them, and are troubled at the very name, and offended with all that
will not dance after our Pipe, while we are so disordered. And all this, by
reason of some idle fancies and crotchets of our own, that have had too much
hold of our Thoughts, and carried them almost beyond the hope of all Recovery,
and true Reformation.

If all this be spoken, not only out of that Duty, and Charity, that binds us
to call upon others, which we think are ready to fall into a dangerous pit: but
with an eye to that Truth also, which every true Christian is bound to obey:
then why should not that which is said, be heard with Patience, and gladly
received of those, who say, They fight for Truth, though they take away our
Peace.

But if any thing be suspected, as spoken in the defense of some grand Error.
Let not that Error be showed us out of some new Revelations, which must
undertake to discover more then ever appeared to Saint John: who, by his Eagle,
seems to be pointed out, as the quickest sighted of all the divine Apostles,
and, as the loving Disciple, does so earnestly exhort us to Love one another,
and so urge the necessity of that Love, that the serious consideration of what
he writes were enough to make whole Armies of Christians throw down their
weapons, fall to mutual embraces, and resolve rather to be Armies of Martyrs,
then what they are.

From such Acts of Love, that are called for by the spirit of Truth, it is
pity we should be drawn away, in these last and worst days, by new pretended
Raptures, utterly unknown to that other divine Apostle, that was rapt up into
the third Heaven, where he heard some things indeed that might not be uttered
(which our new Enthusiasts never do) but none spoke more plainly then he did
of those two things, that trouble us more then they need do. That is, both
concerning the Ecclesiastical Government by Bishops, with the subordination of
Priests, and Deacons (clear enough in him, unless we call his Epistles to
Timothy and Titus into question:) and concerning the Duty of Christian Subjects
to their Kings, and Princes, which is as plainly enjoined by him, in his
Epistle to the Romans (unless that Chapter may be rased out, which says,
They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.) Romans 13.
And as plainly does the same Apostle foretell the present breach of that
Apostolical Precept, where he makes that known to Timothy, the first Bishop
of Ephesus, 1. Tim. 3.
which all our present Bishops, and the best part of their Flock, have now
found true to their cost.

Now, while some strive to delude us with strange Doctrines, and idle
Prephecies, newly started out of we know not what suspected corners, shall not
Saint Paul's Prophecy be observed and acknowledged, which we see and feel to
be so fulfilled? And shall not that be heard, which has been so long since,
and so clearly taught us, by those two great Apostles? Are we all for
Novelties, and such Popes and Patriarchs of our own Election, as shall make
those Novelties increase upon us every day? Yes. So it is. God help us.

We would have a new Religion, a new Church, a new State, a new Government, a
new England, all new by all means: whereas a new Nothing were far better for
us. For, if we should be desired to set down the Tenets of our new Religion,
and the ways of our new Policy and Government in Church and State: I doubt, in
all our new Illuminations and Directions, and what you will, we should not be
able to see, how to agree upon them for above one year. And then it were a
rare Almanac, that could be able to Prognosticate, how we should entertain
our selves for the year to come.

This is plain English, you will say. But we had better suffer our selves
(before we are too much engaged) to be thus told in plain English, what we are
going about, then run on we know not whither, to the hazard of the Curses of
all our Posterity, and somewhat worse then that.

But I will touch no more so roughly upon that sore. With all my Heart I wish
it well cured. For, while it continues as it is, no man shall dare to be a good
Christian and a good Subject, and venture to speak that which is Right and True
to a crooked and perverse Generation, but he may too soon meet with them, that
will rather take offense then instruction by it.

For, they that are most bold with God and Men in the breach of all divine and
humane Laws, would either be let alone, or told very gently of it. They would
have no bold kind of Metaphores, much less that bolder Rhetorical Figure,
which we call (...), or Liberty of speech. And yet, why should not that be
indulged to one side as well as to the other? or if more to one; Loosers have
more leave to talk (as we use to say.) And who sits down by more loss, and
so have more reason to expect a Liberty of speech, then they that (besides the
loss of that Liberty which they lately had in the use of their Laws, and
Friends, and Fortunes) are still in danger of loosing that which is dearest to
them, the Liberty of their Religion, and of their Conscience?

It were not amiss, if they that have made us so miserable, specially the
prime Incendiaries, and maine Fomenters of that under which we groan, could be
well chidden out of their new Fancies and Quarrels and Hypocrisies, into the
old sober way of true Godliness, Jam. 3.17.
which partakes of that Wisdom from above, that is first pure, and then
peaceable.

But, if that cannot be done, we shall be willing to take any course: 1. Cor.
9.22.
to become all things to all men, that, by all means, we may win some, and
so be Followers of the great Apostle. Who, Gal. 3.1.
in one place bespeaks the foolish Galatians, in a kind of chiding way, with
(...); who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth? In another
place he charges and conjures the Thessalonians, 1. These. 5.27.
with (...): in another place, 1. Cor. 1.10.
he beseeches the Corinthians, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they
would all speak one thing, and that there might be no dissentions amongst
them, but all would be knit together in one mind, and in one judgment: and
elsewhere he does likewise beseech the Romans, by the mercies of God, Romans 12.1.
to give up their body a living sacrifice, etc. and not to fashion themselves
like unto this world, etc.

And if that would any thing prevail, most willing should we be, to beg of
them, and (in the Apostles words) beseech them to be reconciled, 1. Cor. 5.20.
and to that end to think sadly of those heavy Distractions, and Public
Calamities of these times, that are able to make any good Heart bleed, and
dissolve any tender Eyes into fountains of tears.

And in the same hearty desire, wherein we would beg that of them, we do
earnestly entreat all true Protestants for their best endeavors, and (amongst
them) for the help of their speedy, and humble, and importunate Prayers, that
God would please to look down in mercy and compassion upon us all. Which
cannot be the Prayers of any, but such as are willing to look with Christian
pity and compassion upon one another, and to embrace the best means of
establishing the old way and the good way, wherein our forefathers had settled
us, Jer. 6.16.
and left us happy, to the envy and admiration of all our Neighbors.

But if we are so bewitched, that neither plain terms, nor humble entreaties,
can any way work upon us, then (before I conclude) I will return to the same
language, wherein I began this enlargement of my Meditations, and wish that
some divine Artist had Music enough to charm us into our right sense again,
and make the strling of the old and true Protestant Religion, and Peace and
Policy, put a new Song of joy and Thankesgiving into our mouths.

O how good and pleasant a thing would it be, to see us all, like Brethren,
unammonsly combined in one Form of Civil and Religious Government; and of
Divine Service, and worship? How good and pleasant, to have us all agree with
the blessed Angels in one Heavenly Song, of Glory to God on High, in Earth
Peace, and Good will toward Men?

A Quire of Angels brought it first to us, in their Music from Heaven, at the
happy Birth of the Prinde of Peace.

If our Christmas, that comes on so fast, in a worthy Commemoration of that
blessed Birth, might have that truly made our Christmas Carole: and all our
Hearts and Mouths and Hands truly joined to make it good: this Christmas
would crown all the rest of our days with Joy and Felicity.

Joy in the behalf of our Selves, our Children, and our Childrens Children, to
whom we cannot leave a better Legacy, then that of Peace, and (with that) Joy
in regard of our Gracious Sovereign, and His Royal Progeny, which should be
as dear to us, as our own lives, and the care of our own Poserity. The rather,
because we have a King, whose unwearied Patience and Clemency, and frequent
loving Overtures of Peace, deserve a greater Conquest of hearts, then ever was
attained by the Sword.

With which happy Conquest; God, of his mercy bestow upon us that blessing of
Peace, which has in one word, all the Rich treasures of Heaven and Earth,
looked up in it, as in one fair casket, even Felicity it self, which is but
the Rest and Peace of all our Desires. Felicity here being nothing else then
Gratia and Pax, a gracious Peace, and felicity hereafter, Gloria and Pax, a
glorious Peace, in heavenly Mansions.

Where we all desire that we may be admitted to chant the Praises of God to all
Eternity: and with Angels and Archangels, and all the Powers of Heaven,
ascribe unto Him all Honor and Glory, and Power, and Dominion, and Majesty.
AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface. p. 3. l. 14. wandering, r. wandering. p. 4. l. 12. obseurity, r.
obscurity. and l. 14. r. though as his second appearing is called by Saint
Paul, (Tit. 2.13.) so his first appearing is called by the Greek Fathers (...).

Paraphrase. In marg. P. 3. r. (...). P. 8. pro (...) r. (...). P. 11. l. 4.
yet, r. it. p. 15. l. 18. for, out of the land of Canaan, r. toward the land of
Canaan. p. 16. l. 5. r. in thine own: and not theirs but --


