A Strange and VVonderfull RELATION Of a Flight of Pismires, That fell in the
Town of Lichfield, and about the City of Coventrey.

WITH The manner of their appearance in the Air; And their settling in the Town:
Attested by several credible Witnesses.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for E. H. MDCLXIX.

A Strange and Wonderful Relation OF A Flight of Pismires, etc:
THere are two things which are in this, as all former Ages, worthy of the
severest reproof, and they are Credulity, or a too light and easy belief on
the one hand; and Incredulity, when men will not acknowledge or assent unto what
is reasonably inferred; and this later too frequently befalls Wise men, though
as absurd as the apprehensions of Fools, and the credulity of the people which
promiscuously swallow any thing. We are not intending to obtrude upon the World
any far-fetcht Foreign matter, which a man had much better to believe than to
go to prove or to beg your compassion from some Poetical Metamorphosis, but
briefly and in the words of truth to give you the Relation of some few matters
which have by the Attestation of many Credible Witnesses, happened here within
our own World since the later end of July last. The things indeed some of them
for their matter and circumstance so strange and unheard of, that I have not
met with a Parallel in any Ancient or Modern Inquirer into the strange
Accidents of present or past Times.

In the Town of Lichfield in Staffordshire, a place of remark, in its being a
Bishops See, on the one and thirtieth day of July last, being Saturday, between
the hours of twelve and one a clock, in the time of a full Market, (that being
a market day there) on a sudden there appeared an innumerable Swarm of
Pismires or Ants with wings, which by their close keeping in a body, therewith
and with their wings clouded and made dark the Sky; So many of them settled
together in the Marketplace, and in several other Streets and Houses, that the
ground was covered, and the market-people so annoyed, that they were forced to
break up and be gone sooner by far then they used to do; for by Three of the
Clock in the Afternoon the whole Market was dissolved: both People and Horses
so grievously stung and tormented therewith, that they were forced to make what
escape they could from them: Some Horses through the torment of their stinging
ran up and down more like wild Creatures, than such as had been accustomed to
the Saddle or burdens. Several of the Workmen that were employed about the
repair of Lichfield Minster, were stung with them: And the People that were at
Harvest, Work in the Fields, were forced to leave their business. After their
continuance in this manner for three or four hours, or more, many of them fell
down dead both in the Streets and Houses, but especially in the Streets in such
prodigious quantities, that the Horses Hoofs were covered over treading among
them: and not much less number in the houses, so that the People were
compelled to sweep them out together; which being by that means brought
together, made several heaps of them, to the bigness of a bushel of Corn or
larger; They were judged by several of those that saw them, to have come out
of the East. At length, the living remainder of them, which was not small, took
their Flight to the Towns-end toward the North, where dividing themselves, as
it were, into two bodies, they parted, some of them flying one way, some
another: yet notwithstanding left both their terror and marks behind them
among the People, who at the strangeness of the Prodigy were so much
affrighted, that they knew not what to say or do, but very much admired the
strangeness of the thing. These Pismires or Ants were not like those that are
commonly found in Mole-hills, but a great deal bigger; they were judged to be
about the bigness of a Spider.

The like thing about the same time happened (with some small varying
circumstances) about the City of Coventry in Warwickshire, twenty miles from
Lichfield, where multitudes of them fell, and in several other places; but we
need not run over the Particulars anew, to trouble the Reader twice with one
thing.

This is the substance of what is received from persons of Eminency and
Reputation, of whom Mr. Archbold, Register, is one, Mr. Boylston an Apothecary;
Mr. John Rawlins, Town Clerk; Mr. Samuel Mar^^and, one of His Majesty's
Servants, and Mr. James Rixam, all Eyewitnesses thereof, besides many more,
which would be too tedious here to mention.

FINIS.

