Strange and Terrible News, from HOLLAND, AND YARMOUTH. BEING, A Perfect
Relation, concerning the Inundation of the South Sea; And of its drowning the
rich and populous City of Amsterdam; with diverse other places in Friesland,
Holland, Brabant, and Flanders, and the names of them.

ALSO, The Overflowing of the River of Rhine, and sinking 60 Parish Churches,
and drowning 100000 men, women and children; and how they row in Boats near
Amsterdam, over the tops of houses.

TOGETHER, With the Breaking in of the Sea at Soal (near Yarmouth) drowning a
great part of the Country and many Cattle; Also casting many Ships upon the
Land, and forcing others to Sea in that storm.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Wood. 1651.

A Perfect Relation, concerning the In-undation of the South Sea; and the
drowning of the rich and populous City of Amsterdam; with diverse other places
in Holland, Brabant, and Flanders.
SIR,
MAn, though he be absolute in himself, and stands upon his own Bottom, yet may
be wrought upon by examples and comparisons with others; for by that means he
may see what he is, or what he may be; For events are not so confined to any
one special subject or Country, but that they may be as incident to another;
and none can plead a freedom to be exempted, whiles our infirmities lay us all
open to the Rod of Divine Justice; therefore, since mitigations of punishments
are new mercies, let our afflictions heighten your thankfulness. Sir, on the 5
of March (new style) there happened a mervailous in-undation of waters in this
City and in several other parts of Holland and Friesland, occasioned by the
overflowing of the South Sea, that (to the remembrance of the oldest man
living) the like has not been known of in these Provinces; I am persuaded you
will have it severally related in London, and perhaps some will make our
miseries appear greater then they are to the eye of the world; therefore for
your satisfaction, and the rest of my good friends, I have endeavored to send
you a brief, but true account of the state of that business.

The wind blowing hard Northwest, caused an extraordinary Flood, which at
first we regarded not, but the Wind keeping in that corner, drove the water so
excessively into the City, that it overflowed the Bourgwals, and broke into
Cellars and Warehouses to the utter ruin of diverse people (especially on the
South Side of the City) who were forced to take to their chambers for refuge;
but by the mercy of God, the water breaking through St. Anthony's Dike,
preserved the City, drowning the Diemer-meer, Bildmer-meer, and s^veral other
places, destroying men, women, and children, beasts and Cattle; and had the
Wind continued Northwest 3 hours longer, this City had not suffered alone, for
Haerlem would have been destroyed and washed away, and Leyden, Delf, and the
Hague, had been also endangered; but the wind turning Southwest they are
preserved, and we hope by Gods blessings and our own endeavors, to be suddenly
freed. In Brabant the Sea has likewise exceeded his bounds, and destroyed two
Poulders or In-lands, the one called Ousterweel, and the other Calou: Also
Flanders is not free from suffering in this kind, for Albertus Poulder lies
quite under water; And in Friesland there are several places destroyed, whose
names we are not yet acquainted with. There are many reported to have lost
their lives in (and about Amsterdam, in) this in-undation, but the certainty of
this being not yet known, I have forborne to insert it; resolving in my next to
give you ample satisfaction: Entreating you to accept of this, from the hand of
him, who assuredly is;

Amsterdam, March. 10. 1651. still. nov. SIR, Your faithful honourer, G. T.

The true Copy of a Letter, sent by a Gentleman now resident in Amsterdam, to
an Uncle of his dwelling in London.
SIR,
MY respects remembered, etc. These few lines are to let you understand the
great judgment of the Lord against this Nation; About a Month since, the River
of Rhine breaking down its banks, the water over-flowed with such violence,
that it sunk 60 Parish Churches. And his anger being not altogether appeased,
on the 23 of this month, there happened such an extraordinary springtide in
Amsterdam, that housekeepers were driven to betake themselves to their
chambers, by reason of the deepness of the waters; but it pleased God, that the
water forcing its passage through a bank, conveyed the water thorough the City
into parts adjacent, by which means we were preserved, otherwise we had
undoubtedly perished; but the country by that means is so over-flowed, that
they row with their boats over the tops of houses; Also the water ran into
Friesland, insomuch, that it is supposed there cannot be less then one hundred
thousand people drowned; Thus desiring to make an end of these my sad lines,
which are neither delightful to write, nor pleasant to read; I rest,

SIR, Yours to command till death: Peter Malbone.
Amsterdam, Feb. 28. still. vet. 1651.
The Copy of a Letter from Yarmouth, touching the Breaking in of the Sea, at
Soal-Marsh, and drowning part of the Country.
SIR,
SInce my last of the 3d instant, here has happened a great and sudden change,
to the great amazement of the inhabitants in these parts, and the impoverishing
of many; the Almighty having been pleased once more to chastise us (as we may
justly attribute it) for our stubborness and disobedience in walking contrary
to his Laws and Ordinances, and refusing to be humbled for our sins, and to
return praise and thanks to him for his former mercies, and deliverances,
vouchsafed to us the last year, when the Sea made inundations in diverse places,
and yet did not much harm: But (about the 5 instant) the Sea broke into the
Marshes at Soal (a place not far from this Town) with such violence, that it
has drowned a great part of the Country, and many Cattle; But the Ships that
lay at Anchor in the River of Soal, were by this means greatly endangered, some
breaking their Cables, others (having not time to weigh Anchor) cut them,
putting out to Sea, yet notwithstanding there were some driven ashore, but we
are using all means possible to free those Ships, and drein the Marshes.

Yarmouth, March the 6. 1651.
FINIS.

