REASONS why those of the People called Quakers, Challenged by George Keith, to
meet him at Turner's Hall the Eleventh of this Month called June, 1696. Refuse
their Appearance at his Peremptory Summons.
WHereas G. K. has after his wonted Irregular and Unruly manner, Challenged
diverse of us to Defend our Selves against such Charges as he has to Exhibit
against us at Turner's Hall* These are to Certify all whom it may concern,
That the Reasons why we Decline any such Meeting, are as follow:

1. Because the said G. K. has given us such frequent Proofs of his very
passionate and abusive Behavior, at the many more Select Meetings we have had
with him, in all manner of Sweetness, Long-suffering, and Patience on our side,
to satisfy and preserve him from these Extremes: That we cannot assure our
selves now of any better Entertainment, or that the Meeting can have any
desirable Success for a through Information.

2. We Decline to meet, because it is not an agreed Meeting on both Sides,
which it ought to have been; and where that is not, or cannot be Adjusted, the
Press is the next fair way and Expedient, which he has begun with, and now
seems to decline; Nor has he sent us a Copy of his Charge or Indictment
against us, which also he ought to have done.

3. That he has two of our Books which lie hard at his Door, in Vindication of
us and our Doctrines from his Exceptions, and which he has not yet Answered; so
that he is not upon Equal Terms with us; and therefore we think his Challenge,
Appointment and Summons, unfair; and that all that are not partial will be of
the same mind with us.

4. Such Public and Unlimited Meetings are too often attended with Heats,
Levity, and Confusion, and Answer not the End desired by sober and enquiring
Men. Besides, that it lets up a Practice that Authority may judge to be an
Abuse to our Liberty, and so draw that under Reflection, as no Friend to the
Civil Peace.

5. We know not what Religion or Persuasion this Wavering Man is of, or what
Church or People he adheres to, or will receive him, with his vain
Speculations, that have led him to desert us; Nor who are accountable to us for
him and his Irregularities and Abuses; the generality of such Assemblies
usually making ill Auditors, worse Judges, and no good Security for our
Satisfaction. And we must therefore take leave to say, It seems to us an
indirect way of Disquieting and Invading our present Liberty, That so
Irreligious a Meeting should be held, whose End is to abuse other Men for their
Religion. If this should be Imitated by all the several sorts of different
Persuasions in this City, what Heaps and Confusions must necessarily ensue!

6. Wherefore lastly, Be it known unto all, That for the sake of Religion, the
Liberty granted us, and the Civil Peace, we decline to meet him; and not from
any Apprehensions we have of his Abilities, or our own Consciousness of Error,
or Injustice to the said G. K, whose weak and unbridled Temper we know is such,
that what Learning and Parts he has, have not been able to balance and
support him on less Occasions so that we may say they are in ill hands; and if
he proceed as he begins, they will be employed to an ill End, which his (poor
Man!) cannot but be, unless he change his Course; which we heartily pray for,
that a place of Repentance he may find; and, through a true Contrition, the
remission of his great Sin of Envy, and Evilly Entreating the Lords People and
Way, which we profess, and which he the said George Keith has long and lately
both Professed, and Zealously Vindicated, as such.

London, 10th 4th Month, 1696. Signed in Behalf of the Persons and People
(called Quakers) concerned. Tho. Story. Ben. Bealing.


London, Printed by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street, 1696.


