AN IRON ROD PUT INTO The Lord PROTECTORS Hand, To break all Antichristian
Powers in pieces.

OR, A Discourse, which tends to a Spiritual War with all Sects and
Self-opinions, which are the Churches enemies: will bring Englands everlasting
happiness, and join all other Lands into the body of Christ's Church, to serve
God with with one consent, Zeph. 3.9.

All which was discovered to John Sanders of Harburn, near Brimingham: By true
Apparitions, Revelations, and many several Visions, as the second Book shows.

Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel, Psalm. 2.9. Rev. 2.27.

The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall see my
name: hear the rod, and who has appointed it, Micah. 6.9.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Angel in Cornhil,
1655.

The Table of the Second Book.
THis Second Book of John Saunders shows a true relation how and where he was
called at noon-time of the day, on the 11. day of June 1643. by a true and a
terrible apparition; and further how the Lord revealed his secret intent, and
confirmed it to him by true signs, and showed him the greatest remarkable
revolutions, turnings, chances, and changes, as have been ever since between
King and Parliament, which he then declared before many: And what way the
Church shall be re-builded, to bring all Lands into one Christian Body, and
Union of Eaith.

Surely says the Lord, then will I turn to the people a pure language, that
they may call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with one consent,
Zephany 3.9.

And a true Relation of what horrible afflictions God suffered him to be sundry
and many times cast into by Satan and his instruments, because he did at first
neglect the message of the Lord of Hosts, conterning King and Parliament,
Church and State.

Dear Christian Reader,
IN this Second Book of John Sanders, here is shown a true Relation of the
manner how God called me to this work in as wonderful a way as he did Paul, at
noon-time of the day, by an open apparition, on the 11. day of June 1643.

Page 37

As I was employed in a Fair with my Master, Mr. Robert Bloomer, it pleased my
heavenly Master and Father in Christ, to cause me to see the Apparition then at
that immediate time: But God knowing that I was inclined by nature to be hard
of belief, like Thomas, who would not believe unles he felt and saw both; or
like the men of our late days, which will not believe but that Apparitions,
Revelations, and true Visions are now ceased, it pleased God to convert me from
that erroneous unbelieving mind, in as wonderful a manner as he did Paul at
noon-time of the day, and caused me to feel his indignation, as the reading of
this Book will tell you in what manner; and at noon again four days after, how
the Lords holy Angel was sent to comfort my comfortless condition by secret
and strange Revelation, and on the morrow at night after, and on the next
morning, being Friday, the 17. day, to confirm me by trial, and terrible
Visions, and strange temptations, and then to comfort me with his holy Angel,
and to give me a command to go to King and Parliament, as it were to be a
Herald of Arms, or heavenly Ambassador from the King of Kings.

And to tell first the King what would befall him unless such things were agreed
on as this Book shows; and then to go to the Parliament to show what they
must do, or else the like and worse judgment would befall them at last, unless
they would do as Zacheus did when Christ called him: Yet the Kings Son, and a
remnant of them; must and would agree at last; for upon their agreement is the
greatest means under God to call the Jews, and convert the whole world into
one union of Faith.

Then I was showed what misery I was to undergo if I refused to go on Gods
message, yet must go at last. This book of my troubles shows the manner what
I have endured.

First, of my going to speak with the King when he was prisoner at Holmby, and
in what manner I was prevented from speaking with the King himself, and then
what I told Colonel Graves would befall first to the King, and then the
Parliament, if such things were not done as this Book speaks of; and what great
troubles befell me after by Satan's malicious working against me, by my wife and
her kindred and some of my own, and many wicked men besides, and of Gods great
miraculous deliverance and mercy to me. p. 44, 46, 47, 48

Secondly, of my putting out of a little Book about the time that the Levellers
rose against the Parliament, called A Description of the Ten Commandments
concerning this late War, laying open the misery of the Church, by reason of
covetous and new fangled Teachers were crept into it for want of true
Church Government: And then what troubles befell me again, and how some of her
friends urged her to be divorced from me, and of their persecuting of me. p.
54, 55

Thirdly, the Bill of Divorcement put in print in this Book, given her six
years since after this manner, which she and they were the causers of. p. 58

Fourthly, the manner how God compelled me to foretell Worcester fight, and the
manner and time of it, and how the King would be overthrown if he fought, and
eminent witness produced that heard me speak it. p. 62.

Fifthly, the humble petition of John Sanders to the Lord Protector, of his
often coming to London since to speak with the Parliament, to tell that
Parliament that they could not stand, and to show them what was the cause.
Colonel Barkstead can witness it that God compelled me to tell him, and what
would be the cause. p. 53

Sixthly, of my coming out of Ireland near 6. weeks before the little
Parliaments dissolution, and to tell some of them that Gods decree was so gone
out against them, that they would be dissolved about the shortest day in the
year: Witness Colonel Barkestead, which is now the Lieutenant of the Tower.
And then of my going into our Country, of my being compelled by God to
prefigure and declare in Brimingham what was then doing that day in London, 88.
miles from London, and then of my being thrown into prison. p. 64

Seventhly, of my being compelled by the dictates of Gods spirit to speak and
write many times, and make many journeys since to the present power, and the
last Parliament, to tell them what has and will befall them, unless they will
deny themselves and seek God. p. 65

Eighthly, of several Visions as I have had this year concerning the Church
being rebuilded suddenly, and the Lord Protectors Council and King Charles his
agreeing: And how God revealed the plot of the Countrys-rising to me, and
caused me to carry a Letter to the Tower of it, and to deliver it before the
rising was. p. 66, 67

Woe is me if I declare not faithfully that which the Lord declares to me,
either to King or Parliament:

Gourteous Reader, some Errors have escaped the press, yet but one worth
observation. In page 38. line 32. for Monday, read Wednesday.

The Table of the First Book.
FIrst, here is showed in this Book to your Highness, and all others that
please to hear or read it, a Petition to move you with all expedition to go
about the work of God to find out true Religion, for the beautifying of Gods
Church, and then to build it up. Page 1.

Secondly; the manner and time how David's Tabernacle fell, as well from the
Christian Gentiles which were in Gospelcovenant, as it did from the 12. Tribes
of Israel in Rehoboams time under the Law, and how there was never no true
Religion in one body since they parted. p. 2.

Thirdly, a short description of the Protestants ruinating in this land by this
late war. p. 5.

Fourthly, the true manner described how David's fallen Tabernacle should be
begun to be raised as in the days of old, Amos 9, proved by Law and
Gospel-rule to be the true Channel for the Church to run in first in this land;
and no other way then this can be proved, which will bring the whole world to
one union of faith, to serve God with one consent, Zeph. 3.9. p. 6.

Fifthly, what a wilderness and infectious, poisoned, and scattered condition
the Church and people of God are in for want of a Church Government, according
to Patriarchal, Prophetical, Apostolical, and Discipled orders, the true manner
of which is laid down in this Book. p. 13.

Sixthly, true comparative signs, first by the Stars, secondly by the Moon,
that Christ's true Religion is ready to break forth into beautifulness more
then ever it was in. p. 15.

Seventhly, a godly direction and admonition for his Highness the Lord
Protector, to take the like care for the choosing of a High Priest to be Head in
chief for Christ's Church, as Abraham's eldest servant did for a wife for Isaac,
the figure of Christ, Genesis 24. This will be the beginning of a fifth Monarchy
under Christ.

Eighthly, the manner of the High Priests receiving of the number of 12.
Apostolical Bishops to be Head Fathers of the 12. spiritual Tribes of Israel,
which are now scattered abroad, Jam. 1. by the holy order of laying on of
hands, and of his and their receiving the number of 70. under them, to make a
body above the ordinary Ministers of Christ's Church, p. 22.

Ninthly, the true manner how to prove them whether their calling and election
be of God or not, by going to a spiritual war, which is a contending for the
faith, or casting rods and lots with all Sects and self-opinions, which are the
Churches enemies, Number. 17.18. Matthew. 27.55. Joh. 19.23. Jude. p. 25.

Tenthly, the manner of the Whore of Babels fall, and all false forms in one day
in this land to be a patterned example for the whole world to follow; and for
the calling of the Jews, Turks, Pagans, and Infidels to the true faith, p. 27.

Eleventhly, it shows the glorious time of the new Jerusalems situated
government, and of the Churches glory. p. 31

Twelfthly, it shows how that King Charles the Second-is appointed by God to
be his chief King under Christ over the whole world; and the Lord Protector, if
he will be obedient to the word of the Lord, to be the second under him, as
Abraham's faithful servant to be chief Ruler for the King; for by their
agreement the Jews and Turks are to be called. p. 36.

And all that assist them, and are faithful in their places, that are now in
power, and will be obedient willingly now they see Gods truth and righteous
peace ready to break forth, to yield to God and his true anointed King, if they
lose a Captains place, Major, Colonel, or General, which now is held by
troublesome fear, then it will be no more loss to them then theattaining to a
Knight, Lord, Judge, Earl, Duke, or Deputy, King or Prince, by this peaceable
agreement, til the end of all things come to dissolution over this Land and
many more for them to be Governors.

As I am commanded of God to threaten those that have gotten into other men's
possessions, contrary to godliness or good consciences, and so prove themselves
by it to be enemies in that to Gods glorious Gospel, and the Primitive Churches
practice; so I am commanded of God to threaten all with the danger of their own
ruin, and the displeasure of God, that will not forbear plotting and mutyning,
and so hurt the Kings agreement. Do you think it is possible to stand in a
strong wind, and throw chaff against the wind, and it not fly back upon you? Do
you think it is possible to do Gods work before his time be? It is but the
Devils policy to cause you so to think. God is near, arising to deliver his
people, and to restore his Church: Therefore wait patiently till the time be,
for the day is near a dawning.

TO HIS HIGHNESS the Lord PROTECTOR.
MAy it please your Highness to vouchsafe the reading of this little Book,
which God caused me your servant in the Lord John Sanders, to indite unto you;
who has come oftentimes on purpose to speak with you, being compelled by the
power of the holy Ghost, (which enableth me to foretell things) to show you what
Gods will is toward you, if you will believe and obey the Lord.

O my Lord, woe is me if I be either fearful or negligent to give you and all
others warning, since God has called me, and showed me a sword of Justice
which proceeds out of his mouth, which he is now arising to draw forth, not
only against you and your power, but against all the chief governors of the
world, unless speedily you and they deny your own ways and embrace Gods
ways: Those that so do, it shall go well with them.

My Lord, I shall in these first lines forbear making use of any other men's
labors, study, or Scripture phrases, lest you should rather think it to be
brain knowledge then the dictates of Gods Spirit.

I conceive your Highness believes that where God appears by visions, and
Christ takes up the room, the holy Ghost carries them on by a real true
power. they will be so guided, and showed Gods ways and will, according to their
gift and talent, to write or speak the mind of God without either study or
natural parts, when God pleases.

The Scriptures are given of God to be as a touchstone for them that fear God
and obey his will, to try the spirits whether they be of God, therefore let them
be your Judge; but have especial care of wresting them: endeavor to let them
arest you in this life, and you shall have rest in the life to come: Truly, my
Lord, if such like counsel, which natural men will not own, but count
foolishness, do not guide you, you will not only stumble in points of Religion,
as many do to fall from heavenly things, but you will fall from the high place
that Gods providence has raised you to. Which by yielding obedience to God and
his King Jesus Christ, and him whom he will set upon his holy mountain, you may
stand firm; otherways it will be very slippery.

O for the Lords sake, who has set you up to be a protector of the people,
endeavor to build your self a sure foundation: Embrace this truth, take good
heed to hold fast the good old ways of Gods worship: but you must first find
it, for it has been a long time lost: take heed therefore of either despising,
or not believing and obeying the spirit of Gods prophecy.

My Lord, I have had still a great fear of you, but it proceeds from the love
of God in Christ which binds me to fear, love honor and obey all that God
does ordain or permit to be Rulers or governors over us.

When natural men are lifted up high, and seem to obtain much credit in the
world, then they may be lower, and farther from the ways of God then before,
the God of this world having blinded their eyes, to keep them hoodwinkt from
the glorious light of the gospel of peace, which offers peace to all.

Behold I speak not these things against you or your power, for I wish you all
prosperity and health, and a settled peace in righteousness and true holiness;
but God has sent me to show you your danger by plots, and which way to take to
appease his wrath.

The manner of David's fallen Tabernacle, how it fell, as well from the gentile
Christians, as the natural Jews.
My Lord, the means to bring us to a true settled and established peace, is
first to seek Gods kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, and all things else
needful shall be added thereunto; as when England formerly did flourish, both
in Church and State, and was preserved more then any other Nation from plots,
conspiracies, inbred-enemies, and foreign foes, as namely, the Spanish
invasion, the Powder plot, and many more, which for brevity sake must be omited.

It Is true, there was a time that we were in Covenant with God, the temporal
state or Magistrate was a wall to the Church and Ministry, yet the Church in
that time was not without spots, or State without corruptions.

The Church was never a pure Church, free from blemishes, since the Primitive,
Apostolical, and Discipled flourishing time; Job. 38.7.
when the morning Stars sang together under the light, glory, and peace, which
was obtained by the mercy and love of God in Christ, that immaculate Lamb, and
his twelve Apostles, Meaning the Church was but one body serving God with one
consent.
which were to be Rulers or Judges of the twelve spiritual tribes of Israel:
then as Jacob and his twelve sons were the first chief natural heads, so Christ
and his twelve Apostles were the last chief spiritual Fathers or Brethren that
laid the foundation under Christ, to bring all nations under the
Gospel-Covenants, the which as many as believe and are obedient to, they are
Abraham's Sons by faith, and Citizens of the new Jerusalem, whose builder and
founder is God.

The old Jerusalem then flourished, when David's natural Son Soloman was King
over the twelve Tribes of Israel, when he had built the Temple and dedicated it
to the Lord by prayer, and religious feasting, he was in Covenant with God.
Those were peaceable, plentiful and golden days for Church and state.

The new Jerusalem will never be in her excellency of glorious beauty; til God
has joined the two sticks into one, Ephraim and Judah: Ezekiel. 37.16, 17, 18, 19.
I mean the natural seed and spiritual seed under the seamlesse garment of one
government under David's spiritual Son, the second Solomon, then will that time
appear that Christ will restore the Kingdom of Israel to be under one
government, and one body for the Church and State, which never has been since
Judah and Israel parted in Rehoboams and Ieroboams time; for as Solomon and his
Son Rehoboam were the only chief Cause or instruments of their parting, one
by Idolatry, and the other by slighting or despising the counsel of the
Ancient; and following the counsel of young men, who were puffed up with pride
and covetousness, like the men of our late days, and so caused the Kings
government to be rent in pieces by Gods Prophet, 1 Kings 11.30, 31, 32.
signifying the greatest part of the House of Jacob to revolt from the house of
David, which are not reconciled to this day.

Just in the same manner fared it with the Christian Gentiles which Christ and
his twelve Apostles first planted in the true Apostolical Catholic order: in
one body under one head who had a seamless garment of pure government, which in
process of time was in a flourishing condition in one body of spiritual
government: in those prosperous days of peace and true Religion, most men gave
themselves wholly to build and beautify Gods house, being charitable minded in
hospitality and Christian duty: in those days men did shine by godly pious,
conversation without flattery or dissembling hypocrisy, showing themselves, as
Solomon says, Aples of Gold pictured with studs of Silver.

But while many slept in security, Satan sowed tares, which for want of being
weeded out of the Church in due time, caused corruption to creep in by degrees;
and at last to break out into idolatry, strife, and heresy, then the Christian
vail of Religious duties was rent in twain, as Christ signified at his death:
by the renting of the vail of the temple, it is to be understood of the renting
and destruction of the Christian Temples by devision, as well as the Jewish
ceremonial Law, of which for brevity sake many proofs for confirmation must be
omitted; but this I give you to understand that David's Tabernacle was raised,
as well to the Christians Gospel covenant as to the Jews and natural Israelites
under the Law, and likewise so it fell: you may question me, saying, how can
you prove that. I answer, When the Catholic Church first passed by divisions,
and gross errors, into jars and open wars, and to part from one real body
which was planted to be over twelve spiritual Tribes under one head in Christ's
Church, Abraham being their Father by true Faith, they being all spiritual
brethren in Christ; then began they to kill, plot, persecute, and revile one
against another, pretending for Religion, but contrary to Christ's covenant, or
the Apostles doctrine.

And so to this day we continue reviling, and hating one another, and they
calling us Heretics that are Protestants, and we calling them gross
Idolatrous worshipers, yet neither of us without great errors, and so we
continue resting Christ's Gospel Truth in unrighteousness, by making corrupt
Laws, on purpose to persecute and destroy one another by Satan's malice,
contrary to Christ and his Apostles rule, or the true Primitive Churches
practice.

A short description of the ruinating of the Protestant Religion in this Land.
THe only cause of the controversies between King and Parliament, was first
pretended to raise up the Protestants against the Papists: some of the
Protestants which were ticed to begin these late wars, but contrary to Christ's
command and Gospel-rule, or the Apostles doctrine, to erect Christ's Church by
unnatural bloody war, therefore God suffered the Spirit of division to arise
among themselves, and to leave the Papists standing, and like unnatural
brethren they have ruinated themselves. I mean the Protestant Church and all
her governments, and the High Priest, and all that Apostolical, Discipled
household cast out for their corruption, when it was grown to a ripe head, much
like unto Ely, as a judgment from the Lord, 1 Samuel 4.

All this came to pass by being carried on by the pretense of a religious
reformation, but God suffered the instruments of his wrath to pluck the
Protestant Church government to pieces, when it was so old that it could stand
no longer. The chief workmen that did begin it wear covetous and new fangled
Teachers, whose Religion has long time hanged on the deceiving hinges of
strange opinions.

These things have been so far from plucking the Church of Rome down, that they
have given many great causes for it to stand firmer then it did before; and to
cause many to cleave to their Church. The Church of Rome as she now stands
will fall, but that must be done by love and a spiritual war as follows.

And as the late several chosen Parliaments were Axes and Sawes to hew down and
part a sunder corrupted governments. So God has ordained and put your
Highness chief now in power to build up and join both for Church and State,
all things in better order then they were before this many hundred years:
therefore take the founders and builders of the first Jewish and Christian
Churches for your example

The way to raise up David's fallen Tabernacle, If fire have burned houses, and
good food has surfeited men's bodies, for want of being carefully used: shall
we never use fire or food more, for the former abuse of them?

Truly, my Lord, it is a fit comparison for these things.


as in the days of old, Amos 9.
HAving now declared the renting and dividing of Christ's seamlesse garment, my
task is now to show your Highness how to raise up the Churchs ruins, and
build it up as in the days of old, therefore take the founders of the Jewish
and Christian Churces for your example.

First my Lord, you must set up a Patriarchal, and Apostolical true reformed
Episcopal order; twelve Patriarchs under the Law, twelve Apostles under the
Gospel; the twelve Founders-, Bishops and Rulers of the Church, under one
Spiritual head Christ Jesus.

As Abraham and Sarah are called the Father and Mother of all the Faithful, so
Christ in God is called the Father, the true Church, the Mother, called the
City or new Jerusalem that is to be sent down from heaven, Rev. 21.10. which
City or new Jerusalem Saint John saw to have twelve gates, and at the gates
twelve Angels, that is, Bishops, Rev. 3. to the Angels of the seven Churches of
Asia, that is, the Bishops of the seven Churches, and the names written therein
of the twelve Tribes of Israel, whose glory God caused to shine like precious
stones, Rev. 21.11, 12, 14.

And the wall of the City had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the
Lambs, twelve Apostles, which twelve Apostles were twelve Bishops, as appears
Acts 1.20. let another take his Bishopric, Psalm. 69.25. and Psalm. 109.8. there
was such a necessity of twelve in chief, that Christ's Ministry could not be
carried on after Judas his fall without that number, Act. 1.25. Isai. 63.11, 16.

Abraham in a typical way, signifies God the Father, Isaac is the figure of
Christ, Rebeccah is the espoused Church of Christ, Jacob is a representation of
the Holy Ghost, the which holy Ghost, or Jacob must beget twelve Patriarchs or
twelve Apostles, which were the Founders, Bishops and Fathers under God in
Christ, of the old Jerusalem, Jewish and Christian, and must be of the new
Jerusalem which is to come.

So likewise, when Ioshuah was about to enter Canaan the Lord caused him to
choose twelve men out of every several Tribe a man to bear twelve stones before
the Ark, thorough Jordan, and to take them where the Priests feet stood firm,
which stones they were to set up for 12 pillars in Gilgal; and he set up twelve
more in the midst of Jordan in the place where the Priests feet stood that bare
the Ark of Gods covenant, Joshua 4. which 12 pillars being set up in natural
Canaan for a memorial of the dividing of Jordan; and being carried on the
shoulders of 12 several men, out of every Tribe a man under the Law, as soon as
they came to enter natural Canaan.

Signifies the twelve chief pillars of Christ's Church, which are to be the
head Founders of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.14. which must and will be set up
when we are at the entrance of a spiritual Canaans peace. All Scriptures are
written for our instruction, and they speak of things past, only to tell us
what should be done now as figures and types of things to come.

But happily it may be objected against what I have said, that there were 13
Patriarchs and 13 Apostles: It Is true Jacob and his 12 sons were 13, and a
little before his death he received Joseph's sons by laying on of hands, to be
as his sons in his and Joseph's place, to make for his 12 Tribes, 13 heads,
fathers; of which Judah was chief, in that he brought forth Christ. So
likewise Christ first chose 12 to be head spiritual fathers of the 12 spiritual
Tribes, to make them one body under him the head, Acts 1.

After Christ's death, resurrection, and ascension, before the holy Ghost was
come down to give them the fullness of their power and gifts, the number was
made 12. Acts 1.
after Judas fall: but after the holy Ghost was come down to carry them on in
their work, when they began to be persecuted and scattered, it pleased God to
convert Paul, even their greatest persecutor and furiousest enemy, and to make
them 13 Apostles, Peter being the head in Christ's Church, and by his command to
feed his Lambs and sheep thrice; to whom Christ committed the keys of David's
Tabernacle, or heaven, to bind or loose things either in heaven or earth, he
being head the body were 12. Besides, here in England, following that example
at one time, as Chronicles show, there were 24 Bishops under two high Priests
or Archbishops.

Your Highness must likewise remember that besides this Apostolical order, you
must set up a Discipled order of 70. both which Orders I shall prove first under
the law, secondly under the Gospel.

Your Highness ought to remember the Law which gave to Moses, to instruct you
what to do, to be as it were a School Master, who when he found the government
for Church affairs too heavy for him, he grieving and making his complaint to
God the Lord, to ease him of his burden; God commanded him in Numb. 11. v. 16.
to gather seventy men of the Elders of Israel, and to bring them unto the
Tabernacle of the Congregation to make a body under him and Aaron the High
Priest, to be helpers of Church government, which as soon as they were elected
and set round about the Tabernacle, the Lord took the spirit from Moses and
gave it to the seventy Elders, and they did all prophecy, and did not cease,
Number. 11.25. Thus you see God ordained the seventy Elders, even the complete
number when they were in the wilderness, that were of Jacobs household when
they went into Egypt to make a body, above the ordinary Priests for Church
affairs, he wanted not Judges or Officers for State affairs, or Marshal
discipline; he took his Father in Law Iethro's counsel for that, Exodus 18.

Secondly under the Gospel, Christ our Savior the only begotten Son of his
Father, when the fullness of time was come, which God long before had
determined, when he said, The seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head,
which is to be understood Jesus Christ should be born of a pure Virgin, which
should be set up as an Ensign for the people and Nations, to lead the chief
Officers of his Army in his life time, he gave no other weapons to the head
Leaders and general Governors of his Army to carry on their warfare against
all his enemies but the sharp sword of the spirit which proceeds out of his
mouth, to slay the enemies of him and his Elect.

Christ first chose twelve, Mark 3. and he named some of them Bonerges, by
interpretation sons of thunder, then Christ ordained seventy other, Luke 10.1,
2, 3. and sent them out when the harvest was ripe, two and two together into
every City or place which way soever he himself would come, and he gave them
power to carry on their work: sending them forth as Lambs among Wolves, and the
seventy returned again with joy; saying, Lord, even the Devils are subdued to
us through thy name: and Jesus said unto them, that he saw Satan like lightning
fall down from heaven: behold, says Christ, I give unto you power to tread on
Serpents and Scorpions, and all the powers of the enemy, nothing shall hurt you;
nevertheless in this rejoice not, but rather rejoice that your names are
written in heaven; the same hour rejoiced Jesus in the spirit, and said, I
confess unto thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hidden
these things from the wise and learned, and have revealed them to Fabes, even
so father, because it pleases thee, Luke 10.17, 18, etc.

Truly my Lord, we must all believe that these very Scriptures are written for
our instruction; there is none that believes that God is God, and his Word is
Truth, that dare object or say; but that these Scriptures are sent from God to
us for no other end, but to direct us to do the same, which they speak of, that
has been done here to fore in former ages, for they are patterns, examples and
lines for us in this last age, to erect, build up, and walk by, and although
God has hidden these things from the wise and learned of this time as it
pleased him so to do in former ages, as Christ says Luke 10.21. and to
reveal it to mean men, which are but like babes and sucklings, yet let none
that bears the name of a Christian disdain, neglect, or despise these things
for the means of the person of him whom God speaks this now but let all that
will own the name of Christians rejoice, in the spirit as Christ their head
Captain did in the spirit, giving all praise and glory to him, assuring
themselves that the meaner persons, they are that God does it by, the greater
work of God is showed therein, and with all expedition to set about the work,
for by this example were our Primitive Christians to choose their seventy
Interpreters. For when it pleased God to have the holy Scriptures translated,
or interpreted for the good of all that believe, he did it by such a number of
seventy, which were all guided by the holy Ghost, as it had been one man, and
they were as it were conduit pipes to convey the water of life into all
Countries, Nations, and Tongue^, for the comfort of Gods Elect through out the
World. Thus you see there is no contradiction with God, he is at the beginning
and ending all one in his Church; for as God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
are all one in Trinity, so is the true Apostolical and Discipled Church whom
Christ promised the holy Ghost should be with to the end of the world, John
14.16. John 17.21. And every member of the body have their proper gifts for
offices and places for the building up, ruling and gathering of the Saints
under Christ their head, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, As Paul says, God has
ordained in the Church several Officers; as first, Apostles: secondly,
Prophets: thirdly, Teachers; then they that do miracles: after, the gifts of
healing, helpers of governments, diversity of tongues; but, says he, are all
Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? are all doers of Miracles? have
all gifts of Healing? do all speak with Tongues? do all interpret? 1 Cor.
12.28, 29, 30.

These Scriptures shows us very plainly, Proved that none of the new Elect,
or Gathered Churches are not true Churches.
that all our new elect and gathered Churches are out of the ways of God at
this very time, as far, I may say, as the East is from the West; yet I will not
judge any: But there may be many true members that belong unto Christ among
them; but thus by the power of God I will assure you, that none of the new Sects
as call themselves Churches, are true Churches, because they have neither true
heads or body above them, according to other Law or Gospel rule, but every one
strives to be a Teacher, by resting the Scriptures to their own corrupt
finister bypath, and so lose themselves, and lead many more into woods,
wildernesses, and deserts of strange opinions; and so it will be worse and worse
still daily, more every day then other, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
til the mercy of God cause us to have an Apostolical and Discipled body under
a head for the gathering of the Saints together for the work of the Ministry,
and for the dification of the body of Christ, this will be the way to make all
the members of Christ's Church meet in the unity of true faith, as follows if
you can believe.

That the seventy Elders that God caused Moses to choose had several prophetical
gifts when they were chosen and brought to Gods Tabernacle, at that immediate
time.

Or if your Highness can believe that Christ's Apostles and Disciples had
several prophetical gifts for the making of a complete body for Christ's Church:
and the seventy interpreters of the Scriptures were guided by the holy Ghost:
Then I entreat you for the Lords sake who has sent me as a Herald to you, to
cause you to choose such a number as you see Law and Gospel rule holds out a
just proof for; which being chosen, and elected as by the power of Gods holy
word and spirit guiding me to direct you as, hereafter follows.

To show your Highness and all the world by the power of God, which he is able
to perfect, and make good in my weakness. For as we read, Mal. 4. that Elias
will come before the latter day, to turn the hearts of Fathers and Children
one toward another; and to end controversies in Families, Nations, and
Kingdoms, lest he should smite the whole earth with cursing; that as where
hatred, war, devision, and heresies have most and last abounded, there grace,
love, peace, and concord may first begin to abound, here for a true exampled
pattern for all other Nations to follow us: for Christ says the first shall be
last, and the last shall be first.

There is no fearful or doubtful question, to be objected against this earth,
and way which here is laid down the ground from antiquity of other ages, how
God has sent the holy Ghost into such an equal rising number heretofore to
carry on his work by; but that he will do the like now if we would deny our own
corrupt ways, and embrace his ways, which are all grace, virtue and humility;
for God is Alpha and Omega, at the beginning and ending of his works, all one
and the same, and his ways of mercy are past finding out.

The Apostles say, that these days would not come unless there were first a
departure of the Faith, by many falling into gross erroneous heresies,
blasphemies and apostasies, there were never more then now: therefore we may
well assure our selves by natural reason, that this is the very last age of the
world, and should be the best: but nature is more abused now then ever it was
in our forefathers days; so that this time showed forth it self to be the
worst, and the very dregs of all other ages, that ever have been.

For, behold, both natural pride, and spiritual pride, abound in every high
degree; natural drunkenness and spiritual, not only by excess of drinking,
which is a very great reigning sin in this land, but also Sects and self
opinions, which makes many thousands stagger without drinking of either wine or
strong drink, so that they are drunken and bereaved of all true spiritual
senses; and many others are blind by ignorance, their knowledge being so weak
and shallow in points of Religion, that they know not their right hand from
their left; and although they have been brought up as it were in the Schools
of Moses and the Prophets in Abraham's bosom, by going to Church, hearing
Sermons, and reading, or hearing the Scriptures, yet they are profane and
covetous, both people and Priests like one another, so that it grieveth the
holy Spirit of our God to see his people destroyed for want of knowledge.

In the late Bishops time in some places we were guided by a sort of Shepherds,
Of the late Bishops time.
which although they were knowing enough for learning, and charitable enough to
the poor in temporals, yet they were profane by starving their flocks.

But now we are troubled in most places, with a covetous sort of Teachers, I
had like to said in all places being ignorant themselves; they do not only
starve their flocks for want of saving and sound knowledge, but also for lucre
sake, they drive and carry them into by and separate paths of errors and
heresies, so being like people, like Priests, God has punished our sins
together, and yet our putrified sins being not healed, are like to break out
into another red sea of blood, if God prevent not.

Now the Church being thus brought into the wilderness weeping in her
widows-like mournful Condition, as one that has lost her husband, Luke 10.
Rev. 9.
and the Elders being all cast out of the City, so that she has no guide for
her children which are left alone among fiery serpent-like Teachers, and
Scorpions and beastly poisoned opinions, and the Ark and Temple of God is razed
and taken by the uncircumcised of heart; and we are a murmuring rebellious
people, worse then the Israelites were, for our God has brought us through a
red sea of civil Wars, to an entrance of a spiritual Canaans peace.

And if our rebellion against God do not prolong our misery, I fully believe
we are near the very entrance of a glorious time for the Church to break forth
into her brightness, and to shine in a more glorious manner then ever she did
since Adams fall: For the time is near at hand when all oppressors and
dissembling hypocrites which do not speedily leave their evil ways shall be
rooted out of power. And those that have served God, following the good old
way, shall shine as the stars do in the firmament, both in Church and State, and
to enjoy a true, religious, ^tled peace according to righteousness and true
holiness, so that the civil Magistrate may be a wall to the Church and
Ministry. Four Monarchs being broken down, there will be another set up, even a
Kingly power under the Scepter of Jesus Christ.

Believe not those Dreamers, Mockers, Makers of Sects whose study is all to
write or speak great swelling words against dignities, and the powers which are
ordained of God, nay even against the Lords day or Christian Sabbath, and the
sacred ordinances of Gods Law and Christ's command, even the ten Commands which
God writ with his own finger in stone, never to be washed out or abolished,
having a double memento for the keeping of the Sabbath and Lords day, as well to
the Christian Gentiles as the Jews, for take away the Lords day, even the day
which is set apart only for his worship: if the candlestick be removed away
from us, the light of Gods true worship will immediately follow, Luke 10. But as
Christ says, he saw Satan fall as lightning from heaven, and transforming
himself into a glorious Angel of light, to carry on many with their new lights
and false visions and new fangled doctrine, to deceive if it were possible the
very Elect, but that is an impossible thing.

More I would have spoken of the Christian Sabbath, and of these strange
opinions, to show every poor soul the subtle wiles of Satan, and the means at
large how to escape him, in this time of spiritual blindness and proud
knowledge, which darkens men's minds, and divides their judgments, by gross
thick darkness which if we have not lost our spiritual feeling, we might feel
it at none time, under the Gospels glorious light; which makes many other dote
away their precious time:

First a sign of the Stars.
ALL which wickedness and Apostasies are but signs of a glorious time at hand,
nay even at our very doors. For as when the Stars are under thick mists or
clouds, that night is very dark, and the darkest part of all that night is
immediately before the break of day; even so when the Churches Stars, the
Ministers are clouded with the foggy mists and errors of factious Teachers
which are clouds without water, as Jude speaks. Even then is the Church in her
dark mournful condition; which darkness will appear most of all when the day
of her deliverance draws near.

Secondly, of the Moon.
AND as when the Moon is near her change, the night imediately before is the
darkest night of all that quarter, so the sad dark mournful condition of our
Moon, the Church, gives us hope that she is near her change, and that the Son
of righteousness is ready to arise with healing under his wings, and that the
morning tide is near a turning; the day of a true religious peace is near a
dawning, and ready to break forth into a glorious light; thus you see the
Churches greatest extremities is always Gods chiefest opportunities.

All which darkness, confusions and mischiefs have arisen for want of these
aforesaid apostolical and discipled orders. For as Natures reason has told
you, that your Army could not stand without general field Officers, above
Captains of Companies, according to Marshal discipline: even so ordinary
Ministers of parishes cannot stand without Heads: as Bishops, Deanes, and other
Church Officers according to Scripture discipline.

If fire have burned houses, and good diet has furfeited many men's bodies for
want of being careful and moderately used; shall we therefore never use fire or
food more? Truly my Lord, this is a fit comparison concerning these things.

There is now a beginning of a fifth Monarchy or Kingly power; The beginning of
the fifth Monarchy.
Your Highness is the first man God has raised to be the man to erect it, and
to be a Protector of the people in State, and to take the like care for the
Church as David did for building up of the true worship of God, and as David's
desire was to be a doorkeeper in Gods house, after he had destroyed the
Churches enemies in the time of the Law. So God has appointed you to keep the
door to let none but the true Ministers of Christ proved by Law and Gospel
rule, to enter into that holy office which have their calling and election from
God and man and approved, able in gifts and sound knowledge fitting for the
dispensation of the Oracles of God.

Your Highness ought to take the first Solomon's desire of God, as an example
to frame your heart, and to keep you from the desire of riches, honor, or the
life of your enemies; but only beg of God for an enlargement of heart, for the
guiding of such a people as is committed to your charge, and then all other
things that God sees is needful for you, will be added without wearisome care,
as both Peace, Safety, Plenty, and Wisdom.

And to hasten speedily to set forward the finding out the true way for Gods
worship to beautify his house. Now you see God has given you more power and
liberty to do such a work then ever any King had since England first was a
Kingdom; although you cannot choose but hear and know how many curse you as
Shimei did David, yet you ought to think as David did when Shimei cursed him:
Surely this cursing and plotting against me is suffered by Gods ordination or
permission, because speedily you do not set about the great Work of God, and
follow Christ the second Solomon by patience and meekness, praying for your
greatest enemies, and willingly and readily open a door of peace and truth to
your greatest enemies that you have fought against; if you can persuade your
self the battles were for God, then the execution of vengeance should be left
to him.

The way to choose a High Priest.
YOur Highness ought first to choose a good Pilot or High Priest for the
Church; a good, learned, orthothodox Divine, such a one who has always
heretofore given himself to charity and hospitality, apt to teach, a man of
sound judgment and grave knowledge.

O for the Lords sake, and for the good of the Church and people, and your own
safety in this life, and for your souls safety hereafter, imitate Abraham's
chief Ruler, and eldest Servant; for God calls you to come to him, and to take
a hallowed oath, as Abraham's servant did, being charged by his Master not to
take a wife of a strange lineage, of the Canaanitish seed, amongst whom he
dwelt, but to go to Aram, to fetch one out of Nahor, his own ancient Family.

Even the like charge lies upon you from your heavenly Master, for to choose a
Bride for his Sons Church of the Ancient, True, Christian Religion, even a man
of selfe-denial, that will leave all like Rebeccha, Genes. 24.

Such a one to be a High Priest God the Father will take delight in: He that
will as soon as he is called to Christ's work, and that he is sent for to be the
only chief Head under Christ in his Church, and to be his chief espoused, as
Rebeccha was to Isaac, who as soon as she saw Isaac in the Field at eventide,
alighted off her Camel and went on foot to meet Isaac her Bridegroom, which
went outto meditate in the field toward evening, who meeting Rebeccha, he
brought her into his Mother Sarahs Tent after she was dead.

Even so will it be with us; though the old Protestant Church be in a dead
condition, yet let us assure our selves that Christ is near a coming to meet
the prayers of his Saints. Now it is eventide with them; yet man's extremity is
Gods opportunity, for Christ will meet such a one as is humble and lowly minded
and meek, and he will bring him to be a High Priest after Melchisedechs Order,
in the Protestants place or Tent: And God will choose an Apostolical and
discipled number to be added to him, they being chosen and set apart for that
end by him. Even such as will be willing to do as Zacheus did, who when he was
climbed up in a Syccamore tree to see Christ, as soon as he was called by
Christ to come down, for he would that day dine in his house with him, yea
rather in his heart, and told him further, That salvation was come into his
house both for himself and his Family.

So now the whole Land is soule-sick to see most men, which are climbed up so
high, and all in a pretending way at the first to see Christ, but nothing
intending any such matter, but to make themselves great in the world, and so
set themselves against God and his glorious Gospel, which calls them to come
down, as Christ did Zacheus, to be charitable to the poor, and restore to every
one their right, and then Christ will dine in their hearts, and the holy spirit
of union will cast out the spirit of division, and bring salvation to their
several Families, and join them together in one united mind, with one accord
to carry on the great weighty affairs both for Church and State, to begin the
work in a perfect way, and so go on to more perfection:

Your Highness cannot choose but see what great things the Lord has done for
you, by preserving your person in many and sundry great Battles of war, and
since, many several dangerous plots which have been lately found out, which for
brevities sake I must omit to name; all which plots and dangers show you God is
angry with you to see his house lie waste still, and no one is setting about
the work of God.

You may well assure your self that God is sorely displeased, that many are
planting and settling themselves in great Estates, and making themselves great
by this slaughterous wars, and so cast Gods work behind their backs. Now his
House and Worship has been plucked down and brought to ruin by several Sects
and evil members, which have some of them been of the Army, and the rest the
Army have favored, I mean all Heretics, seditious and blasphemous persons,
in this fiery time of trial, or consuming of the true worship and zeal of Gods
good old ways of worship, which did shine in a flourishing condition.

And now you see God has preserved your Highness, as he spoke by the Prophet
Zechariah 3.2. concerning Joshua the High Priest: The Lord will rebuke Satan,
and choose Jerusalem to reprove him. But says the Lord, Is not this a brand
plucked out of the fire? And thus you see the Lord many times brings his beloved
children very near the very gates of Hell, or in great danger of falling.

And now you may see God has plucked your Highness from among those brands, and
brought you to the Kings Throne, to be chief Ruler over all, as Abraham's
eldest servant was. The first thing you ought to have done, that would have
been most pleasing to God, and best and surest for your self, was to have
found out the true worship of God, and to have been as faithful in choosing a
spiritual Head for the Church, the woman, as St. John saw to be clothed with
the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, having a crown of 12. Stars on her head,
Revel. 12.1. being meant Christ, or one in his stead, twelve Apostolical
governors called a crown of twelve Stars: that is, Bishops of his Church,
being clothed with the Son of Gods bright garment of pure government: Having
the Moon under her feet; that is, all changeable governments which change like
the Moon.

Take one imitation of Abraham's servant, who refused the eating of bread to
feed his hungry appetite after his long journey, till he had showed his
faithfulness, and knew Rebeccha and her friends mind, Genesis 24. So take heed of
feeding your selves with worldly dignity, till you have found out a Head, and
an espoused company to make a body for Christ's Church.

Take your example from Moses, who after he was Gods chief servant, although
he was brought up in Pharaohs Court by Pharaohs daughter, when he came to
years of understanding, he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter:
O therefore take heed of those Courtly offers after you understand the ways of
God, as either to defraud or detain any man from his Right, or keep the Church
and people of God either in bondage or a wilderness condition.

O therefore for the Lords sake delay no more time, by building your own
houses, but set about the house of the Lord, which is called a house of prayer
for all people.

For the neglect of that, God showed you a sign of his anger, when you were in
that great danger of being killed in Hide Park on S. Michaels day, if you can
believe the word of God to be true, That God commanded Moses to put off his
natural shoes when God called him from being a natural shepherd to be the
chief Leader of his people, Exodus 3.5. and likewise the same he commanded to
Joshua. Josh. 5.
The shoes signify the natural affection of a man's heart and mind, when he
is called to the holy work of the Lord. We read that for a very small offense
the Lord met Moses, and would have killed him in the way, Exodus 4.24.

And as the Angel of the Lord stood with his sword drawn before Joshua to cause
him to unloose the natural shoes from his feet; if the Lord hide it not from
you, and so leave you off to hardness of heart and spiritual blindness, you
may well see that the Lord is not pleased, by the many dangers you have been
near. All those plots and dangers should be as warning pieces to set you
forward to go about the work of the Lord, or as goads to stir you up to it. I
entreat the Lord, and oftentimes do pray that God will be pleased to open the
spiritual eyes of your soul, and clear up your understanding, that you may go
about the great work of the Lord with all expedition.

And you may well assure your self, that if the burden was too heavy for
Moses, who had his counsel at Gods own mouth, who had likewise Aaron the High
Priest, and other Priests to assist him; yet it made him to cry out to be eased
of the Lord, or slain. Therefore let the example of the Jewish and Christian
Churches lead you as a pattern or line. Choose first a High Priest, then 12. and
gather 70.

The manner of the High Priests receiving the number of 12. for to be
Apostolical Bishops, by the holy order of laying on of Hands, and then 70.
proved from Jacob, Moses, and the Apostles ^octrine.
YOur Highness having according to Gods command and Scripture rule to be your
guide, chosen a High Priest for the head of Christ's Church, as Aaron and Peter
were; and then by the High Priests advice ^o ordain twelve Apostolical
Bishops, as several heads under him, for to be over the twelve spiritual Tribes
of Israel or Christ's Church; the High Priest should not receive them to be his
spiritual Sons without the laying on of hands: this holy order and confirmation
of laying on of hands I shall prove to you by example from Jacob, Genesis 48.14.
who when he was about to die, and to receive Manasse^ and Ephraim into the
number of his twelve Sons, to make them thirteen Head Fathers of the twelve
natural Tribes of Israel, Manasseh and Ephraim being called the two half
Tribes; at Jacobs receiving of them at the hands of their Father Joseph to make
them as his sons to bear their part of his name for the time to come throughout
all generations; he did not do it without laying on of hands and, receiving
them without that holy order to confirm them by his blessing.

Joseph at his bringing them to old Jacob his Father, whose eyes were dim, his
full intention was, that old Israel should have laid his right hand on the
eldest, and his left on the youngest; but he would not do so although his
natural eyes were dim, yet God gave him the spiritual eyes of the soul to
discern that the youngest son should come to be greater then his brother;
although, says Jacob, I know Manassch shall be great, yet his younger brother
shall be greater then he, for his seed shall be full of Nations; and he set the
youngers name before the elders. Although it much displeased Joseph, who sought
means to prevent his Father for doing thus; yet Jacob knowing the decree of
God, would not alter it, Genesis 48. from the tenth verse to the end of the
Chapter.

A little before Jacobs death he called all his sons together to bless them,
and to show what would befall every one of them in the latter days: and how
Iudab should be the heads in that out of his lineage Christ was to come, and all
people should be gathered to him.

In these prophetical signs Jacob is a representation of the holy Ghost, and
likewise for the manner and number of his family. Of Moses laying on of hands.
Moses he followed this example of Jacobs laying on of hands, Scriptures make
no mention of it, but a little about the time of his death, Deuteronomy. 34.9. This
Text of Scripture says that Ioshuah the son of Nun which was the succeeder of
Moses, was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had put his hands upon him,
and he and Israel did as the Lord had commanded Moses.

In the Apostles and Disciples time at the Gospels first plantation, as it is
written for our instruction in several places of the Acts of the Apostles, how
that by their laying on of hands many received the gift of the holy Ghost. Paul
at one time laid his hands on twelve several men, and they all received the
gift of the holy Ghost and Prophesied: and furthermore Paul exhorts his son
Timothy whom he had begotten. Says he, Despise not the gifts that is in thee,
which was given thee by prophecy, by the laying on of hands by the Presbytery
Elders, 1 Timothy 4.14. All these Scriptures were written for our instruction and
learning, there is none that believes in God and his word that dare or will
object against it: thus you see here is proved in Christ's Church an example of
twelve Apostolical Bishops under a High Priest, otherwise called an Archbishop,
and a Discipled number of seventy, to make a complete body besides, and the
order of receiving of them in their several places and degrees into that holy
office of the Ministerial Function and body of Christ's Church according to
those holy orders which have been always practiced by the ancient Fathers of
both Jewish and Christian Churches, in all former ages.

One Objection answered by Scripture ground and argument.
Object. But happily many in our days may be apt to raise Objections against
this truth, that is so manifestly proved here by Gods holy Writ, saying, that
Apostles and Elders are all one; therefore, say they, there need be no other
order but a number of Elders according to the Presbytery, which order is
mentioned in the Scriptures. To answer these ^bjections and make them fall to
the ground. Look in the fifteenth Chapter of the Acts, and the first, second,
and third verses; when there was a great diffention and disputation about
Circumcision by Paul and Barnabas against them: at last they ordained that Paul
and Barnabas and certain others of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the
Apostles and Elders of the Church. The word Apostles in all places of Scripture
stands before the word Elders: Paul was one of the twelve Apostles, 1 Cor.
2.28, 29. Ephesians 4.
Barnabas, Stephen, Timothy, and the others in their several places were of the
company of the Elders of the Church, Acts. 20.17. Multitudes of Texts and
Scriptures might be raised to confirm this truth, to show that there was first
an Apostolical number as chief, twelve: and then Secondly, a discipled number
of seventy according to order then in those days: and that order would have
continued till this very time, had not corruptions and divisions cast them out
of the Church.

But this I can by the power of God assure your Highness and all others that
desire to know; that we shall never enjoy perfect peace nor true Religion till
that time be, that there be ordained for the Church such an Apostolical and
discipled number; the which being done by God and man's appointment, having
their commission signed and sealed by God and man, and being entered into a
hallowed Covenant at the Ark or Tabernacle of Gods testimony, meant the Church,
being received and ordained every one according to order to make a complete
body: by joint order their chief reverent father in God ought not to receive
them into this holy office without the laying on of hands: the which being
done, and they joined together as one man for the work of the Lord, for the
ruling and gathering of the Saints, and building up of true Religion, being
thus elected and choseu.

The true way to prove them by going to spiritual war with all Sects which are
the true Churches enemies.
YOur Highness and many more may question me, or demand, saying, How shall we
know whether thy calling and election be of God, and sure and firm, and not of
men's traditions, or superstitious consecrating?

It Is answered thus.

It will be known by this manner of trial that follows, whether or not that
they be the only men God has appointed to beautify his Church, and to raise
up David's fallen Tabernacle here first in this land, and to be a pattern and
example for all other lands to follow them.

Your Highness and they must (...) ^lame open spiritual war against all Sects
that hold (...) of Church fellowship, that call themselves Religions: and they
may be all comprehended under four heads, as namely these, 1. Presbyterians. 2.
Independents. 3. The Anabaptists must be called. And last of all the Church of
Rome that is in these dominions, must be called to this spiritual war, to bring
them to the Touchstone of Gods word.

All these aforenamed Churches so called, or any other whatever, ought to have
both leave and command from and by your Highness, to come to disputation,
together with them of the late and new ordained Election, which is the
Apostolical and discipled Body under a spiritual Head: Then as Jude says,
there will be earnest contending among all these several elect for the faith
once delivered to the Saints: every sect, such a certain number as equalizeth
the fore named being chosen and ordained according as best pleases their
several judgments or opinions.

When this Herald or Trumpet is sounded which God will cause his holy Angels to
stir up the hearts of men to do it in his good time, Matthew. 24.30. to gather
his elect from the four winds, to see the true way to join themselves to the
true Ministerial head and body of Christ's Church, Ephesians. 4. in one united faith.

For when these several elections are gathered together, there will be casting
of lots among these spiritual soldiers that are called to this spiritual
warfare to see which can gain Christ's seamlesse garment of government, which
so oftentimes has been parted and rent to pieces, and dipped in Christians blood
formerly.

And there will be likewise a casting of rods also together one with another;
the Egyptians rod that would keep the Church in bondage, or the covetous
idolatrous time servers, or the divided new fangled people, or the Church of
Rome. All these their several rods may turn like Serpents, or bud many
Scriptures each of them; But Aarons rod, or the true Priesthoods iron rod will
devour up the rest of (...) ^ods, and break their power to pieces like a
potters (...), all that are Antichristian, or Tyrannical, or seducing.

Yet they may at the first bud many Scripture phrases, like the true Priesthood
in the fight of the ignorant, but they will soon discover themselves when they
come to the touchstone of trial, by division to bring themselves to confusion,
and so silence themselves.

But the true Priesthood which has his foundation from Antiquity, that is,
entered into a hallowed Covenant with God, and joined together in a complete
body under a head, shall then show forth themselves to be the true Prophetical
and Apostolical Discipled Church, in a most manifest way they will then appear
before al people by their several gifts and places; being all guided by the
spirit of Union; for their rod will not only devour the other Serpent-like
rods, but also it will blossom, and the spirit of Daniel will appear in their lot
to defend the woman, Christ's espoused Church, which otherwise if she were not
known by this kind of trial and spiritual war, they would judge her to be a
Whore still, and say she were as full of fornication as other-idolatrous
Churches have been in other Kings reigns before: But now she will prove her
self to be a pure Virgin: and that day the iniquity of Jacob will be removed
out of this land, Zach. 3. and the Whore of Babel shall fall, and all false
forms, shall sink in the Sea like a Mil-stone, never to rise again: then will
that Scripture be fulfilled, Revel. 12.1. The Woman will appear clothed with
the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and that is meant all changable
Church-Governments, and she will have a Crown of twelve Stars on her head; which
is to be understood the new Jerusalems Church, clothed with Christ's
righteousness, and the twelve Stars are the twelve Patriarchs, or Apostolical
Rulers, Rev. 21.11, 12, 13, 14. And Christ's promise then will be fulfilled to
his twelve Apostles, when he was with them on the Earth, that they should be
head in chief over the twelve Tribes of Israel; and the fullness of the
Gentiles brought in, and the Jews called, then the kingdom will be at this
immediate time restored again to Israel, and all the kingdoms of the earth will
be under the glorious government of Jesus Christ; and the four beasts, and the
four and twenty Elders will cast down their Crowns before the Lamb that sits
on the throne praising God, Rev. 4.

By the four Beasts we may understand the four Monarchies, or head ruling
powers that have been already broken to pieces, and brought to their former
beginnings of nothing again, when their corruptions were grown ripe.

By the 24. Elders are to be understood 12. natural Patriarchal Judges under
the Law for Temporals, under a natural Head, a King; and 12. Apostolical
Spiritual Bishops over the Church, under their spiritual Father, the Head of
the Church, the Judges of late years have turned judgment for the poor widow
and fatherless into wormwood and gall, Hos. 10.3, 4, 7. Amos 6.12.

Though the temporal Father of the State be now cut off and cast out for the
corruption and bribing partiality of the Judges, and the Judges held in at this
present, but not without great corruption; and God has so severely dealt with
the spiritual Father, and all his Household, to cut off the Head, and cast out
the body; but look what Peter says, 1 Pet. 4.17. But the time is come that
judgment must begin at the house of God: If it first begin at us, what shall be
the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God? Wherefore let them that suffer
now according to the will of God, commit their souls unto him in all well
doing as unto a faithful Creator.

Look what Jeremiah says, Chap. 23. v. 3, 4. Though it has befell so with our
Church of late years, and although God has suffered his people to be thus
scattered, Yet they shall be brought again to their folds, and he will set up
Shepherds over them, which shall feed them, and they shall dread no more nor be
afraid, neither shall any of them be lacking, says the Lord. Behold, says the
Lord, the days shall come that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a
King shall reign and prosper, and execute judgment and justice in the earth,
Jer. 23.5. And Dan. 2.44. That God will restore to us Shepherds for the Church,
and an Apostolical discipled order above them under a High Priest.

Even so his promise is to restore to us a true stock of Judges under a
temporal Head, their true borne King? In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely. Zeph. 3.9. In those days, surely says the Lord, I
will turn to the people a pure language, that they may call upon the name of
the Lord, and serve him with one consent. And all powers will be broken to
pieces, and the Heathen shall be smitten by that sharp sword which proceeds
out of the mouth of God. And he (according to his promise) will rule the
Heathen with an iron rod; for he it is that treads the winepresse of the
fierconesse of the wrath of God, Psalm. 2.9. Rev. 2.27. Rev. 19.15. Then will
that time be that the swords shall be broken into plow-shares, and the spears
into pruning hooks, and Nations shall have no more cause to lift themselves up
one against another in warlike manner.

Wherefore I entreat your Highness, and your wisest Counsel, for the Lords
sake, that you will make no delay, but speedily with all expedition choose such a
number by election and holy ordination, that is, laid down a perfect rule from
the Scriptures, and a command from God, and try them by spiritual war against
all Sects and self-opinions, and they will bring the Church out of her
wilderness and widowhood-condition, not only of all danger of being brought
into danger again, but also through these red seas of bloody wars which have
been maintaned under the pretense of Religion, but contrary to Christ's command
or Gospel-rule. Likewise they will cause these feigned Rivers of Jordan to be
dried up, that all the Israel of God may come unto one united spiritual Canaans
peace, within the Harbor or Suburbs of the new Jerusalem, to make us all
Citizens of that place which Saint John saw in his Vision to have twelve gates,
and at the gates twelve Angels with the names written on them of the twelve
Tribes of Israel, and the Lamb, and his twelve Apostles, which are the chief
Founders and Builders of this glorious situated government.

We must understand, that as the judgments of God first began at his own house
in this Land; so God will have his house restored and built up again, to be as
it were a pattern for the King and Lord Protector to frame and set up their
State-government by. For a^ there is to be appointed by God twelve Apostolical
Bishops under a Head spiritual Father, to be the Leaders of the Church so far
as their power can well be able to rule; so likewise it is convenient to have
12. temporal Judges in chief, under one Father, the King, so far as their power
is well able to extend in every division; which being thus done according to
order, righteousness, and true holiness, every Kingdom will then become the
Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15, 16, 17.

So then the King being as Abraham or Moses, in chief under God the Father,
Exodus 4.16.
he must be as Moses was to Aaron, as it were a God to the High Priest, or
Archbishop. The High Priest or Archbishop representing Isaac and Rebecca by a
Melchisedech-order of Christ, must be as it were a chief Prophet to the King,
as Aaron was to Moses: And the twelve chief temporal Judges, and the twelve
Head spiritual Bishops, which make the number of 24. Elders, must cast
themselves down, with all their government both for Church and State, to give
all praises to God the Father and his Son Christ Jesus, for judgment given to
the great Whore; and the other 70. discipled Elders will do their office as God
will appoint them to, and carry them on by the power of the Holy Ghost. And the
High Priest shall then wear no more polluted garments, but God will cause him to
have change of raiment, and a fair Diadem or a Micre on his head as Aaron had.

And then the Church will begin to flourish in a glorious manner, This fifth and
last elect 70. will by Gods assistance beautify the fifth Monarchy.
and God will carry on this last 70. under the High Priest and the 12.
Apostolical Bishops, which are to be heads of the 12. spiritual Tribes of
Israel, Gods holy spirit guiding these, and going along with them, they will
build up the truth Church better and firmer then ever it was before, advancing
the true worship of God above all. Zach. 3.

And they will give example for the Judges and State-officers to follow them in
like manner; for the spirit of Daniel will be among them, standing in the Lot:
the dark letters and the hidden mysteries which are to be revealed to man, God
by these will unseal, and God will esteem of them as his dearest Jewels.

These will be guided by the Holy Ghost to do as Solomon exhorts, to purge
the tin and the dross from the go Iden and filver governments.

The two famous Universities and Schools of learning shall be made pure
fountains by these, from whence the sincere milk of Gods word shall flow for the
nourishment both of Church and State, to feed the flock and people of God as
the breasts of Sarah and Rebecca did nourish Isaac and Jacob.

Then shall all houses of hospitality and religious store houses be settled and
established according as is intended to their right end again, the store houses
to be rightly erected without either Idolatry or Superstition, for an account
of the Tithes and other things to be brought in thither, that their may be
provision for Gods house, for all necessary uses that belong thereunto,
according to the word of God, that being their guide; and all parish Churches,
and Places that are or have been appointed for Gods worship, as need requires
to be desently restored to their Priestine adornments, to make them the beauty
of holiness, as Gods word requires, without superstition or idolatry, as Paul
says, Let all things be done decently and in order, and the Ministry for
every degree rightly to be restored, and they to have their charge and orders
from the Apostolical Bishop and Discipled Elders of their several limited
Diocesses in all degrees as belong to the Ministerial office to be as careful
of their chargeover every Parish according to Vrim and Thummim, soundness of
Doctrine and integrity of life, and to be as careful over all sorts of people
that belong to their congregated charge, in all needful degrees, as great rich
men's Shepherds must be over their folded or pastured Sheep, which were only
kept and appointed for that end, if any of their flock be lost by the Shepherds
negligence, as earthly Masters will look for the price of the sheep at their
hand as is hired and kept for that end.

Says the Lord, surely I will turn to the people a pure Language, that they
may call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with one consent. Come let us
go up to the house of the God of to learn of his true Shepherds and Ministers,
Ezekiel. The same charge lies upon me or any other that has a message to declare
from God to your Highness, concerning the seeing of a sword or a judgment, or
an alteration of the times; we must not fear to declare the mind of God, for
the displeasure of either King or Potentate; if we do, whenever it be, they
die in their sins or ignorance for want of having warning by the seer, that God
reveals it to; they shall die. and their blood shall be required at his hand.

For by this which I am to declare to your Highness, I am appointed of God to
assure you, and the whole Council of State, that although other powers of the
late several choices for Church and State have not sought Gods ways but their
own; yet those that God will perfect his work by, he will have them to deny all
to follow Christ: although the other selfeseeking powers took not Solomon's
counsel, who exhorted them to take away the evil counsel from before the King,
and the Kings Throne should be established according to righteousness, but
they wilfully and unadvisedly took away the King instead of his evil Counsel to
establish themselves by it in great places; these natural warriers did it
unadvisedly by spiritual blindness, yet the thing could not be omitted because
it was long before so determined of God.

These spiritual warriers will restore his son again to the royal Throne, to be
supreme, in more Dignity and Majesty then ever his Father enjoyed it, to be
established in and by peace, if God harden not the Churches enemies to their
own destruction, as he did Pharaoh and his host; nevertheless whatever the
malice of Satan and wrath of wicked men do endeavor themselves against the ways
of God: yet it will be at last for their greater ruin that withstand the will of
God: the more violently they withstand it, the more God will be glorified by
their destruction, which will come upon them like a sudden whirlewind, when God
arises to deliver his Church: Fhr God and his chosen as he will do his work
by, he will cause them to restore every thing in the right order, both in Church
and State, which has been displaced and disjoynted this many hundred years;
and so he will preserve it til the end of all things come to dissolution;
because God has the hearts of all Kingly Potentates in his hand, to dispose of
them as pleases him, either for the establishment of a Nation in peace, or the
remove of them by war.

I must needs be bold to speak and declare my conscience in the presence of
God, and the like to all the world:

Concerning King Charles his Life and Death, that for ought I could ever see or
hear upon ground or proof, waving afide envious or slanderous aspersions cast
upon him, that are now plainly seen were cast upon him, to carry the design of
his enemies on against him in a violent way, as things were laid to David's
charge that he never knew of: If Christ were so wronged by false witness, and
put to to death, and his Apostles, Martyrs and Saints, and the holy men of God
in all ages, let no man judge the worse of him for his untimely death; for
there is a righteous Judge that knows all, therefore let every man begin to
judge his own heart, and there he shall find himself to be in a great high
rebellion against God, and guilty of high Treason. The meanest creature as God
made for our necessity and servile service, in their nature does condemn us in
the things they were created, for so they remain still.

I call God to record, I speak nothing in his behalf, no not a word more then I
would for any man else, for God caused me to fortel his overthrow, and I have
had great loss and trouble by some that were of his Army; yet I have been long
assured, and caused to write and speak how that he was the Lords anointed King,
and that his conscience being firm to maintain the ancient Rights of the
Protestant Church, was the cause of his death. Furthermore I am forced to
foretell how that his Posterity and Heir will come to enjoy the Crown: And this
I am caused and compelled to speak, as I have heretofore foretold by the power
of God, of the greatest remarkable changes and chances as have fell out between
King and Parliament, near this 12. years past, which is all come to pass
since but only the manner of Church Government, and the Kings Son being
restored to his Fathers Throne, and in what manner, if any man will needs ask me
what ground I have for it, I must needs tell him, it is the witness of Jesus,
which is the spirit of Prophecy, which has carried me on in this manner. Not
that I can fortel any of these things by any power of my own, or by any natural
Art; but when it pleases God to compel me, then I cannot forbear to go.

As for King Charles his life, they could speak no other of him when he reigned
in peace, but that he was a loving godly peaceable Prince, sticking close to
the fundamental point of the Protestant Religion.

I butsaid many he was almost turned Papist; but they that cast that aspersion
upon him first, soon after, when they had made many believe that, then they
said the Common Prayer and the Protestant Religion was all Idolatrous Popery,
and so they esteemed Charity a while after. I judge noue that were the
instruments of the Kings death, I with great fervency of spirit pray that his
bloed may not cry to Heaven for vengeance like Abels, but like our Saviors;
for they that were the instruments, did not know what they did, God hiding it
from their eyes by their spiritual blindness, as the Jews that put Christ
their heavenly King to death.

I fully believe that this City of London will be a second new Jerusalem,
ordained by God to reign over the Gentiles. I speak not this by any
prophetical command of God, but by permission and several natural reasons as
cause me so to think.

You know Paul was a great man in discernment of the ways of God by Visions,
yet he spoke many things by permission more then only Gods immediate command
at all times to him; but this by the power of God, and his holy spirit that I
hope dwells in me, and I trust will always guide me in all my ways by his
holy spirit in the way of truth, both in speaking, writing, walking and
talking, I will show you.

As our Savior Christ was envyed by the Pharisees, and put to death by their
Counsels, but not against the ordination of God, by those hard hearted Jews;
yet Christ prayed for them, and his death was a destruction to their Religion,
even of those wilful blinded Jews, that put their King Christ to death by the
Soldiers who guarded them to do it.

Even so will it prove in the end with those Pharisalcal Presbyterians, that
first put to death their High Priest, raised up some of the Army, which caused
the King to be put to death; also they gave the first onset by their preaching
and covetous lives, to raise Sectaries and Herifies to be the instruments to
do it, it could not be omitted, it was both permitted and long so before
determined that he should be cut off by an Army and a flood of-Heresies, Dan.
11. Hos. 10.3, 4, 7.

The King he imitated Christ and Steven, in praying for his enemies, and to be
a meek man and a godly Christian Prince, standing firm for the Protestant
Covenant.

But by the Bishops death, which none but the Presbyterian Priests were the
cause of, that every one of them thinking to reign as Bishops by it, some of
them gave the first onset to set others against the King: But the death of the
King and the Archbishop, which all Sectaries thought to have reigned in a
living condition by it, and knew they could notwithout it; yet his death and
the Bishops will prove to be the death of al Sects and Herefies, and the
chiefest means under God to convert the Jews, Pagans and Turks to Christ's
truth.

The Lord guide me with this holy Spirit
I Shall assure you in truth, eleven year ago, I being an Apprentice to an
Iron-Monger, it happened by the powerful providence of God, as I was at a Fare
on the longest day of the year, called Saint Barnabies day, as I was helping my
Master to keep the Fare at Newport-pannel in Buckinghamshire, I being in
perfect health, and busily exercised about my Masters imploiments with him at
the stall.

About 12. of the clock as I was weighing out of ware, and many people at the
stal, I was struck of a sudden with amazement; the power of God caused me to
look before me, and there was standing before me the shape of a Woman, clothed
in blew, like an old fashioned cloak and safeguard,

Aaron Exodus the liknesse of her face was black as an Oven,

Jude Clouds without water. she struck her hands over her face.

I took as little notice of it as I could, but was following my Masters
occasion of trading, being a waighing of nails I was struck fick at heart of a
sudden, and was forced to look on the strong appeparission which was like a
Woman, and looked steadfastly on her, who struck her hands again over her face
in a wailing condition as a ^man that had lost her h^ and, or children, or some
great friend, and so she vanished away.

I was very heart and stomach sick, of a sudden being forced to leave the stal
I told my Master I was not well, I went to his Inn, and being very sick, I
vomitted blood: after a little time being something better, I went to my Master
again, and staid by him all day, but not without much pain, this was on the
Satterday, and was I sick and heavy at heart, and all parts of my body many
days after, but I praise God I slept very well every night, but could not tell
what ailed me, my stomach was gone, I could not eat any thing at all, nor drink
any thing; but what was sour like vinegar.

I told my Master at night of the strange apparission and vision, and of my
sickness, but he believed me not, so we went that night to Eubourne in
Bedfordshire; on Monday I was not able to go on foot, but rod on my Masters
hackney horse most of the way to Hampsteed in Hartfordshire. On Teusday we went
to Watford fifteen miles off London, but very sick and weak I was every day,
yet slept well every night. On Monday we returned homeward; I riding with much
pain on horseback, I besought the Lord with a fervent mind, to be merciful to
me, he heard my prayers, and as we were riding about a mile and an half off
Redburne; the Lord made my heart to think, and my tongue to speak, and tell my
Master, that if he would go by Redburn, it being near a mile out of his way, I
might ride home in a Wagon; he asked me how I could tell, or with whom; I told
him with my Father; for I told him my Father had two Wagons then in Redburn,
it being at mid time of the day; and how that my Father was there and one
Brother, and his man. I had no natural reason to say so, for I could not tell
they were in those Countries, but only the Lord had revealed it to me, who
reveals his secrets to them that fear him, Psalm. 25. and 34 his holy Angels
pitch^s their tents about them.

My Master was unwilling to go that way, but with much entreating did, and we
found them in Redburn according as the Lord had caused me to speak. My Master
overwent me that day, and left me to ride in my Fathers Wagon.

On Thursday night, we came to Tosseter, fifty miles from London, Coventrie
rode; my Fathers Inn was at the Sarasens head; but my Master appointed if I
was not able to ride home, I should be carried to his Inn, which was the fign
of the Peele.

As soon as I came thither, I defired to go to bed, presently with in an hour
after, my Fathers Brother and many more came to see me, and asked me how I did,
I told them I praised God I was better then I was before, and many such words.

I told them of the strange Vision in the Fair at Newport-pannel, but they
believed me not, and the manner of it oftentimes; and how the Lords Revelation
to me made me know where to meet them, which was against natures reason: My
brother offered me to watch with me all night; no said I, brother go to your
bed, and take your rest, for I praise God I am better then I have been ever
since I saw the Vision. So they left me.

There was no Guests in the house that night, and I did lodge in an upper
room, a good distance from the people in the house; and I had been hot and
cold on a sudden, my clothes being light and thin on my bed, and I was
dangerous sick, near unto death of a sudden, not thinking I could possibly live
while morning: it being the dead time of the night, I could get none to come to
me by knocking or calling. The Lord put it into my mind of a sudden that I
should live to see an end of these troublesome times, and how God had ordained
me to be an instrument to the bringing it to pass: Lord said I to my self,
how can can this be, seeing I am thus weak, not like to live til morning? My
heart began to sink, so that I could scarce speak. Within a little space the
Lord strengthened me wonderfully, and put it into my heart to hang my clothes
about me, and go out of my bed to other beds in the next chamber, and fetch
clothes: I being not able to stand, crept on my hands and knees, and fetched the
clothes of two other beds, and with the help of Gods holy Angel laid them on my
bed, and went to bed again.

A while after, being something warm in my bed, the Lords Angel gave me warning
that I must undergo the strongest temptation that night as any man had
endured; yet the Lord would uphold me in it. Dear friends, it was no dream nor
fancy; for I was awake, and had my perfect memory.

A little while after there was as it had been a book opened in my conscience,
I cannot forget the remembrance of the letters still; and there was laid to my
open view and memory all the sins that ever I had offended God either by
omission or commission; and the Lord assured my conscience they were forgiven
assuring me that they were buried in the Sea of Christ's blood.

That was no sooner past, and another Book opened, but there came into my mind
a remembrance of al my dealing between man and man, and there was found no
accusation against me, but only for 4 d. which had been near six years past.
For the first journey that ever my Master sent me out with iron ware, he sent
me three days journey from his house to a place called Chessom in
Buckinghamshire, and before I came home again, I lost 1 s. of my account, and
having cast it up at Warwick, the last night of my journey, and then I fearing
to tell my Master of it, kept half a peck of oats from my horses, thinking to
get the shilling that way at several times; so after with my with my Master, I
losing 8 d. and wronging the dumb creatures of their allowance, my conscience
being troubled at it, did so no more.

And when I was at the point of death, God suffered two ugly Devils, in shape
like Blackmoors to accuse me before him; so that I was forced to look out of
the bed, and they stood between my bed and the window at my left hand: I was in
a terrible fright, they standing near my bedside a little after midnight. The
Lord gave me a strong spirit to resist the Fiends by prayer, which made them
fly from my bedside. And Gods holy Angel comforted me exceedingly, and so left
me for a little time.

Anon after there appeared another Devil, who was transformed into a glorious
shape, whose adornments shone like gold, as it had been a great Emperor, King,
or Monarch, with a Crown on his head, who would have persuaded me to have
denied that Christian Faith as I was trained up in, and renounce the Baptism as
I had received in my infancy, and I should be in as great estimation for the
time to come as any in the world.

I endeavored to pray against those persuading temptations, but my own heart
would have deceived me one time, I could scarce keep my mind close to God; and
being mighty hot by sweating, and faint by sickness, my soul desired to keep
close to God. My heart was brought very weak, I was brought so feeble-minded, I
thinking all hope past but I must yield; at last I said, avoid Satan.

At these words, and many more such like, the transformed Fiend vanished away;
and the Angel appeared at my right hand as I lay in my bed, and strengthened me
with exceeding inward comfort, and so left me again.

The black Fiends appeared a second time, and being resisted by prayer, they
fled. And there was another like a General, or great Commander, in gay apparel,
in several colors, as red, black, green, yellow, in a bunch, persuading me as
the former did; but the Lords power was strong in me to resist him by prayer,
which made them fly from my bedside; then began it to be a little
morning-light. I prayed all night, looking every minute when the Lord would
fetch away my soul from my body, but I desired much of the Lord to live to see
my Father and brothers, and to make a Will to dispose of some little money, and
some cattle; some to the poor, some to my brothers, some to friends, according
to my Talent as I had.

When the day began to dawn in my chamber, there was the shape of a Ladder,
reared from the chamber-floor to the window; the top of the Ladder was above
the window, the two ugly black Fiends and the transformed Devil appeared again
near my bedside in violent way to fear and tempt me. I prayed to God for
defense and succor; the transformed Devil, shining like an Angel of Light, ran
up to the top of the Ladder above the window, there I was tempted again; the
two black Fiends ran up after, and stood one above another on the Ladder,
calling to me twice, and saying, Come, will you come? The Lord strengthened my
heart to prayer; the transformed Fiend vanished away from the top of the
Ladder: The ugly black Fiends, after they had turned feet to feet, the ones
head was up toward the top of the Ladder, the others hung downward, and thus
they hung their soles of their feet together on the Ladder. I thought all this
while on Jacobs Ladder. Lord, thought I to my self, this is such a Ladder as
Jacob saw in his Vision, Genesis 28.12:

At the end of these terrible fights of the fearful Vision, I brake forth,
uttering these very words, saying, O my Savior, thou that wast tempted and
had no sin, (...) able to succor me a poor finful creatore; in the name of
the whole Godhead avoid Satan. The one fell one way, the other another way, the
Fiends parting asunder; and I praise God I had no more temptation all the rest
of the time of my sickness.

And the Angel of the Lord came and comforted me, and told me when I was
restored to health I must go on Gods message to the King, and tell him he must
agree with the Parliament, and condescend to them by agreement, and forgive
them that which had been past, as a loving Father, although it were against him
in that way as he was in and his Army: if he did refuse to do it speedily, and
for to work Reformation both in Church and State, if this were neglected, the
Kings Army would come to nothing but destruction, and he would be destroyed
and cut off, but yet his Son would come at last to reign.

Then I was to tell the Parliament, in withstanding the King they must not do
it to make themselves great, but perform their vow, for the setting up of Gods
truth in the true purity for Church Government; and for Temporal and State
Affairs, it must be to maintain true Judgment in all degrees for the
Magistrate according to truth.

If this in the beginning were not their aim, and in the end in the end their
actions, God would blast all their proceedings, by one power displacing and
dissolving another, til at last their heresy and injustice and division would
bring them to confusion.

And the Angel then gave me direction how the King and Parliament must make
their agreement at last, and what form and manner the Church must and would be
established and governed. And how that God had ordained tha I must be one of
the three, and my Talent was to show first the Church Government.

And after, in my ficknesse the Angel revealed to me again, how that all
Countries would rise in a triumphing manner, with all sorts of Music, and so
come up to London with great joy, to establish the King, and overthrow all the
enemies of Christ and his Gospel, and cast them out of power, and then all
sword-powers would begin here to cease, and as a pattern other Nations should
follow.

I should have spoken of the manner of the sickness, and more of Gods great
goodness to me; but for brevity-sake I end with praises to God

The reason why God suffered the two two black Fiends to accuse me for the
groat as I wronged my Masters horses of their allowance, gave me warning after
for ever wronging my fellow servants more, if it should lie in my power after.

As much it signified and breatned to any that either are, have been past, or
shall be for time to come, put in power above men, to be Rulers either in Church
or State, if they wrong, defraud or smite with the fists of iniquity, Matthew. 24.

They that do so, without repentance to God, and restoration to man, like
Zacheus, God and their own conscience will find them out, and Satan will bring
bills of indictment in this life or after: For we have all one Maste- in Heaven.

Satan's transforming himself into a glorious shape, and persuading me to
renounce my infant baptism, and the feigned apparition of Jacobs Ladder,
signified all Sects and selfopinions, that are tempted by Satan to renounce
their infantbaptism, to go after the feigned River of Jordan, persuading others
to follow their steps up Jacobs Ladder, which is not the true way to Heaven:
Therefore, as Christ says, Neitherbeleeve nor follow them, Matthew. 24.

A short description of some of my great Troubles.
AFter the first Apparitions, Revelations, Temptations and Visions that the
Lord bad made known unto me his unworthy servant, many of his secret
determined intents which suddenly were to befall the King and Parliament both,
Church and State, and a means how it might have been prevented, and a true
peace settled, if they would but have denied their own corrupt ways, to have
embraced Gods ways.

And further, when the word of the Lord came first unto me by his holy Angel,
to cause me to go on Gods message, first to the King, and then to the
Parliament, to declare God^ mind unto both parties, as I have showed before,
and what great troubles I must undergo by crosses, imprisonment, violence from
my nearest friends, loss of goods, if I refused to go at first, to displease
them: yet after many troubles I must go at last.

When God had restored me to health and strength of body again after my
sickness, through my friends persuasion I left Gods message undone, and cast
his will behind my back; but many times I should talk of it to many of my
friends and others, telling them in what manner God had appeared to me, and
what a charge was laid upon me from God to press me on to discharge my
conscience, I oftentimes speaking of it with grief; but they most of them
would be still persuading me that it was a temptation of Satan and his
delusions, and would be arguing much with me, that in these days God did not
appear by either apparitions, visions, or revelations, saying those things
were now ceased.

Thus their persuasion wrought upon me by Satan's temptation to let Gods work
alone for the space of above three years. In this time I had some great
troubles: The first of them was when I thought I should have been married to a
Neighbors daughter as lived near my Masters dwelling, one of a good portion
and parentage. She was my first love, being made sure one to another by strong
promises in the way of contract between our selves: it was broke by false
pretended friends, and so parted. I looked upon it no other way then this, I
was assured that God did cause my proceedings in the world to be crossed, because
I had not been obedient to what I was commanded of Gods holy Angel, and
confirmed by sure signs.

Within the compass of a year after I was married to another rich man's
daughter of my own trade, being set up to follow the calling of an Ironmonger
at Hales Owen, five miles from Brimingham, lived peaceably with my Wife, kept
near 60. Nailors at work to make iron ware. I kept great trading, and many
horses to send ware up unto other Countries, for to serve whole sale to many
Chapmen.

In this time I had many troubles and losses, which if I should lay them down
in particular what I had before I was forced by God to go on his message, and
those as I have endured since, in the manner as they have befell me, and Gods
mercy to me in delivering and preserving me from one time to another, in no
ordinary way, but in a miraculous way, the like was scarce ever heard of by
any; if I should put them in a Book, it would be larger then could be read in
the lengest day in the year, and yet all true and good reading, to show the
wrongs as I have endured by my nearest friends, and she that was my Wife, with
some of her friends, and many more, which before I went on Gods message showed
great love toward me; but when I went on purpose to the King, when Colonel
Graves was his Keeper at Holmby, they were all great friends, but after,
professed enemies against me by Satan's malice, to wrong me in the highest degrees
that ever was heard of by any man in such nature since the world began, not
only once or twice, but several times in several years; yet I praise God I
can speak it with a good conscience, in the sight of God and man, that there is
none of my greatest enemies can say upon truth, neither will they I believe,
that I in all my troubles as I have undergone, I ever wronged man, woman or
child willingly, not so much as to use any extremity against any of my greatest
enemies, but still committing all to God, and praying for my greatest enemies,
which are sure fignes and strong testimonies to all that know me, that I have
been all this while guided, preserved, and carried on by a miraculous
providence of Gods holy spirit.

First, when I went to speak with the King, Colonel Graves was his Keeper at
Holmby: I being compelled by God to leave all and go to foretell King Charles
what would suddenly befall him if such things were not done as the Lord had
showed me concerning his agreeing with the Parliament to erect and set up the
true Religion of Jesus Christ in the good old way, and that the Magistracy
should be as a wall to the true Ministry.

I having these things in my breast to declare to the Kings own person by word
of mouth, I coming very near to the Kings Majesty, being at bowls that day at
Boulten Court, two miles from Northampton, with many Noblemen and Gentlemen to
attend him, I was fearful and bashful to be so bold as to speak my self to
such a person as a King, I being ready to speak several times, but being
possessed with slavish fear, I called Colonel Graves aside, he being my
neighbour-countryman, and of great acquaintance with his kindred and family, I
told him what my occasion was to speak with his Majesty, and what it did
concern, who walked a great while with me: I declaring Gods m^ssage to him
concerning the King and Parliament, hoping that he would have been an
instrument to have brought me before the King, being it was so that the King
was his prisoner, he told me he durst not let me speak to the King, for he
feared I would speak those things to the King as would be displeasing to some
there, and so he should be blamed, and I might be troubled because notice was
taken of my calling him aside.

He said to me, Countryman, Countryman, trouble not your self with the these
things, but go home and follow your calling, for there are many which are
crackbrain'd coming with such stories to the Parliament, and I belieeve this
is a temptation of Satan's working upon you.

Sir, said I to Colonel Graves, you shall find it no such matter; for if there
be not this speedy agreement between King and Parliament upon these con^^tions,
that the Protestant Church may be truly and rightly reformed, so that the King,
Judges, and Civil Magistracy may be reformed according to righteousness and
true holiness, that they may be as a defending wall to the true Orthodox
Ministry, according to that direction as God declares to you by me now, and
more fully he would if you would believe what he speaks now by me. The King will
be taken away in a pretense to do him good; but many intend to destroy him.

When I had declared Gods message to Colonel Graves, I was eased of my burden.
I went home thinking to follow my Trade again close suddenly, not thinking
these things should be any hinderance at all to me. But God was angry with me,
because I having lost such an opportunity in speaking to the King by slavish
fear, but must needs declare it to him that prevented me.

After they had taken away the King from Holmby, I went to speak with General
Fairfax concerning the King and Parliaments agreement, and Church Government,
but was prevented.

God suffered Satan to raise my Wife and most of her kindred to be violent
against me, my Wife being there at that time, according to her and their
desire, she being great with child, near her time of deliverance, after they
had gotten a great part of my best goods and stock to their house, using much
desperate cruelty against me. The very remembrance of it grieves my heart to
speak or think of it still. Before the time as God caused me to go to the King,
my Wife and I lived as peaceably as any man and his Wife did in our Country,
and as much true love was showed to her by me; but for her part, she fell off to
be my bitterest enemy, for want of being guided by the true love and fear of
God.

When they had forbid me to come to the house; yet patiently I endured, hoping
to have overcome all my enemies by love, I came oftentimes to see my Wife, I
was many times in great danger of being killed among them: Their Neighbors did
lament my sad condition, and will witness the same, I seeking no Law nor Justice
against them.

When the very time of my Wifes deliverance was come, she forced me from her
with bitter swearing and cursing, forbidding me ever coming near her more,
being set on by her Mother. So at that time I left her with a heavy heart,
praying for her, and telling her that I would pray to the Lord earnestly that
he in mercy would preserve both she and the child from death; but yet to cause
her not to be released of her tormenting pain, til she was glad to send
speedily for me to be a comfort to her, and to confess the wrong which they
had done me.

The Lord heard my humble prayers; for she was near three days in travail, and
could not be delivered, til I was at last with all haste sent for. When I came
to her, she lovingly embraced me with bitter tears, laying great blame upon
her Mother and the rest of them that were my enemies, desiring me speedily to
go to prayer for her, and so I did, and she was immediately delivered of a
daughter, and we were all friends again; and she was forced to confess the
great wrong they had done against me before many women that were their
Neighbors.

Her Father did seem to love me all this time, caused my Horse to be put to
grass, and desired rue to stay all night. At evening his eldest son came home,
and gave me very bad words, telling me he would turn my horse out of the
ground, and taking a riding rod in his hand to drive out my horse, having laid
a great club in a private place in a readiness, intending to knock me down
privately. I followed him, desiring him not to show himself so uncivil against
me as to put my horse out: I having neither staff nor any other thing in my
hand: I being before him when he came to the private place where the great club
was hidden, he had like to have beaten my brains out of my head before I was
aware of his wicked villainy, being in the dark evening time, yet I saw a
glimpse of the blow coming toward my head, and stepping close toward him, I
put it by my head with my arm; if Gods mercy had not preserved me a thousand
to one I had been slain, I dare say it was his bloody intent, and many more,
such desperate attempts I several times escaped.

Thus they abused me, and sold my horses among them, and broke me of my Trade.
I then began to seek out to the Justices for a warrant, being thus abused for
my patience sake; but before I could bring them before the Justice, they had
caused me to be brought into great misery, using my own money as an instrument.
They wrought upon my Father by the worst enemies I had, to persuade him I was
troubled with distraction; and because my Father hearing I had been with the
King at Holmby, and writing and talking strange things, though it were of God,
yet understood not, he consented for to cause me to go to be a while with a
Doctor, rather then they should show violence to cast me into prison by false
swearing; and to draw my Father to be willing to that, they made promises that
a while after I should have all my goods restored again. They knew there could
be no other mask to cover that vilany as they had lately done against me, but
only to cause many to think I was out of my wits, to make good their credit.

But Brethren, it was so thought of Christ, when he began to put in practice
his Fathers business, when he chose his twelve Apostles, Mark 3.17.21. and
called some of them sons of Thunder, his kindred thought he had been beside
himself, intending to lay hands on him: if it were so judged of Christ by
natural men, let not his spiritual soldiers be ashamed to be called madmen,
and so all natural men do all Gods people. But all that ever saw me, let them
be enemies or friends, I praise God cannot but say I ever spoke sensibly, with
sobriety, and very well in the Scriptures, which made all that heard me admire
to hear me speak, and to read those things which I wrote, having no natural
learning to attain to it, but the dictates of Gods holy spirit to press me on
to it.

And when all this misery, and much more had befell me, I willingly submitted my
self under this great burden of afflictions, to Gods protection, and to be
ruled by my Father counsel, although I knew it were against me. But when I came
out of that misery, I went to a Justice of the Peace again for a warrant to
bring some of the chief actors of my misery before a Justice in
Worcestershire, on Midsomer day was seven years past; and when I had laid open
the wrongs to him, it much grieved him, and all that heard of it. The Justice
promised me that I should have justice, for he had heard that the whole
country spoke well of me, and cried out against them for wronging of me.

So I went that day after to see my unnatural Wife, to her Fathers house, and
finding none at home but she with her little child, I was glad. She pretended a
great deal of love to me when she saw me, by outward signs of weeping, and
good words, as she sat by my little child, it lying in a Cradle.

My Wife desired me not to think of any difference that had been past, but to
forget is, and to go as soon as possibly I could to housekeeping again, for
she told me that they began to lead her a very disquiet life. Quoth I to her
again, I hope all will make for the best, to cause your love to cleave to me
again; for said I, you ought to forsake all your friends to live with your
loving husband, you know Gods word commands you so to do.

I desired her never to so much as think any more of any thing that had been
past, but now to turn over a new leaf, as though we had been newly married;
and so she made great promises to me that she would.

I further asked her how it was possible we should keep house so suddenly
again, seeing they had sold my horses, and broke me of my Trade? She told me
her Father would restore to me such things again, for he loved me well she said,
and was sorry for me.

I took the little infant out of the cradle, and sat me down on a stool at
the end of the cradle, and laid my staff at my feet, for I was fearful of
more mischief if any of the rest were at home, which made me do so.

My Wives Mother, and her daughter Katherine being near the house, and seeing
me when I came fromward the Justices, they laid a plot, thinking that I had
been for a warrant for them, if they could persuade my wife to take their part,
they would fall upon me, and so would take their oath all three when they came
before the Justice, that I offered them wrong, and so make their own matter
good, and throw me in prison again.

As soon as they came into the house, they called my Wife from me, and told her
privately if she did not help to assist them against me, they should be utterly
undone and discredited: So she presently yielded to her Mothers and middlemost
Sisters counsel, and came presently from them. I had the child on my knees, and
was playing with it: She took up my staff as lay at my feet, and made as
though she would have carried out of the hall into the parlour; she turned back
again suddenly with a great blow, and struck me on the head and studied me,
and caught me by the throat, and plucked me by the hair of the head, and beat
my head against the wall; her Sister being a great lusty wench, came running
upon me too, and beat me about the head with my own staff; and thus I lay with
the child on my knees, leaning with my back against the wall, my breath being
almost gone: yet I praise God I lay quietly til the Lords providence had caused
me to pass the child safe off my knees into the cradle without harm, I
sitting as the end of the cradle.

I looked up, and saw my Mother in Law coming in upon me too. I by the power
of God who preserved me, and in abled me, gave my wife a push on the breast as
hard as J. could, and flung her backward. J. leapt up and plucked the staff out
of her Sisters hand, and gave her but one I bow, which lighted on her arm, and
bruised it forely, that the ran away crying, and her Mother. My wife, as soon
as she could recover her self to get up, ran and took up an axe, and came
having it up above her shoulders, with the edge toward me, ready to cleave my
brains in twain: J struck up my hand quick under the head of the axe by the
handle, and put it by my head: all this being done, and J being wounded. My
Wife with that one blow J gave her on one of her breasts, never gave suck more
of that breast, which made me very sorny: Her Sisters arm was so bruised, that
it was lame above two years after.

The Angel of God that preserved me, caused them to be so wounded; for J dare
swear J struck but only those two blows; for J had so much patience from God
that time, that J was not angry. Her Sister and Mother ran both out of the
house; J stayed my wife by the arm, and told her if she had not betrayed me
with her Judas-kissing and dissembling weeping, J had not so much cared.

J never struck woman before that time, nor since, neither would I have done it
then but in defense of my life. A while after, ah Briget, said J, when thou
have done all against me as can be done, thou will be sorry for it, and sorely
repent it: For J fully believe, said J, that it is not thee, but the Devils
temptation, and thy Mothers bad counsel, for lack of serving God; but if thou will swear, said J, that thou will not come near them for a great while, and
go along with me from them, J will freely forgive thee, and never speak of it
to any man. I spoke thus, but not intending to do it suddenly. She replied
again, saying that she would never live with me more cursing me in the name of
God with many bitter curses.

Then I spoke mildly again to her, saying, J pray you fetch some beer, and let
us drink together before we part; J said she, if J could find any Rats-bane to
poison thee, J would. So I left her, and went to my Fathers house, with a heavy
heart the Lord knows.

So the next time I went to the Constable, with a warrant to bring them, her
Mother, eldest Brother John, and Sister Katherine, before the Justice; but
before I could have my warrant executed, they lighted on me first, and her
eldest brother that before had like to have killed me, having an Officer ready,
arrested me of flat felony, I being kept as a felonious prisoner. So I sent
for my Father: when he came, my Father-in-Law and he took up the matter, and
made agreement, with my Fathers persuading me. I presently imitating Christ's
forgiving his enemies, committed my cause to God, and was persuaded by my
Father and Father-in-Law. But I came not near my wife a great while after, but
abode with my own Father: And I began to follow my trade again. My wife seeing
that, she made many friends to come to live with me again, making great moan,
and showing her self very penitent. I being persuaded by my Father and many
friends more, consented; and we lived together again at a place called Harburn
in Staffordshire, two miles from Brimingham. My loss was above 200 l. besides
the misery I endured; and God blessed my trading when I began with a little
stock again as I had left, having nothing to set me forward in trading from
them, but words of promise. We were all made friends, but since I may curse the
day that ever I did trust any such former enemies to be reconciled friends
again.

For about the time as the Levellers did rise against the Parliament, I having
attained to a good flock of cattle, and horses, and trading, more then ever I
was in before, my wife and I both living in a quiet condition, all former in
juries forgiven by me to her and every one of them.

And the spirit of God caused me to put out a little book concerning the
present misery of the times, both for Church and State. My wise and her friends
that abased me before, brought greater calamity upon me then I endured before:
Thus I was abused, and they banded themselves together against me. My own
natural friends forsook me, God had so ordained it to try me, and punish me;
for them that were formerly great pretended friends, became my utter enemies. I
looked up still toward God, his holy spirit still guiding me with patience to
endure it, and assuring me daily more that the cause of my being thus abused by
men and women, was because I had cast Gods message behind my back. I often
thinking how God punished Jonah for his neglect, when God called him and sent
him to Nineveh.

Many of my best friends that loved me well, would blame my Father for not
taking my part; but God had suffered Satan to blind his eyes from the spirit of
true discernment, as all natural men are, so that he did show me no favor,
but added more affliction to me. Many would say to him, why do you not seek to
have him released out of his misery? If I should do so, says he, he would be
imprisoned for meddling with King and Parliament-affaires; for I had been in
prison at Buckingham a little before, by some soldiers who raised thimselves
against me by false witness, to make a prize of me for my horses and goods,
and carried me from Buckingham to Alisbury to try me for my life, by false
Articles as they had forged against me: But when I came to be tried by a
Council of War, God gave me such an undaunted spirit, that those false
witnesses had not power to witness against me: So I was set at liberty, having
loss and hinderance of time.

After these miseries of imprisonment, and many more great troubles: in the
mean time of my troubles, my wives friends setcht my best goods a way from my
house, and some cattle, after I had forbid them to meddle with any thing: For
when they saw they could not take my life away, they thought to make me run my
Country; but God gave me much patience and courage; for I went to the house,
and took four men with me: I demanded my goods, taking a cart and horses to
fetch them in a peaceable manner, if I could have them so: But they denied me
my goods, and my wife stood against me with railing words, and her Mother and
one Sifter, the younger daughter did never speak against me: So with much
patience I went my way, and looked in their grounds, to see whether I could
find any of my cattle there: Finding a Cow, and a young Bull that were mine, I
took them away, to my house at Harburn in Staffordshire.

The manner that they had taken them from me, according to the Laws of God and
man, was but a felonious way of robbing me; for they owed me part of my Wives
portion, as was due to me long before that time.

This was on the Wednesday. On the Thursday my wife knew that I would go to
Brimingham-market: her Father being from home, my wives Mother, her eldest Son,
and my wife and her sister Katherine, being fearful that I should begin to
trouble them, or bind them over by an order from the Justices, to answer at the
Assizes before the Judge, for all the wrong they had done me, they thought
they had no other way to take, but to begin with me first, and so they did. For
my brother-inlaw. his name is John Bissel, met me at Brimingham on the
Market Day, and arrested me with flat felony, and so suddenly caused me to be
thrown into the Dungeon; no Bail would be taken: All did condemn him shamefully
for it, yet wilfully and presumptuously he did it. On the morrow I went to the
Justices, the Justice could not persuade him but he would take an oath of
Felony against me; yet he could not deny but that the cattle were mine. After
the Justice had examined thoroughly the Witnesses, he told him hanging was too
good for him, and he should dearly answer for it.

Then when his Father came home out of the Country, for his Son did all in his
Fathers name, he was almost out of his wits to hear what his Son had done;
Fearing he should be undone by it, presently he made to the Justices, and to my
Father and me and my friends, to take up the business again, and to keep me
from going to prison.

This ensuing Bil of Divorcement was made after she and her kindred had by
Satan's malice and their cruelty brought me into horrible persecution and
misery. I may not now, for brevity-sake, lay down the manner of it; but I hope
in God in another Book I may, because always I hope I shall have all the
mercies of God showed to me still in remembrance.

Her Father and she coming on a Sabbath day where I was in prison, gave me
threatening words, and said they were glad to see me there; and scoffing at me,
her Father desired that we were divorced. Well said I, pray you let it be so.
His answer was, he would give forty pound upon the condition to have it so. I
have witness of it.

At last they gave me good words: My desire was for her to bring my daughter to
me, that I might see her: She told me she would not, and gave me very desperate
urging words to make a solemn Vow, that if she did not bring my daughter
between that time and Wednesday following, according to the Law of Moses I
would write her a bil of divorcement; if I could not get ink, I would write the
first Copy of it with my own blood, if I loft one of the joints of my little
finger on my left hand to do it, that all the rest of my body might mourn for
the loss of her that wanted grace to mourn for her self. Besides this, I
thought that many men might take example to put their wives away by divorcement
without any true desert: And therefore, because I intended to put the Bil of
Divorcement in print, I would go such a hard way, that none dare follow such an
example. Furthermore I desired to know by a token if it were of God or no, that
if she came not with my child by Wednesday, I might neither eat nor sleep with
quietness til I had disjoynted my self of the nail-joynt of my left hand,
being the little fingers end. She came not, and that sign was fulfild; yet I
did not do it til above two days after Wednesday; and when I had done it, I
having some revelations from God to confirm it, suddenly I had a Revelation and
a Vision, that God had appointed it to be done, and that it was lawful for me
to take another wife, as Hosea did in a typical way: And it was showed me by a
Vision between four, which was allotted for me, and how that I must speak to
one of the four, and then speak openly of it to others. This is near six
years paft, and I believe the parties are unmarried still. Let no man judge
this to be madness, but let them think if it be of God, it cannot be prevented.

The Bill of Divorcement.
KNow this all my honest Christian Neighbors, and all others whom it may
concern, That I with much reverence and holy fear do call God to the recording
and renewing the condition of this Obligation or Bill of Divorcement, which
breaks and violateth the band of Wedlock and Matrimony, and separateth for
ever she that was formerly my Wife and me asunder.

It is a very weighty matter, therefore it had need to be understood, and
thoroughly to be proved by the word of God, and the light of a good conscience,
which is that glittering sword which stands drawn to slay every son and
daughter of Adam and Eve, that either turns to the right hand or to the lest,
either by hypecrisie or their own sinister ends in such weighty affairs as
this.

I do therefore for several great causes, in the presence of God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, which is my Redeemer, Creator, and Preserver, whose
powerful providence has still from time to time preserved me from being
swallowed up or destroyed by many great dangers, and several desperate enemies,
which the Devil has formerly raised up against me, to bring me to an untimely
death, without any just cause offered by me, whereof the said Briget Bissel,
daughter of the the late said Richard Bissel, which is now dead, of the Parish
of Yardlie, in the County of Worcester, Ironmonger; the which said Briget
Bissel, which was the married wife to me the said John Sanders, whose dwelling
was at Harburn, in the County of Stafford, Ironmonger, she being a great
instrument to bring me into many borrible persecutions, by Satan's malicious
invention, and some of her nearest kindreds counsel; for no other end, but for
the witness of Jesus, and his testimony, which has carried me on by his holy
Spirit of Prophecy.

Besides, more then this misery which she and they brought upon me, she and
they have often urged me to be divorced from her for ever. I do therefore,
according to the Law of God, as he gave to Moses, Deuteronomy. 24. and Gods command to
me, which caused me to write her this Bill of Divorcement after this manner,
and deliver it to her near six years past, and now again it is renewed,
desiring that Gods mercy and forgiveness may be extended to her for the
forgiveness of her sins, as well as for my self: And that it may please God, I
humbly desire upon the bended knees of my body and souleaffections, that the
parting and breaking of this temporal wedlock, may cause a spiritual warriage
to the Lamb Jesus for us both; and that all profane and wicked persons mouths
may be stopped, that shall be apt to speak against this, seeing it is permitted
and so appointed by thee. O Lord raise me up speedily by thy mercy and
providence again, that so I may be able to take a godly fatherly care for my
daughter, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen and so be it.

And she is ever to be free from me to be any other man's wife, if it please God
and her own conscience: And the like release is to me, if God and my own
conscience please; only some chattels and goods of mine which are in her
keeping, contrary to my mind, at my demands to be at my request when I please,
if it be not otherwise agreed upon.


These troubles were true signs to me, and gave me cause to believe that God
had appointed me as he did Hosea, Hos. 1.2. typically to take a wife of
Fornications, because the whole land had committed spiritual whoredom against
the Lord, and as the Prophet of God was to do by Gods appointment, and to
signify how they had divorced themselves from the Lord by their idolatrous
whoredoms, he was to divorce his wife for that as a figne.

Truly Brethren, there is none can say but that the word of God is written as
well for our instruction, as it was to the natural seed of Israel, for we are of
Abraharis seed by Faith: And though the Scripture speaks of such things done
then, yet there is a signification now of the same things to us.

Our whole Land has committed spiritual whoredom against God. First, in this
manner, by breaking our ancient Covenant with God, to worship him in new
fangled manners of their own invention, hating Gods old true way of worship,
now there is no King, neither has been this many days in England, neither
true Sacrifice, Hosea 3.

Secondly, our whole State being like the Nobility of Israel, which brought no
fruits of Reformation to God; but made High Altars to themselves by
Covetousness; which is idolatry and spiritual whoredom: And our being divided
like them, Hosea 10.2, 3.

Thirdly, we may well say our wars began, because we would have no King to reign
over us, for want of the fear of the Lord to guide us.

Fourthly, who can say but they broke Covenant with God by swearing falsely to
be true to the King and the Protestant Religion, and to work reformation in
Church and State for true judgment: But in stead of being better, it is worse,
for it has broke out like hem lock or wormwood in the furrows of the Field,
and has tafted as bitter as gall, Amos 6.12. Hosea 10.4, 7.

And the death of King Charles is typified to be the King of Samaria, whom
Hosea prophesied should be cut off as a foame on the factious water which the
Devil caft out of his mouth to drown the woman, being meant the Church, in this
time of new fangled worship, and heretical way of new opinions.

If we see H^s^a's Prophesies to be fulfilled by the late dissolved
Parliaments, and to be as true to us as they speak of the natural Israelites;
you cannot choose but believe it to be true in these things.

And why then may not my troubles and crosses, when I was forced by God, and
their own violence against me, which could not be done without Gods permission
and ordination: Let no man dare, or presume to judge otherwise, but being done
by Gods appointment, it did signify these things as have befell our Nation
between King and Parliament, by being divorced from God to follow their own
corrupt ways.

My Wife came out of such a Lineage by her Fathers birth as Hosea was to take
his wife of for a further sign, Hos. 1. but I was ignorant of that when I
married her; my love was never the less to her; yet her Father had always the
relation of all people to be a very honest dealing man: But seeing my unhappy
predestination was to be thus afflicted by she that was my Wife, I look upon it
no other way then this, it was because I did not at the first forsake all these
outward things of this life willingly to go on Gods message. I am very sorry
that I cannot forbear writing and laying open to the view of the world the
wrong as I have received from her and their hands. Let no man judge the worse
of her or them for acting these strange actions, or me for relating of it; but
let them all assure themselves thus as hear of it. The Devil did not only
afflict Job by his wife, and Satan's temptation by his friends, when he was in
his great calamity; but the like instruments Satan can make use of any, let
them be never so honest for natural parts, if God leave them to themselves: But
let every one watch and pray, lest they fall into Satan's temptations, and
praise God for all the enjoyment of his benefits.

If any will say, as many have done, that there can be no divocement lawful
unless it be for the act of Adultery: To give them an answer, look in Malachy
2.16. God hates putting away; but if so be thou must, such iniquities ought to
be hid within ones own garment; therefore if I do know such things, I will
forbear speaking of them to the world.

The humble Petition of John Sanders to the Lord Protector, Most humbly shows,
THat whereas the humble Petitioner have oftentimes on purpose many sundry and
long journeys to speak with your Highness, for the space of above 3. years
and a half; but none of these times could I find any opportunity by any of
your Soldiers or servants. I have at this time many grievances to ease and
unburden my self of to your Highness, which is the Head in chief: I having
undergone much wrong by many several men, to the sustaining of great loss both
of goods and chattels, and other things: But concerning those things, your
humble Petitioner will keep silence at this time, committing all those things
to God, who has kept my life from the rage of my enemies for the time past by
his merciful providence, and so I trust he will for the time to come.

My Lord, the cause of my complaint now at this present time, after the many
and sundry journeys, and many losses and false imprisonments, which false
bosome-friends, and false witnesses have brought me to, for nothing else but
the witness of Jesus, which has carried me on by his holy spirit to foretell
things to come.

About half a year before Worcester fight, which was since you came to be Head
Leader in chief of the Parliament Forces, the Lord compelled me openly to
foretell how that King Charles would come with an Army into Worcestershire
before Bartholomew-tide from Scotland against the Parliament; and how that his
taking up of Arms to maintain the Scottish Presbytery Government would be the
cause of the overthrow of his Army, if he fought: These things God compelled me
openly to declare in Brimingham, and at the Lady Graves, and many places more,
and how Colonel Graves, the Ladies Son, would come in with him: I was cast into
great imprisonment and misery by Satan's malice and wicked men, til the very day
of Worcester-fight, and lost all my time, trade, and stock, besides all the
misery and false imprisonment I underwent in several places. Some said I was
distracted; others said I was guided by the spirit of God; but in the presence
of God I speak it, that I never knew my self at one time worse then another,
but it was the will of God to carry me on in that manner: No man ever heard me
speak at those times like one that had been distracted; but if Christ were so
esteemed, Mark 3. and Paul, let not me be ashamed of that name by natural men,
which are spiritually blind. Many witnesses I could produce, that heard me
foretell the manner and time of Worcester-fight. When I was out of prison, the
spirit of the Lord caused me to come fourscore miles to speak with your
Highness, and to tell you how that the present standing Parliament could not
stand without they entered into a hallowed covenant with God at the Ark of his
Testimony, for want of the true worship of Jesus Christ, being found out and
set above them, was the cause of Gods overthrowing them for their injustice and
division: But when I could not find an opportunity to declare Gods message to
your Highness, I told Colonel Barkstead these things, and showed him writings,
and told him what way the Church must and would be rebuilded.

Being then eased of my burden, I went home into my own Country again, and
after that into Ireland, counting my self unfortunate: I carried iron ware to
set up my trade there, and began it in Dublin; but the spirit of the Lord
compelled me to come out of Ireland again, to come up to London about six
weeks before the Parliament was dissolved. I could not speak with your
Highness, the Parliament was newly rose about the Seamen; the spirit of God
compelled me to make a Speech in Westminster Hall before abundance of people
concerning the Parliaments dissolution about the shortest day in the year: And
then before I could be eased of my burden, the spirit of God compelled me to
go to Colonel Barkestead, the Lieutenant of the Tower, to tell him Gods decree
was so gone out against them for their covetousness, injustice, and division,
and to prefigure it by a Vision and a Revelation which I had seen before,
concerning a white wand, and a bunch of filk colors, which were green, red,
yellow, and black, and to tell him the meaning of it, by the appointment of God:
These things he cannot choose but witness at this very day.

Then I returned toward Warwickshire again, and testified the same in many
other places, and at Brimingham several Market days, in a strange manner, to
the admiration of all that saw me, and grief to my friends and kindred after
the flesh, and the greatest grief and terror of all was to my self, because I
was compelled by the dictates of Gods holy spirit to do it.

And that very day that the Parliament was dissolved, being Monday morning, I
was caused by the spirit of God to go from Harburn to Brimingham, which is two
miles, to my great terror and grief, God is a witness against me if I lie,
and to hire the widow Westwoods son to go with me to carry my best wearing
clothes for me; and I was commanded of God to wear old clothes and old shoes
to Brimingham Towns end, and there to put my shoes off my feet, rent some
seames of the old garments as I wore, and take a Carpenters Rule in my hand,
the young man carrying my best raiment and old shoes before me, I making
proclamation by the power of God, and his great Parliament of Heaven, and
saying thus.

If you should see Ezekiel measuring the Town with a Rule, or seething a pot,
and skimming off the skum, and nothing but water in it, or the holy men of God
put off their shoes, or renting their garments, though the thing were
commanded of God by them now as it has formerly been, yet you would think they
were mad, as the Jews thought by Paul, so I know you think by me; but it will
be known otherwise: The Carpenters Rule that I had in my hand, was to signify
that Parliaments time of fitting was measured out to fit no longer: Then the
seames of some of my old garments being rent, was to signify their renting and
tearing by division: The putting the old ^^ooes off my feet, I told them
signified that they must cast off their old natural sinful affections from
their hearts, and factious seditious ways, that their hearts might be made good
ground, and they to become members of the true holy Church of God, which is
hated by them.

The cause of my speaking of Ezechiels seething pot to be skummed off, I told
them was the skum of factious members of the Parliament House, that were
against Ministers and Church Government, were then cast out of power: Yet said
I, the flesh and bones are left still, and we shall not suddenly be eased of
Taxes that oppress the poor; and how that the power would be under one head
suddenly, much like the power of a King, but not a King, which meant the Lord
Protector.

After all these things were ended, and done by the command of God, by me his
most unworthy servant John Saunders. I call God to witness I would not have
been hired to have done the like for a hundred pound then, nor would not now in
a counterfeit way or manner. I never did the like before; some hypocritical
people said I counterfeited, and many pharisaical people, that say Prophesying,
Visions, and Revelations are ceased, counted me a mad man. I praise God, for
those things, either dissembling, counterfeiting, or natural madness, I have
been always free from.

Then when these things were ended, I went and put on my better clothing, and
refreshed my body by eating and drinking, I walked in the Town civilly, in
those places where I had made those speeches, desiring many of the honest civil
people which I knew, that they should not judge me distracted, or any other
thing else, for those words of wonder, or strange postures, which I spoke of
and did. For I told them I did nothing but what I had a command from God, and
was bound in the spirit thus to do; yet I was no Ranter, or Quaker, or strange
Opinionist, and that you shall know by a good testimony shortly, if you take
notice of it what I said, and did at this time, or any other past but more
especially this strange manner of that I now did, which you condemn me to be
mad for doing: But within few days after I was thrown into Warwick Jail by
Satan's malice and false witness; for brevity-sake at this time I will forbear
describing the manner of it, I pray God forgive the instruments of that misery,
for there I had lamentable misery about 30. days, or else suddenly I had come
to the Lord Protector and Council of State; but after I was at liberty, I did
come suddenly after, the Lieutenant of the Tower knows it well, and siince the
last Summer I went into Ireland, and wrote Letters unto Colonel Barkstead, and
came to him several times, as the beginning of the Book shows.

On New-yeares day in the morning 1654 in my sleep I saw a Vision, I being in
London. Me thought I saw a great party of Parliament horse drawed out of London
going up Hoiborn, Vxbridge Road, and the Trumpets founding a very sad solemn
march as they went. I knowing one of them that was a soldier, I called to him
and asked him what was the cause of their going out so speedily with such a
great party? He told me they did hear the King had a great Army Vxbridge road
coming toward London, and they went out to meet them and give them battle. I
asked him what number the Parliament horse were? He told me 7000. but the other
J heard were many more. Me thoughts I would go along with them to see them go
out of London, and I was very sorry to think of so many of those gallant men
that would be slain, I overtaking the forefront of them; and before they were
marched to Hide Park, I saw many men come running with speed fromward
Whitehall, with long white poles, and they were measuring the Land back again
as was taken away by the late War from the King, the which being done, to me
signified peace between the Lord Protector and the King: So I awaked with much
gladness, praising God that he had sent his Angel to show me these things.

Many more Visious I have had lately to this effect. On the 14. of February
1654. being Wednesday, in the beginning of the night before I slept, I being
perfectly awake, saw as it were in an apparition, the beginning of a work of
new building in London for reformation of Church and State.

A few nights after in February I saw another Vision. I thought my self in
Warwickshire, at a place called Tanworth Parish, and I saw as I was walking
over a piece of hard poor land, the bravest hopeful green grass springing,
and young corn and herbs in that barren land, all which gives me great
testimonies of the Kings and Lord Protectors agreement, that peace may be
established in truth, and grace may abound and grow for the true nourishment of
the Church.

The first day of March, in ths morning I had another Vision, how that there
was a great plot or net lay for the Lord Protector concerning the Kings land.
In the Kings ground I saw an apparition of one that told me by an audible voice
of it: And I saw an apparition like a great net, to catch the Lord Protector. I
was compelled by the dictates of God to write a letter concerning it, and carry
it to the Lieutenant of the Tower. The tenth of March the dictates of Gods
spirit caused me to write another letter, and carry it to the Tower, which if
they did take notice of, it gave them warning of the rising of men in several
Counties suddenly upon it. Plotting is not of God, nor never will do the King
or any of his friends good.

FINIS.

