Strange and wonderful News from Northamptonshire, OR, The discontented Spirit.
Being a true Relation of a Spirit that App^ared to one Richard Clarke of
Hinnington in Northamptonshire, That had been Murdered, 267 years and odd
days, he was seen several times about Richard Clerks yard: and at last he
coming from turning his Malt, the spirit met him at the door and should him
into the Orchard, and there spoke to him, Saying that he must go to London, and
so to Southwark to be his Messenger, and he would be his guide to go with him,
(which the said Clarke did) and what he saw, is expressed in this following
Ditty.

The Tune is, Summer time.




GOod people all pray listen well,
i will here lay open to your veiw,
A Song most wonderful and strange,
and it is known for to be true.
You have heard of spirits for to walk,
though many be, you He'r did see,
And with some men do seem to talk
about their hidden treasury.
As by this story very strange,
the which to you I shall declare;
Of Richard Clark of Hinnington,
a town that is in Northamptonshire.
This man a Farmer is, it is known,
and well beloved of his neighbors by;
Although he lives not on his own,
yet he does live sufficiently.
About that house where he did dwell,
a spirit did appear also,
Which did amaze him very much,
for it was murdered long ago.
The spirit much amazement bred,
as it did walk too and again,
His cattle it much troubled,
because it could not speak with him.
For when he walked the Yard in the night,
either was untied his shoe or hose;
Or else unbuton'd it had no power,
what it walked for for to disclose.
But it finding an opportunity,
one night he turned his malt o'th flower,
To's house he went most speedily,
but it did meet him at the Door.
The second part, to the same tune*
INto the Orchard it him shove,
in the name of Jesus Christ, said he,
Crying out, was much amazed
whither will thou shove me.
Be not afraid, the spirit said,
no harm shall come to thee at all,
But to thee I must declare my mind
and look thou do fulfill it all.
Two hundred sixty and seven years
since a servant man there did him slay*
But conjured down it now appears
as the spirit unto him did say.
I was a man the which was killed
two hundred sixty seven years ago,
By a servant man that dwelled here
for that I had the truth is so.
He also did cut off my head,
and wounded me very sore,
And in this place me buried
what could he against me a done more.
Then after was I conjured down
for so many years as I tell thee;
But now my time is expired,
and thou my messenger must be.
Prepare and go thy ways (said he)
to Southwark I Will be thy guide;
To such a house to set things strait,
which I so long ago did bide.
And in a celler thou shall find
some money and some Whitings too,
To the right owner thou shall them give,
I Will be with thee the place to show.
So go thy ways unto thy house,
and mark these words that are so plain:
Be sure you perform all what I say,
but do not you look back again.
So he to London went with speed,
and on his Journey made no stay,
Much like a man of forty years,
the spirit met him by the way.
And smiling unto him it said:
what on thy Journey thou do go:
And upon London Bridge ag^in
the spirit met him there also.
And to the house in Southwark
the spirit it did him convey:
And was his guide to go with him*
and would not let him make no stay.
But when he came unto the house
he declared the thing in solemn wise*
And when the Women was sent for,
the tears did trickle from their eyes.
Then into'th celler he did go
and dig'd not above two foot i th ground
Whereas the spirit did him show,
and there the money strait he found.
In a brass pan this Money was,
and the writings in the same did lie:
But the papers did crumble away
so that they could not them desery.
But the Parchment it was safe and sound,
the which did signify some Land:
But the money was so eaten with rust,
the same they could not understand.
So the money and the writings too
to this poor woman he did give:
Who from that Relation did spring out,
who at his hand did it receive:
The spirit stood by all the while
and gave him directions what to do,
That he should no ways her beguile
the which the same belonged unto.
And when its mind he had fulfilled
the spirit vanished away
Unto the place from whence it came,
and seen no more unto this day.
Thus friends and neighbors you do see,
that wilful murder will come out,
Though it be do^e no'r so long ago*
yet time and years will bring it about*
Therefore lets fear the Lord on ligh,
that we may be of the flock which Christ has,
And then we need not fear to dye,
our souls no doubt will be at rest.
So to conclude what here is p^nd*
and is laid open to your view,
Although it be a story strange,
yet hundreds knows it to be true.
Printed for R. Burton, and are to be sold by W. Whitwood, in Duck-Lane.


