THE Wiltshire Rant; OR A NARRATIVE

Wherein the most unparalled Profane Actings, Counterfeit Repentings, and
evil Speakings of THOMAS WEB

Late pretended Minister of Langley Burial, are discovered; the particulars
whereof are set down in the following Page.

Also the Proceedings of those in Authority against him. With a Catalogue of
his untruths in his Mass of malice, and Replies to sundry of them.

By Edw. Stokes Esquire;.

ISAIAH 59. 4, 5, 6. They trust in vanity and speak lies, they conceive
mischief and bring forth iniquity: They hatch Cockatrice eggs, and weave the
Spiders Webb; He that eats of their eggs dies, and that which is crushed
breaks out into a Viper.

Their Webbs shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover themselves
with their works, their works are works of iniquity.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Sign of the Bible in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange. 1652.

THE CONTENTS.
Thomas Webb late pretended Minister of Langley Burial Appears in Wilts like
an Angel of Light. Page 3. Obtains a Parsinage. ib. Refuses Tithes. ib.
Burieth his second wife. ib. Makes himself sure to another man's wife. p. 4.
Commits Adultery with her by his own confession. ib. Marries a third wife. ib.
Becomes a kind of Pander to his own wife. p. 6. Has a man-wife, who is
discovered. p. 7. Falls at variance with Mistress M. W. another man's wife. p.
10. Is accused of sundry horrid crimes and misdameanors, by Mistress M. W. and
diverse others. p. 11. The Catalogue of the women he said he had lien withal.
p. 12. He getting the French Pox gave it his wife. ib. Salmons blasphemous
Letter. p. 13. The particulars of his fained repentance. p. 14. Makes frequent
Confessions of his unclean life to M. Stokes and others. p. 15. His first
Letter to M. Stokes, confessing his uncleanness. p. 16. His second Letter of
Confession and repentance to Edw. Stokes, and William Shute Esquires. p. 17.
His third Letter to William Shute Esquire. p. 19. Preaches against whorish women
and the sin of uncleanness. ib. Becomes friends with Mistress M. W. p. 21.
Scorns and contemns such as dislike his ways, and those to whom he confessed
his unclean life. ib. His companions. p. 21. His study. 22. Songs. p. 22. Is
become a lover of Music and mixed dancing. ib. Seeks the ruin of his own
fellow creatures, for relating his wicked word, and works. p. 23. Is charged to
have been taken in the act of Adultery with M. W. p. 29. Is examined upon the
information, which is upon Oath, and committed to Goal. p. 33. Rails against
his accuser and the Justices. p. 34, 35. Pretends a second repentance in Goal.
p. 39. His deliverance and return from Goal. p. 43. The Articles of
profaneness and scandal against him. p. 47. Depositions to the Articles
against him. p. 49. to 56. His ejectment from the Parsonage of Langley B. p.
57. His Mass of malice discovered. p. 58. A Catalogue of his lies. p. 60, 61,
etc. Replies to some of his lies and self-invented blasphemies. p. 66, 67, 68,
69. His blasphemy upon Record. p. 82. His late progress into, and return from
Wilts. ib.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
THou art here presented with a Narrative of one of the most saddest Stories
that has been related in this latter age, in which you have these three
particulars:

First, A true Character of T. W. late Minister of Langley Burial, his life
and actions, according to his own Confessions, Letters and Accusations of his
own dear fellow creatures, whilst he continued Ranting upon the public Stage
of Wilts, with the proceedings of the Justices against him the said Webb.

Secondly, Thou have laid before thee a Catalogue of Parson Webbs most
notorious untruths dispersed in his Mass of malice against his Judge, the
Justices of Peace, and his accusers and prosecutors, etc.

Thirdly, Thou have diverse of those untruths guarded with replies of truth
tending to clear up the innocence of the most falsely accused E. S. from those
fierce, foul and hell-invented aspersions laid to his charge by the malevolent
mock-Parson T. W.

And the Narrative aforesaid is now made public, First, To inform the world
upon what grounds Tho. Webb was prosecuted and tried for his life in the County
of Wilts; and wherefore he was ejected the Parsonage of L. B.

Secondly, To give a true Character of the most delusive Parson T. W. that
others be not deceived by him, as many hundreds in Wilts have been, many of
whom are bound to curse the day that ever they saw his fawning face, or heard
his deceitful tongue.

Thirdly, To clear up the innocence of those in Authority, and to make it
manifest that their proceedings against the said T. W. were neither unjust,
illegal, nor malicious, as the Author of the Mass of malice and his Ranting
gang give out.

Fourthly, To lay open the weakness, wickedness and vanity of the Ranting
principle and practice, that Wisdom may be justified of her children, etc. and
the mouth of ungodliness stopped.

To conclude with the Psalmist, Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his
trust, and respects not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies, Psalm. 40.
4.

Reader, Thou art desired to take notice of two particulars, for the better
understanding of the Author, in the ensuing Narrative.

First, That it is not his intention in any wise to cast reproach or contempt
upon any of the Godly, able Ministers of the Gospel, for such he accounts
worthy of double honor, according to that 1 Timothy 5. 17. whom to despise, is to
despise Jesus Christ, whose messengers they are, sent out to proclaim the grace
and love of God to sinners, that they may be turned from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan to God; whose number the Lord increase for the glory of
his great Name.

But profane, ignorant and scandalous Ministers, and such as take upon them
the work of public Ministers and Preachers, when never sent of the Lord, nor
allowed or approved of men, nor any way gifted and qualified for so glorious a
work, whose light is but darkness, whose confidence is in the flesh, whose God
is their belly, who glory in their shame, who mind earthly things: Amongst
which number you shall find the painted sepulcher, and wandering star T. W.
with his most besotted faction and adherents: These are the mock-Parsons and
Priests mentioned and intended in the Narrative, and none other; and who in
their best estate make but a fair show in the flesh, to accomplish their wicked
and most pernicious ends, which when obtained, their abominations appear to the
great scandal of Religion, and the righteous ways and people of God.

The second particular is to let the Reader know that the said Narrative is the
more dark and hard to be understood, because the names of many persons,
principal actors in the Wiltshire Rant, and others deluded and abused by them,
are at this time past over in silence, and not made public, and that for
these Reasons:

First, Many of them seem to repent of their folly and madness; and if their
repentance prove true (and not like that of T. W.) their names shall be
concealed for ever by this Author, otherwise they may appear with their actions
in due time.

Secondly, Some of them have been but as weak instruments in the hands of the
mighty Ranters, and therefore wholly past over in silence.

Thirdly, Some of them have promised to publish to the world the Wiltshire Rant
more perfectly then the Author, and therefore at present their names are left
out.

Fourthly, Some being in great esteem as yet amongst the godly people, the
Author was unwilling to publish those words and papers which he received from
others of the Ranting crew, concealing them in hopes that they will acquit
themselves like men; and withal knowing that the Ranters, especially T. W. and
his fellows, are like to the Cretians, who are always liars, evil beasts, slow
bellies: But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest
unto all men.

THE WILTSHIRE RANT.
MAnifest it is that the Accuser of the Brethren, the old Serpent, the Lier
from the beginning, could never have acted so much mischief in the world, if he
had always appeared in his own Shape: wherefore that he may the better
accomplish his ends, he presents himself oftentimes in the shape of an Angel of
Light, and so he teaches all his angels or ministers to appear: So the false
prophets of old, the deceivers of this age, and all hypocrites appear in Sheeps
clothing, with a form of godliness, with the Word of the Lord in their
mouths; and although these persons know nothing as they ought to know, yet they
assume all knowledge to themselves: And although they are possessed by an
unclean spirit, yet sometime they cry up a clean conversation; and all this is
because they would the more easily accomplish their corrupt interests, beguile
unstable souls, and lead captive silly professors. Nay many of these are so
much given up to believe lies, to deceive, and be deceived, that they are
become pure in their own di^s: And as the man that would tell a lie so often
that at last he believed it to be a truth, so these men being practisers of
evil, believe themselves and their cursed ways to be righteous, and that from
a cursed principle which they hold, ( viz.) There is nothing sin but what a man
thinks to be so: This the wise man speaks of, Prove. 30. 11. There is a
generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their
filthiness. A right character of our Wiltshire Ranters, who speak great
swelling words of vanity, sporting themselves in their own deceivings, whilst
they beguile unstable souls, and ly in wait to deceive the ignorant. But
notwithstanding these painted Sepulchers are discovered by truth and time,
which makes manifest, and it will appear that whilst they assume all knowledge
to themselves, and profess themselves wise, they become fools, and this is the
great work of our blessed Savior, to discover cover and destroy the works of
the devil, to take away the counterfeit painting and false covering cast upon
foul and unclean hearts, and to lay them open to public view: and certainly
Jesus Christ will first or last bring every hidden work to light, the purest
hypocrite must be discovered, as well as the profane person: and this
discovery is made diverse ways.

1. Sometimes by the terrible pangs of a guilty and accusing conscience,
hastening and hurrying the soul toward desperation: in this condition many
times the most secret and hidden works of darkness are brought to light; and
now men vomit up their own shame and confess with horror and astonishment of
spirit, their former cursed and abominable ways and actions.

2. Sometimes by the falling out of those who have been brethren and
copartners in iniquity; this way many thieves are brought to the Gallows, and
unclean persons to Justice: And to the honor of God, and to his praise be it
recorded for ever; The Ranters were building their Babel of Profaneness and
Community in Wiltshire, but were constrained to pluck it down with their own
hands, they laying open each others wickedness, having each other before the
Magistrate, and accusing each other in the day of their fury and horrible
confusions, as this Narrative will demonstrate.

3. Sometimes hypocrites and dissemblers to regain their lost credit by a
fained repentance, lay open the wickedness, madness and folly of their own
hearts and ways, and confess their most secret and bosom lusts, and hidden
corruptions, with promises of a new life, and never more to turn to folly; yet
having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; they return with
the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow that was washed to the former wallowing
in the mire: notwithstanding with the whore mentioned, Prove. 30. they wipe
their mouths and say, they have done no wickedness. These can sometimes speak
purely, yet live filthily: They plead liberty, yet are the servants of sin.
These are self-justitiaries, self-seekers, such as sacrifice to their own nets;
lovers of themselves and their own deluded followers: Despisers of those that
are good, or do any ways protest against their witless, worthless whimseys
and practices; yet through the just judgment of the Lord, these deluders,
seducers and deceivers, are oftentimes brought to light, and are made (mauger
their hearts) to demonstrate what they are in reality.

And what discovery the Ranting crew, even the most eminent of them have made
of themselves and of each other, the ensuing narrative will sufficiently
demonstrate, in which you have little besides their own Confessions, Letters
and Accusations of each other, and that will sufficiently declare that their
destruction and ruin is of themselves, and not from the Magistrate, as they
most untruly give out, with a world of other notorious lies and scandals; (the
fittest employment of such a generation of people) which they heap upon all
that disown their cursed principles and lascivious ways.

The most notorious Champion whereof that have caused the enemies of God to
blaspheme, and made sad the hearts of the people of God, T. W. appears like an
Angel of light.
and is become the greatest monument of scandal and reproach as ever appeared
in North Wiltshire, is one Thomas Web late of Langley Burial within the said
County; who came as an Angel of Light into those parts, with a great form of
godliness, in sheeps clothing; whereby he gained with ease the affections of
many, not only hypocrites, but sincere hearted Christians, who took him to be
as he only seemed to be: As new things, so new or strange persons affect much:
So new brooms sweep clean; this man seems to be of a blameless life and
conversation: and being furnished with cunning and expression, makes use of it
to his best advantage, and so rouls up and down, T. W. obtains a Parsonage
till at last he takes up his rest at Langly aforesaid; and having obtained the
parsonage there, he preached and practiced for some short space, that none
could spy out his wickedness.

This young Stripling, having formerly made himself a Preacher, forsaking his
lawful Calling, T. W. refuses tithes.
becomes a Parish Priest or Parson; and being settled to his content, and
obtaining a Gleab worth 70lb per annum, he cunningly, to increase his fame,
refused the Tithes, protesting against them as an unjust Tax; by which means he
obtains the good will of diverse of the most ignorant parishioners, and others
looked upon him as a conscientious man, not knowing what he had been, nor what
he was.

Not long after his settlement he buries his second wife at Langley aforesaid;
T. W. burieth his second wife.
who had not lain many days in the grave, but he the said Thomas Web became
so far in love with a certain Gentlewoman (notwithstanding her husband was then
and there living) insomuch that he engages himself to be a faithful friend
and servant unto her, T. W. makes himself sure to another man's wife. T. W.
commits adultery by his own confession.
not to marry with, or make use of any other woman besides her self; and
thereupon he had (as he says) diverse times carnal knowledge of, and fellowship
with her.

But as he said conscience fled in his face, and would not suffer him to
continue this vile course: But its rather thought one woman was not sufficient
to satisfy his brutish lust.

And therefore in a short time he marries a modest sober young woman, T. W.
marries his third wife.
without the consent and to the great grief of her friends; whereupon a great
difference grows between the two former lustful lovers; the Parson is charged
with perfidiousnesse and breach of promise, but he being grown a cunning Parish
Priest, has a salve ready to cure this sore, gives satisfaction by a new
Engagement; which made good that saying of his, That there is no Heaven but
women, nor no hell save Marriage: So that this late Marriage prevents not the
rage of lust in either. But notwithstanding that so many times a week are set
apart for the satisfying of the flesh. And now any reasonable creature would
think that the former Marriage, and the late agreement would have contented
both parties. But the union (in wickedness) is not yet near enough; And
therefore about March 1650. two houses being too many, and at too great a
distance for such choice lovers: Both families are united in one, and Thomas
Web removes, the former distance being almost a slight shot, was too far to
strike whilst the iron is hot; neither could wickedness be acted so covertly,
nor kept so closely in many meetings, (and it was not yet time to profess
their principles publicly to the world.) Here modesty commands the Author in
silence to pass over many particulars of uncleanness confessed by the said
Thomas Web in the time of his pretended Repentance and Reformation.

Well, now the famous families are united, and the uniters wonderfully well
pleased, and none displeased. The Patron and the Parsons wife rejoice, being in
hopes to enjoy each others love more constantly then formerly: But the devout
Parson and his co-partner in wickedness, having brought their Swine to so fair
a market, resolve to eat no such flesh; nor to be so profane or silly as to
delight themselves with lawful things; leaving that to those that know not
their liberty; and to nice and weak-sighted Pharisees (as they term those that
dare not, will not, cannot, run with them into the same excess of Riot) And
let those deluded souls feed their fancies with vain hopes or empty husks as
long as they please, all is one to these endeared lovers, who have attained to
the height of humane society, and Christian ( alias diabolical) liberty, and
to so much perfection as to know their fellow creatures from other cattle.
It Is not for servants to pry into their Masters nor Mistrisses secrets, nor to
meddle with their meat. Mixed Governors of a mixed family having the highest
knowledge and deepest understanding, are fittest to bear Rule, and to rule the
rest: Wherefore no pity nor praise shall attend the forlorn hope of the P. and
Parsons wife, who are ordained to stand as Ciphers, or at best as servants, to
stand still or wait, whilst those who are more spiritually wicked, give up
themselves to chambring and wantonness.

Well, Thomas Web being a Parson of the last Edition, and having undertaken a
great charge, lays about him how to manage all his affairs, as becomes a man
of so excellent parts and calling, and hold out to the end; which that he may
be able to do, and come off with credit, the sweet draughts of an Independent
heat, the most coroborating cordials, the fattest morsels, and the most
delicate fare is provided for his sweet tooth (which never goes alone) and good
reason, for hereby he is made able to give content to his fellow Creature, and
to answer all scruples that might arise against him from or by means of any
pretended relation, or formal union, such as Ranters term marriage to be.

For you are to understand that ere a long time is past over, even before this
pious (or rather impious) Parish Priest, had taken his fill of lust; although
the Gentlewomans husband remains contented, yet the Parsons wife being more
sensible, begins to grumble, and grows passionate, and manifests much trouble;
fearing least her husband Thomas Web (notwithstanding his seeming sanctity)
would prove an unclean Parson. Hereupon the slipshood Priest is put to his
trumps; yet he having taken so many degrees in wickedness, resolves to answer
and silence this case of conscience also; and therefore summons all his wits
together, and when he finds them all too shallow, he calls to his council his
fellow creature, who being of better understanding, and of riper wit then
himself (two heads being better then one) they make up and contrive a silencing
argument to satisfy and content this complaining Spirit of the poor woman.

Hereupon a cunning and devilish plot is contrived, for they apprehend action
to be more prevalent then argument, to make her understand her liberty and the
Ranters true doctrine.

And therefore in the first place the Parsons wife is instructed in the
lawfulness of making use of any other man (setting relation aside) whom she
could most affect: And further she is taught that God has not tied up mankind
from those enjoyments which are left free to the beasts of the field, etc.

From this doctrine arise many uses, but the use which is insisted upon is an
use of examination; the Parsons wife is strictly examined by Webbs fellow
Creature, Whom she loved best, or whom she could love most besides her husband?
The woman being pressed exceedingly upon this point, and being (as is supposed)
ignorant of the depths of Satan, and not knowing that there was a hook under
the Bait, confesses, that next to her husband she could most affect such a
man, naming a lusty young man, who lived not far from Langley, and one who made
often resort thither, and was in great esteem with the Fellow Creatures, and
therefore as right as a gun (and as pat to the purpose as might be) to
accomplish the design in hand, which was to cure the rage of jealousy in one,
and to set two Fellow Creatures at the more liberty and freedom; and good
reason that one woman's tongue should be silent, whilst two consciences were
rockt asleep in the cradle of lust made after the Ranting mode.

But secondly, T. W. a kind of Pander to his own wife.
There is a time and place appointed. The time is whilst Thomas Web is
Preaching in the public Congregation, and therefore most likely to be on the
Lords day: and the place is near the Congregation. At this time and in this
place, by the great industry and contrivance of Web and his fellow Creatures,
the young man aforesaid, and the Parsons wife meet, where no time is to be
lost, and therefore whilst Web is Preaching in the Church, others of his
fellow Creatures, whom he had taught to live above Ordinances, are practicing
their higher principles at home; and to that purpose a sumptuous bed is
perfumed and well warmed (to prevent danger) and the young man with the Parsons
wife, are brought into the said bed, and the backwardness of the woman is
spurred forward by the subtle persuasions of the fellow Creatures; and her
modesty overpowred by the immodesty of the others, so that ere the preachment
is done in the Church, the practice is effected in the house, and in bed these
persons are laid, and then the Parson is sent for by his fellow Creatures, who
hastily and chierfully comes into the said chamber, where he perceives (as he
had before plotted) his wife in bed with the young man; at which sight Web
(as one transported) in stead of a sharp reproof or other dislike, brings out
of his Priestly budget, this reverend grave salute; Well said T, (says he,
naming the young man) is this your liberty? well done wife, well done, pray God
bless you together, or to that effect: and so departed the chamber, having his
mouth filled with laughter, and his heart with confidence, that he had laid his
wifes tongue as still as his own conscience: And though (thinks he) I am with
my sweet and lovely Mistress, and fellow Creatures early and late, night and
day, taking my fill in dalliance and fleshly delight, yet my wife cannot
clamor; if she be jealous, yet she must say nothing, least I cast this in her
dish: Oh unheard of wickedness! Oh pretty profane Preacher! Art thou he that
live in the Spirit? that have attained to a higher light? that art raised up
against a time of Reformation, to help forward the work? Art thou more wise,
more holy, more knowing then the Bishops, and the Episcopal Preachers? Then the
Presbyterian and Independent Ministers, or rather, art thou not altogether
notwithstanding like a deceitful Idol? Thou art gilded with godliness I say:
Art thou not altogether in the flesh? Is not the light that is in thee
darkness? Art thou not raised up of the devil to bring an evil report upon the
work of Reformation? Do not the Episcopalians hate thy ways in wickedness? Do
not the Presbyterians hear of thy fame, or rather infamy, and harden themselves
against the Independants amongst whom thou have, to their grief been numbered?
And yet thou continuest amongst strangers as a cheater amongst true men, of
whom they are not aware; who only with the ranting crew take thee to be some
great one: yet God has opened thy painted Sepulcher in Wilts, and all the
godly fly from thy infection.

But to go on, leaving for a time this L. Parson with his female fellow
Creatures, as full of security and content, as of lust and uncleanness. The
Reader is to take another relation along with him, T. W. his man wife
discovered.
that so he may know this goodly Preacher. Wherefore note that Webbs most
principal favorite, and greatest choicest associate in the whole Country; for
one of his own Sex, was one J O. a comely young man, and a man of a seeming
sober behavior, even as Web himself, of whom a stranger cannot but say, or
at least think, that butter would not melt in his mouth (as we use to say) yet
here you will perceive, as the Proverb is, The still Sow eats all the draught.
This man with his Cob-webb seeming sobriety, and unclean inside, is taken by
Tho. Web, as men use to take their wives, For better for worse: So I say,
this man is honored with the title of Webbs wife, for so he calls him, My wife
O; and O owns Webb for a husband; and now where ever they come, it is my wife O,
and my husband Webb. True it is, Webb is become a great lover of Music, which
to profane hearts is an inlet to lust: but whether ever he played any hellish
tune with his Organ or Church music yea or no, is not yet discovered: But this
is discovered, that both the man and the man-wife were in other things brethren
in iniquity, and have brought more shame upon the professors of the Gospel,
then all the hypocrites and whore mongers of this later age.

This J. O. is of an honest Stock and Parentage and lived in his Country in
good esteem, and with good repute, till such time as he was all wood and
Married to this holy unholy Parish-Parson, Tho. Webb. But now Cat after kind,
he soon becomes Ranting ripe, and enters with the first upon the Stage,
publicly to act what he had privately learnt from husband Webb: Whereupon he
shakes hands with, and bids farewell to his natural affection (the first step
toward the perfection of Ranters) he forsakes his own lawful wife, dwelling,
and children, and Country to boot; and takes to himself as a Companion and
Traveller, a light Maid forsooth, being his neighbors daughter, which he takes
without parents consent, as his fellow creature; and away he goes: and as
Web before, so Mr O. now travels into other Countries, to gain credit and
esteem, which in his own Country was totally extinct. And the better to do
this, Web makes him a Preacher before he goes; for Web is most eminent
this way, to teach men how to use the tongue; so as it may not prejudice the
principle or the practice of their purely impure sect, or hinder the building
of their R. Babel.

Well into Kent and into the Isle of Shepy there these travelers go: O.
appears there like a great new light, though no bigger then a farthing candel,
grows into esteem with men of quality, and with the good people in those parts
becomes a most singular Preacher there: and gains a living or some other
stipend for his said Preaching: but long he continues not there, ere all the
fat falls into the fire, and the two Lovers fall at variance; and so through the
righteous judgment of God, the Travelers return, the woman to her Parents,
and O to his Wife and family, crying shame on his shameful progress, and
pretending to the Author great sorrow; and has promised to lay open the
pernicious ways of the Ranting crew. Wherefore no more of this, but to
conclude this sad story with these Queries.

1. Whether J. O. aforesaid being an ingenuous young man, was not a fit piece
of the Creation, to be a wife for T. Web the Parson?

2. Whether the said Web be not a man of a thousand to make a Parish Parson,
and public Preacher in this time of Reformation?

3. Whether all the godly people in Wiltshire ought not to admire the singular
parts and gifts of this famous non-such Parson, as the happiness of such as
enjoy him?

4. Whether they ought not to be recommended amongst those that are eminent
lovers of Liberty and Christianity, that subscribe a Certificate of Webbs
preachings and actings, to help him to preferment for the future in a strange
place?

But now to return and review this famous mock-Parson, with his female
Fellow Creatures, you may find him enjoying his liberty with all quietness
and content, and for a time without check or control swimming down the stream
of lust. Yet the hand of Justice is pleased sometimes to fall upon, and to
affrighten, even those that are lulled asleep in all carnal security, and
become senseless in their lusts; and so it happens to the unhappy Parson, who
thought erst while that he had for ever silenced his wives tongue, and his own
conscience, but now finds himself deluded: what ever his conscience does, yet
his wife grumbles afresh, and begins to look sad upon the business, and to
take to heart her husbands familiarity with his Fellow Creatures; and so much
is the poor woman perplexed with their doings, that she seems willing to choose
death at any hand, rather then her husband should continue in the tents of
wickedness: whereupon Web is advised to have a care of his wife, and to
remove her from the aforementioned family, otherwise evil would come of it.
Well, the Parson seeing no other remedy prepares himself for a journey, and
takes his wife with him; a great kindness, that a man of his principle could
so far humble himself and deny himself, as to leave for a while his fellow
Creature, and cleave to his wife, but Patience perforce is a medicine for a mad
Dog. the Cynicall Parson is necessitated hereunto, for fear of, and to prevent
a worse inconvenience: But it is not long ere Web returns in hopes to be
accounted a white boy, as formerly, and to be received as in times of Yore; T.
W. falls at variance with Mistress M. W.
but he is deceived in his expectation: He is to give an account of his idle
journey, of his pretended kindness to a simple thing called a Wife; of going
out and returning in, as if he were at his own dispose; and so high are these
misdemeanors stretch; that the silly Parson is at his wits end; for being an
English man (and more a Parson) he goes better led then drove; he answers his
fellow Creature somewhat suitable to her furious spirit, and pretends more love
to his wife (contrary to his former promise or the rule of Ranting) which was
crime enough: but it is an ill wind blows no body good, the poor woman is like
to enjoy better times then formerly, whilst on the other side the fellow
Creature acts the part of jealousy even to distraction, pretending she would
be her own executioner, and lay violent hands on her self: Yet still the breach
grows wider, and the difference greater; that God who sets bounds to the raging
sea, sets bounds also to the raging lusts of wicked persons. The pitiful
Parson is in a peck of troubles; whilst things are thus disjointed, he well
knew he was the common table talk of the Country, that the godly people grieved
for him and were ashamed of him, that the profane made him their scorn and
reproach, and with the same wounded through his sides. All that appeared for
Religion or Righteousness in those parts; therefore now the man resolves upon
another way, and though his fellow Creature causes the P. to break the Parsons
head, yet afterward she brings him a plaster, in hopes to reclaim him; yet he
resolves to set up his flag of defiance against his own dear Fellow Creature: [
Ranters are seldom long true to themselves or principles:] neither her
strikings or stroakings, nor frowns, nor flatteries, nor threats, nor fawnings,
shall move him to hearken to her again: So that the house is so foul, and the
much stirring has caused so great a stink, that the householders must part, P.
W. to his Parsonage, and the rest, Gent. as you were.

Now the mock-Parson bethinks himself how to regain his lost Credit with the
good people, and such as are enemies to the Ranting way; and to that purpose
pretends a sight and sense of his sin; cries out also upon the lewdness of his
Fellow Creature. She also ringing a Langley peal of Webbs wickedness and
uncleanness, both which follow in order briefly.

The spirit of a man seems to possess the hateful hearts of the late lustful
lovers; and as great is the present hate, as the former love, so that the
Magistrates are complained to, and called upon to hear the business; whereupon
a day and place is appointed, where two of the next Justices meet ( viz.) Mr
Stokes and Mr Shute.

But before the meeting, Mr Stokes receives these ensuing lines, on the behalf
of Parson Webb.

Sir, I have something to declare unto you, which though I know not how to
speak for my self, yet I can heartily beg you for my friend poor Tho. Web,
which his fall it is true is exceeding great; and by himself greatly lamented,
and to my knowledge so exceedingly beset by a pernicious woman, and her
perfidious bloody company, that did you know the particulars you would take her
to be the only monster of that Sex: And I hear you go anon where you will have
the hearing of it; for Gods love have no prejudice against him for former
failings acted by him: but answer the desires of an insatiable woman in her own
folly, and you shall a thousand times engage, etc.

Fra. Bailiff.

Well the time appointed is come, the Justices met, and many Country people of
all sorts are come together to see these rare persons, and to be informed in
the truth of things: But by reason one of the Justices could not stay, there
was nothing done as to Justice that day, only the parties charged each other
with horrid crimes and misde meanours; and Webb confesses his folly and
naughtiness in one kind, denying it in another, Preaching a Billingsgate
Sermon, as if he had met with all the Oister wives at once, but was answered in
his own kind; and so the company was dismissed, only another day afterward
appointed for a hearing, which was the second day of Sept. 1650. at Chippenham,
where the aforesaid Justices met; where Mistress Mary White and diverse others
appear, and tender upon oath to prove against the profane Parson these high
crimes and misdemeanors following. T. W. accused by Mistress W. and others.


The Information of Elizabeth Briscoe, taken against Tho. Web Clerk, the
second of September 1650. before Edward Stokes and William Shute Esquires.

She informs, That she has heard the said Tho. Web say often times within
this half year, upon some private discourse in her Masters house, That Moses
was a Conjurer, and that Christ was a deceiver of the people: And that
Preaching and lying was both alike unto him. And further says, That when
Lieutenant Col. Lilborn was upon his Trial, the said Web drank a health to
the counfounding of the Parliament, and then said they were Rogues and Devils.

And further she the Informant says, That the said Web said (in a boasting
way) That he had lain with six women; and affirmed, that he could lie with any
woman except his own mother: and then he named the women, which he had lain
withal, ( viz.) with two Captains wives at Bristol, Mistress R. of Bathe, the
wife of Captain M. his Aunt D. of Batheston, and with a Majors wife at London.

And further she this Informant heard the said Web say, That he had lain with
one S. C. of Slaughtenford, and that she had given him the French Pox, and he
gave it to his wife.

To this foul Charge Mrs White also subscribes her Name at large. Elizabeth
Briscoe. I Mary White do testify the same.
The Information of William Lewis Yeoman, and Edith his wife, taken as
aforesaid, etc.

William Lewis says, That about the midst of May last, on a Sunday in the
afternoon, Tho. Web Minister of Langley was asleep in the said William Lewis
his Chamber, when the Sermon Bell was tolling, and then he awaking him told
him, that there was a great number of people come to hear him: Whereunto he
then answered, Ah poor fools, they be come to sit and gape upon me whilst I
tell them lies. And then further said, Now Preaching and lying are to me both
one case: and also Edith Lewis, wife of the said William, was then in hearing
of these words so spoken by the said Webb, as aforesaid, who verrifieth the
same.

William Lewis. Edith

The Information of Anne Brewer, wife of John Brewer of Corsham, taken as
aforesaid.

Who Informs, That about Whitsuntide last, she heard Mistress Mary White tax
Thomas Webb concerning the words that he had formerly spoken unto her, which
were, That Moses was a Conjurer, and that Christ was a Deceiver of the people;
which he did not deny; but said, If Mistress White would swear it, he would
forswear it: and then also said, That Preaching and lying were both one case
unto him.

And then Mistress White further charged him that he did about the time that
Lieutenant Col. Lilborn was upon his Trial, drink a health to the Confusion of
the Parliament; whereunto he replied also, That he would forswear that ever he
drank any such health.

Anne Brewer.

Besides all this, Mistress W. charge the said Parson to have endeavored to
force her Chastity, and strive to Ravish her in her husbands house: And withal
she produces two other female creatures of the same house ( viz.) a married
woman, and her own maidservant; who would have sworn that the precious Parson
would have committed uncleanness with them, and had attempted the same
oftentimes. Withal the said Mistress White charge the Parson and
fellow creature to be a great Ranter; and to prove this, she produces this
most horrid and blasphemous Letter, written to him from one Salmon, the
Contents whereof follows.

My own heart blood, from whom I daily receive life and being, in whom my
eternal freedom is perfected, to whom is ascribed now and for ever, Amen.

Thou art the Webb of my own spinning, I have labored to bring them forth in
this glorious form that thou now live; let me cloth my self with the Webb of
my own travel. My dear thou art to me as a garment of Needlework, I wear thee
as my choicest robes of Royalty; because thou art as a vesture upon me, wind
nor weather affright me not; the Northren gales and Borean blasts of cruelty, I
know cannot pierce through thee, my garment of salvation. Well, to be brief, I
know, my heart, thou art not altogether unascertained of my present estate as
appears by yours lately received. My love, thy patheticall lines, I did with
much tenderness accept, and I shall never forget thy love therein manifested.
Cop, my, thy own heart is gone to London; No other note from the Vulgar but
hanging at least for him. The last week five one a Soldier was burnt through
the tongue for a business of the same nature. The glory of these things
possesses multitudes both in City and Country, notwithstanding all their
cruelty. For my own part I find my Genius much elevated and heghtened, to look
the worst of casualties in the face, that can succeed these things: My
condition outwardly is very poor, when lying here at great expenses, yet am I
made not to care for the future, although sometimes I scarce know over night
how I shall be provided for on the morrow. Well, what my Titular Angel, the
Guardian Genius will do with this handful of earth, I know not, neither am at
all troubled, but that if I live, my love to thee; if I die, I die to thee: So
that whether living or dying I am

thy To. Salmon.

Ten thousand salutes, alias holy kisses to thy dear wife, with whom is my
heart; my tender respects to thy Uncle, my Father, his Spouse, my beloved, my
dear love to Mary your maid: Eternal plagues consume you all, rot, sink and
damn your bodies and souls into devouring fire, where none but those that walk
uprightly can enter. Sirs, I wish you damnable well, because I dearly love you;
the Lord grant we may know the worth of hell, that we may for ever scorn
heaven: For my own part I am ascended far above all heavens, yet I fill all
things, and laugh in my sleeve to think what is coming: well I say no more, but
farwell.

From my Palace of Royal Majesty, in the last year of the reign of the beast,
and in the day wherein the neast of all hearts are ripening as fast as possible
may be.

Coventry, April 3. 1650.
Well, you see what the Charge is, and by whom laid against the profane
Parson; not by the Justices, not by such as were enemies by profession, but by
his own converts, his endeered lovers, and fellow creatures; these are they
that vomit the Spider out of the Webb, and spread the venom of its poison in
public, which before lay private amongst the fraternity.

Yet to all this the Parson pleads the general issue, Not guilty, especially
not in manner and form as is alleged; and therefore he gives the special
matter in evidence; and by a fained repentance (as afterward will appear) he
confesses his notorious wickedness and uncleanness, and promises amendment
for the future.

This repentance of Webbs appears in these particulars.



Secondly, By his Confessions to persons wholly averse to the

Thirdly, By Letters under his own hand writing.

1. As for his Humiliation 'twas wonderful to behold the head of this Bulrush
to hang so low; his countenance is changed, his looks more lamentable, then
lustful; the extraordinary poudring of his head and frizling of his hair, and
other inticements to lust and wantonness (his former every days garb) is now
wholly laid by, and in all things he now appears as at the first, Poor Tho.
Webb, and not like the proud and insolent Parson of Langley; and it is
remarkable, how at the first meeting of the Justices, he smote himself upon the
breast, and threw himself upon the ground before many witnesses, seeming
exceedingly to lament his unclean life.

2. T. W. confesses his unclean life.
His Confessions were wonderful, both to Mr Stokes and diverse others, to whom
he confessed, that he had frequently committed folly and uncleanness, even
ever since the death of his second wife; and that he had committed the
detestable sin of uncleanness so often in one day, that he was glad when he
could take the Air. And further before many witnesses confessed, that the child
which the Gentlewoman was then great withal, was of his own begetting; naming
the time when, and the place where it was by him so begotten; and that he never
forced her, neither needed he to do so, but that always she tempted him to
commit the sin of uncleanness with her: And further the said Webb alleged
that Mistress W. would have hid him for some time in a private place in her
husbands house, as her own closet, and then make the Parsons wife, and the
world believe that Web was gone beyond sea, whilst in the mean time a stock
of money is providing for such a journey, that they might go both together;
with a world of other things of a vile nature, which for brevities sake I pass
over.

3. The Letters under his own hand writing follow, which are upon record, and
in the custody of Mr Stokes, and so not to be denied or forsworn by the Parson,
or any others of the Ranting Knights of the Post.

To the Worshipful Edw. Stokes Esquire. and Justice of the Peace for this County:
Present.
Dear Sir,
PRay give me leave to express my whole self unto you, T. W. his first Letter
to M. Stokes, confessing his uncleanness.
which by these in brief I shall do in the name of a true Christian, one who
sincerely loves the Lord Jesus Christ: It Is well known to our loving and wise
God, that evil that has been committed by me, which I cannot choose but
confess and acknowledge, for my sin is always before me, and for the same I
heartily wish my self accursed for the precious Gospels sake which is
blasphemed by it, and truly amongst all my trouble, that is the only thing that
troubles me; for the rest I am innocent, and God himself knows they never
entered into my thoughts: But for that, O my sin which I have committed
against my Lord and merciful God, and all good men, I am guilty; I have made
the members of Christ the members of an harlot, and God has suffered the
strange and adulterous woman to lead my poor simple spirit captive, though she
stand like a bold and impudent woman in the justification of her self: O look
for a most sad and fearful coming of the Lords just judgment and vengeance
upon her. Dear Sir, I profess to you my heart is smitten within me, for my sin
is great, and lies very heavy and sore upon me; and nothing troubles me but
that: as for the present proceedings against me since I knew my self free, and
that it is because God has called me home from the ways of an adulterous
woman, though they should touch my life, yet I bless God that I am made able
to slight them, and to be very careless of them, only I shall do what in me
lies to defend my self from them: And in order thereunto, whilst I am at
London, I shall advise with some friend about it, and so if our wise God so
order it, I shall return and appear before you at the time appointed, which is
this day fortnight, as I understand, humbly thanking you that you would grant a
longer time, and withal I humbly entreat you to stand my friend as to let
nothing be acted against me in my absence. I know the way of an unsatiable
woman is to ruin and to have the life of one whom they cannot mold to their
Lusts. And for my part, if she does ruin me, as that is her intentions, I
shall glory in for greater would my misery have been, if I should have
continued in the ways of her uncleanness. O, dear Sir, it is impossible almost
to believe the many temptations she has followed me withal, and the many
devises she has used ever since the difference, to bring me over to her self
again: But O let me be accursed, and O that the earth might swallow me up
alive, rather then I should hearken to her again. Dear Sir, Your neighbor
Uncles does me much wrong, and I am forced to write in an unusual manner to
him: I beseech you to desire him to desist and forbear giving out such
scandalous and false things against me as he does: I know he cannot but see
into the malicious proceedings that are against me, as by his own words to me
he did acknowledge; yet with them he takes parties, and he and his son in law
Crook does very much wrong and abuse me, whereas if they loved the Gospel which
they would profess, they would be silent. Therefore I beseech you, though not
for my sake, yet for the Gospels sake desire him to forbear: and truly in
equity, though my foot has slipped and I have sinned against God, yet none
ought to devide me, and speak reproachfully of me, especially such who would be
thought professors of the Gospel, and so much the more that God has touched my
heart and made it very sensible of its sin. Thus dear Sir, in faithfulness and
truth I have made you acquainted with my present condition, the truth of which
I hope God will make good by my life and conversation; which is the prayers of
him who is,

Sept, 2d 1650. Your true friend and servant Tho. Web.

For the Worshipful Edw. Stokes and William Shute Esquires, and Justices of
Peace for this County: Present.
Gent.
UNderstanding by my neighbor Brumham that the meeting was put off till Monday
come fortnight, T. W. second Letter to M. Stokes, and M. Shute, confessing his
unclean life.
I took the liberty this day to go toward London, for that my father lies
very sick and weak, and to see him will be great satisfaction to me. As
touching the business depending before your Worships, when you and others have
had a full and clear hearing of it, and that the tales of both are heard, it
will appear to proceed from the height of malice, and that its but the fruit of
an unsatiable woman's malice: For the question is thus to be stated, and the
business is thus to be considered ( viz.) There has been a great familiarity
and friendship between Mistress White and I, till it was within this three or
four months, in which time we have both committed a great evil, of which it
pleased God to make me sensible; whereupon I began to forsake, and my spirit
grew much troubled, and estranged my self from Mistress White; which she
perceiving, and having attempted allwaies and means to keep me, but finding all
to be in vain, she now proceeds in this way against me; the truth of which our
wise and al-knowing God knows, and which all impartial and unbiassed judgments
cannot but see: for were there truth in what they say, which there is not, yet
for as much as they have for a long time concealed it; and notwithstanding none
was so great and so much in her favor as I was, so long as God gave me over to
be one with her in iniquity, it appear to be but malice: Much more might be
said to prove that it proceeds to be from malice; they in telling their own
tale bewray themselves, as witness M. White, who what he swore to the Jurors,
as the Jurors will testify upon oath, when called thereto, he denied before
you; nay though Uncles was by him, and did justify before him. A fuller
relation of the whole business between Mistress White and I, ye shall hear
upon the day appointed, wherein I shall answer for my self, and which I have
provided to pass through the press into the public. And if it be the will
of God, that through the malice of a strange woman I must suffer, I dare not
question my God for it, it is the just wages of sin. O that vile thing that
has been committed between us, and that it will be made very good to me; for I
bless my God for it, who has delivered my poor soul out of her hands, for
greater would have been my woe and misery, if I should have continued and have
gone on with her in our evil courses, then now she can make me by all her false
and malicious courses against me; and therefore rejoice that God has called me
home, and not suffered me to go on in the ways of sin continually, which makes
me very much to slight and to be careless of what ever she can do against me;
and I much rejoice in my present sufferings, being fully assured, and it is that
which I can testify to the whole world, that my present sufferings are because
I will no longer serve the filthy lusts and desires of the flesh, and this is
no new and strange thing, Solomon speaks often of it, By the means of a whorish
woman A man is brought to a piece of bread, and the adultresse seeks for the
precious life. Well, I had rather die through her malice, then in her
wickedness; and I bless my God for it, I speak it unfainedly, that I had
rather beg my bread from door to door, and end my days in sorrow, then to sit
down with her, and serve the lusts and desires of the flesh as I have done: and
so the will of my God be done, and according to the time appointed, I hope I
shall be come down from London, and shall wait upon your worships. This account
I thought good to give you, that so it should not be thought by any, that I had
withdrawn my self out of fear, and for being guilty, a thing which my very
adversaries will be very ready to give out: No, I bless my God for it, that as
to those things which they charge me withal, I am free from them all, my
enemies themselves being judges, if they will speak but the truth: However the
Lord will judge between us, and to his judgment I refer my self, and am no
ways afraid what they can do unto me: Now I shall rejoice, for I account it is
better to suffer by sin, and forsaking the way of uncleanness, then it is to
suffer in sin and in the way of uncleanness. O bepity that woman, for there is
a most fearful coming of the Lords vengeance and judgment upon her. Gent. I am

Your most humble servant, Tho. Web.

Both the aforesaid Letters were received by the said Justices, September. 2.
1650.

To the Worshipful William Shute Esquire. this.
Worthy Sir,
ACcording to my promise I have been with M. T. W. his third Letter to Mr Shute.
Stokes, to whom I have given satisfaction, as by our tithingman I have sent M.
White word more then once or twice, but he cannot tell how to leave his old way
of contention: and therefore out of a malicious spirit he troubles your
Worship, seeking thereby to make you an instrument to execute the base and
wicked desires of his wife and her wicked confederacy: But I know not what the
will of our wise God is to do with me; I have no heart to stir, but to sit
still and see his salvation which he will work for me, and patiently take his
present hand that is upon me; for it is just, and I have deservedit by my great
folly, wherein with that woman M. W. I have caused the name of Christ to be
evil spoken of, and his dear Saints reproached, for which the Lord give us both
hearts to be truly humbled, and to repent with a repentance that may never be
repented of, which is truly the hearty prayers of him who is: worthy Sir,

Your Worships most faithful friend and servant, Tho. Web.

Nay, T. W. preaches against whorish women, etc.
besides all the foregoing signs and tokens of repentance, the Parson proceeds
further, and desires all persons to take warning by him to beware of a whorish
woman; and not only was this advice to single persons or to persons in private;
but his zeal carries him farther even into the pulpit, where in the face of
the whole Congregation at Langley aforesaid he Preached upon that Text
mentioned, Proverbs 6. 26. For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to
a morcell of bread, and the adulteress seeks for the precious life. From
whence he admonished his Auditory to beware of such persons; telling them that
Solomon was experienced that the adulterous woman tended to the ruin of all
those that followed them, and likewise (though he was no Solomon) yet he
brought in his own experience; and by that also urged the Parishioners not to
follow the way of uncleanness with such, as he had done, etc.

Upon the view of the aforesaid Humiliation, Confessions and Letters, being
acted to the very life (by this Juggling Parson) many were in expectation of a
great change, and began to think he was real, and so truly sensible and
sorrowful for his evil and unclean life, and therefore he was received again
into favor amongst many good people, who exceedingly rejoiced in his
returning, who were but lately grieving for his Ranting and wickedness.

Neither can his seeming repentance be paralleled by any Converts, though
sincerely returning home to God, especially in the former part and outward
appearances: But as the joy of the hypocrite is short, so the repenting of
wicked and unclean hearts, is but as the crackling of thorns under the pot; as
lightning fills the room with light, but suddenly leaves it as dark as formerly;
or as the morning dew dried up with the rising sun; or as the early
summer-fruit is soon ripe and soon rotten; so is the repenting noise of the
Ranting Parson, whose crackling is extinguished with the fire of lust; the
lightning leaves the room of his profane heart, and darkness keeps possession
there; the dew is dried up through the rising up of L. flames; and Rottenness
seaseth the early fruit of his seeming repentance. Solomon says truly, Pro.
27. 8. As a bird wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his
place, etc. Was not this man as a silly bird to wander from his place? from his
lawful calling? from the wife of his bosom? from his pretended purity, to lay
the eggs of his filthiness in other birds nests? But because he could act any
part on the devils stage; he imitates the Cuckoe also, the better to increase a
generation of a more pure strain then are produced by lawful marriage.

And then see how far he wanders in a counterfeit repentance: one would have
thought his own tongue had raised so many Bulwarks against his own self, that
it was altogether unpossible for him any more to return again into his wonted
folly or way of wickedness, or to have familiarity with his fellow creature
any more for ever.

But it has been the usual practice of these vain persons to give the most
cursed titles to each other, that ever the world practiced, or the devil
invented, as Toad, Toads brood, Toads Spane, Witch, Devils brood, and such
like, with most horrible cursing each other, like mad Bedlams or Devils
incarnate. See Salmons Letter before recited to Webb, and yet they love each
other entirely; scorning and jearing all that are not of their own Sect; their
profane language and terms being as they pretend, uttered in a mystery to
destroy the precise wickedness of the professing party, who make conscience of
these words, ways and actions.

So it seems that what ever the Parson pretended, T W. scorns those to whom he
confessed his uncleanness.
yet he intended no such matter: he now slights and scorns all those to whom he
had confessed his wickedness, and to whom he promised amendment, and dotes
again upon his fellow creature; enters into the house of H. W. at set times,
and at private ways, where all matters of difference are hushed up, and the
fellow creatures reconciled upon a personal Treaty; T. W. becomes friends with
M^s. W.
after the Gentlewoman was brought to bed, and delivered of her child (which
Tho. Web said he begot.)

This agreement of the fellow creatures, fills the Country with a famous sound,
astonishment seiseth the hearts of those that lately rejoiced in his repentance
and return; but now all their hopes of him die, in so much that diverse reject
farther society with him, which the lust-loving Parson bears with scorn enough
(being so abundantly satisfied with returning to his vomit.) The old lascivious
dress and garb is now taken up again, and the humble Parson acts afresh the
part of a most proud and insolent fantastic, and appears more like unto a
profane stage player, then Parish Parson or sober Christian. His long shaggy
hair, which lately hung like a forgotten excrement, is now taken into
consideration, and furbisht up with so much frizell and pounder, as if nature
or lust had altered its course on the sudden. We have read of men, that through
sudden fear have been turned gray in one night; why may not a lascivious joy
upon its resurrection operate as much upon this vain man?

1. T. W. his companions.
His companions now are not these to whom he pretended a repentance, no, they
are slighted, but the Ranting professors, and such as were most notoriously
ignorant or scandalous, or both; these are his fellow creatures and daily
associates.

2. Solomon's Proverbs which lately were so well expounded by him, and applied
against whorish women, are now expunged out of his mouth and mind, and the
rest, his study of the Scripture must give place to a study more noble in the
esteem of illiterate Ranters, His study.
called Astronomy; in which he is likely to become a proficient as soon as
other Egyptian fortune tellers; nay more, he being a man of so much learning,
wisdom and experience, may happly attain to know how far he may wade in English
dirt, and not fall into a French mire.

3. It Is not David's Psalms of repentance or praising that the Parson can now
sing, Songs.
but foolish fancies and witless songs are his delight, being uttered ex
tempore.

4. Music and mixed dancing is now also grown into fashion and practice, T. W.
a lover of Music and mixed dancing.
with this Parish Parson, to which the youth of the Parish and others are
invited, that so the work of conversion may not cease, nor the building of the
Ranting Babel be at a stand any more, as lately in the Apostasy of the prime
Parson and fellow creatures.

It Is recorded of Cain, that to quiet his accusing conscience he went to build
Cities; and the learned Parson Web knows that a multitude of business, and
variety of employments, was the only means to make him have no more conscience
of sin; and therefore farewell humiliation, confession and sorrow for sin, I
have other fish to fry; welcome my sweet Mistress (let the falling out of us
lovers be the renewing of love.) Welcome my lascivious dress and whoring garb,
I am no precise Parson; welcome thou new noble study of Astronomy, I am weary
of this Scripturing; though I have gained a Parsonage by it, yet i will use no
more then may keep it: welcome my fine fancies and ex tempore songs, you are
pleasing to me, and I with you must please my fellow creatures: welcome Music,
mixed dancing and mirth, thou art more pleasing to me then those sighs and
groans which erst while I poured out most foolishly, to the great scandal and
reproach of the Ranting cause; this is the way to attain to our true liberty
and freedom, which a foolish niceness would rob us of.

Such expressions all wise persons read in the Parsons practice; and whether
the particulars are not fitting qualifications for a Parson and public
Preacher, let Christians stand by whilst the profane world judge.

But to proceed with all possible brevity; The reconciliation is upon such sure
grounds between the fellow creatures that it holds to this day; yet the
counsel of the Lord shall stand; destruction shall arise to evil doers from
among themselves.

And therefore the Reader is desired to take notice that when Thomas Webbs
family was united with Mistress W. there being houseroom enough; another of the
same gang is taken with his family, and there retained as a convenient inmate:
for the fellow creatures were acquainted with the old saying of Cheaters, when
they have enticed young travelers into their company, The more the merrier.
Now you must note that this man ( William Lewis by name) was lately become a
very great enemy to M. Stokes, who had formerly opposed him in his Ranting
principles: For the first that ever manifested those principles publicly to
M. Stokes, was the said W. L. and F. B. Whereupon the said parties were
received with greater love amongst the fellow creatures at Langley, and the
said W. L. entertained, and who but he with the Parson and his, etc.

And so they continue great friends for a good space; but when the differences
first arose between Web and his Mistress, T. W. seeks the ruin of his own
fellow creatures.
this Lewis and his wife assist Mistress W. and charge the Parson, as you may
see formerly expressed; wherefore the Parson resolves to call them to an
account for taking parties with the weaker vessel against the mighty male
Ranter.

But Lewis being now jealous of this new friendship, is become a strict
observer of the ways of Parson Web, and dislikes with his private approaches
through bye ways, and his long abode made upon his friendly visits early and
late; he now begins to have an evil opinion of his Landlady, and thinks her as
lewd as her fellow creature: Hereupon Lewis discovers his mind to his own
wife, she thereupon-declares to her husband, what she both heard and saw.

Now the rage that was formerly in Tho. Web the Parson against his
fellow creature, who likewise hers against him, unite against Lewis and his
wife, and for telling tales out of school, are threatened to be soundly whipped.
Fear now possesses the woeful hearts of Lewis and his wife. Mistress W. takes
with others a journey to Gloucester, and to the whispering place or some better
Oracle they repair, where being advised, home they return, and in their company
one J. M. for the better nodification of Goodwife Lewis, upon whose aproach she
is surprised with fear of what former threatenings would amount unto in the
close; and therefore though it was late in the night, and the waters out, yet
as late as it was, away runs Lewis and his wife to Justice Stokes, and requires
a Warrant of the peace against Thomas Web, Mistress W. E. B. her servant, and
the said J. M.

Mr Stokes knowing the aforesaid parties were Ranters all a row, was very shie
of meddling with them, and unwilling to hearken to any of their stories or
complaints, and the rather, because the parties complaining, as well as the
fellow creatures, were his bitter enemies, and expressed so much a good while
before; because as a Magistrate he had expressed himself (as well as being a
Christian) against the Ranting principle, as is before remembered.

Wherefore Mr Stokes demands of them why they trouble him about such
complaints? why at that time of the night? why they did not rather get the
assistance of some of their friends to reconcile them? or if not, wished them to
repair to some other Justice of the Peace.

To which William Lewis answers, Sir, although there have been some former
difference between us in matters of opinion, yet I take you to be a just man,
and that you will do Justice impartially, which is that we desire: He said, we
came this late, because, it was but even now that Mistress W. and her company
came home with I. M. a most wicked and profane man; and that he was brought on
purpose to do his wife or himself a mischief, and had given out threatening
speeches so soon as he was alighted from his horse, the woman in the mean time
seeming to be wonderfully affrighted.

Mr Stokes asked her how they fell at variance: the woman replied that she had
discovered some lewd actions of Thomas Webb and Mrs. W. which was come to their
ears again, and therefore they have threatened and sworn to be revenged upon me
and my husband; so that I dare not return home any more without danger of life,
and therefore I desire surety of the peace to be granted against them.

Mr Stokes replied again, Surely I doubt it is not fear brought you hither, but
rather revenge; for I understand you were arrested at Mr Whites suit the other
day.

William Lewis confessed he was arrested, but the cause of that arrest was but
a beginning of that revenge which the Parson and Mistress W. had threatened
against them, because they disliked their wickedness. She said further, she
would not for a world go such a way to work as to seek revenge, but she could
take her oath that she was afraid of her life.

When nothing would serve to silence the parties, Mr Stokes tenders her (with
admonition not to swear falsely) the Oath, which she takes, and thereupon grants
her a Warrant of the peace against the said Parson Webb, Mistress W. I. M. and
E. B.

After the Warrant was perfected, these persons make a full relation to Mr
Stokes of all passages at Langley between the fellow creatures, and
particularly William Lewis acquainted him with the foul act of Webbs being
taken in the act of adultery with Mrs. W. a little after Michaelmas last past,
and this complaint to Mr Stokes was Nov. 23. 1650.

William Lewis calls his wife, and she makes good the Information, and tenders
to swear it; diverse questions Mr Stokes put to her tending to weaken, if not
stifle the Information: but she stands boldly in the justification of it, with
a world of other most horrible and hateful crimes and practices of theirs, not
to be named.

Two questions Mr Stokes desires them to satisfy him in; one is Why the fact
was concealed till now? The second was, Whether ever they took M. W. to be a
good woman? To the first query the answer falls in from the woman's own mouth;
afterward to the second he answers, that they looked upon M W. to be a godly,
religious, and as wise a woman as any in the Country, till of late they had
found to the contrary; but Webb had discovered himself to be a leacherous knave
long ago.

Well, Mr Stokes takes the woman's Information, but not upon Oath, and so made
no further proceedings upon it, thinking perhaps the woman might be (as Ranters
usually are) of another mind another day.

But they continue the same tune from day to day; W. L. follows Mr Stokes for a
prosecution; M. Stokes acquaints two of his fellow-Justices with it, and a day
is appointed for a hearing of the business.

Well, in the mean time the Warrant of the peace is served on M. W. and Thomas
Web, and they also meet on the 25. of Novem. before M. Stokes; M. W. gives
sureties to keep the Peace; Webbs credit is so much cract, that he must needs
pretend that he will go to Goal; yet rather then he should go alone, and be in
Lo^s pound without a fellow creature, M. W. (such is the tender love and pity
of the woman to the Parson) moves her husband to stand for one of Webbs
sureties; but some having more wit then some, he refuses, and pleaded an
engagement to the contrary; at which the little Gentlewoman seems angry: And
anon M. W. and his wife mount on horseback, and are returning home; but before
they had rode a flightshot from the place, M W (finds better arguments on
horseback then afoot) prevails with her husband to become a surety for the
Parson (what will not love do?) So M. W. and his horse face about, and he
brings his wife with him for a witness that he himself (with another
Gentleman) was surety for Tom. Web, that he should not go to Goal, nor stay
at home to break the public peace; so away they went: And for as much as
William Lewis had expressed himself to be in a great fear of M. W. life, by the
fellow creatures, they sent M. White to another Justice of Peace, where he
swears that he stands in fear lest W. Lewis, Edith his wife, etc. will take
away his life, hurt and main his body, or burn his houses: Whereupon he obtains
a Warrant, and binds them to the Peace: withal, the better to effect the
business, ( viz.) the design of the fellow creatures, he procures a Warrant to
search for stolen goods; by which means they search Lewis his part of the house,
and pretend they find goods of M. W. there: So they arrest Lewis as a felone,
and hale him and his wife, etc. before the Justice, where whilst their Mittimus
is making, and M. White binding over to prosecute, Parson Webb and his, etc.
are employed in getting Lewis his possession; so they are turned out of doors,
and their goods secured to the total undoing of the said Lewis.

The Information of Henry White of Langley Burial Gent. against William Lewis
and Edith his wife, taken upon Oath, before Edward Stokes Esquire, November. 26.
16^0.

He this Informer says, that of late he has had certain household goods,
feloniously stolen from him the said Henry White out of his dwelling house, and
having obtained a Warrant from a Justice of peace, he made search in a part of
his own dwelling house at Langley aforesaid, being in the possession of the
said William Lewis, where he found certain parcels of his goods (...) lost, (
viz) One new Exe for a Wam never used; certain Apples, in measure about one
bushel, and a certain Table-board in length about ten scot; whereupon he the
said Henry White charge him the said William Lewis and his wife upon
suspicion to have feloniously stolen the said goods at several times from the
said Henry White.

Henry White.

The Examination of William Lewis taken as aforesaid.

He this Examinant says, that he is altogether guiltless of the felonies
charged by M. White against him, That the Exe mentioned in the Information, was
lying and being in the room where upon search it was found, when he the
Examinant first entered possession of that part of the house belonging to M.
White in Langley aforesaid, and there ever was at M. Whites command for his
use: For the Apples, he this Examinant says they were his own goods by virtue
of a contract or bargain made with M. White about three weeks before the feast
of Michaelmas last past: As for the Table-board he this Examinant says he
borrowed the same of Mary the wife of Henry White, and set the same upon two
Tressles in a certain room of the said house, not with any intent to defraud
the said M. White; and further he this Examinant says the said M. White has
four or five times in a day frequented the said room. and made use of the said
Table, and never questioned any thing till this very day; and further he has
not to say.

The Examination of Edith Lewis the wife of the said William, taken as
aforesaid.

She this Examinant says, that the Information is altogether untrue, that the
said Exe was in the said room when she first came into possession thereof with
her said husband: That the Apples mentioned in the Information, are her said
husbands goods: That the Table-board was in the house when they came to it, and
there they intended to leave it: And further she says, the said M. White did
every day resort into the said Room, and made use of the same Table, and till
this day never questioned the same; and further she has not to say.

You see what the felony is which M. White through the instigation of the
fellow creatures charge against Lewis and his wife, and you may easily guess
that the warrant of the peace was upon the same ground. Notwithstanding the
Grand jury at the trial finds M. Whites Bill of Indictment to be but an
Ignoramus.

By what is past you may perceive what a spirit of giddiness had possessed the
primest actors upon the Ranting stage. The Idolators of old having worshipped
their Idol God, through the just judgment of God Almighty, fell out among
themselves, and sheathed each others sword in their brothers bowels: So these
having committed folly, act the part of madness and enraged fury, and resolve
never to quit the stage till they have devoured each other, and then the
longest liver take all. Lord how true is thy word, Though hand join in hand,
iniquity shall not go unpunished. 'Twas wonderful to see the love of the
fellow creatures, but the other day what a union there was among these persons,
and others of the same kidney, not yet named, united in family, living under
one roof; united in principle, united in practice, united in all things
becoming fellow creatures and lovers of community; yet now like simple
children, which for a time delight in each other, and laugh and play friendly
together; but anon, fall out and fight with each other, or rather like
drunkards, which for a while love each other entirely, praise each other to the
skies, and despise all that are not as themselves, pot-companions; yet
afterward having added drunkenness to thirst, fall to boxes and blows amongst
themselves, wounding and tearing each other to pieces: such was the behavior
of these who were drunk with folly and frenzy in the time of their Ranting
Catterwalle.

You may perceive all the discovery made by the actors themselves, and very
remarkable it is that their own councels and their own tongues brought their
horrid wickedness to light, loudly proclaiming that publicly, which before
was but privately suspected and whispered. Remarkable also it is that hitherto
none prosecuted them to this day that were not of their own party; except one
warrant granted against the fellow creatures, at the request of one S. V. about
August before; to whom one of the faction and council discovered their wicked
ways and practices; but the business being upon the stage, the discoverer
shrunk in the wetting, only manifested that birds of a feather must hang
together; otherwise not a man moved toward their public prosecution, or any
way sought their disgrace.

Neither need any man act that way, seeing the parties concerned had entered
upon the work, as if they had taken it to task.

1. So you have seen the breach, first made between the most choice
fellow creatures, after the highest expressions of love and L.

2. You have seen the breach made up again by the learned Parson (in
wickedness) alias mock Parson.

3. You have seen the said Parson, First, in his seeming sobriety. Secondly, in
his Ranting. Thirdly, confessing and repenting. Fourthly, Ranting as before.

4. You have seen evil arising afresh against both Parson and fellow creature
from their own Sect and gang.

5. You have seen the fellow creatures furiously working the ruin and
destruction of their accusers.

Now it remains that the charge of Lewis and his wife against Tho. Web and M.
W. and the proceedings of the Justices thereupon, be also made manifest, as it
lies upon record, which is here made public upon this account, only to
manifest to the world that the ruin and distraction of this people arose from
among their own selves, and not from the Justices, as Tom Webb in his mass of
malice most untruly gives out.

The Information of Edith Lewis wife of William Lewis of Langley Burhill, T. W.
charged to have been taken in the act of adultery.
Yeoman, given the 23. of November. 1650. unto Edward Stokes Esquire. against Thomas
Webb of Langley aforesaid Clerk, and Mary White wife of Henry White of the same
Gent. for and concerning the felonious committing of the horrible and crying
sin of adultery together, and now again taken upon oath this 9th of December. in
the year aforesaid before George Ivy, the said Edward Stokes, and William Shute
Esquires, three of the Justices of the Peace within the said County, as
follows.

Who says, That her husband and she living in part of the said Henry Whites
house in Langley aforesaid, she this Informant was sent by the said Mistress
Mary White to Chippenham upon a Saturday, between Michaelmas and Alhallontide,
and making more haste from thence, then she usually did at other times; she
went into that part of the house wherein the said Mistress White lived, and
finding no body in any of the lower rooms, she went up stairs, and a
chamber door near the stair-head being open, she stepped into the said chamber,
and there saw the said Thomas Web lying upon the body of the said Mistress
Mary White, and being in the very act of adultery with her, upon the bed there:
And further she this Informant says, that there was in the same room at the
same time one John Morris a soldier of Gloucester, who hastily came to the
said chamber door to put back her this Informant; he supposing (as she
conceived) that she had been Mr Henry White aforesaid, husband of the said
Mary: but she being in the chamber before he could shut the door against her,
he let her alone, where she stood as one amazed, and in exceeding great fear.
Then the said Thomas Web arose from off the bed and place where he lay, to
one side, and the said Mary White to the other side, and afterward they two
together, with the said Morris, fell to dancing, using in their said dancing
much filthy and unclean language, worse then ever she this Informant heard from
any others, with whom she this Informant complied in dancing for the time, for
fear they should do her some mischief, but was glad when she was gone from them.
And this Informant being asked, why she concealed it so long, says, that she
told her own brother Thomas Riley of Calve of it, the next day after it was
done; and that she durst not acquaint any other with it, for that she lived
under the same roof with the said Mistress White, and did not know what injury
they might have done her, if she should have spoken of it: But not being able
to hide it long from her husband, at length she acquainted him with it; who, as
soon as he heard of it, caused her presently to go to Justice Stokes, and
inform him of it. And this Informant appearing again before the said George
Ivye, the 17. day of February following, says further, that the day wherein
she took the said Thomas Web and Mary White in the act of Adultery, and left
uncertain upon her former Information, was the very next Saturday after
Michaelmas last past, as she does now perfectly remember.

The Information of William Lewis of Langley aforesaid, Yeoman, taken upon Oath
the 17. day of February 1650. before the said George Jvy, against the said
Thomas Web and Mary White, as aforesaid.

Who says, That about the 10th or 11th of June last past, there being a great
falling out between the said Mr Web and Mistress White, she the said Mistress
White did in the presence and hearing of this Informant and diverse others,
charge the said Mr Web, that he had many times endeavored to ravish her, and
force her chastity: to which the said Webb replied, that he needed not to do
so, for that he had oftentimes had carnal knowledge of her with her own
consent; and that she had sent her own husband Mr Henry White to fetch him four
mornings in a week out of his bed, of purpose to ly with her; and that she had
formerly told him, that the child where with she then went, was his, and that
he begot it on her on S. Stevens his day at night last past; and that her
servant Elizabeth Briscow was as good as her self, for that she lay with John
Morris and young Organ of Castle-combe: Which things being bruted up and down
the Country, some honest and religious people of Calve sent one Thomas Riley of
the same, to this Informant, to learn the truth of it; to whom he the said
Informant gave this answer, That the said Mr Webb and Mistress White had
charged each other as aforesaid, not only in the hearing of this Informant, but
also in the presence of M. White and Mistress Web, being the husband and wife
of the said Mistress White and M. Web, and that he conceived them to be both
naught; and further says, that this quarrel continued between the said M.
Webb and Mistress White, until the said Mistress White was delivered of the
child wherewith she then went, and it grew to that height, that there were
above twenty suits in Law depending betwixt Henry White aforesaid, and the said
M. Webb, and that shortly after Mistress White was brought to bed, and
indifferently well recovered of her child birth, the aforesaid Elizabeth
Briscow told him this Informant, that her Mistress had a great desire to speak
with M. Webb, and had appointed her to bring him unto her: Whereupon this
Informant remembering what had formerly passed betwixt them, and fearing that
they would grow as familiar again, as they had been before; did the more
strictly observe their doings, and the Thursday following being the next
Thursday after Michaelmas last past, he saw the said M Webb and the said John
Morris walking athwart the grounds toward M. Whites house, and coming near the
said house, they stood still under an Oak, and looked about them, and after a
little pause, they went a by-way through the Orchard and Garden into the said
house through a door seldom used; and the said Morris continued there all that
night; and for the greatest part of the night the said Morris and the aforesaid
Elizabeth Briscow drawing a servant of this Informants into their Company did
nothing but curse and swear, sing lewd songs, and drink such profane and
blasphemous healths, as this Informant never heard the like before; and the
next morning being Friday, the said Riley (whose sister he this Informant
married) coming again to his house, he the said Informant told the said Riley,
that he feared, that M. Webb and Mistress White would grow too familiar again,
and that there would be murder or some other mischief follow it; and did
thereupon turn away his aforesaid servant, and forbid his wife to meddle or
make with Mistress White or any of her business: And further says, that his
wife told him, that the said Webb and Morris were the greatest part of that
afternoon in the chamber together with Mistress White: And this Informant
further says, that the morrow after being Saturday about one or two of the
Clock in the afternoon of the same day, M. White and his sister being then from
home, and this Informants wife likewise at Chippenham, he saw the said Webb and
the said Morris walk in the Churchyard together, and after a little while
slipped into the said M. Whites house the back way, through the said Orchard and
Garden, and toward the evening he saw the said Webb come forth of the said
house again the same way. And the next day being Sunday in the evening, this
informant asked of the said Elizabeth Briscow, how it chanced that the said
Morris had not preached there that day? to which she replied, that the said
Morris intended to have preached, but she would not let him, and that she told
him, that he should not come thither roguing and whoring, and yet make people
believe he was godly.

The Examination of the said Mistress Mary White taken the 9. day of December.
1650. before the three aforesaid Justices; she the said Mistres White being
then and thither brought, and charged with the felonious committing of the said
act of Adultery, with the aforesaid M. Webb, as follows.
Who being examined whether she this Examinant, Thomas Webb aforesaid, and one
John Morris were together at her said husbands house on any Saturday betwixt
this and Michaelmas last past, or not? denies that ever they were, but says
that the said Webb and Morris were on the Friday next after Michaelmas day
there in her own chamber, at her said husbands house; and that all the same
time Elizabeth Briscow this Examinants maidservant was also in the same room,
and during all the while that they continued there: and further says, that the
said Webb and Morris have been diverse times severally at her husbands house
since Michaelmas last past, but never both together, except that one time. And
this Examinant does also utterly deny, that the said Thomas Webb had carnal
knowledge of her then or at any other time, or that she, the aforesaid Tho.
Webb. the said John Morris, and Edith Lewis aforesaid ever danced together; or
that she, or the said Webb, or either of them are any ways guilty of the
things wherewith they are charged in the Information of the said Edith Lewis.

The Examination of the said Thomas Webb taken before the said Justices, as
aforesaid.
Who says, That there being some suits at Law depending betwixt the said M.
White, and him this Examinant; he the said Examinant and one John Morris a
soldier at Gloucester, went to the house of the said M. White the Friday
before Michaelmas day to talk with him and his wife about reconciling the said
Lawsuits, and Mistress White lying in about the same time, sent for him this
Examinant and the said Morris into her Chamber, and there had discourse of the
business: And being further asked, whether he and the said Morris were ever
together in that or any other chamber of the said Mr Whites, with the aforesaid
Mrs White at any other time since the said Friday before Michaelmas; confesses
and says, that he this Examinant and the said Morris have been several times
together in that house with the said Mistress White, but denies that they were
together in any of the chambers of the said house, with the said Mistress White
ever since that time, and does also deny that he had then ever before or since
any carnal knowledge of the said Mistress White, or that he the said
Examinant, with the said Mistress White, and the said Morris, and the said
Edith Lewis danced together, or spoke such words as they are accused of by
Edith Lewis aforesaid.

After the aforesaid Informations and Examinations were taken, T. W. committed
to Goal.
the said Mr Web and Mistress White for their said offense were both
committed by the three aforementioned Justices to the common Goal for the said
County of Wilts, where they remained prisoners till the Assizes following.

When the fellow creatures understood their mittimus, and saw whereto they must
trust, they seem to be somewhat milder then before, and more moderate in their
language then formerly; but after a little pause, Web being a better Scribe
then Parson, imploys his pen, and tumbles out of his treasury of
self-confidence and impudence, expositions of the Parliaments Act of Adultery
in Folio, and sends them to M. Stokes, amongst which he asserts these
particulars.

1. That no Parson (though made a felon by that act) is to be proceeded against
till after Presentment or Indictment at Assizes or Sessions, and the verdict of
twelve men is to be the leading card to sentence, or any other proceedings upon
this new Law.

2. That no Justice of Peace or other Officer is to imprison or secure the
felons mentioned in the said Act, till after Indictment and Conviction.

3. That the Justices had no power to summon Tho. Web nor Mistress White
before them, nor power to hear the complaints, nor to send them to Goal though
offending against the said Act, according to what is charged against them.

4. That the Parliament would rather a man should fly for such an offense then
suffer death, and therefore they have provided that no other proceedings are to
be then upon Indictment; wherefore (says he) the Parliament would be glad to
be rid of them so.

5. That old Laws are not a rule for Justices to walk by in their proceeding
against offenders as are made so by modern and late Acts.

6. That Judge Nicholas can give no council upon this Act more then another
man; for first, it is a new Law, and he is as young a Lawyer in the knowledge
of it as another.

7. It is distinct from all other Laws, for it both afflicts and affords that
which no other Law does.

Then he lays down his own verdict upon the Justices proceedings, and says.

That they are Acts of inhumanity and injustice.

That they are beyond all Law, equity, reason, president and common respect
that one creature owes to another.

That neither Reason nor Wisdom was called to their Councels or Consultations.

That their present proceedings were to gain aplause amongst the multitude, and
that nothing has more served the enemies designs, then their cruel and
tyrannical proceedings against them.

That such dealings are not amongst Turks and Infidels that are acted against
him and his, etc.

Then he falls to these Queries.
1. Who shall secure the Tithingman for what he does upon the Justices unjust
proceedings?

2. What provision is made for conveying him and his etc. to Goal, for a foot
they cannot go, and horses they will not hire?

3. Whether (seeing they were States-prisoners) the State ought not to make
provision for them, both to the Goal and in the Goal?

4. Whether they ought not to have received more favor being they were
public persons, and had laid out themselves for the public, and upon the
public service, though they were guilty, and the Act required such dealings?

5. Seeing they were bound to the Peace before, and were no Rogues nor
Vagabonds, whether that was not sufficient; and the rather seeing the poor
Gentlewoman is sickly, and not inferior to those that committed them?

Then he falls to his proud and insolent threats, and tells M. Stokes,

That for as much as bayl was offered and refused; now it should not be given
if the Justices accept of it.

Then for the great wrong and injury which I sustain (says he) through the
Justices, I will seek a remedy by a Law and equity.

That the business shall be publicly questioned, and Mr Stokes made ashamed
of it.

That whatsoever he has formerly confessed or written to M. Stokes, he values
it not, but challenges M. Stokes to do him what prejudice he can, and not to
spare.

That he is resolved to turn every stone, to find out, and to be satisfied of
the justness of the Justices proceedings against him.

The Letters bear date, From my illegal and discourteous restraint, December. 6.
1650.

From my unjust, illegal and tyrannical restraint, Langley Burial, December. 12.
1650.

Signed, This Nations true friend and servant, Tho. Web.

To all which and much more of the like nature, M. Stokes returns to Tho. Webb
only these ensuing lines.

Sir, Your lines savor of so much passion, conceitednesse and untruth, that to
answer them particularly, would argue more vanity and weakness in me, then yet
you impute to me. I perceive it is your manner to revile at any that cross you
in your lusts: Your Janus-face and conversation is sufficiently known in these
parts. I own those acts of Justice you now lie under; you may continue your
taunts and threats, and do your worst, either with or without them: Justice is
my Master, which I cannot betray to humor you in your lusts.

Your hypocrisy has hampered you, and your own practices, if not principles,
have brought this judgment upon you, which when you come to your self, you
will acknowledge and give glory to God in truth: till which time I am content
to lie under your reproach and scorn, and there subscribe,

Your, etc. E. S.

By what is last past, surely there is no Reader that views this Parson, but
must needs admire him for his deep judgment and singular knowledge in the act
of adultery, and the Parliaments Act against the same, of which he is the only
expositor after the Ranters understanding, which he has fully expressed, that it
wants no refutation; and he that goes about to convince a Ranter in any point,
either of Law or Gospel, may as well undertake to wash a Black-more white.

Yet at length toward Goal the fellow creatures go, and knowing the farthest
way about was the nearest way home, they go as Parsons in Perambulation; but in
stead of reading Epistles and Gospels, when they are at their utmost bounds,
these read railing and invective lectures against the Justices and their
accusers: for being the only champions of liberty, and such as had laid out
themselves for the public, they resolve not to be cast down, but bravely to
carry out the business, for they were well assured that old birds could not be
caught with chaff, nor such eminent fellow creatures so expert in the knowledge
of Liberty and L. to be caught by a new Act of Parliament against Adultery;
they knew well enough how to manage the business, they can produce witness
enough to outswear whatsoever shall be sworn against them; what if one or two
fellow creatures be fallen off from, and out, with these choice lovers, and tell
tales out of school, and swear in public what was acted more private? that is
nothing, there are five for one remain faithful to the cause, and they can
swear for a need that the evidence is upon malice, and that there was no such
thing acted, etc. and this every man that knew any thing of the Ranters
principles or ways, knew upon what score there was no danger of death in the
parties before they came to trial, and therefore some who were forced to speak
at the time of trial, did it to lay open their wickedness not to take away
their lives (which were secure) but Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

Long these persons had not continued in Goal, but they sue for bayl, which the
Parson a little before scorns to accept of, yet now all possible means they use
for liberty upon bayl; to which purpose M. Stokes is again courted by Parson
Webb and his then agent M. B. as if all the business had depended upon his
will; withal they tell him that the Justices of Salisbury much wondered at the
proceedings, and said M. Swanton was offended thereat; and further said he
would bayl him if he had the informations; whereupon M. Stokes procured the
Informations and Examinations, and sent them enclosed to M. Swanton with these
lines:

Honored Sir,
BEing informed that you were offended with the proceedings of the Justices
against one Webb and Mistress White, because sent to Goal, and not bayled, and
that if you had a Copy of the said proceedings you would bayl them, I thought
good to send you the Copy for your satisfaction, and withal to tell you that I
do not in the least credit any report that proceeds from this raging Ranting
crew: And indeed having experience of your prudence and wisdom, I am satisfied
with whatsoever you shall do on their behalf, and shall only acquaint you that
the persons aforesaid have rendered themselves very scandalous, and were of evil
fame long before the accusation for which they stand committed; in so much that
Webb has openly confessed, that the child lately born of the body of Mistress
White was begotten by him the said Webb, etc. And that he had carnal knowledge
of her he confessed in a Letter to my self, when lately he pretended to be
troubled in conscience for his sin. Sir, I can make it appear (notwithstanding
his fair gloss to strangers) that he is a mere piece of hypocrisy and
deceit; as for the Gentlewoman, she has lived so long in these parts, that I
need say nothing as to her particular; I perceive their design at present is to
render their accuser infamous, of whom I have only this to say, that I have
observed her conversation for diverse years, and yet neither by my own
observation or other information did I ever take her for other then a modest
and sober woman; but what they ( viz) Webb and Mistress W. have made of her
since they have all lived under one roof together, which was ever since March
last, I understand not; but she seems to be very serious in what she charge
them withal. Sir, I write not this to hinder their bayl, but to give you light
upon what account we proceeded against them as we have done. The next day after
our mittimus was made, M. Shute and my self acquainted Judge Nicholas with what
we had done, who justified our proceeding, and in whose judgment they were not
baylable.

Sir, Your cordial friend and servant, E. S.

M. Swantons reply to M. Stokes.
Sir,
AMongst all affronts and abuses I ever received, I never a more scandalous, as
by so false and foul an information made to you, as appears by the first line
of your Letter, that I should take offense from you and the rest of my fellow
Justices, that Webb and Mistress White should be sent to Goal, and not bayled:
so base and unworthy a relation delivered you as before I intend either to
read over the Examinations, or to consider what to do in the business, I must
give you an account of the daily continued labors and endeavors of the
delinquents to be bailed, which has been prosecuted with all the eagerness
that can be thought of; and on Wednesday last, by their mediation, I was sent
for to Lieutenant General Ludlow to have bailed them, at which time I gave him
such full satisfaction, perusing the mittimus, and informing him of the
foulness of the fact, and the regard we ought to have one of another in these
cases of baylment, that I satisfied him until I could get a copy of the
Examinations I could not be able to give any resolution toward bayling them,
the mittimus being so full as proof and oath, of being taken in the act of
adultery, which I perceive to be made good by the Examination. Sir, I pray
conceive that I am not so slight, as that false relator should make me, for its
not a straw difference to me, whether M. Webb or Mistress White be at liberty
or in the Goal, and therefore I shall desire you that I may know the relator,
for I profess I shall question him. And now I have given you a full answer of
your Letter, I shall let you know, and my other good friends M. Ivy and M.
Shute, that I conceive you have proceeded according to the Law; but yet if you
please to be at the Sessions, and the Court may conceive them baylable, I shall
join with them; but Sir, be assured no man shall have a more tender respect
unto you and all others of your place, then

Your most assured Friend Fra. Swanton.
Sarum. 29. Dec. 1650.
Together with this Letter more Letters came from Webb and his Agents to M.
Stokes, intimating that his Letter hindered their bayl, and earnestly
entreating a word from him to M. Swanton; whereupon M. Stokes wrote these
ensuing lines:

Honored Sir, I have received yours, to which I shall give you a more
satisfactory answer when I see you, then I can at present, having only time to
acquaint you that the prisoners suppose that my last to you is the only
hinderance they are not bayled, for so they write to me, and exceedingly press
me to write to you to take their bayl. Sir, I am confident if they were
baylable in your esteem, you would not defer it, but I thought good to tell you
that now they impute their imprisonment till the Sessions, to proceed from my
Letter, the truth of which is known to you; but notwithstanding all abuses
which they have heaped upon me, I have not yet sought the least satisfaction,
much less revenge; neither would I by any means hinder their bayl, if any
Justices are free to take it.

Your faithful friend to serve you, E. S.
December. 30. 1650.
The reason why these Letters are inserted, is to show that there was no plot
nor contrivance between the Justices, and that M. Stokes did nothing
maliciously against the fellow creatures, or hinder their bayl, as the Parson
has given out, who having lost a Parsonage, has made lies his refuge, as if
he intended to be a Chaplain to the father of lies, for which he is learned
enough.

But yet notwithstanding they are not bayled, no not at the next general
quarter Sessions, where M. Stokes appeared not, and therefore could be no
obstruction, yet the Gentlewoman might have enlargement, but like a good and
loving soul to her dearest friend refused it, T. W. pretends a second
repentance in Goal.
unless he might partake of the same privilege, as M. B. confessed. But Webb
now perceiving how things went, intends to act another part of repentance,
having made himself weary of his Ranting party, as the letters and message
hereafter immediately following demonstrate.

Honored Sir,
AS to the will of our wise God, which is fulfilled in my present condition; I
must indeed, I am made to acknowledge it; and therefore for that I have blamed
and passionately wronged you, I am heartily sorry and humbly implore your
goodness for to have me excused for it; I shall now learn to submit to a
divine will, who is just in what it does, and will justify all those whom it
makes use of for its accomplishment, etc.

Your humble servant, Tho. Web.

Dear and Honored Sir,
WHat the decree is that is gone forth from the presence of our good and wise
God, I do not know, nor indeed am I able to spel it out, the characters almost
pass my Intelligence; for providence acts so darkly to me, and in so many
paths of contrariety, that indeed I am almost amazed, and were it not that
former experiences were renewed in me, and that I do draw something of
sweetness from many sweet promises, I should look upon my self as an undone,
lost man. I say wisdom acts beyond my genius, and apprehensions; very much
engaged should I be in this my straight, you would by your own enjoyment help
me to learn and understand; I hope God will yet make me to know, and do his
pleasure; and this confidence I have, that out of this wilderness he will
deliver me: Oh that my patience would carry me forth to the end, and not suffer
me to murmer against him! no nor against any he is pleased to inflict upon me.
Many thanks and returns of love to your dear Lady and your self for your love
and care toward me, which I must and shall for ever acknowledge to be
altogether undeserved by me, and though my desires for my liberty and your well
wishes take not effect, yet I do heartily thank you; and truly I profess it
from my heart, it will for ever oblige me, not only to subscribe, but to be,
dear Sir,

Your cordial friend and humble servant, Tho. Web.
January. 17. 1650.
Honored Sir,
THat which at first moved me to write to you, and to express my self in so
bold and rude language, truly was my love to you, for I could have chused to
have writ to others, but indeed I ever loved you, and was persuaded my lines
would have been received without exception; but understanding my lines were not
to be born withal, I most humbly desire you to have me excused for them, and
to impute them to passion, not to any thing of prejudice; for I profess it
might proceed from the former, but as for the later it had no place nor
footing; for I owe you no prejudice, but as formerly I love and honor you.
Furthermore, I humbly entreat you to give a gracious hearing to what I have
entrusted my loving and very good friend M. Bailiff to acquaint you with, and
so far own me, if ever you will do me good, as to answer it graciously: I would
have made my Paper the Messenger, but truly I could not do it conveniently, and
therefore made bold with my friend to do it for me, to whom I have imparted my
whole heart, and my present condition as it now stands; I have faithfully
declared my self to him, and have desired him to acquaint you with it, and so
humbly entreating you to give him a hearing, and to act for me as one who once
was your near friend, and still is,

Honored Sir, Fisherton January 1650. Your faithful friend and servant, Tho.
Web.

The request of the arch-Parson made known by M. Bailiff, was, that he was
exceedingly wearied and tired out with Mistress Whites company in Goal, that
she by her flatteries and frowns still endeavored to keep him in his evil and
unclean courses with her, whose provocations and temptations gave him no rest;
and therefore he humbly desires to be removed into any other prison out of her
company, where he might be at rest, and then he would publish to the people of
God the whole business in truth and in Print (concerning his unclean life with
the said Gentlewoman) which now he could not perform, because of her presence
with him; nay he could not now, such was his condition, so much as write or
speak a word but she grew jealous it tended to unfaithfulness. Besides this
relator added that the Parson had no rest, unless he were sucking at her
breasts, which was his work amongst others (after one Puppy had lost his life
by often sucking) or merry and frolic with her, according to the accustomed
manner; and besides said, that she left her own husband and came and lay upon
Webbs bed and body, this relator being then in bed with the said Webb, and
there with many tears and threats endeavored to keep him to her self;
notwithstanding with much ado he writes the foregoing lines, and earnestly
desired M. Stokes his assistance to work a separation between him and Mistress
White, in putting of them to several Goales.

M. Stokes upon the receipt of this Letter and Message said but little, and did
less, being well assured that this proceeded at best but from a short-lived
heart-qualm, or rather it was only a vail to cast over M. B. whilst at once the
amorous Parson and his Giglets made a jear of the Messenger, the message, and
he to whom it was sent, as afterward was manifest.

Yet you see the inconsiderate Parson Webb seems to practice a pensive man's
part, after all his audacious and malepert carriage and demeanor before
remembered. Notwithstanding this repentance also hastily proves abortive, and
the Parson faceth about to his fellow creature, who in a few days after, wrote
this ensuing Letter to M. Bailiff, in answer to one of his formerly sent to
persuade her to show kindness and respect toward Parson Webbs wife, who was
gone to visit her husband in Goal; for it was feared, it seems, that Mistress
White would not nor could not dissemble her principles, but would openly
dislike that Mistress Webb should be so bold as to take such a journey to see
her husband, having no more right to him then a formal union, which is nothing
to the liberal and free union of fellow creatures.

The Letter of Mrs. White to M. Bailiff follows.
Kind Friend,
I Am very sensible of your realities and endeared friendship toward us, you
shall find us as truly yours in whatsoever lies within our powers, when
opportunity shall honor us with some ample expressions, whereby we may
express in deed rather then word what we would be. Dear friend, To show
gratefulness for all favors, and the truth of our profession, which is no
less then the height of humane society, in which (though darkly) I will walk
as far as I know to all, but especially I have observed your desires, though
not without trouble, and I must tell you sensibly also how much it reflects
upon me, knowing my self so grossly abused, yet am as I am, it must lie upon
more worth to requite and aquit, then I have yet found acted toward me from my
dearest friend; we shall be glad to see you, I doubt till two days before the
Assizes I shall not get Bess and Goody Brewer, then I hope you will all meet
here; till when, and ever be most confident I am sincerely,

Your Friend both in life and death, M. W.
Jan. 30. 1650.
Postscript.
Mr Web is so taken up with his friends, I beseech you excuse him for not
writing, I am sure he is yours as much as his own: his dear love to you.

The aforesaid Letter is inserted to show the Reader that the Antic Parson did
but merely dissemble, whilst he sought a divorce from his fellow creature in
the Goal, for in these lines you may perceive how great the union is; so that
now M. Stokes is no more troubled with Letters or Messages, nor hears no more
of the Lovers until the Assizes.

Not to trouble the Reader with the deportment of the fellow creatures in Goal,
T. W. his delivera^ce and return from Goal.
nor what unworthy design Web puts in practice to save his Neck; nor to
mention any thing concerning the Witness produced on his behalf at the Trial,
all which requires a Volume: but the Author forbears these particulars: being
tender of the good Names of some, who at present seem to repent for what they
have acted in relation to the deceiptfull mock-Parson.

As for the Trial it self, the Author will pass over that also in silence,
because all things acted there were in the face of the whole Country, wherefore
the impudent mock-Parson at the Trial needs no discovery, it is so famously
known in Wiltshire. The grand Jury finds the Bill of Indictment, the Jury for
life and death find him not guilty, whereupon he is freed: And surely now any
moderate man would have thought he would have given glory to God, turned over a
new leaf, and left off his Ranting way: This was expected from him, because of
his Goal-repentance not long before; but in stead hereof he continues the same
pace as before, nay he becomes more proud, imperious and impudent then ever.
After he had kept holy day with the Ranting gang in Sarum, he returns toward
his Parsonage, but the farthest way about, to visit the fellow creatures:
Wherefore M. W. being sent home the nearest way, Webb with Mistress W. and his
own wife, with others, returns by the way of Warminster; in which progress,
such was the demeanor of the Libertine Parson, lately delivered out of the hand
of Justice, but still fast in the devils clutches, that he publicly owns his
relation to his fellow creatures, to be above and more binding to him then his
relation to his own wife, which was but formal, but the other was real. Upon
this, with other his most impudent carriage, the Parsons wife (poor woman)
expecting better things, as the fruit of his sufferings; but now seeing her
hopes to fail, she falls into a labirinth of misery and heart-distress, and
presently in the same room earnestly desired M. F. Bailiff (then in company,
who was one of Webbs witnesses at the Trial) that he would run her through
with his sword, for she was no longer able to bear as she had done. Not to
trouble the Reader with all passages in the Parsons return from his Chapel at
Fisherton, to the Parish Church of Langley; you shall only know that at
Bradford the Sack went merrily down the Witnesses throats, and the rest of the
fellow creatures, who well deserved it: But amidst their Cups they quaff about
this health, Here is a health to the Star that now is in the Eclipse, but
hereafter shall shine in perfect glory; which the Relator thus interprets, The
Star in Eclipse is Mistress White, who though now despised because of the
peoples ignorance of true liberty, yet hereafter, when it should be known, she
should shine in perfect glory ( viz.) be had in high account and esteem.

Well, at length home the fellow creatures come, diverse are in expectation that
the mock-Parson will surely now become a new man, at least in apperance; but he
reforms like a Parsons Ape, the clean contrary way, he swaggereth it out most
bravely with his proud looks, poudered pate, and prating tongue; he breaths out
no less then ruin and destruction against all opposers, amongst which M.
Stokes must have a large share, he shall no longer continue in the Commission
of the Peace (a great revenge) because he acts so irregularly and unjustly, as
to prosecute the Law against the honest party, and makes no difference between
common whoremongers, and Masters of Art, alias mock-Parsons and Priests Apes (a
sad case.) Well all the influence of this honest party is withdrawn, which
raised M. Stokes into the sadle, therefore he must needs fall; and the
prophetical Parson foretells strange things to come, and fortunes to befall
diverse persons, which will all be fulfilled the next black monday. And after a
while the Parson takes a journey to London, and appears before the Committee of
Plundered Ministers (who so bold as blind Byard!) in hopes to continue Parson
of Langley by that power which he despised, the better to out-brave Mr Stokes
and others, to whom he had whined and howled out his own wickedness: for he
well knew though he had narrowly escaped the Halter, yet he appeared in an
unclean and most ugly shape to all tender spirits. And at length about May
1651. he sends Mr Stokes, under his own hand writing, the Copy of an Order from
the said Committee, with four Articles against himself, to be examined by, and
certified from the Justices, and desires Mr Stokes to appoint a time and place
for the execution of the said Order, which Mr Stokes appointed accordingly, and
withal promised the mock-Parson to make good the charge himself against him,
which when his grace understood, he startles not a little, and at length
scribles back an invective Letter to M. Stokes, acquainting him also that his
time would not now permit to have the business heard, for he must wait upon
his wife (a kind Parson) to Batly, which proved a shift, whereupon M. Stokes
gives this reply to the P.

Sir, Though you snarl at creatures, and like a mad man strike at those that
are next you, yet when you shall be delivered from your frenzy, you will say,
It was the iniquity of your heels that compassed you about, and not malice in
your Opposers: You might have enjoyed your being at Langley long enough with
the love and liking of all that fear God or love the Nation, had you been true
to your self or friends; your dissembled Repentance had once almost
re-inthroned you in the hearts of honest men, had not your revolting and
revellings tumbled you down from thence. When you appeared in sheeps clothing,
who harmed you, who molested you, who advanced themselves above you? When you
appeared in another shape, who did not pity you and pray for you, and expect
your return, etc. Had you learned the doctrine of self-denial but half so
perfectly as that of self-justification, certainly your present condition had
been such as now you fain it to be. But why do you boast your self in your own
deceivings? your great swelling words of vanity affrighten none save fools or
women. You do well to study the Law, but I wish your understanding therein
prove not abortive, like your Gospel knowledge. But howsoever you need not
fear, the times are so peaceable, thieves cannot, and so good honest men will
not rob you of any priviviledge due to you: The whole body of Articles you may
meet withal, with the Committee of Plundered Ministers, or have a Copy here
when my Clerk is at leisure. You can appoint and wave meetings at your
pleasure, you can both juggle and play fair at the same game, it is no matter
into what shape you lick your self, so long as you like your self. Sir, Your
contemptible reproaches and threats are but badges of honor, which you are
pleased to cast, though with another intent upon.

E. Stokes.

About the later end of August following, these ensuing Orders and Articles
were sent down by the Committee for Plundered Ministers, unto the Justices of
the Peace for the said County of Wilts.

By the Committee for Plundered Ministers, August the 8th 1651.
ORdered that the Articles exhibited against Thomas Webb Minister of Langley
Burhill in the County of Wilts (a copy whereof is annexed) be referred to the
Justices of the peace in the said County, or any two or more of them, who are
desired to receive the said M. Webb his Answer to the said Articles; and to
summon before them, examine and crosse-examine the witnesses that shall be
produced, as well for proof of the said Articles, as of the defense of the said
M. Webb, and to certify the said Articles, answer and Examinations to this
Committee, by the eleventh day of November next, close sealed. And the said
Justices are desired to secure the profits of the said Rectory, till this
Committee shall have heard and determined the cause upon the said return, and
to see that no spoil be made on the said Personage-house or Glebe-lands
thereunto belonging.

By the Committee for Plundered Ministers, August the 13th 1651.
ORdered that the Additionall Articles this day exhibited against Thomas Webb
Minister of Langley Buthill in the County of Wilts (a copy whereof is annexed)
be referred to the Justices of the Peace in the said County, or any two or more
of them, who are desired to receive the said M. Webb his Answer thereunto; and
to summon before them, and examine, and crosse-examine the Witnesses that shall
be produced, as well for proof of the said Articles, as of the defense of the
said M. Webb, and to certify the said Articles, together with the former
Articles, Answers and Examinations to this Committee, close sealed up with all
convenient speed, and the profits of the said Rectory are to be secured
according to the former Order of the 8th instant, in the mean time.

Articles of Profaneness and Scandal against Thomas Webb the pretended
Rector of the Personage of Langley Burhill in the County of Wilts.
1. THe said Thomas Webb never had any legal Order for his incumbency there,
but by the help and favor of his pretended Patroness Mistress Mary White, and
some other Parishoners of the same Parish upon his promise unto them of
non-taking Tithes, obtained the Parsonage, usurping the place of an Incumbent
there, contrary to the Orders made by the Honorable Committee for Plundered
Ministers, and the Committee of this County.

2. The said Webb stands charged to be an Adulterous person, and to have
committed the detestable sin of uncl-annesse with diverse women (besides his
pretended Patroness Mistress Mary White) and has confessed the same, and
gloried therein, and affirmed he could lie with any woman save his own Mother.

3. The said Webb stands charged to have affirmed in his discourse, that Moses
was a Conjurer, and that Christ was a deceiver of the People.

4. The said Webb stands charged to have affirmed, that Preaching and lying are
both alike to him.

5. The said Webb stands charged to have termed his hearers fools for coming
to gape on him, whilst he told them lies.

6. The said Webb stands charged to have drank to the confounding of the
Parliament, and to have termed them Rogues and Devils, withal saying, that if
he were (by those that heard him) accused for any of the aforementioned
crimes, he would for swear the same.

7. The said Webb has in an high nature scandalized and abused Judge Nicholas,
George Ivy, Edward Stokes and William Shute Esquires, and other the Justices of
the Peace for this County, for discharging their duties, both in Law and
Conscience, according to the trust reposed in them.

8. The said Webb has done much waste, and made great spoil and destruction
upon the Gleab lands of the Rectory of Langley Burhill aforesaid, by cutting
down, and selling at very low rates, a great part of the Wood and Trees late
growing and being upon the same, which were before his coming thither much
stored, and better replenished with Wood then any Parsonage in those parts;
besides also he has let fallen, pulled down to the ground, and sold away part
of the housing belonging to the Parsonage-house there.

9. The-said Webb stands charged by the most knowing Christians in his own
Parish, to have Preached false and unprofitable Doctrine.

WHereas we have received two several Orders from the Committee of Plundered
Ministers (purporting certain Articles, heretofore to have been exhibited
against Thomas Webb Minister of Langley Burhill in the County of Wilts)
referring the same to the Justices of the Peace in the said County, or any two
of them, who are desired to receive the said Mr Web his Answer thereunto; and
to summon before them, and examine and cross-examine the Witnesses that shall
be produced as well for part of the said Articles, as of the defense of the
said M. Webb; These are to give you to understand, That we Justices of the
Peace of the County aforesaid, intend (God permitting) to execute the contents
of the said Order at the house of Captain Tailor, being at the sign of the
White Heart in Chippenham, on the 12th day of September next ensuing after the
date of these presents, between the hours of eight and nine of the Clock in the
morning of the same day; where if you think fit you may produce Witnesses to be
examined on your part and behalf; and we shall be then ready to receive your
Answer according to the Contents of the said Order.

Witness our hands at Chippenham this 28. of August 1651.
To Thomas Webb Minister of Langley Burhil.
This Paper following was delivered in by the said M. Webb unto the said
Justices, at their appointed meeting for the executing of the aforesaid Orders:
viz.

Grounds of Exceptions against Sr Edward Bainton, William Shute Esquire. etc. and
against the Examination intended.
1. FIrst, That the Charge to be examined, is not the Charge exhibited before
the Honorable Committee, upon which the Orders were granted, which occasioned
this meeting.

2. That most part of the Charge has been already answered, and the accused
quit.

3. That in some part of the Charge the Examiners themselves are concerned.

4. The Examiners have manifested abundance of prejudice against the accused,
as will easily be made to appear.

5. The accused stands bound in Judgment and conscience to prosecute the
Examiners (for neglect of doing of their duty for the Commonweal, in the late
time of danger) whenever called thereunto, and has already declared against
it, as he believes is known to some of them.

6. Lastly, Such was the height either of ignorance or malice, if not both,
that when the Warrant for appearance was sent, they sent neither copy of Orders
nor charge, but I was forced (though not bound to it) to send to them for the
Charge and Orders, and as yet have received but a part of the Charge, and but a
Breviat of the Orders.

These and other grounds are my Exceptions built upon, which I humbly tender,
that they may be seriously considered, and I have right done to me: No more is
desired by him, who in the integrity of his own spirit, subscribes to these his
Exceptions,

Tho. Web.

Depositions of Witnesses taken at Chippenham in the County aforesaid, the day
of September, in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred fifty and
one, against Thomas Webb Minister of Langley Burhill in the said County, by
George Ivy and William Shute Esquires, two of the Justices of the Peace for
this County; by virtue of two several Orders unto the Justices of the Peace of
the County aforesaid; or unto any two or more of them directed from the
Honorable Committee for Plundered Ministers, the one of which Orders bears
date, Aug. 8. last past, and the other bears date the 13th of the same month:
in manner following, viz. Charles Aland of Langley Burhill aforesaid, Yeoman,
aged thirty two years or thereabouts, Sworn and Examined, deposes as follows:

TO the first Article this Deponent says, I.
That the said M. Webb (about a month since) did confess in this Deponents
hearing, that he had no Order from any Authority to possess himself of the
Rectory or Parsonage of Langley aforesaid, or to Officiate there; but that he
did Officiate there by the consent and approbation of some of the Parishioners
of Langley aforesaid. And this Deponent further says, That he did thereupon
shortly afterward search in the Office of the Committee for Plundered
Ministers, to find whether the said ^. Webb had any such Order or Authority
from thence, as aforesaid, but could find none.

To the sixth Article this Deponent says, 6.
That the Sunday sevennight before Mistress White and the said M. Webb were
carried to Prison for committing of Adultery together, in the Church yard
before the morning-Sermon, the said M. Webb and this Deponent walking there
together; and this Deponent being formerly appointed to be a Lieutenant unto
one Captain Parsons, designed to be a Captain of the Militia* forces of this
County; the said M. Webb to persuade this Deponent to dissert the said service,
and to withdraw his affection from the Parliament, used amongst other
persuasions these words following, That the Parliament was unjust, and dealt
unjustly in gathering too much moneys, and employing the same to their own
private uses, and not for the public; and that if he and others might have
liberty, they would prove it, or spoke words to the like effect: And at one
other time the said M. Webb told this Deponent, That God would appear for and
on the behalf of the Cavaliers once more.

To the eight Article this Deponent says, 8.
That when the said M. Webb came and entered into the Rectory or Parsonage of
Langley aforesaid, the Glebe-land thereunto belonging, was very well stored and
replenished with Timber Trees, and other Underwood, and that since that time
the said M. Webb has cut down, burnt and sold, all or the greatest part of the
same Trees and Underwood; and has also pulled down two substantial outhouses
belonging to the said Rectory or Parsonage-house, and sold away the materials
thereof. And this Deponent further says, That the said M. Webb being required
by a Warrant, which came under the hands of Edward Stokes Esquire. being both a
Committee man and a Justice of the Peace of the said County of Wilts, to
surcease from making of further spoils upon the Glebe of the said Parsonage, he
the said M. Webb returned seven Queries in Writing upon the backside of the
said M. Stokes his Warrant, by way of mocking and jearing of him, and withal
abused the said Warrant, before he sent it back unto the said M. Stokes
defiling the same with his own or some others excrements, as this Deponent does
verily believe.

To the ninth Article this Deponent says, 9.
That the Lord's Day seven-night before the said M. Webb was committed to Prison
as aforesaid, he heard the said M. Webb deliver in his morning-Sermon on that
day in the Parish Church of Langley aforesaid, to his Auditors then and there
assembled, That he was no Minister of God, and wished them not to look upon him
as a Minister, for that (said he) God had put an end to all Ministers and
Ministrations, and at the same time persuaded the people not to conform
themselves to any visible Ministrations, either for Church or state (meaning
thereby, as this Deponent conceives) that they should not obey any
Ecclesiastical or civil Authority. And further in the same Sermon he informed
the people, That God requires no obedience to any Scripture-commands. And this
Deponent further says, that after the said Sermon was ended, the said M. Webb
being asked by this Deponent, what then meant all the Epistles of the Apostles?
whereunto the said M. Webb then answered, that they concerned us not.

Edward Stokes of Tytherton Lucas in the said County of Wilts Esquire. aged Thirty
six years or thereabouts, Sworn and Examined, deposes as follows:
TO the first Article this Deponent says, 1.
That after M. Hughes had left the Parsonage of Langley Burhill aforesaid, the
same being destitute of an Incumbent, one M. Martyn had Orders both from the
Honorable Committee of Plundered Ministers, and also from the Committee of the
said County of Wilts to Officiate there, and to receive the Tithes and Profits
there-out arising; which Orders the said M. Martyn showed unto this Deponent;
and upon the request of the said Martyn this Deponent went along with him unto
the Parish Church of Langley Burhill aforesaid; who being come thither, and
intending to Preach, was opposed by the said M. Webb, Mistress Mary White, and
some other of the Parishioners, who labored to have M. Webb to Officiate
there; some of them then conceiving him to be a very godly and profitable man,
but have since found themselves deceived; and others upon his promise of not
taking Tithes of them, did altogether set themselves against the said M.
Martyn, which made him to depart thence, and leave the cure: And the said M.
Webb has thereupon continued there ever since, without any Order or other
Title to the same place.

To the second Article this Deponent says, 2.
That there having formerly been overmuch familiarity between the said Mr Webb
and the said Mistress White the wife of Henry White Gent. about June 1650.
there happening a great varience between them the said M. Webb and Mistress
White, the said Webb then seemingly* professed to this Deponent to be a great
penitent, and exceedingly troubled for his vile conversation; and diverse times
since that, did both by words and letters of his own handwriting confess to
this Deponent, that he had committed the detestable sin of uncleanness with
the said Mistress White; through whose temptations he had committed it so
frequently with her, that at length he was glad when he had the liberty to walk
in the air. And the said M. Webb seemed to this Deponent to be so penitent,
that he wished himself accursed for the precious Gospels sake, that had been so
blasphemed by his wicked and unclean conversation: And further said, that
solicitations were used to bring him over, and reconcile him again unto the
said Mistress White, but he then wished, saying, Oh that I might be accursed,
and the earth swallow me up alive, rather then I should hearken unto her any
more! Notwithstanding all which imprecations he shortly after grew intimate and
familiar with her again, and was so open and impudent in his carriage with the
said Mistress White, that he was charged upon Oath to have been taken in the
very Act of Adultery with the said Mistress White, whereupon they both were
committed to the common-Goal for the County of Wilts aforesaid, there to remain
until they should be discharged from thence by due order of Law.

Robert Jeffryes of Langley aforesaid Yeoman, aged Forty three years or
thereabouts, Sworn and Examined, deposes as follows.
TO the second Article this Deponent says, 2.
That this Deponents wife being sent for to Mistress White the wife of Henry
White of Langley aforesaid Gent. when she was intravell with her child
(whereof she was then shortly afterward delivered) the said M. Webb came to
this Deponents house about a weeks space after her delivery, not usually having
come thither before that time, and then asked her how Mistress White did; and
told this Deponents wife in his this Deponents hearing, That the child which
Mistress White had them brought into the world, was his the said M. Webbs
child, or no bodies. And this Deponent further says, That this present day
the said M. Webb told this Deponent, that if he did come to be examined against
him, that he would bring his Action for the same against him.

Deborah Clerk late servant to the said Robert Jeffryes, aged Seven and twenty
years or thereabouts, Sworn and Examined, deposes as follows:
TO the second Article this Deponent says, 2.
That in some short time after Mistress White was delivered of her child, the
said M. Webb came to her said late Masters house, and asked her Dame how
Mistress, White and her child did, and withal, did thereupon say in a
boasting way, That the child which Mistress White had then brought into the
world, was his the said Webbs child, or no bodies.

Edith Lewis wife of William Lewis of Langley aforesaid Yeoman, aged Forty
years or thereabouts, Sworn and Examined, deposes as follows:
TO the second Article this Deponent says, 2.
That about Whitsuntide last was twelve-moneth, the said M. Webb, this
Deponents husband, and she this Deponent, being conferring together concerning
matters of Religion; she this Deponent did then and oftentimes since bear the
said M. Webb say, That he did live above Ordinances, and that it was lawful
for him to lie with any woman. And at one time above the rest, the said M.
Webb, Mistress White, this Deponent, and diverse others sitting in the
Gate House of the dwelling house of the said Mistress White (there being tame
Pigeons in the Court) the said M. Webb observing a great Cock Pidgeon to tread
diverse of the Hen Pigeons there, said unto those that were there present, that
it was lawful for every man and woman, and that they ought to take that
liberty and freedom one with the other, as those Pigeons did, although they
were not married the one to the other.

To the fourth and fifth Articles this Deponent says, 4, 5.
That upon a Lords day in the afternoon about Whitsuntide last was
twelve-moneth, the said M. Webb being asleep in a room of the dwelling house of
her this Deponents husband, and sitting in a chair, this Deponents husband came
to him, and awaked him, and then said unto the said M. Webb, that it was time
to go to Church, for the Bell had done ringing, and there was a great audience
of people come to hear him; whereunto the said Mr Webb answered her husband, in
her this Deponents hearing, Alas poor fools, why do they come so far to hear
me, and stand gaping upon me, whilst I tell them lies! Whereupon this Deponents
husband asked the said Mr Web, What? do you tell them lies in the Pulpit?
whereunto he replied, That lying and Preaching was all one to him.

To the eight Article this Deponent says, 8.
that when the said M. Webb entered into the Rectory or Parsonage of Langley
Burhill aforesaid, the Glebe-lands thereunto belonging were very well stored
and replenished with Timber Trees of all sort, and other Under-wood, and that
since that time the said M. Webb has hewed, cut down, burnt, and sold all or
the most part of the said Timber and Under-wood, which were any thing worth,
and has mored and grubbed up about the one half part of the Copice-ground
belonging to the said Rectory; And that in summer last was twelve-moneth the
said M. Webb did hire Workmen, who did by his appointment pull down an handsome
Barn belonging to the said Rectory, and sold away the materials thereof.

Robert Powell of Langley Burhill aforesaid, Husbandman, aged Fifty years or
thereabouts, Sworn and Examined, deposes as follows:
TO the last Article this Deponent says, 9.
That the next Sunday after the Lent Assizes, being the first Sunday after M.
Web came from Salisbury Goal, he heard the said Web in his then morning
Sermon, Preach and declare to his Auditors then assembled in the Parish Church
of Langley aforesaid, these words following (that is to say) That the works of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles were dead works and carnal, and ended when they
died, and served but for their time only, and that people might live unto God
without Jesus Christ; yet said, I must confess that Jesus Christ was the
greatest Ordinance that ever God set up, and yet the Saints may live unto God
without that Ordinance.

Nicholas Gale of Langley aforesaid Miller, aged Five and twenty years or
thereabouts, Sworn and Examined, deposes as follows.
TO the last Article this Deponent says, 9.
that about Whitsuntide last upon a Sabbath day he did hear the said M. Webb in
his morning-Sermon, Preach and declare in the said Parish Church of Langley to
his Auditors, these words following (that is to say) that the doctrine and
practice of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, were dead works, and ended when they
died: and that Preaching and Praying cease, for the Lord has no ears to hear.
And this Deponent further says, that at another time afterward, upon a
Sabbath day, he heard the said M. Webb deliver in a Sermon, in the said
Parish Church of Langley, that Ministers ought not to be believed, though they
did Preach the truth, except they could work miracles, as Christ and his
Apostles did.

Hugh Wastfeild of Langley Burhill aforesaid Yeoman, aged Forty years or
thereabouts, Sworn and Examined, deposes as follows:
TO the eight Article this Deponent says, 8.
That when the said M. Webb came and entered into the Parsonage of Langley
aforesaid, the Glebe-land thereunto belonging was very well stored and
replenished with Timber Trees and other Under-wood, and that since that time
the said M. Webb has hewed, cut down, burnt, and sold a great part of the same
Trees and Wood, and has grubbed and mored up a great part of the Copice-ground
thereunto belonging; and that since the said M. Webbs coming to dwell in the
Parsonage-house of Langley aforesaid, there has been a great Barn or Hay-house
appertaining to it, pulled down, and the Material's thereof were either burnt
or conveyed a way.

To the last Article this Deponent says, 9.
That he has heard the said M. Webb deliver in several Sermons these things
following (that is to say) that the Baptism of water was only John's Ministry,
and was a legal washing, and to be reckoned amongst legal things; that Gods
reaching his people is not by any outward Ordinance or Ministry, or means, but
by the inward unction and anointing; and that all preaching, all conference or
speaking one to another is but mere declaring to each other what we are taught,
and not any Ministry, as for the teaching one of another; and that he knew not
whether Paul's Epistles do concern us or no. And further this Deponent says,
that he did hear the said M. Webb deliver in a Sermon, That he did hope to live
so long, and that it was now in working, that there should be no such thing as
a Parsonage or Minister in England.

The Certificate of George Ivy and William Shute Esquires, to the Honorable
Committee for Plundered Ministers, after they had taken the aforesaid
Depositions.
WE do humbly Certify your Honors, That we being the two next Justices of the
Peace for this County of Wilts, unto Langley Burhill aforesaid, that are
unconcerned in this business, did in pursuance of your two several Orders
hereunto annexed, prefix a time and place for the execution of the same,
whereof the said M. Webb had sufficient notice, and upon his appearance before
us this present day, we did show unto him the said Webb the Charge and Articles
exhibited against him, and required his answer thereunto; and withal offered
to examine and cross-examine any Witnesses that he should produce unto us for
his defense: but the said Webb after much uncivil carriage used by him in the
presence of us, and diverse others, and many frivolous and unfitting discourses,
tending only to the diminution of your Authority, and the disparagement of our
selves, and the rest of the adjacent Justices, as not being fit to examine that
or any other business that concerned him, instead of an Answer, did at length
deliver us the afore-recited scandalous Exceptions, and withal told us, that
he would give us no other answer, and that we should not examine or
crosse-examine any Witnesses for him by these Orders, or used words to that
effect.

We humbly conceive it necessary to signify these things by themselves, and
have also herewith sent the Execution of your Orders so far as Witnesses come
in; but we did not examine upon the Article wherein we and other Justices are
concerned, because we would avoid all cause of exception, and we did inform the
said M. Webb of so much, before we examined any Witness.

Upon the Articles and Depositions aforegoing the most famous Parson was
ejected the Parsonage of Langley Burhill, T. W. his Ejectment from his
Parsonage of L. B.
in September 1651. by the Honorable Committee of Plundered Ministers, where
the said Webb appeared in his own defense, being armed cap a pe, with his
wonted silly self-confidence, impudence and ignorance, who, notwithstanding
though he had over-stood his Market, refusing to examine or crosse-examine
Witnesses in the Country; yet now propounds to the Committee of Examination, as
aforesaid, only he desires two other Justices of Peace to be joined with those
whom he termed his adversaries, with such like frothy conceits, as vain as
himself; but they hold no water, the mock-Parson is reduced to his pristine
purity ( viz.) a Priest without a Parsonage, which act of Justice operates much
upon the Parsons foul stomach, and therefore though the Parsonage be evacuated,
yet the dregs remain, which are brought up and disgorged at several times, or
by degrees.

First, The unsavory salt was no sooner cast to the dunghill, but the ejected
quondam Parson lays about him, and seeing his tongue was too short to tell of
his misfortunes, and to bespatter his persecutors, he betakes himself to his
Pen, and writes his black Parson-like Epistles to the honest, alias Ranting
Party, acquainting them what had fallen out, and then rails, Parson-wise,
against Mr Stokes, giving him such titles as can belong to none save
mock-Parsons, and withal promises his fellow creatures to write a book and
publish it against Mr Stokes and others, and then sets down such particulars as
he intended to Print against M. Stokes, which he has with some alteration
performed.

Secondly, He abuses the Honorable Committee of Plundered Ministers, taxing
them with injustice, and tells his friends that he will endeavor to turn the
stream, assuring them that if not this, yet another Representative will do it.

Thirdly, He makes them believe he is very near a very good settlement in
another place, and presses them to gain him (with speed) a Certificate from
the honest party.

So after this non-such Parson had a while lain his wits a soaking in the
stinking puddle of envy and Revenge, and bent his tongue like bows for lies, he
composeth a certain ill-shapen Libell, as full almost as the Author of untruth
and error.

Which monster so far resembles a well-formed creature, that it runs upon two
legs.

The first whereof is to inform the world, That Tho* Webb is a man of excellent
parts, and full of piety, an enemy to uncleanness, to blasphemy, to
Parsonages, to Tithes, and whores, a man of a public spirit, of sound
judgment, of great temperance, and a sufferer for righteousness sake.

The second is, That all those that did not flatter him in his wicked and
unclean ways, or did in any thing dislike his Rantings and counterfeit
repentings, were unjust, cruel, tyrannical, malicious, and bloody minded men;
and amongst the rest M. Stokes (being the greatest opposite to the Ranting
Parson) is to be numbered amongst the worst of men, he is now a blasphemer of
the highest rank, a deceiver, and what not, etc.

upon these two legs the Libell comes into the world, the father whom it
resembles gives it a name, and the witnesses names being in number a hundred
and four, are fastened to a silly certificate, to justify the father, that by
their credit the monstrous birth may travel the Commonwealth, without being
questioned or dealt withal as a runnagate or base born brat.

The Name or Title is A Mass of malice against Tho. Webb late Minister of
Langley Burhill in the County of Wilts discovered.
IN the Title you may note that this Parson has often times in public and
private denied that he was any Minister, yet here writes himself, Late Minister
of Langley B.

Secondly, Whilst he was possessed of a Parsonage, he said there were no
Ministers in England, yet now being spewed out of the same, he prints himself,
Late Minister of L. B.

He says of his work, It Is a true relation, which indeed is most untrue, as
also are those six several Heads attending the relation (though they all walk
upon two legs, as before mentioned) as in the catalogue afterward will appear.

Then he most profanely abuses two several Texts of Scripture, applying that
which is true in David the Type, or Christ the Antitype, unto his unclean and
most graceless self.

The first is Psalm 35. 11. False witnesses did arise up, they laid to my
charge things that I knew not. He has been charged to be a whore-master, and
he has acknowledged himself so to be (see his Letters before) and yet here he
says in a Scripture phrase, They laid to my charge things I knew not.

The second Scripture to support the Mass of malice and the Author, is Psalm
38. 20. They also that render evil for good are mine adversaries, because I
follow the thing that good is.

It seems all those that disliked Webbs wicked ways are such as render evil
for good; he justifies his own actions, and by a Scripture phrase, says they
are good, and he follows the thing that good is: Surely the thing that the
Parson follows is not good, unless Ranting, Revellings, Whorings and
counterfeit Repentings be good; these he has followed to the heels, as the
relation makes manifest: But it seems these are good, and so followed by T. W.
late Minister of Langley B. and such as dislike him are his adversaries, and
render evil for good. But let the mock-Parson alone to condemn all others, and
trumpet out his own praises, saying, Stand further off, I am holier then thou,
etc.

The Certificate in the front of the Mass of malice being so ridiculous,
frivolous, and untrue, needs no more but the bare reading over by the Ingenuous
man, the thing it self being but the brainlesse birth of a broad-brim'd
professor, who when he shaped it to his own liking, dealt with it as
counterfeit cripples with their self-made sores ( viz.) lie in the high ways
and public places to move pity in the passengers to gain relief: So the
professor aforesaid repairs with his scabbed Certificate into the highways,
Markets and Churches; where after much beggary and baseness, above one hundred
names are subscribed; the pretense is to gain the Parson another place:
however, the subscribers, some of them schoolboys, deboist, swearers, covetous
earthworms, drunken companions, with unknown names, to fill up the number, some
Ranting professors with about three or four plain-hearted men, brought in
through deceit, whose names pass like Jackdaws among the Rooks; and some
there were that set their names in the rear, because Mr White was in the front,
and they allege they have as good reason to subscribe* as he and more too; yet
some of all these are ashamed to see and own their fair names in the front of
so filthy a monstrous Mass of malice, etc.

So much for the Title and Certificate: For the Mass it self the Author will
not foul so much paper to answer a fool according to his folly, nor trouble
himself nor the Reader with a particular Survey and reply to all the materials
of which the Mass of malice is composed of.

Wherefore you shall have first a Catalogue of diverse of the most ill-shapen
untruths laid down, which are the subject matter of the malicious Mass.

Secondly, You shall afterward find replies of truth, to diverse of the most
notorious quondam Parsons hell-invented untruths against M. Stokes, by which
you may guess at the whole Mass, and perceive the depth of its Malice.

The Catalogue of Untruths follow.
Untruth.


etc.

per annum in our Parish, and would never pay any rate for the Parliament and
Army, p. 3.

Stokes took Mistress White aside, and read to her an Information given him by
Good wife Lewis, as the cause wherefore she desired a Warrant of the Peace
against us, p. 4.

viz.) Mr Stokes being glad of any accusation, is easily wrought upon (though
it be contrary to all law and reason) to prosecute us, page etc.

page 5.

p. 5.

viz) the Justices could give me no answer, but would refer that matter to
Judge Nicholas, p. 5.

p. 6.

p. 7.

Lewis and his wife were then bailed for felony, upon Bail not worth 10l p. 7.

And this the wise Justices would have had done and endeavored p. 9.

Mr Stokes about three weeks before our trial sent me a time which proved
false, p. 9.

For what they had done ( viz.) Mr Stokes and M. Shute* they Ivy was gone, but
they would the next morning talk with Judge Nicholas, p. 9.

Such were the threats M. Stokes followed the Officer with, page 10.

M. Swanton seemed to be much troubled, saying, he admired at it, Lewis and his
wife to Goal, and that if we would procure the deposition he would bayl us, p.
10.

Whereupon I sent to M. Stokes for the Deposition, but he denied p. 10.

He ( viz.) M. Stokes says, M. Ivy has the Information, when he p 11.

And at length on purpose to keep us in Goal, sends the Deposition Swanton, and
so continues us prisoners to his lying, ignorant and malicious spirit, p. 11.

Judge Nicholas says, O sir, you know the Law, do you? you are Lilborns
faction, you shall be banished, says the Judge, p. 12.

Upon this woman's accusation they had an opportunity to lash me, Lilborns
faction: You shall be banished, says the Judge, p. 13.

I was not suffered to speak, p. 13.

The Judge did promise our prosecutors that we should not do any thing against
them, p. 13.

The Indictment was to this effect, p. 13.

This amazed his Lordship, and set his blood on fire.

He spoke to her in a very chiding, scolding manner, p. 14.

He discovered himself to be full of malice and envy, p. 15.

She being upon her trial, could hardly have the liberty to speak for etc. p.
15.

And the woman swore to the 6th of October, p. 15.

They were intended to do what they could to deprive us of our lives, p. 15.

Untruth.
p. 17.

p 17.

p. 17.

p. 18.

Stokes fearing that he should miss of his ends ( viz.) my death, series of his
actions tended to, p 18.

Bailiff solemnly took his Oath, that he told him no such thing, page 18.

p. 18.



Bailiffs Deposition, p. 19. A most notorious untruth made by T. W. never
spoken by M. B. in Court.

Stokes (says the Libeller) was so impudent as to swear p. 19.

Stokes (says Webbs Mass of malice) thinking to get himself

p. 20.

Perfect malice and envy leads him to another design (says the

p. 20.

Richard Wick supplied my place in my absence, p. 21.

Pinell parted and looked after the business no further, though very much
solicited thereto by M. Stokes, p. 21.

But M. Stokes he sends to a solicitor that attends the Committee, p. 21.

M. Stokes being troubled in his mind that nothing was done against p. 22.

Which two Orders were not then created, nor was there any such p. 22.

He summons me to appear before the Commissioners, p. 22.

M. Stokes returns me this answer, that he had sent up the body of p. 4.

He will have this Massey, and sent his Letter for him, as it was proved
September last.

Great preparation was made by M. Stokes, etc. for a Petition to the Massey.

What was acted by these men ( viz.) M. Stokes and M. Shute (says p. 46.

Sr Edward Baynton and his faction caused them to be disbanded, p. 50.

Their sending me the Warrant without either Charge or Order,

So about ten days after, when M. Stokes his partner Cha^ Aland Massey had
hatched a Charge, then it was sent to me, p. 51.

The great grounds of exception, page 52. are printed contrary to

Wherein falsely they informed that I contemned the Committees Order, p. 53.

But M. Wiliington told me what I had done, questioned the Authority p. 53.

The Articles intended to be examined, were not those exhibited p. 53.

The Libeller intimates, page 54. That M. Stokes did carry up the p. 54.

Truly mine eyes have seen him do such horrid acts of blasphemy (says the
Libeller) of the highest nature as ever I heard related to be done by any, p.
54*

He is become ( viz) a mere dissembler with God and man.

He is a public mocker, jearer and derider of all public worship, and fell
down upon his knees to a mock-prayer, and made the same a subject of mirth,
page 54.

Stokes and my self, with two or three more, lay at the Bores-head in
Salisbury, p. 55.

page 55.





And expressed himself in this abominable and blasphemous language viz.)









p. 55.

p. 56.

I might insert many other acts of his blasphemy (as true as the p. 56.





viz.) M. Stokes, his pocketting up of 4l which were collected of the honest
party in my Church.

He issued out his Warrants for the raising of him money to buy him p. 56.

p. 57.

page he has set down the Articles of profaneness and scandal against
himself falsely.

In the same page he belies M Stokes concerning his Deposition to the first
Article.

White (and the Parish) I accepted. Q. Is not M. White and the Parish beholding
to T. W? Answer, M. White is, having raised his fortunes and saved his tithe by
this acceptance, p. 58.

Stokes and M. Martyn were both satisfied that the right lay in M. White and
not in the Committee, p. 58.

Webb a Webb.

Until it was within this half year, M. Stokes looked upon me as

He says M. Stokes has sevenscore pounds a year land in our Parish, viz.)
Langley, as true as the rest, he has but 30l per annum there, during his
fathers life, p. 59.

Truly (says the Parson that cannot speak truth) such is the enmity of my
spirit against the evil of uncleanness, that I should be never p. 60.

She (meaning Good wife Lewis) M. Stokes sent his Warrant to p. 61.

This last clause struck the nail on the head before the Committee, p. 62.

At that time M. Stokes and I were a little intimate, p. 62.

And in this late time of danger engaged my self, p. 62.

I hope (says Webb) its because they knew themselves guilty of having dealt
very unjustly by me, which is all that ever I said of p. 63.

The following certificate which is from the most knowingest and godliest
Christians, page 63.

The Justices most knowingest Christians are such who will swear and speak most
falsely, p. 63.

Their own consciences do acquit me, p. 64.

All the honest party the whole Country throughout will clear me, Webb, p. 64.

They have sought to take away my life, p. 65.

Here you have the true Relation of my Case, p. 65.

The unjust (says the unclean Parson) and harsh dealing I have received from
the Justices was the cause of the great Odium cast upon me, p. 65.

Truly this was the plot even to send me to the Goal, and thereby p. 65.

I acted amongst many of the Country for the bringing of him, viz.) Geo. Ivy
Esquire. to an account for his Malignancy, p. 65.

He is not a fit man (meaning Mr Shute) to act in any public employment, p.
65.

Of M. Stokes he says he knows that the woman who was my accuser, p. 66.

When danger was eminent, he laid down his Commission, p. 66.

p. 67.

Lilborn, M. Walwin and the rest were put into the Tower, Untruth.
he towred up his just principle also, and arraigned them and their
well-wishers at the tyrannical and usurping bar of his Justiceship.

p. 67.

Often saying that he would give 200l to have me taken out of the p. 67.

p. 67.

Whites, to be taken away, p. 67.

viz.) Mistress White to sell a parcel of Plate; p. 67.

p. 67.

p. 68.



In the Catalogue aforegoing, you have the most part of those scandalous and
slanderous untruths, as they lay in Order in Tho. Webbs disorderly Mass of
malice: In which he has (as he thinks) justified himself, and sufficiently
bespattered with his black mock-Parson mouth both Judge and Justices,
especially M. Stokes, on him he has vomited all his own shame, contracted with
the long enjoyment of a fat Parsonage and a fine Concubine.

That it may the more clearly appear that the said Catalogue is a bundell of
notorious untruths: some few of them, and they the most gross (against M.
Stokes) are answered; by which the Reader may see of what mettle the rest are
made.

In the 53. page of his Mass of malice, he confesses that he is ejected the
place ( viz.) the Parsonage of Langley B. and in the 20. page he attributes the
ejectment to M. Stokes, as you may see in the 51 untruth in the Catalogue
before.

Wherefore it is very necessary that M. Stokes should be required and rewarded
for so good a work, and the Parson scorns to be ungrateful; and therefore not
as a bribe before hand, but as a gratuity afterward, he brings out of his
learned Treasury ( viz.) his most unchristian and Parson-like heart, a whole
Mass of malice, and lays, through his Pastoral charity, the greatest mess of
the said Mass on M. Stokes his Trencher.

And therefore in the 54 page, he begins afresh, as a Parson recovering breath
to complete his Mass of malice, with a Truly, truly, says he, my eyes have
seen him do such horrid acts of blasphemy of the highest nature, as ever I
heard related to be done by any; nay I never heard of the like acted by any,
whether Atheists, Pagans or Infidels.

Answer, How or when could the Parson see with his eyes such

Honest Parsons or true Christians, having the least part of grace Mass of
malice.

That M. Stokes is such a man, or guilty of such high crimes, must quondam
Parson of Langley, and registered in a better record, and more true then Webbs
Mass of malice, otherwise none but vain and light creatures will credit the
report.

M. Stokes affirms that he has had no familiarity with Webb for July 1652. And
therefore if his eyes have seen M. Stokes do such horrid acts of blasphemy,
either a Parsonage or a blasphemous principle hung in the Parsons light that he
could never see to speak of it, but conceal it till he brought forth his Mass
of malice.

The very reason the Parson urges why he concealed it till now, Stokes: the
tender respects, says he, I did owe to him, because he carried a fair
correspondency with honest people, has made me hitherto to conceal the same.
(Mark) would not any man of reason think that there was reason enough for the
Parson to endeavor to convince M. Stokes of his error, as the Scriptures
direct? and if M. Stokes had refused his admonition, he might have published the
evil to the honest party, toward whom he carried a fair correspondency, and
those honest men might have assisted the Parson in so good a work; but surely
the Parson was ignorant of his duty, otherwise he never saw those horrid acts
of blasphemy, nor ever thought of them till he had sat upon, and almost hatched
his Mass of malice.

But to come to some particulars he says in the aforesaid 54 page of M. Stokes.

In the first place he is a public mocker, jearer and derider of all public
worship.

Answer, M. Stokes his daily practice both in public and private acquits him
of this slander.

Webb and diverse more of the Ranting crew, will free him now in private, and
shall at the last and great account, publicly confess that this charge
proceeded from the brains and bowels of a discontented Parson, who having lost
a good name and a fat Parsonage, behaves himself as a Bear that is robbed of
her whelps.

Stokes confesses that he has been addicted to laughing and jearing at false
and formal worshippers, both Papists and common Protestants, who make
ignorance the mother of devotion, and worship an unknown God, or the true God
after a manner not prescribed in Gods word.

Moreover he confesses that he has privately and publicly jeared those that
Preach and Pray, and Profess to, for to gain good names, fat Parsonages, and
handsome women for wives and whores, that makes merchandise of the word of God,
that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly; and this Tho. Webb
knows, whose works praise him in the gate.

Stokes (who before the Lord acknowledges that he is less then the least of
all Gods mercies) affirms, that he has a most honorable account and high
esteem of all Gods Ordinances, of all true worship and worshippers, and withal
believes that Marriage it self is an Ordinance in force, honorable amongst
all, and the bed undefiled; which the accuser believes not, nor yet the
Commandment which says, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife.

The Parson gives one instance to prove M. Stokes such a public mocker, but
it is as solid as the Parson is learned, ( viz.) that M. Stokes, Captain
Matraners and himself were all three in London about two years ago, and lying
(liars had need of good memories) in the blew Bores-head in King Street, the
morning we were to come out of town, M. Stokes fell down upon his knees to a
mock-praier in Westminster Abbey.

Answer, M. Stokes affirms that to his best remembrance he was London with Webb
and Treavers together, but confesses that about four years since he was in
Westminster with the said parties. There is a sign of a blew Bores-head in
Kingstreet, at which house all the parties lay, but surely the Bores-head is
neither so large nor so hollow as to lodge three persons within its own bulk;
yet the Parson affirms we were all being in London, and lying at the blew
Bores-head in Kingstreet.

As for the mock prayer, M. Stokes understands not what the Parson Stokes will
be so ingenuous to confess his errors and miscarriages in public worship;
yet that either then, or at any other time any thought, word or action passed
M. Stokes with an intent to make a mock of that holy Ordinance of prayer, or
any other public worship, is the highest untruth and scandal as ever Satan by
any of his instruments (whether spiritual) or lay Parson charged upon any
creature that expected salvation by Jesus Christ.

M. Stokes knows that all prayer not acted by faith, is mock-prayer; David is
true, ( viz.) If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my
prayer: To allow ones self in the practice of any known sin, and to come before
the Lord in daily prayer, is mock-prayer.

It Is much to be feared that the Libertine Parson Webb is well acquainted with
mock-prayer. Reason 1. He has both Preached and Quere, Whether those prayers
were not mock-prayers? 3. He has confessed that he has not had the assistance
of the Spirit, as in former times, and yet he kept his appointed hours of
prayer in the public Congregation; Q. Were not these mock-prayers? yet all
these are left out, and one pretended mock-prayer by a mock-Parson in his Mass
of malice fastened upon M. Stokes, etc.

Yet the Parson says not that M. Stokes made a mock-prayer, but fell down on
his knees to a mock-prayer; so whether he means the prayer of the Minister, or
the gesture of kneeling, or the pillar to which he kneeled, he is desired to
demonstrate what he means when he wipes his eyes with his Mass of malice, or
makes an addition to that learned Libell.

In the second place he forms a most Execrable blasphemy in the Mass of
malice, p. 55. concerning the Lords Supper, not to be thought of, much less
named amongst the Christians; and endeavors to fasten that also upon M.
Stokes, and this he says was committed at Salisbury, at the Bores-head, there
after the time before mentioned, which was about two years since.

Stokes affirms that he was not with the said Webb at Salisbury at that time,
nor at any time since, except when he was upon his trial for Adultery at Lent
Assizes, 1650.

Stokes affirms that he never lay at the Bores-head in Salisbury by himself,
with the said Parson, nor with any other person, and that he knows no such
sign; moreover he affirms that if he can be disproved in either of these
answers, he is contented to be branded with the blackest mark of infamy that
ever was due to a blasphemer.

Stokes believes, that were himself (or any) guilty of so horrid and most
accursed actions, God is so just and jealous of his own glory, that as great
plagues and furies would pursue the offender, as befell Julian, Judas or Spira.

Stokes affirms the whole story of the blasphemy, as penned and published by
Webb, is of the Libellers own invention, and never had a being, but in Tho.
Webbs brain or practice till, it came from thence to fill up his Mass of
malice against M. Stokes.

Stokes believes the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be of Divine Institution,
and of great use to all believers at this day, he cannot justify himself, but
must confess that he has sinned against the Lord in the use and neglect of
his holy Ordinances, but to speak or to act any thing by way of derision or
derogation to any one of them (even those that are now abolished) is that which
his soul abhors and trembles to think of.

Mass of malice, has diverse times in public and private, preached and
disputed, That believers into whom Christ or the Spirit is come, are no longer
to use the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, for which learned conceit of his, M.
Stokes confesses that he has grossly jeared the said Parson, but abborreth
the thought of under valuing, much more of blaspheming that body and blood by
which only he expects eternal salvation.

Yet M. Stokes is beholding to the Christian moel-Parson, not for page in these
words, Blasphemy that I never heard in my life. If he had said That he had
never heard the like in his life, or never heard before, it might have been
otherwise understood: But to conclude, after he has filled up with most
accursed circumstance a self-invented blasphemy, he clearly acquits the
accused, and says, blasphemy that I never heard in my life. Lord how good thou
art? this is thy hand and thy doing I Thou have made the Author of the Mass of
malice to acquit the innocent, in the midst of his fierce and foul Charge, To
thy name be all the glory.

The Libidinous Parson says himself, That he made no words of Stokes were
guilty, must not the Parson be as far forth guiltty as himself; Is a man of his
Coat and Calling to conceal a blasphemy of that nature, without check to the
blasphemer or complaint to the Magistrate for two years together? but it seems
the blasphemy, as great as it is, had never been contrived nor revealed, had
not this spiritual Parson fallen into travel with, and longed to be delivered
of a monstrous Mass of malice: And therefore who will not conclude that this
blasphemous bastard (being as ugly and deformed as the fellow creatures could
make it) had the corrupt brains of Parson Webb for its womb, and the father of
lies for its midwife, who brought it forth, and wrapped it up in a Mass of
malice, and then deal with it as petty whores with their poor bastards ( viz.)
give them suck and lay them at other folks doors.

But the peremptory Parson is a man of reason, and therefore is not without
reason for the concealment of the said blasphemy, yet the unreasonableness of
the reasons will acquit M. Stokes.

His first reason is because we were there met, and about the affairs of the
Country.

Answer, The meeting about the affairs of the Country could Tho. Webb (who is
none of the shame fast Parsons) from a dislike, or a check to so gross an evil
in his companion.

Webb is no Minister of the Lords making, that prefers the public employments
and Country affairs, above the glory of Jesus Christ the great Bishop and
Shepherd of our souls.

Stokes believes that the Commonwealth of England, is not so barren of good
men, that its affairs must be managed by blasphemers, and they never told of
their evils neither, until such time as a little malice be grown into a Mass,
but from such blasphemers, and such Parsons good Lord deliver the Commonwealth
of England.

But Parson Webbs second reason is, He was well thought of, and therefore,
says he, I concealed it till now from all people.



viz. Parsonages) and all shall be well; but cross them in either, they will
load you with their own actions, and lay upon you a a Mass of malicious filth.

Stokes believes he is as well thought off in his Country amongst all sorts of
people (Ranters only excepted) as ever: yet he desires rather to be good, then
to be accounted so; he values not the praises of men, yet loves a good name,
which no sort of people, high or low, rich or poor, nor Cavalier nor Roundhead,
nor Presbyterian nor Independent, ever sought to rob him of; till the famous
malevolent Parson Tho. Webb and his fellow creatures (whose tongues and pens
are no slander) undertook the charge of the work in a Mass of malice, and this
M. Stokes accounts as an addition to his good name and honor ( viz.) to be
evil spoken of by the generation of Ranters; whose wicked ways and practices
are an abhorring to his soul, which the mock-Parson knows to the grief of his
profane heart.

The next material thing the Parson charge M. Stokes withal, follows in the
same page 55.

I having taught (says he) one Lords day from the words of St James, Be ye
holy in all manner of conversation. And showing how a Christian ought in all
his actions to set a strict Watch over himself, and see that he imitate the
divine life: And M. Stokes being present after I had ended my discourse, and
going out of the Church, he asked me why I meddled with such stuff as that was,
etc.

Answer, This knowing arrogant Parson you may perceive is so James for St
Peter, for the Text is, 1 Pet. 1 15. But his employment is so great, and his
travel so hard to bring forth a Mass of malice, that for have he robs S.
Peter, and belies S. James.

M. Stokes affirms that the doctrines as they are now set down in Mass of
malice, (as Christian Watchfulness and imitation of the divine life) are
excellent doctrines most profitable to believers: but neither the one nor the
other were ever preached by Parson Webb in M. Stokes his hearing, and disliked
of by him, neither did the Parson ever Preach upon that Scripture, as M. Stokes
remembers.

Yet M. Stokes confesses that about four years since he heard the Largley a
very unprofitable Sermon, without any life, power, or appearance of the spirit
of God, showing the Auditory how much and how often they should eat and drink;
when he ought rather to show that that which enters into the body defiles not,
but that from the heart proceeds murders, adulteries and the like, and to have
endeavored to have made clean the inside of the cup and platter, for till the
heart be cleansed and purified through the presence of the Spirit of Christ,
there can be no Christian watchfulness, nor imitation of a divine life: These
with all observations of meats and drinks perish with the using, and are bodily
exercises which profit little; and this way of preaching by Tho. Webb was
friendly reproved by M. Stokes, who then seemed to take it well, and a little
after confessed to M. Stokes that he had not the assistance of the Spirit of God
in his preaching, as formerly, but now this reproof is become a crime to make
up the Mass of Malice.

Stokes disliking the preaching of Parson Webb, acquaints him with it
presently, which argued love and friendship in him.

But this Parson conceals all Mr Stokes his errors and miscarriages, as he
says, till now, that is, till he brought forth that worthy work, the Mass of
malice; in which he is so far from mentioning of real errors, that he
endeavors to fasten upon him many most notorious untruths of his own devising
and invention.

Stokes had not been a lover of good works, and the Parson an enemy thereunto,
both parties had continued lovers and friends to this day: Yet the Author of
the Mass of malice justifies himself, and condemns M. Stokes to be an enemy to
sound doctrine and good life, hoping thereby to recover his lost credit, and
render himself a most rare and singular Parson.

In the next place the famous Parson in the 56. page of his Mass of malice,
says, I might insert many other notorious acts of his blasphemy.

Stokes believes the male-contented Parson to be a man of a quick invention,
nimble wit, and ready pen, and therefore wonders why he behaves himself like a
Preacher, that having ended his matter with his hour-glasse, says, I might
insist upon these and these particulars, when poor soul he has not a word to
say more; so this man at first mentions many acts of blasphemy, insists upon
one, and then says, I might insert many more; and who knows not but that he
might, had not his charity prevented, or his invention failed in raising so
famous a structure as the Mass of malice?

Stokes is not offended with this Parson for revealing or concealing any thing
concerning him, nor for creating blasphemies, or other crimes in a Mass of
malice to lay upon him; he well knows that the Parson and all the
fellow creatures are acted by a power irresistible, which makes them to say and
swear any thing against those that hate their Ranting practices and blasphemous
unclean ways: yet M. Stokes cannot own Parson Webbs base born brats, but must
leave them to their ghostly father, who is most pure in his own eyes.

Stokes (though a great sinner before the Lord) challenges Parson Tho, Webb
and all others of his invenomed generation, fellow creatures, male and female;
whether Ranters in judgment or practice, or both; to invent, say, swear,
write, print, publish, whatsoever they know, think or can imagine against him,
which may tend to his dishonor or disgrace; for he is resolved to defy the
devil and all his works; knowing that it is God that justifies, and therefore
accounts it his greatest honor to be evil spoken of by that generation.

Furthermore in the same 56. page he says, what I have asserted is enough, and
is no more then what is truth in every particular of it.

Who sees not that Tho. Webb is satisfied with his Mass of malice* Webbs
scandals and self-intended blasphemies, reviling censures and reproaches are
all true, you are not to question them, because Thomas Webb is Author of them,
which M. Stokes knows to be true.

But to fasten a belief in his Reader, he is fain to use all his
Ecclesiastical Stokes, all my labor is vain, and my Mass of malice will not
be regarded nor had in esteem amongst those that are adverse to the Ranting
rout; and therefore having wiped his beard, and set his countenance, he
devoutly and demurely imitates the whores and bauds, when they act the part of
grave Matrons and honest women: or deceiptfull Shopkeepers, who with a truly
put off their Tarnisht wares; so the hypocritical Parson, to make men believe
his lies, says, To imprecate and make protestations is not my usual manner of
speaking; for truly, says he, I approve not of any such thing, but according
to my manner of speaking, which is as I am taught by the Scripture, Yea, yea;
Nay, nay; in very truth all these things are true.

So that you may believe him, for all his untruths are uttered by Divine right
by the excellent Parson, and fastened in a Scripture phrase upon Mr Stokes, who
doubts not but the Parson can prove the legality of his uncleanness and
blasphemous ways by the Scripture; he can gain Parsonages, Marry, Baptize and
Bury persons, live disorderly in his Whoring, Ranting, reproaching and reviling
at any who please him not; and confirm himself and his deluded followers by a
Scripture phrase, Believe him you that list.

Stokes, though as he pretends he makes conscience of a manner of speaking
which he has learned in Scripture. So Satan and all his false prophets set
forth their untruths in a Scripture language, not out of love to truth or
Scripture, but to obtain their own cursed ends ( viz) ruin to the souls,
bodies or good names of those that fear the Lord, and hate their hypocritical
and lascivious ways, otherwise this Parson would have learnt and practiced
other lessons out of the Scriptures then those he makes use of to make up his
Mass of malice.

But the Parson proceeds in his charitable way of concealment, of M. Stokes his
errors or blasphemies, but yet makes them public, and says in the same page,
I might insert his pocketting up of four pounds, collected of the honest party
in my Church, for to defray the charges of our Bristoll friends in carrying up
a Petition to London.

Stokes might answer that this slander which the quondam Parson might insert,
is as true as the rest which he has inserted, which are all as like the
father, since he has given himself over to commit uncleanness with
greediness, and has followed the spirit of error as ever they can look.

Stokes knows not what the learned Parson in wickedness means by his Church,
in which he says the four pound was collected, unless it be the Parish Church
of Langley Burhill: if so, Mr Stokes affirms that in Parson Webbs Church he
never received a penny for any such use as he mentions in his Mass of malice.

Stokes acknowledges that in the year 1647. on a Lords day, after evening
Sermon, there was a collection of moneys in the Parsonage house of Langley. And
further M. Stokes affirms that he received the moneys there collected to the
use aforesaid, which amounted to the just sum of 29t -- 11d and no more, as
the note yet remaining will demonstrate, who paid it in the particulars, and
how much the sum is in gross, which is just 29^ -- 11d, toward which sum
the accomptant Parson Webb paid not one farthing. Now 25s M. Stokes paid of the
said sum to one William Collar appointed to receive the same; so that the
whole sum M. Stokes stands charged withal is 4s -- 11d, which the Parson
has scrued to 4l, the better to build a Mass of malice.

This very Parson when he saw that for his high crimes and misdemeanors, B. row
in the custody of M. Stokes, where he tells of his ejectment, and promises to
print against Mr Stokes the very particulars now published in his Mass of
malice, in which he charge M. Stokes with 3I, but in the Mass of his malice
has stretched it to 4l as you have seen before.

M. Stokes affirms that the payment of the twenty five shillings W. Collar,
according to order, was a work of supererrogation in him, and that he might
justly have retained it in his own hands to this day, and given a good account
thereof to a wiser man then Parson Webb, whom it principally concerned, for it
no way concerned him, but to fill up his Mass of malice.

Another blasphemy or crime (which the Parson pleases) is the pocketting up of
twenty pound to buy Trumpets and Banners, Mass.
this was paid he said by the Committee of Wilts about two years ago to M.
Stokes.

Answer, M. Stokes affirms, that (that not about two years ago, Hambletons
Invasion, the Committee of Wilts assigned to M. Stokes and others, then in
command, 20l to each Captain to defray their extraordinary charges, and to
provide themselves with necessaries fit for War. And further M. Stokes
confesses, that after the whole service was over, the Cavaliers every where
beaten, and the L. General Cromwell, with part of the Army in Scotland, then M.
Stokes received the 20l, and about 7 or 8l more at several times, which was
all the money of the Commonwealths that he ever received for the service, in
which he spent a far greater sum, continuing the command from the beginning
of June, until about November, 1648. It Is believed that if Parson Webb had
gained no more by Preaching and practicing, then M. Stokes has by the late
troubles, by his chargeable Offices and Employments, all along the War, he
could never have been so much given up to pride and covetousness.

Stokes has spent his time in the service of the Commonwealth, which has
proved a great burden to him, in respect of his Estate, which is but small:
That he has spent and lost much in the time of his banishment from his estate
and public employment, and yet never sought any place of advantage or profit
in the Nation, nor ever sought after Honor, except it were to be faithful to
his own conscience and the Commonwealths Cause, the prosperity whereof is all
the praise or reward Master Stokes expects.

Where is the man that can stand forth and truly say, M. Stokes, you did me
injury in the War, you eat my meat and paid not for it, you rode my horse,
you received a bribe, you have enriched your self by these Wars, you were
cruel when in place of trust and Honor, you were covetous to cheat or cosen
the Country or Commonwealth; you sought great things for your self, you have
solicited a Parliament man, a Member of the Council of State, or Officer of
the Army to assist you in the gaining an Office, or Honor, or Profit, which
you spent on your lusts: let such a man stand forth and make the challenge, and
M. Stokes will be his bondman for ever.

But the Parish-Parson, as lawless as a Parish-Bull may bellow forth his black
charge, and roar out his Mass of malice, and say all manner of evil against M.
Stokes, right or wrong. Oh excellent Parson!

And therefore in the next place he tells the Reader that M. Stokes issues out
his Warrants for the raising of him money to buy Trumpets and Banners for the
Troop. An aspersion so false and silly, that none but Ranters have the
boldness or impudence to affirm, or weakness to believe: All the
Commissioners in the whole County, all the Constables, petty Constables, and
Tithing-men; and all that pay a penny toward the Public Charge of the
Nation, will readily and cheerfully tell the Parson, that this is an untruth:
But fit enough for his Mass of malice.

The last thing M. Stokes takes notice of amongst all the quondam Parsons
aspersions is,

That M. Stokes upon his marriage, and when danger was eminent, he laid down
his Commission, and left the Troop without a Commander.

A most manifest untruth, The whole work of the Nation was Stokes continued the
command six or eight weeks after he had Orders to disband, as the Committee of
Wilts can testify, whose Orders and Letters yet remain to manifest the
contrary.

The Charge of the Command being insupportable to M. Stokes, Henry Aland, who
continued it by Order of State for the Irish service, where he is at this day.

Let it be considered by any person, not Ranting ripe, what November 1648.
unless to eat up the poor Country with Free Quarter (for no pay was then to be
had) and to pull the curse of the needy upon M. Stokes. Yet says this State
mock-Parson, when danger was eminent M. Stokes laid down his Commission. That
Mass must needs be great that is made up with such abominable and malicious
untruths, invented and brought to the work by an opprobious Parson in his
luxurious and malevolent humor.

And that all the world may see that not only an unclean, but also a lying
spirit was the Author of the Mass of malice; here is inserted the Committees
Order for Disbanding the said Troop.

At the Committee of Parliament, for the said County, the 22. of September. Anno
1948.
THat all the Horse that are now in pay under several Captains in this County,
Wilts.
and those under any other Command, Ord.
be this day disbanded, and forthwith paid for what service they have lately
done in this County, and this day; and that only Thirty be continued under the
Command of Cornet Anthony Yardly, and that those Thirty men which are to be
continued are to be approved by this Committee.

A true Copy Examined by Jonath. Hill, Clerk to the said Committee.

These are the most principal calumnies and foul aspersions that the Parson
has attributed to M. Stokes, which are most faithfully answered and retorted:
There are many more, but so ridiculous as not worth a reply.

Stokes were guilty of such foul crimes, How comes it to pass that Webb in all
his angry and reproachful letters, never mentioned a word to M. Stokes of any
one of them.

Stokes; its as clear as the sun, that he then did not take M. Stokes to be the
man as he has set him out to be in the Mass of malice, the letters being of a
later date then these pretended crimes; neither is it likely that he would make
a blasphemer his Confessor.

Stokes, clear him: besides those before mentioned in this Narrative there are
many other in M. Stokes his hand, which discover to the world, that he is not
such an offender, save in Webbs Mass of malice: Amongst diverse take notice of
this one of the 3d of Aug. 1650. which is after the time wherein the blasphemy
and crimes are said to be committed in the Mass of malice.

Sweet Sir,
I Ever took you to be a cordial and a true friend to the Saints and truth of
Christ, and therefore I profess to you unfainedly from my heart, that
exceedingly I love you and tender you, and could I but assure my self that you
would receive me with the same sweetness of spirit as formerly, and with the
spirit of meekness restore me, wherein I am fallen. Oh how glad would my heart
be to see you! While you were at London I longed for your coming home* because
to you I would unbosome my self, but I was cast off by you to my great grief
and sorrow, etc.

Now Reader, if Parson Webb in Aug. 1650. took M. Stokes to be a cordial and a
true friend to the Saints and truth of Christ how can he justly charge M.
Stokes as in his Mass of malice, with such abhorred crimes of an elder date.

Neither can it be imagined that he would have unbosomed himself to a
blaspheamer, deceiver, etc.

So M. Stokes is acquitted by his accuser before the accusation received any
being.

Let it be considered, whether Webb had not better thoughts of Stokes but a
very little time before his trial; for about the time Lieutenant Genesis Ludlow
went into Ireland, the said Webb being then in Goal, drew with his own hand a
Petition to the Parliament, that Edw. Stokes Esquire. might command the Regiment of
Horse for Wilts, in the place and absence of Col. Ludlow, and this Petition he
promoted by his Agents then at liberty, until M. Stokes himself put a period
to that design. Quaere, Whether then he took M. Stokes to be the man as now he
has printed him to be in his Mass of malice. Yet the crimes charged are of a
far elder date by his own account.

But besides all this M. Stokes is acquitted in his own conscience, which is
better to him then 10000 witnesses, and therefore can boldly say, Who art thou
that condemnest? it is God that justifies, who will clear up the innocence of
his servants, and find out (to their shame) all such as make lies their
refuge, and become false accusers of others, as the ridiculous Author of the
Mass of malice has done; who having made himself drunk with the much bibing
at the Ranting cup, behaves himself like a mad Bedlam, striking those that are
next him. In his repentings you have seen him striking and wounding his own
dear fellow creatures, charging them through and through, with malice and
wickedness. And so soon as he is reconciled to them, he Raves and Rants like a
most furious frantic, against all other that could not dandle or flatter him
in his wicked and unclean ways; So that the Parliament it self, the Committee
of Plundered Ministers, the Judge, and the Justices of Peace for the County of
Wilts, amongst which M. Stokes acknowledges he is not worthy to be named;
these are the object of Webbs Mass of malice, and are more or less abused by
the filthy Libell so called.

And well may the mock-Parson charge M. Stokes with blasphemy, in his Mass of
malice, being himself a blasphemer upon public Record; All delinquents
delight to fasten their own titles and actions upon the most innocent persons;
so the delinquent Parson having been discovered and convicted to be a
blasphemer, he gives away his own title, and imputes his own abhorred actions
to M. Stokes.

That the said Parson is a blasphemer himself, T. W. his blasphemy upon Record.
you shall find upon diligent inquiry, that he stood charged about the year
1644. before the then house of Lords, to be a Blasphemer, one that had
delivered many blasphemous principles to the people; whereupon he was by the
said House committed, and stood so for some time; yet afterward he pretended a
repentance of those errors, subscribing a form of Recantation with his own
hand, and afterward gave thanks to a Minister of the Assembly, for being a
means to draw him off from those errors; and blessed God for his mercies to
him, for he was in the ready way (as he said) to Atheism, and many of his
companions in those opinions were turned Atheists. Notwithstanding all this he
both preached and practiced as before, holding forth many things against the
glory and truth of Jesus Christ and Scripture; and not long after came into
Wilts, as transformed into an Angel of Light, upon which stage he has acted
the Ranting part, as is before expressed.

The last thing concerning Tho. T. W. his late progress into, and return from
Wilts.
Webb the Author of the Mass of malice, is this, he comes lately ( viz) about
March last into Wilts, to visit the honest party, and disperse his malicious
Mass. Well, he visits his friends, and amongst the rest (to color the
business) he gives his poor wife a visit, only by way of complement, but durst
neither to stay with her, nor in any wise to keep her company, as men usually
do, etc. but hastens away to visit his man-wife J. O. and others; so to Langley
he comes, where he was received with all alacrity amongst his honest party,
where diverse met, to whom he declared that he lately Preached upon that Text,
The spiritual man is mad, and now resolved to dissemble no more ( viz.) never
to receive Parsonage, nor Preach more, nor yet to conceal his principles from
the world, as he had done: But being asked by one, what he would do if his
Mistress should cast him off; said, that he should be the most miserable man
living, and thought he should make away with himself. So to put it out of doubt
that he would dissemble his principles no more, he takes the child, which he
said he begot on the body of another man's wife, (yet never went to see his own
child born in lawful Matrimony, though he rode by the house where it was kept
by the mothers friends;) and himself became a convoy, riding by the Wagon in
which the child was carried through the Country toward London, and for part
of the way afterward, sends back the party that did attend it, and himself
plays the part of (not only a loving father, but) a nurse, till it met the
mother and her husband, where the joy was completed: And this the impudent
mock-Parson performed, as if he had done it in the height of contempt against
both Religion and Magistracy.

So I have done with the mock-Parson and his Mass of malice: Many things I
have omitted, because I would not be over-tedious, and the Narration being of
too great a bulk already, I forbear to add. If in any particulars I seem to
offend, let it be thy glory, courteous Reader, to pass it by. I was forced to
the work which I never sought after, nor do not delight in; yet what I have
done, I have done it publicly and truly, that truth may be manifest, and
falsehood discovered, that the righteous ways and people of God may be
justified, and the wicked ways and works of ungodly men may be condemned.
Wherefore, as I wish all that respect the health of their bodies, to take heed
of Empericks and Mounte-banks; so I advise all that respect the health of their
souls, and peace of their spirits to take heed of mock Parsons, and counterfeit
Preachers, who though they appear in sheeps clothing, yet inwardly are
ravening wolves; I mean such as make themselves Preachers and Parish-Parsons to
gain Parsonages or filthy lucre for their Preaching; amongst which number you
may find T. W. From whom, that God may deliver thee, and all that fear his
great Name within the Commonwealth of England, is the daily prayer of this
Author.

FINIS.

