THE SEVEN WOMEN CONFESSORS, OR A DISCOVERY OF THE Seven white Devils which
lived at Queen Street in Coven-Garden.

VIZ. Katherine Wels, Susan Baker, Anne Parker, Katherine Smith, Elinor Hall,
Mary Jones, Dorathy Marsh.


WHOSE ARTICLES ARE HEREIN DECLARED, AND their mad pranks presented to the view
of the World.

DISCOVERED By John Stockden a Yeoman. Jan. 22. 1641.

London. Printed for John Smith.

THE SEVEN WOMEN Confessors. OR, A DISCOVERY OF THE SEVEN WHITE Devils, which
lived at Queen Street in Coven-garden.
ROman Papists are daily complained of, their names of late have bin so odious
unto each Protestant, that they cry up and down England, down with them down
with them.

Nor is their cry unjust, so many distractions by them being caused, Jesuits,
Priests, and Friars, were once in England, as plenty as Patientees, Promooters,
or double feed Attorn^ies. At which, was very much murmuring, many just reasons
being given to the Parliament how prejudicial their staying would be to the
kingdom.

Whereupon the Honorable Court of Parliament took it into their wise
considerations, and one of the first things which they established was their
banishment, against the time specified in the Proclamation, and those which
were found slack in obeying the aforesaid Proclamation, were to suffer
according to the Laws of England: some were supposed to fly away, but many
were known to be left behind, whereof one is executed, and eight at this time
are prisoners in Newgate. Not one of them being uncondemned: one of which was
tried upon Monday being the 17. day of Jan. who being called to the Bar, he was
asked whither he were a Jesuit or no: at which he seemed to answer with a push,
why was I b^ought ^i her else; yes, I confess to you all, that I have bin a
Jesuit above thirty years, and say unto you all, J think in my conscience that
there is no such law, is to condemn a man for his conscience.

Whereupon a Jury was called, who sat upon him, guilty of death: whereupon he
was condemned to be drawn, hanged and quartered, at which he seemed not so much
as to change his countenance, hoping to be reprieved as the rest before were.

But leaving him to his fortunes: by all good women's favors, I will treat of a
late Discovery of some women Confessors, whose title although it be rude, yet
is this Relation true.

Some certain women belonging to the Popish crew, perceiving that Jesuits,
Priests, nor F^yers did dare publicly to show their faces, impudently resolved
to supply their places, and privately proclaimed themselves Confessors, ordained
by Father Ciprian, their abode was in Queen Street at Coven-garden.

Unto whom did daily many assemblet hemselves, not only for absolution, but
distraction.

Their Names are these: Katherin Wels, Susan Baker, Anne Parker, Katherin
Smith, Elinor Hall, Mayor Jones, Dorathie Marsh.


The manner of their absolution was thus. He or she which came to be confessed,
brought a piece of silver in hand, which was paid as an offering to the chief
Matron Katherine Wels, then of all the seven might he choose his Confessor,
which goes presently into a room with them or her, but this by the way must be
made known, that amongst these seven female Confessors was there but one old
woman, which was Mistress Wels, the other young and handsome.

Either of which being privately confessing one, it was ten to one (unless she
knew him well) if she did not make him confess that his purse was gone: and to
come thither to complain for it, no man durst, for fear of a good-Fridays
whipping out of Lent; for why, each of them were sworn to keep these Articles.

I. FIrst, never to declare any thing to Heretics, which belong to their
sacred Order.

II. Secondly, never again to come unto them, unless in the dark.

III. Thirdly, that he should not question their holy Authority.

IV. Fourthly, that wickedness was never committed in that house.

V. Fifthly, to confess all things to them, nothing being hid.

VI. Sixthly, never to be confessed, by any man afterward.

And lastly, if it were his fortune to ingonder with any of the female
Confessors, not to tell it to any of the rest.

And so the Pope must help him: by which way they stuff their purses with
gold, and their bellies with children, and then did they against their wills
forsake their cheating Nunnery, the chief cause being discovered, by John
Stockden, a plain Country fellow, who was willing to have a wench, but not to
swear to their Articles.

FINIS.

