A STRANGE And Lamentable accident that happened lately at Mears-Ashby in
Northamptonshire. 1642.

Of one Mary Wilmore, wife to John Wilmore rough M^son, who was delivered of a
Child without a head, and credibly reported to have a firm Cross on the
breast, as this ensuing Story shall relate.

Hor: Mirando cano.


Printed at London for Rich: Harper and Thomas Wine, and are to be sold at the
Bible and Harp in Smithfield. 1642.

A strange and lamentable Accident that happened lately at Mears-Ashby in
Northampton shire. 1642.
THis Kingdom once glorying in the flourishing title of Olbion: which is as
much as happiness and tranquillity, (tam Eccles. quam Re^p^b.) but now being
clouded and maskt with various distractions, as are apparently known and made
manifest to the whole world, in so much that she is made a laughing stock, and
a scorn to all Nations, may now with the Publican cry, Lord have mercy on me a
sinner: or with Eccebolius, chief Captain of the Apostates, who in
Constantines time to oak upon him the note of a zealous Christian: in the
reign of Julian he became a Pagan; Julian being dead then he would become a
Christian: but being sensible of his mutability and inconstancy, prostrated
himself flat upon the ground at the Porch of the Temple, crying with a loud
voice, Tread on me, tread on me, for I am unsavory salt.

I fear me we have too too many of these unfavourable and wheeling Rotundities
frequent amongst us, but I pray God it happens not to them as it did to
Julian Uncle to Julian the Apostate, for their contemning and slighting Gods
holy ordinances, who coming into a Church at Antioch, profaned the Lords Table
by pissing upon it, saying in scorn, that the Divine Providence took no care
of outward ceremonies. But not long after divine Justice found him out, for
being taken with a disease that rotted his bowels, his excrements leaving their
wonted passage, ran through his throat and blasphemous mouth in as stinking a
manner, as the poisoned trash and beggarly rudiments are fomented now adays
from the impudent mouths of unlearned and ignorant Teachers, the event of
whose pernicious and illiterate doctrine will lead me to this ensuing story of
Gods wrath and judgments to over curious and nice zelots of our times.

In Mears-Ashby in Nottingham shire, on^ Mary Wilmore wife of John Wilmore,
rough Mason, being great with child, and much perplexed in mind, to think
that her child when it pleased God she should be delivered, should be baptized
with the sign of the Cross: The Minister of the Parish being a very honest
and conformable man, not suiting with the vain babbling and erroneous
Sycophants, as there are too too many thereabouts inhabiting, desires her
husband to go to Hardwicke, a Village near adjoining to one Master Ba^nard a
reverend Divine, to know his opinion concerning the Cross in Baptism: whose
answer was, That it was no ways necessary to salvation, but an ancient,
laudable, and decent ceremony of the Church of England* Which answer being
related to her from (...) husband, it is reported she should say, I had ^^ther
my child should be borne without a head, then to have a head to be signed
with the sign of the Cross.

Happily this woman through her weakness, or too much confiding in the
conventicling Sectaries, Qui quicquid in buccam venerit blatterant: might
think she did well, supposing as she was taught by them, the Cross in
Baptism to be a pernicious, popish and idolatrous ceremony: yet see Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. 1 Chronicles. 13.9, 10. vid. Judge. 8.27. though thy intent in doing a
seeming good action be never so good, yet if thou have not warrant for nor so
doing, thou and thine action may happly perish together, as the sequel of this
story will declare. It pleased God about a month after, she was accordingly
delivered of a Monster, Rudes indegestaque moles, a child without a head, to
the shame of the parents, in not having that part whereon it might have been
marked with that token whereof it should never after have been ashamed.

What strange judgments of God have we seen, says Pollychronus, in the
times of revolters? as we may see in the third year of Queen Elizabeth of
ever blessed memory, when as in Moore and Geofferey, two of the devils agents,
published their prodigious and heretical tenants, to the allurement of many
faithful and constant believers: the year after was many monstrous births. A
man child was borne at Chichester in Suffex, the head, arms, and legs whereof
were like Anatomy, the breast and belly monstrous big from the navell, about the
neck a great collar of flesh and skin growing, like to the double ruffes and
neckerchiefes then in use, and many more like accidents, Qua nunc norandi non
est locus. Good Lord therefore which have made and fashioned us, and as there
is one Lord, one faith, and one baptism, one God and Father of all, even so
Lord grant that we may jointly agree in love, and that there remain amongst
us a godly consent and loving concord, and that nothing be done in contention
and vainglory: and suffer us not to exercise our selves in the works of the
flesh, as hatred, emulations, contentions, heresies, seditions, needless and
unprofitable questions, which tend to rebellion and discord, breeding
ungodliness, and make dissension: break thou the bonds of Satan, and the
malice of those who extinguish the bond of peace.

By John Lock, Cleric.
FINIS.

