TWO SPEECHES, MADE BY Sr. THOMAS WENTWORTH: Now Earl of Strafford, in the
Parliament holden at VVest-minster. 1628. The one concerning the liberty of the
Subject. The other the Privilege of the Houses of Parliament.

Printed for John Aston, Anno Dom. 1641.

SIR THOMAS VVENTWORTHS SPEECH, xxijd. Martij, 1627.
MAy this days resolution be as happy, as I conceive the proposition (which
now moves me to rise) is seasonable and necessary, for whether we shall look
upon the King or the people, it did never more behove this great Physician the
Parliament, to effect a true consent toward the parties then now; This debate
carries with it, a double aspect, toward the Sovereign, toward the Subject,
though both innocent, both injured, both to be cured.

In the representation of injuries, J shall crave your attention in the Cures;
J shall beseech your equal cares, and better judgments (surely in the greatest
humility, I speak it) these illegal ways are marks and punishments of
indignation.

The raising of Leavies strengthened by Commission, with unheard of
instructions, the billetting of Soldiers, by Lieutenants, without leave, have
been, as if they could have persuaded Christian Princes (nay Worlds) the right
of Empire had been to take away by strong hand; and they have endeavouerd, as
far as was possible for them, to do it.

This has not been done by the King (under the pleasing shade of whose Crown
I hope we shall ever gather the fruits of Justice) but by Projectors. They
have extended the prerogative of the King, beyond the just Center, which was
the sweet harmony of the whole.

They have rent from us, the light of our eyes, enforced a company of Guests,
worse then the Ordinaries of France, vitiated our wives and daughters before
our faces, brought the Crown to greater want, then ever it was, by
anticipating the Revenue, and can the Shepherd be thus smitten, and the flock
not scattered?

They have introduced a Privy Counsel ravishing at once the Spheres of all
ancient government, imprisoning us without Bail or Bond. They have taken from
us what shall I say (undeed what have they left us) all mean of supplying the
King and ingratiating our selves with him, taking up the roots of all
propriety, which if it be not seasonably set into the groundby his Majesty's
hand, we shall have instead of beauty baldness.

To the making of them whole I shall apply my self, and propound a Remedy to
all these diseases, by one and the same thing has the King and People been
hurt? and by the same must they be cured, to vindicate what? New things? No.
Our ancient, sober, vital liberties by reinforcing of the ancient Laws made
by our Ancestors, by setting such a Character upon them, as no licentious
Spirit shall dare hereafter to enter upon them. And shall we think this a way
to break a Parliament? No. Our desires are modest and just, I speak truly
both for the interest of the King and People. If we enjoy not those, it will be
impossible to relieve him; Therefore let us never fear that they shall not be
accepted by his goodness.

Wherefore J shall descend to my motions, which consists of four parts, two of
which have relation to the parsons, two to the propriety of goods, for the
parsons the freedom of them from imprisoning.

Secondly, from employments abroad, contrary to the ancient Customs for our
goods, that no leavies may be made but in Parliament. Secondly, no billetting
of Soldiers: It is most necessary, that these be resolved, that the Subjects
may be secured in both.

Then for the Manner in the second place, it will be fit to determine it by a
Grand Committee.

(...)
