THE READING UPON THE STATUTE OF THE Thirteenth of Elizabeth, CHAPTER VII.

TOUCHING BANKRUPTS, Learnedly and Amply Explained, BY JOHN STONE of Gray's
Inn, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for B. Griffin, C. Harper, J. Place, S. Keble, G. Collins, R.
Sare, M. Wotton, G. Sawbridge, D. Dring. MDCXCV.

The Reading of John Stone, of Gray's Inn, Esquire; upon the Statute of 13th.
Elizabeth, Cap. 7. touching Bankrupts, learnedly and amply explained.
Oration Lectoris.
HE was surely liber and legalis homo, that said, Servi sumus omnes: But he
added, Legibus servi sumus omnes, ut liberi simus, For we are, and must be, all
Servants to the Law, if we mean to live free and happy Lives; for the Law is
the Rule of Right, by which all our Actions are to be squared; so as if you go
not by the Law, you go not by Rule, or Order, but all our doings will be
nothing else but alia enormia, things out of Rule: But as all Men are bound to
keep the Law, so We above all Men that Profess the Law, that Study and learn by
it the Art of Right and Wrong, are doubly bound not only to serve it, and
observe it, but also to honor it, to advance it, and (to our Powers in all
things) to maintain it.

Those that have gone before me in this place (amongst other things) have most
commonly said something in the commendation of the Law; but for this time I
mean to save that labor; and my reason is, for that two most worthy Men of
this our Age (the one famous above all other for his Learning, the other
inferior to few for his Wit) have both of them in their Epistles in their late
Reports, written and set down as much of this Argument (I mean) of the
commendations of the Laws, and of the Profession and Professors of the Law, as
I can say, and more.

But to leave then the General, let me speak something of this Particular Law
which you have heard read, upon which I have a little settled my Thoughts and
Meditations.

Commerce (that is, Trade of Merchandise) it is a thing that has always been
so well known to be profitable to all Nations, if it be well handled, that our
fore-Ancestors, many Years ago, so favored Merchants, that for their benefit,
a Law was made of purpose, called, Statutum de Mercatoribus; so as, where at
Common Law, if a Debt were owing to a Man, he could not by Law recover this
Debt without Process and Pleading, and yet then no Man's Lands were liable to
the Judgments; by that Law (if once a Man acknowledged himself to be indebted
to a Merchant, and paid not his Money at his day) without Process, without
Pleading, without further Suit or Judgment, the Merchant shall have present
Execution against his Debtor, both for Body, Goods, and Lands.

It is true, that in those days few Englishmen were Merchants, but Strangers
brought their Commodities hither, and fetched ours; but now that course is
clean altered, for very few come from Foreign Nations to us; but we our selves
Trade and Traffic into all parts of the habitable World, Christendom, or
Heathenish, and into many parts not Inhabited by any Human Creature.

But as the number of Merchants has increased, so have their Cunning and
Crafty dealings increased, so as now a days it falls out, that we had more need
to make Laws against them, than for them; for it is found to be (now a days) a
matter of more difficulty for Men to get their Debts of Merchants, than it was
in times past for Merchants to get their Debts of other Men, Sed ex malis
moribus, bonae leges.

Thereupon within this last Hundred Years, there have been many good Laws made
against them, and especially against them whom the Civilians call Decoctores,
that is, Bank-Merchants, for in these three last Ages there have been
published, amplified, and confirmed against them, three several Acts of
Parliament, one in King Hen. 8. time, one other in the 13. Eliz. which you have
heard read, and the last in primo of King James.

I have not so little discretion, as to take upon me to commend these Laws, for
so I should assume to my self an Authority of the allowance, disallowance, and
censuring of Laws made by those that know better what belongs to those Matters
than I do, and I shall idly spend the time in praising of them, that stand in
no need of my commendation, only I will say (as Thirning says in another Case
in 14 Hen. 4.) Our Masters that were before Us, and plus scavant que nous, have
made and published these Laws; for my self, that have undertaken to read or
comment upon one of these Laws, I will discover thus much, that this Law was
never yet Read on in this House, nor in any other; the Use or Help of which I
could not by any means obtain; but you may say to me hereafter, I need not tell
you this; for as Sir Tho. More answered a bad Poet, that underneath his Verses
had written, Raptim scripsi; stulte quid hic scribis? Why do thou say of thy
Book, Raptim scripsi, nam liber hoc loquitur te reticente tuus; so I shall make
it appear to you plainly before I have done, that I had no help in these
Matters, for if any wise or grand learned Man had been of my Council, I should
never have gone so badly through my business.

But I have an ease of one thing, that much troubled a Gentleman of a Noble
Family, who being to publish a Book, said, nothing troubled and terrified him
so much from publishing his Work, as his friendly Foes expectation; I have an
ease of that, for you all know my weakness so well, that I am sure you expect
nothing from me more than ordinary Matter; I pray God I may go well through
with that; and there is another thing that eases my Mind as much (on the
contrary part) which I learned of a worthy Gentleman, not many Years ago, that
supplied this Place before me; for said he then, and so say I now, I will do my
best endeavor to please you all, but as he said further, so say I, that I have
absolutely set aside this vain hope, or impossibility, called, Expectation to
please all: But I hope this, and no more, that my Friends will make the best of
the worst.

And I must ask pardon of you all in one thing, which is this, all the most
Excellent Poets and Eloquentest Rhetoricians, and many great Historiographers,
in all their best Works, they bring in always one Man that goes from the
beginning to the end of their Discourses, whose Famous Virtues, and Noble Acts,
grace their whole Work: But so much the Law differs from their Acts, that I
must be enforced to the quite contrary; for in every Act, and in every Scene
(that is) in every Division, and in every Case I put, I must bring in a running
Tromper and Imposter (a Bank:) But I shall desire you to respect, rather the
goodness of the Law, than the lewdness of the Breaker, therefore, and that my
endeavors may tend more for your Learning and mine, than for our Delights; Now
my Law is this,

1. Who shall be said a Merchant, or other Person, seeking his Trade of Living
by Buying and Selling, within this Statute.

An Adventurer in the East India Voyage is within this Statute.

To Newfound-Land for Plantation, or Discovery, is not.

An Adventurer in the Virginia Voyage is not.

One of the Muscovia Company, Adventurer to Green-Land, and Discovery, is not.

A Clothier, or any Manual Occupation, which is within the Statute of 5. Eliz.
of Laborers.

A Grasier is no Mechanic.

A Gentleman goes beyond Seas, and gives his Bills of Exchange to be paid
here by his Bailey or Steward, who accepts it, and after that protests, no
Merchant.

Goldsmith, Hammer-man, Goldsmith-Shopkeeper, the same of Jewellers.

A Feme-Covert sole Merchant in London, the Husband is Outlawed, the
Commissioners sell the Land of the Husband, who dies, the Wife brings Dower,
London 11. Ash. She is Sister to the Elder Brother, and after another Brother
is Born Heir to the Elder.

There is a difference between a Smith, and an Ironmonger.

A Feme-Covert sole Merchant, an Obligation is made to the Husband and Wife,
and they are Divorced, and she is a Bankrupt.

An Innkeeper is within.

A Courtier takes a Lease of the King, of the Preemption of Tinn, if he shall
be within the Statute during his Term.

One has a Monopoly of the sole making and selling of Glasses, or Cards, he is
not within, but any who has the sole Importing or Exporting of any Commodity,
is within.

A Merchant gives over his Trade, and seven Years after becomes non solvent for
Money he owed while he was a Merchant, he shall be a Bankrupt. Jo. Quarles.

But if it were for new Debts, contrary, Hickmough's Case.

But if he were indebted, and gives over his Trade, and his Debts are continued
at Interest, and the Bonds from time to time renewed, he is no Bankrupt, by
John Stone.

Where one shall Sue for his Debt before it is due.

If an Assign shall have a Re-extent.

If an Assign shall have a Writ of Error. See Davies Reading.

2. Who shall be said a Subject Born within this Realm, or any of the King's
Dominions, or a Denizen.

One Naturallized by Act of Parliament.

The Son of an Ambassador of Venice, born here, and after Sworn to his King.

One is made Denizen, so that he is only a Purchaser for his Life.

One Born upon the Sea, upon the Coasts of Holland.

One Born in the Port of Diep.

The Bishop of Sodor, Born in the Isle of Man.

A Denizen, upon condition, that he shall not depart the Realm, and he for Debt
departs.

One made Denizen of Ireland, by the Charter of Ireland, 11. H. 8. Kelloway,
fol. 202. A difference between the Isle of Man, and Wight, etc.

A Pewterer goes beyond Sea, and there uses his Trade, he shall lose his
Privilege, and the benefit of an Englishman, says the Statute of 25. Hen. 8.
cap. 9.

One has a Prisoner in Execution for Debt, and becomes a Bankrupt, if he
escape, if the Assigns may have an Action of Escape.

Quere, If the Bankrupt release to the Prisoner, if such a Debt may be
Assigned, for his Body is a Pledge.

3. What shall be said a Departing from his House, or out of the Realm.

A Merchant keeps his Ship for fear of Arresting, which Ship is by Pirates or
Tempest driven beyond Sea.

A Merchant departs the Realm to Merchandise; and having loss by Tempest, he
returns not upon a Privy Seal; if the King or his Creditors shall have his
Goods.

A Commoner keeping his House.

A Merchant indebted, leaves off to Merchandise, and after keeps his House.

One keeps his Ship, or his Mill, or being Churchwarden, keeps himself in
any part of the Church.

One that has no House, but an Upper-Chamber.

One that is a Keeper of a Castle of the Kings.

One that has no House, but Sojourns now in one place, and after in another.

Absenteth himself.

A Capias de Excommunicato Capiendo is awarded against a Merchant, who absents
himself for fear of being thereby Arrested; no absence within the Statute
generally.

An Attachment out of Chancery is awarded against a Bankrupt, for not payment
of Money decreed, if he absent himself, he is a Bankrupt.

Contrary, if it were for not making a Conveyance.

Taking of Sanctuary.

Parries Case before the Bishop of Ely, Feb. 1. 1616.

A Recusant Convict grants an Advowson for 21 Years, and dies, the Church
becomes void; The Question is, if his Heir, or the Lessee shall present upon
the Statute of 3. Jacobi.

4. Sufferance of himself to be Arrested, or Imprisoned for six Months, by 1
Jacobi.

Outlawed.

Outlawed without Proclamation.

An Outlary reversed by Error, and Averment; a difference.

One outlawed for Felony, committed after he is a Bankrupt; if the King by the
Outlary, or the Creditors shall be preferred for the Goods.

One outlawed in Ireland.

5. Yiedling himself to Prison.

Imprisoned by 1 Jac. for a Fine in the Star Chamber by Exchequer Process.

For a Fine before the High Commissioners.

For a Debt recovered in the Admirals Court.

His Goods being Attached or Sequestered.

A Merchant Farmer of a Rectory, the Parson serves not the Cure.

6. What Authority the Commissioners have upon the Body of the Bankrupt.

A Merchant confesses himself to be the Villane of I. S. who takes his Goods.

A Merchant enters into Religion after Bankrupting or before, his Executors,
etc.

A Bankrupt is made a Clerk.

7. What Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of a Bankrupt which is Freehold,
may be sold, which he has in his own right, or purchased jointly with his Wife
or Children, or shall be said to descend or come to him before, or after he is
become a Bankrupt.

Sale of Lands in Tail.

If such a sale may prejudice him in remainder, or it shall be construed a
Feoffment of Record, as a Fine is; One has Land in right of his Wife, if it
may be sold to one to have during the Goverture.

A Merchant makes a Feoffment to one upon condition to pay Money, if the
Commissioners may transfer this power to perform the condition to any.

A Merchant makes a Feoffment upon condition that the Feoffee shall pay the
Money, and it is not paid, if the Commissioners may give Authority to any to
enter for the condition broken.

Land is devised to a Merchant, or a Remainder, or an use is limited to him, if
he can waive after he is a Bankrupt.

Rentseck whereof there is no Seizure, shall be sold.

A Barony, Earldom, or Baronetship, are Hereditaments, and yet shall not be
sold.

A Villane shall be sold, but if the Bankrupt Infranchise him, Quere, If he
shall be sold again.

The Office of Warden of the Fleet, or Gaolor of Inheritance, and all other
Offices of Inheritance shall be sold; contrary of Offices of Trust, which are
but for Life.

A Monopoly granted to one and his Assigns, shall not be sold.

Land Escheated shall be sold; but Quere, if it Escheat after the Commission,
and Death of the Bankrupt.

One bargains and sells a Seigniory to a Bankrupt, and after Commission the
Bankrupt dies, and the Deed is Enrolled after the Commission.

The Bankrupt having Land holden in Capite dies, his Heir within Age and Office
is found, if they can sell.

The same, if his Heir be an Idiot, or a Lunatic.

A Bankrupt becomes Lunatic, an Office is found.

A Bankrupt is Tenant in Tail, the remainder in the King, if it can be sold but
for the Life of the Tenant in Tail.

Tenant in Tail grants all his Estate, and becomes a Bankrupt, the Land shall
not be sold.

Tenant in Tail of a Rent, is disseised thereof, and dies, his Issue is a
Bankrupt, and brings a Formedon, yet the Rent shall be sold.

Two joint Tenants, the one is a Bankrupt and dies, if his part shall be sold,
not, because the Survivor is not in by him.

Tenant in Tail, the remainder to an Alien, Tenant in Tail is a Bankrupt, and
suffers a Recovery, the Land is sold.

Tenant in Tail dies without Issue, an Office is found, if the Land shall be
sold for the King.

8. What Copyholds they may sell, and what agreement made with the Lord is good.

The Lord sells the Freehold of one sole Copyholder to A. the Copyholder
becomes a Bankrupt, if the Commissioners can sell.

Copyholder in Tail with a remainder, where no Recoveries, or where Recoveries
are remedied against the Lord who will not compound.

A Copyholder by License of the Lord, makes a Lease for One and Twenty Years,
the Copyhold Escheats, Quere, if the Lease is good against the Lord.

A Feme by Custom is to have a Widows Estate, the Bankrupt makes such a Lease,
if the Feme shall avoid it.

A Bankrupt Copyholder makes a Feoffment, the Lord enters, the Commissioners
sell, the Vendee tenders a competent Fine, the Lord refuses to admit him, the
Vendee enters, the Lord brings Trespass, it lies not.

A Bankrupt makes waste, the Commissioners sell, the Lord enters for a
Forfeiture.

A Copyholder surrenders into the hands of two Tenants, he to whose use is a
Bankrupt, the Lord dissolves the Manor.

9. What Fees, Annuities, Offices, Goods, Chattels, and Debts, the
Commissioners may sell.

A Merchant acknowledges himself to be the Villane of I. S. the Commissioners
may Assign his Debts, Quere, of his Goods.

A Lease for Years, provided that he shall not alien, the Commissioners sell,
if it be a Forfeiture.

10. What Uses, Interests, Rights, or Titles of a Bankrupt, the Commissioners
may sell.

A Bankrupt has an Advowson, the Church becomes void, the Commissioners sell,
the Vendee presents, if this be Symony.

A Bankrupt prefents one who is privy to his Bankrouting, who is Indicted, the
Commissioners sell, their Vendee brings a Quare impedit within six Months.

A Bankrupt has a Warranty, what use the Vendee shall have of it.

A Bankrupt has the next avoidans, the Commissioners present one for Money
paid to the Creditors.

The Disseisor dies seized after five Years, the Disseisee becomes a Bankrupt.

A Woman has a Rent charge, she takes a Husband a Bankrupt who Distrains, and
Rescous is made, if the Commissioners can sell all the Rent which shall be due
during the Coverture, 1 E. 3. fol. 5. Pl. 23.

The Commissioners sell a Rent, or Reversion, if good without Attornment.

A Bankrupt loses by erroneous Judgment, if this right to bring a Writ of
Error may be transferred by the Commissioners.

The same of an Entry for condition broken, or performance of a condition.

A Bankrupt becomes Lunatic, the Commissioners sell, an Office is found.

11. What Deed Enrolled in one of Her Majesty's Courts of Record shall be good.

The Deed is not acknowledged before any of the Masters of the Chancery by the
Commissioners.

The Deed is not Enrolled within six Months, the Statute of Inrolements says,
by Bargain and Sale only.

I. S. By prescription holds Plea in his Manor above Forty Shillings, the
Deed is there Enrolled, after Sale and before Inrolment the Bankrupt takes a
Wife, and die, if she shall be endowed, the Deed is enrolled in the Mayors
Court in London; no question, of the Hustings.

12. What shall be said a just Debt, and how the Statute shall make an
apportionment between the Creditors; what is their duty to do, and what remedy
they have for their Portions, and who shall be said a Creditor, and who shall
be relieved.

A Merchant indebted as Surety, or Bail for a Gentleman, but not for himself.

If one may Sue for a Legacy before the Commissioners.

How a Debt doubtful shall be tried before the Commissioners.

For Money decreed to him in the Chancery or Star Chamber.

One Creditor sole Sues a Commission, and keeps it with him secretly until the
last day, within four Months, and then the Commissioners sell the Land, and pay
all to this Creditor, the others never having notice thereof; what remedy for
them?

The Commissioners sell all the Land, and distribute all, but this is not full
satisfaction, after other Land descends to the Bankrupt, if they can make
another sale, and new distribution.

The four Months are past, and part of the Estate distributed, new Creditors
come in, if they shall be admitted to have contribution of the rest, which is
not yet distributed, and if such new Creditors shall have allowance ratably
with the other Creditors according to the Remnant of their Debts, or according
to all paid, or not paid.

A Bankrupt becomes indebted to one who had notice that he is a Bankrupt, if he
shall be admitted a Creditor?

One has a Debt which is not yet due, yet he shall be relieved with rateable
respect of abatement for the time.

13. What Act or Conveyance made by a Bankrupt before or after he is a
Bankrupt, shall be good.

He takes a Wife after he is a Bankrupt, if she shall be endowed of Land, which
he had before.

He takes a Wife after he is a Bankrupt, and Land descends to him, if she shall
be endowed.

A Bankrupt Disseisor, the Commissioners sell, and before the Deed is enrolled
the Disseisor releases to the Bankrupt.

A Bankrupt presents one who is private to his intent, who is indicted, the
Commissioners sell, the Vendee brings a Quare impedit.

A Bankrupt becomes a Clerk-Convict, and has Goods within a Liberty.

A Bankrupt after Commission awarded becomes felo de se.

A Conveyance to the use of a Daughter a Widow formerly advanced.

A Merchant Tenant in Knight Service, his Heir within Age makes a Feoffment by
collusion, the Lord after becomes a Bankrupt, this is no fraud against the
Creditors, but yet the Land shall be sold, for though it be fraud between the
Lord and the Tenant, yet there is a Trust between the Feoffor, and Feoffee.

14. What Declaration or Account the Commissioners shall make to the Bankrupt,
and whether the Proviso be a Condition, and what remedy the Bankrupt has for
to cause them to account.

The Commissioners all die after the sale of the Lands, and distribution, what
remedy has the Bankrupt for the rest against the Executors of the
Commissioners, or against the Survivor of them.

After the Sale, and before distribution, all the Commissioners die but two,
what shall be done.

A new Commission shall be awarded to other Commissioners (not to them) and
they shall be called before the new Commissioners, as they who have the Estate
of the Bankrupt in their hands.

15. What shall be said a concealment of the Estate of a Bankrupt, or of his
Person, or a fraudulent claim or demand, or detaining of his Estate, and what
remedy for the Forfeiture or Fine.

16. What damage is it to be out of the Kings Protection, by this Statute.

17. Who shall be said a Creditor within this Statute.

A sole Creditor if he can sue the Commission.

A Mortgage of Lands or Goods, if they can sell them.

Conusee of a Statute-Merchant, or Recognizance.

The Plaintiff who has the Body of the Defendant in Execution upon a Judgment
at the Common Law.

He who has the Bankrupt in Execution upon a Statute-Merchant.

A Merchant is taken in Execution, and after becomes indebted to A. and remains
six Months in Execution, and so is a Bankrupt; if A. shall be a Creditor, that
is, if he be a Bankrupt from the beginning of his Imprisonment by relation, or
only after the six Months.

A Merchant is imprisoned for Debt, the Jailer Credits him for Victuals for a
Year, if he shall be a Creditor for part, for all, or for none?

A Bankrupt is Convicted for keeping of Inmates, or erecting Cottages, the
Statute gives an Action of Debt to the Lord of the Leet, he is no Creditor.

18. What Conveyance the Commissioners may make after the Death of the Bankrupt.

A Feme Covert, sole Merchant within Age, the Baron and Feme levy a Fine of the
Land of the Feme, a Commission is awarded, the Fine is reversed for Nonage of
the Feme, with a Cessation of Execution during the Life of the Baron; they have
Issue, the Feme dies, the Commissioners sell, the Issue enters.

The First Division.
Who shall be said to be a Merchant, or other Person, using or exercising the
Trade of Merchandises, by way of Bargaining, Exchange, Bartry, Chevisance, or
otherwise in gross, or by Retail, or seek his or their Trade of Living by
Buying and Selling.
1. A Makes a Lease for Years to B. and grants the reversion to C. in Tail, B.
attorn; and enters, A. grants the reversion of C. to D. being a Denizen of
Ireland, C. commits Treason, and attorns, D. becomes an Adventurer to the East
Indies, C. is attainted, D. is Non solvent, and having no House, keeps himself
on Shipboard, C. Dies without Issue, a Commission is awarded, and after supers
the Commissioners sells the Land by Deed Enrolled in the Mayor's Court in
London.

D. is a Bankrupt within the Statute, and the Sale by the Commissioners is
good.

2. Tenant for Years of an Inn, makes a Feoffment in Fee to Baron and Feme, an
Alien makes livery within the view to the Feme who enters, the Baron is made
King, the Lessor being an Adventurer of Virginia, Releases to the King by Deed
Enrolled, an Office is found, the Queen waives, the Lessor enters, and keeps
the Inn, and being Non-solvent, is made Keeper of a Castle in the Isle of Man,
where he was Born, and there remains.

The Lessor is a Bankrupt within this Division of the Statute, and the
Commissioners may sell the Land.

3. A Disseisor makes a Lease for Life to a Feme sole, the remainder to the
right Heirs of I. S. she makes a Feoffment in Fee upon condition, and enters
for the condition broken, and grants a Rend charge to A. a Goldsmith of London,
Naturalized by Parliament, the Disseisee Releases to the Feme, she Marries A.
the Disseisor enters, and makes a Feoffment to a Stranger, I. S. dies, the Feme
has Issue, and dies, A. enters, and being Non-solvent surrenders to the Issue
and departs the Realm to Merchandise, the Commissioners sell the Rent, the
right Heir of I. S. enters.

A. is a Bankrupt within this Division of the Statute, and the Vendee may
presently Distrain for the Rent.

4. R. Tenant in tail makes a Gift in tail to M. has Issue, and dies, M. makes
a Feoffment to C. and dies without Issue, his Wife the Issue of R. enters, a
Son is Born who enters, the Feoffee enters, and being a Grasier buys lean
Cattle, and feeds them upon the Land, and Sells them when they are fat, and
sells his own House, and after being Non-solvent keeps his Neighbors House.

C. is no Bankrupt within this Statute, and the Issue of R. recovers the Land
by Formedon, and the Son Born has no right.

5. A Man has Issue, A. and B. two Daughters, they Disseise I. S. and infeoff
their Father; A. Marries C. and by his leave becomes a Sempster in the
Exchange, London; the Father dies, I. S. releases to the Husband, B. brings a
Neuper Obiit against A. and C. C. makes default, after default, A. is received,
and being indebted to diverse Creditors, disclaims in the Blood, the Husband
keeps the House.

The Husband is a Bankrupt within this Statute, and the Moiety of the Land is
liable to the sale of the Commissioners during the Coverture.

6. One makes a Lease for Years to A. the remainder to B. for the Life of A.
the remainder to the right Heirs of A. B. dies, A. having Issue a Daughter, his
Wife with Child with a Son, devises the Land to I. S. for the Life of M. for
payment of his Debts, and makes I. S. his Executor, and dies, I. S. enters, the
Daughter being a Feme Covert, sole Merchant in London, enters, M. dies, the
Daughter is Non solvent, and elopes, the Son born enters.

The Daughter is a Bankrupt within this Statute, and the Commissioners may sell
the Land.

7. One devises his Land to A. B. and C. and baeredibus, A. paying 10 li. they
enter, and A. being an Exchanger enters into Religion, B. releases to C. the
Bills of A. are protested, C. dies, the Creditors of A. brings Action against
his Executors, and before Judgment A. is deraigned, the Commissioners sell all
the Land.

A. is a Bankrupt within this Statute, but the sale is good only for a third
part.

8. M. and F. join Tenants of a Horse, Mortgage him to E. a Feme sole, who
intermarries with M. F. being a Horsecourser, performs the condition, and takes
the Horse, E. by commandment (...) her Husband Steals the Horse, M. and E. are
Divorced, causa praecontractus, M. dies, E. is indicted for Felony, the
Horsecourser becomes a Bankrupt the Commissioners sell the Horse.

F. is a Bankrupt within the Statute, and the sale is good.

9. The King makes a Lease for Years, rendering Rent of the Pre-emption of Tynn
in Cornwall, to I. S. one of the Grooms of the Privy Chamber, who becomes
indebted to diverse Persons for Tynn, bought of them by his Deputies, and sold
to Merchants the term expires, I. S. continues his Debt by renewing assurance,
and payment of Interest for Seven Years, and then keeps himself in the King's
House for avoiding the Arrests of his Creditors, the Commissioners sell his Fee.

He is no Person who is a Bankrupt within the Statute, and the sale is void.

10. A. Feme sole being seized of Land in Fee, B. contracts with C. an
Ironmonger, and D. a Smith (for Money to him by them paid) to marry A. and that
after the Marriage he and A. will Levy a Fine of the Land of A. to the use of
C. and D. and their Heirs; the Marriage is had, the Fine is Levied, C. is
Outlawed, D. departs.

C. is a Person who is a Bankrupt by this Statute, but not D. and the Moiety of
the Land shall be sold.

The Points of the Second Case.
1. WHen Tenant for Years makes Livery within the view, the Question is,
Whether the Feoffer, or the Feoffee, or both, or neither, are Disseisors. See
Ash. Disseisin.

It appears by our Books, as in 10. E. 4. fol. 18. that before the Statute of
W. 2. cap. 25. Tenant for Years had made a Feoffment, he was the only
Disseisor, and by the Statute, Tam feofator quam feofatus, shall be Disseisors;
so as vivente altero eorum lorum habeat predictum breve (meaning the Writ of
Assise) and the very reason why that Statute was made, was to avoid the
mischief which was put in practice in Farmer's Case, in Coke lib. 3. For even
as there Tenant for Years, or a Copyholder would Levy a Fine, and yet keep
Possession, and then thought by suffering five Years to pass without entry or
claim by the Lessor, that he might gain the Land; so here Tenant for Years
would make a Feoffment, then he being the only Disseisor, if he died, there
would no Assize lie against the Feoffee; and so the Lessor lost the benefit of
this festinum remedium, which the Statute gives: This very Question being moved
by chance in the Court of Wards, Hesketh was of Opinion, that if before the
Statute, Tenant for term of Years had made a Feoffment upon the Land, he was
the only Disseisor, if within the view the Feoffee was the only Disseisor. But
what such a Livery within the view would work since the Statute, he made a
great doubt; if I should hold that neither of them both were Disseisors, and
that nothing pass but only the Term, I should very well maintain the conclusion
of my Case to the end, for nothing does actually pass by Livery within the
view, but by Operation of the Law, and the Law will never work to do any Man
wrong, and therefore, 9 H. 7. Tenant for Years of one Acre, and in Fee of
another, makes a Feoffment of both, and makes Livery only in the Acre wherein
he has Fee, nothing passes of the Acre he had for Years.

28. H. 8. D. 18. One has a House Leased, and one close in possession, etc.
for Act in Law never will work a wrong.

41 E. 3.5. The Tenant pleads non tenure, if the Land descend pendente vere,
the Writ shall not abate.

So if nothing pass but the Term, then if I resolve the sixth point of my Case,
that the Term remains with the Queen after Marriage, then the Release made to
the King works nothing, and so the Lessors best right is to enter for a
Forfeiture, although the Queen afterward waive; but I will let this Question
rest a while by reason of, etc.

20 Eliz. D. Where by the Opinion of the Chief Justices, That when Tenant of
100 Years makes a Feoffment by Letter of Attorney, the Lessor being upon the
Land that the Fee passes.

2. Whether Livery within the view be good without Deed?

3. Whether a Feoffment made to Baron and Feme without Deed and Livery to the
Feme sole, be good to the Husband until disagreement?

4. Whether if Tenant for Years enfeoff two and the Lessor Releases to one, if
he shall exclude his Companion?

5. If Baron and Feme are Disseisors, and the Disseisee release to the Baron,
if he shall exclude his Wife?

6. A Feme Covert has a term, and the Husband is made King, if the Queen or
the King should hold the term?

7. Baron and Feme Disseisors, the Baron is made King, the Disseisee releases
to him, if it makes the King and the Queen Joynt-Tenants, or Tenants in Common,
or if they shall be seized by moieties, or intireties, or if the release be not
utterly void, is the seventh Question.

8. I. S. is Disseised to the use of the Prince, who is made King, the
Disseisee releases, if this be not void, for then the King agrees to the
Disseisin.

9. A Feoffment is made to a Feme Covert Alien, the Baron is made King, Office
is found, if the King shall have the Land?

10. A Feoffment is made to a Feme Covert, and the Husband is made King, if she
can waive?

Points upon the Statute.
1. WHether an Adventurer into Virginia, be within the Statute? 2. Whether an
Inn keeper be within the Statute? 3. Whether one born within the Isle of Man be
within the Statute? 4. Whether the keeping of one of the King's Castles, be a
keeping of his House within the Statute?
2. and 3. Questions are, Whether a Feoffment made without Deed to the Husband
and Wife with Livery within the view to the Wife only, and she enters, will
invest any thing in the Husband?

That Livery within the view may be made with-Deed, I make no great question,
It is true, that the Books are both ways.

For 38 E. 3.32.38. Ass. 2. Baron and Feme, Allford, 41 E. 3. Jo. Sees Case.

Temp. Hen. 8 Brook, It is good says he by Deed by Livery within the view.

Thorowgood's Case, Coke, lib. 9. If of the ground, he says, see you this Land
enter according to the Deed.

Cont. 39 E. 3 Ass. 12. I vouchsafe you the Land, 42 E. 3. Fitz. Feoffment. 54.
the same Case, Which: made he a Deed to his Father, Lass. non. Which: was the
Land in vica, Ass. it was half a Mile from the Church yard. 11. Ass. 6.11 E. 3.
Ass. 86. Feoffment of all but one Chamber. 43. Ass. 20. per Brook, Feoffment
without Deed.

But the Question is, whether a Feoffment to two or three by Deed with Livery
to one is good to all, but without Deed, but to him to whom, etc.

10 E. 4.1. 8 E. 4.12. 15 E. 4.18.

But here the Baron and Feme cannot take by moleties, and their Estate is but
one Estate, and they are Disseisors, both at Common Law, and also by Statute,
so as if the Baron consent afterward, he consents as one that consents to a
Disseisin made to his use.

15. Ass. 11. by agreement to a Rescous made by a Stranger, the Tenant is a
Disseisor.

37. Ass. If my Tenant at will, enter into another Man's Land, lying by my
Land, or take Estovers or common, if I consent to it, I am a Disseisor.

Tenant for Years enfeoffes, two and the Lessor releases to one of them, if he
shall hold his Companion out.

27 E. 3. cap. 9. gives an Ass. of novel dissm. to Tenant by Statute Staple
against him that outs him, as against a Disseisor; yet he has no Freehold,
for 1 E. 3. a quid juris clamat lies against him, although he be but Disseisor
fictitius, yet at the election of the Disseisee, he is a Disseisor in Law, as 7
E. 4. the Vouchee is but tenens fictitius, yet a release is good to him.

If Tenant for Years infeoff two and the Lessor brings assise against one, he
shall not plead that his Companion is also Tenant not named; for by the Statute
of 3 E. 1. de Conjunctim feofatis, he must slew of whose Feoffment, which if he
do, he overthrows his own Estate, and must plead himself was a Disseisor, which
the Law will never allow; for 1 E. 4. fol. 7. no man shall be suffered to say,
that he himself was a Disseisor. Coke, Beverlies Case 4. Rep.

To stultifie himself, Herl. 5 E. 3. non sanae memoriae inblenisht himself, 35.
Ass. 10.

It is true, that in respect of themselves, they are in by Feoffment and Title,
in respect of the Lessor they are Disseisors; then the question is, who shall
be in election, and who shall interpret how this release shall work, the
Lessor, or the Lessee, or the third Person.

It is probable to say the Lessor, for cujus est dare etc. and H. 7. If one Man
be to pay two Sums at one time and place, and pay but one, it is in election,
and interpretation of the Payer and not the Receiver, which sum was meant to be
paid.

It may be said the release, etc. for the Party to whom a Deed is made, if it
inure to two intents, shall, etc. as 7 H. 6. a Feoffment may be used as a
confirmation, 15 Eliz. D. release, and grant of a Rent.

But I conclude, the third Person shall take benefit, etc. First, for the
reason that int. se, etc. But they are Disseisors, not at Common Law, but by
Statute, for the Benefit of the Lessor, of which Statute he may take benefit if
he please, or waive it: 3 E. 4. 21 H. 7.32. 19 Eliz. D. Alien and Denizen
challenge medietatem linguae, so here he has his election to make him a
Disseisor by bringing his Ass. or a Tenant in by Title by the release.

Baron and Feme Disseisors, and a release to a Baron whether shall this inure
to the Feme, for they are seized not by parts, but by intireties, it shall go
all to the Husband, for flagitiosae rei nulla est societas, it is feodum.
princip. and commiatem latronum. The question has been, if a Feme sole be a
Disseisor, and marry, whether the Husband be a Disseisor or not, 6 E. 3.42. he
is not, for in a Writ of Entry, sur disseisin against him and his Wife, he had
the view; but in our case (I take it) that if no other thing had happened
between the Disseisin and the Release, the Husband should have had all.

The Husband is made King, the question is, Baron and Feme are Disseisors, the
Baron is made King, the Disseisee releases to the King what is wrought. First,
when Baron and Feme are Joyntenants by Disseisin, by Title, or by Disseisin,
all is one, and the Husband made King; whether do they remain Join tenants, or
else they are Tenants in Common? Or else has the King all? Or the Queen all? I
hold them to be Tenants in Common, although this case can be matched or
compared with no case of the Law, wherein the alteration of the Persons only
shall change the Estate of the Parties without making of any new conveyance of
the Land. 32 H. 8. Brook Deraign.

22 H. 6.2. A Feoffment to an Abbot, and I. S. they are Tenants in Common, but
a Feoffment to A. and B. and A. is made an Abbot, all shall survive to B.

So if a Feoffment to A. and B. and A. acknowledges himself Villain to I. S.
this alters nothing till I. S. enter; but whatsoever the King has before he is
King, or whatsoever descends to him, or he purchases after he is King, he
holds all, in jure coronae suae Angliae. Caluins Case, ex part matris,
Barkley's Case, Gavelkind.

Lancaster. Partition int. sorores Queen Eliz. Queen Mary, Queen Katharine,
Ferdinando's Daughters.

So as the King's possession alters the very nature of the Land, and so makes
him and his Wife Tenants in Common.

And that it makes her as it were a Feme sole, I need vouch no authorities, who
all know it in Experience.

18 E. 3. fol. The Queen alone brought a Quare impedit.

49 E. 3.4. Cavendish, the King may give Lands or Goods to the Queen.

9 H. 6.13. Margery Parkers Case.

14 H. 4.67. Sci. Fac. by the Duke of Suffolk, against the Queen, to repeal the
Patent whereby the King had granted to the Queen the Land of the Duke's Father,
Tirwhite: In all times a Precipe has been brought against the Queen, for she
has always been a Person exempt, notwithstanding the Coverture, so both their
Persons being changed, etc. it is as if the King were Dead.

Then have I driven it to this pass, that the release can work but to a Moiety,
the question being whether it work for all or for a Moiety, or none, that it
should work for none.

If a Feoffment be made to the Wife, and before agreement or disagreement, the
Baron is made King; I say he comes too late now to agree or disagree, no
otherwise then if he had died.

Then the question is this, One makes a Disseisin to the use of I. S. and he is
made King, can he now agree to the Disseisin? The rule is, The King cannot be a
Disseisor; it is true, that in times past he might.

20 H. 3. Ass 431. Non habet ingressum nisi per Disseisinam quam Dominus Rex
facit quaerenti dum fuit infra aetatene, and in Custodia Comitis de S. and the
Tenant says, Non habet ingressum per Disseisinam quam Rex fecit, sed habet
ingressum per judicium curiae, etc.

But at this day the Law is altered:

22 E. 3.37. 23 E. 3. Entry 11. If the King Disseise one, and makes a
Feoffment, the Disseisee shall have a Writ of Entry, neither in the per nor in
the post, quam Dominus Rex fecit. See the Book.

1. H. 4. cap 8. It was doubted what remedy one should have, but the Statute
is, That if the King enter, and grant the Land of another, if the Grantee
enter, the Tenant shall have an Assise, and trebble Damages against the Grantee.

And by the same reason he may not agree to a Disseisin done before, for till
agreement, the Disseisor was Tenant, and nothing in the King, as 2 H. 7.16. 15
E. 4.15.

If you will say nothing but a Term passed, then in whom was it till I. S. was
made King, in right of the Woman, and that it shall remain no otherwise than a
Man that has a Term in the right of his Wife, and is made King, she shall have
all her Inheritance, and all her Terms, no otherwise than if he were Dead.

3 H. 7.14. The Queen and her Sisters were vouched as Heirs to E. the 4.

A Baron and Feme Alien, a Feoffment is made to the Feme, the Baron is made
King, if upon Office found, the King shall have the Land?

He shall not have it.

For the Baron being made King, she is made a Denizen by relation to the
Marriage, which was to prevent the relation of the Office, no otherwise than H.
7. being made K. it had such relation, that it drowned all former Offenses,
Forfeitures, and Attainders whatsoever.

7 E. 4.31. The King grants a Farm to the Baily and Commonalty of S. they are
made Farmers, and a Corporation. 2 H. 7.

A Lord infeoffes his Villain, he has the Land and his Freedom.

Grondon's Case Commentaries, the King grants Land to a Corporation, this is a
Grant, and a License in Mortmain.

Coke lib. 5.15. Tenant for Life grants a Rent charge to him in the reversion,
and his Heirs, who grants it to one, and his Heirs, this is a grant and a
confirmation.

A Disseisor makes a Lease for Life, the remainder to the Disseisee, the
Disseisee grants this remainder over, this is a grant, and a confirmation.

A Parson makes a Lease to the Patron, who grants it over, this is an
Assignment, and a Confirmation.

A Feoffment is made to Baron and Feme, the Baron is made King, if the Feme can
waive.

1. Whether she can waive or not, as a Feme may after death of her Husband? 2.
In whom it shall vest? 3. How the release should work then? 4. Whether a Feme
Convert Disseisor can waive?
She may no otherwise than if the Baron were Dead, for she shall have all her
own Land, and all her own Leases, but not her Goods.

And it is not of necessity that she expect his Death, for if a Feoffment be
made to Baron and Feme, and they are Divorced, the Feme may waive.

In whom it shall vest, Whether in the King or not, because in a sort here was
a partition?

But the question will be upon the release, whether that shall relate to
extinguish all the right of the Disseisee in all the Land, as if the Case were,
Disseisor makes a Feoffment to Baron and Feme, and I. S. the Baron, and I. S.
make partition, the Disseisee releases to I. S. this inures only upon his
possession for the half; the Baron dies, and the Feme waives I. S. has all by
Survivour, yet shall not the release go to all?

Also by the waiver it cannot go to the King, for that were to make him a
Disseisor by the waiver, it cannot return to the Lessee, contrary to his
Livery, nor to the Lessor, then will not this amount to an occupancy.

But in this Case the Queen cannot waive, but still in regard of the Lessor she
remains a Disseisor; for if a Feme Covert be a Disseisor, and her Husband die,
she shall not waive the possession, for so for years and days she might take
the profits, and yet in the end pay nothing, which were unjust. 41 E. 3. An
Infant may be a Disseisor, and cannot waive a descent.

It may be probably alleged, that she might waive, for being a Feme Covert,
she may allege ignorance of the matter of fact, that is, whether her Feoffer
had but an Estate for years, or was seized in Feesimple, and we find in our
Books, that great wrongs have been excused by the ignorance of a Man in what
wrong he did, and waiving the thing wrongfully taken. As,

22. Ass. 85. vid. lib. faux imprison. Heir son friar prise, per Scots.

7 H. 6.27. One brought an Action of Trespass for taking his Swans; the
Defendant pleaded that he was Lord of such a Manor, and that in a River within
his Manor, he found the Swans, and took them for strays; but after he had
notice whose they were, he waived the possession of them, and let them go; this
was a good excuse both of the Trespass and Damage.

21 H. 6.14. One brings Trespass, Quare filium suum rapuit, etc. He answered,
you married my Sister, and had by her this Son, and you being out of the
Country, it was reported you were Dead; whereupon I, as next kin to your Son,
seized him, but when I heard you were alive, I sent him home again to his
Nurse. Thus rightly did he waive, and avoid his wrong for want of true
intelligence, which in Law we call Notice.

But in all those Cases, these wrongs were with intents to do right, and the
parties were of opinion they were in the right; but our case is of a Disseisor,
which is always intended a wrong-doer.

But you will say, this Woman is no Disseisor at Common Law, her entry was not
malum per se, but malum prohibitum, a Statute Disseisor, and she being a Feme
Covert, is not bound by Statute.

But I say she is bound by the Statute, for in all Statutes where a Feme Covert
is not expressly excepted, she is bound, as the Statute of 13 H. 6. Disseisin 1.
per Martin. Baron and Feme may both be Disseisors.

35. Ass. 5. Baron and Feme Disseisors, Assise against the Baron sole abated.

15 E. 4.15. Disseisin is made to another use, the Disseisor is Tenant until
agreement.

21 E. 4.53. Tenant is issuing out of Land of the Wife, the Husband and Wife
make a Rescous, they are both Disseisors.

That as I have argued the Lessor enters his entry is congeable for a Moiety,
that is, the Queen's part.

Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment to a Feme Covert without License, the Husband
dies, the Feme waives.

Points upon the Statute.
AN Adventurer into Virginia, is not within the Statute, for although from time
to time we send Trifles thither to exchange with the Savages; yet the main
drift and cause of our Traffic thither is for Plantation and Discovery, and
not for Merchandising. I hold the same of Greenland, but not of Muscovia.

2. He that is an Innkeeper is within the Statute, for he buys and sells again
retail. Ireland's Case in Smithfield.

3. He was born in the Isle of Man, the Statute is born within her Majesty's
Dominions, or Denizen, and I should have made small question, but that one born
within the Isle of Man, is born in her Majesty's Dominions, if it were not for
the Book of 11. H. 8. Kell. fol. 202. It was found by an Office, that the Earl
of Derby dyed seized of the Isle of Man, the Countess came and prayed to be
endowed, to whom Brudnell ex assensu Brook and Fitz. Herbert, and all the Kings
Counsel said, That the Office was void, because the Isle of Man is not parcel
of the Realm, but the Isle of Wight is parcel of Hamp-shire, and Wales and
Ireland are parcel of the Realm, for Writs of Error lie, etc.

And I think it is very true, Hollinshead description of Britain, fol. 16. b.
that the Isle of Man was then no parcel of the Realm; for the first mention
thereof in any Chronicles, is the same year that England was Conquered by the
Normans; for when Harold had at Stainford-Bridge Conquered another Harold that
was King of Norway, one Gordard the King's Son of Ireland, fled to the Isle of
Man, in time Conquered it, and made himself Lord and Landlord of all the Isle.
So as to this day there is not a Freeholder in that Island, but all are
Tenants to the King of that Country: It is about thirty miles long and fifteen
miles broad, it is not governed by any written Laws or Courts of Record, but
all their Controversies are ended by Arbitrators, whom they call Deemsters.

When King John Conquered Ireland, he sent Forces into Man, and wasted it all,
but seated no Government there.

1240. One Harold of the Norway Line was received, and was invested in the
Kingdom of Man, by the King of Norway, and yet afterward he was made Knight by
the King of England.

1250. Or thereabouts, in King Ed. 1. time, Alexander King of Scots having
Conquered all the Islands, either by Strength, or for Money, amongst the rest
brought the Isle of Man under his Dominion; the old King's Daughter sued to
Edw. 1. as to the Supreme Head of Scotland, the Answer, Sequatur coram
Justiciariis de Banco Regis and ut Justicia.

Edw. 2. granted it to Piers Gaveston, but in Anno 1393. William of Mountacute
by strength won it from the Scots, as Thomas of Walsingham says, and sold it
to William Scroop, he was attainted, and so it came to Hen. 4. The King of
England he granted it to Henry Peircy to hold it, by carrying before the King
Lancaster's Sword; but presently he was attainted, and the King granted it to
Sir John Stanley, and so it came to the Earl of Derby.

Seman's Case, 5. Reports.

A Man's House is his Castle, and his Castle is his House.

Points upon the first Case.
1. IF Tenant for years may attorn before Entry. 21 H. 7. One makes a Lease for
years, and before the Lessee enter, the Lessor releases to him, the release is
void.

One bargains and sells his Land to another, and before the Deed is enrolled,
he attorns to the grant of the reversion, and after the Deed is enrolled, and
the Bargainee enters. 21 H. 7.28 H. 8. Dyer, Debt for Rent lies before entry of
the Lessee.

Litt. Lord and Tenant, the Tenant makes a Lease for life, the Lord grants the
Seigniory to the Tenant for life in Fee, the Tenant ought to attorn, yet he
shall not hold of the Tenant for life, during his life.

28 H. 8. Brook. Tenant for twenty years, makes a Lease for ten years, Tenant
for ten years attorns, it is good.

20 H. 6, 7. A Seigniory is granted by Deed to one for life, the remainder in
Fee Tenant for life dies before attornment, etc. contrary if it were by Fine.

11 H. 4.18. One who has nothing in the Land must attorn, as Tenant in Dower
who has assigned her Estate:

2. The reversion of Tenant in tail is granted, he commits Treason, and
attorns, and is attainted.

12 E. 4.3. Tenant in tail shall not be compelled to attorn, but 15 E. 4.13. if
he attorn voluntarily, it is good.

Nor Tenant in tail, after possibility, etc. 46. E. 3.13. 39 E. 3.20. 3 H.
6.12. 5 H. 5. Attornment. 17. One makes a gift in tail rendering Rent, the Donor
by Fine grants the Rent, the Tenant in tail must attorn. 8 H. 5.10. Tenant for
life grants his Estate upon condition, the Lessor grants the reversion, Tenant
for life attorns, and after performs the condition, yet the Attornment is void.

But all the question is upon the relation of the Office, and this shall not
vacate the Attornment, for it shall not relate for the mean profits of the
Land. Sir William Fleetwood's Case, Cook, lib. 8. by the same reason, if Rent
were reserved, it were well paid, and well received, and sufficient to invest
the reversion in the Grantee.

3. Adventurer to the East Indies is within the Statute.

4. Guardian of a Ship is within the Statute.

The Chancellor has authority to award a Commission, but not to grant Supers:
And therefore death of the King, or a new Commission leaving out the old
Commission may be, but no Supers.

If the King present to a Benefice above 20 l. the Chancellor cannot make a
revocation, but as well in our Case, as in that Case by Warrant under the
Signet, Privy Seal, or Seal Manual, the Chancellor may award Supers.

6. Denizen of Ireland.

Points upon the Third Case.
1. TEnant for life, the remainder to the right Heir of I. S. makes a Feoffment
in Fee upon condition, and enters for the condition broken, who shall enter for
the forfeiture.

The Feoffer shall not enter, for all is out of him by the Feoffment, and he
has nothing but a possibility.

The right Heir of I. S. shall not enter, for his remainder is destroyed.

The first Question is upon the Statute of W. 2. cap. 25. Whether if Lessee for
years make a Feoffment by Livery within the view, the Feoffer or Feoffee, or
both of them, or neither, be Disseisors.

2. Upon Baron and Feme, whether a Feoffment without Deed to the Baron and
Feme, and Livery only to the Feme, invests any thing in the Husband.

3. Upon the matter, admit they are both Disseisors, whether the release made
to the Husband shall exclude the Wife? it shall, but in this Case, where Tenant
for years enfeoffes two, and the Lessor releases to one, he shall not hold out
his Companion.

4. Baron and Feme are Joynt-Tenants of a term, and the Baron is made King;
what is become of the term, and so of Freehold.

Whether the King shall have all, or the Queen all, or they remain
Joynt-Tenants, or Tenants in Common, they are Tenants in Common.

5. A Feme commits a Disseisin to the use of her and her Husband, and the
Husband is made King, and the Disseisee releases to the King, what is wrought,
if he can agree to the Disseisin being King.

6. A Feme Covert Alien purchases, the Husband is made King, and Office is
found.

7. A Feme Covert purchases, the Husband is made King, if he can waive.

Points upon the Statute.
1. IF one born in the Isle of Man is within the Statute? 2. If Adventuring to
Virginia is Merchandising? 3. If an Innkeeper be within the Statute? 4. If
going to the Isle of Man be a Departing? 5. If keeping of a Castle be a keeping
of his House?
The Second Division.
Who shall be said a Subject born of this Realm, or of any of the late Queens
Dominions, or Denizen.
1. A. and B. Disseise C. (who in consideration that A. at his request has
married B. (being a poor Maid) releases to A. and his Heirs, to the use of B.
and his Heirs, Females of his Body; they have Issue, a Son and a Daughter, B.
dies, the Daughter makes a Lease to C. for one and twenty years, rendering the
ancient Rent, and dies, having Issue E. a sole Merchant, born upon the Coast of
Flanders, and is married to F. a Citizen of London, born in the Port of Deep,
A. makes a Feoffment to F. who is outlawed for Debt.

The Feme is a Bankrupt within this Division, and the Land shall be sold, but
subject to the Lease made to C.

2. One has a House of Gavelkind, and purchases Estovers to this House, out of
Land in Borough English, and dies having two Elder Brothers, they make
partition of the House, the Younger is Executed for Felony, the Lord enters
into a Moiety, the Elder Brother born in Virginia, and using to give Gold for
Silver, contrary to the Statute, and for that is condemned in 100 l. in an
Action upon the Statute, at the suit of the Informer, and the King, and remains
in Execution at the King's suit for six Months, the Informer, and I. S. a
Creditor, sue forth a Commission.

The Elder Brother is a Bankrupt within this Division, but no part of the Land
shall be sold by this Commission.

3. The Lessor when the King was absent in Scotland, enters upon the Lessee for
life, and die seized, his Heir for Money paid by a Merchant Naturalized, makes
a Feoffment to him and to a Feme sole an Alien, the Merchant and the Feme inter
marry, the Lessee and the Stranger make Livery by Letter of Attorney, the Baron
is made Churchwarden, and being non-solvent keeps the Church, Office is found.

The Baron is a Bankrupt within this Division, and all the Land shall be sold.

4. White-Acre is given to A. and B. Baron and Feme, and to the Heirs of the
Baron for the Jointure of the Feme, a Disseisor enters, and levies a Fine to C.
who marries D. an Alien, A. dies, five years pass, D. is sole Merchant, and
made Denizen upon condition, that she shall not depart the Realm without her
Husband's leave, B. brings Dower of Black-Acre, the Heir of A. enters into
White-Acre, D. being non-solvent Elopes into Scotland, C. enters.

The Feme is a Bankrupt within the Statute, and White-Acre shall be sold.

5. A Tenant for life, and B. an Infant, in reversion, born in Greenland, they
levy a fine to C. B. uses his stock in the Muscovia Company, and reverses the
fine, A. surrenders to the King by Deed, B. being of full age, and indebted to
the Company, procures himself to be arrested, and after he grants the reversion
to the King by Deed enrolled, and after the first Deed is enrolled, the Company
sues a Commission.

B. is a Bankrupt within the Statute, and the Commission is well awarded, and
the Land shall be sold.

6. A. and B. a Merchant-Stranger, enter upon C. the Heir of a Disseisor, B. is
made Denizen for seven years, the Disseisee releases to A. who makes a Lease
for years, rendering Rent upon condition to re-enter for non-payment, the Heir
releases to B. the Land is extended for the Debt of A. B. is non solvent, the
extender enters for non-payment, B. keeps his House, seven years pass, Office
is found, A. dies.

B. is a Bankrupt within this Division, and the Land shall be sold subject to
the Lease, but not to the Extent.

7. A Lord has the Goods of Outlaws within his Manor, and M. his Tenant who
was born in Gernsey, is a Meal-man, and outlawed, and for redemption of his
Goods, enters into an Obligation to the Lord to pay 100 li. B. recovers 10 li.
against him for Battery, the Lord leases to him a Windmill, M. reverses the
Outlawry, and being in Debt to a Scotch-man, an Irish man, and a Dutch man for
Corn, before his day of payment ceases to be a Meal-man, and becomes a Miller,
and being non-solvent, keeps himself in the Mill.

He is a Bankrupt within the Statute, but the Debts are not remedied by this
Statute.

8. An Accountant to the King has a Seigniory, and dies, his Son being a
Merchant, and born upon the River of Canada, releases to the Tenant all the
services for the life of the Tenant, who dies without Heir, a Stranger abates,
the Son being non solvent goes to Barmudas, a Commission is awarded for the
King upon the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 7. and another Commission is upon the
Statute of Bankrupts, the Commissioners for the King sell the Tenancy to A. the
Commissioners of Bankrupts sell the Seigniory to B.

The Son is a Bankrupt within this Statute, and B. shall recover the Land
against the abator by Writ of Escheat.

9. A. makes a Lease of years to B. a Merchant-Stranger, Denizen of Ireland,
upon condition to have for life if he pay 10 li. at M. and to have in fee if he
repair a Highway before Christmas, rendering Rent upon condition to re-enter
for nonpayment, the first condition is performed, B. being non-solvent returns
to Ireland, and there stays in his House, the Rent is due at the Feast of All
Saints, and is demanded and Arrear, B. performs the second condition.

B. is a Denizen within the intent of this Statute, but the King shall have the
Land during his life.

Upon the Second Division.
The Points of the First Case.
1. IF one may release to one, to the use of another? 2. Two Disseisors are,
and they intermarry, and the Disseisee releases to the Husband, to the use of
the Wife in tail, where the Fee-simple is? 3. If Marriage of a poor Maid be a
good consideration to raise an use to the Maid, or to A. 4. Lands are given to
a Feme Covert, and to her Heirs Females in tail, she takes Husband, has Issue
a Son and a Daughter, if the Husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy? 5. If
the Issue in tail in the life of Tenant by the Courtesy makes a present Lease,
if this shall be good against the Issue of the Issue, after the death of Tenant
by the Courtesy.
Points upon the Statute.
1. IF a Feme Covert sole Merchant be within the Statute. 2. If the Husband of
such a Feme by her Bankrupting shall be also a Bankrupt? 3. If the Outlawry of
the Husband for the Wives debt shall make the one, or the other, or both
Bankrupts? 4. If the Lands or Goods of the Husband shall be sold for the Debts
of the Wife? 5. If the inheritance of the Wife shall be sold? 6. If one born
upon the Coast of Flanders is born out, or within the King's Dominions? 7. If
one born in the Port of Diep, is born within the King's Dominions? 8. If the
Wife of an Alien sole Merchant be within the Statute? 9. If a Wife Alien, and
the Husband English, be within the Statute? 10. If the Estate of Tenant in tail
a Bankrupt shall be sold? 11. If by Entry of the Commissioners and Sale, the
Vendee shall avoid a Lease, which Tenant in tail a Bankrupt might have avoided?
1. If one may release to the use of another, or if an use can be raised upon a
release, and it may for three reasons.

A Release may be upon condition, for there the case was put in Libro, and
consequently to an use. But by 43 Ass. 12. the condition and the release ought
to be both in one Deed. 17 Ass. 2. 31 Ass. 32.


2. Secondly, it is a good proof, that a release to a Disseisor may be to an
use, when a Disselsm may be to an use; as 34 Ass. 12. 37 Ass. 8. 1 H. 5.4. 15
E. 4.15. All is in the Disseisor until agreement; And 2 H. 7.16. If one
disseise another to the use of a third, the first is Tenant until agreement,
but after all is in him to whose use, although not to be punished for the force.

3. My third Argument is taken out of the Book of 17 E. 3.5. where it is said,
That if the Disseisee take homage of the Disseisor, he shall never have an
Assise, for now they be Lord and Tenant, when at first the Disseisor was in the
post, and destroyed the Disseisees Estate, and held of the Lord Paramount: So I
hold that if before the Statute of Quia Emptores Terrarum, the Disseisee had
released to the Disseisor, the Disseisor must have held of him, although it is
true, that since that Statute, a release of all his right in the Land, releases
his Seigniory, as 34 Ass. But Temp. E. 1. Ass. 423. In a Writ of Entry in the
Post of Disseisin made by A. to the Demandants Grandfather, which A. infeoffed
the Grandfather of the Tenant, the Tenant answered, after A. infeoffed my
Grandfather, your Grandfather confirmed and released to my Grandfather,
reserving homage, and my Grandfather did homage to yours, and my Father to your
Father, etc. But he relied upon the Deed, a Tenure was reserved upon the
confirmation, in which Case a release makes a degree; See my Moot Book, fol.
121. Then if an use may be raised out of the possession of a Disseisor, if a
condition out of a release, and a tenure out of a confirmation, by the same
reasons an use may be raised, or declared by release.

2. Two Disseisors and they intermarry, it may seem they are mutually and
respectively in by title, for if the Husband make a Feoffment of his moiety,
yet he has title to be Tenant by the Courtesy of her part, and she has title
of Dower to his part after the Feoffment which is in severance of the Jointure.

Kelloway's Case, Incerti Temp. fol. 129. This Case is well debated, which was,
A. Feme sole, and A. Joynt-Tenants, she marries B. A. releases to B. whether
this shall inure to the Husband only, or to the Wife.

Keble says, That it shall inure to the Baron sole, for before marriage he
might have infeoffed the Baron, and it is no reason that he should be hindered
to convey the Land to none but the Feme by release, and by the release he shall
be Tenant in Common with himself in right of his Wife.

But by others the Law is contrary, for he might have infeoffed others as well
as have released to the Baron, also a release to one shall be in many cases to
the benefit of another, as a Release to Tenant for Life, etc.

9 Eliz. Dyer 263. This Case seems to make against me, Baron and Feme, and I.
S. were Joynt-Purchasers, I. S. released to the Baron, nothing went to the
Wife; but I say, that cannot be, for the Baron and Feme being seized by
intireties, the release could not make them hold the Land by several moieties.

16 H. 9. Fitz. Herb. Release. 45. Nor do I agree that Case, for there the Case
was, that a Woman was Tenant for life, and she takes Husband, the Lessor
releaseth to the Husband and his heirs, by Paston, he had the reversion, for
the Freehold of the Husband was in right of his Wife, and the release to him
conjoyns that right, but I agree well that the Fee-simple shall be in the
Husband, etc.

19 H. 6.35. One makes a Feoffment upon condition that he shall make a
Feoffment over, if he does it not, the Feoffer may enter; but if one makes a
Feoffment in Fee upon condition that the Feoffee shall make a gift in tail, and
he does it, the Feoffee, and not the Feoffor shall have the reversion: So here.

3. If marriage of a poor Maid be a good consideration to raise an use, it is
good to carry the Feesimple to the Husband, and the intail to the Wife.

Before the Statute of Quia Emptores Terrarum, one might have created a Tenure
in performance of a charitable use, as to make or repair a Bridge, or to keep a
Castle. 34 H. 8. Brook. p. 51.

6 E. 3.13. One holds by three pence to aid the Sheriff, and good, and another
by four pence of the Wapentake Fine, and good, because for to discharge the
public contribution.

12 H. 7.18. Keeping of a Beacon, whereby the Country may be warned when the
Enemies come.

11 H. 7.12. The same for finding a Chaplain chanting in such a place.

And by the same reason that a Tenure may be created, an use may, and the same
consideration.

For before Qui Emptores Terrarum, If one had made a Feoffment in Fee without
declaring an use, it was to the use of the Feoffee, for the Law created a
Tenure which was a sufficient consideration; but after no use to the Feoffee,
but to the Feoffor, if neither Tenure created, nor use declared, and for that a
lease for life, or for years, or in tail is to the use of the Lessee, or Donee,
for the Law will create a Tenure of him in reversion: So here is a good
consideration to raise the use of the Fee to the Husband, and the Estate tail
to the Wife is good, without other consideration than that Tenant in tail must
hold of him in reversion. 24 H. 8. Brook.

4. Lands are given to a Feme, and her Heirs Females, and she has Issue a Son
and a Daughter and dies, if the Husband shall be a Tenant by the Courtesy? He
shall.

Cook lib. 8. Pains Case is reported, as if before that Case the Law had been
doubtful, whether the Husband should be Tenant by the Courtesy, when the Wife
Tenant in tail had Issue which dyed, and so she dyed without Issue.

For the Estate was determined, and this was the reason that Leases for life,
or years are not good against the Lessor, for Cessante Statu primitivo, etc.
yet one may be Tenant in Dower without Issue, and therefore the Estate tail
will continue to some purposes: 21 Edw. 3. Dower after a Dying seized without
Issue.

21 H. 3. Dower 198. Tenant by the Courtesy may be, although the Issue dye
before the Wife.

16 E. 3. Aid 129. One may be Tenant by the Courtesy of the moiety of
Gavelkind without Issue by the Custom there.

Reppes Case, the Child was ripped out of his Mothers Belly, and so after the
death of the Feme the Baron could not be Tenant by the Courtesy.

But this Question rises upon the Case put in Pains Case; Lands are given to a
Feme and her Heirs Males, and she has Issue a Daughter, and dies, the Husband
shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy; for although a Man shall be Tenant by the
Courtesy, notwithstanding the Estate tail be spent, yet his Estate must begin
by an Heir heritable to the Estate. Here in our Case the Son was the Heir, and
by him the Father would have been Tenant by the Courtesy to all other his
Wifes Lands, but not to this; But although a Female cannot be Heir that has a
Brother, yet since the Statute of Donis, and by the Equity of that, a Daughter
may be Heir by Cook, in Shelley's Case, notwithstanding that he had also a Son,
fol. 103. and so here he may be Tenant by the Courtesy for this Land by the
Daughter, and of other Land by the Son, if the Wife had been Tenant in tail of
other Lands to her, and her Heirs Males.

5. Tenant by the Courtesy is, and Tenant in tail in reversion makes a lease
to commence presently, has Issue and dies, Tenant by the Courtesy dies, if
his Issue shall avoid the Lease.

This Question is grounded upon the words of the Statute of 32 H. 8. which
gives power to Tenant i^ tail to make Leases; Provided always, that this Act,
etc. shall not extend to any Leases to be made of any Manors, etc. being in
the hands of any Farmer or Farmers, by virtue of any old Lease, unless the same
old Lease be expired, surrendered or ended within one year after the making of
the new Lease; and upon this Clause has risen many Questions; as Tenant in
tail makes a Lease for Forty years not warranted, and Ten years after makes a
Lease for Twenty One years to another warranted: Within a year Tenant for Forty
years surrenders, Tenant in Dower surrenders to the Issue in tail upon
condition, Tenant in tail makes a Lease, etc. Tenant in Dower enters for the
condition, and dies, and Tenant in tail dies, if the Issue may enter?

Tenant in tail makes a good Lease for One and Twenty years, Tenant for years
surrenders upon condition, Tenant in tail makes another Lease for One and
Twenty years, or three lives, the first Tenant in tail enters for the condition
broken; By Philips, the second Lease is good; Cook contra in Elmers Case lib. 5.

And my Question is, whether Tenant by the Courtesy be within those words
Farmers, etc. and he is not?

Foster in his Reading upon this Statute, vouched one Richards Case, That
Tenant by the Courtesy was no such Farmer.

Points upon the Statute.
1. IF a Feme Covert sole Merchant, by the Custom of London, shall be within
the first Branch, or Division of this Statute, which is, using the Trade of
Merchandising, or getting their living by, etc. she is.

That there is such a Custom in London, and mentioned, and allowed in our Books.

Custom Br. 43. Ley Br. 74.

1 E 4. fol. 6. An Action being brought in C. B. for ones Board in London, he
would wage his Law, not. And the difference put between Customs which go with
the Lands, as Gavelkind, Borough English, etc. and Customs of Courts, good
within the Town, but not here, but a recovery by such Custom may well be
pleaded here in this Case, Littleton.

Billing says, A Feme Covert, sole Merchant, by the Custom of London, shall be
impleaded sole here,

35 H. 6. fol. 28. The Question was, Whether the property of the Kings Jewels
could be altered or forfeited, because they were pawned, and forfeited in
London. By Needham, in the Exchequer Chamber upon an Information: Custom Brook
5. and Pledges 28.

21 H. 7.17. Departure, Brook 10. in case of a Departure, because he had
entitled himself by a new matter, that is, by a Custom which he might have
pleaded.

9 E. 4.35. A Feme removed by Habeas Corpus, objected by Pigot, that she and
her Husband were both arrested for the Femes debt, because a sole Merchant, and
prayed that she might be remanded, for they have no remedy here, this had been
allowed and granted to him, had not the Woman come in charged with a Reddidit;
So upon an Exigent.

The Customs of London have been confirmed by Parliament, 1 E. 37. R. 2. and
admit that she could not be sole sued here, as in the Courts of London; yet if
a Contract made by her shall bind the Husband by the Custom, the Husband shall
be sued here, and it shall be said, the Contract of the Husband, as 21 H. 7.

2. The Husband shall be bound by the Contract of his Wife, if he command
before, or agree after, and it shall be accounted his folly to suffer his Wife,
and so they be both Bankrupts.

To put cases how the Husband shall be prejudiced by the Act of his Wife.

49 E. 3.25. The Husband shall not be charged with the debt of the Wife which
she owed before marriage after her death, but if an Action during the Coverture
were brought against the Baron and Feme, and Judgment were had against them,
and she dies, the Husband shall be charged.

20 H. 6.22. If the Wife buy any thing by the Husbands commandment, or that by
his allowance comes to his use, he shall be charged.

9 E. 4.24. Debt against Baron and Feme, the Baron appears, the Feme makes
default, the default of the Wife is the default of the Husband.

Not. Brevium 120. G. A man shall be charged by the Contract of his Servant or
his Wife, if he gives them Authority, otherwise not.

12 H. 7.24. The Baron shall pay Money in the Spiritual-Court, which was charged
for corporal punishment of the Wife for a slander. And so it is at our Law, for
all Slanders and Batteries, as we see every day.

20 H. 7. Kello. 61. A Feme Disseisor takes Husband, who occupies the Land
without notice, or cognizance of the Husband, yet he shall pay damages. I
conclude, her Merchandises are his by the Common Law, and by the Custom.

3. For all the Reasons aforesaid, the Outlawry of the Husband shall make him a
Bankrupt by the Statute, and shall make the Wife a Bankrupt by the Custom, and
the Statute.

Which is plain against all, using Trade of Merchandising, and getting their
living by Buying and Selling, and that if he be non solvent, as he must needs
be by his Outlawry, then she must be non solvent; but whether the Creditors by
the Commission shall have the Goods, or the King by his Outlawry, That is a
Question, that comes not within the compass of this Case, but I shall move that
some other time.

4. But I put the Husband to be dead before the Commission, and whether his
Goods or Lands shall be sold afterward is a Question, but not properly upon
this Statute; for the death of a Bankrupt is not provided for by this Statute,
but plainly by the Statute of primo Ja. the last Clause; and I think that even
for the debt of such a Wife, it shall be sold after his death: and although I
put it, that a Feoffment is made to him by the Son, which cannot work by way of
Livery, because he was Tenant in tail, yet if the Donor will enfeoffe the Donee
by Deed, this will work to the increasing of his Estate by way of confirmation,
7 H. 6.

5. If the Inheritance of the Feme shall be sold?

She has power to forfeit it by Attainder, or by Cessavit; and by this Statute
they may sell all the Bankrupts Lands lawfully, that is, by any lawful course
of Conveyance depart with all.

6. The Commission shall be in force against her after the death of her
Husband, for if her Husbands death shall not help his Heir, a Fortiori it shall
not help her that lives.

Also, as the credit of the one, was the credit of the other; for who would
trust a Woman whose Husband was known to be of no credit; so the offense of the
one, is the offense of the other; and the gains of the one, the gains of the
other.

7. But if this Man and Woman be both Aliens, then neither of them are within
this Statute, but another course must be taken with them, by the Statute of H.
8. cap.

The Woman was born upon the Coasts of Flanders, and the Man in the Port of
Diep, and I hold them both born in the Kings Dominions; for him that was born
in the Port (I mean in a Ship lying at that Port Town) there is small question,
but it is within the Kings Dominions.

It is said of King H. 2. That he was the greatest King that ever was in
England, for he had all the Land and Sea under his Dominion from the Orcades to
the Pireneian Mountains, which sever France and Spain, England and Scotland he
had by the Norman Conquest; they and Normandy were laid together by Hen. 1
Anjou Tourain, and Main, were the Inheritance of his Father, the first
Plantagenet; Poytiers and Aquitaine, he had by his Wife; Britainy held of him,
as of his Dukedom of Britainy; so as all the Sea Coast, even from Calis to St.
Sebastians in Spain was his; so that the French King had no way nor passage to
the Sea, nor Jurisdiction in the Sea: It is true, that by the Attainder of King
John for the murdering of Prince Arthur, a great part of all this was seized
by the King of France, and in the end by R. 2. H. 6. and Queen Mary, all the
Land was lost, but the Sea was never lost, witness the Isles of Alderney,
(which stand within three Miles of France,) and Gersey, and Garnsey, which the
French to this day could never conquer, and yet they speak French, and indeed
are all that is left to the King of England, that was any part of the Dakedom
of Normandy.

But the Coasts of Flanders is more doubtful, for Flanders was never in the
Jurisdiction of the King of England, but yet they were never Masters of the
Sea. The Lord Admirals Jurisdiction that he claims, is at this day as well of
the German Ocean, as in the Straights; and we say, the Dutchmen do us wrong to
Fish in these Seas.

8. But admit the Woman is an Alien, yet I take it, if her Husband be an
Englishman, they shall be both Bankrupts within the Statute, he (as I said) by
the Law, and she by Law and Custom; for as the Custom will allow her to be a
sole Merchant if her Husband he a Citizen (although she be an Alien) so likewise
shall her Estate be subject.

9. But if he be an Alien, yet all will be one for his Goods, but his I ands
are the Kings; for if he will Trade and Traffi^ue by his Wife and her Credit
being English, and having Land, and so have and enjoy the Privileges and
Benefits of a Subject by his Wives legitimation, her Land, and the Custom of
the City there, it is no reason but that he should be subject to such Laws as
other Subjects are.

So, as if the Wife be an Alien, and the Husband a Subject, or the Husband an
Alien, and the Wife a Subject, they are clearly in both cases within the
Statute for Goods; but my Case is for Lands, and in my Case I hold them both
born within the Kings Dominions.

10. But the greatest Question in my Case, and a thing never yet put in u^e or
questioned is, if a Bankrupt is Tenant in tail, if by the sale of the
Commissioners the issue in tail shall be barred? they shall; for the words of
this Statute, and of the Statute of 26 H. 8. are all one, The words of 26. are;

If any parsons shall be attainted of any High Treason by course of the Common
Laws, they shall forfeit to the Kings Majesty their Lands. Tenements, and
Hereditaments, wherein they have any Estate of Inheritance.

Our Statute is, That the Commissioners by Deed enrolled, may sell the
offenders Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, as well Free as Copy, etc. in
neither of these Statutes are intailed Lands mentioned.

But we see in Walsingham's Case, Plowd. and in Dowghties Case, and in common
experience, that an Estate tail is forfeited, by 26 H. 8.13.

But you will say in 26 H. 8. there be words more to carry it, than in your
Statute, for that says, any Estate of Inheritance, and an Estate tail is an
Estate of Inheritance; but our Statute has words which tant amount, for ours
is of all Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, which he or she may lawfully
depart withal, and Tenant in tail may lawfully by fine cut off his issue.

And it is set down for Law, that a gift in tail, with condition that the Donee
shall not levy a Fine, is unlawful, a void, and repugnant condition; for it is
said in Mary Portington's Case, there be three incidents to Estate tails, at
the Common Law, by Statutes, and by Custom; By the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28.
to levy fines, and no condition can take away that from an Estate, that is
incident to the Estate, as it is put of Dower, Tenant by the courtesy.

11. The last is upon my conclusion, admit that the issue in tail could avoid
the Lease, whether the Vendee has the same privilege?

If Tenant in tail make a Lease not warranted, and dies, and the issue levy a
fine before entry, 33 H. 8.

Dier, The Conizee shall not avoid the Lease.

8 E. 3. p. 22. The same is if he accept the Rent, or confirm the Lease before
entry. The Lord Bedford's Case, Cook lib. 7. The Kings Guardian shall avoid.

The King has the Temporalities of a Bishop, he shall avoid, and all this is
for the benefit of the Heir, or Successor; and so in our case it is for the
benefit of the Bankrupt, for in the end they must account with him, and he will
say, that by their means he ought not to lose his election and benefit of the
Lease.

The first Case of the second Division.
A and B. Disseise C. (who in consideration that A. at his request had married
a poor Maid) releases to A. and his Heirs, to the use of B. and his Heirs
Females of his Body; they have issue a Son and a Daughter, B. dies, the
Daughter makes a Lease to M. for one and twenty years, rendering the ancient
Rent, and dies, having issue E. a sole Merchant born upon the coasts of
Flanders, and married to F. a Citizen of London born in the Port of Diep, A.
grants the reversion to F. who is outlawed for the debt of his Wife, and A.
dies, M. enters.

The Wife is a Bankrupt, and the Land shall be sold charged with the Lease to
M.

Points upon the second Case of the second Division.
1. TEnant in Gavelkind of a House purchases Estovers out of Land, in Borough
English, to be spent in the House, he dies, his Brother makes partition, if the
Estovers shall descend all to the elder, or shall be divided, or if by the
division of the Land they are extinct? 2. Two Brothers in Gavelkind, the one is
executed for Felony, if the Custom, the Father to the Bough, etc. holds place
between Brothers, as between the Father and the Son? 3. If one born in Virginia
is a Subject born? 4. If the exchanging of Gold for Silver, which is an
unlawful act, is buying and selling within the Statute? 5. If a Debt recovered
by Information by an Informer, makes the Informer to be a Creditor? 6. If
remaining in Execution six months at the Suit of the King, makes him a
Bankrupt?
Upon the third Case.
1. A Feoffment to two, and they intermarry, the Livery is made, if the
marriage interrupts the Livery? 2. If the Lessee is remitted when he enters
only to make Livery? 3. A Feoffment to B. and a Feme an Alien, how they shall
take, and what part the King shall have? 4. If one naturalized is within the
Statute? 5. If a Churchwarden a Bankrupt keeps the Church, if that be a
keeping of his House, or taking Sanctuary within this Statute?
The third Division.
1. WHat shall be said a Departing of the Realm. 2. A beginning to keep his
House. 3. An absenting himself. 4. Taking of Sanctuary. 5. A suffering himself
willingly to be Arrested. 6. A suffering himself to be Outlawed. 7. A yielding
himself to Prison. 8. A departing from his Dwelling House.
A Grantee of a next avoidance presents A. by parol to a Benefice of 5 li.
value per Annum, he is instituted, B. a Merchant and Farmer in Ireland, and
indebted, by agreement with the Grantor, and the Ordinary pays 10 li. to the
poor, and is made a Minister, and presented; A. dies, B. is instituted and
inducted, and after is inducted to another Benefice, and recovers glebe to the
first of 20 li. value per Annum, he renders himself to the Prison of the
Admiral for Trespass in Ireland, the Parishioners detain their Tithes, the
Grantee presents to the first Benefice, and his Clerk is instituted.

The Incumbent is a Bankrupt within this Division, and the Assignee of the
Commissioners shall have Debt upon the Statute for the Tithes, and the Farm in
Ireland.

3. Points upon the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 6.
1. IF a presentation in consideration that the Presentee gave money to the
poor, is Simony? 2. If the Ordinary's making a Minister in consideon that he
gave money to the poor, makes the Benefice void immediately after his
Induction? 3. If the Parishioners may refuse to pay their Tithes to a Simonist?
One Point upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. of Pluralities.
ONe has a Benefice of 5 li. value, accepts a Benefice of 10 li. value, and
afterward recovers Land, to the first of 20 li. value per Annum, whether this
makes the first void by the Statute?

Three Points at Common Law.
1. IF a Presentation by parol be good? 2. One has the next avoidance, and
presents, and his Clerk is instituted, and dies before induction, if his turn
be served? 3. One Presents, and his Clerk is instituted, and before induction,
another presents, the first Presentee dies, the second is instituted, if good?
Points upon the Statute de Bankrupts.
1. IF a Merchant turning Priest, and then become non solvent of his former
debt, be a Bankrupt within these words, Using or exercising the Trade of
Merchandises? 2. Whether lying in Prison in the Admirals Court for a Cause
whereof they have no Jurisdiction, be a yielding of himself to Prison, and if
they have Jurisdiction? 3. Whether Creditors of Ireland may sue here that is,
whether a man may be Bankrupt here for Debts in Ireland? 4. Whether Debts given
by Statute for Tithes be liable to his Debts? A Statute giving an Action of
Debt, this Debt may be transferred. 5. Whether Goods in Ireland may be sold by
Commissioners here?
1. Grantee of a next avoidance presents A. by parol, to a Benefice of 5 li.
value, and the Clerk is instituted.

The reason as it seems why one cannot present by parol is, quia (as Linwood
says) Laieus potest variare, and then if he name one, one day, etc. dif qt.
Clericus and laicus ^resentat.

Again, it may be said, that it is an Authority given to the Ordinary, and
Authority ought to be by Writing, and so all things not manurable, as to be
Attorney, grt. of Rents, Advowsans and Reversions.

But to this the Divines say, they receive the Authority from the Parent, but
as they do confess that for Tithes, Testaments and Marriages, they had of the
gift of the Laity; so the Laymen have the nomination, etc. from them, for
before Churches were endowed with Lands, etc.

But I intend this no question; our Books are direct, that an Infant may
present. So is

8 E. 2. Fitz. praes. 10. If Gaurdian by nurture present, it must be in the
Infants name.

27 E. 3. fol. 89. The reason is, for he shall be Guardian of nothing but for
that which he may account.

26 H. 6. Grts. 12. One may present by a Letter Missive.

19 E. 3. qua. imp. 60. For direct authority by Husey, quod fuit concess. the
King may present by parol.

But Merchant of Ireland, and indebted, agrees with Patron, and Ordinary, that
for 10 l. given to the Poor, the one shall present him, and the other make him
Minister; and here rises two of my Questions upon this Statute of 31 Eliz.

The Statute names not Simony, but says, if any for Money, Gift, Reward, or
Profit, directly or indirectly, etc. whether giving 10 li. to the Poor to be
presented be Simony.

2. M. Justice D. and others that have read here before me do vary, all agree,
that to do charitable acts, as to build a Bridge, marry a poor Maid, preach
three times a Week, to teach a School, is Simony. But to give to the Poor some
say it is not, for Bona Ecclesiae sunt partimonia pauperum, the Apostles
distributed communes distributiones, and quotidianas distributiones, at Lincoln
to this day Linwood Sacrilege.

But I hold it is, for as in our Case, if he pay it before hand, it goes out of
his own Purse, if afterward, though it go out of his Benefice, yet it is to be
intended this is benefit to the Patron, for since the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap.
3. made for the relief of the Poor, the more the Parson gives, the less the
Patron needs give, and Charity ought to be voluntary, and not for hope of a
Benefice, or a Reward.

But I will agree, that if it had been in consideration, that he shall maintain
the Patron, if he be at any time in want during his life, this is no Simony.

Patronum faciunt dos, edificatio, fundus, Patrono debentur, honos, onus,
emolumentum.

Linwood fol. 157. De beneficiis, est and onus alendi Patron. Ecclesiae ubi ad
summam pervenit paupertatem, Ergo, etc.

But this is likewise given to the poor, to the end that he may be made
Minister.

Whether this be Simony? I think this is Simony in the highest degree; and the
very same which Simon Magus would have committed, for he offered the Apostles
money to be admitted into the Ministry, he knew and saw, that they received
nothing to their own private use, all things were common with them, and as I
said, they distributed to every man as he had need; yet you all know how he was
answered, and what became on him, even eo. quod voluit, and yet non potuit quod
voluit facere malum.

But the Statute for gift, reward, or benefit, to the Ordinary or any Friend of
his, and so thought to be Simony in Spiritual Law, yet it is not within the
Statute; yes indeed it is, for even as they say, Si quis aliquid dederit alio
quam praesentandi aut ordinatori si alias beneficium non esset habiturus, est
Simonia. But then says the Statute, if such a Minister be to be presented,
instituted, and inducted into any Benefice for seven years after, that
immediately after the induction, the Benefice shall be void, and it shall be
lawful to the Patron to present another.

But here is the Question upon this Statute, by the first branch the King is
entitled, by the second, the Patron, but the Kings interest makes it no
induction at all.

A. dies, and B. is instituted and inducted.

4. But admit here is no Simony in the Case, then rises another Question,
Whether here be any good presentation or not? Where the Case is no more but
this, one presents, and his Clerk is instituted, one other presents, the first
Clerk after institution, and before induction dies, whether this presentation
when another was instituted, be good at all? Or whether his death before
induction have made it good, whereby the second may be instituted, and inducted?

It is plain, if one present in the life time of the incumbent, the presentment
is void.

22 H. 6.27. By admission and institution one is Parson before induction, and
Linwood says, he has jus ad rem, and in re. But 5 Eliz. Dyer, he has jus ad
rem, but not in re, and Hare and Buckley's Case, he is like a Tenant in Dower,
that has Judgment, but no Execution. Or like a Copyholder after a Surrender,
and before admittance, but neither to charge, nor bring action. But as in my
Lord Digbies Case in Coke. l. 4. A Parson having one Benefice, is instituted
into another, and then gets a dispensation, and then is inducted, the induction
shall so relate, that the dispensation is of no force. So his death shall make
that he had by the institution no interest at all, but that the second
presentation is good, and consequently the induction; But if in the life time
of A. B. had been both presented, and instituted, the institution had been
merely void, and then the induction could never be good, 13 Ja. B. R. if it be
not in the Kings Case.

5. Afterward B. being inducted into the Benefice of 5 l. value, is inducted
into another, and then recovers Lands of 20 l. value to the first, whether this
first be void by the Statute, 21 H. 8. and I take it, it is not.

The Statute is, That having a Benefice of 8 l. accepts of another, and is
inducted into the same, then the former Benefice shall immediately be adjudged
to be void. And although I am of opinion, that this Law shall be taken strict,
and even extended by equity, because it is to repress a great inconvenience in
the Church, and Commonwealth, That yet nevertheless this word, having, shall
be construed, as it is in the Statute of 32. of Wills in Buttler and Bakers
Case, pro ut the Case, so here: And here is also this word immediately, which
is much enforced there, because the Land could not descend immediately till
disagreement.

A man infeofts a Feme Covert, and then grants rent charge, the Husband dies,
she waves, if she had agreed, it would have avoided the charge, and yet the
disagreement shall not make it good.

But I cannot compare it to a better Case than the Case of a Ward, the Rule is,
If Tenant in Knights service die seized, his Heir within Age shall be in Ward,
with this addition to the Rule, that if he were disseised and might enter, or
if he had made a Feoffment upon Condition, and the Condition were broken, if
the Lord, or the Heir enter, he shall be in Ward; or if the Tenant for Term of
Life of a Ward make a Feoffment, and the Heir enter, the Land shall be in Ward.
So be the Books of 17 ass. 18 ass. 18. 19 E. 3. Guard 114, and 48 E. 3. fo. 8.
But 12 H. 7.20. Frowick, if the Heir recover by action Auncestrell, he shall
not be in Ward.

15 E. 4.13. Urfwick chief Baron the same, or if he pay money to redeem Land,
and enter for the Condition performed, he shall not be in Ward, so here I hold
the same Rule, if B. had been disseised of parcel of his Glebe, or that it had
been forfeited for a Condition broken, the first Benefice would have been void,
but not in this Case, I hold, that if his Rectory were a Signiory, and but of 5
l. value, and then he accept a second Benefice, and afterward by the Escheat
of a Tenancy it had come to be of 8 l. or 10 l. value, it shall not in this
Case be void.

6. But this Clerk was a Merchant, and turns Priest, and now leaves his old
debts unpaid, whether he can be a Bankrupt, because of the words, using the
Trade, etc.

He is ruled in John Quarles Case; my Lord Chief Justice being Recorder, was a
Commissioner, for he left his Marchandizing, and was turned Gentleman.

7. Whether yielding of himself to Prison in the Admirals Court in an action,
whereof their Court has no Jurisdiction, be a yielding himself to Prison,
within the Statute.

The Admirals Jurisdiction is limited by the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 5. that
they shall not meddle with things done within the Realm scil. this Realm. 15 R.
2. cap. 3. de South les points, 2 H. 4. cap. 11. gives an aection, and double
damages.

There was a Case in the Common Pleas.

I take it, the Admiral has no Jurisdiction to hold Plea of a thing done upon
the Land in Ireland, for he is Admiral both of England, and Ireland; so the
King has his Justices there for to give justice for trespasses and offenses
there done, first for that these Statutes are in force in Ireland, as all other
are, which were made before 1 H. 7. And a Prohibition will lie here in the
Kings Bench, if they hold Plea of a thing, whereof they have no jurisdiction,
although they cannot hold Plea thereof themselves, as we see in the Orphans
Case in Coke li. 5. and these Courts ought to respect them of Ireland, as
subordinate to them for 34 Assizes. Errors here upon a Judgment there.

31 H. 8. Bro. Prohibition 17. A Prohibition lies against the Admiral, when he
supposes a thing to be done upon the Sea which was done upon the Land.

8. The Parishioners detain their Tithes.

The Question is, A man is presented by Simony, the Statute is, the
Presentation, the Institution, and Induction are all void. But it is to give
title to the King to present. But to the Parishioner he is dominus pro tempore,
as if he had been mere laicus; yet Sacraments ministered by him are of force.

The Church, and the Minister are compared to the Husband, and Wife; A woman is
married to one Husband, and in facie Ecclesice, she is afterward married to
another, as the Priest is actually in facie of the Country inducted, 17 Ass. 32
H. 6. The Feme with her second Husband, levy a Fine, none can avoid this Fine,
but the right Husband, no more can any displace the Simonist, but the King.

And a Prohibition has been awarded against a Parson, supposing he was a
Simonist, and upon advice, and consultation the Parson Closes, B. ver. (Simony)
in the Exchequer, another presented by the King, and yet all one for the mean
profits.

9. The Grantee presents to the first Benefice, question, whether I grant one
Primam and advocationem proximam and he presents, and his Clerk is instituted,
and dies before induction, whether his turn be served? It is, 38 E. 3.36.6.
vide lib.

10. That Commissioners here may sell a Bankrupts Goods in Ireland, and
Irishmen may sue the Commission.

11. The first is within the express words of the Law, scil. being also a
Subject born.

The second is proved by the Case of the Merchants of Waterford; 2 R. 3.11. An
Act of Parliament in England shall not bind men of Ireland for their Lands, but
for things transitory it shall, as the Case was there for shipping of Wools
from Waterford, to carry to other places than Callis.

Also a man attainted here of Felony, or Treason, shall lose his Lands in
Ireland. My Lord of Essex, and Ororkes Case.

12. An action of debt upon the Statute by the Statute of primo Jac. which
gives not only all things in Action, but also gives an Action to the Assignee
in his own name, but he must declare specially.

1. A. makes a Lease of a Rectory to the King for another man's life, and grants
the reversion to B. a Merchant to the use of B. and C. the King grants his
Estate to D. E. enters, and marries with the Merchant, C. dies, D. releases to
B. who being non solvent keeps his House, the Tithes are sequestered for not
repairing of the Quire, the Creditors grant a Letter of License to B. for six
months, E. dies, D. enters, he for whose life dies, B. renders himself to
Prison for a Fine assessed before the High Commissioners, six months past.

B. Is a Bankrupt within this division, and the Moiety of the Rectory shall be
sold, and all the goods sequestered.

1. The King tenant pur auter vie, the lessor grants the reversion, if good
without Atturnment: It is good. 2. A grants to B. to the use of him and C. if
they are Jointenants, or Tenants in Common? they are Tenants in Common. 3.
Tenant for life is disseised by a Feme sole, she marries him in the reversion,
the disseisee releases to the Husband, it is good to extinguish his right. 4.
What is wrought by the occupancy: nothing. 1. If a Bankrupt procures a Letter
of License for six months, and within the time is a Bankrupt again: if he shall
be a Bankrupt ab initio? He shall be. 2. If Imprisonment by the High
Commissioners is within the Statute? It is. 3. If the Goods of a Bankrupt
sequestered shall be sold? They shall.

2. A. Devises 20 l. to B. and C. and 200 Acres of Land to D. and E. his
Executors, D. proves the Will, E. wastes the assets, and dies, D. a Merchant
makes a Feoffment of 99 Acres to F. D. is non solvent, and outlawed in Ireland,
B. and C. join with the Creditors in suing a Commission.

D. Is a Bankrupt within this Division, and 101. Acres shall be sold, and B.
and C. shall be relieved.

3. Tenant of the King makes a gift in tail, and dies, having issue two
Daughters within age, the Donee makes a Feoffment to Coparceners, office is
found, and the Land being seized for the King, he grants it to H. a Merchant,
as long as it shall be in our hands, H. marries the younger, and is non
solvent, and suffers himself to be arrested, at the suit of a Son born, the
other Daughter dies, H. confesses the action, and is imprisoned in execution
for the damages, the Commissioners sell the Interest of H. All this is found by
another office.

H. Is a Bankrupt within this Division, and the Vendee shall have an Ouster le
main.

1. Discontinuee makes a Feoffment to issues in tail within age, if they are
remitted, for they are not Tenants in Common, but Jointenants. 2. Tenant of the
King makes a gift in tail, and dies, his Heir within age, the Discontinuee
infeoffs the Infant, if he shall be in Ward, because a Purchasor
notwithstanding the Remitter. 3. Tenant in tail discontinues has issue a
Daughter within age, and his Wife with Child with a Son, and dies, the
Discontinuee infeoffs the Daughter, the Son is born, if he shall have the
benefit of Remitter. 4. If the Interest of the King by an office, shall be
divested by another office without Petition, or monstrance de droit. 5. If a
Merchant being a Discontinuee confess an action of trespass, at the suit of the
issue in tail, and is taken in execution, if it make him a Bankrupt.
4. Grantee of a next avoidance presents A. by parol to a Benefice of 5 l.
value per Annum, he is Instituted, B. a Merchant and Farmer in Ireland, and
Indebted there by agreement with the Grantor, pays 10 l. to the Poor to be made
a Minister, and to be presented, A. dies, B. is Instituted and Inducted, and
after that, is Inducted to another Benefice, and recovers Glebe to the first of
20 l. value per Annum, and after he is non solvent, and renders himself a
Prisoner to the Admiral for a trespass in Ireland, the Parishioners detain
their Tithes.

B. Is a Bankrupt within this Division, and the Assignee of the Commissioners
shall have debt for the Tithes, and the Farm in Ireland.

5. Tenant in tail is attainted of Treason, and pardoned, the King grants and
restores to him the Land in tail, the Donor Releases, Tenant in tail suffers a
recovery to the use of B. a Merchant, and has issue, and dies, the release is
Enrolled, B. is made Steward of the Tower of London, the issue in tail enters
B. is non solvent, and keeps himself in the Tower.

B. Is a Bankrupt within this Division, and the Commissioners shall sell the
Land.

1. If the gift is within the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 20. 2. If the reversion
be good to the King without Inrollment. 3. If the Inrollment shall Relate. 4.
If the Tower is comprehended within the Statute, or the Equity re vera.
6. A. Feme sole Tenant in tail makes a Lease for thirty years to B. a Merchant
indebted to C. and D. she marries E. has issue F. A. and E. levy a Fine to G.
which is reversed for nonage of the Wife, B. lies in Prison for six months, in
execution for the debt of C. and in that time becomes indebted to the Jailer
for Victuals, the Wife dies, E. enters claiming as Tenant by the Courtesy, and
surrenders to the issue, D. assigns his debt to the King, a Commission is
awarded, all this is found by writ of Prerogative, and that B. had nothing.

B. Is a Bankrupt within the Statute, but the King shall have the Term, and
neither C. nor D. shall be relieved.

9. Tenant in tail makes a Lease for thirty years, and enters into Religion,
the issue accepts the rent, and dies having issue, the Father is deraigned, the
Lessee being a Merchant at Constantinople, becomes indebted to English
Merchants there, and turns Turk, the Father dies, the issue of the issue enters.

The Lessee is a Bankrupt within this Division, and the Term shall be sold.

Cases upon the fourth Division.
What Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments of a Bankrupt the Commissioners may
sell.
THE King grants the Manor of S. to A. and his Heirs, to be holden by the
service, to be a Justice of the Peace within the Manor, A. Bargains and sells
to B. and C. his Wife, and to D. and after A. grants the services to I. S. a
Tenant to B. B. and C. are divorced causa Praecontractus of C. with I. S. D. is
a Bankrupt, a Commission is awarded. I. S. attorns, D. enters, and manumits a
villain, D. is imprisoned in his House and is felo de se, his Heir within age
enters, I. S. dies without Heir, B. and C. intermarry, the Deed is enrolled,
office is found.

The Commissioners may sell all the Land, and the Goods of the Bankrupt except
the Villain.

1. The King grants Land to be holden by the service to be a Justice of the
Peace: What Tenure this is? 2. A Bargain and Sale to Baron and Feme and a
Stranger, and the Baron and Feme are divorced before Inrollment: how they shall
take? 3. One sells a Manor, and before Inrollment the Bargainor grants the
services of I. S. to one of the Vendees, and he attorns: If the Inrollment
shall be good for the rest to others? 4. Bargainee of Land holden in Capite,
enters, and dies before Inrollment: If his Heir within age shall be in Ward?
Upon the Statute.
1. A Bankrupt has a Seigniory, a Commission is awarded, the Bankrupt dies, a
Tenancy Escheats: If the Seigniory, or the Tenancy shall be sold? 2. Tenant in
Capite is a Bankrupt, and dies, his Heir within age, and in Ward: If the Land
can be sold? 3. A Bankrupt has a villain, and manumits him: If the
Commissioners can after sell him. 4. A Bankrupt is felo de se: If the Goods
shall be sold notwithstanding the interest of the Almoner?
The King grants a Manor to A. to be holden by the service, to be a Justice of
Peace within the Manner, the Question is, what Tenure that is, if grand
serjeanty, Petit serjeanty Tenure by Knights service in Capite, or Tenure by
Soccage in Capite?

Neither at the Common Law, nor at any time before the Statute of Quia Emptores
terarum, there was no Officer in this Commonwealth, called by the name of a
Justice of Peace, and therefore there can be no Authority of any ancient tenure
of that nature; But there were diverse Officers, who by virtue of their Offices,
and as incident to their Office, were Conservators of the Peace, as Sheriffs,
Coroners, Constables, and all the Justices of the Kings Bench.

17 ass. 5. A Sheriff, or Coroner may take an Appeal, a fortiori in the Kings
Bench, for there Scot says, That they are the Sovereign Coroners of the Land.
But till 18 E. 3. cap. 2. the name of a Justice of Peace was not known.

But whether such a tenure may be created at this day, is a Question? and I
think it may, for the King is not bound by the Statute of Quia Emptor. as it is
plain by the Books of Com. 240. Bark. Case.

He at this day may create new tenures; and Marrow in his Book of a Justice of
Peace, says, That if the King grant a man Land to be holden by being a
Conservator of the Peace he is a Conservator by tenure, but he does not
determine what Tenure it is Mr. Lambert vouches a Record at Chester, that one
Urianus de Sancto Petro that held medietatem serjanciae pacis, and this, he
calls it Tenure in Capite, but rather as an Executioner, than as a Judge. It is
thus material to the end of the Case, what Tenure this is, that if it be
Knights service, then here is a Wardship, and then it will be a question,
whether the Kings interest will prevent the authority of the Commissioners? if
in Soccage in capite, then that point is cleared. Some would have this to be
grand Serjeanty, because it is to be performed in person, and that person is to
represent the Kings person, and if (by Littleton) it be grand Serjeanty to be a
Chamberlain of the Exchequer, who is but a Keeper (as it were) of the Kings
money, it is grand Serjanty much more to be a Keeper of the Kings Peace: Others
would have it Soccage in Capite, for it is a Tenure must go with the Land, and
so to a person incapable of the Office (as in this case) to an Infant, or to a
Woman, who cannot be a Justice of Peace. And this is an Office, which cannot be
transferred, no more than as it is in Kelloway in his cases incerti temporis,
fol. 151. If the Office of a Sheriff, or Coroner be granted to one it cannot be
granted over, for such an Officer ought immediately to attend on the King
without any mean, for the office of a Sheriff, as Sir John Davies says well,
etc. for life, and I am of opinion, that if this grant had been made before
primo of E. 3. it had been a Tenure by grand Serjanty, for then the Tenant
could not alien without license upon pain of forfeiture. But now it is
otherwise, so as I am of opinion, that this grant being now made, and in fee,
it was a tenure by grand Serjeancy for life in the first Patentee, and his
Patent was his Commission; But when he does alien or die it will be a soccage
in Capite; And yet if it should turn to be a Tenure by Knights service in
Capite, yet I shall maintain the case at latter end, that the Commissioners may
sell the land, notwithstanding that the heir of the Bankrupt is within age, and
in Ward.

2. A Bargain and Sale to Baron and Feme and a stranger, and before inrollment,
they are divorced, the Question is, how they shall take, as three several
Jointenants, or each shall have a third part, or whether the husband and wife
shall be jointenants for either of them a quarter part, and the stranger a
jointenant with them for a half part?

35 Ass. 15. It is plain, that if one make a feofment to the husband and wife,
and a third person, the Husband and Wife as one person, take the one Moiety,
and the other person the other Moiety, vide Librum. 7 H. 4. fol. 17. That they
that be divorced, the divorce will change, and alter their estates, as if Lands
be given in tail special to an Husband and Wife, and then they are divorced,
the estate tail is turned to a freehold, and they are made jointenants, by
dividable Moieties whereas before they held by intireties, and yet if they
marry afterward again they are Tenants in tail again.

3. 39 H. 6.43. The difference is taken between a feoffment before coverture,
and after, for if it be before, and then they intermarry, if the Husband alien
all and die, the Feme shall have a Cui in vita but for a Moiety, contrary if it
be after marriage: Copledikes Case 3. rep. Baron and Feme jointenants, the
Baron suffers a recovery of all, and dies, it shall be good for nothing against
the Wife.

But there have been many Questions raised, how they shall take when a
Conveyance is commenced before coverture, and finished after, or as our Case is
when the Conveyance is commenced during coverture, and finished after Divorce:
as if a reversion be granted to a man, and Feme sole, and they intermarry, and
the tenant attorns, they shall take by entireties, because by the Book of 48 E.
3. The Attornment shall not relate, and yet if a Feoffment of a Manor be made
to a man Feme sole, and they intermarry, and then the Tenants attorn, they
shall be in of the whole Manor by Moieties, because in that case the
Attornment will relate, as it is proved by Longes Case, which was Pa. 31 Eliz.
Rot. 20 24. One made a Feoffment of a Manor to which an Advowson was
appendent, the Church became void, and the Tenants attorned, it was adjudged
that in this case the Attornment should relate, and that the Feoffee not the
Feoffer should present.

But in our Case, here be two relations together, the Relation of the Divorce,
and Relation of the Inrollment. I have showed, that the Relation of the Divorce
shall change their Estates, and the Relation of the Inrollment will give it
them, as they were to take at the time of the ensealing of the Indent. 6 E. 6.
Bro. 6 E. 6. two Jointenants, and one Bargains and sells all the Land, and
before Inrollment, the other dies; yet no more shall pass than the Party had at
the time of the ensealing of the Deed. Surely the Deed relates to make them in
by Intireties, and the Divorce to make them Jointenants, but shall this
Relation of the Divorce change, or alter the Estate of the third person. And I
take it, this nothing at all concerns the Stranger, nor shall it alter his
Estate, but it shall be as a matter of estopel binding the Baron and Feme, but
not to be respected of estrangers, and this is proved by the writ of Cui ante
divorcium, for there the Feoffment of the Husband stood as a discontinuance
till it was defeated:

Lex non oberit tertio extraneo, prodesse alteri nemo tenetur, sed obesse
vetatur.

48 E. 3.38. Tenant for Life, the remainder for Life, the remainder in Fee, the
first Tenant for life makes waste, he in remainder in fee releases to him in
remainder for life, this shall not make him who was the first Tenant for life,
to be punishable in waste.

43 E. 3.17. An appeal is brought against two as Principals, and an exigent is
awarded, now the King is interested in their Goods, they appear, the Plantiff
declares against one of them as principal, and against the other as accessory,
the second desires to have restitution of his Goods, he shall not, for
alteration of the plaint by and between the Plantiff and Defendant, shall not
by relation of any matter ex post facto prejudice the King or a third parties
interest.

But before this Divorce, A. grants the services to I. S. a Tenant to B. the
Husband, here arises three Questions at once.

1. If one bargain to two, and afterward levies a Fine or Feoffment to one of
them, whether it be not such a disagreement to the former Contract, as by that
bargain the other shall have all, and the Feoffee nothing? and I think the
other shall have all, and the Feoffee or Conizee nothing. 2. Whether if one
bargain for a Manor, and before Inrollment the Bargainor grants by Fine or
Feoffment parcel of the Manor, to the Vendee, whether this destroys not the
bargain for all? It does. 3. There is Husband and wife, and the Husband
purchases by bargain and sale to him and his Wife, and their Heirs, and before
Inrollment, the Husband takes a Fine, or a Feoffment of all, and then the Deed
is enrolled; what shall the Wife have? I think she shall have nothing. For the
first, and for all these questions, we must agree upon this ground, which is
set down in Hinds Ca. Coke li. 4. That if a man buy Lands by bargain and sale,
and before Inrollment he accepts of a Fine, or a Feoffment, he is in by the
fine, and the Inrollment is of no force.
The next rule is, That if Lands be conveyed to two, and the one will disagree
in Court of Record, or disclaim in the tenancy, all vests in the other.

17 E. 3. fo. 6. a Placito 18. A gift in tail was made to the Husband, and
Wife, and they had issue, and the Baron died, the Wife disagreed, all descended
to the issue.

10 E. 4. fol. 13. The Tenant infeoffs the Lord, and a stranger, the Lord
disagrees, the stranger shall have all.

20 E. 4. Fitz. Nuper obiit 14. If the Defendant in a Nuper obiit disclaim in
the Blood, the other Coparcener shall have all by descent, and a Mordancester
of all.

22 H. 6.44. A Precipe against two if one disclaim, all vests in the other.

So here, in as much as the use passed by the contract, if one of them will
waive that contract, and take himself to another bargain, then the first
contract will stand good for all to the other, and the Inrollment for all shall
relate to the use of the other, and shall be paramount to the fine, and destroy
the Conveyance by the fine, as it is in Pophams Case. 5 Eliz.

2. But then comes in the next question, this fine was but of part of the thing
bargained and sold, and therefore it will not destroy the contract for all, but
only for part, that is for a Moiety of the services. I take it that this
contract being entire, being destroyed in part, is void for all, Qui partem
individui facit nihil facit. I will example it with other Cases.

34 H. 6.21. It is a good plea in an action of debt for rent, that the Lessor
entered before the day of payment, for the contract was entire, and therefore
the rent not apportionable.

22 Ass. 53. Lease for life rendering rent for Land part in Franchises, and part
in Guildable, in an Assise brought at Common Law, for the rent, Conizance shall
not be granted, for the rent is entire, and the Kings Court shall be preferred
contrary to Thorp, as it is in 46 E. 3.8. But if the Land is in question,
conizance shall be granted for so much as lies in Franchises.

9 E. 4.1. One is to lease a Chamber, and find the Lessee his board, for 6 s. a
Week, in an Action of Debt for the Money, non demisit cameram is a good Plea,
for destroy the contract in part, it is destroyed in all, for it is entire.

30 H. 8 Little Broke. I sell my Horse, and another man's for 20 l. to be paid
at a day to come, and before the day, the other man recovers his Horse against
the Vendee, yet the Vendor shall have an action for all the money.

So here the Consideration of the money raises the use that is an entire Sum,
and if you will have that the Demeasnes shall pass by the contract for the use,
and the services, or part of the services shall pass by the grant, what a
confusion would that be, and how much of the Consideration went for the one,
and what for the other. I might that way maintain my conclusion, that the whole
Manor passes to D.

9 E. 4. Choke: A Manor consists of Demeasnes, and Services, sever them and
the Manor is destroyed, and in Sr. Roll. Heiwards Case none shall take by
fraction of Estates.

3. The third question being, that the Husband purchases Lands by Bargain and
Sale to him and his Wife, and before the Deed is enrolled, the Husband takes a
Fine or a Feoffment of the Land, to him and his heirs, and then the Deed is
enrolled, what shall the Wife have? and I say (as I said) she shall have
nothing.

3 H. 7.9. It is plain, that if Lands be conveyed to a Feme Covert, if her
Husband disagree, the Feofment made to her is made void, and it shall return to
the Feoffer. But if a Feofment be made to I. S. and a Feme Covert, and her
Husband disagrees, all vests in I. S.

Rutland's Case, li. 5. Cook is, that the Husband by Indenture limits Lands to
the use of his Wife, but before the fine levied, by other Indentures he limited
the same to other uses: so in that case before the assurance is perfected, the
Husband by whose means, and bargain making, this use was to rise to the Wife,
before this Assurance finished, makes a new bargain for himself, and the Wife
if he disagree can take nothing.

Kenn's C. Cook. lib. 7. It is the Husband has the power to contract for the
use, although it be of the Wives Lands.

4. The next matter that I intend a question upon the Statute of Inrollments,
is (supposing this Land is held in Capite) Lands held in Capite are bargained
and sold to a man, and before the deed is enrolled, the Bargainee dies, his
heir within age, whether here be such a dying seized, and a descent, as his Son
shall be in ward? and I think it is.

There be diverse Cases, where the heir shall be in ward, and yet the Ancestour
dyed not seized.

48 E. 3.8. If there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant is disseised and dies,
his heirs within age, the Lord may seize, etc.

20 H. 6. Tenant in tail aliens, and dies, his heir within age, his heir shall
be in Ward to the Donor.

33 H. 6.5. Tenant for life, the remainder in fee, he in remainder dies, his
heir shall not be in ward for the remainder, but if the Tenant for life die,
then by matter ex post facto he shall be.

11 H. 4.61. By Hank. and Norton. If the heir recover in a writ of ayel on
Cocinage he shall be in Ward.

If the Father lose by error, or false verdict, If the Son reverse the Judgment
by error or attaint, he shall be in ward: If the Father recover and dies before
entry, or execution, and the Son sue execution, he shall be in guard.

Points upon the Statute.
Swinburn Fol. 175. I will that my villain be manumitted when my Son comes to
age, my Son dies before the age, the villain shall be at Liberty, when the Son
would have been of age.
D. Enters, and manumits a villain: The Question is, a man has a Manor to
which be villains regardant, he becomes a Bankrupt, manumits the the villain,
Commission is agarded, if the Commissioners may sell the villain? and I have
concluded they cannot, For the villain being once at liberty, in this case is
infranchised for ever.

I grant that in diverse cases a villain may be infranchised pro tempore, and
yet be a villain again.

13 E. 4.2. As if Tenant in tail will enfeof his villain of the Manor, the
issue shall have a Formedon and reduce both the Manor, and the villain.

33 H. 6.13. Enfranchment by Tenant for years, or for life, is good but for
their time.

And it is much controverted, whether if a nieff marry a Freeman, she be not
for ever enfranchised.

Old Not. Brevi. fol. 6. If her Husband die she shall be a nieff again.

33 E. 3. Statham Vil. She shall be neiff again even to her own Son, when her
Lord and Husband dies: But as the Law says, there is nothing more respected
than life, and liberty, So I am of opinion, and I have authority for it, that
if she be once married, either to her Lord, or another Freeman, she is at
liberty for ever.

31 E. 1. Fitz. vill. 46. It is first questioned, and some there are of
opinion, that after the death of her Husband, she shall be in bondage again,
quod Burton negavit, but if she marry the Lord, then by all she is infranchised
for ever.

Britton fol. 78. She is infranchised for ever.

Natura brevi. B. 78. G. I will conclude with the first authority; by
Fitzherbert Brittons opinion seems reasonable, if she divorce not her self, or
acknowledge not her self in Court of Record, in favor of Liberty, and because
she and her Husband are but one person in Law, and of the same condition with
him.

There be diverse things favored in Law, as Women's dowers, the King, Lords,
Holy Church, ancient Records, Devises, Infants, Purchasors and possessions; But
next life, Liberty of all things is most favored.

18 E. 4.6. No amercement lies against the Sheriffs return, yet in a writ of
Liberate probanda, if the Sheriff returns, that he has no writ of nativo
habendo depending before him, one may offer the contrary in favorem libertatis.
Quia propensiores esse debemus ad liberandum, quam ad obligandum.

It has been made a Question, upon the Statute 39 Eliz. that appoints the
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of Accomptants to be sold, which they had
at the time when they fell into Arearages, whether if the Accomptant shall
manumit a villain, he shall be nevertheless sold, and the best opinion of him
that read upon the Statute in this place was, that his liberty could not be
revoked, for here were neither Lands, Tenements, nor Hereditaments; and so here.

27 Assizar. Enfranchisement for a time by act in Law, but if the Lord will
manumit his villain for a day, by his voluntary grant, he is at liberty for
ever.

The Tenant dies without heir: the Question is this, A Lord is a Bankrupt, and
dies, a Tenancy escheats, if the Seigniory, or the Tenancy shall be sold?

I take it, as I have concluded, the Tenancy, that is the Land shall be sold,
first see the words of the statute Primo Jacobi, The Commissioners may proceed
in the execution of the Commission, in such sort as they might have done, if
the party Offender were alive; this makes an end of the question, for if he
were alive, and the Tenancy escheated, the Land should be sold. And therefore I
shall not need to put you Cases at Common Law, where the Tenancy escheating
shall be bound to that, where the Land was tied.

6 H. 4.1. Tenant in tail discontinues, and dies, and leaves a Seigniory to
descend to the issue in tail, a Tenancy escheats, in a Formedon by the issue,
the Tenancy shall he Assets.

14 H. 8 4. Fitzherbert, cestui que use of a Seigniory, a Tenancy escheats, the
Feoffee shall hold the Land to the use of the Feoffer.

46 E. 3.4. Tenant in tail of a Seigniorty, a Tenancy escheats, Tenant in tail
discontinues, and dies without issue, the Donor shall have a Formedon of the
Land.

3. A Commission is awarded, D. is felo de se, the Question, a Commission is
awarded, and the Bankrupt becomes felo de se, Office is found, if the Almoner
shall have his goods, or the Commissioners may sell them? for the Lord Almoner
has all the goods, and chattels of Felons of themselves, and all Deodands, as
appears by our Books, and his Charter which I have seen.

6 E. 6. Dier fol. 77. The King leases Richmond fee with all Deodands, and
after grants to the Almoner, the term expires, the grant to the Almoner void,
because the other lease was not recited.

2. Mar. Dier fol. 107. The King grants to the Archbishop of Canter. Deodands
in D. and to the Almoner all in general, Hales is felo de se.

Plow. Dame Hales, the Bishop is attainted, the King shall have the Lease.

It is true (as it appears in Dame Hales case) That when two titles come
together, that is the Kings and a subjects, the Kings shall be preferrd, As if
a villain be a fool natural, the King, not the Lord shall have him.

If a villain be felo de se, the King, not the Lord shall have his goods. Then
a Bankrupt is felo de se, shall the King, or the Creditors have his goods? I
think the Creditors: For if the Bankrupt in life had no authority to dispose
them, (as it is in Tibnabams Ca.) much less shall he dispose of them by his
death. And admit the Almoners Patent were before the Statute of primo of the
King, yet both the King, and the Almoner, by Act of Parliament have given away
their title to the Creditors.

4. I have already argued, that the heir of the Bankrupt is in by descent, now
the Case is, he is within age, and an office is found, and that the Land is
held of the King in capite, the Question, (and the hardest question in my
Case,) is, whether after an office of all this matter found, the Commissioners
may sell? And I think they may.

For this office, finding the whole matter, notwithstanding a tenure in capite,
a dying seized of the Tenant, and the minority of an heir is found, yet nothing
vests in the King: For when an Act of Parliament shall appoint the Land to go
another way, and the course taken according to the Statute is found in the
Office, the King his Officers in the Law shall consider of all the whole matter
in Concreto, and not in abstracto, and shall challenge nothing for the King,
which belongs not to him, as is seen by a Devise made by Tenant in capite,
according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Wills.

5. The Commissioners imprison the Bankrupt in his own House: Two questions,
first whether the Commissioners may imprison him by the Statute of 13. which
gives them authority to dispose of his body, as they shall see good in their
discretions, when as the Statute of primo appoints an imprisonment upon a
special cause of refusal, as if there were no Law general to imprison him, in
diverse cases expressa nocent Vide, my Moote Book?

I think they may. It is true that Leges posteriores priores contrarias
abrogant, but this is not a contrary Law, but a strengthening, and a
confirmation of the former Law in a particular, nor does it revoke the former
no otherwise than that, where by the Statute of 27 H. 8. Leases shall be under
the Duchy Seal. This does not take away the Authority of the Great Seal, but
that Grants may pass under the Great Seal since the Statute: And for sureness
now a days, they put many times both Seals to them.

2. Question is, whether this Imprisonment in his own House be such a Dealing
in the Commission, by the Commissioners as is intended by the Statute of primo.
That his dying afterward shall not alter the Case, For if it be a lawful
Imprisonment, then here is a Dealing, if not contrary, for Ea possimus quae
jure possimus, for as it is said by Herle for a Maxim, that all Leets,
Hundreds, and in 2 E. 3. all Ports, and Cities are the Kings, and the Lords
have but the use and profits of them under the King; so it is said, all Gaoles
are the Kings Prisons, and none others of the Land, for life, and member
belongs to him only, and the Lords have only the regard; and that is the
reason, that in all Corporations in their Charters they always have a Grant,
and liberty to have a Prison.

Auditors by the Statute of W. 2. cap. 11. may send the Baily, found in
Arrearages to Prison; by the Book, it must be to the next Gaol, though it be in
another County, otherwise an Action of false Imprisonment lies. So our
Commissioners must be careful to pursue their Commission; but because the
Statute says, they may dispose of his body at their discretions, therefore to
stay him in his own House, or in one of theirs, till he be further examined, I
think it not amiss, although I have heard, that some Commissioners have been
blamed for not sending him to the Gaol.

1. A. makes a Feoffment in Fee to B. by livery, within the view, B. Covenants,
with C. to stand seized to the use of D. his Son, A. enters and makes a
Feoffment to B. D. enters, and makes a Lease for years to E. a Merchant, upon
condition to have in Fee, E. is a Bankrupt, C. disagrees to the Contract, E.
becomes a Recusant Convict, and has not Lands sufficient to pay 20 l. a Month,
the Commissioners sell the Land, the King seizes the Term, the condition is
performed.

The Vendee shall have the fee-simple.

Points.
1. IF livery within the view may be countermanded by livery in fact? 2. If the
Feoffee, to whom livery is made within view before entry, Covenants to stand
seized to another use, and after enters, if the Covenant good, that is, if by
his entry he by relation is in from the time of the Livery? 3. If a covenants
with B. to stand seized to the use of C. and C. enters, and B. disagrees to the
Covenant, if the Land shall revert to A.? 4. If a Bankrupt has a Lease for
years upon condition to have fee, if the Commissioners may sell the Land with
the possibility? 5. A Bankrupt has a Term, and is a Recusant convict, if the
King or the Creditors shall have the Term?
2. The King, Lord, Mesn, and Tenant of Borough English Land, the Tenant by
License of the King to create Tenures, devises the Land to A. in fee, to hold
of his Heirs by Knights service, A. is attainted of Felony, and devises the
Land to his eldest Son a Merchant Bankrupt, the Mesn enters, the younger Son
reverses the Attainder, the eldest waives the Devise.

The Commissioners may sell all the Land.

Points.
1. IF the King may grant to the Tenant of another to create new Tenures in
prejudice of the Mesn as to Escheats? 2. If Tenure in Borough English, which is
always Soccage, may be altered into Tenure in Knights service? 3. If it may be
altered as to the Custom to descend to the youngest? 4. If it may be altered as
to the Tenure, but not as to the Custom, if the youngest Son shall be in Ward?
5. Upon the Statute of Wills 32 H. 8. Lord and Tenant, the Tenant is attainted,
and Devises his Land, and dies, the Heir reverses the Attainder before entry of
the Lord, if the Devise is good? 6. One Devises Land to a Merchant, and he
becomes a Bankrupt, and waives the Devise, if the Commissioners may sell the
Land?
3. A Merchant makes a Lease for Life to an Infant, the remainder to the King
for Life of A. B. enters, and dies seized, the Deed is Enrolled, A. dies, the
Infant enters, the Lessor, in consideration of marriage, covenants to stand
seized to the use of himself and his Wife, and their Heirs, the Infant at full
age makes a Feoffment, the Heir of the Disseisor enters, the Lessor is a
Bankrupt, the Commissioners sell, Lessor dies, the Feme waives.

This is a good Sale of all the Land in Possession, and Reversion.

Points.
1. WHether the Inrollment does not relate to avoid the descent? 2. Whether the
Entry of the Infant reduce the reversion? 3. Whether the Sale not being good
against the Wife, is made good by her waiver?
Vide ante the Principal Case.

5. One grants a Rent Charge to a Physician, and his Heirs, pro Consilio
impenso and impendendo, the Physician is his own Apothecary, and becomes non
solvent for Drugs and Simples, which he used in his Art, a Commission is
awarded, the Physician keeps his House for fear of Arrests, the Physician
brings a Writ of Annuity, and recovers by erroneous Judgment, the
Commissioners sell the Rent, the Recoveree reverseth the Judgment, the
Physician dies.

This Sale of the Commissioners was good for this Rent, but not to take effect
during the Life of the Physician.

Points.
1. IF an Annuity in Fee be granted pro Consilio may be sold? 2. Whether he
have any Election after he is Bankrupt? 3. Whether the bringing of this Annuity
which is reversed, be an Election?
6. One makes a Gift in Tail rendering Rent, and dies, the Rent is arrear, a
Disseisor enters, and levies a Fine, five years past, the Heir of the Donor is
a Bankrupt.

The Commissioners shall sell the Rent, and the Arrearages.

Three Points upon the Statute.
1. UPon the Statute of Fines, the Second and Third upon the Statutes of
Limitations, and Bankrupts.

1. Upon the Statute of Fines, that is, if Fines of the Land shall be a Bar for
the Rent?

2. And 3. Upon the Statute of Limitations: If Commissioners may sell when the
Party was concluded by the Statute of Limitations: 6 Jacobi Banco Regis,
Executors notwithstanding no Seisin in their Testator by fifty years, shall
destrain by the the Statute of 32 H. 8.

7. A. and B. Tenants in Common of the Manor of D. and Jointenants of the
Manor of S. They by Deed Poll bargain and sell Common of Pasture, within the
Manors for a Cow to C. and his Wife, and to the Heirs of their two bodies
begotten, C. the Husband grants the Common to E. in Fee, the Wife dies without
issue, E. is a Bankrupt.

E. had Common for a Cow, but it is neither Land, Tenement, nor Hereditament,
which may be sold by the Commissioners.

8. The King grants to I. S. that he only for his life shall have the
Importation of Steel, he assigns his Patent to I. N. a Merchant, I. N. becomes
non solvent, and after acknowledges himself to be a Villain regardent to the
Honor of Hampton Court, a Commission is awarded.

I. N. Is a Bankrupt, and the Commissioners may sell all his Lands and Goods,
but not the Monopoly.

9. A. and B. Jointenants Covenant for natural affection to stand seized to the
use of C. for life, C. enters, and B. dies, C. dies, the Heir of B. makes a
Gift in Mortmain, the Lord before entry bargains and sells the Seigniory to I.
S. who enters, and makes a Gift in Tail, the remainder to I. N. a Merchant,
Tenant in Tail is attainted of Treason, and suffers a common Recovery, Office
is found, I. N. becomes a Bankrupt, Tenant in tail dies without issue, I. N.
waives the remainder.

The Commissioners may sell the Moiety of this remainder.

10. One grants an Advowson to a Feme Covert sole Merchant, the Church becomes
void, the Husband in consideration that I. S. does enter into Bond to preach
twice a Week, presents him to the Benefice, the Feme becomes a Bankrupt, the
Husband dies, the Feme waives the Grant, the Commissioners within the six
months sell the Presentation, and the Advowson.

This is a good Sale of the Advowson, but the King shall present.

5. Division.
What Copyhold Lands of a Bankrupt the Commissioners may sell, and in what case
Composition shall be made with the Lord, and in what not.
1. A Tenant by Copy of Wh. Acre surrenders to the use of B. for years, upon
condition that he will not do waste, and after he surrenders the reversion into
the hands of two Tenants to the use of C. a Merchant in Fee, the Lord makes a
Feoffment of the Acre to D. C. departs the Realm, and after is non solvent, a
Privy Seal is awarded against him, the Tenants present the surrender to the
Court of the Lord; C. will not return, the Commissioners sell the Reversion to
E. B. makes waste, E. tenders Composition to D. who refuses it, and E. enters
for the Condition broken.

The Sale is good, and the entry of E. congeable, but no Composition is due.

Points in the Case at Common Law.
1. TEnant by Copy surrenders into the hands of two Tenants, and the Lord
separates the Freehold from the Manor, if the surrender is void? 2. Tenant by
Copy, surrenders to one for years, and after to the use of another in Fee, if
good without Attornement? 3. If the Tenants are bound to Present the surrender
at the Lords Court, after he had separated the free hold from the Manor, That
is, whether the Presentment shall not interest the party to whose use, etc. by
relation from the surrender? 4. If Tenant by Copy surrender to the use of one
for years upon condition, and after he surrenders the reversion to the use of
another in fee, and after the condition is broken, if the Grantee in reversion
shall enter for the forfeiture by the Statute of 32 H. 8. Cap. 34. 5. If a
Copyholder Lessee for years by surrender commits waste, if this is a
forfeiture to the Lord, or only to him in reversion, or of the reversion?
Points upon the Statute.
1. IF a Merchant who departs by license, and upon a privy Seal will not
return, but is non solvent, shall be a Bankrupt? 2. One had only the freehold
of a sole Copyholder, if such Copyhold may be transferred by sale of the
Commissioners? 3. A Copyhold is surrendered to the use of a Husband, who will
not be admitted, if the Commissioners can sell? 4. Whether one fine, 2. fines,
or no fine be due to the Lord? 5. Admitting a fine were due, and the Lord after
tender refuses it, what remedy the Vendee has for the Land, or the Lord for
the fine?
1. When there is a Lord of a Manor, and Copyholder of Inheritance surrenders
into two Tenants hands, and then the Lord makes a Feofment of the Copyhold, I
take it that this severance of the Free hold, and of the Copyhold from the
Manor shall not destroy the surrender, For when the Copyholder has once
surrendered, he has dismissed himself of all his interest, and the right is in
the party to whose use the surrender was made.

Bunting Ca. Coke. li. 4. The death of the surrenderer, the death of the
Tenants, nor the death of the party to whose use the surrender was made, shall
not alter the Case. But the party to whose use such a surrender is made, has
such an interest as shall descend to his heir, for his heir shall be admitted,
and by the same reason his interest shall remain, notwithstanding the Lord sell
the Free hold (as it is said in Morrels case,) the custom has so established,
and fixed the estate of the Copyholders that the Lords severing it from the
Manor, cannot alter it.

It was adjudged, that the custom of a Manor being, that if Tenant for life
by Copy die, his Wife shall have her Widows estate, the Lord dissolved his
Manor, the Copy holders Wife died, he took a new Wife, and then he died, the
Second Wife had her Widows estate, and yet there was no Court, whether she
could come to have the death of her Husband found and presented, and where she
might be admitted? etc.

But admit that the Surrender had been made into the Lords hands, out of the
Court, as by Melwich his Case it may, or admit it had been made in Court, and
the party to whose use it was made, had tendered the Lord his due fine, and the
Lord would demand more, and so defer the admittance: In these Cases, the Law is
plain, that the party may enter, and no Action lies by the Lord against him.
And what if the Lord dissolve the Manor, shall that alter the case? No, no
more than if a Copyholder of inheritance die, and the Lord severs the Freehold
from the Copy before the Heir be admitted, this shall not destroy the Heirs
estate, but he may lawfully enter, and hold it for ever without admittance.

2. But here notwithstanding this severance of the Free hold from the Manor,
the two Tenants present the Surrender the next Court held by the Lord for the
Manor. The Question is first, whether the Tenants were bound to do it or no?
And the next, what is wrought by it? And I take it they ought to present it;
For notwithstanding the Copyhold be severed from the Manor, yet they are not
severed, they be Tenants still, and they must do their duties, and the rather,
because it is not altogether severed, for Tenant for years of the Copyhold,
remains still Tenant to the Lord, and his rents and duties are to be done to
the first Lord, and not to the Copyholder in reversion: But to what use is
this presentment of theirs? I take it to this use. It shall have relation to
the Surrender and interest of the party, to whose use it was made from the time
of the Surrender. Like as an Office found 10. years after an escheat, will
entitle the King to all the mean profits from the death of the party; Or as a
Deed acknowledged to be Enrolled, shall be Enrolled notwithstanding the death
of any of the parties, and shall have relation from the date of the Deed, to
entitle the Bargainee to the profits: Or as a Legacy is given by Will, cannot
be sued for till the Will be proved, and then the Probate makes the Legacy due
by relation, ever since the death of the Testator; Even so the Presentment has
relation to entitle the party to whose use the Surrender was made, from the
time of the Surrender; And this appears plainly by Rowswels Case in Chancery,
Feme Tenant for life of a Copyhold, the Lord grants the Reversion to three,
the Baron Surrenders to one of them, who first dies, there the Lord would have
kept the Land as occupant, during the Husbands life. 9 Eliz. Dyer. 267.

But it was decreed, that if the Husband and Wife would surrender to the
Surviving Lessees in reversion, the Lord must admit them, or else avoid the
possession; So if the Lord will not admit the party to whose use, the party
shall have the Lands; if a man surrender to the use of his last Will and
Testament, the Lord shall not have the Land but the Tenant during his life.

3. But before I go any further, let us consider of this Lease, it is by a
Surrender upon Condition, and he in reversion surrenders to another use, and
the Condition is broken: My Question is, whether he in reversion shall enter
for the Condition? by the Common Law he cannot, then may he enter by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. Cap. 34. of Conditions, there be diverse Statutes which
reach Copy-holds, though they be not named.

Heydons Case, lib. 3. Copyholders are Lessees within the Statute, 32 H. 8. of
Monasteries.

The Statute of Cui in vita, Receipt, quod ei defortiat, Coke li. 4. Kite. per
Wray, Copyhold estate is within the Statute of Champertie, and Maintenance, 32
H. 8. Cap. 9. Dean and Chapter of Worcesters Case, Coke li. 6. Copy hold is
within the Statute of 13. Eli of Leases by spiritual persons, Lands usually
let, etc.

Lillingstones Case adjudged 27. Eliz. That if the Lord infeoff the Copyholder
to another use, that the Copyhold is saved by the Proviso in the Statute of
27. H. 8.

Margaret Podgers Case. A Copyholder is bound by Fine, and 5. years.

The general rule is laid down in Heydons Case, That all Statutes that may be
for the good of the Copyholder shall extend to them, therefore I am of
opinion, that such a Grantee shall enter for nonpayment of rent, or for doing
of waste, as the words of the Statute are; For it is for the good of the
Copyholders that their Farmers be bound to pay their Rents and keep their
Tenements in repair. I should make small question of this if the Lease were
made by license, for then it is a plain lease at Common Law, and an Ejectione
firm will lie: But here the Lessee comes in by the Lords admittance, but that
is answered by my Lord Cook, when he is once admitted, he is in immediately
from the Surrender and in the Per.

4. But this Condition is, for waste, and it is broken, whether is there a
forfeiture to him in reversion, or a forfeiture to the Lord of the estate in
fee simple? It is to the Lessor, not to the Lord, wherein I fall again upon the
difference, when it is by License, and when by Surrender, for I take him to be
as if he had a particular estate with a remainder over. In Podgers Case fo.
107. Si cop. pour vie sit semble al case del Duke of Norff.

Points upon the Statute.
A Merchant being a sufficient man departs the Realm, and beyond the Seas
becomes non solvent, and so refuses to return, although he be served with a
privy Seal to return: Here be two Questions, First whether he be a Bankrupt for
not returning; For he is not within the Compass of the Statute of departing the
Realm. The next Question is, (admitting him to be a Bankrupt:) Whether the King
shall have his Goods, as the goods of a Fugitive, or else whether they shall go
to satisfy the Creditors? For the first, I think, he is a Bankrupt, and
although he be not within the compass of these words, (depart the Realm) yet it
is plain, he is within these words (absents himself) for although his departure
was no offense either to the King or his Creditors (For Merchants both by the
Common Law, and notwithstanding the Statutes of 5 R. 2. Cap. 2. or the Statutes
of 13 Eliz.) might depart the Realm without license, except the King (as it is
in Natura Brevium fol. 85. had made proclamation to the Contrary.) Yet the King
not only by the Statute but by the Common Law, as he may forbid a man to
depart, so he may send for him at his pleasure to return; And that is proved by
the express Book of 2 and 3 Phil. and Mary. Dyer, fol. 128.

Where it is said, That if he be commanded to return, either by the privy Seal,
or the great Seal, and refuse, his Lands and his Chattels shall be siesed into
the Kings hands; and for that a President was found in the Exchequer, where in
Anno 19 E. 2. It was William de Britains case, although it is true (as I said)
the first departure is no offense according to the Book of 13 Eliz. D. fol.
296. But then admitting he is a Bankrupt, and admitting that by his refusal to
return he has forfeited all his Goods and Lands to the King, The Question is,
whether the King, or the Creditors shall be preferred? And I take it the
(Creditors shall be preferred) Yet He agree the rule is, that when a title
falls to the King and a Common person both at once, the King shall be preferred.

Dame Hales, Villain and Idiot, Priority and Posteriority. 5 E. 3.

But I rely upon a Case, which was ruled upon a Trial by my Lord Cok. 12. Jac.
int. Newman and Martin, ou Martin fuit adjudge Bankrupt because he was beyond
the Seas, etc.

2. Points upon the Statute. One has the freehold and another has the
Copyhold of one only acre severed from the Manor, this is plain, as it is in
my Lord Cokes 4. reports in Case. This Copyhold by no means can be transferred
from one to another. But now our question is, Whether this Copy may be sold by
Commissioners? I say, Parliamentum potest omnia, By Act of Parliament it may be
sold, And here the very words of the Parliament are, That the Commissioners may
sell his Copyhold estate.

The Law was taken before Corbets case was first argued, That it was impossible
to cut off perpetuities, yet there were diverse before, that were cut off by Act
of Parliament, and they all that argued for the perpetuites agreed, that by Act
of Parliament it might be done. By the Common Law a thing in action cannot be
transferred, as a debt upon an Obligation; Yet by the Statute of Bankrupt,
Jacobi primo, we see it is done every day.

But it will be objected, that the Statute goes on and says, That the Vendee
shall compound with the Lord for the Fine, and be admitted: Now if there can be
no admittance, then no sale, and it shall be intended such Copyhold whereof
admittance may be. And in Dr. Bonhams case, diverse cases are put where diverse
Acts of Parliament are void and diverse others construed directly contrary to
the words. But out of that Case I will prove this to be good; for first this
Act says, The Commissioners may sell, then there is their Authority; the
Vendee shall compound, that is a second action which must be done, if it may be
done. Hillary 38 Eliz. A Grant was made to the Mayor and Commonalty of London,
that the Mayor should have the search, etc. of all Handicrafts, and should
punish them, but granted no Court where the same should be punished; this was
good for to search, and to discover; but void for him to punish, but it must be
punished, as it may be otherwise.

The Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 13. of Highways says, Who comes not at the common
days shall forfeit, and orders, that the offense shall be presented at the next
Sessions, etc. Upon pain of Forty Shillings; no Certificate is made, yet the
offense shall be punished.

3. But now we are upon the point of Fines, a question rises in this Case,
whether two Fines, or but one, or no Fine be due to the Lord; and I think a
Fine is due. Plainly two Fines should have been paid, one to the Lord of the
Manor upon the surrender of A. to C. and another upon the sale by the
Commissioners, as it is in the 4th. Report fo. 22. the heir surrenders before
admittance, the Lord shall have two Fines. But in Hubbard and Hammond's Case,
it is said no Fine is due to the Lord before admittance; for the admittance is
the cause of the Fine; and if after admittance it be denied, it is a
forfeiture. But I take it in this case, the Lord shall have no Fines; for the
Statute must have a reasonable construction; and indeed for all parties
according to equity; and in all Statutes where the ordering of things is
referred to men's discretions, equity and good Conscience ought to respected;
and therefore it is said, 3 E. 3. An account ought to be amended by the
Auditors, according to equity and good faith: But what remedy has the Lord for
it?

4. But here a Fine is tendered, and refused; now the question is double, 1.
What remedy generally? 2. Whether it be lost for ever or not? For the first, if
it had been in a case that the Lord could have admitted him, he should have had
the ordinary remedy, as all Lords have for their Fines, that is upon
presentment of a Surrender, or of the death of a Tenant, or of sale by
Commissioners, the order is to call the Party that should be admitted, and if
he come not in time, to seize his Land: But here can be no Calling, for here is
no Court: Surely, I think as the Vendee may enter without admittance, so the
Lord may enter again upon him, and seize the Land till his Fines be paid; but
these Fines have been tendered, and refused.

We see that tender and refusal in many cases is peremptory, as Littleton in
case of Mortgage.

27 E. 3.88. Un distr. pur dam. fesant, and si avoyde, the Tenant pleaded, that
before the taking, at the taking, and after the taking, he tendered sufficient
amends, and the Avowant refused, he has lost his damages, and shall pay
damages, etc.

22 Hen. 6.44. A Man is bound in an Obligation to stand to the award of J. S.
he awards that the one shall release the other, who tenders a release, the
other refuses, in Action of Debt, sur le ob. tender and refusal is a good plea,
sans dira uncor Prist.

But yet in the same case it is put, That if Money had been awarded, and
tendered, and refused, the Bond had been saved, but the duty had remained.

45 E. 3.9. The Lord destrains, the Tenant tenders, the Lord refuses, yet the
Rent is not lost, but at another time the Lord may distrain.

Brian, If the Tenant tender his homage, and the Lord refuse, he cannot
destrain, but upon a request, if the Tenant refuse, he may destrain. So here,
the Tenant tenders his Fine, the Lord refuses, I take it the Fine is not lost;
but after a new request the Lord may seize.

5. The last point upon my Statute is, a Bankrupt purchases a Copyhold, and the
Tenant surrenders into two Tenants hands to the use of the Bankrupt, and now he
will not be admitted: whether the Commissioners shall sell the Copyhold? And I
think they shall by the very words of the Statute, which are, That the
Commissioners shall sell all Lands which the Bankrupt shall purchase with any
other Persons of trust, or to his secret use; If then they may sell Lands
wherein he has secret use, much more, Lands wherein he has an express use:
And in this Case, if his negligence to pray to be admitted, or his absence
beyond Sea shall hinder the present Sale, and he die, his heir may be admitted
after his decease: And then a greater Question will rise, Whether the Land may
be sold, or not?

2. A Copyholder of Inheritance, where the Custom is, that the Wife shall be
endowed, surrenders into the hands of two Tenants to the use of the Mayor and
Commonalty of D. in Fee, and dies; the Wife marries with I. S. a Merchant, the
Mayor and Commonalty are admitted, the Heir of the Copyholder enters: I. S. and
his Wife affirm a Plaint in the Lords Court, in nature of a Writ of Dower, and
recover against the Heir, the Mayor and Commonalty enter, I. S. and his Wife
sue a Precept, in nature of a Scire facias, against the Mayor and Commonalty,
for to have a a Writ De Dote assignanda, and damages: I. S. becomes a Bankrupt,
the Commissioners sell the Copyhold, and assign the damages which shall be
recovered; the Vendee compounds with the Lord.

This is a good sale for a third part of the Copyhold, during the Coverture,
and a good Composition; but the Assignment of the Damages is void.

3. A. Is Tenant in Tail of a Manor, where the Custom is, that the Wife of a
Copyholder shall have a Widow's Estate: A. grants white Acre to B. by Copy for
life, and after he makes a Lease of white Acre for life to F. the Wife of B.
dies: A. makes a Feoffment of the Manor to G. and all the Tenants attorn: A.
dies, B. takes a second Wife, and dies, the Issue in Tail enters into the
Manor; the second Wife takes M. to Husband, who becomes a Bankrupt; the
Commissioners sell white Acre, the Vendee compounds with the Issue in Tail, and
enters, F. dies.

The Sale is good during Coverture, and the Composition is good.

4. Baron and Feme have issue, A. a Daughter, the Baron dies, the Manor of
Sale is given to the Feme for life, the remainder to the Heirs of the Baron and
Feme: A Copyholder surrenders to the use of himself in Tail; the remainder to
A. in Fee, the Feme takes a second Husband, and has issue B. another Daughter
and dies, A. enters, the Copyholder suffers a customary recovery, and dies
without issue; his Heir being a Merchant, and Bankrupt: B. enters, the
Commissioners sell the Copyhold: the Vendee compounds with B.

The Sale is good, but the Composition is good but for a fourth part.

1. A. Shall have a Moiety as Heir of the Husband, and the Moiety of the other
Moiety as Heir of the Feme, and B. the residue. 2. If Tenant by Copy, by
Recovery may bar the Remainder? 3. If when the Lord is in Remainder, it be not
so annexed to the Fee, that it cannot be pulled out by a Recovery?
5. The Manor of D. is holden of the Manor of S. by Copy, and I. S. holds a
House, and Land Common for ten Cows of the Manor of D. by Copy in Fee: The
Lord of D. surrenders his Manor to the use of I. S. for life, who is admitted
accordingly: I. S. grants the Common by Copy to A. a Merchant, A. is admitted,
and is a Bankrupt; I. S. dies, the Lord of D. enters, the Commissioners sell
the Common, the Vendee compounds with the Executors of I. S.

The Common cannot be sold, and if it might the Composition shall be with the
Lord of D.

6. Tenant by Copy is disseised, and the Disseisor is admitted Tenant by the
Lord; the Lord bargains and sells the Manor to I. S. in Fee, by Deed enrolled,
the Disseisee becomes a Bankrupt; the Commissioners sell the Copyhold, the
Vendee compounds with the Bargainer.

This is a good Sale, and a good Composition.

1. If Tenant by Copy may be disseised, or ousted, and this shall be no
disseisin to the Lord? 2. If the Lord by the admittance of the Disseisor has
dispensed with the disseisin in part, and so he may apportion his own wrong?
7. A. disseises B. of the Manor of S. and dies seized, C. the Son of A.
enters, a Copyhold escheats; D. enters and disseises C. and Leases the Manor
for years to E. who grants the Copy to F. in Fee; F. dies, his Heir is sworn of
the Homage, and becomes a Bankrupt; D. dies, B. enters, the Commissioners sell
the Copyhold, the Vendee compounds with B. and is admitted; the Heir of D.
recovers in a Mortdauncester, C. recovers in Entry sur disseisin, and B.
recovers against him in a Writ of Right.

The Sale is good, and the Composition good.

8. A. and B. joynt-Tenants in Fee of a Manor, they grant white Acre to I. S.
for life by Copy; A. enters into Religion at Roan, B. makes a Lease for years
of the Acre to C. to whom I. S. surrenders; B. dies, A. is deraigned, C.
surrenders to A. I. S. becomes a Bankrupt; the Commissioners sell the Copyhold,
the Vendee compounds with A. the Heir of B. enters.

This is a good Sale, and a good Composition for a Moiety.

9. Six Copyholds escheat, the Lord grants them to A. a Merchant indebted, and
after the Lord makes a Feoffment of the Freehold of the Copyhold to B. C. and
D. the Merchant gives over Trading, B. disseises C. and D. the Merchant
continues his debt by Interest, seven years pass, C. and D. recover against B.
and have judgment to hold in severalty; C. and D. make partition; the Merchant
renues his Bonds with the Creditors, and keeps his House, the Commissioners
sell the Copyholds, the Vendee compounds with B. C. and D. severally admitted.

The Sale is not good, because the Merchant is no Bankrupt; but if it were
good, the Composition was good, and B. C. and D. have three Customary Manors.

The Sixth Division.
What Fees, Annuities, Officers, Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises, and
Debts of a Bankrupt may be sold by the Commissioners.
1. BEfore Quia Emptores, one makes a Feoffment in Fee, rendering Rent to be
holden by Foreign service, and a Tenant dies, and his Heir dies before entry,
and a Stranger abates, the Lord becomes a Bankrupt, the Heir recovers in
Mortdauncester, the Commissioners sell all the Debts of the Lord.

The Vendee shall have two actions of Debt for two several Reliefs.

1. If the Heir shall pay Relief when his Ancestor had but a Possession in Law?
he shall, Kelloway 173 6 H. 8. 2. If Debt lies against the Heir, for relief
due, after the death of his Grandfather? 13 E. 3. Relief 6. A distress lies. 3.
If Fee-farm made before Quia Emptores shall pay Relief? 45 E. 3. fol. 15. now
it shall not. 4. If Tenant in Knights Service shall pay Relief? Kelloway. 5. If
the Heir shall pay relief for Land which he had by recovery? 6. Debt lies for
relief by the Lord himself, 23 H. 8. Brook. It lies for his Executors. 7. If
relief is such a debt or duty which the Commissioners may sell?
2. A. Tenant of two Acres herriotable covenants to stand seized to the use of
himself for life, the remainder to his Son in Fee, with clause of revocation,
and for money paid, he bargains one Acre to B. B. dies, the Lord seizes a
Herriot, the Heir of B. re-enfeoffs A. A. revokes the first Deed, the Lord is a
Bankrupt, A. dies, the Commissioners sell all the Lords Goods to C. C. takes
relief of the Heir of A.

C. Shall have detinue for two Herriots against the Executors of A.

1. If two Herriots, or but one are due notwithstanding the repurchase? 34 E.
3. Herriot 1.2. They are due. 2. If the power of revocation be not gone
notwithstanding the repurchase? 3. If acceptance of relief of the heir may be
pleaded by the Executors in an action against them for the Herriot? 26 E. 1. H.
6. Quaere. 4. If detinue lies for a Herriot-Custom? 6 E. 3.29. R. 2. Herriot 4.
and 5. the Lord may seize it in all the goods. 5. If the property of the
Herriot is so vested in the Lord before seizure, that the Commissioners may
sell it?
3. The King grants the Office of Aulnage of London to a Merchant stranger for
years, with a Fee of 20. l. per annum, who assigns it to a Merchant Denizen
indebted, who discontinues his Trade of Merchandise, and lives by his Office,
and enters into Recognizances for his debts, and makes I. S. dis deputy, and is
made Steward of the Tower of London, the Recognizances are forfeited, and he
keeps himself in the Tower, Office is found.

The Commissioners shall neither sell the Office, nor the Fee.

1. If the Lease be good, because no Office of trust, or confidence? 2. If
discontinuance of Merchandise is an exemption from the Statute, when the
Creditors have taken new assurances? 3. If the Steward of the Tower is not sole
Judge there by Prescription?
4. A Feme sole Alien, grants to A. a Scottish Merchant, the Office to be the
master of her horse, with a Fee of 20. l. per annum for his life; she takes a
Husband, who is made King of England, who by his Letters Patents grants the
Mastership of the Queens Horse to I. S. with a Pension out of the Exchequer,
the Scot becomes a Bankrupt.

The Commissioners shall not sell his Office, but they may sell his Fee, and
the Vendee shall have an Annuity for it against the Queen.

5. A Resiant is enjoined in the Leet to reform a public nusans by him made
before such a day, upon pain of 10. l. at the next Court he is presented,
because no reformation is made; and there then the Tenant Traverses the
Presentment, that he is not guilty; the Traverse is disallowed, the Lord
becomes a Bankrupt, the Affeerors resuse to affeere the amerciament, the
Commissioners sell all the debts of the Bankrupt to A.

A. Shall have an action of debt for this amerciament.

6. A. sues execution of a Statute Merchant, and the Conizors Land is extended
at too high a value, and refused by the Extendor, and delivered to the Jurors,
B. defeats the execution by extending an elder Statute; A. is a Bankrupt, the
Commissioners sell all his debts, the elder Statute is satisfied, the Jurors
will not enter.

This is a good Sale of the possibility to extend, and the Vendee shall have a
Scire facias against the Tenant by the elder Statute, and the terretenants, and
the Jurors to revive the former Execution.

7. A. and B. Tenants is Common, grant a rent of 10. l. per annum to C. who
brings an Annuity against A. and recovers, and after he distrains and Avows
upon B. and becomes a Bankrupt, the Commissioners sell the Annuity, and the
rent, a fourth part of the Land descends to the Vendee.

The sale of the Annuity, and also of the rent were good, but he shall Avow
upon B. but for 5. l. per annum.

1. If he can bring an Annuity against one, and distrain the other? 2. How a
Rent shall be apportioned when part of the Land descends to the Grantee? 3. If
a Rent charge be within this Statute, because it is not within the words?
8. A Manor in Surry is giving to Baron and Feme, and to the heirs of the
Baron, the Baron dies, his heir, being a Merchant, claims the heirlooms; the
Executors of the Father claim them as Chatells, the heir sells the Reversion,
and becomes a Bankrupt, the Commissioners sell the heir-looms.

This a good sale, but the Wife shall have the use of them during her life.

9. One makes a Feoffment upon condition that the heir of the Feoffee shall
infeoff I. S. the Feoffee grants a Rent charge, the Feoffer enters for the
Conditions, and dies; the Feoffee re enters, and two Copartners being the
heirs of the Feoffor, bring a Mortdauncester against the Feoffee, and recover
the Land, and damages, they have other Land in execution by Elegit for the
damages, the one dies, the other is a Bankrupt.

The Commissioners shall sell all the Extent.

10. A Disseisor makes a Lease for life to A. who makes a Lease for years to B.
a Merchant stranger, who is made Denizen, upon Condition that he shall not
depart the Realm, the Disseisee confirms his estate, Tenant for life dies, the
Disseisor enters, B. being non solvent, by License of the King (with a Non
obstante) departs the Realm, the Commissioners sell the term, the Vendee enters
upon the Disseisor.

The sale of this term is good.

11. A. By Deed Poll demises the Land of B. to C. a Merchant, who enters, B.
reenters, C. in an action of Covenant, grounded upon the Deed, recovers 10. l.
damages against A. C. being indebted is committed to Prison by the High
Commissioners for non payment of a Fine by them assessed, and there he remains
by six months; the Commissioners assign the damages to D. who sues a Scire
facias in his own name against A. and has Judgment to have Execution, A.
brings a Writ of Error against C. of the first Judgment, C. confesses the
Error.

The Judgment is erroneous, and yet the assignment of the damages is good, and
D. shall have Execution.

12. A. Makes a Jointure to his Wife an Alien of part of his Land, and dies,
she is made a Denizen, and takes a Bankrupt to Husband, the Commissioners sell
the Jointure, part of it is evicted by elder title, she sues a Scire facias,
and recovers other Land in recompense, an Office is found, the Commissioners
sell as well the Land recovered in value, as the residue which was not evicted.

The sale of the Land recovered in value is good, but not for the residue.

For New-Inn.
The Case.
THe Land of A. is extended for the debt of B. and A. grants the reversion to
C. in Tail, B. attornes, and has a Liberate, A. grants the reversion of C. to
D. a Feme sole Merchant Denizen of Ireland; C. commits Treason, and attorns,
and suffers a common recovery to the use of himself; D. takes E. an Alien and
Londoner to Husband, C. is attainted, D. continues sole Merchant, E. is
naturalized, D. is indebted, and elopes, C. dies without issue, E. enters, and
is non solvent, a Commission is awarded, and proclaimed, D. has issue and
dies, an Office is found, the Term expires.

Conclusion The Land shall be sold by the Commissioners.

1. When Land is extended, and before a Liberate, it is to be considered in
whom the Land is, 3 E. 6.68. It is said, that goods extended are in the custody
of the Law, but yet not so out of the Conizors possession, but that they may be
extended for the Kings debt due by the Conizor, 41 E. 3. Fitz Recognizance 38.
Land was extended by the Sheriff, and before Liberate, the Lands were extended
for the Kings debt, and so process stayed, 33 H. 8. Broke Recognizance 41.
Liberate may be taken out seven years after the extent, 41 E. 3. fol. 1. It is
questioned whether the party, or the King shall have the mean profits of Lands
taken by cape grand, till a petty cape.

Also it will be objected, that a reversion will pass by words of possession,
but possession will not pass by words of reversion. Frokmerton and Tracy, 43 E.
3. and Smith, and Stapleton.

But except we prove this reversion to be well granted, we are at an end of our
case, for all the rest depends upon this point.

We say then, that when Lands are extended, it is plain, they are out of the
Conizor presently: And although it seems, that for the time they are in the
Kings hands, yet when the Liberate comes they are in the Conizee ab initio, and
by strong relation.

So as if a Manor be extended to which an Advowson is appendent, and the
Church becomes void, and Liberate sued, the Conizee (and neither the King, nor
the Conizer) shall present. So if Arrearages of Rents fall due between the
extent and the Liberate, the Conizee shall distrain, and avow for them.

Wherein I will compare it to Longs Case, that was in the Common Pleas, Pasch.
31 Eliz. Rot. 2024. one granted a Manor to which an Advowson was appendent,
and made Livery, the Church became void, and afterward the Tenants, attorned,
the Grantee shall present, and the Attornment shall relate to make the Grantee
in from the time of the Feoffment. And although it is said, 8 H. 5. fo. 10.
that no man can attorn to a grant of a reversion, that has as yet nothing in
possession, but hopes or possibilities, As if Tenant for life grant his Estate
upon condition, and the reversion is granted, and he attorns, and then enters
for the Condition, yet the attornment is void: But yet the Law will respect
such a possibility as 5 E. 3. fol. 36. Lands were given to the Baron and Feme,
the Baron dies, the Feme makes a Lease for her own life, the Lessee is
impleaded in a Cui in vita, and he vouches the Feme, and she prays in aid of
the heir of the Husband, and well, and yet the Feme had nothing.

If I bargain, and sell Lands to one for life, and then I grant the reversion,
and the Barganee attorns, and then the Deed is Enrolled, this Reversion is well
granted, and this is a good Attornment.

But it may be objected, that the Land is not in the Conizee upon the extent,
for if it be extended at too high a rate, he may return it upon the extendors;
for so are the Books of 44 E. 3. 2 H. 4.17. 21 E. 3.21. 15 H. 7.16. and diverse
others Books.

But I make this an Argument for my self; for that shows it is out of the
Conizor, and if the Land were in the extendors hands, no doubt but the
reversion might be granted, and by the Book of 1 E. 3.8. in a quid juris
clamat, they shall be forced to attorne.

2 But admit that such a grant of reversion may be made, yet no grant of a
reversion can be good without Attornment of the particular Tenant, and here
your Conizee the Tenant attorns before his time, that is, before he has
possession by the Liberate, and so the case of 8 H. 5. fol. 10. comes full
against you. To that I answer, That the Tenant by Statute is esteemed (in point
of Attornment) as Tenant for term of years; for so the Case of 1 E. 3. fol. 8.
esteems him. And I make small Question, but that if a man make a Lease for
years, and before the Lessee enter the Lessor grants the reversion, and the
Lessee attorns, This is a good Attornment? for it matters not whether ever the
Lessee entered or not; for the Land was in him to give, grant, or forfeit, and
21 H. 7. fol. 27. after such a Lease, If the Lessee will not enter, (yet if the
Lessor waive the possession) and a rent day accrews, the Lessor may have an
action of debt against the Lessee without ever making any averment that the
Lessee entered. So in our Case, although the Conizee cannot enter of himself,
but by the Livery of the Sheriff, yet he is not in by the Sheriff, but by the
Law in the Post. And it is not very absurd to say, he is in by and under, and
from the Conizor: for if the Conizor had Covenanted, that any to whom he (after
the Recognizance) had conveyed the Land should have enjoyed it against all
claiming from by and under him, and the Conizee had sued execution, the
Covenant had been broken.

3. Then allowing that this first grant of the reversion is good to C. in Tail;
Then the next question is that C. commits Treason, and A. grants the reversion
of C. in Fee to D. and C. Attornes, Whether this be a good Attorment? Whether
if C. comes afterward to be attainted for the Treason, and an Office being
found has relation to entitle the King to the Land from the time of the
Treason committed, that is, Whether this Office shall not relate to make C. no
Tenant of the Land from the Time of the Treason committed. I will agree, it
will relate to avoid all charges and encumbrances made by C. but yet the
Attornment is good; for that I will put but one Case, that comes full home to
the point, which is, Sir Miles Fleetwood's Case, in my Lord Cooks 8. Report,
which is that the Attainder, and Office relate to entitle the King to the Land
from the time of the Treason committed, but not to Chattels sold, or to the
mean profits of Lands received, so as for the mean time C. was Tenant, and
might take the Profits, and the Rents paid to him by the Tenants were well
paid, then a fortiore might he do, and execute all instrumental Acts, as if he
had been Lord of a Manor, and a Copyholder (after the Treason, and before
Attainder) had surrendered to the use of another, who had been admitted, the
surrender and admittance had been good, and so consequently the Attornment; for
by the Attornment he parts with nothing of his own, only he is a means to
profit another man's grant of that which was never his.

4. The next Question is, That the Tenant in Tail commits Treason, suffers a
Recovery to the use of himself, and then it attainted, whether the King shall
have the Fee-simple, or else whether the Office shall not relate to make the
Recovery void? and whether he in Reversion, who by intention of Law had
recovered other Land in value, shall have any benefit against the King, by the
Kings privilege, which he has to avoid this Recovery?

It is plain, that if this Recovery had been to the use of a Stranger, the King
by Office should avoid it, and consequently he in Remainder would have been
remitted.

The difference of the relation of an Office to entitle the King to Goods, but
from the Attainder, and to Lands from the time of the offense committed are
these, 42 E. 3.26. 33 E. 3. Fitz. Forfeiture. 30 31 H. 6.5. temp. H. 8. Bro.
fo. 42.

I take it, that if the King in this Case had taken the benefit of the Statute
of 33 H. 8. c. 20. which gives the King all the Lands which a person attainted
has at the time of his Attainder, though there be no Office sound, then the
King might have seized the Land, and the party had had no remedy. But now an
Office being found, the King is in by the Office, which discovers the whole
matter of Record, and the party has the benefit thereby, And thereby it
appears that C. was by the offense, and the relation of the Attainder disabled
to make any Conveyance or disposition of his Land; That a Common Recovery is a
Conveyance; vide Coke li. primo, Pelhams Case. So this Grant of the reversion
to D. is good, and not pulled out by the Recovery.

But it is granted to one that is an Alien born, but made a Denizen of Ireland,
whether now the King be not entitled to the reversion in Fee, as the Lands of
an Alien?

I take it, that he that is free of Ireland, is free of England, it is true,
that one which was born in Scotland ante, etc. and these that were born in
times past in Aquitain, or in Normandy were Aliens born, because these
Countries were brought with the Kings of England as their former inheritance;
but Ireland was conquered by H. 2. and inhabited, and planted with Englishmen,
and upon the matter made part of the demeasnes of the Crown of England, as
other Islands are, as the Wight, and Jernesey, Virginia and Greenland, and
therefore the Kings of England did not call themselves Kings of Ireland, but
Lords of Ireland, and the Parliaments of England bound them till 2 H. 7. and
they are governed by the Laws of England; And if a Denizen of Ireland bring an
Action in Ireland, and it be adjudged against him there, he may have a Writ of
Error in the Kings Bench here, and reverse it, and it is no Plea of the
Defendant here to plead in abatement of the Writ of Error, that the Plaintiff
is an Alien, which shows, that if he be free of Ireland, he is free of England,
as all born in Ireland are. Authorities that Ireland is subject to the Laws of
England, and that their errors are to be corrected here, viz. 15 E. 3. Fitz.
Record 17. and error. 72.34. As. 7. 5 E. 2. Fitz. Error. 89. Natura Brevium,
fol. 22. E.

See Case de post nati. 2 R. 3.12. Kelway 11 H. ^. fol. 202. read this case.

6. She is married to a Londoner being an Alien, It may be questioned whether
an Alien be capable of the freedom of London, or not? and I say, he is; but
there be private orders, that none shall be admitted or made free; but if de
facto, he be made free, then free he is till he be disfranchised.

7. That the Wife of a Freeman of London may by the custom be a sole Merchant,
1 E. 4. fol. 6. ^5 H. 6.28. 9 E. 4.35. 21 H. 7.17.

Points upon the Statute.
1. WHether such a Feme covert, sole Merchant can be a Bankrupt? I think she
may, for (...) by the custom, she may buy, and sell, and ^^e, and be sued, then
she is within the words of the Statute, which is getting her living by buying
and selling; for otherwise the Statute would be deluded, and the Londoners
Wives only shall buy and sell, and trade. 2. Whether a Denizen of Ireland be
within this Statute? Besides the former Arguments, see the words of the
Statute, which are, etc. But you must intend that she was made Denizen of
Ireland by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, and not of that of
Ireland: Note, an old difference. 3. Whether the Wife can be a Bankrupt within
this Statute, when the Husband, because he is an Alien, cannot be within the
same? As if an Alien marry an English woman, and they with others rebel, the
Woman is a Rebel, and a Traitor, and if she be taken in the Wars, she shall be
executed in cold blood, but the Husband is but as an Enemy, and by the Law of
Arms may be ransomed. 4. But he is afterward naturalized, whether he be within
the Equity of the Statute, because he is not within the words? But tantamount:
amplify this with cases of tantamount, and of qui potest majus and minus
potest si unico vincentem te a majori unico te. 5. If a Feme Covert sole
Merchant elopeing shall be a Bankrupt? the difference will be when she lopes
carrying her Goods with her, so as she leaves her Husband non solvent, and when
she leaves him sufficient; for if such a Woman be indebted, no doubt but the
Creditor may sue her by the Custom in the Courts of the City, or else he may
sue the Husband alone at the Common Law: But if he be non solvent her absenting
of her self will make them both Bankrupt; her, as a Merchant by Custom, and him
to his folly to suffer her. 6. Whether her Land shall be sold? it shall; for it
may be, it was the credit of her land, that procured her to be trusted. 7. And
it shall be sold after her death by the Statute of primo Jacobi of Bankrupts.
8. Whether his Estate which he has as Tenant by the courtesy shall be sold?
for the Estate of Dower of a Bankrupts Wife shall never be sold: But I answer,
here the Land shall be sold, and he shall not be Tenant by the courtesy.
First, note in many cases where there shall be Dower, but yet no tenancy by the
courtesy, as Payne's Case. Lands are given to a Feme, and to the Heirs Males
of her body, and she has issue a Daughter, and dies, the Husband shall not be
Tenant by the courtesy, the same it is if the issue be ripped out of his
Mothers belly after her death: But here the Husband is particeps Criminis, and
a Bankrupt, and his interest shall be sold for his debt; for so were all the
debts of his Wives making, and his Wife traded in his right, and for him, if he
so please, and the Reversion shall be sold for the payment of the same debts;
for they were hers.
The first Division.
Who shall be said a Merchant, or other person seeking his, or her, living by
buying and selling.
1. AN Inn keeper is indebted, and absents himhimself; he is a Bankrupt. 2. A
Feme Covert sole Merchant in London, the Baron is outlawed, the Feme is a
Bankrupt. 3. A Feme Covert sole Merchant in London elopes, the Husband is non
solvent, the Feme is Bankrupt, and her Land shall be sold. 4. An Officer of the
Court takes a Lease of the King, of the sole Preemption of Tyn, he is a
Bankrupt for all debts he makes during his Term. 5. Such a Lessee pays not his
Debts in seven years after his Lease expires, and after he leaves off buying
and selling of Tyn, yet he is a Bankrupt: But if his Creditors give him longer
time (after he has given over) and cancel their old Assurances, and take new:
he is no Bankrupt. 6. A Grasier that hireth Grounds, and buys Cattle and feeds
them, and sells them again is a Bankrupt: but if he grase his own Freehold,
contrary. 7. A Clothier that sets poor People a Work, but himself does nothing
but buy Wool, and sell Cloth, is a Bankrupt: But if he work himself, and keep
Looms and Servants, contrary. 8. An Ironmonger in London is a Bankrupt, but a
Lock-Smith, contrary. 9. A Goldsmith Hammer-man is not a Bankrupt, but a
Goldsmith Shoop-keeper is a Bankrupt. 10. A Gentleman Adventurer in Virginia is
not, but to the East Indies is a Bankrupt. 11. An Adventurer into Greenland is
not a Bankrupt, into Muscovia is a Bankrupt: No Adventurers for Discovery, and
Plantation, are within the Statute, although they carry with them trifles to
exchange, and truck with the Savages; for their end is not Merchandising. 12. A
Nobleman has granted to him the sole importing of Cards, or Glasses, is a
Bankrupt: but a Monopolist that has granted to him the sole making, contrary.
13. A Tailor that uses to make apparel to Noblemen or Ladies, and to buy the
stuffs for them, and sets higher prizes in Bills then the stuffs cost, is a
Tromper and a Deceiver, but not a Bankrupt. 14. But a Tailor in London whom we
call a Salesman that keeps Shop of Apparel to sell ready made is a Bankrupt, he
is like a Clothier. 15. No Handicrafts-man that is in the compass of the
Statute of 5 Eliz. is a Bankrupt, although he buy his Materials wherewith he
makes his Ware, and sells his Ware again, as a Shoemaker. 16. A Vinter is a
Bankrupt, for he buys Wine, and sells Wine: but I doubt of a Brewer.
The second Division.
Who shall be said to be a Subject born within the Realm, or Denizen.
1. NO Ambassadors Children born in England can be; for although they were born
within the Realm, yet they are not Subjects born. 2. One born upon the Coasts
of Denmark, or the Low Countries is no Bankrupt; but one born upon any part of
the French Coasts, or Brittany, between Calice and the Isle of Oleron is a
Bankrupt. 3. One born in Ireland, or the Isle of Man, or in Garnesey, etc. or
in Barwick is a Bankrupt, but neither the ante nati nor post nati of Scotland
are within this Statute, but they are both within the Statute, of primo the
King. 4. A Merchant Stranger is made Denizen upon condition that within seven
years he shall marry an English Woman, he becomes indebted, and at five years
end he marries an Alien, and departs the Realm, and before seven years end she
dies, and he marries an English Woman, he shall be Denizen, and Bankrupt within
this Statute. 5. A Merchant Stranger is made Denizen upon condition, that he
shall not depart the Realm, and he departs, yet he is a Bankrupt; but if it
were for another life, contrary; for that is not his own act. 6. One is made
Denizen of Ireland by Charter under the Great Seal of Ireland, he is no
Bankrupt; but if it were under the Great Seal of England, contrary. 7. One
naturalized by Act of Parliament is Bankrupt. 8. A Merchant Stranger is sworn
to Allegiance in the Leet, or at Sessions, and dwells here for twelve years, by
the Law of Nations this makes him subject to the King, but not within the
Statute; for he must be a Subject born, wherein he is different from an
Ambassadors Son; for he is born, but no Subject, and this contrary. 9. Baron
and Feme travel beyond the Seas by License, a Son born there is not a Bankrupt,
yet he is a Subject, but not a Subject born within the Realm. 10. One born in
England, becomes a sworn Subject to the King of Spain, and dwells and trades
there for two years: he is within the Statute, and his Goods there shall be
sold. Doctor Story. 11. A Merchant Stranger is naturalized without being sworn
to the Supremacy, or Allegiance, he is a Bankrupt notwithstanding the Statute
of 7 Jacobi, cap. 2.
The Third Division.
In what Cases, and what matters make one Bankrupt, as departing the Realm,
etc. as in the second Division.
1. A Feme Covert sole Merchant of London Elopes with her Goods into Scotland,
she is a Bankrupt. 2. The Baron of such a Feme is outlawed for the Debt of the
Feme, the Baron and Feme are both Bankrupts. 3. A Merchant departs the Realm to
Merchandise, and becomes indebted, and to avoid arrests, defers his return,
this does tantamount, as a departing of the Realm. 4. One departs the Realm by
License, and becomes a Merchant, and a Privy Seal awarded against him; he
refuses to return, he is a Bankrupt. 5. A Capias de excommunicato capiendo is
awarded against one, who for fear of Arrests, departs the Realm, he is no
Bankrupt. 6. The same for departing the Realm, or keeping his House for fear of
an Attachment in Chancery. 7. A Merchant indebted, keeps a Shipboard, this is
keeping his House. 8. A Maltman becomes a Miller, and he keeps in the Mill. 9.
The King grants to a Merchant indebted the keeping of a Castle, who keeps the
same by color of his Office, but for fear of Arrests refuses to come abroad
to Church, etc. 10. A Merchant indebted, departs the Realm to Merchandise, and
having loss by Tempest, returns no more, this is not a departing, etc. but an
absenting himself. 11. One recovers debt in the Admirals Court, upon a Contract
made upon the high Sea, and the Defendant being a Merchant lies in execution in
the Admirals Prison for six months, he is a Bankrupt. 12. An Apothecary is made
Churchwarden, and being indebted keeps in the Church; this is a keeping of his
House. 13. One has no House of his own, but keeps in another man's House, and
is a Bankrupt, it is his House. 14. There be now in England no Sanctuaries,
therefore all privileged places where the Kings Officers cannot come, (and yet
there is no Law, nor Justice to be had judicially in the place,) is within
these words of taking of Sanctuary. 15. To keep in the Tower of London is no
taking of Sanctuary, but if the Steward, or the Lieutenant be a Merchant, and
indebted, and keep the Tower, he is a Bankrupt. 16. One takes Gray's-Inn, is a
Bankrupt, yet they have no exemption from Officers, but usus, and condo, etc.
17. One has no House, but an upper Chamber, 7 E. 3. 18. One is outlawed, he is
a Bankrupt, but if the Outlary be reversed for want of Proclamations, all done
in the mean time by the Commissioners is void; but if it were reversed for
Error, contrary. 19. One outlawed in the County Palatine of Durham is a
Bankrupt, but contrary in Ireland, for the Record is not pleadable here. 20. A
Merchant has a Rectory appropriate, the Quire is not repaired, the Tithes are
sequestered, no sequestration within the Statute. 21. A Merchant ackowledges
himself to be the villain of I. S. to defraud his Creditors, he is a Bankrupt,
and yet his goods and body are not subject to Commission.
The fourth Division.
What Freehold Lands of a Bankrupt may be sold by Commissioners.
1. A Merchant makes a Feoffment in Fee upon Condition, upon payment of money
to re-enter, he becomes a Bankrupt, the Commissioners may tender the money at
the day, and sell the Land. 2. A Bankrupt is Tenant in Tail, the Commissioners
may sell the Land, and the sale shall be as good, as if it were by Fine, for
Tenant in Tail by Fine, etc. may lawfully depart with the Land. 3. One has a
Lease for years, upon condition to have in Fee, the Commissioners may sell the
Term, and possession. 4. Land is devised to a Bankrupt the Commissioners may
sell, and the Bankrupt shall not wave the devise. 5. A Bankrupt has a villain,
and manumits him, the Commissioners shall not sell in favorem Libertatis. 6. A
Baron uses merchandise, and is nonsolvent, the Commissioners shall not sell
his Barony. 7. A Rent seck whereof is no seisin shall be sold, and good without
Attornment. 8. All Offices of inheritance shall be sold, as the Wardenship of
the Fleet, or a Jailer by inheritance; contrary of all Offices of trust, that
are but for life. 9. A Monopoly granted to one, and his Assigns, as the sole
making of Cards, etc. shall not be sold, because it is a void Patent, and
nothing passes by it. 10. The Office of sole Printing of Law Books is void,
therefore not saleable. 11. A Bankrupt becomes Lunatique, and Office is found,
yet the Land shall be sold. 12. A Bankrupt is Tenant in Tail, the remainder in
the King of the Provision of the King, sale by the Commissioners shall not be
good against the issue in Tail; for the Bankrupt neither by Fine, nor Recovery
could lawfully part with it but for his life. 13. A Bankrupt has a Seigniory,
the Commissioners seize, before assignment a Tenancy escheats, the Tenancy
shall be sold, but if after seizure of the Seigniory, and before the Escheat
the Bankrupt dies, the Commissioners shall not sell by this Statute, but by the
Statute of primo Jac. the Tenancy shall be sold. 14. Two Joyntenants, one is a
Bankrupt, the Commissioners seize a Moiety, the Bankrupt dies, no part shall be
sold by this Statute, but by primo Jacobi a moiety shall be sold; for that
Statute is, that the Commissioners shall proceed, as if he were living. 15. A
Merchant takes a Wife after he is a Bankrupt, she shall not have Dower against
the Vendee. 16. A Feme Covert sole Merchant inheritrix in London is a Bankrupt,
her land shall be sold, and her Husband shall not be Tenant by the courtesy.
17. A Bankrupt commits Felony, the Land shall not escheat, but the
Commissioners may sell it.
The fifth Division.
What Copyhold Lands shall be sold, and in what case Composition shall be made
with the Lord, and in what not.
1. THe Lord sells the Freehold of one sole Copyholder to A. the Copyholder
is a Bankrupt, the Commissioners shall sell. 2. The Lord is to be compounded
with for the Admission by the Statute, and in this Case here can be neither
Surrender nor Admission, yet by the equity of the Statute the Lord must be
compounded with. 3. Commissioners sell a Copyhold, the Vendee tenders to the
Lord a competent Fine, which the Lord refuses, and will not admit the Vendee,
the Vendee may enter. 4. If a Copyhold be intailed to a Bankrupt in a Manor
where Recoveries are used to cut off intails, Commissioners may sell, but if no
Custom be for Recoveries, contray. 5. A Copy hold is surrendered to the use of
a Bankrupt, who will not take it up, or sue to be admitted, because it shall
not be liable to his Creditors; the Commissioners shall sell it. 6. A Copyhold
is surrendered to the use of a Bankrupt, who will not be admitted; the
Commissioners shall sell, but the Vendee shall pay two Fines. 7. A Copyholder
(where the Feme by Custom shall have Dower) surrenders into the hands of two
Tenants, and dies, the Feme marries a Bankrupt, the surrendree is admitted, the
third part of the Feme shall be sold, but no remedy for the damage betwixt the
death of the Husband, and the admittance. 8. One surrenders Copyhold to the
use of a Bankrupt, the Lord dissolves his Court, yet the Commissioners shall
sell.
The sixth Division.
What Annuities, Fees, Goods, Chattels, Debts, etc. Commissioners may sell.
1. B. Has a Lease for years made unto him upon condition that he shall not
alien, yet the Commissioners may sell, and this is no forfeiture. 2. B. has
the next advowson, the Church is void, the Commissioners sell the Presentation,
the Vendee shall present, and no Symony. 3. A Bankrupt purchases Land with
warranty, the Vendee of the Commissioners shall not vouch, but he shall rebut.
4. Commissioners sell a rent, or reversion, this is good without Attornment. 5.
A Bankrupt becomes Lunatique, his goods shall be sold; as before of Lands, etc.
6. Lord and Tenant, the Lord is a Bankrupt, the Tenant dies, the Commissioners
shall sell, the money, or debt due for relief. 7. The same of a Herriot. 8. The
Lord is a Bankrupt, the Tenant dies, the Commissioners sell the Relief-money,
and the Herriot, the Executors pay the Relief, the heir shall not pay a
Herriot. 9. The King Leases the Aulnage of London for years, the Lessee is a
Bankrupt, the Lease shall be sold. 10. Lord of a Leet is a Bankrupt, the
Commissioners shall sell the Amercements past, and the Vendee shall have an
action of debt. 11. A Lease for years is devised to A. if he live so long, the
remainder to one B. the Commissioners shall not sell the possibility. 12. Land
is extended, and delivered to the Extenders, because too high, another defeats
this Execution, by extending of a former Statute, the first is a Bankrupt, the
Commissioners shall sell the possibility. 13. A Rent charge shall be sold, yet
it is not within the words. 14. The same Law of a Common in gross. 15. It is
the Custom in Surrey, that certain Heir-Looms shall go with the Land, and not
to the Executors, the Land is intailed, Tenent in Tail is a Bankrupt, the
Heir-Looms may be sold from the Land, and the issue has no remedy. 16. Two
Tenants in Common recover damages in trespass, the one dies, the other is a
Bankrupt, all the damages shall be sold. 17. A Bankrupt recovers damages by an
erroneous judgment, the Commissioners assign them to the Creditors, who
recover them in execution, the Judgment is reversed, the sale was good, but
the Assignees or Vendees shall make restitution. 18. A villain is a Merchant,
the Lord seizes all his goods, and imprisons his person for six months, he is a
Bankrupt, the Lord shall have his goods, but his debts shall be sold. 19. A
Villain Merchant is a Bankrupt, the Lord seizes his goods, yet the
Commissioners may sell. 20. A Merchant by Outlary becomes a Bankrupt, the
Creditors shall have his goods, and not the King. 21. A Merchant Bankrupt
commits Felony, his Creditors, and not the King shall have his goods. 22 A
Bankrupt is felo de se, the Almoner shall have his goods, notwithstanding this
Statute, but by primo Jacobi the Commissioners shall have them.
The seventh Division.
Who shall be said a Creditor that shall be relieved, and and who not, and what
shall be said to be a just debt intended?
1. ONe sole Creditor shall not by this Statute sue the Commission; for it
ought to be at the Suit of his Creditors. 2. Merchant Mortgages his Lands, the
Mortgagee may choose to come in as a Creditor. 3. A Merchant enters into a
Statute, or Recognizance, the Conizee is a Creditor, else he shall have neither
Land, nor money, if he come not, and contributes. 4. A Merchant pledges goods
and becomes Bankrupt, the party need not come in. 5. The plaintiff that has
the defendants body in execution, shall not come in to be relieved. 6. But he
that has a judgment for a debt may come in before execution. 7. One that has
the Bankrupts body in execution upon a Statute Merchant may come in. 8. One
that recovers damages in Waste, or Assise, or trespass, shall not be relieved.
9. An Informer recovers money forfeited by a special Statute, he shall not be
relieved. 10. A Bankrupt is indebted to the King, Commissioners seize the
Bankrupts goods, process comes to the Sheriff, he shall leavy the Kings debt
before sale; but if they had sold before the process awarded, the Sale would
have been good. 11. A Merchant is imprisoned, and becomes debtor to A. six
months past, A. shall have relief; for he is not a Bankrupt by relation. 12. A
Bankrupt is committed to prison by Commissioners, because he will not answer
interrogatories, the Jailer gives him credit for victuals, he shall not be
relieved, although he come in before distribution, or any man that trusts him
after. 13. A Bankrupt is indicted and convicted of erecting of Cottages, and
entertaining of Inmates, contrary to the Statue of Eliz. 31. Cap. 7. which
gives 10, s. a month forfeiture to the Lord of the Leet where the offense was
committed, and an Action of debt for the money: he shall not be relieved for
this debt: because no Creditor. 14. A Merchant is bound as Surety for a
Gentleman, and neither of them will pay, but for fear of Arrest the Merchant
keeps his house; the Creditors shall be relieved. Denhams Case. 15. An Executor
becomes Bankrupt, a Legatee shall be relieved. 16. A Decree is made in
Chancery, that a Merchant shall pay 20. l. to I. S. as a debt due in equity I.
S. shall be relieved. 17. But it is decreed in Star Chamber, that a Merchant
for a wrong done to I. S. shall pay him 20. l. and the Merchant becomes a
Bankrupt, I. S. shall not be relieved. 18. One has a debt not yet due, he
shall be presently relieved with a rateable part of abatement for the time. 19.
Four Months are past, and distribution made, and other goods and Lands come or
descend to the Bankrupt, the Creditors shall have no relief of them.
The eighth Division.
What Conveyances made by a Bankrupt, before or after he is Bankrupt, shall be
good, or fraudulent and void.
1. A Merchant to defraud his Creditors, conveys his Lands to the Crown, with a
secret hope, that some friend of his (a Courtier) shall get them again, this
Conveyance is void; for the King shall never be made an instrument of deceit,
18 E. 3. 2. A Bankrupt takes a Feme after he is a Bankrupt, she shall not be
endowed, but if Lands afterward descend to him, of that she shall be endowed.
3. A Bankrupt is disseisor, Commissioners sell the Land, and before the deed be
Enrolled, the disseisee (...) to the Bankrupt, the Vendee shall have the (...)
his release: Quaestio difficilis. 4. A Bankrupt to defraud his Creditors by
Coven with a Lord of a Liberty, becomes a Clerk convict, yet the Commissioners
shall sell. 5. Lord and Tenant, the Tenant makes a Feoffmen to deceive the Lord
of the Wardship of his heir within age, the Tenant becomes a Bankrupt, the Land
shall be sold; for although the Conveyance were fraudulent against none but the
Lord, yet there was a Trust between the Feoffor and the Feoffee. 6. A
Conveyance made by a Merchant in Marriage with his daughter is good. But if he
make such a Marriage, and Conveyance of purpose to defraud his Creditors, with
an intent, that his daughter shall rather have his goods, than his Creditors,
the Land shall be sold.
The ninth Division
What shall be said to be a Concealment of a Bankrupts Goods, Lands, Estate, or
person.
1. THe Bankrupts Wife refuses to be examined, no remedy. 2. The Bankrupts Wife
is examined, but refuses to discover, either her Husbands estate, or his
person, she shall not be committed. 3. A Merchant bona fide, sells Land to I.
S. and afterward becomes Bankrupt, I. S. may choose to show his Evidence.
The tenth Division.
What Declaration, or Account the Commissioners shall make to the Creditors of
a Bankrupt, and what remedy is there for the same.
1. IF the Bankrupt die, yet his Executors shall have an action against the
Commissioners, but if all the Commissioners die, their Executors, nor the
Executors of the Survivor are not accomptable. 2. If after seizure, and before
distribution all the Commissioners but one die, he cannot proceed alone, but a
new Commission shall be awarded, and the new Commissioners shall call the old
to account. 3. If the Commissioners will not pay a Creditor his rateable part,
he has his Action of debt.
The eleventh Division.
What authority the Commissioners have over the body of the Bankrupt.

The twelfth Division.
What danger it is to be out of the Kings protection by the force of this
Statute.

FINIS.

