A Rot Amongst THE BISHOPS, OR, A Terrible Tempest in the Sea of CANTERBURY,
Set forth in lively EMBLEMS to please the judicious Reader:

Incidit in Syllam qui vult vitare Charibdim,
Ovid. By THO: STIRRY.

LONDON, Printed by R.O. and G.D. MDCXLI.

To the Reader.
IT is not unknown to all (Judicious Reader) how many imps of ingenious wits,
upon this Subject, have issued forth into public view. so that he would seem
to power water into the Ocean, or to mend she Crows eyes, that should attempt
to add any thing to what is already published. Know therefore that so various
and wonderful are the works of the Almighty, that they are altogether
unsearchable and past finding out: so that although thousands have gone before
me, yet may I come after and gleane more then sufficient. so many 1000 choice
roots are there in the Garden of our God, that although many have cropped
Flowers enough to compose fragrant and delectable Nosegayes, yet is their
choice enough left for me to gather on; ^ut to be contemned. Nevertheless
far be it from me, out of a vain ostentation, to arrogate any thing to my
self, for I am privy enough, I must confess in this way, to my own
insufficiency, and therefore I will not be a Judge of other men's labors, but
I come,, with an afterdish as one that desires to furnish the same Feast: if it
be pleasing to your Pallats; I need not fear your stomachs; for it is but
small and light of digesture; fall to it, it is an Egyptian Dish dressed after
the English Fashion. For before that immortallizing knowledge of Letters; the
Egyptians were wont to express every thing by Hieroglyphics, or silent
Parables, and therefore I doubt not but you will easily satisfy in this doubt:
why I call the first emblem, a ship of Alexandria: but perchance some may be
offended with me, because I have chosen this Subject rather then any other, let
them know that I have Authority for it; for if the Almighty shall be pleased
in this our age, as Mr. Quarles of Neverdying Memory speaks, to see these proud
Popish Prelates, as Shroving Cooks, for every one to spend a Cudgel at to the
Worlds end; I see no reason but I as well as others may throw one stick at
them. Thus hoping that your pleasure, in reading, will be equivalent to mine,
in writing.

Farewell Yours in the like Service THOMAS STIRRY.

The Invocation.
AWake my soul, cast off thy drowsy Thoughts,
Which clog thy mind, let not such earthly faults
Adhere to thee; awake, and soar up higher,
And join in consort with the shrill-mouth Quire
Of heavenly Seraphims, and to them incline,
So shall thou make thy Music half divine.
Crave not assistance from the sacred hill,
Nor dip in Helicon thy feathered quill.
The water's muddy, and Vrania's vain
Is far inferior to thy heavenly strain.
Invoke them not, thy God whom thou do hallow
Will be thy Muse, and thy divine Apollo.
His sacred influence thy brains inspire,
And fill thy breast with his Heroic fire.
Hee' ll touch thy tongue, and teach thee how to sing
His wondrous Works that he to pass does bring.
Hee' ll guide thy hand, that thou may learn to play
On six-and-twenty strings. Oh have away
My ravished soul: Let not this dunghill earth
Detain thy thoughts, and rob thee of thy mirth.
Which heaven ordained to please thy tender ears,
And glad the fainting hearts of all that hears.
Rouse up my soul, untie thy furled sail,
The Wind blows fair, Thou have a prosperous gaile.
Mount up the Olympian hill, and therhence bring
An ayre-dividing pinion from the wing
Of some bright Cherubim, that thou may write,
What wonders heaven has wrought in mortal sight.
And now oh first and last, so guide my pen,
That first and last I may declare to men
The secrets of thy will, and show thy praise,
Grant me thy favor, IN ll not seek the Bays.
EMBLEM I.
The Church and Commonwealth of Engalnd.
high Commission
ship (figuratively, the Anglican Church) sailing toward the mouth of Hell
Process
pennant atop the main mast License
sail of ship the Oath
two cannons, one discharging the et cetera oath and the other a noose Dr. Duck
Arthur Duck, chancellor of the diocese of Bath and Wells Laud
Archbishop Laud Dr. Lamb
Sir John Lamb Wren
Bishop Wren of Norwich

hell
sea monster with gaping mouth

And he found a Ship of Alexandria, sailing into Italy.

Acts 27.6.
THe Infernal Tempter, when he first begun
To trade for souls, no labor did he shun;
He could not stay (for have) to take advice,
But trots on foot as far as Paradise,
Where he not ceast to use (be it good or bad)
Such Retorick the Land of Darkness had:
And all to gain that pure immortal breath.
Blown from the spring of life, then free from death;
And having got but one poor soul in store,
Forthwith to it he adds many more.
But now who lives, and does not plainly see,
That under Heavens Star-spangled Canopie,
There Is scarce a place, or Country to be found,
Wherein this Hell-born crew does not abound;
Deceiving souls, and griping in their hands
The wealth and riches of the fruitful Lands,
Witness this Island, which not long ago,
Was in subjection to this Hell-borne foe:
For who can say he did not see, or hear,
What sway the Lordly Prelates late did bear?
None scarce durst preach without these Lords admission,
But straight were hoist aboard their High Commission,
Which in full Sail here fixed before thine eye,
Adumbrats plain, that wicked Hierarchy;
It Is now in pomp, and makes a glorious fight,
Though now it is fair, it may be foul ere night.
Now Winds obey, and send a Sovereign gale,
Which makes those Seamen thus hoyst up their Sail,
And over blessed Albions Church and State to ride,
Discharging Canons in their furious pride;
Whence flew the Oath, Et Caetera; after came
A good strong Halter to conclude the game;
The Duck takes wing, and to the Topsayle flies,
And on the Flag a Process neatly ties;
The Sails have got a License, to proclaim,
No preaching 'thout a License in their name;
Their Colors are displaid, that all may see,
How in this Ship the Devil and they agree.
Hell mouth's wide open, sure it is to show,
Both Ship and Sailors with the Devil must go.
Hundreds of years has heavens resplendent eye
Run his diurnall course, since men did spy
This Hell-built Ship, spreading her swelling Sails
Over Englands Church, and Commonwealth, with gailes
Blown from the lower darkened world beneath,
Such as the damned infernal Furies breath.
And ever since this Church-consuming band
Of Romish vermin, has impaired our Land:
For whatsoever these holy Seamen spide,
They would not rest, but night and day they tried
To get 't aboard their High Commission Boat,
Which every tide toward Italy did float.
And that these sacrilegious Pirates might
With greater foree and safety vent their spite
Against Gods people and deprive them quite
Of Christ's soule-saving Gospels heavenly light,
See here what help the Devil does them afford,
He is their Pilot; he't was brought aboard
That new made Canon; 'twas his damned plot,
To ram in to 't that truth confounding shot,
That he that would not by their Laws be led,
This hell-cast bullet straight should strike him dead
But he that sits in heaven did them deride,
He turned the stream in height of all their pride:
For turn the leaf and there in brief I Will show.
What woeful shipwreck now they undergo.
EMBLEM II.
inclement weather and stormy seas threaten to sink ship (of the Anglican
Church) Justice
divine hand hurling lightning bolts at ship depiction of ship Process
pennant licenc
flag

Then the Mariners were afraid, and they cried every man unto his God, etc.

Jonah 1.5.
Who made
account that times,
so soon would change; who knew
when heavens justice would appear,
and bring the Prelates fall so near?
even now in all men's sight.
They were in prime,
and said.
of mortal men why should we be afraid?
But now
that time is gone,
the present (Now) is theirs,
wherein by heavens ruling hand,
these Judges now Delinquents stand,
oppressed with grief and fears
that are unknown,
and bow
to blessed impartial Justice frowning brow,
Our Land
Was sore oppressed,
our Church and Commonwealth
groaned beneath the Tyranny
of this oppressing Hierarchy.
But what they got by stealth,
with them cannot rest,
they stand
Trembling beneath the power of Justice hand.
Unlade
the Ship they cried,
perchance by that we may
preserve our lives, and Lordly state.
But Reformation was too late,
for they too long bore sway;
now shall their pride
be laid,
which makes these Romish Seamen sore afraid.
The Wind
of the Commons,
't was not the Common wind
that did this mighty Tempest raise,
which put these Prelates in amaze,
they can no harbor find.
For sure no one's
inclined
to pity those that have bin wilful blind.
Help us,
they cry we perish.
Now Gallows claim thy right.
Our Ship will now no longer sail.
Our Canons at our need does fail,
which did our Lordly might
uphold and cherish
And thus
In deadly fear their case to us discuss,
hoping to have a ^al^e by moving us.
Archbishop Laud escorted into the Tower of London EMBLEM III.


The righteous are delivered out of trouble, and the wicked is in his room.

Prove. 8.
A Pirate is no sooner brought a shore,
But laid in prison, there he is kept in store,
'Till Justice says his time shall be no more.
Even-so, this Prelate was no-sooner free
From peoples rage, but Justice did decree,
Where he sent others there himself should be.
Where he shall lie with horror in amaze,
And reap the fruit of his oppressing ways,
When Justice hand shall consummate his days.
Time was when he in England shined as bright
As Cynthia's night-lamp with her borrowed light,
But now his Grace is found some grains too light.
For now it is known he studied alteration,
Uniting Rome to Englands thriving Nation;
He was sole Author of this strange translation.
'Twas he that sought to bring a dismal night
Upon our Land, by vailing of the light
Of Christ's eternal Word, which shines so bright.
But now the Cloud's dispersed, her golden head
Shines thrice more glorious, and the Clouds are fled.
But had they stayed the had dire disasters bred.
'T was thou that did Gods people overreach;
'T was thou that stopped the mouths of them that preach,
And were a hindrance that they could not teach.
Some thou did prison, some thou made to flee;
Remember these, 't is heavens just decree,
What thou did do, should now be done to thee.
Now they their wonted joyful freedoms have,
And thou art fast, and now do freedom crave:
But thou must have unto thy darksome grave.
And Thou O everlasting Three in One,
Show him that mercy he would show to none,
Archbishop Laud, atop the Tower of London, looks down upon a gallows EMBLEM
IIII.


DEUTERONOMY. 32.29. Oh that he were wise, that he would understand this, that he
would consider his latter end.


ARch-Polititian, art thou not ashamed
To live thus long, and now at last be blamed
For want of wit? thy folly now despise,
And let your Lordship learn to be more wise.
How long did thou uphold thy High Commission?
And imitate the Spanish-Inquisition.
How dare thou own that damned Canon Law?
The like to which there is no man ever saw.
'T is this that makes men hate thee, and despise,
O would thy graceless Grace had bin more wise.
'T was thy goodwill the people should not look
In any other but the Service Book;
Unless 't were such which for to sport and play,
Did give them license on the Sabbath day.
By this you thought you should their souls surprise,
O would your little Grace had bin more wise.
You loved few words, and therefore would not preach,
But filenc'd such as daily used to teach.
Your aim was always to have alterations,
And by your Altars thought to alter Nations.
But God Almighty crossed your enterprise,
O would your Popish Grace had bin more wise:
For now be sure that all your golden Coapes,
You must exchange for new spun hempen Ropes.
And thou which ofttimes did thy body screw,
Into such shapes Prometheus never knew,
Before thy Altar, be it no dispraise,
Thou shall be straightned, and so end thy days.
Consider this, and every day conjecture,
That Pulchers bell does toll to Tyburne Lecture,
FINIS.

