A barbarous and inhumane SPEECH Spoken by the Lord Wentworth, Son to the
late Earl of STRAFORD, Wherein he incourageth his soldiers to plunder
Towns, and ravish Virgins, with many more inhumane outrages.

Also a Protestation made by the said Lord Wentworth.

Wherein he sollemnely protests to revenge his his fathers death on all the
Kingdom.

Likewise a true relation of a cruel combat that happened between the said
Lord Wentworths Regiment, and the Regiment under the Command of Prince Robert,

Where they slew above 800. of their own men, in striving who should plunder
the Town of Cicitur, on thursday December 21.

December. 24. Printed for I. H. and William Sommerset 1642.

Joyful News from the Kings ARMY, Or the destruction of the Cavaliers
ON Thursday December 21. there happened a great Skirmish between Prince
Roberts own Regiment, and the Lord Wentworths son to the late Earl of
Strafford, for both Regiments happened to meet near the Road to the Town of
Abbington in Oxfordshir^, upon the way to Cicitur, a great Market Town, and
the Jnhabitants richly possessed of Earhs indowments, this Town these two
Regiments had plotted to plunder, (but their intentions altogether unknown to
each other) so that they happily met each other, and God so so brought things
about, that the mischief that they intended against the said Town fell upon
themselves, for meeting each other, the question was made by by the Lord
Wentworths Regiment, whether the other were marching, Answer was made, to quar
ter themielves at Ciciter, the other replied, that they had made choice of
those quarters, and therefore they would keep them, or loose their lives in
the defense of them, these things being agravated, they grew towordes, and from
words to blows, in such a cruel manner, that all the Kings Army was
presently in an uprore, and the Country up in Arms, during this combat, the
Town got intelligence of the cause of the Battle, and called the County in,
to their assistance, and fortefied themselves, all this time the number of the
Cavaliers increased, for several Troops of Horse came and sided some with
Prince Roberts Regiment, and some with the Lord Wentworths, according as they
stood affected, so that the Battle was very fi^rce and bloody, for there was
slain above eight hundred of the Cavaliers in the space of an hour and half.

At last the Lord Wentworth having received intelligence of the proceedings of
his men, came rideing post to the place of Bataile, where he found his men
disordered, and put to apparent rout, which he seeing commanded his Trumpeter
to sound a parley, which was answered by the other Regiment, and both Parties
gave over fighting and retreated, then he rode up to Prince Roberts Regiment,
and Commanded them to march up, and front his Regiment, and to put themselves
into a complete Body, and so to march in a close order, which was by them
withal speed and Dexterity effected.

Then he ordered his own men and put them into the same posture and caused
them to troop up close toward the other Regiment.

And having brought them up close together, leaving a small intervaile between
each front, he with a loud voice began to speak as follows.

Fellow Soldiers J much wonder at your inbecillity and rashness, can not you
find in all this spacious Kingdom, enemies to vent your spleen on, but you
must needs employ your valor to destroy your selves about a petty quarrel,
have you not enemies in every corner, round dealing blades, whose chests are
stuffed with Gold, and kept for you to ^o^e with, and must you needs, about one
petty Town: shed thus much blood and give your enemies cause to glory in your
ruin leave of for shame join your united strength in one firm body: and
turn your revenge upon your Enemies.

Pillage and plunder, ransacke all their Chests, and if they do deny to yield
their treasure, tie burning Matches to their Fingers, or else about their
horns until you make the Couckolds to discover where they have hid their
treasure.

Being laden with Wealth, if you desire to taste forbidden F* ravish their
Virgins, force the timorus maids to clip with you in dalliance, and wreake
your utmost spleen upon the roundheads.

Jn the performance of which, you shall have my assistance, I lost a father,
for whom J'le be revenged on all the multitude, especially of London, whose
clamorus outcries caused my fathers death and as they ceased not, but with
remorselesse rigor urged the Law, so my revenge, as boundless as their
malice, shall swim in blood and triumph in their ruin.

Having spoke thus in a barbarous and inbumane manner, the whole Crew in an
applausive manner, cried out, A A Wentworth, A Wentworth, so they immediately
joined Bodies, and marched toward Ciciter, what the Event will be J know not,
but we hope they will find very bad entertainment, for the Country made great
haste to go in to their rescue.

Thus you may see the depth of the intentions of that viporus Crew, which
pretend that they stand for the true protestant Religion, when by their Actions
and endeavors, they labor to destroy both it and the professors.

FINIS.

