AN IRON ROD For the NAYLORS and Tradesmen near BRIMINGHAM.
The voice of Gods holy Spirit crying in the Wilderness, prepare the way of
the Lord, make his paths straight: Or, the spirit of Eliah, that is to come
before the latter day, Malechi 4.
O All you that were my honest Christian neighbors and Country people which
are whole sale Chapmen of any Trade whatsoever; but more especially to you that
be Ironmongers of Though many of you accounted me mad, (as Christ, Mark 3. was
thought to be possessed with a devil: and Paul thought to be a mad man) am I ever
the worse for your false judgment, and slanders? But as the Lord caused
Jerusalems destruction to be foretold by poor despised instruments whom the
world would not believe: so did God compel me to foretell the destruction of all
corrupted Governments, and the downfall of King and Parliament. Let no man dare
to judge otherways.
my own native Country: it being the Trade that God (by his overruling
providence) ordained me, your servant in the Lord John Sanders, to be brought
up unto from my youth, till it pleased my heavenly Master and Father in Christ
otherwise to dispose of me by his heavenly wisdom: to call and compel me to
go on his message both to King and Parliament, as an Herrald or Ambassador
from the great Kingly power and Parliament of Heaven, who has assigned and
sealed to me a Commission to be a forerunner and foreteller how that the Church
and State must be rebuilded and reformed in this Land, to be a pattern and
example for the whole world to follow, to learn to serve God with one consent,
Zeph. 39.

And for proof of what I here write, it will appear to any man's view the Holy
Ghost has compelled me to put out a Book called An Iron Rod put into the Lord
Protectors hand, to break all antichristian powers in pieces; or a Discourse
which tends to a spiritual warfare with all Sects and self-opinions which are
the true Churches enemies, which has its ground and foundation from Abraham,
Moses, and Christ, having both Law and Gospel rule to direct every poor soul
into the true good old way which leads to the new Jerusalem cituate above, a
pure glorious government whose founder and builder is God, Rev. 21. so that all
dissembling hypocrites and wilful oppressors shall leave their evil ways, or
be suddenly rooted out, and those that have served God following the good old
way, shall shine as the stars in the firmament, and enjoy a true religious
peace according to righteousness and true holiness: so that our true born
King Charles Stuart the second being restored, and Oliver Cromwell by the grace
of God being united to him, and the second under him, the Civil Magistracy will
be a Wall to the Orthodox Church Ministry.

Four Monarks being broken down there will be another set up, even the Kingly
power under the Scepter of Jesus Christ. Believe not those Dreamers, mockers,
makers of Sects, as Peter and Jude speaks who write and speak nothing but
swelling words against dignities and the powers ordained of God: nay against
the Lords day or Christian sabbath, and the sacred institution of Gods holy
Ordinances. Take away the Candlestick, and the light of Gods true worship will
immediately follow. But God has promised to deliver the poor from the slavery
of the wicked, Psalm 12.

I tell you once again, that God has formerly compelled me by the dictates of
his holy Spirit to foretell First the Lord compelled me openly to foretell what
would befall the King and Parliament when the King was prisoner at Holmhy,
witness Col. Graves: the manner and time of Worcester fight: And the
dissolution of the three last Parliaments, witness Colonel Baxter, Lieutenant
of the Tower. And of the rising against the present power in the beginning of
March 1654. before it was.
the most remarkable revolutions and changes that have befaln this Nation,
King, Parliament, and State, for these 12 years past, which God revealed to me
by his holy Angel, not by dreams and fancies, but in a real true manner, as in
my book delivered to my Lord Protector, more at large appears. All that I
have spoken having come to pass except only two things, namely the Church and
State to be truly reformed, and the true born King to be restored. Several
things my neighbors and natural friends of Brimingham have heard me speak to
their great amazement, as when God compelled me to wear old clothes, and rent
the seames, putting off my old shoos, and with a Carpenters rule in my hand
making Proclamation by the power of God and his great Parliament of Heaven,
that the Parliament that very day and hour was dissolving in London, being 88
miles from the City.

Good friends, and honest neighbors, and brothers of a Trade, to you at this
time I chiefly address my self: What manner of persons ought we now to be, in
all godliness and honesty of life, living in brotherly love one toward another!

To which purpose I commend to you this course in our Trade: and first I speak
to you rich covetous and uncharitable Ironmongers of mine own native Country,
and also to other Trades and occupations in other Countries.

I am to charge you in the name of the living God whose workmanship you are
that you be not highminded, or uncharitable grinding the faces of the poor,
whom the Lord has promised to deliver for his name sake. For all that will not
deny themselves and leave off their wicked ways, and conform to the Image of
his Son, God will pour out his indignation on them, and destroy them, as he did
Pharaoh and all his host, to the comfort of his distressed people, and
deliverance of his Church. Therefore forsake your evil ways, and make your
peace with God while you have time. Live no longer like so many Dives keeping
the poor like so many afflicted Lazarus's. You cannot choose but remember that
many of you were poor, but now being raised up in the world you have forgotten
God. Remember from whence you are fallen, and repent, lest you have no other
heaven, but what you have here, but receive that dreadful sentence, Go ye
cursed into everlasting perdition.

Amend your lives therefore for the time to come, and live to that end God gave
you a being, the general good: give better prises 2d, in 12 d to poor workmen,
that they may not have cause to hate you, many hundreds of them enjoying
nothing but misery and want. So shall the Nation be served with serviceable
ware, and you live more honestly and honorably then ever.

Brethren and fellow sufferers if this be not forthwith done, for the healing
of your grievances, then take my counsel, let them work themselves: for
certainly you that make the ware are the most, and most considerable, though
least valued, and worst Whereas there has been yearly held by an old custom a
month for the ending of harvest and mending of Trade, which rich men were the
cause of for their own gain: Now, as other old customs have been altered and
broken of late in this Nation, do you alter that: and do you poor laboring
Tradesmen hold together, by assisting and maintaining one another one
fortnight or a month, and forbear working for the cunning Egyptian Taskmasters
now in the Spring. However take my advice, and let us have a general meeting
thereupon. If we cannot gain our desires, we will try another way, that is, I
will draw a Petition to the Lord Protector for a Corporation, that we may make
orders among our selves: and those that have set up our Trade within these 7.
or 8. years (not having served just apprentiships) may be called in question.
provided for. I pray God direct us in all our undertakings, for the general
good and welfare of the Nation, and every man's just interest. These being the
things God has set before our eyes, and put into our hearts, in which work, O
Lord be pleased to arise and help us for thy names sake; to thy glory, and the
comfort of many poor distressed people.

My other book is to be sold at the Angel in Cornhil.


