THE SIEGE OF ANTWERP.

Written in Latin by FAMIANVS STRADA, Englished by THO: LANCASTER, Gent. DeVM
CoLe.

LONDON. Printed by W. W. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard.

ERRATA.
IN the first verses line the last, blot out wisely, p. 5. l. 22. before it
read else, p. 6. l. 6. p. 7. l. the last, for file r. board, p. 8. l. 9. for
ber r. his, p. 13. l. the last, blot out by force. p. 19. l. 13. r. contrary.
ib. l. 15. r. rooks for kings. p. 23. l. 17. for first r. one. p. 36. l. 9. for
kings r. queens, ib l. 11. for queens r. kings, p. 42. l. 7. for second r.
bishops third, p. 36. l. 1. r. contrary queens bishops pawa, p. 67. l. 11. for
39 read this, p. 68. l. 13. r. her bishops, p. 86. l. the last, read White
knight, p. 93. l. 12. r. his house, p. 100. l. 10. r. one house p. 107. l. 19.
r. 76, p. 111. l. 3. r. White kings, p. 112. l. 2. r. takes, p. 28. l. 12. p.
32. l. 6. p. 50. l. 16. p. 58. l. 26. p. 72. l. 4, and at the beginning of
Gambett. viij, xxiv, xxxiij, xxxiv. xxxv, lviij. make this mark vvv p. 72. l.
7. and Gambett. xlvj. lix make this mark vvvv.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CARYLL Lord MOLLINEUX, VISCOUNT MARIBROVGH, etc.
My Lord,
BEing about to publish these first fruits of my studies, I found my self not
as others, in need only of a patron for my Book, but of a Guardian also for my
self: Whose years as yet exempt me not from the tutelage of others, and whose
attempts in this kind will scarce be freed from presumption and temerity. But
yet I was no little animated, when I understood, how much your LORD-ship was
pleased to favor me as to condescend, that this little Treatise might bear in
the front your HONORS name inscribed; I confess it is too unequal a task
for one of my years, and so little verst in the curiosity of either language,
the subject being so serious, the variety of passages so full, and the Authors
expressions, not of the Vulgar strain. Notwithstanding when I reflected on
your Lordships courteous disposition, love of learning, and promptness to
further any laudable undertaking, I went on with greater alacrity, not doubting
but I had found a fit Mecaenas, whose frowns would not blast my little
learning in the bud, but rather whose cherishing glances, would bring it to
maturity. Arts come not to perfection but by degrees, and if weak beginnings
had found no foster fathers, I know not if the world would have flourished with
so many eminent person for learning as it has. My intention in this
translation, was to profit my self, and therefore I had rather be instructed
by others, in what I am defective, then be applauded for any thing which may
seem to be passable. But whatsoever it is, I present it to your Lordship, as a
testimony of the due service I owe to your Honor. And in this, my desire is,
that not so much the book (though otherwise in the Original, not unworthy
your Lord-ships perusal, where valor and worth are not slightly shadowed) as
the sincere affection and duty, wherewith I offer it, may be regarded. This is
the height of my wishes, and chiefest pretense of

Your Lordships most humble servant THOMAS LANCASTER.

The Translator to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HAving lately left off our Country Schools, I was not minded to lose that
little I had learned; wherefore I applied my self to peruse some of the best
latin authors; and though I sought to better my self in the language, yet to
dig and labor in the Quarry of choice words, and still to be hewing and
squaring out latin phrases, only I thought too servile, unless the matter it
self also yielded some sweetness and content: which made me walk forth into
the pleasant fields of History, in which I found a rare mixture of pleasure and
profit, where the matter it self with variety of passages informs and
delights the understanding, and the elegant words and delivery teaches the
tongue and pen to express. Amongst the rest, I fell upon a modern
masterpiece in that kind, viz. Famianus Strada of the Low Country Wars, and
of all other parts, I was most taken (and not without just reason) with the
Siege of Antwerp, contained in the sixth, and part of the seventh book of his
second decade. A complete History of it self, and to those that understand it
in the Original, as exact a piece perhaps, as hither to has been published,
wanting neither worth in the actours, nor ability in the writer. This for my
own private practice I assayed to translate; which after showing to some
friends (to whose judgment and anthority it were presumption in me not to
subscribe) their pleasure and desire was to have it sent to the press. Nor do
I doubt, but if in playing the Translators part I could near have paralel'd the
latin relation, little had been wanting to have made this small Teatise
appearing in our Country habit grateful to the perusers. But how can that be
expected from a Schoole-boy? for neither by age, nor knowledge, dare I assume
more to my self, having not passed the eighteenth year of my age, nor saluted
any University, or School of more eminent learning, nor yet traveled to
converse with those of a more terse style, and consequently less able to
treat of so serious a subject, and shadow in our native colors the deep
expressions and language of so grave an Author. For my presumption herein I
expect not but to be censured, when others of greater ability have not escaped
the brows of Critickes. But yet my nonage may afford me this advantage, that
what others point at as a fault, I may learn to amend; for as yet I cannot
despair of bettering my self in learning for the future.

The right Worshipful Sir Robert Stapylton has highly merited of our Country
men, by sowing this field with our English seed, having with exquisite skill
and general applause to their pleasures and profits published the first Decade
of Strada, and may perhaps produce the second, of which this is a part. Why do
I then presume to thrust my sickle into his corn? That worthy learned man I
trust, will not be offended, if I gleane one sheafe out of his rich harvest,
who will thereby neither become poorer, nor his work of less value even in
this part, when the judicious Reader shall see how far his pure language and
expressions do surpass those bare lines of mine: the whole disparagement will
fall upon my self. As for the injury I may seem to do to the Author by not
publishing the whole work, how can that be imputed to me as a crime? He
wants not his due desert in the Original, nor is he wronged, if neither I nor
any else should make him a Denizon of our Country? Why then should I be taxed
for making him free at least in part. Nor wants there examples which may render
me irreprehensible in both: and in particular, have not several tuned Horace
his Lyre, to keep consort with our English Vyoll, sung some, yea even the same
select parts of that Roman Muse, and not the whole work, and have neither been
censured, nor yet defrauded of their deserved bays. The like may we say of
that learned Caledonian, who has taught Rome to speak her own language more
refined, and yet has at least tw^se been instructed in the Dialect of his own
Island. Nor lastly, can the Reader justly complain for wanting the whole
work, both for the reasons before mentioned, and especially for that I serve
him with one complete dish, as well seasoned as my skill for the present will
afford; an exact, entyre, full history of it self, where the actours and
relator, seem to contend, which shall bear away the palm. And admit the
whole Decade be printed, yet this part by it self may also take; for sometimes
a small treatise has gotten perusal, when a greater volume has been cast
aside. What more to say I have not, but only to request thee not to be too
rigid a censurer, but rather to favor my weak beginnings, and if any thing be
mistaken, any thing defective, I shall be as ready to correct, as thou to find
faults. Farewell.

T. L.

THE SIEGE OF ANTWERPE.
GIve me leave, 1854. The siege of Antwerp.
(warranted by Livies example) to tell you by way of preface in this part of my
work, (which in the beginning most annual writers use openly to profess,)
that I am to speak of a siege more memorable by far, how great.
then ever yet was laid to any city: for never were rivers bridled with
stronger bulwarks, nor wits armed with more adventurous stratagems, nor by
Soldiers, who in many sieges had gathered both skill, and courage was it ever
more gallantly fought. Here Castles were erected on violent rivers, mines
discovered amongst the waters, Rivers overflowing rampires, and again,
rampires outtoping the rivers; and as if the labor of Antwerp siege only
seemed but little, defignes were extended by the General into other places;
Antwerp. Gaunt. Dendermund, Bruxels, Mechlin. With what forces it was begun.
And at the same time, five most strong and potent Cities were all at once
besieged, all in a years compass subdued. These greatattempts, with what
great forces, with what courages they were perfected, now I do begin not
negligently to relate.

Part of the Catholic army was drawn into the Garrisons of Cities and Forts;
part fought in Friesland under Verdugo prefect of that province, and Taffius
his Lieutenant, against William of Nassau and Martin Schench, Count Aremberg,
and Manrieque had in arms two regiments of Germans about Colen. Appius de
Comitibus, Manrique a Spanyard, but borne in Germany.
and Blastius Capisuccus, with some troops of horse, made excursions into
Zutphan. The Marquess of Renthi with his Regiment of Walloones, guarded
Artois, and Vaynolt, against the motions of the French. There were four
Regiments, and some companies besides, with Alexander Prince of Parma, in
Brabant and Flanders. Besides three Regiments were newly come out of Spain,
which (as before we related) King Philip, after his Navall fight at the Tercera
Isalands, had sent into the Low-conntries. And with these forces, which
amounted to about ten thousand foot, and one thousand seven hundred horse (for
he had contracted the seven Regiments, So Alexander writ to the King. July 15.
which as I sald were but half full, into five) Alexander having first advised
with his Council of war began the siege of Antwerp.

Antwerp is situated on the river Scheldt, being almost five miles in compass,
The Inhabitants of the City, Its form.
and contains an hundred Inhabitants, besides Seafaring people It much
resembles the form of a bended bow, whose string is the bank of the river,
there being not any other City in all the Netherlands stronglier fortified,
Its strength.
or better appointed against an enemy. That side which bends into Brabant,
most high walls, from which ten strong Turrets appear, so placed as with
mutual aid they may relieve each other, environed with a great ditch of
water, securely defend. The side toward Flanders, has for a trench, the river
Scheldt, capable not only of single ships, but even of whole Navies; yea
someties there have been numbered about two thousand ships in the port and
river: whence trafficking with a great part of the world, the River plays not
only the Merchant, by bringing in all foreign commodities, but the warrior
also for Auxiliary forces. The consultation of besieging it.
But how much securer the Anwerpians were, so much the more cautious were
Alexanders Councillors. There were present at the council, besides Count
Mansfield, and the rest of the regal Senate never wont to be absent,
Mondragonius, Billius, Olivera, and Pacius, all Spaniards of Belgians, there
were Mottaeus, Goigne, and Licquius, for the rest of the Low Country men were
absent: of others, there were Camillus a Monte, George Basta, and Camillus
Capisuccus. Most are against it.
Most of these were even amazed with the greatness of the proposed design,
and thought the attempt more bold, then could be brought to a prosperous end.
For said they, he who would think of besieging Antwerp, ought seriously to
consider whether he have sufficient forces, wherewith at the same time, he may
block it up by land in Brabant, and by the river on Flanders side: For it were
in vain to besiege it by land, to which by the river: if not from above from
Gaunt, at least from below, to wit, from the Sea, both provision and relief
may continually be brought in. But the river was so broad, that it could not be
blockt up by less then two armies on either side one. Wherefore he had need
of three armies, who from Brabant, and either bank of the river Scheldt, might
stop relief. But that would not be done, by reason of his small forces.
Neither had he sufficient ships wherewith to hinder the enemies Navy about to
enter the river from the sea. To these things added Billius, that the
complaints of the Soudiers more troubled him, who being defrauded of their pay,
not coming from Spain, almost hungerstarved, and most of them half naked,
verily were unfit to be brought to a siege, of more then one months
continuance. Nor did Pacius and Montius omit, that it was seriously to be
thought on, whether it were best to begin Antwerp siege, leaving Dendermund.
Gaunt, and other holds behind him, from whence the enemy with free excursions,
might disturb the bringing in of provision unto the Army, and the raising of
Fortifications. Lastly, all except Mondragonius, Two only excepted.
and Capisuccus, who committed all to Alexanders fortune, thought it unsafe,
and unseasonable, to set upon so great designs with so small forces. Therefore
turning from the siege of Antwerp, to besiege Alexander, And strive to divert
his mind from the siege.
they stand about him with joint prayers: and objecting the danger of losing
both his and their own honors, they endeavor to subdue his mind in his
resolution still immovable. But his opinion is to besiege it.
But he commending their care, in the first place said, that he had reflected
on all those things which they conceived to be the greatest dangers.
Notwithstanding he did not think, but that after they had heard him reason a
little on the matter, they would think better of the success. Then he began
much after this manner: That he had not the thought of invading Antwerp,
before he was encouraged by pious men, that it would be acceptable to God: and
had known the Kings mind concerning it. Neither did he doubt that human and
ordinary helps would be wanting, which for the present might persuade the
expedition. For, he certainly knew, that the enemies were never in like fear,
being within few months afflicted with so many and so great losses by the Kings
Army; viz. Being destitute of the Prince of Orange's counsels, out of hope of
succor from the French, and having lost so many Towns and Castles, nere
adjoining to Antwerp. And surely, when the walls being battered, do tremble and
shake, then with greater certainty may the assault be pursued. And from thence
had he greater encouragement to assail the affrighted enemies, even in their
chiefest fortress of war, and to carry that terror through the strong holds
of Brabant: not with vain hope, that they will for fear of losing Antwerp,
either slight other places; or, for fear of losing other places, will not be
able to defend it. Indeed he had but few forces to set upon so many things
with; but, they were skillful in war accustomed to victory; and, which is above
all, conducted by great commanders. For, unto which of your hands here present,
might not one safely deliver the charge of an Army? FOR, by the skill of
Captains, and prowess of Soldiers, an Army is doubled. And be they never so
many, those be but few who conclude the victory. As of a spear, how long soever
the palm only of the cuspe does all the execution. GREAT forces are not always
to be wished for in war, no more then great bodies, being for the most part
subject to many infirmities, used to be more pampered, move slowlier, and are
but fairer marks to be levelled at. Nor had he cast over with himself so to
win Antwerp, that it was needful to employ many Soldiers about it; since that
by land, a few troops of Horse, making inroades into the territories of
Antwerp, between Liere, Hochstrate, and Breda, Towns of the Kings party, might
easily hinder traffic. And by the River, toward the Ocean (from whence the
greatest force of the enemy was to be feared) he had determined, either to take
the Castles on both sides the River; or, to build new ones; and from thence
with Canon shot to restrain the Ships passage, if not all, at least so much, as
that the Merchants might perceive their loss, and the City, full of
Inhabitants might be wearied out for want of provision. Nor seemed those forces
which for the present he had with him, unable to perform these things: Nor did
he doubt of their obedience in the work, having tried, that his Soldiers were
more courageous in battle, then mutinous in their quarters: But, lest they
should be discouraged, he had lately received a sum of money from the King,
which he would divide amongst his Veterans; for those that were newly come out
of Spain, had already received pay. Although it was not to be feared, but that
his Soldiers would willingly undergo the siege of Antwerp, from which so great
booty might be expected. There were many yet in the Army, who, about eight
years since, had sufficient experience of the riches of that Empory, the yet
memory whereof inciting them, they will doubtless enkindle in their fellows
the desire of like plunder. Lastly, for security of the Army, he had provided,
that provision might safely from the territories of Wasia, be conveyed unto the
Camp. Nor had he so left Gaunt and Dendermund behind, that the Kings Army had
any cause to fear; for they would have enough to do, to defend themselves from
our Soldiers, placed in Castles, newly raised thereabout. Wherefore, seeing
that many things for the present invited him, no reasons appeared sufficient to
withdraw him from it; let them leave that only determination to him, and with
great and constant courages begin the Siege of Antwerp; and from whence he
forsaw the access of all Brabant would follow: And they might be confident,
that the Mother of God, patroness of Antwerp, having been wickedly banished
from her own City by Heresy, they now, refusing no peril, to restore her to
her ancient possession, would not forsake them in their so pious attempts. The
Siege of Antwerp once decreed, The Siege is decreed.
rather by Alexander's authority, then his Oration, command was forthwith given
to provide things necessary for it; which by reason they were many, and in
several places: For, Antwerp, Gaunt, Bruxells, Dendermund, and Mechlin were
all at once attempted, I thought it worth my labor to prescribe the sites of
these places.

Antwerp, by Reason of the River Scheldt, sufficiently strong of it self, How
Antwerp is defended by the River Scheldt. By the Castles placed on the River
banks.
by the many Forts and Sconces placed thereon, especially toward the Ocean, is
yet far stronger, chiefly by two, about nine miles from Antwerp; the one called
Lillo, taking its name from a neighboring Village, Mondragonius, by the Duke
of Alva's appointment had erected on the coast of Brabant: The other called
Liefkenshoeck, the confederate Provinces possessed of Antwerpe, built on the
other side of the River over against Lillo; and not long after took Lillo also.
By commerce of the same River, By commerce of the same River, with Gaunt.
Antwerp is joined to Gaunt, distant about thirty miles: Dendermund Strengthens
the traffic in the midway between Antwerp and Gaunt, with Dendermund,
placed also on the River Scheldt. But nearer, about twelve miles from Antwerp,
is seated Mechlin: And by the River Dele running into the Scheldt, with Mechlin,
under the name of Rupel, gives and takes mutual assistance. and with Bruxels
24 miles.
A little further distant from Antwerp is Bruxells: but having opened
themselves a ditch or channel, fit for navigation, they can sail into Rupel,
and thence sliding into the Scheldt, enter Antwerp. Prince Alexander well
apprehending all these things, determined not with several Armies to lay siege
to every City, for that by a hundred and fifty thousand soldiers could not be
effected; but, as he had begun at Gaunt, erecting Sconces and Forts a distance
off, Alexander begins to cut off this intercourse.
and blocking up the Rivers, by which the Cities had their relief, by little
and little meant to make them feel the miseries of a Siege, without the noise
of a Siege: Therefore sending Plato his Enginere, with a band of Soldiers to
Wettera, he commanded Anthony Olivera, who kept the bridge lately built there
on the Scheldt against Gaunt, from Gaunt, from Dendermund,
to raise a new Fort toward Dendermund, thereby to cut off all hopes of
commerce between Gaunt, Antwerp, and Dendermund. He dispatched part of
Igniquesius regiment to the Village of Willebroeck, which is between Mechlin
and Antwerp, from Mechlin,
to besiege the Castle erected there on the bank of the River, and from Bruxels.
and stop the passage of Bruxells channel, whose chiefest defense is
Willebroeck. Then applying himself unto Antwerp, Then sets upon the Siege both
by land and water. He commits the land to George Basta.
he thus distributed the Siege amongst the chiefest Commanders of his Army: He
commanded George Basta, Commissarie of the Horse, a wise and valiant man, with
some troops of Epirots and Italians, to guard the country about Antwerp in
Brabant; and so to provide, that in time of need, calling for aid from the next
Forts, he might see, that no provision should be carried into the City out of
Brabant. The banks of the Scheldt, Flanders side to Rubasius. That of Brabant
to Mansfield.
As for the banks of the River Scheldt, Flanders side, where the Army then lay,
he committed to Marquess Rubasius, General of the Horse, and That that of
Brabant to Peter Ernest Count Mansfield, Camp-Master-Generall. To Mansfield he
added Christopher Mondragonius, and part of the Army, viz. four thousand and
five hundred foot, and eight Troops of horse To Rubasius he joined Gasper
Billius, and Peter Pacius, with three thousand foot, and four troops of Horse;
and commanded, that as well they, that stayed on this side, as those that were
to pass over the Scheldt, with all celerity should assault and take the
enemies Forts and Castles, placed on both sides the River toward the Ocean.
And from thence to oppose themselves against the enemies sailing from Holland
and Zealand to Antwerp. Wherefore he commanded Mondragonius with his Regiment,
Before whom Mondragonius goes on his side,
consisting of twenty one colors, to go before Count Mansfield, who was soon
after to follow with the rest of his forces, and at Rupelmund, and Borcht, to
pass over his Soldiers into Brabant in boats: Which he did prosperously
execute, and puts to slight the enemies shipcoming to oppose him.
putting to flight hy Canon shot, the Admirall's ship of Antwerp, which came to
hinder his passage, after it had received some hurt. Antwerp.
The City being highly offended at the negligence of the Garrison Soldiers; but
when they saw the Kings Army spread on both sides the River, and their tents so
suddenly pitched, their anger was turned into care. For now Alexander moving
with his Court from Tourney, Alexander pitcheth in a Village of Flanders. Not
far from him R^basius.
came to Bevera, a Village of Flanders, about seven miles from Antwerp, and
there fortified himself: not far from his pavillions, Rubasius, with all his
warlick Magazine, sat down in the Village of Calloo on the Scheldt, having
first ejected the Garrison Soldiers hence. Between both Charles Mansfield.
Between both, but nearer to Alexander, Charles Count Mansfield, son to Ernest,
Master of the Artillery, those for seat of his military Engines the Village of
Melsen, But on Brabant side, On Brabant side Mansfield the Father,
Count Mansfield Camp-mater General, following Mondragonius over the Scheldt,
placed his tents in the Village of Straboeck, about four miles distant from
Lillo; which (because Alexander designed that seat for himself) he diligently
fortified. A distance off, in the Village of Berendrecht, and Mondragonius,
was the station of Mondragonius: with whom afterward, near Stanflict Camillus
a Monte, with Montitius and Capisuccus.
and Capisuccus joined theirs. As Soon as it was perceived, that Antwerp was by
the Kings Army attacqued on every side, the Antwerpians, although at first,
knowing both theirs, and the enemies forces, The Antwerpians prepare for their
defense. Phil Marnixius of Mont Saint Aldegund.
had jeered at the enterprise; yet, notwithstanding, fearing Alexanders
fortune, they courageously prepared for their defense. Aldegund governed the
City as Consul, the Prince of Orange's most intimate friend, and next after
him, was out-topped in authority by none of the States. Especially on both
banks of the Scheldt.
By his advice, especial care was taken of fortifying the Castles on either
side the River: The chiefest were Lillo on Brabant side, Liesken shoeck on
Flanders coast, and the Forts standing in the Isle of Doele. Odettus Tilinius,
The Isle of Doele.
son to Lanoy, with a fresh cohort of French, took upon him to defend Lillo.
John Pettin, an old Colonel, was commanded to fortify Lieskenshoeck with a
new mud-wall. The like care was taken of the other forts. The bank at Safting
and other places being cut, and a way opened for the Scheldt to overflow the
fields of Wasia, even unto Antwerp. They sent some also to Bergen-Zom to gather
Soldiers; and others to demand aid from Zeland and Holland, and also to
solicit William Blosse de Treslong, Admiral of Zealand sea.

But now, as they had orders, And Alexander's Commanders invade both sides of
the River.
Mondragonius advanced against Lillo, Rubasius against the Isle of Doele, but
with contrary success; for the one by aged caution making delay, Mondrag.
Rubas.
lost opportunity; the other burning with youthful celerity, set upon the
enemy, unprovided both of counsel and defense. The Isle of Doele, The Isle of
Doele, and its Castles.
which is made by a Rampyre or Dyke drawn about against deluges, is defended by
four Castles, and there ends the territory of Wasia. Thither Rubasius,
sending before Pacius Regiment, came sooner then could be expected; therefore
the Castle of Antonia yieded it self forthwith to Rubasius; The Castles of
Antonia and Teruent.
and the Garrison of Teruent not expecting the enemy fled away: But, it fell out
far otherwise at Liefkenshoeck. Liefkenshoeck.
It was kept by about eight hundred Soldiers, who fiercely rejected Rubasius's
Trumpeter, demanding the render of their Castle, for three days most valiantly
maintained their defense, until by Canon shot, the Rampire being beaten down
in several places, and Prince Alexander advancing from Bevera, and offering
them in vain kind conditions, he commanded Rubasius not any longer to deferr
the assault, who sending thither Hernandus de Isla, and Gasparine Lucensis,
Captains of select companies, commanded them not to admit any to mercy; who,
although at the first assault they were repulsed; yet, venturing again, they
took the Castle, put about four hundred of the enemies to the sword, drowned
almost two hundred, Rubasius takes it,
and brought away seven Colors; Pettin Governor of the Castle being slain by
Rubasius own hand, who the same night marched to Noort, the last Fort of the
Isle, situate on the Scheldt; but Fer^mius Governor of that place, having
conveyed all his Artillery into Ships, killed all his Cattle, and set fire on
the Fort, retired to Antwerp. From thence the Army retired to Safting, which
only held remained untaken, but finding it void of defendants, they began to
make up the cleft of the bank, against the waters bursting forth from the left
side of the River. And thus by Rubasius's expedition, and wins all Flanders
bank.
Antwerp was disarmed of the Forts on Flanders coast, and of all the Country of
Wasia, lying along the Scheldt; when in the interim on Brabant side,
Mondragonius. marched against Lillo, Mondragonius sets upon Lillo.
knowing how strong a Castle, both by situation and fortification he was to
attempt, as having built it himself, and for that he was too cautious of the
enemies strength, as conscious of it, he gave time to admit a Garrison into
Lillo. It HELPS, to wit, sometimes not to know dangers, which if known, would
be a hinderance to victory. For two thousand soldiers under Balfurius, The
Garrison increased.
a Scotch Colonel, were received into the Castle, against part of whom,
sallying out under Tillinius, Mondragonius advanced with his Regiment, He
fights with them, sallying out,
and giving them battle, it was with equal loss a long time disputed, until
the Cataracts which were within the Castle being drawn, and the River Scheldt
then swelling with the tide, let out amongst the Spaniards, the Mondragonians
not being able any longer to endure, without success.
both the vehemence of the Canons thundering from the Castle, and the tempest of
the water, and having lost Aloysius Toletanus, and Peter Padilla, two valiant
Captains, by little and little retired, and were compelled to move their
station into a safer place; with great constancy, But with great constancy of
the Spaniards.
chiefly of the Spaniards, carrying away in the sight of the enemies their
wheel-pieces on their shoulders, and wading in the water up to the breasts, Nor
were they so dismayed, when they could not by reason of the deluge, assail the
enemies on the front, on the right side, climbing up the banks of the Scheldt
(upon which the Castle stands) they obstinately again attempted the assault,
and having taken a little Sconce, they fiercely stormed the Castle: but the
Rampire being cut in many places, hindered their entrance: Therefore being out
of hope of winning the Castle, Whom Alex. calls off.
they were by his excellency commanded to retreat to Stabroeck, and there to
prohibit the excursions of the Garrison soldiers from Lillo.

Whilst the confederates defended Lillo, they lost Herentalls. For the
Antwerpians solicitous of Lillo, called thence the Scotch Garrison, Herentals by
Caesius means.
and trusted Herentals to the Townsmen. Wherefore Caesius (the Horse being
divided between him and George Basta) making inroads into those places, did not
let slip so fit an opportunity; Count Nicol. Caes.
for, having sojourned there as a Prisoner, he had contracted great familiarity
with the chiefest Townsmen, and therefore easily persuaded them, that not
expecting the Victorious Army, they should deliver the Town to the Prince of
Parma; which was scarcely effected, when the Townsmen, having first admitted
Caesius into the Town, Submits to the Kin.
the Garrison Soldiers being by the Antwerpians (too late repenting them of
their rash counsel) commanded to return, shut their Gates, turned their
Cannons against them, and beat them off. For that service, Caesius obtained of
the Prince the Government of that place. But, Alexander for the present having
lost opportunity of taking Lillo, though it not convenient to spend any longer
time about that siege, which if it were taken, together with Liefkenshoeck on
the opposite bank, which he already had, the enemies ships could not by them be
sufficiently prohibited from passage, by reason of the rivers breadth, and the
daring enemies in the dead of the night, waiting for the help of the tide,
violently rushing in from the sea, might easily delude both Castles endeavors:
Wherefore seeing the Rivers passage could not be obstructed, Alexander thinks
of a Bridge to block up the Scheldt.
unless by the interposition of a bridge, he judged it all one, whether to
erect it there, between Lillo and Liefkenshoeck, or elsewhere, raising Castles
in some other places. Wherefore measuring (as it were) the Channel, Alexander,
to whose opinion the most ancient and skillful Mariners, with his Captains
Baroccius and Plato, easily assented, thought it best to block up the River not
far from Lillo toward Antwerp, He chooses the place between Calloo and Ordam,
for three reasons.
between Calloo, a village of Flanders, and Ordam, a village of Brabant. The
motives, as he writ to the King, why he chiefly chofe that place, were these;
Because the Scheldt there is not so very broad, and a hillock of earth, like to
a bed of sand (which they call a bank) stretching it self out from the shore,
straitneth the channel. Besides, in that place, the river bending it self a
little toward the right hand, the ships have therefore almost need of another
wind, so that they cannot so directly, and with like violence keep on their
course. Lastly, he had tried, that the earth there was full of gravel and
solid, and most commodious, both for raising and upholding the work. Moreover,
He commands Castles to be built on either side the River, at the ends of the
bridge,
he had committed the charge of building the Castles on both sides the River,
which should be the heads of the bridge, viz. Flanders side to Rubasius, and
Brabant to Mondragonius. That for reverence to the Mother of God, to whom he
had dedicated the whole work from the beginning, was called Saint Mary's; this
in the honor of the King, Saint Philips. Besides, he erected other Castles in
other places, and others elsewhere.
some for defense of his Army, others against the enemies Forts; and those that
were placed against Antwerp, were called of Saint Peter, and Saint Barbara;
those against Lillo of the Blessed Trinity.

Whilst Alexander was continually busied in earnest labors on both sides the
River, THE SIEGE OF DENDERMUND.
and was thought there to have his whole care employed; secretly, with Pacius's
Regiment, and a band of Italians, he sets upon the Siege of Dendermund.

Dendermund is situated at the mouth of the River Dender, from whence it takes
its name, Its site.
which River runs into the Scheldt; wherefore by reason of its site and
fabric, it was reckoned amongst the strongest Cities in Flanders; and in
regard it is seated in the midway, between Gaunt and Antwerp, is very
commodious to them both. Commodious to the bordering enemies.
Alexander determined long since to bring it under subjection, as well to
enterpose it as a bar, to cut off all passage and commerce between both Cities,
as to exonerate himself of the trouble of dividing his forces, for he was
forced continually to keep a guard in the Country about Gaunt and Dendermund.
Forces are sent thither before.
Thither he sent before John Gamboa with Augustine Igniquesius Regiment,
commanding him to take the sluices of Dender, which the enemies with a Mill near
the City had fortified, and from whence they might easily overwhelm the places
near adjacent: Which he had scarce effected, having killed about fifty of the
defendants, First, the sluice is taken.
and put the rest to flight, when from Bruxells side appeared Charles Count
Mansfield, with five troops of Horse, and some Companies of Walloones; and
from the other side at Waestmuster, Alexander with Pacius's Regiment; who
forthwith setting guards on the river Scheldt, both above and below, and
environing the City, planted his Cannons against the Fort before Bruxels gate.
Then the City is besieged, viz. The gate toward Bruxels. The Governor had
carefully fortified it,
Mortagnus with eight hundred soldiers, besides armed townsmen, instead of
Rihovius their Governor, who then was absent, commanded the City; he fortified
all places industriously but especially Bruxels fortification, strengthening it
with most of his Veterans, against the force of the enemy: especially the fort
before the City,
and from thence they continually shot, and not in vain, against the Royalists,
but weakly fenced. The first terror they struck was by the death of Peter
Pacius, a Spanish Colonel, who behind a gabion, From whence shooting they
kill Pacius,
or wicker basket, directing a Cannon against the enemy, was suddenly slain
with a Musquet-bullet, piercing his head. The same day, a little after, Peter
Tassius, overseer of the Army, was slain, and Tassius.
being shot also into the head with a Musquet-bullet. At the first, with great
grief of the Spaniards, especially for the loss of his piety and valor, who,
because he had a care of his soldiers necessities, as if he had been their
Father, was commonly called Peter de Pan; The Spaniards are thereby incensed;
but afterward with so great rage against the enemy, and desire of revenge,
that the Cannons having not as yet made a sufficient breach in the Fort, they
all contentiously desire the assault. ANGER to wit, sometimes, adds more
force, then loss does diminish. They have yet another motive to whet their
fury. especially seeing the Saints injured.
The Garrison soldiers brought into the Fort with a mimick kind of state, a
great Image of a Saint, and setting it upon the battlements, after they had
abused it with derisions and stripes, furiously tumbled it down: At which
spectacle, all their hearts were incensed with indignation; yea, the Captains
could scarcely contain the fury of their soldiers, threatningly demanding the
sign of the onset. Whereupon Alexander thinking it best to make use of their
heat, seeing the front of the Fort to be beaten down, and part of the back
also, Alexander gives order for the assault.
he chose three soldiers out of every Spanish company (which amounted not to
above fifty) and commanded them, being conducted by two Captains of Pacius's
Regiment, to assail the back: he also chose as many of the same Regiment, led
also by two Captains, to follow after; he attributed the front to the Italians
and Germans, and commanded the Walloones to assault the side with scaling
Ladders. Notwithstanding he deferred the assault until the next day, which was
the Eve of the assumption of our Blessed Lady, because on that Feast (as he
advertised the Captains) the Queen of heaven assisting them, Trusting in the
help of the B. Virgin.
he doubted not but to revenge the Injuries of the Saints. Nor was he deceived
in his piety. And now they begun the assault on all sides, with great animosity
and contempt of death; but, especially the Spaniards. And for two hours it was
gallantly fought on both sides, but, at length the Royalists prevailed, and
with the loss of fifteen only of their soldiers, took the Fort; The Fort is
taken.
but, the defendants lost above eighty, and the rest fled into the City:
which, although the Spaniards from the higher place commanded; yet,
notwithstanding the strength of the Walls, the interior Bulwarks, and
especially the Ditch, which being very deep, and full of water, hindered their
access to the Walls, seemed to retard the conquest: Besides, the City on a
sudden, by a slight occasion, but made greater by conceit, was much animated.
There were some Carriages laden with provision, Provision sent unto the
Farnesian Camp,
sent from the Village of Gaure to Alexanders Army, when about two hundred and
fifty soldiers issuing out of Gaunt, from whence Dendermund had requested
aid, Intercepted by those of Gaunt;
and putting to flight the convoy near to Alst, joyfully brought away the
booty. But short was the joy of both Cities; for Olivera having notice thereof,
drew forth from the Fort of Wettera some troops of Horse, and meeting them not
far from Gaunt, unawares set upon the conquerors, and either killing or
taking them prisoners, but recovered with their overthrow, was sent back to the
Army.
for there did not one escape by flight, sent back the Carriages to Alexander.
But the Dendermundians had yet a far greater affliction; for, when the River
was turned, and drawn another way, (which they never expected) and thereby the
Ditch, their chiefest defense drained, they were daunted with that unheard of
celerity: for, within five days, with admirable expedition, they had seen
Bridges built, Rivers blockt up, Tents pitched, the City besieged, the Walls
deprived of their Trench of water, their Fort taken, nor any rest either night
or day allowed them, fearing any longer to provoke the Conqueror, they sent a
Trumpeter to demand a parley, Dendermund delivered to Alex. 17. Aug.
and delivered up the City; the Citizens being fined in sixty thousand Florens;
the Soldiers (which were about five hundred) sent away without either horse or
arms, and the City commanded to receive what Garrison it pleased the Prince of
Parma. Wherefore three companies of Spaniards of Pacius's Regiment, and two of
Italians entered the Town, Alexander creating John de Rivas, John de Rivas made
Governor,
an old Captain of the same Regiment, for a noble act performed at that
expedition, Governor of the City. For, he committing some Carts, made ready in
the nightime, laden with Faggots, to the forwardest of his Captains, to be
conveyed into the ditch of the Fort, thereby to defend the assailants; Rivius
was the first that drove the Cart forward against the enemy; who having notice
of the design, had prepared themselves to shoot from the Fort, and he was the
first, and soon after the only man, that adventured to advance against a storm
of leaden hailstones; for two of his fellows were shot, and he also a little
after wounded in the shoulder; notwithstanding, he with a courageous spirit,
for his gallant exploit,
and a threatening look stood to his work, nor did he desist, before he had
driven his Cart to the place intended; and in defiance of his enemies, with all
his might, did drive the next Cart, forsaken by his wounded soldiers, even
unto the front of the Fortress. Then by Alexander's appointment he was carried
into his Tent, and in reward of his approved valor made Governor of the City.
But Prince Alexander, although in the beginning, the Siege of Dendermund was by
Mondragonius judged to be a tedious business, and would not (as he said) be
dispatched, before the earth was covered over with snow; yet, the eleventh day
after he departed from Bevera, the City being very strong of it self, And the
expedition dispatched sooner then was expected.
and within short time like to draw Gaunt the same way, was by his counsel,
authority, help, and especially fame, which was Alexanders chiefest favorite,
brought under subjection; and then he returned to the siege of Antwerp,
Returns to Antwerp.
where the sum of his cares resided.

Alexander together with Plato and Baroccius (whose judgments next to his
Council of War he chiefly made use of) contrived of what form the work should
be to block up the River: and commanded, He prepares timber for building the
bridge.
that the longest Trees that could be found, should in the territory of Wasia,
especially near the Castle of Vorhoteus, and other places, be cut down: and
with a huge number of faggots, boughs, and other timber, be conveyed into the
Church of Calloo: a great part whereof being already brought, he, whilst some
ship-masts fetched further off were expected, began, partly to fortify the
Forts of Saint Mary's and Saint Philips, He fortifies St. Mar. and Phil. and
the banks of the Scheldt.
partly to build new Castles on either side of the River, and carefully to
provide, that the workmen and Carpenters, ready to set upon the groundwork of
the Bridge, should not be hindered and disturbed by the enemies Navy. Aldegund
jeers at it.
But Consul Aldegund, being informed at Antwerp by his Emissaries what was in
agitation, it is strange how ridiculously he contemned it, and in the presence
of many, censured it as vain and foolish; whether deceived himself he thought
so, or desired that others should be of that opinion: For, said he, Prince
Alexander, even drunk with prosperity, thinking by the interposition of a
Bridge, to bridle the liberty of the Scheldt, does too much confide in
himself; for that River will no more brook the shackles of engines, then the
free Belgians the bondage of Spaniards. The River in that place; if he know
not, is two thousand four hundred foot broad, deep, when the tide is out of
it, above sixty, and when the sea sends in the tide, it increases at least
twelve foot. And how can the Spaniards have in readiness trees of so huge
length and firmness to out-top that channel, and appear above the water; nor
could this be expected to be done by ships, which perhaps might be in place
of a Bridge, since that for the present the besiegers had none with them, nor
could any be conveyed to them, but before the walls and part of Antwerp. But in
nothing did the Prince of Parma so grossly mistake, as in deferring the work
till almost winter when the River now congealeth into ice, then breaks into
huge pieces, even like swimming Islands: he surely has but little knowledge
of the place, if he think to make a wooden Bridge to endure and hold out
against Mountains of ice, forced and dashed by the Tide rushing in furiously
from the Sea against it: which if with like violence should be moved against
the City it self, though firmly founded, would without doubt subvert it. And
these things will certainly come to pass, though Antwerp act nothing, but sit
still as a spectatour. But what if on the one side, viz. from Antwerp, and on
the other side from Holland and Zealand, the Bridge should at once be assailed
by both our Navies, what can Alexander interpose against the winter, the sea,
and our Fleets? enemies all at once combining against him, to protect that
weak foundation raised in the Waters? Thus whilst Aldegund either out of
dissimulation or contempt of the danger, gave encouragement to his Soldiers;
Alexander having already begun the work, brought the River under subjection.

Now I will, The description of the bridge.
following Julius Caesar's example, who was as careful in describing, as he
was in building of his Bridge over the Rheine, exactly and distinctly deliver
unto you the model of the work, because rather by fame then knowledge it begot
admiration with many: especially I having seen the form of the same bridge,
with the Castles and Forts thereunto adjoining, in a great frame of Wood
composed by a rare Artificer of Gaunt, which Prince Alexander, together with a
Table representing also in colors the whole work sent to Rome, which then by
all was much admired. It was made after this manner: First, at St. Mary's Fort,
three piles of an equal distance from the Bank, St. Mary's Fort.
and placed about five foot one from another, were fastened into the River by a
wonderful and quick invention. Its beginning on Flanders bank on Piles thus
placed.
After these, there were as many distant from the first, eleven foot, and five
foot one from another: from these about thirteen foot off were three others:
and from these succeeded three others, eleven foot distant; and thus by course,
as it were several couples, some eleven, and some thirteen foot asunder, they
were so far extended into the middle of the River, that by reason of the
depth of the Channel, and violent course of the waters, there could not any
more Trees how long soever be fastened, twelve piles of seventy foot long being
fixed in the river, almost in a Quadrangle, to be the basis or groundwork of
the Castle, finished this part of the Pile-work, and the topps of all the Piles
beforementioned joined together by beams laid length-way, connected by
overthwart-planks like lattisses were for the Causey, or floor of the Bridge:
On the outside in the midway between every Ternall of Piles, there was a
beam standing out five foot from the said piles struck fast into the Waters:
which by two other beams as it were Arms, taking hold of two of the adverse
Piles, in form of a wedge bound fast the whole work to the opposite beams. And
this was observed in every ternall juncture on both sides the foundation. But
yet more distant outwardly, on either side there went along another row of
Piles over against those which were placed three in a rank, about twenty foot
off, from the bottom of which, to about the superficies of the Water, were
raised great props, which being put under the sharp Angles of the former work,
and in the middle meeting together cros-wise like claspes joined together the
inner Piles, and there by wonderfully strengthened the whole Machine. The work
thus ordered, The way over the bridge upon beams boarded and fenced.
boards were laid over the former Floor, to make even the passage over the
Bridge, which was securely flancked on either side against Musket Shot, with
strong and firm Plancks, five foot high, with a Parapet of two foot, with like
solid boards was the Castle, the intended station of the Soldiery in the
furthest part of the work fortifyed. The passage of the Bridge being twelve
foot broad, admitted eight Soldiers to march on breast: and the Castle forty
foot broad, and fifty two foot long, was capable of about fifty Soldiers. And
whilst this part of the Bridge on Flanders side, was built, at the same time at
St. Philips Fort on Brabant side was the other part of the Bridge fabricated,
The same was observed on Brabant side.
after the same fashion a Castle being built also at the end of it for the
Soldiers, saving that on this side the Channel being not to deep, the
foundation was continued on far further, The length of the steccada on both
sides,
for it was nine hundred foot in length, when the other was not above two
hundred. The Soldiers called both parts of the Pile-work Steccada. The middle
which was the greater half of the River yet remained open: for it was between
both Castles above one thousand two hundred and fifty foot. In which place the
Channel was of such an immense deepnesse and violent rapidity, The breadth of
the River betwixt both works, could not be made up by Poles for the depth
thereof.
that it was impossible to fasten any more Piles by what Engine soever:
Alexander therefore determined to block up that passage by the interposition of
the Ships, sending to Dunkirk, that if there were any there to fetch them from
thence, but there were not many, nor could they be conveyed through the Scheldt
but in sight of Gaunt and Antwerp. Yet he had great hopes, that Gaunt as he
was informed thence by credible persons, would ere long come into his hands,
and so he might from thence abundantly furnish himself with ships, Mariners,
and other warlike Magazine. In the interim he thought it sufficient that the
River was straightned, and the passage not only made narrower, but by the
Castles fortifyed on both sides almost unaccessible, and thereby the hopes of
Antwerp contracted. But the further it was divulged that the besieged being
hindered of navigation were at want of provision, so much the more were many
Merchants spurred on with hope of gain to carry victuals into the City, there
scarce passing any day, but some Ships expecting the opportunity of the sea,
And therefore some Auxiliary ships daily passed to Antwerp, through the open
passage.
and forced forward by the violence of the Tide, entered the City with
prosperous temerity, although from every side, but especially from the two
Castles there were many both surprised, and by Cannon cast away.

But the delivering up of Gaunt terrifyed the Antwerpians confidence, The
delivery of GAVNT. The Gandavians brought under by Famine,
and gave great advantage to Alexanders design; for they of Gaunt were not
only out of hopes of provision, both by sea and land: but daily afflicted more
and more, on the one side by Olivera, and on the other by Varambone, who
quartering in the Village of Hevergeme near the River Livia, and having joined
his Burgundians and English with Olivera's Horse, harassed and plundered all
the Country about Gaunt, on both sides the City: wherefore now their haughty
courages beginning to cool, they sent a Trumpeter to Bevera to entreat Prince
Alexander to give safe conduct to their Commissioners to come to him: who being
admitted, offered to deliver their City on the fame terms as those of Bridges
had delivered theirs, Septem. 15. They after to submit and request certain
conditions of Alexander,
and which then also were offered to Gaunt. But Alexander utterly denied them
those, for that when new symptoms appear, new Physic must be prescribed; who
gives no care to them.
and checked them because they had not only with great contumacy slighted those
conditions that were heretofore offered but also by new injuries against
Religion and things sacred; and by strange punishments inflicted on those of
the Royal Party, had provoked his Majesty's just indignation: and bad them
reflect on their former trespasses, He blames them and dismisseth them.
and not to expect any other conditions then the Kings mercy. But they laid the
fault on a few, and said their City was strong and able to hold out a siege yet
for many months: and showed his Majesty's Letters of France brought them by
Prunaeus his Ambassador, They excuse themselves but in vain.
with an assured hope of his aid: And in fine, added that they feared, if they
should return without dispatch of their business, the seditious Citizens
bearing an unplacable hatred against the Spaniard, would desperately set fire
on the City, and leave nothing for the Conquerers to triumph over but ashes.
Alexander nothing moved herewith, sent them to President Richardott from whom
hearing the unpleasant conditions which he mentioned to be imposed on Gaunt,
especially when amongst other discourse, he said that he saw a private Letter
sent from Spain, that persuaded the Prince of Parma not to admit the
Gandavians upon any other terms, then such as his Grandfather Charles the
first had done, not pardoning them til they came as suppliants with Halters
about their Necks, and half naked to submit themselves; at which words the
conditioners took such distaste that they returned to Gaunt. But the next day in
the Cities name, They depart, but return again.
there came two chief Gentlemen, Peter Devos, and Peter Cortevilla, and for the
Soldiery three Captains, and that they might trans-act all things with
greater facility with Prince Alexander, following the ancient practice of the
Britains, And use this Art.
who about to make peace with Caesar joined with their Ambassadors, Comius of
Arras Caesar's near friend, whom a little before they had taken Prisoner: So
they taking with them out of prison Frederick Perrenot Lord of Champine, and he
together with Richardott, They deliver the City to Alex. and receive these
conditions.
conferring apart in the end concluded on these conditions. The Prince of Parma
Governor of the Low Countries does in his Majesty's name pardon and indemnify
the Gandavians received into favor and protection of all their former
Delinquencies and grants all their ancient Privileges. The punishment which
was merited by all, being reduced to six Citizens only, and those six also whom
he had demanded to be delivered, to receive punishment at his pleasure, most
mercifully he forgives, reserving the disposition of all other matters to
himself. He taxes the City in two hundred thousand Florens, and commands the
Citizens to reedify the Imperial Fort, and all the Churches and Religious
houses. Given order that the Clergy be recalled, and restored to their goods
and possessions, of which in these last troubles they were deprived. He gran
teth to the Heretics leave to stay at Gaunt two years, to set in order their
affairs, and then to depart He also permiteth the garrison soldiers, (which
were somewhat above two thousand) to march away with their Arms, and he to
substitute others in their places, of what Nation he pleased.

And having thus settled these affairs, he brought into the City three thousand
Foot and five Troops of Horse under Olivera, and created the Lord of Champine,
lately close prisoner there, and twice in danger to have lost his life Governor
of the City. Alex. orders the state of Gaunt, both civil, and sacred.
The Arch Bishop of Mechlin was also sent for to see to the Clergy of Gaunt,
and to reduce into the City the Priests and religious Families, and to
reconcile to God and true Religion the desertors of the Orthodox Faith; And
after this manner the Prince, as well as he then could, (being otherwise
employed) took care of the civil and Ecclesiastical affairs of Gaunt. And
thus this City, the greatest in all the Belgic Provinces came into his
Majesty's hands being excellently well fortifyed with Walls, And of the Victory
of this greatest and strongest City.
Ditches and Forts against all On-sets of great Armies whatsoever and within no
less strong by the windings and enclosures of Rivers, and Channells, by which
being cut into many Islands: if the Suburbs should be taken, the Citizens may
retire into those Islands, and cutting down the Bridges may have them; Lastly,
for safe refuges, this (I say) so great and rich a City, besieged rather by the
terror of Alexanders Name, then by a few stations of Soldiers placed about
it, with very little cost to the King, no loss of soldiers was compelled to
receive what conditions it pleased the Conqueror, with so great gain of all
warlick Magazine, there being carried from thence a huge number both of Wall and
field Pieces, Military Engines, carts, Pioneers and other workmen, besides
ships and Mariners, that Prince Alexander sending a Messenger to to Spain
with news of the Victory; He sent news to the King.
to add something (as he writ) to the solemnity, then intended as he
understood, for the Nuptials of Princess Catharine his Majesty's Daughter;
Married to the Duke of Savoy.
after a relation of the Victory lastly affirmed, that he never amongst all his
prosperous success in the Low Countries, had trial of Gods bounteous
goodness at a fitter time then in this Victory over Gaunt, of it self great,
but shortly to produce a greater.

Nor was the fruit of this Victory long concealed: There were thirty two ships
besides some Barges, Ships brought from Gaunt to finish the Bridge.
manned with five hundred Soldiers brought from Gaunt, to be conveyed down to
the Scheldt to Caloo. But because between Gaunt and Caloo was seated Antwerp,
before whose works they were to pass, they determined thus to shun it. The
Antwerpians having opened the banks of the Scheldt at Lasling and other
places, And through the fields drowned by the enemies.
(as I said before) had overwhelmed the greatest part of the Country, even to
the Village of Borcht a little beyond Antwerp, and excepting the Isle of Doele,
Caloo, and some other Forts which were free from the Deluge, had covered over
with waters all the seacoast of Flanders. Alexander laying hold of this
opportunity, as soon as the ships were set out from Gaunt, and safely passed
Dendermund and Rupelmund, Cities now of the Kings party, Avoiding Antwerp.
and being augmented with some Frigots and little Galleys, commanded them to
leave Antwerp on their right hand, and divert their course to Borcht, and
cutting there the banks of the River, to break out into the fields then flowing
with Waters, And fighting with good success.
which they, after a short skirmish with the Antwerpian fleet, (which came
thither to stop them) killing John Cock the Admiral, and being guarded with a
new Fort raised on purpose near Borcht prosperously performed. Then steering
toward Caloo, and breaking through the Rampire of Blocherse at St. Francis
Fort, at length at Sebastians, the banks of the river being cut, and sliding
again into the Scheldt came to Alexander with so much the greater joy to the
Army, Are conveyed to Alex.
for that it was reported, the Royal ships were scarcely passed Borcht, when
a new navy from Antwerp, under the conduct of Tilinius, flew into the help of
Cock. This Tilinius some days before, But Tilinius son to Lanoy, sailing
from Lillo to Antwerp,
whilst the Confederates on every side assailed and disturbed the workmen
building the Bridge, departing in the night from Lillo, made an escape to
Antwerp, and drew with him three Spanish Barges, Not without some booty.
but seeing the Royalists to have worsted the Antwerpians ships, and already
passed the bank of the Scheldt even to Borcht, lest that passage and port
should hereafter lie open to any more ships coming from Gaunt, with the Fleet
that came with him, cast Anchor where the bank of the River was opened, and
there erected and fortifyed a Castle which was called Tilinius. Raising a
Castle hindered that passage from Gaunt.
Then returning to Antwerp, and consulting with Aldegunde and the chiefest
Commanders, when they had determined to call from Zutphan Count Holach, to move
Colonel Morgan to assist them with his English Regiment, and again to demand
aid from the French; He engaged himself to go to the Hollanders, and solicit
their Navy. And expecting the ebbing of the sea in an armed Galley, Afterward
sailing back to solicit the Hollanders.
having sent before one of his Barges, about midnight escaped between the
wooden bridges, but by and by falling on the Lord of Bills Galley and ships;
who by Prince Alexanders appointment, kept guard between the bridge and
Lief-kenshoeck after some dispute was overcome, taken prisoner, It taken.
and sent to the Castle of Tonrney, With great loss to the States.
with no less loss to Antwerp, deprived of a stout and hardy Captain, then
grief to his father Lanoy, Lanoy taken before.
with that captivity twice captivated. But the damage given by Tilinius, who by
placing ships near Borcht, had debard the Royalists from thence, and so
block't up the ships passage from Gaunt, The passage from Gaunt being
obstructed.
was not recompensed by this defeat: Which greatly vexed Prince Alexander,
standing in need of ships, by the interposition whereof the now finished
bridge might at length block up the Scheldt, and inhibite the passage to the
enemies, who daily in despite of all danger passed that way, and continually
transported some provision to Antwerp, especially the nearer it drew to winter,
he feared every thing would grow to a worse condition, principally the ice of
the river, then which as the inhabitants threatened, there could not happen a
more certain mischief. Besides, he had need of more ships for the defense
of the bridge against the enemies attempts invading it either from the sea, or
Antwerp, or from both sides at once. Therefore advising but in vain, with
those that were best acquainted with the Waters and places thereabouts, he
himself, either necessity urging wit, or rather, (as we writ to the King) God
inspiring it into his mind, after he had well viewed and taken notice of the
Country all about the River, intended (following Drusus, and Corbulonus
example, Alexander devises another else where.
who in those places made Ditches, he from the Rheine unto the lake of Flevus,
this between the Moss and the Rheine not far from the coast of Holland:) to
make a channel capable of ships, from Steken, 14. Novem.
a Village of Wasia, and draw it on even to Caloo. And although a great patt of
his Pioneers were elsewhere employed; yet assured of his soldiers obedience,
(for Alexander had attained, that that which heretofore was esteemed Might and
Authority, now became emulation and customary) Himself the Architect of his
own design, amongst his soldiers and pioneers as one of them; laid his hands
to the work, and a little above Steken, whither an arm of Moere a river of
Gaunt reaches, He begins the Channel.
opens the head of the ditch, and letting Moere into it, draws on the channel
to a place, And letting the River into it.
where by reason of the former inundation, the Waters were sufficiently deep
five miles distant from Steken. Thence bending its course through the fields
that were ebber of waters, to the Village of Gillis, he brought it between
Verbock, and the Fort of Devera, to Calloo and so to the Army, and in fine
cutting the bank of the Scheldt disburdened it into the river: and built there
a Sconce called Perla, for the defense of this new Port and Haven, which in
that place he determined for his shipping. And thus though the passage through
the Scheldt was obstructed by the enemies, yet having opened a new and much
shorter cut into which the shipping from Gaunt, Draws it even to the Camp.
through the River Moere might enter, and so be conveyed to the Army, he
sufficiently provided plenty of Timber for the bridge, and provision fot the
Army with great admiration of the enemies; seeing so huge a work, so speedily
perfected: and rejoicing of his soldiers, highly and not sparingly extolling
the Prince of Parma, to whose honor they called this new Fosse, Parma. The
length of it measuring both the dry land and the overwhelmed fields, The
length of it.
was fourteen miles: and first, The commodiousnesse of it.
there came from, Gaunt that way seaventeen Barks but afterward as the
greatest Rivers of all Flanders do meet at Gaunt, so from all places of
Flanders, all kind of Merchandise began to be brought to the Camps, with no
little gain to the Towns and Villages, safely conveying thither, and uttering
their vendible commodities; with the greatest benefit to the soldiers, whom
all the time of the siege, this one channel abundantly supplied with
victuals, so as they needed not to leave their Posts and Ensigns. But the
principal profit of Parma then was, Ships are brought through it to perfect
the bridge.
to bring in ships to finish the bridge: Yet by reason of the frost they were
some days retarded, for the River Scheldt, which was almost all frozen up,
being broken, huge pieces of Ice were heaped together, which if perhaps with
the violence of the Tide, had been dash't against the bridge doubtless had
dissipated and overthrown the ships standing in the midst of the River,
where it runs with greater violence. Certainly some huge fragments of the
congealed River, forcibly being dash't against the bridge, and sticking into
the substance of the piles, almost half a palm, were a sufficient proof, of
what strength and firmness it was, standing immovable and stable against such
sharp darts, violently hurled by the raging billows of the Ocean. And the
violence of the congealed River ceasing, they are made use of. 1585.
But as soon as the Winter began to dissolve, and less fear of the Ice they
returned to their work. The middle part of the River (as is before signified)
between the Castles lay open little less then one thousand three hundred foot.
To block up which there were thirty two ships, Those ships were chiefly two.
of sixty six foot long a piece, and twelve foot broad interposed, with their
sides together evenly placed. Thus ordered.
Nor were they joined close together, but distant one from another twenty two
foot, and tied together in four places, at the Fore-deck, middle, and stern
by Cable-ropes, and chains. Besides, every shipp from the Fore-deck and stern
was stayed by Anchors so cast that the river swelling up, and the Cables
loosned by the Mariners help, the rank of ships might be raised unhurt. But
the distance between every ship was made up by beams, and boarded by
overthwart planks, Over these the passage is made.
fastened unto the hatches: whereby there was made a continual bridge between
the Castles, of one thousand three hundred foot long, flancked also with
battlements of firm plancks, as was observed in both parts of the Steccada, to
which, this middle bridge was connected. To every ship for their defense were
attributed thirty soldiers, fenced with hurdles and gabions, four Mariners,
and two double Cannons: But for the Castles there were far more defendants;
Fortified with soldiers, Mariners and Cannons,
and to every corner of them so many cannons, two whereof were placed for the
defense of the Steccada, and two for the ships. For the defense of the whole
work, there were 97. Cannons.
And for the protection of all the whole bridge, there were ninety seven great
Gunns. Nor was this work sooner perfected, but another was dispatched, which
might be to this a munition and fortification. And as before City gates some
Forts or bulwarks a little distant from the Walls are wont to be raised against
the enemies, A double defense placed before the Bridge.
by opposition of which they may be retarded, and dulled, that they cannot
assault the City it self, but first tired and diminished; so this new Bulwark
(as Baroccius the inventor of it, reasoned) would be a tuition to the bridge,
upon which the enemies ships must of necessity run and be entangled, before
they could freely and in full force assail the bridge. And after this manner
was the structure of this Machine. Before the Navall bridge, Of the kind of
structure.
but about a darts cast off, there were thirty three boats, placed three and
three together, their sides somewhat distant one from another, fastened together
with huge beams laid over, and ships Masts. Then three others connected
after the same manner, but separated from the first three a little distance: so
again others, succeeded with equal distance, even unto the eleventh Ternall.
Besides, from every one of these Ternalls, stood out forty beams in a forked
order, being very long, round, and their points sharpened with iron; which like
Pike-men in the front of an Army, might terrify with their points set and
turned against the enemy, those that advanced against them. These Boats were
filled with empty Hogs-heads, lest they should be swallowed up, either by the
stream or tide: these were on either side stayed with Anchors, but their
Cables long and slack, that the River rising with the tide, they might also
rise with it, therefore they called them Floates. The one of these Engines, for
there were two were placed toward Antwerp, the other toward the Ocean, either
of these being one thousand two hundred and fifty two foot long, were so far
extended into the breadth of the River, that they might by their opposition and
hinderance, defend all the Navall bridge, and part of the Castles. Lastly, his
Excellency adding a Navy of forty sail of ships and galleys, twenty on
Flanders side, and as many on the coast of Brabant, for the safeguard of the
Bridge; after the seventh month of the siege, brought this work to a happy
end: And built a bridge over the Scheldt, two thousand four hundred foot long,
And the bridge 2400 foot long, being finished.
of that firmness, that both horse and foot, with Carriages and Wheel-pieces
might safely pass to and fro, as occasion required between Flanders and
Brabant; block't up the river, The passage from Antwerp to the sea, is wholly
cut off.
and took away all hopes of commerce between the Sea and the Antwerpians. That
day, on which the bridge and its fortifications were finished (being the feast
of St. Matthias the Apostle, That day the work was finished, the soldiers
celebrate with great joy.
which Prince Alexander divined to be to him, as he writ to the King, luckie
for the memory of his Grand father Charles the fifth, to whom that day often
proved fortunate) all the Army celebrated it with military triumph. A great
part of the soldiery were placed on the new bridge, as if, having subjugated
and trampled on the Scheldt, they were already Victors: part from the Castles,
and Forts built on both sides the River; some from the ships, many from their
stations and tents; all with joyful Volleys of their Artillery, and exulting
shouts wished life and Victory to their noble General the Prince of Parma.
Alexander likewise gives thanks to God.
Whilst he, who knew the design to be begun by the singular Will of God, and
by him protected amongst the continual conflicts, both of the enemies, and
elements, rendering with a submissive mind, thanks and praises to the Divine
Majesty, prayed that the work might continue and be defended by his most
omnipotent hand.

But as soon as it was known at Antwerp, The Antwerpians admire to see the work
finished.
the passage of the Scheldt to be stopped by a bridge, and many after off beheld
the Machine; it is scarce credible, with what admiration and consternation the
people were taken. Yea, there were of opinion, that this could not be invented
by humane Art, but the model of it by some demonicall inspiration demonstrated
to the Prince of Parma, and accomplished by Artificers, and Tools sent from
Pluto. Indeed Aldegund, all thought then he dissembled his fear, was mightily
dejected, and in a Book, which after the delivery of Antwerp he set forth,
affirmed, to be above humane judgment, Aldegunds judgment of it.
that a River of that nature, could by mortal hands be obstructed. And verily
amongst all the Ancients, one can hardly read of a more exquisite and rare
piece of work. I know Caesar's bridge a little beyond the Belgic bounds, built
over the Rheine, Compared to Caesar's Bridge.
to be by Historians made famous. But Caesar's bridge on the Rheine was erected
on a far straiter, and by reason of the Summer time more shallow place.
Alexanders bridled a river broader, almost by the half, hard by the Ocean, yea
mixed with it, and tossed by the fury of that Element. Besides, Caesar.
he had every thing ready brought from confederate Provinces, offering ships
and Timber: Alexander had few necessaries at hand, most things to fetch afar
off, now surprised by the English, then by the Hollanders, always in danger of
the enemies. And that Caesar's bridge was but for a short time to be used, to
wit, for once transporting of an army, and therefore did not need to be of that
stability, as of necessity Alexanders must, to hold out a siege of many months
continuance. Lastly, Caesar stood in no dread of enemies, who, as soon as the
bridge began to be erected, fled away, Alexander in sight of an hostile and
most potent City, erected a Bridge amongst Waters, restless by the Tide of the
restless Ocean, Antwerp.
betwixt Antwerp and the Sea, both held by the enemies, now thence, then from
Antwerp, often from both sides at once, assailed by dangerous invasions of the
enemies ships. So as if the Name of Caesar were but taken from Rheine, and
added to this bridge of Antwerp, our age, I believe, needed not to be ashamed
of their Caesar's. But a spy sent by Aldegund to the Camp, to take notice of
the fabric of the Bridge, and the enemies designs, aggravated the besieged
Cities cares, who being known and apprehended, but treated by the Prince of
Parma, A Scout from Antwerp taken.
otherwise then he feared, (to wit, in imitation of Scipic, who with like
security of himself; and contempt of the enemy admitted Anniballs scouts,) was
commanded to walk about the Army, diligently to talk notice of the bridge, to
number the ships, Artillery, and Forts, and then without fear to return to
him. Being returned, go quoth he to those that sent thee, And is sent back from
Alex. with these words.
and after thou have related all things thou have with thy eyes beheld, add
that Alexander Farneze, with a constant resolution has determined with
himself, not to depart from the siege, till under that (and points to the
Bridge) he bury himself, or by it force a way into the City.

But the news of the unfortunate attempt of Bolduc, The attemps of Bolduc.
was to Antwerp a far greater terror then the relation they had from the
Scout at his return. What was decreed by the states at their meeting.
The States confederate amongst other things, agitated at their meeting at
Middleburg, had thus divided their Forces. Whilst Tresland Admiral of Zealand,
was drawing his fleet to Lillo, Count Holack should attempt Bolduck which if
the Prince of Parma should releeve, (for so they disputed) doubtless, the
bridge and the Castles would be left destitute of their accustomed defense, and
so their fleet might have a more facile access, and onset upon the bridge, but
if he neglected Bolduck, and chose rather to attend to the head of the War,
it could not hold out long, especially when some of the Citizens had promised
their endeavors* and if Bolduc were taken, they might convey succors to
Antwerp by land, not needing the sea. And now by Holacks command fifty foot
soldiers under Claragius lay in ambush, Iulians charge.
before the City gate, which tends toward Antwerp, and as soon in the morning
as the Citizens opened that gate, and let down the drawbridge, on a sudden
they showed themselves, and putting to flight the Citizens, took that gate. And
forthwith three hundred horse, and seven hundred foot not far off listening
to the success, commanded by Holach himself enter the City: and being
divided, Holach and his forces enter the City.
some march into the marketplace, some lay hand on the Magazine and Artillery,
many now as secure of the Victory, Who fall to plunder.
furiously spread themselves all over in pillaging this rich City. The keeper
of the gate joins himself to the plunderers.
And a Corporal with three soldiers appointed by Holack to look to the gate,
now supposing the City to be taken, lest he should be defrauded of the fruits
of the Victory, basely forsook his station, and joined himself to his
plundering companions. At that time by chance, Altapen newly recovered of his
sickness was at Bolduc, and hearing the noise of the enemies, armed himself,
and drawing with him forty Lanciers of Elmont his Italian Troop, who then was
Governor of the City, advanced to the Marketplace, and with his presence
greatly animated the dejected Citizens, Altapen charges the enemies.
and fiercely charged the Vanguard of the enemies. They fight. By and by
others also.
Then the Govemour Elmont follows Altapens example: and with both, some
Citizens join themselves: others by their own conduct, and with mutual
exhortation invade the enemies: and taking up arms every where, it was all the
City over, both in the streets and Market, with different resolutions, but
equal obstinacy on both sides disputed. These, the love of their City, care of
their wives, children and fortunes, inflamed against the assailants, and
robbers; these were encouraged with the glory of surprising the City, and the
great booties which now were in their hands. But, whether EVERY one more
carefully defends his own, then strives to take others, or the armed crowd of
Citizens increasing for, FOR THE most part a few begin high designs, but are
soon seconded by many; the Hollachians were forced to desist from plunder, and
fall to their own defense. And were yet encouraged with hope of succors,
Holach being gone to call in more forces, which for this purpose lay privately
in a Neighboring Village. Holach departs to fetch in more forces.
But an old man seeing the gate slighted by the Holachians, privily crept down
from an adjoining Turret, cutting in sunder the ties, and letting down the
Port-cullis, shut out and deluded the enemies, Returns with them. But the gate
being shut, he is not admitted.
being one thousand horse and two thousand foot, posting with all speed to the
City, and even then at the gates, whereby it came to pass, that the Holachians
now fighting with unequal number and courage, were all either shut up within
the City, and miserably cut off; Then following the slaughter of the Holachians.
or voluntarily leaping from the Walls into the Ditch, excepting a few, were
swallowed up by the Waters. At which time it is reported that many also of the
Citizens, as yet ignorant of the delivery of their City, in a precipitate
flight, and with vain fear of them, to whom they themselves were a terror,
fell down headlong from the opposite part of the City Walls, and so both the
victours and conquered were alike drowned. But it is more probable that they
were not by ignorance of the Victory, but guilty of Treason, driven to flight
and that fate. Amongst the dead, were found Ferdinand Truchsesius, brother to
the deposed Imperial Elector, and the Prince of Oranges base son, besides
Count Holachs Lieftenant, and some German Captains of Pike-men.

Thus this City already taken, was by one Corporal quitting his post lost, and
saved by the undaunted courage of Altapen. And so accordingly the Corporal
flying from the walls received his merited punishment, The keeper of the gate
punished.
who by Holachs command lost his head. Altapen and Elmont, Prince Alexander
highly extolling them both, were by the Kings letters as signals of his thanks,
Altapen rewarded.
honored, together with a gift sent to Altapen.

As the news of this defeat entered Antwerp, Bruxels besieged, is tormented
with Famine.
at the same time almost some horse, and suddenly after foot also, the relics
of the slaughter given by George Basta Commissary General of the horse,
confusedly fled into the City. For Viluord a Town near adjoining to Bruxels,
not long before being taken by the Royalists, and Ambrose Landriano left there
to defend it, those of Bruxels were miserably tormented for lack of provision.
Wherefore the Mechlinians. and the Antwerpians, had thus agreed to releeve
them, that they should provide provision, They of Mechlin and Antwerp send them
provision, with a great Convoy.
and these a Convoy. But by chance this came to the Prince of Parma's
knowledge, who appointed George Basta from Tornhout, and Edward Lanceavech from
Liere, Governor of that Garrison, to join their forces, and about Viluord to
enambush them-selves. But falling on an Ambuscado of the Royalists.
And now at the close of the evening, they saw nine Troops of Horse and almost
thirteen foot companies, to march before two hundred Carriages, and but a
slender guard on the Rear. For by reason of the vicinity of Mechlin, they
suspected not any danger. Whereupon the Royalists to make show of greater
forces, with great and sudden sounding of Drums and Trumpets, charged the Van
of the enemies horse; then the foot and horse joining themselves, whilst on
both sides it was courageously fought, the Waggoneers conveyed away the
carriages, and drove most of them back to Mechlin, Are beaten and put to flight,
from whence a little before they came: whereby the Royalists with greater fury
pursuing the fight, slew at least two hundred, and took many prisosoners but
especially of Rag^ers horses, With prey to the Victours.
for they brought away above four hundred, killed and routed all the rest, and
thought it sufficient, so to have disappointed the Antwerpians design, to
their no small damage, and to have dash't all hopes of releeving Bruxels. now
in great distress for want of provision. The famine increases at Bruxels.
And indeed the famine in that rich, famous, and most populous City, grew
almost intolerable, although oftentimes many, both men and women were sent
out, thereby to ease it. But most of them by the Kings horse were either by
shot forced back into the City, or not returning, were taken and hanged up: but
they commanded the women, having their garments cut above their knees, with
that disgrace to return to be with their fellows hunger-starved. And truly
every day there, many miserably perish't for lack of meat; yea, it is reported
that a mother of many children being inwardly tormented with their continual
lamentations, A miserable example.
caused them to drink poison, and afterward drunk it her self, thereby to
prevent the irksomeness of a tedious death. Discord increases as the famine.
Then discord, famines companion, entered the City, some of the Citizens being
in mind to surrender the City, others still retaining their obstinacy with hope
of help from France: these with armed soldiers possess themselves of the
Palace, those with like preparation of arms took the Marketplace and
Townhouse. Til at length in despair of the French succors, and seeing all
passages on every side the City to be obstructed, Viluord lost, and
Willebroeck the head of their chief Navigation, together with the garrison
taken by Igniquesius Regiment; Templaeus Governor of the City, the soldiery,
They send to Alex. to deliver up the City.
and the Magistrates, sent their several Commissioners into the Camp to
Alexander, to render up the City to his mercy: only petitioning they might
receive conditions, not dishonorable to their City, the seat of the Belgic
Princess: adding that their constant fidelity to his mother the Duchess of
Parma, deserved something at her sons hands. Alexander after a short
reprehension, that that Faith to his mother, and the King her Lord, they had
rashly changed, By whom being reprehended,
and by a furious edict, had made him exile to his own, yet putting them in
good hopes of his Majesty's clemency, dismissed them to President Richardott,
by whose especial means they agreed on these Articles. They receive these
conditions.
The Citizens now received into his Majesty's favor: being no otherwise
charged with any fine of money, are only commanded to repair the Churches, to
restore the precious furniture of the Kings Palace, and the sacred Ornaments
of his Chapel, which they had plundered, or else to pay their worth. As for
the goods they had taken from the houses of Cardinal Granuell, Count Mansfield,
and other rich men, whether they were to be restored or no, was left to be
determined afterward; Lastly, the Heretics had leave to tarry in the City two
years for the settling of their affairs: and the soldiers (which were about
one thousand five hundred foot, and four hundred horse) are permitted to march
away with their arms, bag, and baggage, but without either banners displayed,
or light matches, their drums and Trumpets silent: and before they departed,
they were sworn: the common soldiers not to bear arms against his Majesty
of Spain for four months, and the Officers for seven months. At whose
departure, Anthony Lord of Goigney, an ancient Commander, even from the time of
Charles the fifth; Lastly, he provides for the civil and sacred affairs.
was by Prince Alexander appointed Governor of the City, with some companies
of Walloones and Spaniards. Then Richardott was sent thither, together with
Garner one of the privy Council, to be over the Council, and new Magistrates,
and to regulate the civil affairs. And in fine, the charge of the Clergy was
with like care committed to the Archbishop of Mcchlin, to whose Diocese
Bruxels then belonged.

And within less then a month Nievmeghen, The render of NIEVMEGHEN.
the Metropolitan of Guelders, came into his Majesty's hands. SO THINGS
conjoined, if once dis-joynted, they all suddenly go to wrack. Count Meursius
Governor of that Province intended to have increased the garrison at Nieumeghen
(there being already for its defense four hundred foot, and two hundred horse)
thereby to terrify the faction of the Catholics in that City, of whom he was
jealous. But new garrison soldiers were both to the Catholics and Heretics
equally unwelcome, and therefore not admitted; yea, Upon a contest amongst the
Citizens.
the Catholics privately conspired amongst themselves to remove the old
garrison: whereof Alexander having notice, to whom not any of the enemies
designs lay concealed, Altapen privately aideth the Catholieks.
forthwith appointed Altapen, whom he had placed in Guelderland to wait on the
motions of Count Meursius, that he should diligently attend to that prize. He
thereupon consulting with the Catholic Citizens, sent secretly now and then,
some faithful and valiant men into the City to strengthen the Catholic party:
Who when they were gotten to a sufficient head, set open the gates, And they
prevailing, is admitted.
and admitted Altapen with a select force of horse into the City, who joined
with them, standing ready in arms. Whereupon the garrison soldiers affrighted
with the with the sudden surprise, without the least resistance, And takes the
City.
or delay submitted themselves, and were forthwith sent away. Whereupon the
Nievmeghens sent their chiefest Citizens to his Excellency: and obtaining what
conditions they desired, returned to their ancient loyalty and obedience.
Wherefore Prince Alexander commanded a solemn thanksgiving to the Divine
goodness; with as great joy through the Army, as mutiny at Antwerp at the sad
tidings, With great mutiny at Antwerp.
first at the loss of Bruxels the Court of Brabant, then of the surprising of
Nievmeghen, in times past the seat of Charles the (...) and by reason of the
commodiousnesse of the River, Waele of greatest importance in all Guelders. So
that indeed Aldegund with all his Rhetoric, could not have repressed the
tumult of the people, Which upon some good news is quieted.
if their dejected spirits had not been animated at the news of the vain and
bloody success of the Royalists attempting Ostend: and the recovery of
Lief-kenshoeck with other Forts.

And truly the assault of Ostend by Valentine Lord of Mott, The attempt of
OSTEND.
does much resemble both for its beginning, success and end, that of Bolduc,
attempted almost at the same time (as we have before related) by Count Holach.
The Lord of Mott with some companies of Camillus Capissuccus Italian Regiment,
and drawing part of the Presidiaries out of the adjacent garrisons, together
with a Regiment of Waloones, led by Lewis Memorancy Baron of Beury, for his
Father the Lord of Berse; on the sudden slew the watch of Ostend, Mottaeus
enters the City.
placed at the Seaport: then entering the old Town (for Ostend is divided into
two parts) and killing all those that made head against them, held it as
Conqueror almost four hours. But he departing to fetch Cannons to open a way
into the new Town, The soldiers falling to plunder,
in the interim most of his soldiers dispersed themselves greedy of plunder: an
accustomed evil, which in such unfortunate attempts will always be condemned
in soldiers, always caused by covetousness. It also happened that some of
the Captains, And the Captains making delay.
to whom the set hour of assaulting the City was prescribed, stayed beyond
their limited time, whereby the Townsmen and garrison soldiers joining both
their forces in a body, easily mastered the assailants, Hinder the victory.
scattered up the down, at their pleasures pillaging the City. And although
Memorancy having gathered many of his soldiers together, Which whilst
Memorancy urges forward,
and ordering them in a ring as well as he could, omitted nothing whereby he
might valiantly reinforce the fight; yet the enemies number increasing, Is
slain fighting.
he was slain gallantly fighting in the very front of his soldiers, and his
body cast into the Waters, whereby his children were deprived of that small
comfort; but they could not eclipse the memory of his renowned valor, which
was too worthy to be buried in the Waters. There were many slain on both
sides, but far more on the Royalists, The overthrow of the rest.
amongst whom there fell four Captains, besides the loss of two Ensigns of
the Italian Regiment, which because they were a long time stoutly defended by
their bearers, and came not into their enemies hands but by their deaths, it
was permitted by the law of Arms to display new ones in their places. The rest
of the assailants, And flight.
after the death of their Commanders fled away. Three Captains therefore
condemned,
Three Captains also were by Prince Alexander condemned to lost their heads,
but for the singular valor of one of these Captains, often made proof of in
the Wars they were after some days imprisonment, But afterward set at
liberty.
all set at liberty. But the fleet from Zealand, which as we have before
related, and fame divulged, The Navy of zealand.
was privately designed at the consultation of Middleburg, was to the Spanish
Camp a far greater terror. Yet the Prince of Parma placed great hope in the
delay of Treslong, The Admiral protracts time.
Admiral of that Navy; for hearing that this Treslong, upon some jarres
between him and Adulph Meetkirk had taken distaste at the States of Zealand,
his Excellency being attentive to such like occasions, Being courted by
Alexander with many promises.
had already courted him with kind complementall Letters, and invited him to
join with the Royal party, offering him great matters, and putting him in
hope of creating him Knight of the Order of the golden Fleece. And indeed
Treslong, whether hanging in suspense or not sufficiently provided for an
assault, seemed but slowly to set forward his ships to transport provision to
Antwerp, and hinder the perfecting of the bridge: not without the sinister
reports of many, and open complaints of the States against such a jealous
procrastination. The States complain of his delay, whom he sleights.
Which he more intollerably resented, because proud of his deserts, for
surprising Brill, with the help of Lume (the first beginning and Origin of
depressing the Spanish Dominion) thought the united Provinces to be greatly
indebted to him. Wherefore following the like rash hastiness of Lume, And as
ungrateful threatens them.
when he could not contain himself from menacing and casting out reproaches
against the Zealanders; almost with the like success as Lume, was by the
Council of Zealand, degraded from his Admiralls place, and not long after
imprisoned, But is removed from his Admirals place.
there remaining, until by the Mediation of the Queen of England he was
released, and retired into Holland, where the business being again agitated
by the high Court of that Province, who took it ill, But after set at liberty
by the Hollanders.
that the Council of Zealand should act things without their knowledge, he was
discharged: whether they found him truly guiltless, and condemned only
because he was rich, and hated: and for fear, lest exasperated with the late
affront, he should desert their party, and join with the enemy. And therefore
the Hollanders advancing him to high Dignities, And honored.
retained him with them. But before all this, Treslong acting nothing as yet,
the Zealanders collected together all the ships they could, and under Justin
of Nassau, The Navy of zealand, entering the Scheldt, sets upon Lief-kenshoeck.
the Prince of Oranges base son, sent them from the sea into the Scheldt, who
setting upon Lief-kenshoeck with the help of the ships belonging to Lillo
the opposite fort batter the Castle with so strong an impression of their
Cannons, that now the fort being beaten down in many places, and a sufficient
breach made for an ascent, after a sharp rather then constant resistance of the
Royalists, the Walloones who kept the Castle either slain or put to chase, they
not only recovered Lief-kenshoeck, And take it,
but Antonia also its Governor not daring to fight and almost all the Isle of
Doele: with great indignation of Prince Alexander, With other Castles.
who sending forces with all speed, and urging forward the ships that kept
centrie not far off, was yet by the Governor of Antonia, and his soldiers
over hasty flight prevented. Wherefore his Excellency being implacably
incensed, Alex. punishes the Governors,
banished the Governor of Lief-kenshoeck, and beheaded the Governor of
Antonia. This Victory, as it warranted the States free Navigation, safely to
pass with relief between their Castles on both sides the River, even from the
sea to the bridge, so it hastened their enterprise agreed on at their meeting;
The confederates design of invading the bridge.
viz. that at the same time, when the Antwerpians should with their pretended
stratagem invade, and overthrow the Bridge, the Hollanders and Zealanders
should approach with their Navy, and convey provision through the breach of
the Bridge. But lest the shipps-masts placed before the Bridge, and fastened to
boats (which as is before said, were called floates) should be an obstacle to
the Antwerpians design: there were Mariners appointed, First of removing the
floates from before the bridge.
to transport themselves in the dead of the night in light shallops, or by some
secret invention to dive under the Waters, and with great hooks and knives to
cut the Cables, and turn the Masts down the River against the bridge. But
Barroccius having put chains to the Anchors, Which they attempting, were
represt.
in stead of ropes: and causing fires to be made along the river side, all the
night through, their intent was frustrated.

But the Antwerpians having now finished the ships, Seaventeen Antwerpian
ships.
which they a long time had prepared for the unevitable destruction of the
bridge certifyed their Navy on the other side, that the ships, which were
made ready, should on the fourth day of April next ensuing set forth from the
City. And that they with their fleet and store of provision, should without
fail, that night be ready at hand, for they might pass through the not to be
doubted breach of the bridge, without danger. I will out of Prince Alexanders
letters to the King, and from a brief commentary of Captain Tuccius concerning
this design, exactly relate the invention and effect of these ships, because
in all Antiquity any thing more terrible was never heard off. The inventour.
Frederick Jambell, an admirable Engineer, coming out of Italy into Spain, is
said a long time to have desired access to the King, that he might offer him
his service, which would be very advantageous for him in the Low Countries. But
being a long time put off, and at last slighted; as he was not brought up at
Court to patience, departed thence in a rage, and threatened erelong so to
effect, that his Majesty of Spain, should hear of the name of this despised
person not without tears. And then went to Antwerp, where he got by this
occasion; as I have begun to relate, a fit opportunity of expressing the malice
of his galled mind. The structure of four of them.
He built four ships with flat bottomes, and high sides, both of them much
thicker and stronger then ordinary: and thus invented to make mines in the
Waters. Mines made in them.
First of all, in the keele of the ship, he made a wall of lime and brick, as
it were the floar, or groundwork, one foot high, and five foot broad; and
extended it the length of the Ship; then he erected walls on each side the
compass of the foundation, three foot high, and as broad, covering them close,
being first filled with Gunpowder tempered by an exqnisite Art, known only to
himself. The covering was of Gravestones, Millstones, and other huge stones.
Upon this covering he made another height Vault-wise, of Millstones, and other
huge stones also, which leaning one to another made a ridge, that the slaughter
might not only be straight forwards, but on either side; within this higher
vault he laid Iron and Marble balls, chains, blocks, nails, knives, and
whatsoever this wicked witty man thought most damageable. Lastly, as far as
lay open between the sides of the ship, and the wall and roof of the mine, he
filled up with square stones close joined, and beams fastened with Iron. But
covered, and hid all these things with strong planks, and a brick floor, in
the middle whereof he set fire to a pyle of wood, (that the ships might
seem to be set out in that order to burn down the bridge) putting under the
Wood, pitch and brimstone, not to be extinguished, before the mine should be
fired with the prepared Timber, Two ways of firing the mines
he framed two ways to fire the Mine: In some of the ships placed matches
besmeared with gunpowder, which being privily extended through part of the
keele, were stretched into the Mine, of that length, as by a certain measure he
had before tried, would continue light, until the ships should come to the
bridge. In other ships, he used those kind of clockes, which are wont by an
admirable and pleasant Art, to be exhibited in stead of night-watchers to light
lamps. And so ordered the stratagem, that it should continue with a gentle
motion of the wheels, until the ship arrived at the bridge: and then with a
sudden and violent meeting together of the wheels, and flint, strike some
sparcles, which recived in the bruised gunpowder there scattered, taking fire,
might inflame the train there laid: and this reaching to the mouth of the Mine,
might speedily convey that creeping fire into it. Jambell having finished four
ships after this manner, added to them thirteen lesser, To these four
greater, are added thirteen lesser.
having within them nothing hurtful, but the Hatches covered with huge fires.
Nor was this preparation unseene of the Royalists, The Royalists in the interim
solicitous.
although they were ignorant of the stratagem: who imagined the fleet was in
making ready in the City, to the intent the bridge might at once be assailed on
the one side by the Antwerpians, and on the other by the Hollanders and
Zealanders. Wherefore his Excellency strengthening the Castles, and Forts with
greater guards, and calling to the bridge the chief of his soldiers, had a
watchful eye to the enemies designs: who by how much he seemed the better
prepared to divert the slaughter, The ships appear from the City.
was so much nearer to receive it. When behold from the City there appeared
three ships brightly shining with fire, 8. April.
and a little after followed others, and after those others. Then all the noise
in the Camp was arm arm, and the bridge was filled with soldiers. The ships
were carried down the river two and three together, in so orderly a course, if
they were but to make a show; for they were then governed by Mariners: and the
fire in every ship shined so clearly, that they seemed not to carry fires,
Their fires made a wonderful show in the night,
but verily to burn themselves, and so fire to sail, and be nourished amongst
the Waters. And truly that night was that Scene acted, which might have been a
pleasant spectacle, if the spectatours had been exempt from fear and care.
For the banks of the River, and the Castles placed thereon shined with
continual fires. As also the soldiers along the banks.
The Companies of armed men ranged along the banks made a reflection of the
shining light: the fiery ships amidst the Scheldt hurtlesly spitting their
flames, it was to be doubted, whether they came to be a sport, or (full of
deceit) a destruction. Then the aspect and pomp of the Commanders and Soldiers
shining in bright Armor, their weapons drawn, and colors displayed all along
the bridge, augmented the Pageant. Lastly, all things composed to the
uncertain pleasure of this new Theater, both struck terror, and yet were
delightful: they feared, and yet had pleasure in the cause of their fear. And
now these ships were scarcely two miles off the bridge, The ships approach
nearer,
when the Mariners that conducted them, directing their helmes, turned those
four ships that were made with Mines straight down the midst of the channel,
against the bridge, not so greatly caring for the rest and forthwith setting
fire to the match leap't into the boats to behold a far off the success. But
they wanting their Pilots, The lesser having no success.
did not at all keep one course: most of the lesser either dash't themselves
against the opposite Machines that were fenced with sharp pykes, or running on
ground stuck to the banks. But of the four that carried within them ruin, one
leaking was swallowed up in the midst of the River, vomiting only smoke and
Thunder. Two others of the four toward Caloo, Nor three of the greater.
(the River being deeper there and running swifter) the Wind blowing hard out
of Brabant, forced on Flanders coast, and there grounded them. The fourth is
stayed by the floates.
Nor did the fourth seem to have any better fortune being almost cast on
Flanders coast, and violently driven upon the very farthest part of the
floates. Therefore the Royalists now shaking off fear especially when the
fires began to diminish in many of the lesser ships, Then the Royalists fear
is turned to mirth.
and were almost extinguished, wondered at the enemies designs, and scoffed
with Military jeeres, that so great preparation was to no purpose. Yea, they
were so bold, as from Flanders side, to board one of those ships that was
gravel'd there, and try with javelins what might be within it. But when it
broke through the floates,
When that shipp, which I spoke of last, being greater and stronger then the
rest, easily escaped those sharp pointed Engines, broke down the opposite
Machine, and came on fiercely against the bridge. Then were the soldiers
renewing their shoutes, again solicitous and fearful. They were again
solicitous.
And Prince Alexander, who having his thought^ bent several ways, now had
regard to the Navy lying at Lillo, then nearer attending to the Antwerpians
design, Alex, hastens to divert the shipp from the Bridge.
forthwith at those shoutes repaired thither, where the fire-ship seemed to
attempt; and commanded some Mariners to board the ship disperse the wood, and
quench the fire: others to keep off and prevent the danger with long poles, and
pikes: He himself stood in the wooden Castle, which is the furthest part of
the Pile-work from Flanders side, to which the navall bridge is connected.
There were with him Rubasius, Cafatane, Billius, and Vastius, with other chief
Commanders, besides the guard of the place. Amongst whom a Spanish Ensign, A
Spanish Ensign endeavors to remove him from the Bridge.
an ancient servant to the Farnezes, having some knowledge insuch like Engines,
was the preserver of Prince Alexanders life. Whether he knew how excellent
Jambell was in this Art, and perhaps had heard how he had been treated in
Spain: and therefore suspected this device to be set forth out of the
workhouse of this incensed man. Or not by humane reasoning he did it, but God,
who then had determined Antwerp should be taken by so courageous and pious a
General, putting it into his mind, came to his Excellency, and most earnestly
desired him, that seeing now he had sufficiently provided what things were
necessary for the present, he would please to withdraw himself thence, and
not to trust his life, on which every soldiers life, yea, the very War it
self depended, to so perilous a place. But being rejected, he insisted in his
suit twice or thrice, Being rejected, he still insists;
and not taken notice of, he prostrated himself at his knees, and said, I
most humbly beseech and entreat you most Illustrious Prince, by your life,
which now I see exposed to present hazard, once to take counsel of your
servant. And saying thus, he reverently took hold of his garment, and with a
kind of commanding authority, And almost compell's him.
besought him to follow him. Alexander interpreting the unwonted freedom of
the man, as from a higher power, Alexander departs from the Bridge:
at last consented, Vastius and Cajatane following him. And as scarcely entered
Saint Mary's Fort on Flanders shore, when the hour of the limited time
approaching, on a sudden the fatal ship burst, with such a horrid crash, At
the same time the fireshipp burst,
as if the very skies had rent asunder, heaven and earth had charged one
another, and the whole Machine of the earth it self had quaked. For the storm
of stones, chains, and bullets, being cast out with Thunder and lightning, The
wonderful force of it.
there followed such a slaughter, as no man, but that actually it happened,
could have imagined. The Castle, on which the infernal ship fell, the
pile-work of the bridge next to Saint Mary's Fort, that part of the navall
bridge next the Castle soldiers, Mariners, Commanders, a great number of
Cannons armor, and arms, all these this furious whirlwind swept away
together, tossed in the air, and dispersed as wind does leaves of Trees. The
Scheldt prodigiously gaping, was first seen to discover its bottom, then
swelling above the banks, was even with the Rampires, and overflowed Saint
Mary's Fort above a foot. The motion of the panting earth extended its force
and fear above nine miles. There were found stones, and that very great ones,
as grave stones and the like, a mile off the River, struck into the ground, in
some places four palms. The slaughter various.
But no loss or destruction was more miserable then of men: some the hellish
violence of the fires, either forthwith consumed, or furiously and miserably
dash't them together: or shot them as it were into the air, amongst stones and
wood, who straight-wayes were bruised falling on the earth, or drowned if
lighting in the River. Others were stifled with the pestiferous vapors, not
wounded otherwise, some the swelling river long tormented with hot scalding
waters: many were slain in the shoure of falling stones, and some the
grave-stones both killed, and intombed; Yet this direful infernal fury,
omitted not to make some sport in this so lamentable a Tragedy. The Viscount of
Bruxels was taken, and darted out of his own ship by this sudden Tempest, but
fell over-thwart another shipp placed a good distance off. The several chances
of others.
This devilish whirlwind carried Captain Tuccius heavy armed out of Saint
Mary's Fort like light chafe in the air, and cast him down in the midst of
the River, out of which he being well skilled in swimming, loosing his armor,
and protected by the Mother of God, whose aid he implored with great
confidence, escaped without any harm. But a young man of Prince Alexanders
lifeguard dispatched a far greater journey; for snatched from the bridge a
distance from Flanders side, he was carried over a great part of the river into
Brabant, being but a little hurt in that shoulder which first light to the
ground; and said, he seemed like a bullet shot out of a piece of Ordinance, he
felt behind him such a violence forcing him forward. Indeed, The judgment of
some concerning this Engine.
there were some of opinion that survived the slaughter, that what man soever
fabricated this execrable Engine, composed that direful plague not of natural
stuff but fetched that terrible fire from the infernal furnaces of hell: that
without doubt he provoked that Thunder and lightning by Art magic from the
Skies: attracted the pestiferous vapors from no other place, then the black
dungeon of Plnto: and derived the very waters burning beyond measure and
custom from the Stygian lake. It is so FAMILIAR amongst men, to judge that
whatsoever is beyond their capacity, is also above humane power to effect.
Vasquius Sergeant Major of a Spanish Regiment, writes, The number of those that
were slain.
there were eight hundred slain, besides a great number that were wounded and
maimed: Nor does Tuccius speak of any fewer, who were both present at the
slaughter; Amongst whom there fell many brave soldiers, chief Officers and
leaders: But the death of Rubasius and Billius, which happened in the Castle,
amongst whom Billius,
from which Prince Alexander departed, far surpassed the loss of all the
rest. Gaspar Robley a Portuguese, but by his wife a Dutch Lady, Lord of Bill,
had been Governor of Friez-land, and was then Colonel of a German Regiment,
and Capta^^ of a Troop of horse, an ancient and expert soldier, as ever any, a
faithful Counselor, and highly esteemed by the Prince of Parma, who giving
the Regiment to one of his sons, and the Troop of horse to another, continued
the love of the Father toward his children. But many things concurred to the
honor of Robert Marquess Rubasius, And Rubasius, Nis Elogium:
his ancient Nobility from the house of the Melunes: his great riches of his
own, and increased by the access of the Principality, which Prince Alexander
(his brother being proscribed) had obtained for him of the King. This great
authority both at home and in the Camp, being both Governor of Artois, and
General of the horse: which he left greater to his successors; being the
first General of the horse to whom (Prince Alexander permitting it) the lances
began to be bowed, an honorable kind of salutation, accustomed only to the
sole General of the Army, which from that time was brought in custom: and
some years after it was allowed, that the Cornets of horse should bow down
their colors to the General of the Horse. For his military mind there was
none more confident, or fortunate: and therefore he was often by the States
confederate, invited to retum to their party, for whom he had once fought
against the King: In the interim they feared him, as conscious of their
counsels and strength. The love of Prince Alexander heaped these dignities
upon him, which his Excellency knew he well deserved, for the return of
Waloone Provinces, chiefly by his example, to their allegiance: for his
discovery and preventing the treacheries plotted against him: and his
incomparable care and reverence, continually acknowledging how greatly he was
obliged to the Prince of Parma, almost adoring the very name of Alexander,
though otherwise high-minded and haughty. But the death of Rubasius, and many
others, And others.
caused not only by this ship at the bridge, but by the other that was grounded
vomiting its poison not without the loss of many, (for the third was driven to
the bank, but the fire-work being extinguished by waters, had no effect) the
approach of day, not without great grief discovered for that night amidst the
pitiful groaning of wounded persons, nothing was thought on, but each one to
lament his misfortune, all struck with terror, and almost out of their wits,
being ignorant of their comrades lives, and not assured of their own. Yea
Alex. himself was thought to be slain.
And the fear increased with the supposed death of their General Prince
Alexander: because so lately seen in the Castle, which the fire first took
hold on, and consumed; often reflecting on those words, which he spoke in the
hearing of many to the Antwerpian scout, viz. that the bridge should either be
his Tomb, or a path to the Victory. They thinking that he too truly had
foretold his death, and the place where. And verily his Excellency although a
good distance off the bridge, was never in greater peril of death; for a great
stake falling on him, His danger.
in the entrance of Saint Mary's Fort, being tossed with the whirlwind of the
disturbed air, between the Helmet and shoulder, struck him to the ground,
where he was found with his sword drawn, like to one in a trance, and Bastius
by him embracing his knees: Cajatane also lying not far off, hurt in the head
with a stone. Prince Alexander after a while coming to himself, His grief at
the overthrow,
when he saw so many dead corpse of his soldiers lie prostrate about, heard the
miserable lamentations, with which some being fastened and hanging on the beams
of the bridge others covered with heaps of stones, or half buried under
gravestones, implored the help of their fellows: when he beheld the Steccada
to be torn in pieces, the Castle utterly destroyed, and three ships that
were next to it devoured by the River and understood that those, that were in
them, both Mariners, soldiers, and their Captains, all to be oppressed in
the same ruin and hearing no certainty of Rubasius; he was indeed in extreme
sorrow, yet not at all dejected, although deserted by his dear and faithful
fellow soldiers, Yet not dejected.
in so great a ruin of his labors; and all being in despair, yet he alone
for all this huge discomfiture took courage, constancy, and bore himself as
superior to the misfortune; and taking to him Mondragonius, Charles Man's
field, and Camillus Capisuccus, besides others that escaped the tempest: to
whom also George Basta, and Casius with a select Troop of horse, called thither
by the thunder and lightning, came on the spurr; he went round the stations,
ships, and tents: whose first and chiefest care was, He walks the round,
to send the wounded unto the hospital of Bevera; Assists the wounded,
to help every one the best he could: to comfort with his presence, Comforts
all with his presence, and words,
words, and encouragement, to extenuate their opinion of the misfortune; he
denied not but that many were hurt, yet diverse of them began to revive, come to
themselves, and take breath, and strength: nor were the enemies exempt from
that terror, with which they had struck others, seeing they durst not proceed
forward in the darkness, being ignorant of the overthrow, and careful of
themselves. One thing was seriously to be provided for, viz. that the day
should not reveal the breach of the bridge, And animases them to repair the
Bridge.
which the night concealed from the enemies; Certainly it is scarce credible,
how much the sight of Prince Alexander elevated the dejected spirits of his
soldiers, and repressed their fear of the enemies approach. The arivall also
of Maurique with his German Regiment, whom the Prince of Parma, after the loss
of Lief-kenshoeck, with all speed had sent for out of Guelders, fell out very
opportunely. Therefore with Emulous alacrity, THE Bridge is repaired.
Prince Alexander himself giving the first example, without distinction of
Commanders, or soldiers; they all contentiously apply themselves to repair
the bridge, not because he thought the invention and labor of many months,
could be restored in four hours: yet the breach of the bridge, by mending the
Steccada, and interposing ships, in some manner closed up, might seem in the
morning to the enemies scouts not to be impaired at all; In show only to
delude the enemies.
knowing soldiers are some times kept off, as well by mere appearances, as
true realities, being always exercised with jealousies and fears; and with
that false spectacle their eyes being deluded and terrifyed, their courages
would easily give back. And did so.
And he presented them with as seemly a Pageant as he could wish: for by
their great dexterity in the rest of the night the beams which floated on the
Waters, being laid in their former places, new piles erected, poles laid
over-thwart; and what else they had at hand driven into the River, and ships
linked between as they were, he so fitly repaired the bridge, placing
soldiers thereon, commanding Drumms and Trumpets continually to be ratled and
sounded; that the enemies Navy was by this imaginary species gulled, and
hindered from an assault; which, if it had advanced from Lillo, might easily
have broken through that temporary supply: but afterward the work being daily
strengthened, it was really retarded. Being thereby highly praised, especially
by the King.
And verily it was uncertain whether the Prince of Parma had greater courage
now, in repairing the bridge, or before in building it. Indeed, the King upon
this occasion. rendering him many thanks, wrote with his own hand. That he was
not provided of words, wherewith he might sufficiently extol his constancy,
and dexterity in that very nick of his distressed affairs. And there wanted
not some, June 6.
who reflecting on the Machine erected above the Waters at the siege of Tire,
(so famous in times past) and its destruction by the fire-ship of the enemies,
did not absurdly, or against reason, The comparison of Alexander Prince of
Parma, with Alexander King of Macedon, in repairing the Bridge,
compare Alexander Prince of Parma, with Alexander King of Macedon: For neither
could they find Antwerp to be a part any ways inferior to Tire, nor the
Scheldt to be of less breadth then the Tirian Sea, being there four furlongs;
and indeed to make a way through the Waters, by casting huge heaps of stones,
and whole woods of Trees, confusedly together into the Sea seemed a vaster
Iabour, and required the help of many hands: but to bridle a River of no less
greatness then that Sea, by a Bridge connected together by Art, was far more
ingenious and curious Certainly, the Tirian ship performing its execution with
pitch and brimstone, was not worthy to be compared to the Antwerpian, fighting
with fire, stinking vapors, stones, scalding waters, and so with all the
Elements at one. And yet for all this great overthrow; the Prince of Parma in
one piece of a night repaired the bridge, and constantly held on the siege till
victorious: when Alexander of Macedon was almost in despair, and but that the
fortunate arrival of his Navy from Cyprus stayed him, and at last was cause of
his conquest, he was in mind to have quit the siege. And truly, they may
conclude their comparison of the Prince of Parma with the King of Macedon, not
to be unequal in the structure, and reparation of this Machine: and if the
excellency of the writers were alike, they might match one another in every
thing. The day following when no enemies appeared, and news was brought back
by the scout-boats, sent that night by his Excellency toward Lillo, that the
enemies fleet lay still, as ignorant, viz. of their own victory, their minds
by Gods especial providence being diverted from the attempt; Alex. gives order
to bury the dead bodies.
It was thought fit to take care of burying the dead: but then the grief of
the Army was renewed, whilst some acknowledge and interr their neighbors, and
kins-folks, others amongst strangers found their friends, and searching met but
more objects of dis-comfort: all at the cruel and lamentable aspect of mangled
bodies, and heads torn off, their fury increasing against the enemies, they
both lamented, and yet threatened. The Corpse of Rubasius scarcely to be
discerned, being taken down from ^he shipp where it hung, with such solemnity
as time and place permitted, Prince Alexander himself, not without tears
interred; He himself interrs Rubasius:
which piety of his toward his soldiers, and participation of grief, was
exceeding grateful to the Army. But Billius being daily sought for, Billius
was found afterward.
was some months after, when the bridge was taken down found hanging on a
pyle, being first taken notice of, by a golden Chain, which he always wore,
and honorably interred at Antwerp.

In the interim, the enemies, Alex. prepare for the next design of the enemies.
although now not with so great hope of forcing a Way through the bridge, yet
not at all dejected, did not desist from their enterprise, but determined to
attempt another way, with greater force then ever: and if the passage through
the Scheldt was obstructed, they would seek another through the fields by
slitting the banks and letting in the River. Alexander having notice of the
preparation of Warlike ships, which with great noise of Artificers, and
workmen, were building at Antwerp, and of those which daily appeared from the
sea, judged of their intent. Wherefore preparing himself for a new conflict;
First of all, First he supplies the places of the Comman ders that were slain.
he supplied the places of those Captains and Officers which were slain:
especially rewarding the Spanish Cornett his deliverer, and though many of the
Nobles stood for the place, he created Marquess Vastius General of the
Horse, until the King should declare another in Marquess Rubasius stead. By
whose death, because the Province of Artois, and the jurisdiction of Heldin
were without Governors, amongst many competitours his Excellency earnestly
requested of his Majesty, that for Count Hermin, and this for Adrian
Gom^curtius. Yet these were a long time by the King delayed but Vastius was
forthwith confirmed General of the Horse. He also drawing part of the
Presidiaries from the neighboring Towns, Then he fortifies the Castles and
forts, especially Covenstene Causey.
and fetching some Cannons thence, strengthened with all speed possible the
Castles and Forts: and chiefly the Rampire called Covenstene Dyke, which he
feared the enemy would attempt, for from Lillo, and a little above, even to
Antwerp, the fields in Brabant lie very low, wherefore they are often
overwhelmed with Water and mudd, and but that, by the peoples industry, who by
casting up copps, do make higher paths, would be impassable, and these the
Belgians call counter-dykes. For as banks of Rivers, which are both to keep in
the Waters, and to be paths for Travelers to walk on, are by the Low Country
men called Dykes; so those over cross ways that meet these River banks, as
with highways, are called Counter-dykes. One of these from the Village of
Covenstene, commonly called Covenstene dyke, reaches from the village of
Stabroeck, even unto the Scheldt, which is above three miles: which being
broken and very crasie, was by the Prince of Parma repaired, and with great
cost and labor made both higher and broader, being very commodious for that
part of the Army, For two reasons.
that quartered at Stabroeck to pass over to the banks of the Scheldt, and
from thence to the Navall bridge, and over the bridge to the Army at Bevera, by
which continual passage, the Camps both in Brabant and Flanders were joined.
There was another motive also which urged the fortifying of this dyke or
causey, viz. If the enemy intended to sail through the fields, overwhelmed
with Waters from Lillo to Antwerp, they might be hindered by the interposition
of this Covenstene Causey, which his Excellency greatly feared the enemies
would attempt. Whereupon commiting the charge of the Navall bridge, which did
belong to Rubasius, to Charles Count Mansfield, he diligently applied himself
to the causey of Covenstene, and carefully fortisyed it, He raises Castles on
that bank,
being repaired with pyles, faggots, and earth, with some Castles placed
thereon. One whereof was already begun by Mondragonius on the bank of the
Scheldt, called for its form Sancta Cruce, whither the limits of Covenstene
reach. The finishing and defense whereof Mondragonius took to himself. And
Prince Alexander commanded three more to be built on the causey. The building
and defense of the first, a mile from Mondragonius his Fort, at a house in
Covenstene belonging to a Noble Gentleman of Antwerp, he attributed to
Camillus a Monte, and named it St. James's. The second, about the same distance
from the first, was erected by Valentine Pardiaeus Lord of Mott, by his
Excellencies command, taking its name from its builder was called Mott, but for
the most part St. Georges. But afterward Valentine departing thence, it was
kept by Michael Benett, an ancient Captain of a Spanish Company, having served
in the Wars thirty five years. The third, was committed to John Gamboa, and
called because it was set on pyles without the causey Palata, but afterward
Victoria. And at Stabroeck where the Causey ends, Count Mansfield cast up a
Fort, hard by his quarters: To whom his Excellency joined Camillus Capissuccus,
whose quarters were not far off. The wonderful fortifying of this Covenstene
Causey went on apace, Castles rising in strife, from narrow and almost no
groundwork, or foundation, and as it were hanging in the air. And the enemy
opening the River-bank,
When the bank of the Scheldt being slit above, by the Antwerpians near to the
City, and below at Lillo by their auxiliary Navy, and the fields in Brabant
covered with a huge deluge of Water, Let part of the River into the lower
fields, through which the ships. might be conveyed to Antwerp.
like to another Scheldt; then the enemies design was plainly discovered of
bringing their ships against Covenstene Dyke, and with their Pioneers of
cutting that Bar, to make a Navigable passage through this new Channel to
Antwerp, in despite of the Farnezian bridge. And that the Spaniards might be
dubious of this their intent, or at least their forces distracted, and
consequently less potent; The besieged Antwerpians, promised the Hollanders
and Zealanders, who came to their relief, that at the same time when they
should invade Covenstene with their ships from the sea, and they from the
City, they also would set upon the Bridge with new stratagems; For Jambell and
the rest of his Sulphurean comrades, had sworn they would not desist, till
with their various Engines, and new battering Rams, they had utterly demolished
the bridge. Therefore the confederates as they had agreed among themselves, At
the same time the Navy appears from the sea, puts part out into the fields
against Covenstene Causey, part into the River against the bridge, May, 7.
divided their fleet, consisting of an hundred and fifty sail into two
squadrons, one under Holach set out from Lillo, into the overwhelmed fields,
where Ship-masts more fully resem bled Woods then the growing Trees had done
before: the other under Justin of Nassau tracing the Scheldt now threatening to
land on Brabant fide, now on Flanders, then fiercely alarming the bridge. And
with the same practices, the Holachians sometimes played their Artillery
against the Castle of Sanctacruce, often threatened to assault Covenstene causey
then carried about the sound and terror of the conflict in every place, the
Royalists standing always ready armed, and provided against them: Prince
Alexander himself being sometimes busied at the bridge, sometimes at the
causey, not taking any rest either day or night. But when they, especially the
Holachians, had now spent some days in threatening to attempt the Causey, and
perceiving that the Royalists, either deluded with their so often fained
assayes, or wearied out with continual labor and watching came more slowly to
their colors, and seeing in the dead of the night a fire about Antwerp, which
was the sign appointed to both for the assault, five hundred suddenly climbed
up the Causey, They attempt Covenstene.
with as great silence as was possible between the Castle of Palata and Saint
Georges, in which place Benett kept his station of Spaniards, and killing the
first guard which they found half asleep, At first with prosperous success of
the Hollachians.
the Captain himself being grievously wounded, and the Sergeant slain who
stood on their own defense and the rest flying to the Castles, on both hands
they safely possessed themselves of part of the Causey. Whereupon more of the
Holachians by their Generals appointment came out of their ships, (for there
were above two thousand soldiers in the Navy) when Ortizius and Verdugo, two
Spanish Captains, came with all speed from the next station, and by and by
Colonel Gamboa posting thither with a select company of Spaniards from the
Castle of Palata, and re-inforcing the fight not only rejected them from the
causey, but pursued them to their ships, But are beaten off.
either pierced them at hand with their swords, or shot them at distance
swimming. And turning the Artillery from Saint James's Castle against them sunk
four of the nearest ships, With their no small loss.
and the rest struck with terror from the other Castles, retired, with no
small loss to the enemies, there being slain of them above three hundred,
besides those, who as I said with the ships were drowned, and others, who
either not skilled in swimming, or over-loaden with their arms were devoured
by the Waters. And greater complaints against the Antwerpians.
Yet greater then the loss, was the complaint of Holach, accusing the
Antwerpians who by hanging forth light, from a Tower, gave the sign of the
assault, and yet as it were on set purpose, came not to prosecute the Victory
which he had begun: But they affirmed, Their reply.
they set not forth any lights as a signal of battle: but said, he was
deceived by a fire, by chance kindled in the Tolasian Sconce, and so began too
rashly to fight. Although Prince Alexander in a Letter to his Majesty, Not
credited by Alexander, May, 20.
construed the matter another way: thinking the Antwerpians not assured that
the Holachians would attempt the assault; for some time deferred the
expedition, and purposely stayed to see, what from that first success might be
expected.

But these were the first, The preparation of the confederates,
and but slight assayes of Covenstene: neither side in full strength opposing
each other. Then the enemies stiffly conspiring together, Greater then ever.
began the fight, which I will so much the more exactly describe, because
scarce at any time on the Low Countries, in a more dangerous place, or with
greater uncertainty of the Victory on either side, or with braver testimony of
daring soldiers, or more present assistance from Heaven, was it ever more
courageously disputed; on the one side, the confederates set forth a fleet,
stronger both in ships and men, and better appointed then ever before: being
the whole power and strength in a manner, both which Antwerp, the magazine of
warlike Engines, as well as of rich Merchandises, and the Hollanders and
Zealanders could raise the greatest part of the Presidiaries, being drawn
forth of their Cities and forts, To set upon Covenstene both from Antwerp, and
the sea, May, 26.
for this battle, and determined day of their public liberty appointed to be,
by the mutual consent both of the auxiliaries and besieged, the six and
twentieth of May: on which day they determined to set upon Covenstene Bar, and
breaking through it, to open a way for provision and relief to the City. On
the other side, his Excellency being assured, the whole force and trial of the
War would be at this over-crosse Causey, caused more Artillery to be carried
into the Castles placed thereon; Nor had Alex. less care to defend it.
and battlements to be raised on either side the Causey from the Castle of
Sancta Cruce, to Count Mansfields Castle, near Stabroeck (which two Castles,
are the extremes of the Causey) and a long row of stakes to be fastened in the
Waters, as it were an out-work to hinder the access of the ships, omitting
nothing in the munition of the place, whereby for the present he might oppose
the enemies designs; and, as he had so often deluded their attempts against
the Navall Bridge on the Scheldt, so by repairing and fortifying this other
Bridge placed on another Scheldt in the fields, he by Gods assistance, might
frustrate their designs, and stop the passage of Navigation in that place
also. Nor did the Antwerpians omit, The Antwerpians to divert the Royalists
from Covenstene, prepare new inventions.
as they had before agreed to re-attempt the Navall Bridge, and to appear with
new and various Engines, thereby to divert the Royalists from Covenstene: some
whereof had a great number either of terrible javelins, or broad sharp axes
fastened in the fore-decks: many carrying fires on their hatches, Ships to
assail the bridge.
had within them mines of Thunder. But having so often trial, that these
Machines, either by the bending of the channel, or by the Wind, easily were
driven to the banks, and there grounded, there was a German, Amongst the rest,
one way most stupendous.
one of Jambels impes, who took upon him, to invent a ship that would go
straight down the midst of the River, and directly fall upon the Bridge:
Wherefore I think it not amiss to relate in a word or two the structure
thereof. He fastened under the water to the sides of the prore a great linen
cloth, like the sail of a ship: which extended before the ship in the Water,
like to a fish-nett, and passing along under the keele, was by little and
little so contracted, until it was fastened about the midst of the ship on
either side. So this German quite changed the use of sails: and contrived,
that as sails filled with wind, drive on the Vessel, so his new fashioned
sail, being filled with water, might likewise move it on with this advantage,
(which chiefly intended) that it would keep a direct course, for needs must the
ship set forth in the middle of the Scheldt, not only be forced forward with
the sail extended before it, and filled with the stream, so much the more
violently, by how much the River runs with greater rapidity in the midst,
especially when the tide back's into the Ocean, but also must needs keep it
from being driven from the deeper part of the channel by any cross gust of
Wind; for the Wind, which flowing above the waters, is accustomed to wrest the
shipp aside from its right course could not have the like force on the under
water which filled the sail, with which, the ship besides the course of the
River, and ebbing of the Sea, was drawn on as with oars. Assuring himself,
that no Machine how strong soever, was able to endure this violent onset, but
at the very first charge of this battering Ram, would fail. And now teen of
those other ships I spoke of, The enemies Engines approach in this order.
were sent down the midst of the River from Antwerp about midnight: six of
the greatest whereof carried destruction privately within them, the rest openly
threatened fire, which were led and guarded by seventeene little cock-boats tied
and connected together. And for that their bottomes were boared full of holes,
and water running in, they were carried scarce a foot above the river, held up
only, and hindered from sinking by empty hogs-heads. To this intent, that
scarce visible, especially in the dead of the night, they might, as lying lower
and secure from danger of their sharp beakes set upon the floates, placed
before the bridge: and breaking down that bar, might open a way for the
ships to assayl the bridge, but without success. For after the overthrow
received the month before, every night some light boats, as scouts, by his
Excellencies command, traced the Scheldt, Alex. makes preparation against them.
which an English Captain, offering his service to Prince Alexander, for that
purpose fortifyed with grapples, hooks, and anchors. At the fight of which, the
boats being affrighted, and scattered, were by their conductours conveyed some
one way, some another, whilst in the interim, the Royalists speedily with their
grapling hooks catching hold of most of the greater ships then destitute of
the lessers conduct, drew them to the banks, and there anchored them. Where
afterward, they vented their poison without any execution. But having not time
to surprise all, But one brake through the floats.
one of them armed with those sharp weapons fell on the piled fortification
that stood before the bridge, and after they had a while goared one another
with mutual wounds, at length the ship cutting in pieces the opposite beams,
And opens the passage for the new invented ship.
and ships-masts, made a breach in the Machine it self also sorely bulked, and
torn in pieces by the sharp points, was forthwith swallowed by the River. But
that which went with sails fastened to the bottom, could not by any hooks or
grapples be retarded, but with incredible swiftness was directly conveyed
through the broken floates against the bridge. And although the soldiers
forthwith took one of the ships from the bridge, (for then the ships were so
ordered, that they might be removed when need required) and hastened to lay
open the way to the approaching ship, Which past through not without some hurt
to the bridge.
yet it hitting on the ship placed next to that which was removed, with
unevitable force tore it asunder, and forthwith sunk it. And thus hitherto
prevailed the Antwerpians Engines; for some Italians at daybreak, in emulation
of the English under Captain Torell, with great audacity boarded those lesser
fireships that followed, and pulling most of them to the banks there anchored
them. Yet three or four escaped, Others attempt the same.
but the ships being removed from the bridge, they slyded through that open way
of the River, But without any effect.
vomiting their pestilence a great distance off the bridge and as every one of
these ships discharging their mines burst a far off, the soldiers on the
bridge their fear now turned into sport, And are scoffed at.
had leisure joyfully to vent their jeeres and iterate their triumphant
shoutes, in derision of their enemies. Nor wanted there some, who desirous to
know the inward subtilty, And the artificial structure of them was found out.
entered with prosperous temerity one of the enemies ships, and finding the
match which conveyed the fire almost entering the mine, forthwith extinguished
it, and made bold to look into the secret vault, and showed it to others, no
little admiring the rarity of it: from whose narrations especially, I received
these things which before are related.

But not long were the Royalists exempt from new fear and care, to wit, The
last attempt of the Antwerpians.
from the last stratagem of the besieged; for as yet the Antwerpian Engineers
had one invention more, which they reserved as their latest hopes. It was a
Vessel of an unusual bigness, A huge ship
and form: whose foundation being not much unlike to Wherryes, was so
connected together with cross beams, like a great, that the places left
between those beams, might be filled with empty Hogs-heads, the better to
support the huge weight that was to be laid thereon. Moreover these beams and
barrels were covered with thick boards pitched, to make a plain even bottom of
the ship: the sides were fenced with impregnable battlements, and thick ranked
with Wall pieces. But upon this shipp covered with strong planks, there was
raised another as it were a Castle, built almost foure-square; in which were
carried above a thousand Musketeers, besides those that appeared not, being in
the lower ship, and those that were exposed to the view in the top-Castles of
the mast, to shoot as it were a storm of leaden hailstones from the clouds.
But it is scarce credible how great confidence the Antwerpians reposed in this
ship, than which there was never any built at Antwerp, with greater industry,
or expenses; for it is reported it was seven months in building, and cost at
least one hundred thousand florens, so much were they taken with this huge
moveable Castle, and all secure of its success, that proudly they named it the
END OF THE WAR; Which they called The end of the War.
and were willing the enemies should take notice of that glorious Title they
gave it, yet never was there Engine or stratagem more vainer, But took no
effect.
or to less purpose. For launched into the Scheldt, and steered through the
cleft of the River-bank at Ostervele, into the drowned fields, the Mariners
could scarcely guide it: and no sooner came it near to Ordam, which Fort it
assaulted but it stuck fast to the ground, and was so gravel'd, that from
thence it could not by any Art of Mariners, any endeavor of other ships be
drawn, or removed. So THINGS that exceed custom and measure in greatness, are
rather for sight-sake, then use and commodity, of which the Antwerpians had a
sufficient experience, Afterward they termed it expenses lost.
who afterward with a truer Title called this their Fabric, Money cast away;
and the Spaniards after the first sight and encounter, in a military jeere
called it CARANTAMAVLA viz. a great Bug-bare for children. And a Bugbear for
children.
But this was afterward, for then, when they heard it was set out of the Port,
In the interim it kept the Royalists solicitous at the bridge.
and supposed it to come against the bridge, (for so the Antwerpians gave it
out, to detain the Royalists on the bridge) they expressed another front, and
earnestly prepared all their forces against this new monster, which same had
divulged.

Whilst the Royalists were by the many and sundry attempts of the enemies
Engines busied at the River, The confederates Navy invade Covenstene Causey:
Covenstene Causey was suddenly assailed by both Navies at once, which
consisted of above two hundred sail, almost one hundred and sixty whereof were
great ships, furnished with Veterans and Cannons, and came partly from the
City under Consul Aldegund, James Jacobius Admiral of Antwerp, Aldegund from
Antwerp,
with Morgan and Balfurius, two Colonells of English and Scots, And Holach from
the sea.
partly under Count Holach from the sea, to whom were joined Justin of Nassau,
Haulter Governor of Walcheren, besides the chiefest of the Hollanders, and
Zealanders. The rest of the lesser ships were, some laden with sacks of earth
and wool: many with faggots beams, hurdles, and pyles, for the speedy raising
of bulwarks and fences: Others with folded bridges for an assault, fireballs,
Grenades, Artificers, and Pioneers, besides those that were laden with store
of provision for Antwerp* Count Holach was the first, First the Hollachians
sending fire ships before, and frighting away the guards.
that by the help of the tide set out from Lillo, who sent before four ships,
with pitch, brimstone, and Gun powder, which the Ship-men privately setting
fire to, might have some resemblance of ships with mines, and as Bowmen in
the Van of an Army, might beat off and deterr the Royalists from their
centries, which took effect. For approaching to Covenstene, between the
Castles of Saint George and the Palata, (the pyles being cut before under the
Water) as soon as they were set on fire, they went off with a horrid, but
hurtlesse noise, wherefore whilst those that kept guard in that place, fearing
a terrible storm of stones would ensue, a little withdrew themselves, the
stoutest of the enemies came out of the other ships, and in a trice took the
Causey, Ascend the Causey.
there being but few there to defend it, cut through a passage, and that gate
being now opened in half an hours space, amongst a continual storm of the
Artillery from Saint Georges Castle, not without the loss of many, about eight
hundred Holachians possess themselves of all that part of the Causey. And
although a little after, Simon Padil.
Colonel Gamboa, and Captain Padilla, came in all speed from the next Castles
with most of their soldiers to hinder the enemies from fortifying themselves,
And seconded by the Aldegundians climbing up on the other side.
yet at the same time Aldegund, first charging with his fireships, then with
the Antwerpian fleet, and sending fresh men to assist their fellows; the
Spaniards endeavors were frustrated: for Captain Padilla and other undaunted
soldiers being slain, The chiefest of the Spaniards being slain or wounded.
Colonel Gamboa himself, and many of his men ill wounded, they thought it
best to retreat, and defend the Castles from the huge multitude of the
enemies. Possess themselves of a great part of the Causey:
And now the enemies being masters of all the Causey, between the Castles of
Saint George, and the Palata, contentiously fortify themselves, and speedily
driving stakes into the ground, and winding them with boughs of Trees, casting
to them sackes of earth, suddenly raised a high bulwark, And fortifyed it,
and fortifyed it with select Musketeers out of the nearest ships,
committing the charge of it to Colonel Morgan. And withal. the Pioneers open
the Causey on either side.
And at the same time, almost an infinite number of Pioneers, applying
themselves to the bottom and sides of the bank, on either side, cast down and
opened so much of it, that both parts of the overflowing waters were almost
conjoined. Balfurius also with a cohort of Scots, and the Governor of
Walcheren with some select companies of Auxiliaries, Others assault the Castle.
fiercely assaulted the Castle of Saint George, and doubtless had taken it,
for the soldiers that kept it were most of them grievously wounded, if
Camillus a Monte had not from his Castle of Saint James with a hardy band of
Italians and Walloones opposed and hindered the insulting enemy: although many
of them were cut off, But are repulst.
by the continual tempest of bullets, without intermission shot from the
ships on both hands. But the most grievous conflict was at the Pioneers, The
sharpest conflict was at the Pioneers,
who that they might safely prosecute their work, were guarded by the
Auxiliaries. And especially the Merchants in the Corn-ships, whom it much
concerned to have the passage of Traffic laid open, earnestly urged forward
the workmen, Who are encouraged to work,
That they should make have, and now show their strength; since that on their
hands only depended the Victory: nor permit a few handfulls of earth heaped
together, in which all the Spaniards confidence lay now included, to stand
impenetrable to so many thousand workmen, And although many of them, and the
auxiliaries were slain,
to hinder the strong Navy of the Hollanders, and liberty of Antwerp. But the
Royalists with so much the more obstinacy, endeavored to divert the enemies
from their work. And as the greatest action was at the bottom of the Causey,
so there they encountered one another, wading in the Waters even to their
breasts, and now wounded, then wounding their opposites with the points of
their pikes, and swords, seldom missing their marks, mutually discolored the
Waters with each others blood; now the Spaniards violently rushing. into the
very clefts, and breaches of the bank, fiercely slaughtered the workmen, and
made up the gaps with their dead bodies, so that those, who when they were
alive had opened the bank, being dead closed it up. Yet they prevail,
But they could not so oppose the workmen every where, being so many in number,
and casting down the Causey in so many places, that with their constant labor
they had in some places made such wide scissures, that with the water rushing
in, And the Causey being opened, one ship slipped through. And brought joyful
tidings to Antwerp, as if they were Victours.
there one bark laden with provision broke through also; into which Count
Holach himself ascending, and drawing along with him Feranta Spinula, taken
prisoner a little before, who not long after departed this life, entered Antwerp
with these joyful tidings, That the Victory was now in their hands; Covenstene
bar was opened, the ships had free passage, and by and by their relief would
follow; the first fruits whereof they might in that bark behold, and by this
prisoner perceive a sure token of the victory. Whereupon the Antwerpians verily
believing it, run up and down the City, some hasten to the Port, to look for
the provision; others wait on Count Holach, asking him many questions
concerning the fight, and how many were slain, or wounded: many set forth
public fignalls of joy with joyful volleyes of Artillery, and ringing of
bells, little knowing what news the evening following would bring.

But the confederates having banded at least two thousand five hundred
soldiers on Covenstene, The Castle of Palata is in danger, Gamboa,
the Catholic affairs were in a straight: especially the Castle of Palata,
its Governor being ill hurt, for that part placed on pyles without the Causey,
was battered from the ships, and the passage from Saint Georges was stopped by
the enemies fort. Nor did Count Mansfield (who was Governor of Brabant shore)
desist from sending fresh supplies of soldiers from Stabroeck, although the
way to Palata was almost blockt up. But most of them being either slain or
beaten back, by the continual showers of bullets and fireballs from the
ships, he was doubtful what course to take: yet going from the Camp to his
Castle placed in the head of the Causey, Mansfield speedily consults of
relieving it.
he speedily advised with some of the chiefest Commanders of the Army. Many
did not approve that the soldiers should be exposed to certain destruction,
lying open to the enemies shot, They give several opinions.
and (the Causey being lost) altogether unprotected. But should rather expect
till night, at which time they would both be in equal danger, AND THE
darkness would even cover the naked. On the contrary, others disputed it was
no time to delay, but that they should endeavor with all their force, by some
means to convey some Cannons to the Castle of Palata, and from thence to send
forces to set upon the enemies Fort placed near to Palata. Not a few referred
the enemies boldness, and the Royalists fear, to Prince Alexanders absence,
and said, he was to be sent for with all speed: and it was not to be doubted,
but all things by his presence would be restored. But as it is accustomed to
fall out in such like desperate affairs, MANY give Counsel, few will undergo
the peril. Amongst the rest there was present Camillus Capissuccus, Colonel
of an Italian Regiment: who, as I have heard, spoke more courageously then the
rest, and performed his magnanimous words, with as daring deeds: for reproving
all their delay, he said, What can be expected in tarrying until night,
Capissuccus offers himself, and his Regiment to relieve it.
or for the Prince of Parma, but to give the enemies sufficient time of
dividing the Causey, and passage for their provision? which being once past,
how can our fighting remedy it? but say our soldiers daunted with the fall of
their fellows, will go more stoutly against the enemy: or if courageously, yet
in vain, and unto certain destruction. Indeed, he did not attribute to
himself and his Regiment more then to the rest, yet could he not deny but he
was more obliged and devoted to the Prince of Parma then others. And from
thence had he greater provocation to the enterprise. Therefore what others
doubted and eschewed, he earnestly desired for himself and his Regiment, viz.
to set upon the enemies, and in the front, if others would follow: or if they
diffided and would leave the glory to them alone, they only would engage, and
as he hoped be Victorious. He knew his soldiers minds and courages, and
therefore he doubted not, but to be freed from ostentation and temerity. And
doubted not but what things were proudly spoken at the Table would as gallantly
be performed in the battle. But if the dye of War should run otherwise, it
would be no disparagement to close up the many years of his soldiery in that
days adventure. But better things might be presumed by those, who so often
had trial of the Divine assistance, the sanctity of the cause, and of the name
of Alexander. His Sergeant Major Picolominy confirms the same.
There was present when he spoke thus, Silvius Picolominy Captain and
Sergeant Major of that Regiment: (whose son Octavio Duke of Amalphi) now when
I write this, the stout and fortunate General of the Austrian forces, both in
Germany and the Low-countreyes, posterity will read, frequently mentioned in
the Annalls of our age. Silvius,
Who for that with no less constancy he affirmed the same, with Capissuccus,
and boldly pawned his word for the Regiment: was by Count Mansfield, to whom
this was most grateful, and who by the very looks of them whom Picolominy had
in his company, presaged well of the Victory, commanded with all speed to
choose three hundred soldiers out of that Regiment, and speedily to return.
Who for this service brought his soldiers to Capisuccus under three Captains.
Six companies whereof quartered near Stabroeck: for the rest were of the
guard for the bridge, from amongst these companies at Stabroeck, Picolominy
chose out three hundred of the stoutest and forwardest soldiers, and brought
them to his Colonel, led by three Captains of approved valor, viz. Mark
Magdalen, John Baptista a Prano, and Lewis Gambolo^t: and found Mansfield
strengthened with new succors, led by John de Aquila, a man of an undaunted
spirit, Aquila, a Spanish Colonel offers his assistance to Mansfield.
Colonel of the Regiment which belonged to Pacius; Who at six or seven miles
distance hearing the continual thundering of Cannons, supposed what the matter
was, and suddenly chose two hundred soldiers out of his Regiment, with
Bartholomew Toralua, Michael Cardone, and Gonsalo Castrio, ancient and stout
Captains and courageously offered himself and his soldiers to Count
Mansfield: and demanded the leading of the Van for that expedition; The contest
between the Spaniards and Italans for the Van in that assault.
Which Capissuccus and Picolominy having already laid claim to desired that
others coming but after, should not be preferred before the Italians, who had
first engaged for the honor. On the contrary, the Spaniards pretended the
right of the War, and preheminency of their Nation in the Low-countreyes, and
Count Mansfield rather inclining to the Spaniards. The Colonels gallantly
decide.
At last Aquila exclaiming that it was not a time of quarrelling amongst
themselves, but with the enemy, laid hold of Capissuccus right hand, and said,
Come most magnanimous man, let us join our selves together, and march against
the enemies fortification: and try the valor of our countries, by the
overthrow of the rebels. Count Mansfield glad of that military strife, and the
deciding thereof, was near ready to have begun the fight: when a far off at
the other end of the Causey, he heard sudden shoutes, and perceived the
concourse from Saint Cruces Fort, to approach nearer, and the tumult to
increase, Alex. hastens to relieve Palata in danger.
at last he understood Prince Alexander was advancing, who had been retarded at
the bridge by the Antwerpian ships; and who although he conjectured by the
noise of the Cannons, that the enemies Navy had already assailed Covenstene,
yet his great care of the bridge would not suffer him to depart thence, until
the Antwerpians attempt on the Scheldt being repressed, he now somewhat more
secure, From the bridge now left fortified.
and rather anxious of his soldiers dangers at the Causey, commanded Charles
Count Mansfield to guard the bridge and Flanders coast; then drawing with him
two hundred Spaniards armed with pykes, under Turrius Viverua an ancient
Captain, with so much the more speed advanced toward Covenstene, (which is at
least three hours march from the bridge) by how much more he was spurred
forward, by the many sad tidings, which one after another met him on the way.
But when he saw so many of the enemies soldiers, and Pioneers on the Causey:
his own men, like waves of Water, sometimes to advance, sometimes endangered by
the Cannons from the ships to give back: and heard from Camillus a Monte, the
death of so many of his chiefest soldiers, the great danger of Saint Georges
Fort, and the defense of Palata almost to be in despair; not using many words
where he knew there was more need of deeds, commanded Montius to convey those
Cannons, which he by the way had drawn out of the Forts of Saint Peter's, and
Saint Barbara into his Castle of Saint James's, and from thence without
intermission to play them against the ships: he gave also charge to
Mondragonius to do the like from his Castle, de Sancta Cruce: and sent Captain
Viverus with part of the Pikemen against those pioneers, that were opening the
nearest part of the Causey. Then himself by his eyes and countenance,
representing the storm of discontent and fury which lodged in his breast, with
a voice like to thunder egging the ears and minds of those that were present,
he said, Let the love of honor, Gods, and the Kings cause, He exhorts his
men to follow him.
be of no price to him, that follows me not, without any other words, he
entered amongst those Spanish pike-men that remained, and ordered the Battalia.
But at those words and looks, as it were at the sound of a Trumpet, not only
the Commanders, to wit, John Maurique, the Marquess Bentivol^o, The chiefest
of the Commanders follow their General.
the Counts Bevilaque, and Sfortia Prince Alexanders kinsman, with other daring
Heroes do encompasse his Excellency, and contentiously demand the first
on-sett: but also the rest of the soldiers then scattered, join themselves,
and fiercely brandishing their weapons together: expect both the signal of
battle and Victory. Nor did Count Mansfield make less have from Stabroeck, On
the other side Mansfield exhorts his men.
when he understood the Prince of Parma advanced from the other end, and
making this short exhortation; he said, Well my mates, all things from Gods
bountiful goodness, conspire to the Victory. Here the opportune succors of
Aquila, unexpected, by divine instinct fly into our help: at the other end
the Prince of Parma, out affairs being in greatest extremity, comes yet in
time, with his sword to cut this Gordian knot. The enemies are now surrounded
in the midst, to be assailed on both hands: they will not be able to stand
the first encounter of our Noble General: and being by him beaten and turned
on us, they will be dispatched by our arms: and so at last we shall be
crowned with the glory of the day. Thus was the battle renewed, if ever any
most bloody and remarkable, Many thousands fight upon that narrow bank.
upon a Causey verily not above seventeene foot in breadth, at least five
thousand men did fight. Into this small plot of earth did the power of Spain,
and the Belgic Provinces gather it self. And here was that field chosen, in
which the strength and forces on both sides opposed each other, and lastly
disputed for the possession of Antwerp; and truly the place not only
necessitated the fierceness of the fight, By necessity.
as glad actours enclosed on a stage, but they being obstinate and resolute,
And with a resolution of conquering or dying.
determined that that day should either be the first of their victory, or last
of their lives. Moreover, the Antwerpians had publicly taken a solemn oath,
not to depart from the Causey before they had rased it, and laid open a way for
their provision. And at the first their obstinacy equalled their unadvised
counsel: The confederate forces held the Causey in many places, wherefore they
encountered, not in one battle only, but divided into many parties, they fought
as it were so many several battles. And though they charged one another with
their swords and pykes, seldom missing their object; yet showed they so little
sign either of flight, or fear, that every one kept that footing which he
had once taken, nor, but by being slain and trodden on, Alex. recovers, part of
the Causey.
as Walls cast down by Engines, gave they any ground to Uictours to advance.
But no force of the enemy was able to stop the Prince of Parma, violently
rushing in with his Spanish company of pike-men, intermingled with some
Musketeers, having recovered all that part of the Causey, which lies between
the Castles of Sancta Cruce and St. James's, not without some loss, he
marched thence toward Saint Georges, and so displayed his Army, that it took
up as well the plain, as both the declining sides of the Causey. And he
himself having but slippery footing and as it were hanging on the steep
descent of the bank, now with his spear repelled the Antwerpians striving to
ascend from their ships, then in the midst with a little Target in the one
hand, And acting wonders, both with his own hand, and his authority.
and his sword in the other, (in managing whereof he had a singular dexterity)
he rusht violently amongst the thickest of the enemies, and foyned those that
opposed him, in the very faces: and every where by his authority, valor, and
very looks, gave encouragement to his own soldiers, and struck terror into
the enemies; until the way to St. Georges Castle being cleared, and the Avenue
laid open from Sancta Cruces's, for new supplies, he determined with like
violence to invade the enemies Fort. But it being excellently fenced with a
mud-wall, Then he hastens to set upon the enemies Fort.
and manned with the chiefest soldiers of the whole Army, but especially by
the ships, which on either side approached near, or continually shooting for
its defense: for his Excellency therefore durst not give the assault, These
things being first provided against it.
until he had caused a bul-wark to be raised before Saint Georges of sackes
of earth, and from thence some Cannons to be directed against their Fort: and
strengthening the Castle with a band of Musketeers, he sought to repel the
ships thence. Then being ready for the on-sett, he heard that the
Mansfieldians, Capisuc, and Aquila with their companies joined by Mansfields
command march thither.
having beaten the enemies off, had entered the Palata: and with great
confidence and hope of Victory, hastened to invade the enemies fortification.
And truly that gallant contention of the Spaniards and Italians promised no
less, for the Colonel Capissuccus, and Aquila departing from Count Mansfields
Castle were closely attended, the one by Picolominy, the other by Toralua, and
their companies of Italians and Spaniards, then mixed together not far behind
first the Spaniards, then the Italians following their example, falling on
their knees, implored the Divine assiistance; and forthwith charged the
enemies, who besieged the Castle of Palata, who after a sharp dispute part
being slain, part put to flight, the Royalists victoriously entered the
Castle: and thereafter changed the name of Palata, they called it Victoria. And
after a bloody skirmish they enter Palata.
Which as soon as they had fortified with Cannons, the Colonels, and those
Captains, as I said, setting their men again in rank and fyle, Then they
assault the enemies Fort.
boldly advanced against the enemies hold, and were fiercely welcomed by the
adversaries, obstinately defending that as their last hopes. And although
Prince Alexander at the same time, the Cannons from St. Georges Fort having
made a sufficient breach, with his soldiers stormed it on the other side, yet
he was once, and they twice, not without great loss repulsed. Being twice
beaten off:
Wherefore the confederates confidence from that success greatly increasing,
and contentiously from the ships climbing up the causey, the battle in a
short time was in many places courageously renewed. But the Mansfieldians
making the third assault, But ventering the third time,
the enemies began to faulter. And here it appeared, what valor provoked by
disgrace, what the fear of losing honor, what desire of revenge, and lastly
what despair is able to do for the space of an hour and a half, the dispute
on both sides was dubious. When on a sudden the Regiment of the Spaniards and
Italians, spurred on with new fury, joining together their spears, and
advancing their Weapons, They scale it.
pulled down, and opened the Fort, some standing on their fellows shoulders, or
climbing on their Targets scaling the mud-walls: and now entrance being laid
open in many places, And the Princes soldiers pressing in on the other side,
they take it.
and the Princes soldiers rushing in also on the other side, whole companies
bursting in together, and making a pitiful slaughter of the enemies, they
took the place. The first that appeared on the Wall (for this honor the
Spaniards and Italians, attributed either to their own Nation) was Bartholmew
Toralua a Spanish Captain. Toralua and Capisuc. thus having the first honor.
Although almost at the same time, Colonel Camillus Capissuccus himself
mounted the rampire, and advanced against the enemy before Toralua, wherefore
his honor may seem equal to Toralna. And for that reason the soldier on
whose shoulders he first mounted the fort, from a common soldier he made a
Sergeant. And his Excellency embracing Camillus Capissuccus with many
honorable words, referred the taking of the fort to his valor, and concord
with Aquila. And commending him and Aquila to the King, For him and Aquila,
Alex. procures patents from the King for their Colonels places.
obtained for them both commissions for their Colonells places (for as yet they
were not confirmed from Spain) with an honorable testimony of his Majesty's
affection toward them. But Toralua being grievously wounded in many places,
was by his Excellencies command carried unto his Pavilion at Stabroeck, yea,
into the Princes own bed, and there cured, and rewarded with the garment the
Prince wore the day before, he preferring his Generals liberty before any
military honor won at the assault. It is reported when the Italians and
Spaniards made their last assault, Strange things of Pacius dead before.
that Peter Pacius, who had been Colonel of that Spanish Regiment, a most
pious man, and dearly beloved of his soldiers, (and was slain as I have said
some months before at the siege of Dendermund) was seen armed as he was
accustomed, leading up his soldiers, pointing out the fittest place for the
assault, and animating his Regiment against the enemies, with his wonted
alacrity. But those who first saw him, being greatly astonished, showed the
fight to their fellows, all being amazed, they doubted whether they saw a
fantasy, or Pacius alive and really fighting: but afterward when they were
all satisfied about the same, they took it as a happy Omen, persuading
themselves that their attempts were acceptable to God, to the prosecuting
whereof the Saints came to their succors, and mixed themselves with them. So
many of them who saw this spectacle took it on their oaths to be true, and
indeed Delrius a most grave Author, and well skilled in the Belgic affairs
affirms the same. Which man's gravity and wisdom, was a sufficient warrant for
me to note it down in this place: for as to record things upon slight
grounds, may be thought a blemish in a writer, too boldly abusing the credulity
of his Reader; so by passing over with silence to diminish the authority of
things seriously delivered and written, may be thought an injury, both to those
who have heretofore mentioned them, whose credits are almost sentenced by our
silence, and to those that come after, from whom the knowledge of such things
are unreasonably concealed. The Royalists continue their Victory over all the
Causey.
But the Royalists Victory did not contain it self within that Fort, but was
speedily carried all over the Causey, the enemies now beginning to faint, who a
little before had come fresh from both Navies, and frequently joining their
forces, had renewed the battle in many places. Alex orderiug and animating them.
Prince Alexander run amongst his soldiers, here setting these in order,
relieving those with new supplies in place of the wounded, placing further
asunder, those that were too close pressed together, with his hand and voice,
animating all, that they should wound and kill that rebellious rout enclosed
within the narrow precincts of the Causey: and revenge the death of their
valiant comrades; that they should make that day the last of the Antwerpian
War; they might know that bank to be the very wall of Antwerp, and if the
enemies were once excluded thence, they had but a step into the City. As he
was thus calling on his men, he perceived the enemies ships to remove, and
secretly to depart toward Lillo, for fear lest after the backing of the Tide
they should be grounded. Then showing that to his soldiers, he said, the
Victory is ours my fellow soldiers. Their sea forsakes the impious desertours
of their faith. Cut off the passage to their ships, which only last hope
remains now to the fugitives. Nor suffer them to escape your hands, By his
encouragement, they more fiercely charge the now staggering enemy.
to return again to wage a new War: At whose words the Royalists fury
increasing, the fight grew every where more bloody: and though many of the
Hollanders and Zealanders begun to waver, their eyes sometimes glancing toward
their ships, sometimes toward the enemy, their courages now no more constant
then the floating ships, yet the Antwerpians whom it nearer concerned, The
Antwerpians hold out longer.
did not of all this time abate any thing of their former obstinacy, or gave
back. So long did the regard of their City, and obligation of their Oath
prevail with them, as the faith of the multitude, and mutual respect stayed
the very timorous from flight. But when a company of Hollanders, which were
hotly charged by Augustine Romanus a Spanish Captain, began to fly, then all,
as if thereby freed from disgrace, precipitately run to their ships, the
Royalists greedily pursuing them, But soon after, they and the rest also fly
to the ships.
and wounding so many more of them, as they themselves in that crowd were their
own greatest mischief, for the multitude of the fugitives meeting and
hindering one another, and the press increasing, like blind men, they tumbled
one over another: and as it falls out in such like events, EVERY ones
particular have, was a hinderance to all. But the slaughter of the enemies,
There was the greatest slaughter.
was no where greater then at the auxiliary ships: for when some were alteady
arrived at them, and ready to enter, they were cast down by the accurse of
their fellows that were stronger: into other ships huge multitudes entered
together, and over-loading them were drowned: some again, the passage being
stop'p, rather then to fall on the Spanish swords, although heavy armed and
wearied in the fight, cast themselves headlong into the water: and less
valuing the danger of the water, then of the enemies, they exposed themselves
to the more certain ruin. SO nothing of all is so much feared, as that from
which our fear had its first origin. Nor had the Antwerpians on the other side
of the Causey a lesser conflict; many whereof, as they had approached nearer,
and with stubborn hope had deferred their retreat the last so being forsaken
by the tide, and left moveable, were miserably scattered by Cannon shot, from
the near adjoining bank, with a huge slaughter of the Soldiers within them;
to avoid which many cast themselves into the Waters, as if by swimming they
could overtake the former ships, nor did they also prevent their fate, for
some Spaniards with no less confidence of themselves, then contempt of the
enemy, With great audacity of the Spaniards.
leapt also into the Waters, and with their swords in their teeth, swam after
the flying ships, and boarded some, carried them back with those that
remained to the Causey, the ship-men being even amazed at that daring
boldness. Lastly, not a few of the enemies to avoid the Cannon shot,
approached yet nearer to the fides of the Causey, and were there killed by the
Royalists, whom they like blind men did fly (for fear had not only taken
away the use of counsel, but of fight also.) Notwithstanding there were some,
who for that they would dye honorable, furiously ran against the enemy, and
fell not altogether unrevenged. It is said there were slain at this Covenstene
battle, The number of the confederates slain.
which continued almost seven hours, of the Antwerpians, and Auxiliaries, but
chiefly of them, about three thousand, besides those, that were devoured in the
waters. The loss of the Veterans, and chiefest soldiers of the Army, The
booty.
far exceeding the number. There were four ships cast away, besides twenty
eight taken: in which were found great brass Cannons sixty five of Iron, and
lesser ninty, besides plenty of all warlike magazine, and abundance of
provision. Of the Royallists slain.
Of the Royalists there fell at least seven hundred, and of them above four
hundred Spaniards: and about five hundred wounded. The fatal Causey thus
recovered, his Excellency first gave thanks to Almighty God for the Victory;
and the next day caused the whole Clergy at Divine service to do the like: and
also a Mass to be said, Thanksgiving to God.
(as his custom was) for those that were slain in the fight, in the presence
of the Army. His care of the dead, of the wounded, and of the Causey.
His next care after he had provided for his wounded soldiers, was to amend
the wounded Causey: which being cast down and opened in at least thirteen
places, the incensed soldiers, besides faggots, earth, and other stuff,
repaired and made up with heaps of the enemies bodies.

Alexander, that he might give no respite to the affrighted enemies, The
fetching away of the huge ship.
hearing that monster of a ship to stay as yet at Ordam, and that many
Antwerpian ships repaired thither, sent Charles Count Mansfield with five
Galleyes, seven Frigots, and twenty lesser Vessels, furnished with Cannons and
soldiers. Mansfield go eth against it and other ships.
And Mansfield forthwith loosing from the Navall bridge, slipped through the
cleft of the bank at Saint Peter's Fort into the drowned fields, and compassed
the enemy with that scelerity, that unless an unexpected accident had happened
in the very attempt, Who is a little hindered by a fire which happened in his
ship.
it was thought not a ship could have escaped. For in Mansfields own galley,
in which were carried Count Aremberge, Marquess Bontivolio, Count Bevilacque,
and diverse other chief men of Note, drawn with a desire of seeing that Navall
Monster, that Noah's Ark, as they termed it, by chance a barrel of gunpowder
being set on fire, fired also the ship: Bevilacque, who was nearest to the
barrel being blown up, and lighting in the water, by swimming got to the bank
at Ordam almost dead: some cast themselves into the waters, some were burned to
death; Mansfield and the rest, bore a long time the marks of the fire in their
hands and faces. But soon after sets upon the enemy, takes some ships. Then
he comes to the huge ship,
By this delay (for many on every side came in to help them) most of the
Antwerpian ships escaped to the City, except nine that were taken in the
pursuit by the Mansfieldians: With which prey returning Victours, they came
about the great ship, admiring there appeared not one to defend it, of the huge
company of seamen not one, Which the Ant werpians had left as useless.
not any inhabitant, as in a desolate forsaken City. And indeed, the
Antwerpians had left it as wholly deserted: for the day before having taken
most of the Cannons out of it, when yet they could not remove it, they
departed, and came again the next day with their Navy, to fetch away the
soldiers and ammunition, and with fire to demolish that heap of wood. And the
soldiers, mariners, and part of the ammunition, they had removed into their
ships, but Mansfields sudden arrival hindered the rest. All which, though
truly related by the prisoners that were taken, The assailants fear some
tredchery in it.
yet the Mansfieldians durst not give credit to them: and by how much all
things seemed more quiet, and without danger, by so much the more cantious and
fearful they were, lest in that wooden Machine, as in another Trojane horse,
some treachery might be concealed. Wherefore, they agreed to discharge a
Cannon against it, They try it.
to try that way what was within it. But the bullet was with silence received
into the wool which stuffed the sides of it, and gave it no more motion, then
if a little wave had dash't against a huge Rock in the Sea. At last one more
adventurous then the rest, as if by boarding it first he should win the glory
of scaling the walls of a Castle: and by and by others, that they might not be
thought less daring, and then more in emulation of the former, taking with
them the prisoners instead of pledges, Some enter.
intending to involve them in the same danger, if there were any, enter the
ship: view the several rooms both above and below, observe the hatches, and
cabines, search all places exactly, And secure from danger.
and not finding any sign of treachery, now exempt from fear, they advise
with the Mariners how to draw it thence, and bring it to the bridge, to the
Princes view. Wherefore they took away from it what was more loose, or fitter
to be removed and being so mangled and made lighter, They hale it into the
River, and in a military triumph they bring it to Alex.
they drew it through the overwhelmed fields of Ordam into the Schelde, and
giving his Excellency notice thereof, steered it toward the bridge, not
without pomp. For the other captive ships haled with ropes led the way: then
followed Mansfields Navy, environing the great ship, which came as if it had
been a whole Navy it self. Then the ships that met them from the bridge
increased the triumph, and coming in Prince Alexanders presence, they
altogether discharged their Artillery, with such exceeding joy of the Army, as
if in the triumph over that one ship, Antwerp now subdued and taken, had been
led prisoner in fetters. And indeed not only the common soldiers, who, as
before at the report of this Engine, apprehended the greatest fear, so now
having it present amongst them, scoffed and jeered at it, and scorned it as a
Bugbeare for children; but the chiefest Commanders also, yea Prince Alexander
himself, admiring the vain structure of that huge Machine, which the enemies
had proudly threatened would be the end of the War; made a truer construction
of that title, With great hope of an end of their labonrs;
that it was the end of the War; but to the enemies (whose forces and strength
were now exhausted) utter overthrow and ruin. Nor did they judge falsely, for
the Antwerpians as soon as they perceived their overthrow at Covenstene, this
their ship taken and so their hopes on all sides to be frustrated, The
Antwerpians not willing to endure the inconvenience of a siege any longer,
exclaimed they would not any longer be fooled by Holach, or encouraged by
Aldegund with vain hope of foreign aid. And it plainly appeared, the City
being divided into factions, would not any longer endure the incommodities of a
siege. Are punished by the Magistrates,
Nor did the punishment of some of the more seditious, prevail any thing with
the commonalty: for some cast into prison, were forcibly set at liberty by the
people: the Magistrates not daring for the future to oppose them. But in vain.
Whose counsel of expelling the Catholics, thereby to ease the City, was not
approved by Aldegunde, fearing a far greater and more certain tumult of the
multitude. Besides, the sudden flight of some of the richest Merchants from the
City; The Merchants also earnestly desire peace.
and the Embassage of the Hanse Cities, demanding that unless peace were
concluded, they should permit their Merchants with their goods peaceably to
depart the City, terrified the Magistrates of Antwerp, and aggravated the
mutiny of the people. But Aldegund had not yet spent out the whole magazine of
his shifts, of soothing up, and complying with the people, in which kind he
had a rare gift, he promised them to write to the Prince of Parma, and soon
after to go himself into the Camp, and if the Spaniards would make peace upon
indifferent terms, he would omit nothing speedily to effect it. And he writ
accordingly, Aldegund goes to Alex.
that he might have audience: and being admitted, as soon as his Excellency had
notice from Richardott, with whom Aldegund had first conferred, that he was
come to treat of peace both for Antwerp, Holland, and Zealand: he perceived
that by the conjunction of so many Provinces, which, to wit, would be a
tedious and intricate business, Who perceiving his subtilty sent him back.
Aldegunds intent was to get time for the succors, which were daily expected
out of England. Wherefore Prince Alexander, using him otherwise with great
courtesy dismissed him to Antwerp, who promised that receiving authority from
the Magistrates and people, he would forth with return to treat only of the
delivery of Antwerp. But he delaying, his Excellency suspected that he
craftily protracted the treaty, that the besieged might gather the harvest
which now began to be ripe from about the Suburbs of Antwerp, And wihall
commands the enemies corn to be brought to the Camp.
and Mechlin; and therefore determined to frustrate them of that hope also; and
commanded Ambrose Landriano with his garrison of Viluord, together with a
company of Boores, and Vastius with a party of horse, the one to harrasse and
plunder the suburbs of Antwerp, and the other of Mechlin and to transport the
corn, hay, and what other thing was of any use, into the Camp. And he himself
takes the Castles about Antwerp,
Then he himself with a select company of horse and foot, marched into the
Country about Antwerp, and took Burgerhout, a strong sconce of the
Antwerpians, and with the like violence took Bercheme, and other Castles and
Forts, And takes the very Suburbs.
and bereaved Antwerp of all that part of the country, even to their Orchards
and gardens; by that means shutting up both the City and famine together within
the City. Famine forces the Citizens to mutiny:
And indeed the people were ready to have broken out into open sedition; the
general clamor in the City being meat and peace. When the Magistrates sent
diverse into the streets, who in several assemblies should divulge, that
letters were newly come out of France, Yet they are encouraged with hopes of
succor.
assuring them that relief and succor was at hand from thence. Besides, some
Citizens of Aldegunds favorites, said they had certain intelligence, that the
Prince of Parma would indeed offer conditions not unreasonable, but had
covertly covenanted with the Spaniards to give them the plunder of the City in
place of their pay. And fear of plundering.
Wherefore they should not by the impatience of a little delay, both lose their
reputation, and the honor of holding the siege until that day, and all their
goods, and fortunes, besides their wives and children exposed to abuse,
together with the loss of their City and lives. But these outward voices were
not heard, for the loud barking of their hungry stomachs within: and most of
the people suspected, these French letters to be written in Antwerp, and to
come only from Aldegunds cabinett. For of the Prince of Parma they harbored a
more worthy conceit. And in the interim there happned a slight accident but
OPPORTUNITY in the least things, is of great consequence. There was a Noble
Matrone lay dangerously sick at Antwerp, and for her recovery had present need
of Asses milk, But Alexanders courtesy upon occasion exhibited.
there being none to be found in the City, a young man therefore offered
himself courageously, to fetch an Ass from the Suburbs, although in the
enemies possession, and had already taken one but apprehended by the Spaniards,
he was carried to his Excellency being as yet at Burgerhout. Who understanding
what the matter was, used the youth with great respect, and commending his
charity, commanded the beast to be laden with Partridges, Capons of Bruges,
and other foul of that sort. Then delivering them to the youth for the sick
Gentlewoman, commanded him that he should in his name friendly salute her, and
testify that he not only wished her health and recovery of strength, but
prayed also from his heart, for the prosperity, and happiness of the Senate,
and people. And indeed that unexpected civility of the Prince, (to whom the
Antwerpians, sending a gallant Horse with some juncates and choice wine,
Altered their opinion.
gave public thanks) wonderfully reconciled (together with the young man's
relation) the Citizens good will toward him. For doubtless, THE wisest
Commanders of War, have that weapon called Courtesy laid up, in their
warlike Armory. But the delivery of Mechlin concluded the business. In that
City, THE TAKING OF MECHLIN.
after the overthrow at Covenstene Causey, there rose a contest between the
Garrison fouldiers and Citizens, The Citizens oppressed with famine, are
afraid of the garrison soldiers.
which after the loss of their corn increased, the Citizens greatly fearing,
lest they should plunder and forsake the City, and then retire to Block-huse a
Castle placed near to Mechlin, which they had already fortified with Artillery
and provision. Which as soon as Prince Alexander had notice of, he thought it
the most convenient time to attacque the City. And forthwith he ordered
Marquess Renthiacus, whom he made General for that expedition, with
Hicquius, and Mottaeus, to have to Block-huse, and prevent the enemies
designs, Renthiacus drawing his forces thither, and causing the Artillery
speedily to follow after, not only took Block-huse, the Presidiaries being not
yet entered, but Necherspole also, besides other sconces placed about Mechlin,
and pitching his tents, Whereupon after the loss of their adjacent forts, they
yield themselves to his mercy.
demanded the rendition of the City it self. Which upon agreement concluded
with Famusius Governor thereof, was yielded to the Prince of Parmas's will and
mercy. The garrison soldiers being sent away without their colors, which were
sent to his Excellency: who having compassion of the City, Receiving from him
favorable conditions.
by reason most part of it were Catholics, agreed with the Mechlinians, on
very gentle conditions. For in place of seven hundred Presidiaries which
departed the City, he but substituted two hundred Walloones under Provenus,
commanding the Citizens to have care of their City, together with the Garrison;
and imposing no tribute on them, liberally in his Majesty's name, gave pardon
to the City: being glad that within few days, with no loss of men, he had
restored the Archbishop of Mechlin after a long exile again into his own
seat (there being not any Diocese in all the Netherlands of so great esteem:)
and reduced a City, the Flower of the Belgic Cities, and with it the Seigniory
of one of the seventeene Provinces to their true and lawful Sovereign: at
that time when having received letters from his Majesty, For the restitution of
the Castle of Piazenza, he renders thanks to the King with Mechlin.
of the restitution of the Castle of Piazenza, which had been kept by a
Spanish garrison, he was in condition to render him thanks for his royal
liberality, with the welcome news of the Victory.

But ere long having at last subdued Antwerp, The agents treats with Alex.
about the delivery of Antwerp.
he sent far more acceptable tidings to the King; for Aldegund, when he saw
the public affairs in despair, thought privately to provide for himself, and
hastened forward the Commission intended to the Prince of Parma from the
Magistrates and people. The agents or commissioners were twenty one: the chief
amongst whom were William Merode Lord of Duffle, John Sconhove, Andrew Hessell,
and Philip Marnixius, Aldegund himself Consul of the City. Who being received
by his Excellency at Bevera, I have heard that Aldegund in the name of them
all, and in the presence of the Royal and warlike Council, Aldegunds Oration.
spoke after this manner.

We come not hither (most mighty Prince) timerously to apologize for our whole
years resistance in defense of our own. For who could have conceived the least
fear of the most potent City in all the Belgic Provinces from so few
besiegers? and you your self, I presume (as no valiant man can affect the
cowardly,) would rather have wished, then approved of our facility and fear.
We had sufficient knowledge of the number of your soldiers: the necessities
of your Camp were not concealed from us; your Navy not considerable, complaints
rung through your Army, and tumults were daily expected. Was it likely that
you, with ten or eleven thousand soldiers (for those were the most with which
you first attempted this great design) could have continued the siege of such
a City, block it up by land, and stop passage by water: with your horse make
inrodes into Brabant: and hinder relief from neighboring Cities? obstruct so
vast a River above, against the forces of Gaunt, and below, against the power
of Holland, and Zealand? invade so many Castles on the banks of Scheldt,
oppose Navy against Navy, which then you had not any: make good the bringing in
of provision unto your Army: And fill all places with Castles, guards, and
Sconces? no surely, had you had fifty thousand fighting men: nay, if every one
of your soldiers had had a hundred hands a piece, could you have been thought
of ability to attend to so many things at once, in places so distant, and
divided, in effect so difficult, in labor so continual, and in necessity so
urgent. And yet with this handful of men, you have besieged Antwerp both by
water and land, possessed your self of Flanders, and Brabant, by frequent
stations every where placed: conveyed provision, and what else was needful for
your Army at the siege, through a channel of your own making: Erected Castles
and Forts upon narrow banks, and in the overwhelmed fields: and what we only
could believe possible, because we have seen it done: coped with a River which
had the Ocean to assist it; yea, subjugated the Scheldt, or rather the Sea with
a Bridge, standing against the furies of the swelling Ocean, against the
violent encounters of the Ice, amongst continual conflicts with our Navies,
Yet we broke down the bridge, not without your great loss: yea, your
animosity: thereby increasing, in a trice repaired it. We turned the Scheldt
into the fields, and sought passage els-where: You following the River hither
also, by a new bridge divided it, and objected that over-crosse Causey against
our Navies. We assailed the Causey, dug it through, and opened a way there
for our shipping: yet you replust us thence; when we thought our selves
Victours, made up the clefts and breaches, and obstructed all hope of passage:
What Engines, what stratagems have we left unattempted? What strength of
navies, what fiery wonders, what inventions of swimming Castles, can there be,
we have not set forth? as much as by wit, as much as by art, could be imagined,
we have performed. The Heavens, the Sea, hell only excepted, we have called to
our assistance, we have taken into our society: And yet with all these, we
have neither removed you from our Walls, nor struck you with the least fear,
but rather have ministered new fuel to your incensed breast; for the conquest
of other Cities, and further dilating of your arms and victories. You have
achieved most invict and illustrious Prince an enterprise; than which the past
and present Annalls cannot produce a greater. We often have read and sometimes
beheld* that a General laying siege to an hostile City whilst he forces and
takes one, has lost another elsewhere. You, whilst with your Army you
straightly attacque Antwerp, as if secure of us, at the same time in Flanders
take Dendermund by force, subdue Gaunt by famine; In Guelders dis-arme us of
Nievmeghen; And in Brabam compel Bruxels, and Mechlin to a surrender. And so
whilst you lay siege to one City you extend your victories rising from
victories, into three several Provinces at once. As if to fight with one enemy
at once, were too small a task for your noble spirit. But the recital of all
these daily disputes betwixt the besieged, and besiegers, tends only to this,
that it may plainly appear, that we, conscious of our own forces did not
rashly undertake our defense, nor having had trial of your fortune do cowardly
give it up. God, and your valor (O Alexander) have afforded you the glory of
subduing Antwerp: and posterity will allow us also some honor, for not
yielding too hastily: One thing as well for yours, and the King your Uncles
sake, as our own, we entreat and earnestly request; that as by conquering you
have understood how great a City you have overcome, so in taking and possessing
it, you will diminish nothing of the majesty and strength thereof, nothing of
the monument of your Victory, nor any thing of his Majesty's possession and
tribute. But diminish them you will, if either by confining the Citizens minds
to a certain religion, or imposing a garrison of externs over their bodies and
fortunes; you change the state and Government of the City. Antwerp, if any City
in all Europe, flourishes for the present. The number of Citizens, and
strangers can scarcely be reckoned. The Scheldt as large as it is, cannot
contain the Merchants ships of all regions, when war hinders them not.
Lastly, no Empory in the whole world conjoynes and associates more Provinces
together, and wealth of countries by communion of traffic. The fame of the
place will endure, as long as solitude of Religion, threats of Castles and
terrors of a Garrison do not shut up this Sanctuary. SAFETY is a nurse to
commerce. But what safety can the naked Merchants expect from armed soldiers,
accustomed to pillage? Surely this City has sufficiently had a lamentable and
grievous experiment of sacking, burning and plundering. For the prevention of
which outrages, that Antwerp may have no just cause for the future to fear
your prudence (most excellent Prince) by this days conditions, for which we
are come hither to treat with you, we hope will provide. Prince Alex. answers
the Agents.
To these his Excellency in a few words made answer, that willingly he accepted
of the treaty with Antwerp. And as he referred the valor and acts of his
soldiers unto Gods benignity, and his blessed mothers assistance; so the
Antwerpians ought to acknowledge, that all their forces, leagues with Cities
and Provinces, and succors from foreign Princes were in vain against the
power, and right of the legitimate Lord of the Low-countreyes. In stating the
conditions he would bury in oblivion the Amwerpians Delinquencies, for having
waged war against God and their lawful Sovereign: and incited others of the
Low Countries, as with an alarm from that strong hold, to defection; but
would rather have respect to his Majesty's clemency, and from thence would
moderate the chiefest of their conditions. And dismisseth them to three
Presidents.
In the interim he had appointed men of understanding and wisdom, and no ways
partial, with whom they might more freely confer. Therefore they should
depart to them, to treat of the articles and then he would deliver the Kings
mind, not in the worst sense. He had chosen for that purpose Pamaelio
Richardott, and Vandenburge, Presidents of the privy Council of Artois and
Mechlin: and committed every thing to their judgment and wisdom; To whom he
referred all things: except the Articles of obedience to the King and religion.
the Articles pertaining to obedience due to the King and religion only
excepted: which he with more then ordinary care as he had received an express
from his Majesty, reserved to himself; for when long ago his Excellency had
proposed it to the King, (thereby to make the Ant verpians more willing to
surrender) whether he should set a certain time to the Heretics, wherein to
dispatch their affairs, or to permit them so long until there might be hopes
of their better disposition and reducement; His Majesty made reply, The King
thus expresses his mind concerning religion.
that he should not grant an unlimited time, what hope or persuasion soever
there was of their reconciliation. Upon which subject, because he had often at
other times treated, I thought it best to insert one of the latest letters from
Spain, concerning this matter, part of which was written with his Majesty's
own hand. In every treaty or parley with Cities or Castles, that come into our
hands, let this be your first, and last regard, that in these places, the
Catholic religion be settled, without leave to the Heretics of professing or
exercising their sects or doctrines, in City or country; unless you grant
them some time for composing their affairs, and let that be limited:
concerning which matter, I absolutely command, that no dubious clause capable
of interpretation, or moderation be inserted that those may assure themselves,
who desire to live in our Belgium, to make choice either of the true worship of
the ancient Roman faith, or after their prescribed time is ended, forth with
to seek their habitation elsewhere. Which things if they be performed, I put
my confidence in the Almighty power, to whose honor and service this war has
for so many years been managed, with so great loss of blood, and expenses
that all things for the future will proceed fortunate; and that his heavenly
majesty, will out of his wonted providence, always so moderate our affairs,
that men by their happy success, may understand of what importance it is, to
put their confidence in the Divine goodness, and to prefer the service due to
him before all secular business. But if God by reason of our great offenses,
will have it otherwise, I think it better to spend all my Kingdoms for his
sake, then for any humane respect, to decline from this, if not a lucky,
doubtless a pious determination. And truly this firm purpose of his Catholic
Majesty was very apparent to be acceptable to God; for on the same day these
were written by the King, which was the seventeenth of August, on the same day
the Antwerpian agents at their meeting at Bevera, receiving their articles,
delivered up the City. When notwithstanding, when they begun to treat with the
Kings Commissioners, The Agents treat with the Presidents, they differ about
three articles.
the business of their reconciliation seemed to be very intricate, and would
go but slowly on. For they insisted immoveably on these three heads above
others. That religion, as then it was, might freely be exercised; that the
Castle now half down, might not be repaired; That no garrison of what nation
soever, might be admitted into the City. Yea, when they understood that the
Commissioners were not empowered to treat about religion, they told the Prince
of Parma they would proceed no further with them, unless they might have power
for that also. And Aldegund, Aldegund promises great matters, if liberty of
conscience be granted.
amongst other conferences, one time staying with his Excellency four whole
hours alone in private discourse concerning this article stuck not to affirm,
that upon that condition of freedom in religion, Zealand and Holland, yea all
the confederate Belgica might be drawn to the Kings obedience. And would take
it upon him, and was confident, for that authority which he had with the
Provinces, Put Prince Alex. discourse with him was wholly to the contrary.
shortly to produce a great benefit to both parties. But his Excellency utterly
dashing all hopes of liberty, and confusion in religion: whereby, as he said,
the Cities and Provinces divided into sects and factions, could neither live in
peace amongst themselves, nor with God, or their Princes Gods Deputies upon
earth; courteously admonished him, that they should consider the daily decay of
their forces, succors from France by reason of the troubles there, past all
hopes, the subtle delay of the English, the invincible power of the Catholic
King, not to be exhausted by any expenses nor tired out by war; and indirectly
he insinuated some things, which might be of great concernment for his own
private interest, with hopes of favor from his Majesty's clemency. And those
things he uttered before Aldegund with such eloquence, with such courage and
with words wholly dictated to him (as he after writ to the King) by Almighty
God, Aldegund is wonderfully taken with his discourse.
that Aldegund admiring the vigor of his discourse, professed after his
departure thence, he had often treated with many eloquent persons, but he
never met any more efficacious, and affable then the Prince of Parma: and that
with reason he might use that of Asdruball concerning Scipio, viz. that Prince
Alexander appeared far more admirable to him in presence, then fame had set
him out for his warlike actions. And indeed whether taken with the words and
civility of the Prince of Parma or wholly hopeless of supporting the siege any
longer, And is more forward for the surrender.
by little and little he made show that his mind was altered being more
propense to treat on the surrender. Moreover in a book, which afterward he set
forth, Yea in a book which afterward he set forth, he extolleth Alexanders
virtues, and the Kings cause,
when he had to the life extolled the deeds performed by Alexander Farneze,
his mercy toward the conquered, sanctity in keeping his Oath, and other
virtues pertaining to a General; amongst other things he added, that King
Philips subjects could not with a safe conscience take up arms against their
King. Which confession not rashly uttered in talk, but witnessed in writing,
he being a man of great authority among the States, and a grounded Calvinist,
was a great blemish to the confederates cause. And was therefore hated of the
confederates.
He thenceforth daily growing out of favor and hated by them, was not
afterward admitted to any. Government in the Commonwealth. But then the
Agents, and the Kings Commissioners often meeting together; The conditions
imposed upon the City at the surrender.
lastly, after some debates in the Prince of Parmas's presence, the article
concerning religion was in the first place confirmed; one, and that the ancient
Catholic profession being appointed to the Antwerpians, They were commanded to
reedify the Churches, which they had rased, and to restore the ejected families
of religious orders into the City into their own houses and possessions. Which
Article concerning religious orders, when the Agents would thus have penned it,
that those religious orders should be reduced into the City, which had had
their residence in Antwerp, in the Emperor Charles the fifths days; A deceit
discovered in them.
His Excellency understanding by that fraud, the Fathers of the society of
Jesus, whose assistance he chiefly made use of against the Heretics, to be
excluded, utterly rejected it, and would have all orders equally included. In
repairing the Castle, and in placing a garrison of Spaniards and Italians, from
whom the Citizens desired to be free, he dealt more favorably. Yet the
Article was thus: That the Prince of Parma should draw with him into the City a
garrison of well affected nations: and if the Hollanders and Zealanders were
reconciled to their Sovereign, the City should be exempt from the Castle, and
garrison for ever after; if not, he would provide for the safety of Antwerp
against the neighboring Zealanders and others. In the rest of the conditions
the Prince of Parma being very liberal, gave pardon in his Majesty's name to
the Antwerpians, of the high Treason committed against their King: restored to
the City its ancient privileges; granted the Heretics four years to tarry
in the City, to settle their affairs. And although he might with reason have
charged the City with the greatest part of the huge expenses laid out at the
siege, yet he was contented to exact only four hundred thousand Florens,
160000. Crowns.
(nor that to be paid all at once) for his soldiers pay. It was also agreed,
that the prisoners on both sides should be released though the Royalists had
more then the enemies, unless they had already covenanted for their ransom:
Tilinius only excepted, whose case although reserved to the King his
Excellency promised, to recommend him to his Majesty: and to effect, that as
some days before he had dismissed Lanoy into France, to be exchanged with Count
Egmont, so Tilinius should ere-long follow his father.

Whilst these, The articles are read in the City.
and other Articles (being in all twenty seven) were read by the Commissioners
returned to Antwerp in presence of the Magistrates and people with great
attention of all; there was suddenly heard a huge noise of Cannons from the
bridge on the Scheldt, and the adjoining forts, which still increased, when
many going out of the City, and looking from the banks and towers, reported
that a cruel battle was then fought at the Farnezian bridge, and upon the
banks and rampires of the River. And it being rumoured that the English
succors were arrived, and had set upon the Royalists, the Antwerpians are at a
stand about admitting the conditions.
And without doubt either the French or English succors were arrived: by whom
the Spaniards being suddenly engaged, and as unprovided, would not doubtless
long subsist against the fresh, and hardy enemy. Whereupon many of the people
verily believing it, as oftentimes HOPE and desire makes men credulous upon new
designs and encourage by those that were against the surrender, forthwith take
arms, and constipating the Commissioners, demand a longer time to deliberate
on the conditions, until they were certified by frequent messengers, one after
another, that there appeared no aid from France, or Navy from England: but that
it was a joyful and feigned combat of the Royalists. And one of them, Seeing
themselves deluded, they return again to hear the conditions.
a witty conceipted fellow, having informed himself more fully, affirmed that
no auxiliary navy was arrived from England, but that the Grecian fleet had
brought the golden Fleece from Colchos to the Prince of Parma. The occasion of
the mistake.
But they being thus deluded, and offended with the incendiaries, return
again with the same levity, as before they had broken off, to hear the
articles of their surrender. The solemnity of Alexanders receiving the golden
Fleece.
But not a few were drawn with a desire to see that military triumph,
celebrated in the royal Army for the solemnity of the Golden Fleece: which
Chain sent by his Majesty long before, Prince Alexander had deferred to
receive until this time, that now secure of the Antwerpian Victory, he might
enter the City more graced by that dignity. The description of that celebrity.
And the soldiers for their love, and reverence to their General, made all
things more stately: for armed companies ranged in Battalia at their posts,
were extended from the Camp at Bevera (where the Prince then resided) even to
Calloo, and from thence to the Scheldt and Bridge. The chief Commanders of the
Army placed themselves on the Bridge: the banks of the Scheldt, the Castles,
Rampires and ships, all glittered with armed Regiments. Saint Philips fort in
the head of the Bridge on Brabant shore was chosen to augment the pomp. To
which his Excellency moving from Bevera on horseback, accompanied by the chief
of the Nobility, and entertained by the way with shows of warlike skirmishes,
sometimes of horse, sometimes of foot, when he arrived at the bridge, which
resounded with the joyful Echo of shoutes and Trumpets, he was saluted with
a volley of Cannons without intermission thundering from the Castles, Forts and
ships. Having passed the bridge and entered the chapel of Saint Philps,
after Mass sung by Lodowick Barlamont Archbishop of Cambray, he put on the
collar of the Golden fleece, received from the hands of Count Mansfield, who
said, he represented the person of Octavio Dake of Parma and Piazenza in that
office, with whom about thirty nine years before, he was preferred to that
order by Charles the fifth. Then his Excellency departing thence, returned unto
the Camp at Bevera, and again all along the river-banks the roaring of
Candons, mixed with the exulting shoutes of the soldiers wishing all happiness
and prosperity to their General renewed the joy. And it was manifest to all,
that this Order was never by any Prince received with greater magnificence,
viz. in the midst of his Veterans, and so often victorious Regiments: upon the
admirable structure of the Bridge on the Scheldt: having subdued the most
potent City in all the Low countries, after a siege the most memorable that
ever was.

Prince Alexander was not as yet arrived at the Camp, 17. August. Alex.
receives the Commissioners coming to deliver up the City.
when he was met by the Antwerpian Commissioners, who (the Articles being
accepted of) came to render up the City. Whom his Excellency courteously
receiving, stayed them with him and sent the Prendents Richard^^t and
Vandenburge, with the Kings Herald into the City: to whom were joined Captain
Petro a Castro, Sanding some into the City to confirm and proclaim the
surrender.
whose office was to buckle on his sword, Didacus Escovario Sergeant Major of
Mondragonius Regiment, and Propertius Baroccius chief Engineer, to ratify the
conditions already agreed on, and to publish the surrender. These had
directions to view the City both within and without, and to make all things
secure against the coming of their Prince. And the conclusion of the peace
being heard at Antwerp, With great joy of the people, pulling down the Duke of
Alenzons arms, they set up the Kings.
the people entertain the Kings harbingers with great joy, they run up and
down the City, pull down the arms and pictures of the Duke of Alenzon, and
set up the King of Spaines: all things were with exquisite diligence prepared
against the Prince of Parma's arrival: all things from continual sorrow and
fear, were suddenly changed into mirth, sports, and preparation of joyful
shows. And Alex. coming is expected.
But his Excellency deferred to enter the City yet ten days. In which time
it is scarce credible, what a number of people from all parts of the
Low-countreyes, The concourse of strangers to see this triumph, and to view the
bridge, especially of the Antwerpians.
and adjacent places repaired thither. Some that they might be present at the
triumph of the Conqueror at his solemn entrance into the City: many to view
the fortifications of the Camp, and famed invention of the Farnezian bridge:
some to draw out in right and full proportion, the models or portraitures of
the works, which as it was reported, Coming out of the City to contemplate
Alex. works.
were speedily to be dismantled. But none more curiously beheld these things,
then the Antwerpian Commissioners; and those, who now having their minds no
less at liberty then their gates, came forth of the City: sometimes they
viewed the castles erected on the banks, then they admired the channel Parma,
and the Fort Perla: at the fabric of the bridge, they were even amazed, and
both hated, and yet praised the wonderful rarity of the work. But on
Covenstene causey, dreadful yet for the fresh blood, scattered limbs, and
relics of mangled bodies, they acknowledging their late loss, privately
lamented: and yet were contented to behold with their eyes. what their minds
detested. But Prince Alexander now ready to enter Antwerp, in the first place
removed the garrison soldiers from the opposite Haven in the head of Flanders,
HIS solemn entrance.
as also from Tilinius fort, and lastly from Antwerp it self, and sent them
all toward Zealand without their arms. Then he committed the charge of the
Catholic Army, who had received orders to meet at Stabroeck, to Vastins, in
place of Count Mansfield, who then was gone to look to his Regency of
Lucemburge. And out of his whole army his Excellency selected two thousand foot
divided into eight companies of Germans, and twelve of Walloones, armed with
pikes, Muskets, and carbines: and three troops of horse, one of Curaciers,
and two of Lanciers. 29. Aug.
And commanded them to stay at Bercheme a village of Brabant. He sent some
before to guard the ways.
He also appointed George Basta, with three hundred horse from Burgerhout, to
ride out and survey the way he was to pass. The next day marching with his
Court from the camp at Bevera, and having past the Scheldt, he sent before
part of the foot from Berchem into the City, under Licquius, who placed some of
them at Saint Georges gate, And the gates and chiefest streets of the City,
which they also call the Emperors; and divided the rest into several chief
places of the City, that by so many stations, lending a mutual assistance, as
it were joining hands, they might enclose Antwerp. So his Excellency would not
only have the conquered City; but the conquest it self in his own power.
These things thus ordered, the ways both within and without the City being
thronged with infinite people, the rest of his Excellencies attendance in great
state marched forward, the horse and foot, not so much for the gaudinesse of
apparel or armor, The aspect of the soldiers.
as (all of them being old select soldiers) for their martial looks, and
military severity, a gallant sight. Himself the greatest spectacle.
But Prince Alexander, now made famous with the Trophies of so many Provinces
and Cities subdued, attracted all men's eyes upon him, and as the ancients in
their triumphs had Ensigns, and pictures carried before them, so fame waited
on him with his titles, and prompted the cogitations of the spectatours: and as
the noise of his famous acts had represented him to their thoughts more then a
man so sought they more greedily to satiate their eyes now in beholding him
present. He was attended by these great Nobles: the Duke of Areschot, Casatane
Duke of Sermonett the Prince of Chimace, Count Egmont, the Marquesses of
Renthi, and Varambone, the Countess Aremberg. Charles Mansfield, Altapen and
others, especially Low Country men, for very few of the Spaniards, and
Italians were admitted, thereby to please the Antwerpians with this retinue,
and lastly with the troops of his lifeguard, whose Captains were Leo Lazarus,
Haller, and the Counts Nicelli, and Caecius: his Excellency arrived at Saint
Georges gate, He is received before the City gate^ by a Virgin.
where he was met by a Virgin in a habitt, and with Ensigns representing
Antwerp, as they use to shadow it. Who lighting from her triumphant Chariot,
with a company of other noble girls reverently saluted the Prince of Parma:
and delivered him a Golden key, she prayed the like happiness to his Nephew
now entering victour, as heretofore she had wished to Charles the fifth, who
made his first victorious entrance through that gate; Alexander courteously
receiving the gift, wore it before him fastened to the chain of the Golden
Fleece, And is welcomed with diverse arguments of joy through the City.
and through the whole City he observed not without admiration, the sudden
setting forth and expressions of public joy. For on the bridge Moere he saw a
beaked pillar of a wonderful height erected, with the staua's of Alexander of
Macedon, and that Roman Alexander placed thereon: and in other places diverse
sorts of Pageants, stately arches and artificial fireworks: to compose which
shows for pomp and state only, those very same, though heretofore so often
pernicious Engineers, did apply their inventions and hands: using the fragments
of the Machines a little before prepared for the War, for solemnizing of this
triumph, making their art obsequious, thereby to appease the Conqueror. Prince
Alexander, after he had a while beheld and commended these and other like
preparations, with all his attendance, hastened to the great Church of our B.
Lady. He went into the Church.
And there whilst Te Deum laudamus with music was solemnly sung, he offered
up his private devotions, and thanksgiving, which, And gave thanks to the B.
Virgin.
next to God he openly professed to the mother of God, FOR THAT THE EXPEDITION
BEING BY HER INSTINCT, UNDERTOOK, BY HER ASSISTANCE PROSPEROVSLY ACHIEVED, HE
AT LAST BE HELD HIS LADY, BY THE PIOUS AND PUISSANT ARMS OF THE CATHOLIC
KING, RESTORED TO HER OWN SEAT, FROM WHENCE SHE HAD SACRILEGIOVSLY BEFORE-TIME
BEEN BANISHED, WHOM THEREFORE HE DEVOVTLY HONORED; From thence he departed to
the Castle half down, and quite desolate: and passing through the Army, which
before the Castle was suddenly composed, as well of the soldiers sent thither
before, as of those who by his command repaired thither out of the City, he
made a little stand at the Castle gate: and calling to him the Colonels and
Captains, Then at his entrance into the Castle he spoke thus to his soldiers.
before he dispersed them through the City, made this short speech unto them.
By Gods great bounty and your valor, O fellow soldiers we possess Antwerp.
But that we may securely keep it, I have chosen you out of the whole Army, to
whose military discipline, but especially civility, and unoffensive
conversation with the Citizens, I might commit the safety of the City, so much
the more earnestly, as the Antwerpians were more stiff and resolved, not to
admit of garrison soldiers: for that they feared, if not open plundering
(though that also they expected;) at least continual contests and quarrels,
which their goods must daily redeem, and would daily occasion. I, that I might
remove that persuasion out of their minds, have engaged my faith. Nor as I
trust will my promise and hope be frustrate, having made this choice of
soldiers, whose commanders I know to be men careful of their own
reputations, and solicitous of my credit. Therefore it shall be your task, to
keep the soldiers within their limits and duties: and not to let pass
injuries and abuses against the Citizens, if any happen unpunished, but forth
with chastise them: that the Citizens may hear of the soldiers punishments,
before the commanders hear of the Citizens complaints. So shall concord, and a
well grounded allegiance be established in the City. Remember you live in the
very entrance of Zealand and Holland, whose castles may be seen, nay their
very words be almost heard from the walls of Antwerp. The Antwerpians will have
an eye thither, if they perceive themselves insolently treated at home by a
foreign soldier: WHO since always he is wont to be a grievance to cities but
then especially when newly conquered, as more near looking back on their late
former condition. Wherefore they will the more intolerably resent injuries from
the conquerers: and having not yet laid by their acient enmities, as if the
war were not yet ended, they will with little ado, resume their hostile
spirits. FOR Torches newly extinguished, will quickly take fire: I, as much as
concerns my self, will have a diligent care, that the glorious labors of the
Catholic Army be not frustrated by the licentiousness of some. Thus
premonished, Then he sent them into several parts of the City.
he distributed them into their several appointed parts of the City: and gave
orders that for some days, as if upon service, they should not lay by their
arms, until at the next convention having removed the Heretics, he should
create new Magistrates.

Whilst thus things passed with a continued gratulation for three whole days
at Antwerp, the Spaniards, The triumph of the Spaniards and Italians on the
bridge, in honor of their General.
and Italians, when they had not admittance into the City, yet at least meant
some way to participate of the common joy, whereof themselves were chiefest
authors: they therefore conspired together with such preparation as time would
permit, to solemnize a joyful triumph for their General upon the Scheldt: and
knowing that the bridge was within three days to be dismantled, they
determined to pass over with triumph and pomp, that Machine yet standing: and
in the interim they chose S. Mary's fort at the head of the bridge, as it were
for their capitol. Wherefore with wonderful alacrity, cutting down what shrubs
and trees were at hand, they erect triumphant works and arches on the bridge:
adorn the sides and battlements with bows: strew the passage with leaves, and
lastly hang on the boughs emblems and verses, such as amongst soldiers could
be composed in praise of Prince Alexander. Then with garlands of green branches
on their heads, marching orderly over the bridge, and at every arch joyfully
discharging their Muskets they enter St. Mary's. You would think they had had
a president hereof from the Macedons, the other Alexanders soldiers, who after
their victory over Nyse, on a hill near to the City, were disposed to
merriment, and crowned with wreathes of ivyes and vines lopped from the wood, (
Alexander the great first admiring, and afterward commending this their new
kind of pomp, Not unlike to the solemnity of Alexander of Macedons soldiers.
with joyful dances on the top of the hill celebrated solemn ceremonies to
the god of the wood. Yea, the General himself acting his part also with the
dancers: at the last invited his Army to a magnificent feast. Nor was this
epulary appendix wanting to the fore mentioned gratulation of the Spaniards and
Italians. For whilst they render thanks with a joyful consort of music and
voices, to the mother of the God of Hosts, Alexander comes thither from Antwerp.
in her Castle, they received unexpected tidings that Prince Alexander with a
train of the nobility was advancing from the other part of the bridge. For he
having intelligence how much his soldiers sought to honor him, being
exceedingly taken with their ingenious good will and affection toward him;
this warlike man omitted not, And the day after makes them a feast.
both to grace them with his presence, and the day after with a sumptuous
banquet to augment their joy. And indeed it was a spectacle worth the seeing,
to behold the Army feasting upon the Scheldt, The banquet on the Bridge.
tables all along the bridge as far as from Brabant to Flanders sumptuously
furnished: to see the Duke of Areschott, the Marquesses of Renthi, Vastius, and
Varambone serving up meat: Charles Count Mansfield, the Prince of Chimace,
Maurique, Cajatane, and Leva, all eminent persons and chief Commanders filling
them wine. When in the mean time all rung with joyful shouts of the soldiers,
wishing life and victory to their General Prince Alexander. Thus the bridge,
The taking down of the Bridge.
the day after that solemn banquet, adorned as it was with arches of green
boughs, garlands and emblems, with joyful expressions and exultation was taken
down. And it was but fit, that the exequies of this victorious Machine over
the enemies should be performed with triumph. The materials were given to
Baroc. and Plato.
Most of the wood and Iron were by his Excellency given to the Architects of
it, Baroccius and Plato. But in Spain (for the joy of that success contained
not it self within the Low Countries only) the news of this victory was with
general gratulation of the Cities received: certainly the King, His Majesty's
joy for the taking of Antwerp.
as Granvell writes, was so transported with joy, that the ancient Courtiers,
who always had been in his company, affirmed, they never saw his Majesty,
either for the battle of St. Quintins, or for the navall fight at Lepanto, or
at the conquest at the Tersera Islands, to have expressed the like content, as at
the letters of taking Antwerp. And I have heard from a person very intimate at
Court, that the King, the same night he received Prince Alexanders letters,
could not contain himself, but got out of bed, and went privately to his
daughter Isabellas's chamber, Signified to his daughter.
whom he dearly loved, and knocking at the door, uttered these two wordse,
ANTWERP IS OURS, and then departed. And verily by those letters, which I have
seen, written by his Majesty's own hand, in exquisite high terms beyond his
usual custom, to express his thanks to Prince Alexander, it is very evident
that his joy was excessive. For he was of a settled opinion, that Zealand and
Holland, would at last follow the example and fate of Antwerp: and so all the
Netherlands would soon return to their own Princes obedience. And it was the
opinion of many, that the Low Countries would turn to the King.
And when Idicquesius resident for the Low-countreyes in Spain, gave letters
to Charles Coloma, a famous warlike man, then ready to depart for the
Low Countries, it is reported that he said to him; he might go, though
ere-long he would return, for no doubt but the Low Countries war would soon
be ended by the Prince of Parma. But his Excellency in the mean while applied
himself to settle the affairs of Antwerp. Alex. takes care of the Governnment
of the City, both civil and sacred.
And choosing new Magistrates, he created Champine Governor of the City, and
Werp of the garrison. He sent also for the Archbishop of Mechlin, to take care
of the Church and Clergy: and the fathers of the society of Jesus to instruct
the youth in learning and true religion, shutting up the schools of the
Heretics. Then having ordered some other things for the good government of the
City; his next care was to reward his soldiers labors. Going therefore to
Stabroeck, and mustering his men, he gave them their pay, He gives pay to his
soldiers.
a great part of the army having much arrears due to them. But if Captain or
Officer, nay any of the common soldiers, had performed any notable exploit,
such as he thought they had merited a greater reward, And requests of the King
rewards for some of his chiefest soldiers by name.
he writ into Spain, and making a particular catalogue of their names,
recommended them to his Majesty's liberality, to be further honored. All
their names, whose famous acts and victories Alexander proposed to the King:
with recital of how many years they had served in the wars, what and how many
wounds they had received if I should in this part of my history insert, it
would no doubt be grateful to that warlike nation. And verily, were it not an
immense labor, those noble and military spirits deserved to have their valor
and Alexanders affection toward them enrolled to posterity. This I will say in
brief, there was not any one of the chief Commanders, And prevails.
whom the King did not either advance to the order of the Golden Fleece, or to
some order of Spanish Knights: or gave not some more honorable place in the
Army, or else made not Governor of some Castle in Italy, or at least did not
increase his yearly revenue. So far did he condescend to Prince Alexanders
requests, Nor permits any to be rewarded by the King under his deserts.
that when his Excellency had taken notice, that in the donative catalogue sent
into the Low Countries, Camillus a Monte Colonel, and Nicholas Basta, Captain
of a troop of horse, were not remunerated proportionably to their deserts: and
had therefore acquainted the King of their daily and faithful service: and what
for the one his Uncle Chiapino Vitelli, and what for the other his father
Demetrius had merited, having both served in the Austrian wars forty years;
his Majesty with new and more satisfactory letters, according to Prince
Alexanders desire, honored them both according to their merits and worth Of
such consequence it is, to be a General of an Army, who taking part with his
soldiers in their labors, can judge of their travells: as he himself is by
his Prince esteemed for the opinion of his valor.

But this muster at Stabroeck was not without some mutiny on the other side the
Scheldt, THE Walloones do mutniy.
occasioned by the distribution of the soldiers pay, so MONEY whether had, or
wanting, is still cause of sedition. Those soldiers that staid in the forts at
Caloo on Flanders side, 20. October.
being most of them walloones, having intelligence that at Stabroeck the
Spaniards and Italians had their pay, out of the money lately come into the
Camp, persuaded themselves they should receive their debentures, For their pay
not equally nor nor totally discharged,
for all the time they had served in the Wars. But when they saw but two
pays, and two coats apiece only offered to every man; at first they were much
dejected, then they begun to despise so vile a reward. Nor wanted there
incendiaries to exasperate the seditious. And by one incendiary,
And whereas they requested but pay something proportionable to their labors
was it fit at the conquest of so rich a City, that in place of ten or twenty
pays, they should silently sit down with two only? what other victory might
be expected for soldiers, worn out with age in the wars having their bodies
weakened with wounds; in which they might yet place their latest hopes? If for
pretense of civility the soldiers were restrained from plunder of that hostile
City, having deserved it in the highest degree; why is not justice, and the
right of war supplied otherwise? To the Spaniards it was already, who having
received full pay, only felt the fruits of the victory So it is now adays, the
Belgians fight, the Spaniards conquer: and how ever the die of war run, the
Belgians still pass for conquered. The seeds of sedition thus sown at Caloo,
They are more provoked.
furiously spread through the rest of their quarters on the bank of Scheldt:
but yet no further, then to extrude the Kings treasurers and such of the
commanders as stood averse from the fact: for neither did they choose them an
Electo, contenting themselves with the Common Council of the officers of every
company, and those that were most forward; but were also highly offended with
the Agents sent from the next garrison of the Holanders, Yet remained their
General and King.
courted them to a revolt, whom they therefore rejected not without threats;
and openly professed to stand faithful to the Prince of Parma, and the
Catholic party: and that what military virtue they had in them, as their
adversaries had experience they had some, should still stand against the enemy,
as long as they had a life to lose, or sword to draw. Which answer moved
Alexander, not ignorant of it. Whereby Alex. being more pacified.
And whereas at the first notice of that mutiny, he had intended to reduce them
by famine: and therefore had commanded some colors of foot and horse of
Spaniards and Italians, to guard the country of Wasia, that no provision
should be brought from thence into the Walloone quarters; yet he thought it
not amiss to deferr it a day or two. And using gentler remedies, he sent the
Marquess of Renthi, an ancient commander of the Walloones to Caloo: to tell
them how much they were deceived and inform them that the Spaniards had
received no more pay then other nations. Sent to show them their mistake:
And though they had, yet ought they to consider, that the money came from
Spain: and an externe soldier wants many things in a strange country, which
the inhabitants and natives have ready at home. But they were not moved.
But Renthies words were not regarded by the raging and disagreeing soldiers
destitute of a Commander. Besides Werp, Governor of the Antwerpian garrison,
certified Prince Alexander, that he had notice that some were sent from Caloo
to Antwerp, covertly to communicate their designs with the Walloone
Presidiaries: And that there were some already heard to threaten they would not
accept of pay unless they might have all their arrears. But most as yet were
free from the infection. Nevertheless it greatly perplexed his Excellency,
lest, Asex. fearing lest they should conspire with Walloone soldiers at
Antwerp.
if the soldiers should raise any tumults in the City, the Antwerpians should
now believe it for certain to be the plot they always suspected, laid
beforehand by the General. Wherefore with all expedition calling Count
Arembergs German regiment from Burgerhout to Antwerp, By several inventions
provides for the Cities safety.
under color of sending them to Calloo, appointed some Spaniards to appear
before the walls; he himself with a troop of Epirots entered the City: And gave
an express, that the walloones who were to keep guard that night in the
castleyard should keep it els-where, (for his fear was lest all the soldiers
in the City meeting there should join themselves, and presuming of the
opportunity of the Castle and artillery, should begin the mutiny. Then placing
the Arembergians before the Castle, instead of the walloones, he fitly
prevented all occasion of the ill-affected Presidiaries (who were but few)
meeting together, or raising any tumults. And in the morning without any
further delay, to try their intentions, he caused the assigned pay to be
offered them. And forces the seditious to return to obedience.
Which they, some dissembling, most of them not conscious, and all being
wonderfully pacifyed accepted. Nor had the mutiny on Flanders coast any other
effect: for provision being stopped from VVasia, and commerce with the
Antwerpians cut off, the tenth day after, having first asked and obtained
pardon, they returned to their obedience and civility. Some of them being put
to death.
Notwithstanding four of the chief incendiaries, but upon some other
pretended crime, which upon inquiry was not wanting, were put to death of the
Antwerpian garrison, with whom no treaty of pardon had passed, Or degraded.
two Captains and two others, who had been sent from Calloo to sow the
sedition amongst the soldiers and these two were hanged at Antwerp, but the
two Captains, for that the crime was not totally proved against them, being
degraded from their Captains places, were sent to fight in Freezland at their
own charges.

But the Princes expedition in preventing the sedition, THE repairing of
Antwerp Castle.
both gained him much love from the Antwerpian Magistrates, and caused a
greater propensnesse to his design, then in agitation. For the garrison
soldiers quartering in the Antwerpians houses, were now thought burdensome
guests: and the Citizens, The people desire it.
to exonerate themselves of that unwonted grievance, began to wish the
reedifying of the Castle. But the Magistrates who regarded the public more
then every man's private interest, But not the Magistrates, who yet being
persuaded by Alexanders servants.
stood out. Yet Champine Governor of the City, and Cosmus Count Masius, a
Courtier very intimate with the Prince: and one of his privy-Councell, very
opportunely began to treat with them, and upon occasion beginning to discourse
of the Citizens desires, which if neglected, it was doubtful, they would
break out into a sedition: and also promising the Citizens their assistance to
his Excellence for the reparation of the Castle, the Magistrates minds began
somewhat to alter: until they also partly pacifyed by the Princes late favor,
and partly moved with the conference, and fit reasons of those I spoke of, And
obliged by his benefits, referr the matter to his pleasure.
went to Alexander, and rendering him thanks for saving the City from a tumult,
they did not omit to make mention of the restoration of the Castle, wholly
referring it to his wisdom. Which by much how more grateful it was to
Alexander, so much the more he slighted it; pretending and not without just
cause, the want of money, not only for that fabric, but winter now drawing
on, for repairing the banks of the Scheldt, and breaches of the Rampires, at
last they divided the charges, the City and adjacent Villages promising their
assistance to repair the River-banks, and Rampires: and the Prince of Parma
reserving part of the imposed fine toward the repairing of the Castle; so the
Castle the ninth of November, the eighth year after its former ruin, began to
be repaired, Antwerp not refusing a bridle: and so great a Bucephalus, The
Castle is redified. 9. November.
by the strength and wisdom of Alexander being tamed. And indeed the work soon
went on with wonderful celerity, for both the old foundations were useful,
and the near adjoining houses, which had been built of the ruin of the
defaced Castle, being pulled down, the same stones served again for the work.
His Excellence as soon as the Castle was habitable, drew into it a garrison of
Germans, A garrison of Germans was placed in it.
not of walloones as was supposed, in pretense as displeased at their late
sedition: But in very deed that he might at last bring in the Spaniards, and
to that purpose more easily remove the Germans being Externs, then the native
Belgians. In which he also had a regard, that none of the Low Country Nobility
should be made Governor of the new Castle, Alex, reserves the title of
Governor to himself.
he therefore declared himself Governor thereof, having already with
himself designed Mondragonius for that place. Whom then he made over-seer of
the work: and at his departure from Antwerp, created him his Vice-Governour: So
bringing him in by several intervalls, and as it were degrees to that Office,
and avoiding by that silent and unperceptible progress, Afterward by little
and little, and unperceptibly he gives it to Mondragonius, and at last brings
in the Spaniards. The first designing of this Castle.
a great part of their discontent, at last he openly declared him Governor of
the Castle: and removing the Germans thence, he brought in the Spaniards, the
City not daring to contradict it, and rather inclining to Alexander; And thus
Antwerp Castle designed first by Margaret of Austria Duchess of Parma, then
built by the Duke of Alva, afterward defaced by the Prince of Grange, was at
last with the expenses of seventy thousand crowns, The building Ruin, and
restitution of it.
by Alexander son to Margaret repaired. But before the Castle was finished
(for that was some months after) his Excellency with his Court departed to
Bruxels, Alex. with hi. Court removes to Bruxels.
the ancient seat of the Princes of Brabant, and the Governors of the
Low-countreyes, having thrice changed his abode: for setting out from Namure,
he removed his Court and Council to Mons in Haynolt, from thence to Tournay in
Flanders, and lastly to Bruxels in Brabant, still providing for himself new
seats by new Victories.

FINIS.

