THE CHVRCH, The proper subject of the new COVENANT.

Delivered first in Three Sermons at Rochester.

Afterward contracted into two, and delivered again at Gravesend.

Together with a Covenant to walk with God.

By WILL: SANDBROOKE, LL: B: Ox. and Minister of Margrets Rochester.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Philemon Stephens. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE Committee of the County of K^nt.
Honored
GIve me leave to bespeake you in a word of an Apologetick preface for this my
intrusio^ upon your goodness. After sixteen years residence in Oxford, and
many years foreign travells, upon my return in these tumultuous times not
being able to enjoy my own charge in Oxford I betook my self to sea
employment under the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, and after two
voyages my lot for residence fell into Rochester, and called to Saint
Margarets, have there two years exercised my ministry comfortably. Here after
my dispatch of the whole doctrine of the new Covenant, I let fall some
conclusions in satisfaction to doubts now agitated in the world, whereof the
first was the subject of this new Covenant, to wit, the Church, which
unexpectedly were not so clear to some as I intended and wished for. After I
contracted their largeness into this model, and delivered them in Graves-end.
Exceptions were taken by such as heard them not delivered, but by report, and
the Author thereof defamed, with what bitterness let others that heard it
judge. I was therefore required for my own vindication, and such noble Friends
as had cast a gracious aspect upon me to publish them, which here I now humbly
present to your censure and patronage, who now (blessed be God) are the happy
instruments of the peace of the County. I have not to my best memory omitted
nor added a material passage or sentence, except the examination of the terms
in Scripture signifying a Church as V. T. (...) and (...) which the Septuagint
for the most part render by (...) though sometimes the various readings of
Aquila, Symachus, and Theodorus gives that by (...). The N. T. use still (...)
which the Syriack translation express by the former word (...) or (...)
familiar also in the very same sense with all the Orientals, so that I inferred
as a general issue from the Etymon of the word, A Church was a collected body
called together in the business of the Lord.

This is the substance of all was omitted from the first delivery, which I have
not inserted in this Copy, because I did believe the excepter would not trouble
himself with any examination of the cryticisme. My spirit I confess has ever
been averse to publish or to have been taken notice of this way, I am too
conscious of my own weakness and insufficiencies to seek to make a noise: my
inclination to obscurity and retiredness is well known, and a mean condition
(if a settled one) in privacy to apply my thoughts to study has been always my
strongest intentions. Other things of greater importance (in literature I
mean) I have prepared, which did providence see good to give me a settled
condition (wherein I might compose my thoughts to a settled sixtnesse, and
center my self in some rest to follow my study, the greatest outward mercy I
long for and value in this life) I should humbly beg your patronage and
protection. In the interim until Divine providence shall effect so great mercy
to me: give me leave to beg your patronage and protection of this rude
draught ((...)) of the nature of a Church) and let me subscribe my self to
be ever really found,

Your most humble and faithful servant in the Lord, Will: Sandbrooke.
From my study in Rochester, Nov. 20. 1646.
To the Right Worshipshipfull the Major, Jurats, and Inhabitants of Graves-end.
Brethren,
YOu may remember I was engaged to your reverend Pastor for an exchange upon
necessary occasions: these conclusions I then delivered for substance to you,
and I know not a material word varied. You know how it was calumnized, and
with what bitterness interpreted by him who heard it not, upon what grounds
he proceeded, I leave it to his own serious thoughts. As they are and were I
commend them to you, to judge whether the things are censurable or no. I must
acknowledge your patience and candid acceptance of them then, and engage my
self now and ever,

Your servant in the work of the Lord, Will: Sandbrooke.
Rochester, November. 20. 1646.
A Breife Summary of Three Sermons preached at St. Margarets RoCHESTER.
EPHESIANS. 1.22, 23.
HAving you know at several times declared unto you the whole doctrine of the
new covenant, my next business I acquainted you should be the examination of
3. grand Quaeries: And these I digested into this order thus.

1. What is the proper adequate and formal subject of all this great mercy of
the Covenant.

The Church.

2. What persons are capeable to come within this condition of the Church.

1. Believers internally called. 2. Infants by the outward seal of Baptism.
3. What law or rule the Church is regulated and walks by, whether the Law or
the Gospel, or both.

These things being dispatched I shall proceed to satisfy two doubts to wit.

1. How the conversation of a believer, or a member of a Church may be steered
to an holy evennesse.

2. What are the manifold impediments and hindrances from

1. Our own deceitful spirits. 2. The stratagems of hell.
SECT. I.
THe first grand Quaerie I began with to wit, The nature of a Church.

Wherein because I found the business in these tumultuous days sorely
perplexed with contentions and difficulties on the contrary parties, I proceeded
in a middle course if it were possible to take off the violence of both.

1. The one party running violently against the other, condemning its adversary
of formality, superstition, and almost idolatry in tying up their devotions to
saying of prayers, set forms and places, running circle of stinted duties
without life and power, and without expectation of any such things from Christ,
together with a mixture of profane and godly. A speckled Bird.

2. The other party running as strongly in a violent contrary channel
condemning the other for schism, hereses, sedition, faction, novelty,
separation and division, making breaches and fomenting discords, opening a way
to the unsetling of the peace and unity of the Church.

In this so sad a condition, I steared a course as near as I could: betwixt
these two desperate rock, and yet unexpectedly struck upon each till, I had
almost splitt again.

1. The one charging me with too much liberty, given to schism and private
conventicles. 2. The other accusing me with too much binding up and
streigthning them in the Privileges of Believers granted to the Church by
Christ himself.
In this unexpected exigent, finding a storm coming, (and we have tumults
enough already,) though I was warned by a faithful friend, that it would not
be seasonable, my improvidence left me in a snare.

I must acquaint you my resolution is, to desist from the prosecution, until
the wisdom of the State shall set up a way which is Uniform, and then I hope
I may prosecute without disturbance.

In the interim because what has been delivered is snuffed at, by some whom I
scarce believe understood (if heard) it, I shall therefore acquaint you with
two things.

1. The conclusions prosecuted already in this business.

2. The conclusions remaining yet behind in the nature of a Church which I will
only name.

These I will lay down as principles, which must be as a firm basis to all
deductive conclusions in the business of a Church, so that

1. I shall adhere to them as of eternal verity.

2. I shall yet willingly submitt to a full conviction of any error deduceable
from them, if cleared to me, and humbly correct it.

These things being supposed by way of Appology, I come now to my business.

EPHESIANS. 1.22, 23.
And has put all things under his feet: and gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church.

Which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.

AFter a short Analycitall resolution of the body of the Text, I inferred
diverse conclusions, whereof the first was;

God the Father has given to Christ by special donation, These. 1.
privilege and grants the power, interest, and propriety, and in succession of
time, the Actual possession of a Church.

This proposition I laid down as leaving the rest to the expository way for
forenoones in my exercise, only to clear it I laid down some concluosins
which were the same in substance, and run parallel to this in this form.

1. Isa. 32.1. Psalm. 2.6.
God the Father has invested Christ in the propriety and possession of a
Kingdom.

2. Romans 8.2.
This kingdom in order to its subjects was endowed with 3. grand privileges.

1. Romans 8.12.
Exemption from the curse of any Law.

2. From the Tyranny of any power to enthrall or engage them to obedience
except of Christ.

3. Col. 2.21.
From observation of any ordinances in point of absolute subjection, but what
himself has instituted to them.

Whence I called in to aid one clear and confessed conclusion.

The Kingdom of Christ and the Church of Christ are in substance the same
thing.

So that in issue, if Christ has been enthroned and established in a
kingdom, ergo also in a Church. But Christ has been enthroned and
established in a Kingdom, by the conclusions, ergo the sequel is easy from
the last conclusion thus, the Kingdom of Christ and his Church are the same in
substance. ergo. If Christ have a Kingdom he must have a Church also.

The maine quaeriethen to be examined thus.

What this Church of Christ is.

After examination of the Terms, incident to this business in the old and new
Testament, I concluded.

A Church or the kingdom of Christ is a combination, or confaederacy of
faithful persons, meeting together in a joint consent to walk with Christ,
and to enjoy communion with him; and amongst themselves in all his ordinances.
I cannot see but this description of a Church agrees with the National
Provincial, and Parochial Church of England unless we suppose intended and
studied hypocrisy in receiving the Gospel.


In this I observed, these distinct conclusions, fully to clear the business.

The members of this combination are faithful persons, Concl. 1.
or actual believers by profession.

This was made clear in reason thus, Christ being a living head, all that come
to him are also quickened, for the cause being put the effect must follow, and
we live by faith in Christ ergo.

The members of a Church are living members or believers.

Thus reason gave attestation fully and clearly, 19. Art of the church of Eng.
Agni. 3. q. 8. Ar. 3. ad 3. Bell. to 2 c. 2. p. 271.
so Scripture also, Esaias. 26.2.6. Acts. 2.40.41.

This first conclusion made good, the 2o. is.

2. These believing persons join together in a mutual combination or joint
consent to be a Church.

The reason is from proportion, a common wealth joins together by consent
under one head, to make a body politic; and the members of a natural body,
by one Spirit of animation constitutes the whole. But the Church is in
proportion a natural and politic body. Bell. ibid. Act. 19.
Ergo. Iere. 50.4. Acts. 11.21.22.

Thus this 2. conclusion cleared, the 3d. was.

3. This voluntary and joint combination of Believers, is to give themselves up
wholly to walk with Christ.

The reason I assigned was, because in this combination they joined themselves
wholly to Christ, and gave themselves totally to him. Ergo. Live and walk with
him. Iere. 50.5. Acts. 2, 42.

And here the starting of one doubt has caused all this dust, and made such a
misconstrued interpretation of things.

Is this combination by joint consent, Quest.
so necessary to a Church, that it is not sufficient for every particular
believer to give himself up to Christ to walk with him, but a society must
join in it?

Because herein the business did pinch, give me leave to give you a a breife
account of what propositions I laid down in the same words, and then I Will to the
rest.

1. Every believer after calling, is engaged to bring over his Spirit to an
universal resolution, and answerable execution of walking with Christ.

The reason was given, because every member is, or ought to be, at the whole
disposition of the head, and subordinat to it. But etc. Ergo. 1 Cor. 6.20.
Psalm. 119.106. This first particular conclusion, the second was.

2. This particular resignation of any believer thus to Christ makes him an
actual member of the Catholic Church of Christ which is only one.

The reason given in this case, it made them of the body of Christ, as by a
special act of faith. Romans 12.5. 1. Cor. 10.16. 1. Cor. 10.12.17.

The second particular proposition thus done.

3. There follows after this an actual union and visible combination of the
same person with other members, which collected body make up a visible society
of believers.

This is properly joining to a particular visible Church, and the reason is
from the very construction, of the Terms, and the manifold places of
Scripture. Acts. 9.28. and 5.13. and 20.17.

And this is the same with our parishes, or parochial congregations and
combinations, to worship Christ and to walk with him. Art. 19. Prop. 2.
Preface to the Catechism in the Common Prayer. B.

So that hence it will be safe I suppose, to infer.

1. Such a collected body or congregation, so united is a particular visible
Church.

And from thence also I inferred as a second conclusion necessary to the
business.

2. 1 Cor. 1.2
Though the catholic Church of Christ be but one, yet there are diverse
particular Churches, as Parochial, National, Provincial or the like.

3. Act. 16. p. 2. Romans 16.4 Gal. 1.2.
Every person so joining himself to that combination, is properly a member of
that particular visible Church distinct from other Churches.

From whence the maine business, wherein the difficulty seemed highest, and
caused the most violence, was in a third maine conclusion.

3. The members of a Church, or a certain number of Believers may further
confaederat amongst themselves by a bond or covenant to a close walking with
Christ.

And yet not break fellowship or communion with the body, congregation, or
particular parrish, or Church whereof they are members.

This because I observed it offended both sides against my intention to either,
I did explain it and deliver the same thus.

SECT. I.
I Mean it thus, It is a lawful, and in some sense a necessary act for
believers of acquaintance, or relation to join in a compact or agreement
amongst themselves, by way of covenant to walk with Christ, and to build up
each other, in a mutual communication of their experience and gifts in the
way of Christ, Heb. 3.13.
for mutual consolation in the Gospel.

SECT 2.
YET I added further to explain my self, that such confaederacie, compact and
agreement should not cause them to separate, or to break fellowship with the
whole congregation, (for indeed the whole congregation should join) but hold a
correspondency with the rest in the public ordinances, in such places as is
appointed by authority; for such assemble that so they may walk in order and
peaceablenesse.

The reason of this my assertion, was removing that which is the grand
argument, which caused the separation, and division.

A mixture of believers and unbeleevers, (say they) in any ordinance pollutes
the ordinance.

To this I then answered in sum to the argument.

1 The unfitness of any person in an ordinance, does not necessarily prejudice
the same ordinance to a believer.

2. Nor does it altogether detract the effectual presence of Christ from
believers.

I mean thus, that for as much as that infallible Spirit of discerning, does
not now abide in the Church: who is positively anunbeleever, that we may
unreservedly conclude such a person, (though professing with his mouth to
believe) is yet in the truth and reality of things is (...) it does not I say
prejudice the ordinance to a believer.

For indeed I grant, where there is such an absolute inspection into, and
unreserved conjunction of the spirits of men, that we know their hearts and
frame of their Spirits, it were utterly unlawful to hold fellowship with them
that are unbeleevers.

But now where no such infallibility can be supposed (as is our case) I
conceive the ordinance is not prejudised, for in the former case of manifest
conviction we are partakers of other men's sins, in this not. And I conceive
the case of Alexander Hymeneus and Philetus -- cunning Hypocrites in an
Apostolical Church, 2. Tim. 2.15.
did not disband the congregation, nor did Christ deny his Church to them. So
that however it be true that Christ walks amongst the Seven Golden
Candelsticks all of pure Gold; yet even in those Churches there were Heretical
Doctrines, unbeleevers, yet the Church disbanded not: but a command was given
to the Angel in the name of the Church for an ejection.

Once more for Dependence upon the Congregation.

I conceive those Churches spoken of in several houses, to be but members of
some full and complete congregation, or Church in Rome or else where.

My reason I laid down thus, forasmuch as,

1. In so small a company as a family, all the ordinances of Christ could not
have a full course which is essential to a Church, in the very resolution of
Episcopal, Presbyteriall, and Congregationall Churches.

2. Every officer could not have a complete and entire place and power, to
execute that authority, Christ had bequeathed to a Church.

So that in issue I did conclude in this, from first to last in these two
propositions.

1 Though one or more Families, or diverse Persons, may join in confederacy to
walk with Christ.

2. Yet their conjunction and fellowship with that congregation or Church, into
which they are admitted, whether you will call it parochial or congregationall,
ought to be inviolable, where the ordinances of Christ have cheerful latitude
of extention.

This was the sum of what was then delivered in these things, in which I did
understand the exception did arise on both sides, and now let wisemen judge.

The third conclusion, in the desmition being dispatched, the Fourth followed
thus.

4. Con. 4.
The end of this confederacy of believers into a Church in giving themselves
entirely up to Christ.

SECT 1.
TO enjoye a special and effectual communion with Christ.

For, for this purpose they give themselves up to him, and are joined with him;
now to what purpose is union and fellowship, except it be for communion and
participation, see 1 Cor. 1.9.

Now to this I added as a consectary and issue.

SECT. II.
THis fellowship and Communion was also a spiritual and reciprocal communion
with the members of the Church amongst themselves.

The ground of this conclusion I told you was, because, 1. they every one
sympathize in breathing as it were the same life of Christ, and 2. they have
the same spirit of Christ: ergo spiritual communion, must be sensibly raised in
their spirits, when each Act amongst them is nothing but a beam of the same
glory of CHRIST dwelling in them, Esaias 44.5. Acts 2.46.

Now as a medium by which all the efficacy of this communion should be poured
out upon them, and enjoy an effectual and special energy in Christ's communion
with them I laid down.

3. This fellowship and Communion in its true spiritual vigor and efficacy
with Christ, and amongst themselves, is in the exercise, use, and power of his
own holy Ordinances.

The reason is, John 14.22. Cant. 1.7.8.
he intending thus to manifest himself to them, and not to the world, sets out
limits and bounds where he will show himself, Isa. 56.7. Acts 9.31. Isa 25.6.

And thus was that fourth conclusion finished, and with it the work of that
time. There was yet a fifth conclusion in this description of a Church, which I
did omit for want of time, only naming of it, and reserving its prosecution for
this occasion. But being prevented, and loving my own peace, I shall only name
it again.

5. This communion that a Church enjoys with Christ and Believers amongst
themselves in his Ordinances,

Is maintained by assembling themselves together to communicate in such
ordinances, as Christ will show his glory upon them, 1 Cor. 14.23. and 16.1.2.
Art. Chapter En. 19.

And see now how it fell out, in this very point rests all the difficulty, as it
must be explained, which in the general is confessed as true on all hands, yet
what my particular thoughts and judgment was, I never yet spoke word, yet
these men on both sides would needs tell me what I would say, when in truth I
knew not fully my self. Yet Brethren for quietness and peace sake, I Will lay
down some things in general, waving difficulties, that you may guess which
way my thoughts tend.

1. All Believers and every member ought to frequent and assemble to that place
which is appointed for the meeting of the congregation in the use of Divine
Ordinauces publicly.

This only I name as confessed on all hands, and therefore in the next place,

2. Every family of Believers ought after public ordinances in the Church or
congregation, to assemble together for recognition, conference, mutual
assistance in what has been publicly done, and the use of such Ordinances as
are proper to them.

These two propositions, no man I know, if taken in this general sense so much
as sticks at. Only if I should add one glance more, it may be it would
startle: yet I hope not offend, especially if taken as it is intended by me,
I Will venture upon good natures, and lay it down in sum thus.

Many grand sticklers and contenders for an universal outward conformity
(which I shall for ever supplicate the throne of grace for us, coming nearest
to a state of glory) Are the most peccant and defective in the main business,
to wit sensible and quickening communion with Christ, which is the maine end of
those Ordinances, and the Saints or Believers general conformity to them.

Brethren, I would demand from these eager spirits, whether it has not been
the practice of this and former ages to terminate their devotion in a circular
course of coming to Church -- reading or hearing a chapter with the Minister,
turning down leaves at Chapter and verse -- things I know good and ought to
be done; yet when it is manifestly apparent this terminates all, and they look
no further but only to the exercise of the body, which profits not, nor see any
thing of the power of Christ shining out in strength in their Ordinances, I
would demand whether

1. These things are not useless in our relation to Christ in them.

2. This be not to profane and pollute that, which he has ordained to
communicate and show himself by to his people?

3. Condemnation will not be advanced hereby?

Brethren, these things I only propose without reflection upon any man's
particular, let his own conscience judge.

Whether this method had not in the days of yore eaten out the power of
godliness, and left the body of religion an empty carcass.

But I do but name this doubt obiter, and by the bye. I must yet crave leave
and a little patience to insert a third conclusion in this business of
assembling or meeting, least I should be accused of bauking or dissembling the
maine. For I expect to hear of it on both sides the head, take it thus:

3. It is lawful for Christians or Believers of several families in a Town,
Parish, or Country, to meet together to confer and examine truths
delivered, to communicate each others experience for mutual consolation and
edification in the way of Christ.

This Brethren I would have rightly understood, and that will prevent a carping,
take then these two cautions in.

1. Such assembling or meeting ought not to prejudice the public Ordinance and
Assembies.

2. Such assembling or meeting ought not to disturb or violate the peace or
quiet of the State or Kingdom.

These two cautions observed, I Will justify the conclusion to be warrantable.
It is an express injunction of the Apostle, and nothing can come in for a
supersedeas where he commands.

Thus I have declared briefly to you as well as I could, the nature of a Church
under the Gospel. What it is in the sense of other men, either for the place
of meeting, or in that relation it stands to the Kingdom or Nation as
protected, and in some cases bound by Laws and Edicts, I have not meddled, as
leaving it to the Lawyers and Magistrates to determine; my errand was never so
far as I know to preach penal Statutes, but obedience to the KING and other
his subordinate Governors, which I shall ever be diligent in both in word and
practice. What I have done amiss herein, I shall submit to censure and error
I shall be convict of. Thus far may suffice for the nature of a true Church.

The next thing I did propose to my self in the business of a Church, is

SECT. 2.
THe Privileges of Believers met in the way of a Church or Congregation in
the use of the Ordinances of Christ.

And these I did resolve to reduce in distinct conclusions in these few heads.

SECT. 1. general.
THe great Privilege of Believers joined in fellowship in the Gospel, and met
together in the use of any Divine Ordinances, is

To have an intimate, tender, and prevailing effectual presence of Christ
himself with them.

This both Scripture and reason abundantly testify, for Christ being a living
head, and appointing his Church to be his body, it must follow, the body must
find the influence from the head in every channel and vessel ordained for
that purpose, Matthew. 28.19, 20.

Thus much in general, now again in

SECT. 2. Special.
AS several branches arising from this common stock, they are to be reduced
to a twofold head.

SECT. 1. Internal.
ANnd these again admit a distinction.

1. General.
A constant quickening influence and power of spiritual refreshing from this
presence of Christ.

This is clear in the former demonstration, and made mention in former places
of Scripture.

SECT. 2. Special.
ANd that again should be dispatched in these things.

1. A sensible and active spiritual taste of Divine love, or of God himself
in his Ordinances by this presence of Christ.

For by this coming to him we come to and see the Father by him. And hence
also follows in the use of the Ordinances by this presence of Christ these
three things.

1. Peace with, and spiritual joy in God.

2. A strength communicated to walk with Christ, and in his power with God.

3. A sealed assurance of eternal communion with God in glory.

These are those internal Privileges of the Church to be powered out and
communicated to the Saints in their assembling in the use of divine ordinances.

SECT. 2. External Privileges.
ANd these I should refer to these three conclusions;

1. A free use of all the Ordinances of Christ belongs to the church.

2. A power of establishing of Officers for the government of the Church.

3. A power of exercising of all censures, or the power of the Keys for the
matter of Discipline.

Whence I would (had I prosecuted) infer red one thing as a most necessary
corollary.

All these Privileges are made truly efficacious and effectual by the
prevailing and actual presence of CHRIST with them.

One thing more I added to be heeded, Cautions.
to wit thus,

1. Whether you will call a Church thus invested with these great privileges
made efficacious by Christ's real presence to be,

A Church. 1. National. 2. Provincial. 3. Classical. 4. Parochial. 5.
Independe^t or Congregationall.


Let others dispute the question, I will not: I conceive all are.

2. Whether the government be invested in an Episcopacy, Classical,
Parochial, or Congregational Eldership from the donation of the Church, for
it is her inheritance, I will not determine, let the King and State determine.

I can with peace submit so far as my conscience yet bears me witness, and
will so soon as the hand is put to execution.

The other two points of the use of the 1. Law.

2. Baptism I touched not,

FINIS.

