THE DOCTRINES AND PRINCIPLES: THE Persecution, Imprisonment, Banishment,
Excommunicating of the Saints of God, By the Priests and Magistrates of
SCOTLAND, Contrary to the Doctrine of CHRIST and the APOSTLES.

Here all may see, The Priests of Scotland, and their Church, and their
Persecution, Imprisonment and Banishment, and Excommunicating of the Saints,
and Lambs, Servants, and Children of God, which the Lord moved to go amongst
them, to visit the Seed of God, in that dark wilderness-country, who has been
as Sheep among Wolves.

Also, How pure Religion is turned upside-down, and vain Religion got in its
place. And the pure Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, which says, Entertain
Strangers, Love Enemies is lost amongst you; In stead of entertaining
strangers, and loving of enemies, they Imprison and Persecute, and have made
their Church unsavory: And the Teachers fruits declares to be false, who are
wrestlers against flesh and blood, and strikers at creatures, which Christ and
the Apostles did not.

George Wear John Heart William Gray William Stockdale William Mitchell Richard
Ismead
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
winde-Mill in Martins-lane near Aldersgate, 1659.

THE DOCTRINES AND PRINCIPLES Of the Priests of Scotland, etc.
FIRST, These Presbyterian Priests of Scotland which Excommunicate and puts out
of the Synagouges, knows not the Father and the Son, John 16. so no true
Christians; for how can they be true Christians that knows not the Son of God,
nor the Father?

Secondly, They are no Ministers of Christ; for Christ says, When they curse,
bless ye; so they be out of Christ's doctrine and teaching, not blessing, but
cursing, and giving forth curses, and all the people must say Amen to their
Curses.

Thirdly, They be out of the Apostles doctrine, who says, Bless, and curse
not, Romans 12.14. so are no Ministers of Christ that curses, and gives forth
their Curses to the people to say Amen to them: and here they are shut out of
the Apostles doctrine, and Christ's, all people mark, and take notice, them they
are that curse, which the Apostle says, Bless, and curse not; these are the
Cursers, and not Blessers, that Excommunicate you out of the Synagogues.

Hugh Archball, Priest of Stravan. John Hume, priest of Lesmahagow. William
Hambleton, priest of Glasford James Durram priest of Glasgow John Castaires,
priest of Glagow. Francis Ard, priest of Discert. Matthew Mackel, Priest of
Bothwel Henry Foreside, priest of Lingiah James Nesmith, priest of Hambleton
Robert Semple, priest of Losmahagow Thomas Garony, Priest of Edenbrough. John
Burnet, priest of Kilbroid
A short Relation of the Unjust sufferings of the People of God, called
Quakers, by those unreasonable cursing Priests, who covet after innocent blood,
as the Reader may find in this ensuing Treatise.
WILL. OSBVRNE was Excommunicated by William Sterling Priest, because he gave
his testimony against him, and the rest of the Priests.

Margaret Hambleton was Excommunicated by Lewis Semerell, Priest of
New-monkeland, for entertaining the people of God called Quakers, and the
denying the tyrannical power of the Presbitery.

John Hutchison was Excommunicated by James Nesmith, Priest of Hambleton, and
the Priest would not give him any account for what he did it.

George Wear was Ecommunicated by John Hume, Priest of Lesmahagow, and the
rest of the Presbytery of Lenarick, for entertaining the people of God called
Quakers.

William Michel, John Michel, Robert Todd, Mary Inglish, Elizabeth Lappy,
Marian Michel: these were Excommunicated by Peter Kid, Priest of Douglass, and
the rest of the Presbytery of Lenarick, for denying that Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John was the Gospel, they witnessing the Power of God to be the Gospel.

Thomas Jacke, Gabriel Hood, James Cook, Gavine Scevenson, John Hambleton,
Alexander Hambleton, Jannett Hambleton, Barbarah Hambleton, Jannett Hambleton,
Andrew Hambleton, Jane Hambleton, Katherine Hambleton, Katherine Heart, John
Allene, James Hambleton, William Hambleton, Margaret Hambleton, John Heart,
James Actkine, John Heart, Alexander Heart, Jean Heart, Gavine Heart, John Lacoke,
Jannett Brown, Jeanet Hambleton, Andrew Brown, Jean Brown; Thomas Craiqqe, John
Torrens, Katherina Hambleton, Katherina Wear, Jeanet Wear: These were
Excommunicated by Matthew Mackell, Priest of Bothwell, and the rest of the
Presbitery at Hambleton, for saying that Priests that preaches up Sin for
term of life, be Ministers of the man of Sin.

James Finly, William Gray, and many others have been Excommunicated by those
Priests in that manner.

And after those Priests had Excommunicated these aforesaid persons, they
caused a general Synod to meet at Glascow, and made an Order, and published it
in all their Masse-houses, that none of those people called Quakers should have
any entertainment, and that no people should have any dealing with them in any
Civil affairs, not to give cursed men work (as they styled our Friends) and
hindering men to work for them, and that under pain of Excommunication; the
extent of which Order, is that they should neither buy nor sell, eat, nor drink
with them in the Nation.

William Stockdale, and John Boweram, being moved of the Lord to go to
Strahavan in Evandale, and declaring the word of truth there one a Market Day
to the people, was oftentimes knocked down with stones, and stoned out of the
town with violence by the wicked people.

William Stockdale, John Gill, and several others having a Meeting in
Strahavan, a company of the Priests hearers came, and fell upon them with
staves and stones, broke up their Meeting, and stoned them above a quarter of a
mile out of the town, insomuch that some blood was spilt, and many were sore
bruised.

William Stockdale was knocked down in the Steeple-house yard of Damanoy, and
the people set their feet upon him, and pulled much hair off his head; insomuch
that some of them cried he is killed, for he could not speak, nor rise off the
ground for along time.

George Wear, and several others had their Bonnets taken away from them at a
Meeting, and they laid it before William Lowery, called Justice; but he instead
of doing Justice, threatened them, saying, If they went to that place to meet
again, he would have them whipped, or else he would whip them himself.

Richard Gollon, Bailiff of Leanarick, took away William Michels Bonnet by
order of William Jacke, priest of Carlooke; and the Priest would not let him
have it again, neither would he let the said William, and some others stay in
the Town all night, although the night was stormy, and the Priest and the
Bailiff had his Bonnet.

Mary Inglish, for going to ask Peter Kid, priest of Douglass, why he warned
them to the Sessions, and did not appear to accuse them there, was shamefully
abused, and beaten by the Priests wife and others: here is the Priests fruits.

George Fox the younger, Elexander Parker, and others, had their letters taken
from them, and broke up by George Monk, and the Council of Scotland, and never
returned to them again; also ten pounds worth of true books taken away from the
people of God called Quakers, by George Monk, and the Council of Scotland, and
never was given back to this day, it being two years since.

Alexander Parker was cast in Prison by order of George Monk, and the Council.

George Fox the younger banished, and sent from Constable to Constable, by
order of George Monk and the Council.

George Wilson, George Fox the younger, and Richard Ismead, was banished from
the Isles of Orkney by George Monks Command, and the rest of the Council of
Scotland.

Alexander Parker, and several others were commanded and sent out of Scotland
by George Monk, and the order of the Council of Scotland.

Francis Howgill, Thomas Robbinson, and one more were apprehended at Dumfreize
by the soldiers and magistrates of the town, whereupon the said Soldiers
rifled them, and their Port-mantles for Letters, but when they could not find
any to accuse them withal, the Magistrates cast them into prison as Vagrants,
and did intend to have sent them into England again by Constables, but it being
proved that they were no Vagabonds, the Magistrates and Soldiers was feign to
let them go, after all the wrong they had done them, though it was to their own
shame.

Christopher Fell was put into prison in Parsley for speaking to the Priest
after the Priest had done, and the people did threaten that if any Quakers did
come again to their Church (as they called it) they would carry knives with
them to stab them, to which threatening John Dove, who was then Lieftenant of a
Troop of Horse, and quartered in that town, said, If they did do as they said,
he would bring the Troop of Horse, and be-set them in their house, so to
preserve the peace.

Thomas Holmes, and Elizabeth his wife, was shamefully abused in several
places in Scotland.

Richard Pinder was put in prison four days, and in the Stocks five hours,
and banished out of the Land, for speaking to the people in the
Steeple-hous-yard of Kilbryde, between the Priests Sermon time.

Richard Ismead for bidding James Nesmith Priest of Hambleton prove himself to
be a Minister of Christ, was put in prison there, and from thence sent prisoner
to Glascow, there put in the stooks with a gagg in his Mouth, and a paper pinnd
on his breast, and was commanded to depart the Land.

William Stockdall, was put in prison four days in a hole where he could
scarce get room to lie down, for speaking to James Nesmith, Priest of Hambleton.

James Lanchester, and others was several times put in prison for speaking in
the streets of Hambleton.

John Heart, Andrew Brown, and John Lacoke, was imprisoned several weeks in
Glascow, for going to the Priests house to speak to him, and the priest,
excommunicated them in the mean while.

Thomas Jack, was put in prison some days for going to the priest to ask why
he would excommunicate him, the said Thomas Jack was put in prison, and kept
from his Trade, he being a poor man, and his wife lying in Childbed:

James Lanchester, and Robert Withers was banished out of Scotland.

George Were, was put in prison twenty three days, and nothing laid to his
charge justly.

Will. Michell, was put in prison above twenty nine days for taking a wife
contrary to the Priests will.

John Robberton called Lord of Ornock publicly refused to enter Andrew
Hambleton in Shawton Hill in his prossession under him, because he was
excommunicated by the Priest, witnesses of this, Alexander Hambleton, John
Strandders.

William Gray, James Finly, Robert Gray, Robert Smally, John Robbins, all five
were put in prison because they could not break Christ's command.

John Heart, and Jeannett Brown, was put into prison for entertaining the
people of God called Quakers.

Three taken out of an Inn by force in the night season, between the tenth and
eleventh hour, and stoned out of the Town: these and many more whose names are
not here written have suffered much by this persecuting generation of Priests,
whose throats are open sepulchers to swallow down the blood of the Saints, and
Servants of the most high God.

Hugh Archballs Doctrine and Principles, Priest of Stravan in Evendale, These
are his Principles as follow.
Pr: THat Christ has not enlightened every one that comes into the world.

Ans. Which is contrary to John's doctrine John 1.9:

Pr. That Christ does enlighten none but those that do receive him.

Answ: Contrary to John 3: speaking of them which has the light, and are
enlightened, and will not come to it, because the light will reprove them; so
he that hates the light is enlightened, and will not receive Christ.

Pr: That it is blasphemy to say, that the true light does enlighten and
condemn the world.

Answ: Contrary to John 1:9: and 3:19: that says, This is the true light that
lights every man that comes into the world. And this is the Condemnation of
the world, that light is come into the world.

Pr: To say, that which reproves for sin is from Heaven, is blasphemy.

Answ: Contrary to John 16:8: which says it is the spirit that reproves, which
comes from the Father, and the Son, which is from Heaven.

Pr. He cries up a natural light, as Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the light of
Christ was before these was made, and says, it is blasphemy to say, they that
did the things contained in the Law was blessed in the deed, and the Apostle
said the doers of the Law was justified; and said he would leave the Friends
that speak to him, to the mercy of the people.

Answ: Upon which they struck bitterly with books, fists, and stones, to
destroy, but that same moderate people and Soldiers stayed the Persecution.

John Hume, Priests of Lesmahagow, His Principles as follows, who got into a
Steeplehouse, and shut the door upon him; thus he taught the people.
Pr: THat which was to be known of God, was manifest by the things that are
created.

Answ: Contrary to the Apostles doctrine, Rom: 1:19: For whatsoever may he
known of God is manifest in them, for the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse:
So with that of God in them they know the invisible things from the foundation
of the world and with that they see the Godhead.

Pr: That God was to be known by the things that were made, as the Sun, Moon,
and Stars.

Answ: But Jesus Christ said, Mat: 11:27: No man knows the Father but the Son,
and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him, and the heathens know not God,
nor the Jews had not seen his shape. And his servants and workmen did throw
water, stones and lime, and persecuted, and dirtted, and abused the people
called Quakers, and threw a pan full of water in a Soldiers neck, and the said
Priest never reproved them; and these be the fruits of him, and his own Family,
in stead of gravity: well may the whole Parish be out of order, when his own
Family is thus. So he is one that is reproved by the Apostles doctrine. 1 Timothy
3. which says, If you cannot rule your own Family, how can you take care for
the Church of God?

Henry Foreside, Priest of the Parish of Lingee in Dunbarton-shire, said in his
Preaching to the People.
Pr. IF they had any Christian zeal, they would stone them whom they call
Quakers.

Answ. It is the blind zeal that stones, not the Christian zeal, that have the
life of Christ; for the Christian zeal is to pray for them that persecute, Mat.
5.44. and not to stone them, and to love enemies: it was the Jews zeal that
took up stones to stone Christ, John 8.59. they stoned Steven, Acts 7.5, 8. and
stoned the Apostles, Acts 14.19. In this the Presbyterians have proved their
Christianity to be out of Christ and the Apostles.

Pr. If Paul and the rest of the Apostles had been alive, they would have
stoned the Quakers.

Answ. Here all may see his work to be the envious man in Cains way, Jude 11.
who would murder, and wrongs the Apostle, who never taught nor intended any
such doctrine, but said, Overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21. and love bears
all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. Now see whose Minister this man is, that cannot bear,
but would have them stoned, and would have the Apostle as bad as himself, which
Apostle said, Christ was his example, who laid down his life for his enemies,
Romans 5.8. who suffered the contradiction of sinners, we will render evil to no
man, but say the contrary, the Lord Jesus forgive them, Luke 23.34. and the
Apostle said, they wrestled not against flesh and blood, Ephesians 6.12. but
them and you that stone, do ye not wrestle against flesh and blood? But if the
Apostles would have stoned, would they not have wrestled against flesh and
Blood? And if the Apostles should have stoned all that were contrary to their
minds, and bidding the people stone them, and told them it was Christian zeal,
what work would they have made? as the said Henry Foreside, called Minister,
does, where would have been long suffering, Gal. 5.22. and loving enemies? Mat.
5.44. and where would he have had any to have converted and who would have been
persecutors? and who would have prayed for persecutors? ye may see what a pit
ye are fallen into, and how should they have convinced gainsayers, Tit. 1.9.
and loved them whem they had stoned them.

And this is the Presbyterians zeal of Scotland, and not Christian zeal, who
would stone, and stir up his congregation to do so; for Christ, who is clothed
with zeal, Isa. 59.17 said, Love your Enemies, but ye are clothed with madness
and folly: And the Apostle that was in his zeal according to knowledge said,
Overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21. amd vengeance is the Lords, and he will
repay it, Romans 12.19. and love bears all things, but his blind zeal cannot bear
any thing, but cries stone them out of the way, and so wickedly and devilishly
calls it Christian zeal, which is false that is, the Devils zeal. Now the
Apostles wrestled not against flesh and blood, but against the powers of
darkness, Ephesians. 6.12. but the Presbyterians called Ministers are striking
against flesh and blood, whilst ye would stone them, whilst that time
spiritual wickedness lies within you. So ye Presbyterian-Priests are as a
troop of robbers that would murder in the way by consent, Hos. 6.9.

James Dorram, called Minister of Glascow, his Principles.
Pr. THat the believers, even the real godly, are not without sin in this
life.

Ans. Here is one that is charging the elect, and laying sin to the elect that
God justifies, Romans 8.33. that in the godly there should be sin. Sin is out of
the godly, in the ungodly, which turn the grace of God into wantonness; and
and what good does his preaching do them, if they must never be without sin
whilst they are upon earth, they can be but in their sin, if they never preach
to them: But the Scripture says, He that believes is borne of God, and he that
is borne of God cannot sin, because his seed remains in him; 1 John 3.9. But
this is of another world to him, who is called James Dorram Minister of
Glasgow, Minister of darkness, who puts no difference between the children of
God, and the children of the Devil, 1 John 3.10. They would have sin whilst
they are upon the earth, and it is darkness, but the Apostles said they were
made free from sin, Romans 6.22 whilst they were upon the earth.

Pr. Christ being sinlesse, seperates him from all others.

Answ. Christ being separated from sinners, Heb. 7.26. who are in Christ are
separated from sinners and sin both, 2 Cor. 6.17. But this Ja Dorram has made
the offering of none effect, Heb. 10.14. which has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified; And has made the blood of Jesus of none effect, which
cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7. And he has made the everlasting Covenant
of none effect which blots out all sins and trespasses: And he has made the
faith of the Son of God of none effect, which purifies the heart, and gives
victory over the world, Acts 15.9. 1 Ioh. 5.5. Thou do herein preach and hold
up sin, and does not preach it down; and yet thou say thou preachest not to
hold it up, and yet thou preachest they must have it whilst they are upon the
earth; here is confusion in thy tongue; Pro. 17.20. Thou should have preached
it down, and have brought them to a Church where there is neither spot nor
wrinkle, nor blemish, nor any such thing. Ephesians. 5.27. if thou were a true
Minister, but your Church is full of spots, and blemishes, and wrinkels, whilst
ye are preaching up zeal to stone people, and sin while they live, as Henry
Foreside, and James Dorram does.

Pr. God be thanked, the scripture speaks nothing for freedom from sin and
perfection.

Answ: Thou thankest God that thou may live in thy sin and imperfection, and
art glad of thy false hope; but thou art a liar, thou art out of the truth in
this, for the Scripture says they were made free from sin, Rom: 6:26: and they
preached wisdom among them that were perfect, 1 Cor. 2:6: and he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10:14: So the scripture speaks of
freedom from sin and perfection, and be perfect.

Pr: That the condemning power of sin is taken away.

Answ: The believer does not sin, 1 John 5:1: 1 John 3:9: but he that the
believer overcomes commits sin, 1 Io: 3:8: and 1 Io: 5:5: and if the believer
commits sin, who overcomes the believer? and so he that commits sin is under
the condemning power of sin which thou say not: which thou and all other
shall witness.

Pr: The believer is not in sin as the unbeliever is, he sins not as the
unbeliever does and in an other place he says, the Law is the same to the
believer, that it is to the unbeliever.

Answ: Here any may read thy confusion, but I say unto thee, he that believes
does not commit sin, but the unbelief is sin, Rom: 11:20: and Christ is the end
of the Law to every one that believes for righteousness sake, Romans 10.4. and
yet thou puts both believers and unbelievers under the Law.

Lodowick Simerell, Priest of the new parish of Munckland, his Principles and
Doctrines.
Pr. THat it is blasphemy to say that the light in man, which reproves of sin,
is the light of God, is perfect, is the gift of God.

Answ. Contrary to scripture, contrary to Christ's words, and contrary to the
Apostles words is thy doctrine and Principles, for every gift of God is
perfect, Isa. 1.17. Isa. 49.6. Joh. 1.3. Joh. 4. For Christ is the gift of God,
and he has given him for a Covenant of light to the Jews and Gentiles, which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, which every one that does
truth comes to it, which every one that does evil hates the light, and will not
come to the light, because the light will reprove him; and so, This is the
condemnation of the world, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds be evil. So this light is
perfect, which does reprove every man of sin, and is from above, and it is the
gift of God, and thou art blind and in darkness that comprehends it not: And
the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, Christ
Jesus the gift of God, him by whom the world was made: this light was before
any natural light was made, Sun, Moon, or Stars; for all things that was made,
was made by the light, which came a light into the world, that all through him
might believe, for he that believes not in the light, is condemned already; and
he that does believe in the light has the witness in himself, to set to his
seal that God is true, and the spirit of truth that does reprove the world, is
perfect, and of God.

The light which every one that comes into the world is enlightened withal,
is not conscience, for the light was before any thing was made, or conscience
named: So the light is that which exercises the conscience toward God, and
toward man, where it is loved, and the voice heard; but where it is hated, and
the voice not heard, the conscience is seared, and the light is their
condemnation, whose consciences is seared, which light was before conscience
was.

The Priest would not have thee and thou to be to a single person, and so is
the man that would not endure sound words, that cannot be condemned, thee and
thou was the language between God and his Saints, and one another, and you is
to many, and thou was to one, and this was the language between Jeptha and his
daughter, and between the Saints and the Kings, this shows thou have not
learned the Accidence nor Bible, nor art come to the form of sound words.

John Castaires, called Minister of Glascow, his Principles.
Pr. It Is natural folks duty to pray to God, and worship him, although they
sinfully keep themselves under a sinful necessity to sin against God through
ignorance.

Answ: This has been your work to keep people in ignorance, which you may be
ashamed of. A natural man cannot worship God, for he cannot receive the things
of God; nor a sinful man, but worship the Devil; for he that commits sin,
serves him; and he that serves sin, serves the Devil, and worships him, John
8:34: And Christ said the Pharisees should receive the greater damnation, for
their pretended long prayers, Mat. 23:14: and so he did not justify them in
their long prayers, but rebuked them, and said, Woe unto them who draw near with
their lips, when their hearts were far off, Isa. 29:13: And they that pray and
worship God, must pray in the spirit, 1 Cor 14:15: and worship in the Spirit,
which the Devil is out of, John 4:21:

Pr: If the first Command be in force, and if it be in force negatively, it is
also in force, positively, thou shall have me for thy God, and ought to
worship me, and if they pray not as they should, let them answer for it, for it
is not sin of it self.

Answ. The children of Israel that the Commandments were given unto, knew God,
but the Heathen knows him not: here all may see what measure thou measures
withal. And further thou say, if they pray as they should not, and yet not
sin, is praying as they should, and as they should not, one? by this to call
upon God with their lips, and the heart not right, and the prayers and
sacrifice of the wicked is justified, Prove. 15.8. and if any pray as they
should not, are they not condemned for it? and if in praying as they should
not, be not sin, then they do as they should.

Pr. If folks should not pray because they are incapable, then a believer not
finding himself in a good frame, may let his prayers alone.

Answ: A Believer is ababe of God, and his cry is right, his prayer is right,
and his groan is right, 1 John 5.1. And every man that comes into the world,
being enlightened, and coming into the light which has enlightened him, 1 John
1.7. in that he is to watch and pray, which leads him beyond naturals, which
will be accepted in the degree, but he that hates the light, his prayer is not
accepted, but is in the hypocrisy.

Pr. The Apostles bad Simon Magus, an old witchcarle, pray, and now is there
any reason to say we are bidding folk sin when we bid them pray, although they
be grossly ignorant?

Answ. The Apostle bad him Repent, Acts 8.22. and he was sensible he had
sinned: and that which makes a man sensible of sin, brings him to pray
aright, and turns him from witchcraft, and so thou do put no difference
between the precious and the vile, Ezekiel. 22.26. the accepted and unaccepted.

And Hen. Foreside, who would have had his people to stone the Quakers, and
calls it Christian zeal, he would have his wall up that he might live in
safety, who murders, and would be preserved in the murtherous estate, and
would have the powers of the earth to be his Executioners and pack-horses, but
the Lord is opening of their eyes, that they will not execute their malice,
though he is stirring up the people to do so; so all may see this is not the
work of our Lord Jesus Christ, but the work of the Murderer, and one that
makes himself drunk with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.6. till he reel again
in his madness. And Christ called them that took up stones to stone him, of
their Father the Devil, for doing his lust, John 8.44. And thou who would have
the people to stone, and calls it Christian zeal, thou have manifested thy
Father, and to be of the Devil, who was a Murderer from the beginning, but you
are the Serpents and vipers that would kill to fill the measure of your
Fathers, Mat. 23.32. and persecute from City to City, and hale out of the
Synagouges, John 16.2. that all the unrighteous blood, shed from righteous
Abel, might come upon you, Mat. 23.35. and you are they that kill the bodies of
the Saints, and are sheders of the righteous blood, (Mark, the righteous blood)
that the righteous blood might be upon you. And Cain slew Abel, because Abels
sacrifice was accepted, and his not, Genesis 4. So it is about the Sacrifice, and
worship, ye would murder and slay: So ye are in Cains way, a company of
vagabonds, whose Sacrifice God has no respect unto; if we were enemies, you
would not teach the people to stone us if ye were Ministers of Christ, but love
us, Mat. 5.44. And do good to us. If the Apostles should have taught the people
to stone all that were contrary to their mind, and Christ should have taught
his Disciples to stone all that were contrary to their mind, and tell them
that were Christian zeal, but ye may see Christ and his Apostles taught
another doctrine, Love your Enemies, and thou teach to stone them, contrary
to Christ, and his Apostles, we do conclude it to be the Doctrine of the Devil,
and not the Doctrine of Christ, who are in scorn called Quakers. For the true
Christian zeal never taught to stone, but were stoned.

The Priests called Presbyterians summoned some people called Quakers to come
before them, and they came into the Steeple house where they met, and James
Nasmith, Priest of Hanbleton bad them remove, or else he would make them remove
by Club Law, and they asked the presbyterian Priests for their accusers, and
Francis Ard one of the Priests said, they were both accusers and Judges; now
whether this be equity, that the same should be both accusers, and Judges that
summons; and when they have summoned, accused, and judged, says they will make
them remove by club Law: whether these be not bruits, and beasts, and not
Justices, and are not fit to Judge, nor to have the name of Ministers, and
Judges that will remove people by club Law; and the said Quakers could not own
them as Judges, nor does look on them as men of equity, but would have had them
to have given them a meeting in any place, whereby the truth might be cleared,
which they had scandalized, and come to light, which they refused, and that
lawful witnesses might hear, but they did refuse, and caused them to be put in
prison by the hand of a Baliffe, by name Nasmith.

And this is the authority of the Presbyterian Priests, who has summoned with
club Law, but it is denied by the Apostles Doctrine, 1 Timothy 3. they must not be
strikers, nor false accusers. These are the Presbyterian Priests of Scotlands
weapons, club Law, which is contrary to the Ministers of Christ, they said, We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, and they must not be strikers, Ephesians. 6.12.
and after they had done violently, they thrust them into prison; after their
wills were satisfied with violence, they thrust them out again, there ye may
feel the Spirit of wickedness.

And these Presbyterian Priests, (are people) petitions the Magistrates, with a
pretense, they might not be guilty of others blood, which pretense is in their
Petitions, to take away their fear, that their wicked peace might not be
disturbed, not regarding their blood: witness James Nasmith Priest, who would
make them remove by club Law. So their Petition is but flattery and deceit, in
pretense of not being guilty of their blood, in whose heart it is to shed
blood, as witness Henry Foreside Priest, who stirred up the people in zeal to
stone them.

Those Presbyterian Priests that set up club Law and persecution against the
Quakers, who would not have any to receive them into their houses. So this is
abominable Doctrine, contrary to the Apostle, whose Doctrine you have trodden
under your feet, who said, Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers, for thereby
some have entertained Angels unawares, Heb. 13.2.

And they say again, They have no certain dwelling places. Here these
Presbyterians with their club Law and Excommunications, which say the Quakers
have no certain dwelling places, they may inform against the Apostles, which
had no ceartain dwelling places, and against Christ, who had not whereon to lay
his head, Luk 9.58. and against Abraham, who had not a foot of ground, Genesis 12.
but Cain built a City, the vagabond, of whose stock and offspring you are,
Genesis 4.17. and said David, Let their Children be vagabonds, Psalm. 109.10. and
so this is fulfilled upon you.

And you Presbyterian Priests with your club Law, who would club those people
scornfully called Quakers, away; you would have an Order from the Justices,
that none should receive the Quakers into there houses, and stop them of their
liberty; and this is contrary to the Law of the Nations: And this is damnable
doctrine, wherewith ye poison the people, and stirs them up with madness and
folly. And in stead of teaching of them peace, you teach them strife, and in
stead of loving one another, you teach them to fight one with another.

And Henry Foreside Priest cries stone them. And James Nasmith Priest cries for
club Law. And William Hambleton Priest of Glasford said to Andrew Brown, if the
Laws were right, they would chop off all the Quakers heads: by William
Hambletons words the Law is wrong, because it does not fulfill his purpose and
envy.

Here all may see that you are doing the Devils work, hunting after blood,
whose envy, madness and folly appears to all men; what ye cannot do your
selves, ye exhort the people to do; and what ye and the people cannot do, ye
Petition the Magistrates to do, that all the righteous blood may come upon you,
Mat. 23.35.

Alas for you, ye poor filly Priests, and mad Presbiterians: Is this your work
to set them to stone, and cry up club Law, and Law to chop off their heads? is
this the way to convert them? is not this the Popish way of converting them? ye
should go to convert them, instruct them, convince them, love them, heap coals
of fire upon them, Mat. 5. Romans 20. Overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21. Pray
for them, Mat. 5.44. No cry you, chop off their heads, begging by petitions
that none may receive them into their houses, stone them, fall upon them by
club law, that your folly and madness may be made manifest; and yet imprison
them, and such as receive them into their houses: As for instance, ye caused
John Heart of the heads of Glasford, and Jennet Hambleton widow of Westmanes,
to be imprisoned for entertaining them into their houses. Here ye have proved
your selves to be the Wolves the sheep are sent among, Mat. 10.16. that are
ravening to devour them; which is one of the marks that ye are the false
Prophets Christ said should come Mat. 7.5. And another haling out of the
Synagogues, and Excommunicating, and ye never show for what; which practice ye
are in, which is a work of darkness.

and upon this bargain that the Magistrates would grant them an order, that
none should receive them into their houses, and that they might not have their
liberty, and their servants would be much refreshed, who cry stone them, let us
have a Law against them, and if the Laws were right, they would chop off their
heads, and make them remove by club Law; but how was these Priests the
Magistrates servants at Dunbar Fight, when they excommunicated and cursed their
now being army and Magistracy? but now they would be their servants, if they
would execute their wills upon the innocent: Surely these things cannot but
stinck to all Magistrates that fear God.

These are the servants and servers of the times, that the Prophets calls
inchanters, Lev. 19.16. and for their own false ends; ye can never read that
the Apostles nor Christ did ever teach any such doctrine that the people should
be stoned, or have their heads choped off, or driven away by clup Law, which
shows you are Apostatates, from the Apostasy, and of the Jewish nature.

The Synod at Glasgow, in the second month, did ordain concerning these
persons in Clidsdale, formerly Excommunicated, who are called Quakers, that no
other people in other parishes should bargain with them, or suffer them to come
within their houses, or have entertainment for money: Upon which the people
persecuted, and stoned them, and haled them out of their houses in several
places, viz. Three of them people called Quakers, were in the night time
between the 10. and 11. hours, drawn by force out of an Inn, in the Town of
New mills in Aire-shire, and stoned out of the town into the Fields to shift
for their lodging. And others, three several times were beaten, stoned, and
shamefully entreated, and persecuted in Stravan. And others at Lithmahaga. And
others shamefully abused in the Town of Kirkantillough. And others stoned at
Kilbride. And others pitifully stoned, beaten and abused; and some blood shed
at Glasford: And at many other places much harm has been done. These be the
Priests fruits, the bloody Presbytery, who would have them stoned, and their
heads chopped off; some of the Magistrates did stop the people for abusing of
them, so that the Priests malice was not altogether satisfied.

Andrew Brown, and John Lacock of Glasford, were cast into prison, for asking
him a question when he was Catechizing, and admonished them when they were far
absent, and if they come before them, they will cast them into prison; this
makes them peepers and mutterers, to admonish them when they are not present,
and is this like to change them, or do they intend to change them, who admonish
them when they are out of hearing, and did Excommunicate them when they were in
prison? what an unhumanly part is this wicked, develish, envious, and
unchristian Ministry.

And John Heart went to a steeple house to here the Priests admonishment, for
the Priest said he would admonish him, and he went to hear him, and when he had
admonished him, he spoke to him, and bid him prove himself in the docrine of
Christ, and they who he admonished out of it, and then give them a bill of
divorsment: but the Priests went to the Court, and got a warrant from the
Justice, and so cast him into prison, and when he was in prison, Excommunicated
him, and said he disturbed him; And here his devilish wicked art and doctrine
appears, which shows him of Cains flock, where is nothing but persecution,
murder, and envious-slayers, vagabonds, and cursed speakers that went on in
the way of Balaam, or Core; that makes merchandise of the people through their
covetousness, and feigned words to the people; And gives forth their Curses in
their Congregations, and all the people are to say Amen to them as follows.

The Priests first Curse that all the people were to say Amen to.
Cursed be all they that say Grace is free, and let all the people say, Amen.
Answ. ANd so they curse the Apostles, and the Apostles doctrine, and all that
witness to it, who said, The free grace of God which brings salvation has
appeared to all men, Tit. 2.11. and was the Saints Teacher; these things the
Apostles commanded to teach with all authority, Tit. 2.15. but the ungodly men
turn this grace of God into wantonness, of old ordained for condemnation.

Ye are the raging waves of the Sea, sending and foming out your own shame,
whose fruits wither, neglecting the common salvation, read Jude. Ye are like to
Sodom and Egypt, clouds without water, who run greedily after the wages of
Balaam, going on the way of Cain, and shall perish in the gainsaying of Core,
and walking despitefully against the spirit of grace; and they that turn the
grace of God into wantonness, denies the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. Jude
11.

Ye are the trees without fruit, wells without water, carried about with
tempests, cursed speakers; teaching the people to say Amen to your cursing the
Apostles doctrine, and so willingly ignorant, that your damnation may be just,
that your madness and folly might appear to all, and so sensual, having not the
spirit, waves of the Sea, wandering stars, received for darkness of blackness,
read Jude. The grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all men,
Tit. 2.11. So that which brings salvation, and has appeared to all men, ye
curse that which is the grace of God, which ye with your damnable doctrine, and
doctrine of Devils, curse them that witness it, 2 Pet. 2. 1 Timothy 4. upon whose
consciences the hot Iron has come, hardened them that went to the doctrine of
Devils, went to them that did not hold forth the Savior of all men, but
especial them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. These things command and teach, let
no man despise thy youth.

Now they that went to the doctrine of Devils, from the Savior of all men, but
especially them that believe, and from the grace of God which has appeared to
all men, which brings salvation; are they which have turned the grace of God
into wantonness, ordained of old for condemnation, which is the light, Jude 4.
Such be in Cains way from the command of God, Cores way from the truth, and
Balaams way from the spirit, those be the clouds and tempests upon whose heads
comes the Woe.

The Priests second Curse, which all the People were to say Amen to.
Cursed be all they that say, the Scriptures is not the Word of God; and let
all the people say Amen.
Ans. HEre they have cursed Luke, who calls the Scripture a Declaration of the
Word, Luke 1.1. and Acts 1.1. where it is called a Treatise; and they have
cursed their own company who say the Scriptures signifies writings; and they
have cursed John, who did not say the Scripture was the Word, who said, In the
beginning was the Word, Joh. 1.1. and the Scripture is words, as Revel. the
last, He that adds to the words; and Christ his name is called, The Word of
God, Rev. 19.13. And the Scriptures are words, not a word, Exodus 20. and which
words Christ came to fulfill.

The Priests third Curse, to which all the people were to say Amen.
Cursed be all they that say Faith is without sin, and let all the people say
Amen.
Ans. FAith is the gift of God, and the gift of God is without sin, Ephesians. 2.8.
Faith is that which gives the victory, John 3.4. And that which gives victory
is without sin. And here they have cursed the Apostles and their Doctrine, who
says, Faith is without sin, and Faith is precious, 1 Pet. 1.7. and that which
is Precious is without sin. Faith is the gift of God, and the gift of God is
perfect, and that which is perfect is without sin, and gives victory over sin:
Without Faith a man cannot please God, and that which men please God in, is
without sin, Hebr. 11.6. And so ye have cursed the Apostle and his Doctrine,
the just and that which is pure, that by which they were healed, through Faith
they were justified, Romans 3.28. and what is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14.23. So
what is of Faith is not sin, and what is righteous is not sin, and the
Scripture speaks of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.13. Faith is not of sin,
but what is not of Faith is sin, Faith gives victory over sin, 1 John 3.4. in
which Faith man is justified, and has peace with God, Romans 5.1. and it is a
mystery held in a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9.

The Priests fourth Curse, to which all the people were to say Amen.
Cursed are all they that say every man has a light sufficient to lead him to
Christ, and that within him, and let all the people say Amen.
Ans. HEre they have cursed the Apostles Doctrine, who said God would dwell in
them, 2 Cor. 6.16. and Christ in you the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. and God is
light, 1 John 1.5. And they have cursed the Prophets, who said, I give him for
a Covenant, a Leader of the people: I will dwell in them, and walk in them,
says God, Jer. 31.31. Hebr. 10.16. And he says, I will send you the Spirit of
truth, and it shall lead you into all truth, John 14.17. John 16: 13. And I
will be their God, to rule them, and they shall be my people, Jer. 31.33. Thy
curses are but wind, for we are redeemed from the curse; and the Apostles
said, the light that shined in their hearts was to give them the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. and they that are led
by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14. and the light to guide our
feet in the way of peace, and he that has the Son has the Father also; and if
any bring another Doctrine, receive them not into your houses, neither bid them
God speed, 2 John 9, 10. You have here showed your selves in the cursed estate,
out of the Apostles rule, the same spirit of truth that led the Disciples into
all truth, that shall reprove the world of sin, John 16.8, 13.

The Priests fifth Curse, to which all the people were to say Amen.
Cursed be all they that deny the Sabbath Day, and let all the people say Amen.
Ans. HEre thou have cursed thy self, and all the Apostles, and all the Saints,
and their own generation; have not thou and thy own generation denied the
Sabbath day, the Jews met on, which is the Sabbath day according to the
Scripture? do not ye meet together upon the first day? and was not Christ
crucified on the sixth day? and did not he arise on the first day? and did not
the Saints meet together on the first day? and not keep the Jews Sabbath Day?
do not you work upon it your selves, and keep Markets and Fairs on it? but as
it is said before, we are Redeemed from the curse.

These are the particular Sentences whereupon Matthew Mackell, and the rest of
the Priests present with him, did excommunicate those people called Quakers in
the presence of many witnesses, and he required his Hearers to say Amen to
every particular sentence.

John Humes, Priest of Lismahagow, his Principles.
Pr. THey who have not the Scriptures, knows not the Attributes of God by the
light of nature, but the Scriptures declare the great mystery of the three
persons in Trinity, which they who want the Scriptures knows not.

Ans. Thy Principle is a lie, and they that had not the Scriptures knew God and
Christ, as Abraham and Enoch, and the Scripture does not declare of the three
persons, nor of the Trinity, and the natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God.

Pr. That the Scriptures reveal the great mystery of Election, the great works
of the Creation, and the work of Redemption.

Answ. There thou have set up the Scripture instead of God, and before God and
the Son, for it is God that does reveal to babes and sucklings, Mat. 11.25. and
God did reveal by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. and God shall reveal, Phil. 3.15.
and the things of God are hid from the wise and prudent, Mat. 11.25. that have
the Scriptures; the Jews had the Scriptures: and God reveals his secrets to
the Prophets his Servants, Amos 3.7. no man knows the Father saving to whom
the Son shall reveal him, Mat. 11.17. now the Son reveals, and the Father
reveals, and the things of God are revealed by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. the
Jews had the Scriptures, and knew not the Son, 1 Cor. 2.8. nor the Father, as
in John, nor the things of God by a natural light, as they call it; the Jews
had the Scriptures, and did not know the Election, Isa. 24. because they were
from the Spirit. So it is God that reveals the Son, and Redemption, and
Election, and not the Scripture, the Scripture was given forth from them that
had the Revelation from God.

Pr. That we and the Papists and Jesuits, and Priests, do agree all together,
that the Scripture is the word of God that lives and endures for ever.

Answ. I do believe that you and the Papists and Jesuits, agree all in one; but
ye did not agree with the Apostles and Ministers of the word, for the Ministers
of the word calls the Scripture a Declaration, as ye may read Luke 1. and ye do
not agree with them that set forth the Acts, that called it a Treatise, Acts 1.
likewise ye do not agree with some of your own, who say the Scriptures
signifies writings, and writings will not endure for ever, so ye are Babylon,
and do not agree with Christ, and ye do not agree with John, Bev. (...). who
says the words; nor with Moses, nor God, who spoke all these words, Exodus 20.
In the beginning was the word, and the word is God, and the word lives and
abides for ever; but the Scripture is words, and the Scripture cannot be
broken.

James Nesmith Priest of Hambleton, his Principles.
Pr. THat the soul of man is a reasonable sinful substance.

Answ. How can that which is sinful be reasonable? and if that which is
unsinful be reasonable, and sinful be reasonable both, then they are one in
unity: The Lord will take the soul for an offering for sin; does the Lord take
that which is sinful for an offerring? Isai. 53. see how thou and the Prophet
agrees here; But what is that soul that the wicked is not able to kill? is it
not that which God has in his hand? and this is a lie, to say that which is
reasonable is sinful, of one that puts light for darkness. God breathed into
man the breath of life, and he became a living soul, who has all souls in his
hand, and the soul is immortal, and Christ the Bishop of it is immortal, and
God has it in his hand which goes against him that does evil, whose hand is
immortal, but man transgressing against the commands of God, the soul lies in
death; so Christ is the Bishop of the souls, so they that came to know Christ,
their souls rejoice in God their Savior, Luke 1.

Pr. That the evil Spirits are both sinful and reasonable.

Answ. This is a lie for reasonable is not sinful, and unreasonable is sinful,
2 These. 3. they have not the faith: and if the evil Spirit be reasonable, and
the good reasonable, they are both one, who then is unreasonable? If the evil
Spirit be reasonable, thou pots no difference between the precious and the
vile; thou have the Mark of a blind guide, and a false Prophet in thy so ehead.

Pr. That one of them Quakers is worse then the Devil.

A. This is a lie with his strange wonder, for there is nothing worse then the
Devil, whose children you are for when he speaks a lie he speaks of himself,
and he is the Father of it.

Henry Foreside Priest of Lingiah in Dunbarton shire, His Doctrine and
PRINCIPLES.
Pr. THat God commands all every where to repent, to the end that they should
not have it to say but they were warned, but not that he would give them grace
to repent.

Answ. Here thou makes God that he does not intend that he speaks, and so thou
would make him unrighteous, though the Lord commands all men every where to
repent, Acts 17.30. who has made all Nations of men of one blood to dwell upon
the Earth, and all being concluded under sin and unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all. Romans 3.9. For both Jews and Gentiles all were under sin, and
none of them did good, no not one. And Gods intent is, that when he calls men
to repentance, they should repent, when he calls them, and many did repent; and
you are not fit men to be Ministers of Christ or God.

Now if God command all men every where to Repent, and, as thou say, does not
intend they should Repent, thou and you go about to make God unjust. First the
Lord he desires not the death of a sinner, but that he should turn from his
wickedness and live, Exodus 33.11. Now in the turning from his wickedness he
lives, but in going on in his wickedness he dies; so Repentance was Preached
from dead works, to serve the living God. Heb. 6.1. and Christ came to call
finners to Repentance, not the Righteous; for the whole needs not the
Physician, but to the sick, Mat. 9.12, 13.

And as for saying, God did not intend to give them grace, though he calls them
to repentance: That is a lie, and unrighteous doctrine, for the grace of God
has appeared to all men, which brings Salvation, Titus 2.11. and so as he
calls them to repentance, he gives them grace, that grace which brings
salvation, which men are justified by; so it is saving grace that brings
salvation, and teaches to deny ungodliness.

Now they that live ungodly, turns the grace of God into wantonness, Jude 4.
and these are the wells without water, in Cains way, Balaams way, and Cores
way, Jude 11. speaks the high words in hypocrisy; and these are they that
separate themselves from the Apostles, sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude 19.
and are of old ordained to condemnation, who separated from the light, which
turns the grace of God into wantonness; so these are they that neglect the
common salvation, it was the charge of the Apostle to Timothy before his
decease, 1 Timothy 4.2. 2 Timothy 4.7. Then told him perilous times should come, and
Doctrines of Devils, and men speaking lies in hypocrisy; he said unto them,
that they should trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, and
especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. But the Devils Doctrine leads
them from their Savior, and from the grace, 2 Timothy 4.1. And they that are not
in the Doctrine, are from the light, which Christ has enlightened them withal,
John 1.9. And have turned the grace of God into wantonness, and pernicious
ways, and draws others from it, and we do conclude that to be the Doctrine of
Devils, which says God calls all men to repent, and intends not to give them
grace, nor would not have them to repent: as thou Henry Foreside does say, for
it was the charge of the Apostle to Titus to speak sound words, and sound
Doctrine, and could not be condemned, Titus 2. and told him that the grace of
God which brings salvation had appeared to all men, which taught them to deny
ungodliness and worldly lust, and to live godly, soberly and righteously in
this present evil world, these things speak and exhort with all authority,
Tit. 1. But as I said before, ungodly men that turn the grace of God into
wantonness, are of old ordained to this condemnation, and this the is
condemnation of the world, that light is come into the World, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil, John 3.19. he that
loves the light, the light is his Savior, but he that hates the light, it is
his condemnation.

Pr. That the two parts of the Church must be profane and godless.

Ans. The Church is the Pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church of
the living God; for the ungodly are out of its grounds, and that which is
ungodly; the pillar and ground of truth, there is no ungodly in it, and the
Church is without wrinkle or spot, holy, without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. and the
Church is in God, 1 These. 1.1. That which is in God is in the light, and out of
the ungodly.

Pr. That God before the world was, had ordained one little part of the people
for eternal life; that sin, or do all the evil they could, they could not loose
that which was ordained for them.

Ans. Here thou go about to make Christ a liar, for he that commits sin is
the servant of sin, 1 John 3.8. says, He that commits sin is of the Devil,
says the Apostle, and thou would make God partial, and have taught a
Doctrine contrary to the Scriptures, For God is no respecter of persons, Romans
2.11. Who will give to every one a reward according to their works, Psalm.
62.12. And he that works iniquity must depart cursed from Christ, Mat. 7.23.
Mat. 25: 41. And he that sins after he has received the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of judgment,
Hebr. 10.27. And the elect does not commit sin, and who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect, Romans 8.33. and the Elect is Christ, Isai. 42.1. who
was elected before the world was, he that is born of God does not commit sin,
neither can he, because his seed remains in him, 1 John 3.9. And he that
commits sin is of the Devil, and never knew God, verse. 6: And here is the
children of God maniest, and the children of the Devil, 1 John: 3:10: and God
hears not sinners, and them that regard iniquity, Psalm. 66.18. Joh. 9.31. Prove:
15: 8:

Pr: That the great part of the world was ordained for Hell, that repent or do
all that they are commanded to do, they would not obtain salvation, because
God had ordained them to Hell.

Ans. Then he was asked wherefore he preached? His answer was to save the
elect: he was answered again, if it was so, there was no need of that, seeing
they could not be lost; Then he was asked before he preached to them that were
ordained to Hell: he answered to make their damnation hotter; it was answered
them again, that they had small friends of them, and they could not make it
hotter, seeing they were ordained before; the Priest aforesaid was asked, who
had the blame that men went to Hell.

His answer was, Seeing ye desire to know, I shall tell you, there is one part
of the blame in man, and another part of the blame in the Almighty, that men
went to Hell.

Ans. In this here is confusion, thou say, God has ordained them, thou
say God has done it, (then mark) then thou say, there is part in man, and
thou say before it was in God; now if it be in God, as thou say, that he
has ordained them to hell, repent or do all that they are commanded to do, thy
preaching is needless; and thou cannot add to Hell hotter or colder: Therefore
thy preaching is done and ceased: And thou say part of the blame that men go
to hell is in God; here thou would make God unrighteous, who desires not the
death of a sinner, God is not to be blamed in any thing he does, but praised,
and righteous in all his judgments; and God is not to be blamed, for God is
truth, so let God be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3.4. thou wicked one,
man's destruction is of himself, Hos. 13.9: and God wills not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he would repent, so no fault in God, who says, let the
unrighteous man forsake his unrighteousness, and he shall live; so let the
righteous man forsake his righteousness, and he dies, Ezekiel. 18.22. So my ways
are equal, the Lord has no pleasure at all that the wicked should die, but
that he should return and live, so man's destruction is of himself: And whereas
thou say, God has ordained a great part to Hell, what make thou of Christ
who came to be a Savior of the world? John 4.42. he does not say the Elect
only, but to save the world, and not to condemn it, and God so loved the world
(mark the words) John 3.19. he does not say, so hated it, that he gave his
only begotten Son into the world, that whosoever believed in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life; and he came not to condemn the world, but
that the world through him might have life, but they that hate the light, and
do not believe in it, are with the light condemned, but thou say otherwise,
that he condemns a great part of the world, and he does not say he loves the
Elect only, but God so loved the world, and God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. he does not say the Elect only; and he through
death has destroyed the power of death, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. and thou art to
be reproved for thy judgment, for thy unbelief, for thy righteousness, for thy
sin, because of thy unbelief, for thy judgment, because the Prince of this
world is judged, Joh. 16. and so Christ does not say I am the light of the
Saints, of the elect only, but I am the light of the world, Joh. 8.12. and
says, that light is come into the world, and this is the condemnation of the
world, that light is come into to the world, and men love darkness rather then
it, because their deeds are evil, Joh. 3.19. So its unbelief that shuts out,
Romans 11.20. So the gates stand open night and day, and every one that does
evil, hates the light and will not come to it, because it will reprove him,
and he will not come in to the gate, for he that comes to the gate comes to the
light, and he that comes to the light, comes out of condemnation, and comes to
be a child of the light, he that hates the light will not come into the
kingdom of God: And for thy saying, God has ordained a great part of the
world to Hell, let them repent, and do all that ever he has commanded them; he
that does the things that Christ commands, enters the Kingdom; he that repents
his mind is changed, and whosoever believes shall not perish, and this command
is general, Joh. 10.28. through the whole world, therefore thou with the Devils
doctrine, shuts up the kingdom of Heaven against others, and wilt not go in
thy self, who says let men repent, and do all that ever they can, they must go
to hell, when God wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should
turn from his wickedness and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. but he is merciful, and judges
not as thou do, whose eyes are blinded, and hands full of blood; so I say,
whosoever repents, and does the things they are commanded, they shall be saved,
and that which thou say to the contrary, we conclude to be the Devils
doctrine, and whosoever resists the thing that is commanded, that will be their
condemnation, but hates the light which was before the world was, which
lights every man that comes into the world, that all through him might
believe, for he that believes in the light shall not abide in darkness, John
8.12. shall not come into condemnation, shall come to be a child of light, John
12.36. and they shall have the light of life, and so the light is sufficient to
save them, and condemn them that believe not, John 3.18.14. James 4.12. and
every one that comes into the light, that they are enlightened withal, such
come into the election, and into the Covenant of God, and evil consciences
thou may frighten, them that hates the light, which is their condemnation;
but the elect thou can neither save nor deceive, thanks be to God Christ
reigns, who will give to every man according to his works, who does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, not believing is condemned, and shut out,
and such turn the grace of God into wantonness, and are ordained of old, that
hate the light which lights every man that comes into the world, and such be
in Cain and Balaams way, persecutors and murderers, and turns the grace of God
into wantonness.

Pr. From the words of Jude 4. they were of old ordained; from these words he
said, That God had predestined one to life, without any cause in the creature
less or more, and the other wicked man to Hell without any cause in the
creature less or more; and both wicked men: And before thou said part of the
cause that God cast into hell was in the man, and part in God; In this seventh
principle and doctrine, thou say there is no cause in the creature, that God
cast into hell and condemns him, and in the other thou said, there were part
blame in man, and part in God; and here is the Devils Doctrine, a lie found in
thy mouth, and thou have wrested, perverted, and wronged that Scripture in Jude
who says, their is no part in man causes condemnation; that all may see you
are liars, he says, they were ungodly, they turned the grace of God into
laciviousness that brings salvation, that denied the Lord that bought them,
Jude 11. 2 Pet. 2.1. They were covetous, made merchandise of the people,
through fained words, so no covetous nor Idolater shall enter into the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. and all they deny the Lord that bought them, but who owns
the light that comes from him, which does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, and none sees him, but with the light that comes from him, and they
go in Cores way, and gain-sayeth the truth, who go from the light that Christ
has enlightened them in the particular, and he that gain-sayeth the truth,
there is a fault in him, and they go in Cains way that are from the command of
God, who said if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if he did not
well, fin lay at the door; now these were of old ordained unto condemnation,
which turned the grace of God into wantonness, were in Cains way, Cores way,
and brake the commands as Cain did, in Balaams way, erred from the spirit, and
admired men's persons because of advantage, which Balaam did, and loved the
wages of unrighteousnes, and so these did not do the things they were
commanded; Cain he did not do the thing that he was commanded, nor Core that
offered strange fire, and his company, Number. 16. So these of old were ordained
for this condemnation, which condemnation is the light, Io. 3. light foresees
them, and sees over them, and condemns them, when they arise and goes out from
the spirit of God in them; and here all may see, here was fault worthy of
condemnation, and those were they that sensually separated themselves from the
Apostles, and had not the spirit, Jude 19 in their days: which were covetous,
which went for the gift and reward, which were like raging waves of the Sea,
which were spots in feasts of charity, feasting, feeding without fear, 2 Pet.
2. Which admired men's persons because of advantage, and spoke the high words in
hypocrisy, Wells without water, Trees without fruit, raging waves of the Sea,
foming out their own shame, clouds without water carried about with tempests,
spots in the feasts of charity, like unto Sodom and Gomorah in filthiness,
which go from the light that does convince them: so there is the self
separation, and their is the condemnation that comes over them, the light; and
these are they that separated from the Apostles; which said love your enemies,
Mat. 5.44. Which are men gone into the world, which be in Cains way in envy, in
Cores way gainsaying the light, they are like raging waves of the Sea, foming
out their shame in their pulpits, so you are the men that separates from the
Apostles, that be in Cains way, who be out of the life, and sacrifice the
Saints were in, that would murder, and Cores way that gain-sayeth the light
that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, so against the common
salvation, and ye be like Cain foming and raging in your Pulpits, and would
murder all that are contrary to you, whose Sacrifice God acceptes, and yours
he does not, and God would have accepted of Cain, if he had done well, Genesis 4.
So God is merciful, and a just God, but Cain he did not well; therefore woe went
out from God against him, and so there was fault in him and not in God, which
was the cause of his condemnation: so you that be in Balaams way; for the wages
of unrighteousness, admiring men's persons because of advantage, Ye are out of
the faith that is held without respect of persons, Iam. 2. and so separated
from the Apostles, to whom Christ said, Freely ye have received, freely give,
and you will not give freely, who are rageing and foming, without you have
augmentations, stipends, gleabe Lands, or Tithes, great sums of money, gifts of
rewards from great houses, so you deny the light that enlighteneth every man
that comes into the would, so gain-sayes the common salvation, Jude 1. You
gainsay the truth, that does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
so in Cores way you are, and would have the persons of the Saints murdered, so
in Cains way, as ye confess that ye have not the spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures, so in the self separation, and ye deny the light that enlighteneth
every man that comes into the world, which is the Lord, John 8.12. And so
denies the Lord that bought you, 2 Pet. 2.1. And so are for condemnation, who
are of that flock that separate themselves from the Apostles, sensually, having
not the spirit, who are in Cains way, that would kill and murder, and out of
the Apostles way, who said love your enemies; who are in Balaams way, for gifts
and rewards, and admiring men's persons because of advantage, to them speaking
high words in hypocrisy, and out of the Apostles way to whom Christ said,
Freely ye have received, freely give, Mat. 10.6. And out of the Prophets way,
who said, come without a price, Isa. 55.1, 2. And ye will have the price, or
else you will not come, let all that can read Jude over, and see if their was
not cause in man of his condemnation, and not in God; and so have not you
proved your selves in the Doctrine of Devils, and in lies, and would make God
unrighteous, and the Apostles unrighteous? for their was fault in Cain, fault
in Balaam, and fault in Core, and fault in Sodom, and fault in them that
turned the grace of God into wantonness, which were of old ordained for this
condemnation, Jude 4. which condemnation is, that light is come into the world,
and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil, and so
the Apostles taught that their was fault in man, as ye may read Jude, and thou
have taught there is none; so then thou art unrighteous, who would make God and
the Apostles unrighteous, like thy self, let all that fear God judge of it,
who are now come to the judgment Seat before the Almighty God, who have been
them that erred from the Apostles Doctrine, with it is judged, and are judged,
and you must have a reward according to your works, and he that comes to life,
comes out of his wickedness, and not the wicked man enters into the kingdom of
God, Rev. 21. and the promise is to the seed, and he that works iniquity
departs from the seed, Gal. 3.16. And the Election obtaines it, Romans 11.7. Not
him that wills, nor runs, But God that shows mercy; And whereas thou say
the wicked manis ordained to life, without any cause in the Creature, less or
more, This is just the Devils Doctrine again, and to bring every one to hide
his Talent and none neither to watch nor pray; for this is the creature, that
brings him to lay a side wickedness, and to depart from sin and iniquity,
which lets him see it, and covetous and drunkenness so through the obedience
of the Spirit, and that is in the Creature that brings him to confess his sin,
and for sake it, whereby mercy is showed; the power of God works in us says
the Apostle; And as they had been servants to unright cousness, so came to
yield themselves servants unto righteousness, Romans 6. How comes the commands
of God to be obeyed, if there be not something in the creature that cause him to
obey it? For thou say without any cause in the creature, why were all these
expressions spoken in scripture, that they should obey all things that Christ
commanded, Mat. 28.20. And all the statute, and Ordinances spoken of in the
scriptures if there be not something in man to cause him to obey it: but thy
intent is to make God unrighteous who respects no man's person, but gives to
every man a reward according to works, Rev. 2.23. The one as well as the other,
and all shall appear before the judgment of Christ, 2 Cor. 9.10. He will judge
the world in righteousness; but there is something in the creature; for every
man that comes into the world being enlightened, whereby he is capable of
obeying or disobeying, and not believing comes to be condemned, and in
believing he is saved, he has the witness in himself, John 3.8. 1 John 5.10
For he that commits sin is the servant of sin, John 8.24. And there is no
respect of persons with God, but whosoever does righteousness is accepted of
him, Acts 10.34, 35. The Apostle said, He perceived God was no respecter of
persons, but whosoever does wickedly he hates the light, and is condemned, but
whosoever does the truth, comes to the light, John 3.21. and so out of
condemnation, so thou teach another Doctrine, so as I said before, The
promise is to the seed, the seed is Christ, and Christ all and in all, 1 Cor.
15.28. And all ungodly and wicked men are shut out of the Kingdom of God,
where no wicked men enters, one nor other, and man must be turned again from
wickedness, before he encers, Rev. 21.8.

Pr. He being asked what he would do with Quakers, and he said if he had been a
Civil Magistrate, he would have thought it good service to have cut off all
their heads.

Ans. There ye may all see if he be not of Cains stock, and what an envy
proceeds out of his mouth, and unchristian Spirit, and how would he convert
them if they were out of the way? and how would he convince them, who would cut
off their heads? has not this proved the Quakers to be in the truth, and he
out of it, and is not the command of Christ that ye should love your enemies?
Mat. 5.44. Now ye may see he is out of the command and example, but followed
the example of Cain the murderer, and does not his envy show as much against
the Magistrates as against the the Quakers, because they will not execute his
malice, and slay them for him, and be his executioners? and were not these
Priests as mad against the Magistrates, (as they are now against the Quakers)
at Dunbar fight? and would not they have had their heads off? let their Pulpits
witness, though now they admire their persons because of advantage, Jude 16.
Who cannot hold in, but their shame must be uttered forth, who would slay the
persons of men as Cain did; so woe from the Lord is gone out against you, who
are envious, and strives to make the people envious, but the life of God is
risen in the hearts of his people, with which they shall see you all, and the
Quakers be out of the way of Cain, who be in the light of Christ Jesus the
Savior of the soul, in which they come to have a habitation in God, the
Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. So you that
be out of the light be Vagabonds, though ye have great habitations in the
earth, for Cain built a City yet a Vagabond, Genesis 4.

Pr. It was asked him of a foreordained number to desiruction, and for what
Christ wept over Jerusalem. He said, as he was humane he mourned, and his
Godhead decreed them to Hell.

Ans. This is a lying Doctrine of the Devil, for after many of them of
Jerusalem came to be converted, as ye may read in Acts 2. And many of the
Priests came to be obedient to the Faith, for all being gone astray both Jews
and Gentiles, Romans 3.9. concluded under sin, the pure, the eternal tendered over
them; who had stopped their ears, and closed their eyes to that which was pure
of God in them, that they might have come to that which is pure, and have been
gathered under Christ's wings, Mat. 23.37. who is pure, and so have been
converted and healed, and have heard with their ears, and have seen with their
eyes. And as for the word humane, that is not Scripture language, it speaks not
that language, and there were converted many thousands of the Jews, and they
were pricked to the heart, when that the Apostle said, that was both Lord and
Christ whom ye have crucified, Acts 2. (mark ye) here thou may see thy self
to be a liar; for here was of the Jews and of Jerusalem, that he had wept over;
thou say he had ordained them them to Hell (as he was God) which were
converted afterward; so thou would make God unequal, that the Son is not in
the Father, and divides them, that the Son should weep over them, and the
Godhead decree them to Hell, and did not Christ command his Apostles that they
should not depart from Jerusalem? and was not the mighty conversion at
Jerusalem? so has not Christ wept over Jerusalem, and after was there not a
mighty conversion there? And thou say he condemned them as God to Hell;
there thou may see thy self in the Devils Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.1. Many
thousands were converted at Jerusalem, which Christ wept over, before the
Apostles departed from thence, where he gave them command to stay; so see thy
Doctri^e is damnable, and thou errs from the Scriptures, let thy-mouth for ever
be stopped: and are not ye found in the steps of them, Matthew. 23. that Christ
gives the mark of blind-guides to the multitude, unto the Disciples, which
marks were such as the multitude might take notice of, and I believe the
multitude will take notice of, and know you; first ye bind heavy burdens upon
men's shoulders, ye are sayers and not doers, and all their works they do to be
seen of men, Matthew. 6. they love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the
chiefest seats in the Assemblies, greeting in the Markets, stands praying in
the Synagogues, called of men Masters, they were swearers, they should scourge
you in their Synagogues, and persecute, do not ye put out of your Synagogues?
Christ should send Prophets and wise men among them, and they should persecute,
and put out of the Synagogues, Mat. 23.34. They should shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against men, and do not ye do so that do deny the light, that lights
every one that comes into the world? do any come to the Kingdom, but who come
to the light, which every man that comes into the world is enlightened withal?
may not the multitude take notice of these things, called of men Master, stand
praying in the Synagogues, having long Robes, salutations in the Markets,
uppermost rooms at feasts, puts out of the Synagogues, and swearers, and Christ
said, swear not at all, Mat. 5.34. And be ye not called of men Master, for one
is your Master, even Christ, and ye all are Brethren; now here is the marks of
the blind guides, as ye may read, Matthew. 23. Are they not a company of
Swearers, and will they not swear for their own advantage? and were not the
Priests always envious, and false accusers, provoking the Magistrates against
the Disciples, against Christ, and against Jesus? did not the Priests say Jesus
should die for crying against them, Jer. 26. And were not the Priests at work
when any of the Saints were murdered, to stir up the multitude against them,
or the Magistrates? Was not the chief Priests and Elders seeking false witness
(...) out Jesus to death? Mat. 26.39. And did not the High Priests say he had
spoken blasphemy? it was Pilate that put him to death, did not the chief
Priests persuade their multitude to ask Barrabbas, Matthew. 27.20. and crucify
Jesus, and did not they mock him? See how the Priests were always busy for
blood, that all the righteous blood might come upon them, shed upon the earth,
Matthew. 23.35. And did not the Priests give money to Judas to betray Christ? and
did not the Priests give large money to the Soldiers to tell a lie, and say
his Disciples stole him away by night? Matthew. 28.11, 12, 13. had not Paul
authority from the High Priest to persecute? Acts 9.1, 2. and so get you your
Authority from the Magistrates, and the people their Authority from you to
persecute, and would not the chief Priests have murdered Paul afterward, when
he was converted, Acts 23. Acts 2.7. Did not a company come with swords and
staves from the Priests with Judas to take Christ? Mark 14.13. as a troop of
Robbers wait for a man; so does a company of Priests murder in the way by
consent, and have not ye consented together? Hos. 6.2.

Pr. That Christ scorned men when he bad them be persect because he knew it was
impossible for them.

Answ. This is wickedness and impudency to say Christ scorned men when he bad
them be perfect. This is Antichrist and the Devils Doctrine, for to say that
Christ did command that which men should not come to, for Christ nor God
commanded nothing but what should be attained unto, and it will be attained
unto, and has been attained unto; Christ said, Be perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect, Mat. 5.4. he knew that they might be perfect if they come
into the Kingdom of God, for there no unperfect thing must enter, Rev. 21. and
so he did speak that which he knew people should come into, but they should
come into it, if ever they came into the Kingdom of God; what is this to thee
which cannot love enemies? for they that love enemies shall know perfection,
and perfect love and patience have its perfect work, Jam. 1.4. the Apostles
speak wisdom to them that were perfect, but not the worlds wisdom which comes
to nothing, 1 Cor. 2.6. and the work of the Ministry was for the perfecting of
the Saints, till they all come into the unity of the faith, unto the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure and stature and
fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. and they should not be any more tossed to and fro
with the windy Doctrines of men, nor cunning craftiness wherewith they lie in
wait to deceive, and there art thou tossed up and down with every wind, and far
off the work of the ministry, when thou say blasphemously, Christ scorned men
when he bad them be perfect; Christ did not scorn them, but thy doctrine, it
is imperfect, and thou and you that transgress and abide not in the doctrine of
Christ, thou and you are Antichrists, as ye may read, 2 John 9.10.

Pr. When it was asked him, of the words that Peter spoke of, concerning them
that brought in damnable Heresies, and denied the Lord that bought them, he
said they did but think the Lord had bought them, but they were not bought, but
they thought they had been so.

Ans. Here thou again with thy damnable Doctrine, do go about to make Peter
and Jude liars, who speaks contrary to scripture, and perverts their Doctrine,
and the words of Peter are thus, even denying the Lord that bought them; 2 Pet.
2.1. and the words of Jude 4. denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ; and thou say the Lord had not bought them, but they thought he had
bought them, woe and misery, man, will be thy portion, that thou should so
wickedly pervert the Apostles Doctrine and Scripture, Acts 13.10. and bring in
such damnable Doctrine, and devilish Doctrine, and speaks such lies in
hypocrisy, whose conscience is seared with a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4. it is time for
people to turn away from you, who have so long deceived them.

Pr. Concerning these words of Ezekiel. 18.28. If the righteous man turn away from
his righteousness, his former righteousness shall be no more remembered; and he
said the meaning of that scripture was, they thought they had been righteous,
but they were not, but supposed it had been so.

Answ. Here in this thou art a minister of unrighteousness, thou go about to
make God a liar, and the Prophets, and perverts the scriptures, for if he
forsakes his righteousness, and commits sin and iniquity, and trespasses, he
shall die, and not live in the righteousness; but if he forsake his sin,
trespasses and transgressions, in the righteousness that he has done and
does, he shall live; so Gods ways are equal, Ezekiel. 18. And thou say they
thought they had been righteous, but it was not so: And the Lord by the Prophet
says it was so, that they should live in their righteousness, and dye if they
depart from it, and transgressed here thou art a diminisher from the Prophets
and Apostles words, whose name is diminished out of the book of life, read Rev.
22.19.

Pr. He denied that Christ dyed for all men, but for the Elect.

Answ. Contrary to John's Doctrine, who says, he is the propitiation for our
sins, and not for our sins only, but for the the sins of the whole world, 1
John 2.2. and so it is the unbeliever that is shut out; and not believing in
the light that men are enlightened withal, with which light they might see the
one offering, who tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. and does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, that all through him might believe; and
they that believe not in the light are condemned, Joh. 3.18. but believing in
the light, shall come out of condemnation, and he is the Savior of all men,
but especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. and the grace of God which
brings salvation has appeared to all men, which was the saints Teacher, Titus
2.11, 12. and they that turn it into wantonness, shall with it be condemned
Jude 4. and they that set up a heap of teachers, 2 Timothy 4.3. after their own
lusts, and went out from the Apostles doctrine, before the Apostles decease, 1
John 2.19. and have turned the grace of God that brings salvation, into
wantonness, ever since, and says it has not appeared unto all men, which
brings salvation, which is saving grace, and Christ Jesus does enlighten every
man that comes into the world, that they might believe, and walk after him,
and says, they that follow him shall not abide in darkness, but shall become
the children of light, and have the light of life, John 8.12. Now say they that
hate the light, it is not sufficient, it is not a saving light, but they shall
find it sufficient to condemme them, and their unbelief, for not believing in
it; for believing in it, they come to have the light of life, John 8.12 and
John 12.36.

Pr. He being asked who were hirelings, if they were not that did take hire?
his answer was, they were hirelings that did not take hire, and to prove it, he
brought that scripture in Philipians of them that preached Christ of envy and
strife.

Answ. Now all may see what doctrine he brings, to pervert or rest the
scriptures, Philip. 1.15. to prove them hirelings that do not take hire, that
in the Philipians does not prove that they were hirelings, neither did they
take hire: so that for his purpose makes nothing, though for this purpose he
brings that scripture, but that his folly and darkness might appear, and be
made manifest by the light, for now to it his deeds are come, who is unfit to
talk of the scripture.

Pr. He said it was the clear mark of the Devil to go up and down from place
to place to preach as the Quakers do.

Answ. Now here in this he may charge all the prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, which went up and down from place to place, Heb. 11. that this is
the mark of the Devil, but this is too manifest to bring to light, and
discover the Presbyterian Priests of Scotland, who lies in Dens and Corners,
and fat benefits, and there stick in the earth, and are crept into houses, who
say it is the Devils mark to go up and down to preach; but this is that they
may manifest themselves to be judged by the practice of Christ and his
Apostles, that their folly might appear unto all men, Luke 9.5.8. Heb. 11.
likewise the Presbyterian Priest are turned like ranters, who says whatsoever
man does, God has a hand in doing of it, whether Good or Evil, if a man commit
never so much sin, and live never so wickedly he shall go to Heaven if he be
ordained there to come; how was God greived when David sinned? the Lord was
angry; the Lord was wrath, when the children of Israel sinned against him, it
greived the Lord that he had made man, when all flesh had corrupted his way,
Genesis 6.6. and thou and you go about to make God the author of sin, and says
God has a hand in it, whatsoever a man does here: again you and thou be in the
doctrines of Devils, what shall we say that God is the author of sin? God
forbid, Romans 6. they that transgress the commandments of God, provoke him to
anger, and though God created the evil, Isa. 49.7. yet his commandments was to
man, that he should not go into it, Genesis 2.17. Genesis 4.7. Ezekiel. 18. but when he
did, he transgressed the command of God; so he who says if ye murder, God is
the author of it, if ye persecute, God is the author of it, if ye do
unrighteously God is the author of it: you that murder, persecute, and do not
righteously, are of him that kept not the command of God, of whom ye are, Joh.
44. that would persecute and murder, thou art gone out of the command of God,
and joined with the Devil, 1 John 3.8. that went out of the truth, the Devil he
went out of his estate, and the woman hearkened to him, and went out of her
estate, and man to the woman, Genesis 3. The Jews went out of their state, when
they persecuted, Mat. 27.25. Cain went out of his state, when he murdered,
Genesis 4. The Christians went out of their estate, fince the days of
persecution, who had the name of Christianity; Cain went out of his state when
he murdered, and Balaam went out of his state, when he coveted the wages of
unrighteousness, and admired men's persons, Numb. 22. Jude 11. Core went out of
his state when he gainsaid the truth, Number. 16. Jude 11. the false Prophet, and
the Antichrist which is the Beast, and the mother of Harlots, went forth from
the state of the Apostles, 1 John 2.19. which has been fince the days of the
Apostles, and so all wars, and fightings, and adversaries, is because of being
out of the truth, fallen out of it, James 4. there is pride and Lucifer, Isai.
14. and that is it that is of old ordained to condemnation, Jude 4. and to be
kept down, and to be condemned everlastingly; and there the time that shall be
witnessed fit for the fire, and Death and Hell; and the false Prophet, and the
Dragon and the Serpent cast into it, Rev. 20.14. but leaven is known that
leavens into the new lump, 1 Cor. 5.7. the everlasting fire that burns for
ever, Mark 9.46. how are the professions, forms, and religions fallen from the
state, and lost the state, and out of the state that Christ was in, the
Prophets were in, Abraham was in, David was in, Moses and the Apostles was in;
and remains in a form of their words, 2 Timothy 3.5. and murders them that enjoys
their life, and persecutes them; The Devil abode not in the truth, John 8.44.
Adam and Eve abode not in the truth, but transgressed, Genesis 3. Cain abode not
in the truth when he murdered Abel, Genesis 4. The Jews abode not in the truth,
but crucified the just, Jam. 5.6. The Antichrist, and the false-Prophets, since
the days of the Apostles, and the Beast abode not in the truth, 1 John 2.19.
that made the war against the Saints, Rev. 13. And here is the murderers,
envious, and persecutors, warring, and fighters, and their sacrifice God never
accepted, Genesis 4.5. in all ages: and these are them that persecuted those that
was in the truth, whose sacrifice God accepted, to the witness of God in you
all I speak; that you may see your fall from the truth, out of the Prophets
life, Christ's life, and the Apostles life; so be out of the commands, and
fallen from God, and say that none can keep the commandments: that is the Word
that shall stand for ever, so ye are they that loves not not God, Joh. 14.13. 1 John 2.4. but are of the Beast and false Prophets that makes war against them
that keep the commands of God, Rev. 22.11. so that which says, none can keep
the Commandments, is fallen out of the truth, and the Commandments of God, 1
John 2.4. Ioh. 8.44. And to him the truth is death, and the commands of God in
which the Saints live, to whom the Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.

Thomas Garwine, Priest of Edenborough, his Doctrine and PRINCIPLES.
Pr. THat the Child that is not sprinkled with outward water is in a damnable
state, and worse then an infidel.

Answ. Now here he and the rest of the Presbyterian Priests of Scotland may say
Abraham was in a damnable state, Isaac was in adamnable state, Jacob was in a
damnable state, and Joseph was in a damnable state, and David was in a damnable
state, and John the Baptist was in a damnable state, which were not sprinkled
by a Priest with outward water, nor named by the Priest, so thou and you with
your traditions, that say a Child is in a damnable state, if ye do not sprinkle
it with water; and the Apostle bids them not look at the things that are seen,
and you are in the damnable state, and the damnable doctrine, teachers of lies;
and many simple people have been deceived by you, and given over to believe
you, but God has taken the vail off their hearts, that you begin to be seen:
and their salvation shall they know stands not in elements, as though you, with
your sprinkling Infants with outward water, could bring out of the damnable
state; Oh ye deceivers, did not the Apostle say, they that were Circumcised,
Christ profited them nothing? Gal. 5.2 ye have long deceived people with your
beggarly rudiments, and elements, and doctrines, and traditions, Col. 2.
hatched up at Schools, and never commanded of God; and say, if people will not
observe your traditions, or your elements which you call (a Papist word)
Sacrament, and perishing, they not observing it, are in a damnable state, and
worse then the Heathen and Infidels; an Infidel, is an Heathen, one that knows
not God; But your generation says it is blasphemy to say any has known God,
and has seen God, and spoken to God: so they themselves have concluded to be
Heathen: The Heathen know not God: The Heathen observes traditions; and they
that know God cannot observe the traditions of the Heathen: but obeys the
Apostles doctrine, and touches not, tastes not, nor handles the traditions of
men and Ordinances which will perish, so not saying; so they that observe not
traditions are not worse then Heathens: but they that observe traditions are as
the Heathens, and be out of the Apostles doctrine in their own traditions and
rudiments, and are offended at those that will not touch them. Robert Semple
Priest of Lasmahagow came to George Wear of Saffield to reason with him, and
he laid down these following things for his doctrine and principles, His first
doctrine and principles was to prove the lawfulness of being called of men
master; standing praying in the Synagogues, going in long Robes, and he
mentioned Ezras Pulpit of wood upon which he stood, and read the Law to the
people; and for the rest he said nothing, for his mouth was stopped concerning
these things, being found in the steps of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. we do grant
that Ezra had a Pulpit of wood, but you profess your selves Ministers of the
Gospel and plesbyterians, and are ye sain to run to Ezra, in the Law for a
Pulpit? now you have showed your selves what you are; and brought your deeds to
the light; but the Priesthood was made by the Law of God: so were you never;
that priesthood changed, and the Law changed also by which it was made, and
pulpit and Tithes ended; and Christ the everlasting Priesthood witnessed; so
thou and you have proved your selves no Ministers of the Gospel, Christ Jesus,
the power of God, and the wisdom of God, the ever lasting Priesthood, who is
the end of Priests, Pulpits and Tithes, that was true in their place. So you
that have got up another Pulpit, Tithes, Temple, like Readers of the Law, and
not like ministers of the Gospel, and Priests, are separated from the Apostles
in the delusion, and from Christ the everlasting Priesthood, Heb. 7. and are
them that Jude 19. and 2 Pet. 2. speaks of, That separates themselves, having
not the Spirit that they were in who witnessed against Pulpit, Tithes, and
Priesthood, and witnessed Christ the everlasting Priesthood, which Pulpit,
Tithes, and Priesthood ye are crying up, and so Antichrist.

George Wear bad him prove his practice for sprinkling of Infants, and whether
or no they were not to believe before they were Baptized. He said the promise
was to Abraham and his seed; George answered him, it was not to seeds, as to
many, but to thy seed which is Christ. Robert the Priest said, That seed
Christ, was natural, contrary to the Apostles doctrine, Gal. 3.16. who said
Christ was the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15. and Christ the mystery, Col.
1.2.7. The first man is of the earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from
Heaven heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. the spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15.
The seed of the woman bruiseth the serpents head, Genesis 3.15. and the promise is
to the seed, and the seed is Christ the power of God, And Christ the seed is
the spiritual man and so not natural, but the Priest said the seed is natural.
Now let all see in this whether he be not given up to delusion, to speak lies
in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.1. to delude and deceive people for dishonest gain,
Ezekiel. 22.13. Which seed he and all the Presbyterians shall find spiritual to
judge them, and bruise the heads of them, and break their wicked cords and
bonds of iniquity which they have laid upon the people, Mat. 23. Ezekiel. 34. Acts
15. The day is at hand that their judgment is come; by that man whom God has
ordained, Acts 17.31. and to judge the world in righteousness, and to give to
every man a reward according to his works, Ps. 62.12. Rev. 22.12. who shall
give to him an account for every idle word they shall speak in the day of
judgment, Mat. 12.36. And William Kenedie came to George Wear, and promised
him that he should have a public hearing, he hearing what the Priest and the
rest of the Elders charged him withal, And when he came they would not give
him a hearing; and so found them truce breakers that are to be turned away
from, 2 Timothy 3. and such as creep into houses, and be of themselves, boasters,
proud, high-minded, as Jannes and Jambres, who have a form of godliness, and
denis the power, which are to be turned away from: And after that the said
Priest did excommunicate George Wear in in another parish without any hearing,
nor would not let him know for what they excommunicated him, which was a work
of darkness to make the peoples minds envious against the just: upon which
George Wear went to their meeting place to read a paper to him, to show why he
denied him; and two Priests, Robert Semple, and John Hume being there, bad the
people to knock down that excommunicated (Swinger) which is in English (Rogue)
upon which the people did obey the Priest, and did beat, and knock George Wear
down to the ground; and might have murdered the man, had not the Lords mercy
been seen, so they be in Cains way, in envy; Genesis 4. Jude 11. And George got up
again, and the Priests bad the people strike him; and they did beat him, and
pluck him by the hair of the head; and the Priests bad beat them away; and they
did so. And after the Priest summoned George to the Court; and told the Bailiff
he would prove it by the Scripture, he must be stoned to death; now here is the
murdering Jews nature, that stoned the prophets, and stoned the Apostles; and
stoned Steven, and took up stones to stone Christ, Mat. 23.24. John 8.59. Acts
7.58 And bloody Butchers, manslayers, no Ministers of Christ: did not the false
prophets go always with the beast to war? Rev. 13. Rev. 16. against Saints and
the Lamb; and did not the chief priests stir up the rulers against Christ, and
had not the priests a hand to murder? and was not the priest at the
examination of Steven, and the Council gave order that he should be stoned to
death? and did not the Priests stir up the Rulers and Magistrates, though they
themselves did not often do it, which had not the power, but they stirred up
the Magistrates to do it? And they came to be their slaughterers, to execute
their malice, and be their executioners; ye do not, ye may say, it is the
Magistrates which ye stir up to do it. It is not said, the Priests did slay and
crucify Christ, but Pilate, but the Priests had power amongst the multitude to
persuade the multitude to ask the murderer, Mat. 27. (which had murder in
their hearts) and Pilate did the thing; and did not God overthrow Jerusalem,
and destroy the power of the Magistrates there, and priests both? and has not
God done it in many ages for executing the Priests malice, and their envy
against the just, and his anointed? have not ye many examples set down in the
scripture, which ye may all take notice of it.

Therefore take heed all ye Magistrates, how you execute and avenge the malice
and wickedness, and envy, of any one against the just: for the envy of the
envious, and the wickedness of the wicked shall slay himself, Psalm. 34.21. and
the righteous shall see it. Therefore you that are called Christian
Magistrates, execute not, neither be ye executioners of their madness, and envy
of those who calls themselves Ministers of Christ. That would have you to slay,
to stone, to stocks, to prison, and to put to death them that be contrary to
them; those be murderers in Cains way, man-slayers, wrastlers against flesh
and blood, and not Ministers of the Gospel which says, Love enemies, and
render to no man evil for evil, Mat. 5.44. and this differs from the Scribes
and Pharisees who loved their own, and persecuted others, and stoned others,
and drew the Magistrates to do it, which says the Ministers of Christ, we
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. Now those Ministers that
would have the persons of men slain, are like Cain and Jezabel, the beast and
false Prophets, that slew Abel, Genesis 4.1 Kings 21. the persons of men stoned,
imprisoned, and put to death, are as the Jews Priests, and those Magistrates
that executes their malice, are as the Jews Magistrates, unchristian
Magistrates. And so those are they that are wrestling, stoning, striking and
imprisoning against flesh and blood. And in the mean time spiritual wickedness
rules among them, and rulers of darkness in high places, where flesh and blood
are wrestled against; so in this state both Ministry and Magistracy are blind,
that be out of the fear of God; they turn their sword backward, whilst they are
executing the Priests malice, and the Priests will strengthen the hands of evil
doers; and provoking to slay, and against flesh and blood wrestling, and do not
profit the people at all, and stirs up the multitude against the just; that
he may keep himself in his place for his own ends, and admiring the Magistrates
persons, and men's, because of advantage, Jude 16. and respects their persons,
which shows they be out of the faith, Jam. 2. which gives victory over the
world, 1 John 5.4. and out of the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles; now the
Magistrates is for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well: which walks in the life, which he that does evil goes from; where
the rulers of darkness and spiritual wickednesses are; and this Magistrate he
can see, he turns not the sword backward, he answers that of God in every one;
and is for a praise to them that do well, 1 Pet. 2.14. so every evil doer acts
contrary to that of God in them; now a Minister of Christ wrestles not against
flesh and blood, but against spiritual wickednesses in high places; so every
one that does evil acts contrary to that of God in him, so the higher power
goes above him; Romans 13.1. So the higher power is above him, and before he was,
all power in heaven and in earth is given to the Son of God, John 5.22. above
all the powers of the earth, that lights every man that comes into the
world, John 1.9. but they who does evil, goes from the light, and so the higher
power goes against him. The Magistrates that be in the power, is a terror to
the evil doers that acts contrary to the light wherewith every one that comes
into the world be enlightened, The Magistrates be in that power which goes over
him, and is a praise to them that be in the light, and the Ministers of God is
to bring from under the occasion of the Magistrates sword.

George Wear being with his friend standing in the field near Foord
meeting house, as they call it, he neither speaking, nor acting any thing
against any man, but standing in the fear of the Lord with his friend; William
Lowry, and John Hambleton called Justices, committed him to prison, where they
lay twenty and three days; and here is his innocence preached.

The original righteousness was before the fall; The original of
self-righteousness was that which fell, and is in the fall; that transgressed.

And in the Catechism which is tolerated by the general Assembly, and in the
Catechize of Scotland, called, A Short Catechism, They say that the Word of God
is contained in the Scriptures.

Answ. And the Scriptures are writings; and it says, God is the Word, John
1.1. 1 Kings 8.27. Solomon says, The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, and
you say he is contained in the Scriptures with his writings: and you say there
is Three persons; and the Scripture does not speak of Three persons, and the
Jews had the Scriptures, and knew not Christ, the Word of God: Then ye tell
people of an outward ordinary means, by which Christ Communicates the benefit
of Redemption; The word Sacraments; the Scripture does not speak of Three
Persons, and Sacraments, they are Papists words; of them ye have learned them;
the means of salvation is not ordinary, or outward; but Christ is the
salvation, who is Eternal, Heb. 5.9. and they that come to him, come to the
end of the outward, Col. 1.27. Ye say the Sacraments are the Effectual means
to salvation; and ye say again, they are not as they are themselves: (so here
is confusion) but only by the blessing of Christ, and his spirit in them. How
do ye differ from the Papists? for they say he is in them; and ye say his
Spirit is in them, and where his Spirit is, is not he? Oh blind, are ye found
out? go ye home to your Mother the Papist; where Christ Spirit is, he is. And
ye say your two Sacraments, is Baptism, and the Lords Supper. The Scripture
does not call Baptism, and the Lords Supper, two Sacraments; which Names you
and the Papists adore and worship, which you have given to them; again, you in
your Catechize call the First day in the week the Sabbath Day: Where did ever
any of the Ministers of Christ, or Christians, un-apostatized call it so? are
not you come unto the breach, and guilty of your own judgment? Of the third
Commandment, when ye give another Name to the Scriptures, then they give
themselves, in calling them the Word, and calling Baptism, and the Supper, the
Sacraments? Exodus 20. Moses says, God spoke all these words, when he gave
forth the Commandments, (mark words) and the words of Christ are Spirit and
Life, John 6.63. God is the Word, John 1.1. and Christ is the Word, Rev. 19.13.
and the Word became Flesh, and dwelt among us, John 1.14. And them that had the
words of the Scriptures, which cannot be broken, John 10.35. the Law and the
Prophets; they knew not Christ, the Word, before they be brought to the light
that Christ has enlightened them with, and they be brought to the Spirit, John
5.37. John 8.19. Can the whole world say the Lords Prayer in truth? or was it
taught his Disciples, or to the world? does not people draw nigh to God with
their lips that say it, Isaiah 20.13. and are not in the light, which every man
is lighted, that comes into the world withal: Can ye say the Lords Prayer,
which is, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us, without Hypocrisy? How do ye forgive them, when ye would have them
persecuted, and would have them stoned, you that be Teachers of the people? and
how do ye love your neighbors as your selves? and fulfill the Law and the
Prophets; Mat. 7.12. to do so as you would be done by?

To ye Presbyterians of Scotland, I speak that be teachers, whose principles is
to stone, chop off heads, and persecute them that be contrary minded to you,
would ye have those that be contrary to your minds stone you to death, chop
off your heads, imprison, and banish you, and persecute, and excommunicate you?
This is the Law and the prophets, to do as ye would be done by: as others
should do to you, so do unto them: but Christ who is the end of the Law and the
prophets, Romans 10.4. says his doctrine is to love enemies, Mat. 5.44. and
says, if men persecute you, pray for them, and bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them that persecute you, and
despitefully use you, that you may be the children of your father which is in
heaven: who makes the Sun to shine upon the evil and the good, and the rain to
descend upon the just and the unjust, if ye love them that love ye, what reward
have ye, the Publicans and Pharisees do so, and the apostatized Christians who
are got into the forms of words, but out of the life of the Saints of Christ
and the Apostles, and there they are saluting their brethren only, but says
Christ, be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, which you stand
against; so ye are they that have denied the one offering which has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. And makes the blood of Christ of
none effect; which cleanses from all sin, and the new Covenant, which blots
out all sin and transgression; and all upon the earth professors and
worshipers, that call your selves Brethern, and Christians, and offerers, of
what sort soever, that have but the name, before thou offers be reconciled to
thy brother, go leave the gift at the alter, and be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift, Mat. 5.24. then will the Lord accept thy
offering, and all upon the earth that prays; so that ye do forgive others
that trespass against you, as you would have the Lord forgive you your
trespasses.

Oh how is the beauty of the Church of Presbyterians marred, and deformed! oh
how are they become Cages of unclean birds, Synagogues of Satan! Oh how are
their Teachers become envious men, and murderers, of Cains Stock, in whom the
eternal life is not abideing: That would club, stone, and chop off heads of
strangers, servants of the Lord God, and Sons, and Daughters, and
Excommunicate, and put out of their Synagogues; these things have I spoken unto
you, that ye should not be offended, John 16.2. they shall excommunicate you,
yea, the time comes, that they that kill you, shall think they do God good
service; these things will they do unto you, because they never knew the
Father, nor me. These things have I told you before, that when the time comes,
ye may remember that I told you of them, John 16.4. so the sayings of Christ
are fulfilled by you that Excommunicate, and put out of the Synagogues of the
Jews, ye are like, and these are their marks; that they neitheir know the
Father, nor the Son of God. These Temples, Pulpits, Priests, that are set up,
since the days of the Apostles, are amongst the false Prophets that Christ
said should come, Mat. 7. Mat. 24. and John saw was come, 1 John 2.18.19. and 1
John 4.1, 2, 3. which went forth from them, which all the world went after,
Rev. 13.3. And these Excommunications, from you are, that none should buy nor
sell, but such as worship the Beast, and receive his Marks, Rev. 13.14. And it
was the Beast that would kill and destroy, and the Dragon, and the False
Prophets, them that kept the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12. here is the patience
and faith of the Saints; that by the blood of the Lamb that overcomes, that
have the testimony of Jesus, and kept the commands of God; so the Jews
excommunications which had the true Temple, true Tithes, and true Priests,
which had the Figure, the Type, Christ being come the substance, Heb. 10.34.
the everlasting Priesthood, Heb. 7. the everlasting Covenant, and the one
offering, Heb. 10. so them that went from the priesthood went to Christ; The
Jews did excommunicate them out of the Synagogues; now they did not know the
Son nor the Father that did excommunicate, John 16. though they had the figures
and Types of the Son of God. They held up their outward things; and saw not the
Son of God the substance when he was come, so these knew not the Son of God nor
the Father that excommunicated and put out of the Synagogues; which Christ bad
them that was to be put out of the Synagogues, not be offended at those things;
he told them before they came to pass, That when these things come to pass ye
may remember that I told you. Now those are they that Christ said should come;
and the Apostles saw was come, that went forth from them; which has got up
Tithes, and Temples, and Pulpits, and Priests, and the Priests are
excommunicating out of their Synagogues, and these must neither buy nor sell
with them, nor eat, nor drink, nor have nothing to do with them, except they
will worship the beast, or his image, and fall down to him; and this is the
worship of the Beast got up since the Apostles: who apostatized from the true
Church, and went forth from them, which all the world wondered after and
worshipped, and received his mark and his image; They that buy and sell, and
will let others do so with them, that are of them that make war against them
that keep the testimony of Jesus, and the commands of God, and against the
Saints and the Lamb; but the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory: But
the Lamb of God, the seed of God is risen; the beast and the false Prophet is
taken, which has long deceived the Nations, Revelations 2. The old Dragon, the
Serpent, the murderer, the deceiver, the devourer, the Mother of Harlots,
Babylon which has made all Nations drunk with her fornications, which has
corrupted the earth, Rev. 14. which the beasts, and the false Prophets that
deceives the Nations, and the Antichrist, the false Prophets; say they are come
but now: These are deceivers of the Nations; that say they come but now; for
Christ said they should come, and John said they were come before his decease,
whereby he said he knew it was the last time; and in the Revelations he said,
all the world went after them, and all Nations have drunk of the wine of her
fornications, and the Kings of the earth have committed fornications with her,
Rev. 17.2. (mark the word have) and the false Prophets say they come but now,
and now is the last time. And these are the deceivers of the Nations that say
so. Now are people but coming from them; and now is the judgment of the great
whore come; and now is vials of wrath to be powered upon her that has corrupted
the earth, and now shall they go into captivity, Rev. 13. Rev. 1.4. and 18. And
now shall people come to that which the false Prophets, the beast, and the
Mother of Harlots went from, all these heads and horns, and Crowns, will turn
against others with their tongues, Languages; and Babylon, that has been
amongst them; and now is the seed of God risen, which overthrowes all the
excommunicators upon the earth, both beast and false Prophets and Jews both,
which seed of God brings to see to the beginning. Glory to the highest for
ever; and Jews and Gentiles, beasts and false Prophets, and is at the top of
them all, and the corner stone is laid.

John Castairs, and James Durram Priest of Glasgow, when the Fast was appointed
by the English, they kept their Houses, and caused their servants to work, and
took notice of all those that countenanced the English Fast, and the first day
they preached, then after they said it was necessary that a day of Humiliation
should be, and that all people should be humbled for the powers they saw now
ruling in the land, for they were giving liberty and tolleration to all sects,
and blasphemies, as Anabaptists, Independants, and said that the Baptists
denied all worship and Ordinances, as they were and ought to be according to
the Ecclesiastical Government, which Government is the true hedge of the Church
of Christ.

Lodowick Simerell Priest of Munkland, he said before several persons that no
true Justice had been, or was since those enemies came to this Nation, neither
would be until the Lord remove them in his own time: Henry Foreside Priest of
Lenyey, and if Paul had been alive he would have stoned the Quakers; and it was
Christian zeal to stone them; and many friends were stoned and beat, and blood
is shed: those that stoned the Apostles and Saints, and haled them before
judgment seats and Magistrates; and the chief Priests had a hand in putting
Christ to death, persuaded them so to do, and the chief Priests had a hand in
stoning of Steven to death, and the Priest had a hand in casting Jeremy into
the dungeon, and into the stocks, and said he was worthy of death; and the high
Priest Ananias examined Paul, and Peter and John was examined by the Priest,
was put out of the Temple by the Priests and Rulers, and charged no more to
speak in that name; and such were these who had a form of godliness, but
denied the power, and such ever stirred up the people to blood and tumults
against the harmless, and innocent in the truth; Therefore come to the light
you that have tasted of the power of the Lord God, that with it you may see and
judge how the Priests blinded the Magistrates by flattery, and so truth came to
be their enemies.

How do you receive strangers, ye Presbyterians of Scotland, and obey the
commands of God, and the Apostles commands, which was, be not forgetful to
entertain strangers; for some have entertained Angels unawares: when as ye
would have the servants of the Lord prisoned, and stocked, and stoned to death,
or their heads chopped off? so you are them that be in Cains way, vagabonds
from the Spirit of God, now a vagabond has not a habitation in God, but
wanders from the witness of God in him, like Cain who built a City, and called
it after his Sons name, Heb. 13.2. Genesis 4.

I am the light of the world that lights every one that comes into the world
says Christ the Savior of our souls, every one going from the light ye be
enlightened withal, ye are vagabonds, and have have not a habitation in God;
and so goes into Cains way, envious and would slay; Balaams and Cores way,
which are with the light condemned; and like unto those Jews, That haled out
of the Synagogues, that Christ spoke of that goes in long Robes, and are called
of men Master, but Christ says, be ye not called of men Master, for one is
your Master even Christ, Mat. 23.

Christ said they that went in long Robes, loved the chiefest places in the
assemblies; should hale out of the Synagogues, and they that do these things be
gone from the light, John 3.19. Joh. 16.2.

All this persuading of corrupt Magistrates to persecute them that reprove sin
in the gates, in the Steeple Houses, streets and highways, is because men have
a self-ish end, and a private interest to themselves, both Professors of
Scriptures and Teachers, and them that does persecute has a self-ish honor,
and an interest to themselves, and so the self-ish Professors, Teachers,
Magistrates that persecutes for them; they have a form of godliness, but the
witness lies slain in them, and they matter not for that rising; for in that
rising all the deeds, words and actions come to light, and then if the witness
of God arise in them, they will not be offended at such as reproves sin in
their Gates, Markets, Steeple Houses and Streets; for all upon the earth, while
they are from the witness of God in them, they are corrupted, and they may get
the form of godliness, the form of Christ's, the Prophets and Apostles words,
and live out of the power, and be in the Religion that is vain, for none upon
the earth comes to the power of godliness, but first they must come to the
witness of God in them, and there is none upon the earth that ever comes to the
first principle of the pure Religion, but first they must come to the witness
of God in them. There Is none knows the Scriptures given forth from the power
and Spirit of God, which was in the Saints, but first they are brought to the
Spirit of God in their own particulars. Come all you Officers and Soldiers,
now after ye have ease, and have overcome your enemies without; take heed least
you sit down in your ease and fullness, and fall down into the earth, and flesh,
and feastings, and fullness, and pride, and so corrupts the earth, and your
selves, and not come down to the witness of God in you; whereby the enemy of
God and of your own souls might be slain, that you might come to find rest and
peace in God, after your outward wars, and so come to the inward wars, which
takes away the cause of the outward, whereby you may all come into true
understanding, to answer that of God in every one, for them that do evil, act
contrary to that of God in them, to such the sword is a terror, and a praise to
them that do well; which is led by the Spirit of God, up to God who is pure,
out of the evil: and all Magistrates swords upon the earth, should reach to
that which is pure in every one to the soul, so it takes away that which wars
against it, that breaks the outward; so comes the soul to be subject to the
higher power, that's above the transgressor, which all the Magistrates and
Rulers upon the earth must give an account to; and there is none upon the earth
that comes to worship God in the spirit and in truth, but who first come to own
that of God in them; and there is none upon the earth, that are like to retain
God in their knowledge, nor his Covenant, while their minds is reprobated from
that of God in them.

There all may see the Covenant of Grace to all men, and the Covenant of light
and life with the Father, he gave him for a Covenant of light to the Gentiles,
to the Heathen, I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel and Judah
the people of God, I will write my Law in their hearts and their minds, so
says Christ, the Covenant of God, I am the light of the world, and does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, that all men through the light
of the Covenant of God might believe it is the Covenant of God, that every man
that comes into the world is enlightened withal, and every one that hates the
light wherewith they are enlightened withal, hates the Covenant, and the light
condemns him, and here all men may see the free grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared to all men; the grace of God that brings the salvation,
the turning the grace of God into wantonness, and walking despightfully against
the Spirit of grace, they neglect their salvation, and bring punishment and
condemnation upon them, as its written in Jude.

Concerning Election, and what is elected, the grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared to all men, the clearing Gods Justice, and the fault is
in man for his condemnation.

There is a precious thing in these Scots, but there is a filthy, beastly,
durty thing lies over.

Lodowick Semerell, Priest of the new Steeple-house of Monkeland, his
proceedings toward Margaret Hambleton.
MArgaret Hambleton went to him to ask the causes why he would excommunicate
her; he said for three causes: First, For that she denied the Presbytery.
Secondly, For denying the Ordinances. Thirdly, For not forsaking the company of
seducers and heretics. Her answer to the first was; your Presbytery, I do
deny, because it is tyranical, and has no power given of God, but what ye take
from men; for ye rule as Lords over Gods heritage: The Priest said she was
ignorant of Scriptures, for they spoke of the laying on the hands of the
Presbytery; she then bid him read the Hebrew copy, which said, the laying on
the hands of the Elders, and true Elders that ruled for the Lord I own, but
such as thou that preaches for filthy lucre, that are Covetous, (as Timothy) I
deny. Secondly, Thy saying I deny the Ordinances, is a lie; for all the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ I own, as Preaching, Praying, or Reading, as any is
moved of the Lord, so to do I own them; for he that ministers out of the
ability that God has given him; or any speaking as the Oracle of God, them I
own: and this is according to plain Scripture, 1 Pet. 4.11. Thirdly, For that
he said, I would not forsake the company of Seducers, and Heretics: I
answered, that way thou calls Heresy, worship I the Eternal God: and this is
according to plain Scripture, Acts 24.14. And it says, Keep company with them
that calls upon God out of a pure heart, 2 Timothy 2.22. And I know they are the
people, therefore thou denies the Scripture, and I obey it; for I witness that
Scripture to be fulfilled, Isay 24.5. they have transgressed the laws, changed
the ordinances, and broken the everlasting Covenant.

I being gone from home about my outward occasions, the Priest excommunicated
me, knowing that I was not there to answer him, and he charged all people to
have no dealing in the outward with me, when I came home the people stood at a
distance from me, so I went to him that I might have the first dealing with
himself, and paid him some money that my husband owned him, and he received it
from my hand, then I asked him the cause why he bid the people have no dealings
with me; yet he himself was the first; but all his answer was, saying to his
man, put her to the door; then I asked what evil I had done, or wherein I had
offended; so I being speaking to the people, showing them how he was out of the
moderation, and out of the bonds of Christian practtice; as I did speak, he
cried the more put her to the door, (although I had paid for apart of the house
building, and so had an interest in it) then I told him he was out of the
practice of the ministers of Christ, and also out of all moderation.

After that he caused a man to make repentance in his Congregation, for selling
me two pecks of Lint Seeds: And soon after the Priest himself came to me to
borrow a book which I lent him, then I asked him why he made the man make
repentance for that which he himself did practice; he replied, it was for
eating and drinking with me, for he said, The Scripture forbids to eat and
drink with an excommunicated person; but I said, the Scripture says, The
Drunkard, the Fornicator, the Extortioner, the Covetous, and the Idolater, with
such a one, eat not; I asked him if I was such a one, he said, I neither can,
nor will say so of you, but I could be content you should live beside me all
days of my life (without excommunicating you) if the Presbytery would suffer
me, and so is judged out of his own mouth, to act contrary to his Conscience,
and to be a man-pleaser.

Afterward he preached lies to the people, saying, That the Quakers received
money from the Pope of Rome, and said, that was the cause that so many went
from their Church; then I and several Friends went to tax him for his lie, but
he hid himself, so that he would not come to us, so is found a worker of
darkness out of the Light of Christ.

The Causes laid down by the Priests why they excommunicated Friends.
THe Cause why they excommunicated William Osburne is this, Because he declared
the Ministers of Scotland Enemies to Christ's Kingdom and Gospel, which are
blood-thirsty men, and bore his Testimony against one of them, which by
violence the Priests were placing in his Land, whose name is William Sterling,
they put him violently out of his own ground, and for these reasons
excommunicated him.

Lewis Simerel Priest of New Monkeland, for these Reasons, viz. Because
Margaret Hambleton denied the power of their Presbiter: Secondly, Because she
would not forsake the company of the people of God whom they call Quakers,
Seducers and Heretics, and also for denying their Ordinances which are by
their own wills, therefore they excommunicated her.

James Nesmith Priest of Hambleton, excommunicated John Huchison, and would
give him no reasons for what he did it; neither is there any known, except it
be for owning the people of God called Quakers.

John Hume Priest of Lesmahagow, and William Simerel Priest of Petenace, with
the rest of the Presbytery at Lannerick, did excommunicate George Wear because
he harbored the Quakers, and for the denying the power of their Presbytery,
and after they had excommunicated him, Robert Semple Priest of that Parish,
viz. Lesmahagow, sent Andrew Clealand Constable, to tell George Wear, if he
would give satisfaction to the Kirk, they would receive him in again upon easy
terms, etc. George Wear, said, because they could not show him the way to God,
which his soul breathed after, who had been long enough under them, he could
not own them; and when the Constable told the Priest what he had said, the
Priest said, If it be so with him yet, I protest to God we will make him Winter
and Summer without.

William Mitchel, John Mitchel, Robert Tod, Mary English, Elizabeth Lappey,
Marian Mitchel, did Peter Kid, Priest of Douglass, with the rest of the
Presbytery of Lannerick, did excommunicate them for these reasons as follows:

1. Priest: You teach that every man and woman gets sufficient light from
Christ.

Ans: Which is according to John's Doctrine, Joh. 1.9. who says Christ has
lightened every one that comes into the world, which light is sufficient to as
many as believe in it.

2. Pr: You cry down Ministers, and say there is no need of preaching.

Ans: Not of envious murderers, blood-thirsters, covetous hirelings.

3: Pr. You destroy the Communion of the body and blood of the Lord, signified
and represented by Bread and Wine.

Ans. We which have the substance, have the end of the shadow, and the
communion is the end of the shadow, and of that which is for memory and shows;
which is not the body, in which body is the unity.

Pr. 4. You say that the children of God have no sin in this life, and teach so.

Ans. The Scripture says, he that is born of God does not fin, and is he not a
child of God?

Pr. 5. You say and teach that the light that Christ gives to every one is
perfect, and so bids them follow the light that is within them.

Ans. Which is according to Christ's Doctrine, Joh. the 1. and John the 3. and 2
Cor. 4.

6. Pr. You deny Matthew, Mark, Luke and John to be the Gospel.

Ans. The Scripture says the Gospel is the power of God, Romans 1.

7. Pr. You deny Baptism in the Church to be a seal of his Covenant, and cry
down that.

Ans. Because there is no Scripture for sprinkling of Infants, but Baptism we
own.

8. Pr. You deny the Lords Day, and would have it taken out of the world,
though it be set apart in Scripture for the Divine Worship.

Ans. All days are owned to be the Lords, who is worshipped in Spirit which we
own.

9. Pr. You go abroad and trouble people in in the worship of God.

Ans. We do not trouble them that worship God in Spirit, but will-worshippers,
who are in their persecuting fained humility: Also Thomas Jack, Gabriel Hood,
James Cook, Jannet Hambleton, Gawine Scevenson, John Hambleton, Alexander
Hambleton, Barbara Hambleton, Jennet Hambleton, Andrew Hambleton, Jane
Hambleton, Katherine Heart, Katherine Hambleton, John Allen, Jane Hambleton,
William Hambleton, Margaret Hambleton, John Heart, Jennet Atkin, John Heart,
Alexander Heart, Jane Heart, Gawine Heart, John Lacock, Jennet Brown, Thomas
Craiqqe, John Torrens, Katherine Hambleton, Katherine Wear, Jennet Wear, were
excommunicated by. Matthew Mackel, and the rest of the Presbytery at Hambleton
for these causes as follows:

1. Pr. You affirm that the Scriptures are not the word of God.

Ans. The Scriptures are the words of God, Christ is the Word, and the
Scriptures are not Christ.

2. Pr. You affirm that there is no rule according to which a man should walk,
but the rule within him.

Ans. The Spirit is the rule into all truth, and not the Scripture it self.

Pr. 3. You affirm that every man has a light sufficient to lead him to Christ
within him.

Ans. Yea 2 Cor. 4. the light that shines in his heart, will give him the
knowledge of the glory of God.

Pr. 4. You affirm that the Scriptures are not to be preached.

Ans. That is false, but they are not to be made a trade of by you.

Pr. 5. You affirm that there is no blessing pronounced to the preaching of the
word.

Ans. Not to you that make a trade of the words: but they that preach the word
has the blessing, for Christ gives the woe to you, Matthew. 23.

Pr. 6. You affirm that the Ministry is no standing Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

Ans. We affirm that Christ must preach the Gospel, but we deny you who preach
for filthy lucre, whose Ordination is by man, and not by Christ.

Pr. 7: You affirm that no man that has faith, has sin.

Ans: We affirm that faith purifieth the heart, and gives victory over sin;
which faith you say is not pure, and curses them that says it is.

Pr. 8: You affirm that there is no external means to be followed in order to
salvation.

Ans. That which is the means to salvation is eternal.

Pr. 9. You affirm these to be Ministers of the man of sin, and reprobates
concerning the faith: that says, whilst a man is on the earth, he cannot be
set free from sin.

Ans. We say, yea we do so, which is according to the Apostles Doctrine which
says they were made free-from sin, and they spoke wisdom to them that were
perfect, and they were sanctified.

Pr. 10. You affirm no Sabbath Day to be observed.

Ans. Neither do you your selves, but what you invent, and you do not keep that
well neither, but Christ the Sabbath we own.

Pr. 11. You are deserters of all public Ordinances.

Ans. The Ordinances of Christ we are not, but man's Inventions we are.

Pr. 12. You rail against the Dispensers of public Ordinances, and those that
countenance those Ordinances.

Ans. Railing we deny, but declaring against any invention of man we own; and
railing is your own, for your Pulpits declares it, that they should neither buy
nor sell, eat nor drink with them in the Nation.

These Accusations were Extracted, and Subscribed by the Priests Clark in this
manner following:

Mr. John Bonave.

And after the Priests had excommunicated the aforesaid persons, they caused a
general Synod to meet at Glasgow, and made an Order and published it in all
their Old Mass-Houses, That none of those People called Quakers should have any
entertainment; and that no people should have any dealing with them in any
civil affairs, not to give cursed men work, (as they styled our Friends) and
hindering men to work for them, and that under the pain of Excommunication. The
extent of which Order is, That they should neither buy nor sell, eat nor drink
with them in the Nation.

Peter Kid, Priest of Dauglass, summoned William Michell and Robert Todd to
their Presbytery at Leanarick; and when William Michel appeared before them,
him whom they called Moderator, whose name is William Jack, Priest of Carlook,
commanded him to take off his Bonnet; and when he refused, Richard Gollon,
Bailiff of the Town, who sat amongst them to execute their malice, rose up in
rage, and took it off his head, and the Priests would not let him give it him
again; but keeps it still from him: and he staying in Town all night, and a
friend of his, called Richard Ray: the Priest and Bailiff of the Town came
about the tenth hour of the night to the Inn where they lay, and charged the
people of the house to put them out, notwithstanding they kept one of their
Bonnets, and the night was very stormy: Witnesses of this, James White, Agnas
Forest. And here is the Priests fruits.

Peter Kidd summoned William Michell, and Mary English to the quarter Sessions
at Hambleton, but did not appear to lay any thing to their Charge: when they
came back again, Mary English went to him, and asked him why he summoned them,
and did not appear to make known what he had against them, but he answered not
one word; but his wife and servants beat, and abused her cruelly: Here is your
fruits again.

William Stockdale, and John Boweran, being moved of the Lord to declare the
truth in the Marketplace of Strahavan on a Market Day, were cruelly abused,
and many times knocked down with staves, and stones, and violently drawn out of
the town by the wicked people.

William Stockdale, and John Gill, with many others, having a Meeting in the
Grave-Yard in Strahavan, on a Market Day, a company of the Priests Hearers
came, and fell upon them with staves, and stones, and broke up the Meeting, and
stoned them above a quarter of a mile out of the Town insomuch, that some blood
was spilt, and many was sore bruised.

Richard Ismead, for bidding James Nesmith, Priest of Hambleton, prove himself
a Minister of Christ, was apprehended by the Bailiff, and was imprisoned in the
Tolebooth of Hambleton, and after was scarryed to a Justices Court at Glasgow,
who commanded him to be set in the Stocks, and a Gag put in his mouth, and a
Paper pinned on his Breast; and made an Order for him to depart the Nation.

William Stockdale being moved of the Lord to go to the Steeple-house of
Damanoy; and as he stood in the Yard declaring the Truth, and against their
Idolatrous Worship, the Priest came, who did encourage the people to beat him;
whereupon some of his Elders, and other wicked people, violently knokt him
down, and set their feet upon him, and plucked much hair off his head, insomuch
that some people cried he is killed: and if the power of the Lord had not born
him up, which bears up the heads of his Lambs, whom he sends forth in the midst
of Wolves, when they are persecuted: he had died amongst them, for he was not
able to speak, neither to rise, a certain time after, off the ground.

William Jack, Priest of Carlook, said to the people of Lismahagow in his
preaching, as follows: Beloved, If you will contribute, and some of you give
a six pence, and others a shilling, that the Steepping may be greater; then God
and we will meet, and find you out some honest man. (Mark) the Priest will not
meet with their God, till they know of a great Steepping.

George Wear, and some others, having their Bonnets taken from them when they
were at a meeting, near unto the Steeple-house of Lesmahagow, and he laying it
before William Lowery called Justice, who said, How durst you come there to
keep your meeting; if ever your come there again, I will have you scourged, or
I will scourge you my self.

James Nesmith Priest of Hambleton, caused William Stockdale to be put into
prison for speaking to him in the Steeplehouse-yard, where he remained four
days in a place where he could scarce get room to lie.

Richard Pinder, for speaking in the Steeple-house yard of Kilbryde between the
Priests preaching, was carried by the Constable before James Steward of
Castle-Town called Justice, who caused him to be put in the Tolebooth of
Rugland, where he remained about four days, and after that he, to wit, James
Stewart and Will. Simmons, both Justices, caused him to be set in the stocks at
Kilbryde on a first day; and ordered him to be carried from Constable to
Constable till he come to his outward abode in England, and he being brought to
a Constable called John Barrie, and he being willing of himself to go, Jo.
Barry gave him the Order, and he went into England, yet nevertheless the
Justices, to wit James Stewart, and the rest fined John Barry 10 shillings
sterling. for doing so, and he not willing to pay it, they put him into prison,
where he lay four hours, and a mad man was put in with him, that had a naked
knife in his hand, whereby he was in danger of his life, if the Lords
providence had not been great in preserving of him; and the Justices when he
was brought before them again said, They would forgive him his Fine, if he
would not be a Quaker, who answered, I cannot tell what I will be.

William Mitchel for taking of a Wife contrary to the Order and Law of the
Presbyterian Church of Scotland, whereupon the Priest of that Parish of
Douglass, called Peter Kidd complained to the Justices, and caused to summon
him to the Quarter Sessions at Hambleton, where James Hambleton of Woodhal was
present, and Will. Mitchel desired to be judged according to the Law of God,
and the right Laws of the Nation; for we have given in a Declaration of the
said Marriage to some of you; Woodhal said, We will neither judge you according
to the Law, nor the Scriptures, we have nothing to do with them at this time;
we will judge you according to the Law of the Church of Scotland; by which Law
and Judgment he lay in the stocks at the cross of Hambleton five hours, and
after that was put into prison, where he remained twenty nine days, and they
ordered him to pay twenty shillings sterling. or else to receive twenty lashes on
his naked shoulders at the Marketplace upon the Market Day in Hambleton, and
he being not convinced of the breach of any just Law, he would not pay the
Fine, neither could they get any to give him the punishment which they laid
upon him. Then Gawine Hambleton of Raploeh, which is Sheriff of the Shire, and
is also Justice of Peace, and James Hambleton another of the Justices gave an
Order to a Captain that was going to France with some men, to take him out of
prison to carry him to France; whereupon they took him out, and carried him to
Edinburgh, where he should have been kept in prison till they had made reddy
their Ship: But in the mean while the thing being laid before George Monk, he
caused to examine it, and the thing being contrary to the just laws of the
Nation, he was set at liberty.

The gross Scottish Doctrines of the Scottish Priests Reproved, That all may
see, whether those be worthy to suffer, which reprove such Doctrines.
1. JOhn Sempel, Priest in Carrick, his preaching to the people was this:
People (says he) what would ye hear? I know ye would hear News: What shall I
fell you, but old Oliver Cromwell, who is called Protector, is dead; he could
not beguile death, as Pockie as he was? But there is gotten up one in his place
whom they call Lord Richard, but beware that Catt Lambert kill not Lord Richard.

3. John Burnet, Priest of Kilbrid, said, They had cause to curse the
Magistrates every morning, and every evening, for giving these Quakers
tolleration; and he said, if there were a Gallows set up in Kilbryde parish,
to hang all that turn from them, so many would not turn to be Quakers.

3. Henry Foreside, Priest of Lemgey in Dumbarton-shire, Prayed, that the Lord
might never give them rest, who is the upholders of this liberty, and
tolleration; and said, Lord, take away this liberty and tolleration, etc.
Witnesses of this, that heard him say it, Andrew Gray, Agnus Gray, Hellene Gray.

4. Robert Semple, Priest of Slamanan, in his preaching said, That Christ's
Sheep had neither mark, nor burn, etc. And that God would say to the wicked,
what have I to you with you sir, etc. But I trow, The Priest means the Old
Masse-house, and he that puts into his Mouth.
he will say another tale to the godly; You have kept my Kirk well, and
trowed my Ministers, go ye up to Heaven yonder sir, etc.

5. Lodowick Semerwell, Priest of New- Monkland, said, That the Grace of God
belonged not to his Doctrine: And this same Priest caused a man to make his
Repentance in his Congregation, for selling to Margaret Hambleton two pecks of
Lintseed; yet the Priest himself borrowed a book of her, and did not his
Repentance, and so manifested that his Doctrine had no grace of God in it.

Answ. Now serious people may take notice how ignorantly, and without cause the
servants of the Lord suffer under such, for the Word of Gods sake, which is as
a fire in their bones, against all such Doctrines which has nothing of the
grace of God in them, nor which the grace of God belongs not unto, as they
themselves confess; and people may consider likewise, what a clamor and cry
has been among the Priests of England and Scotland by Petitions, and Addresses
to every power that appeared in the Nation, to establish them in such
Doctrines, as nothing of the grace of God belonged unto; but is murderers, and
destroyers of the Creatures, and would limit the Spirit of God, and Word of
God, from declaring against their deceit; and does give themselves to Cursing
of them morning and evening, that will not uphold them, and make Laws for
them, to destroy the Seed of God: This is not like the Apostle of Christ, which
said, Curse not, but bless; and their weapons were not carnal, but spiritual:
The Apostles had not a gallows set up for those that turned from them, but the
time is come that your folly is made manifest unto all men, so that you cannot
deceive the Nations any more, as ye have done.

Again, the Priests of the Presbytery belonging to Glascow, made a fast, and
excommunicated these persons, viz. William Gray, and James Findly, and charged
people not to let them come into their houses, commanding them to have no
commerse with them in buying nor selling, nor borrowing nor lending; and James
Findly being a Smith, they charged people that they should not work with him,
for if they did they should be excommuicated also; and Henry Foreside Priest of
that parish, again told them, that it was acted in the presbytery, that if any
work any longer (work that pertaines to the Smiths trade) with James Findly,
they should be excommnicants, and should not parake with any of his
Church-Ordinances, as marriage, sprinkling the children, and communion of bread
and wine: which act several of the people murmures under, but say they must
obey it contrary to their minds, because they cannot bear the Priests wrath.
Again, John Burnett Priest of Kilbrid, charged his hearers to have no dealings
in civil affairs, with these people called Quakers, that were excommunicated;
and he summoned such to his Sessions, which had eaten or drunken, bought or
sold with them, requiring them to make public confession before the people,
that they had given offense in so doing, etc.

Again, Robert Paul, one of the Priests elders, said he would convert James
Findly and his doctrine: to convert him by, was this, That the Scripture was
the word; And secondly, That the Scriptures was God: Thirdly, That the
Scriptures is the way to the Kingdom of Heaven, and no other under Heaven:
Fourthly, That the scriptures is the Holy Ghost that the Father promised that
he would send, that should reprove the world of sin, etc.

Ans. If he had said that the Scripture is that which testify of these things,
that doctrine had bin more like to have converted; for the scripture says,
That the word was in the beginning before scripture was; and it says that
Christ is the way, and there is no other Name under Heaven by which men shall
be saved but by Christ; it does not say that by no other name but the
scripture, so that all such doctrine will pervert people from God, and not
convert them to God.

And the same Robert Paul said he would respect men's persons, and that he would
never be free from fin, neither was it possible.

Answ. How can thou do any other but respect persons, and commit sin while thou
denies God to be God, and Christ to be the way, and would make the scriptures
both to be God, and the way to God, and would make them the spirit, the gift of
the Father; but herein thou art blind, and leads none but the blind, and does
pervert, and not convert; for thou art ignorant of that which convinces the
world of sin yet, which is the Spirit of truth, which the scripture testifies
of; but that thou must first come to know to convince thee of, and to condemn
thy darkness, before thou do either convince, or convert any unto God.

James Gartsore Priest said, they loved God which kept not his commandments.

Answ. Which is contrary to the Apostles doctrine which says, If any man says
that he loves God, and keeps not his Commandments, he is a liar, and the truth
is not in him; and hereby do we know we love God, because we keep his
commandments, 1 John 2.3, 4. and his Commandments are not grievous, but
joyous. And Christ says, Why call ye me Lord, and does not the thing that I
command you; so that none loves God, but he who keeps his Commandments, and
abides in him; and he that abides in him sins not, 1 John 3.6.

Peter Kid, Priest of Douglasse, said, Put a man in never such a close place,
his soul will run like a post horse.

Answ. Thou show that thou art ignorant of the soul, and never knew what it
was, nor knows how to Minister to it, nor how to watch over it; But if thou
had seen thine own condition, thou might have said that thy vain thoughts and
wandering imaginations runs to and fro in the earth, and thy mind is not staid
upon God, and art not come to know the first principal of the the time
Religion, that which should stay thy mind upon God; so thou art to wait to be
taught, and not to teach.

William Simerwell, Priest of Petinance, said, that Christ died for the Elect,
and godly people of the world, and not for the Turks and Pagans, and
Barbarians, etc.

Answ. Christ died for sinners, according to the Scriptures, Romans 5.8. And he
came to call sinners to repentance, not the righteous or godly, Mat. 9.13. And
Christ died for all, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And is the propitiation for our sins,
says the Apostle, that was the believers, and not for ours only, but for the
sins of the whole World; and the Gospel is to be preached to every Creature,
and remission of sins in his Name, to Turks, Pagans, and Barbarians. So herein
thou have showed that thou was never made a Minister of the Gospel unto any,
neither knows what the Gospel is to be Ministered unto; so therefore be
silent, and learn no more to blaspheme God, and his truth, as thou have done.

Again, Priest Simerwell, says, Christ calls all men every where to repent,
but he will not that all should Repent.

Answ. Here thou would make Christ a deceiver, and so has manifested thy self
to be Antichrist; what, does Christ call men to do that which he would not have
them to do? What, is there any guile to be found in his mouth? would thou go
about to turn the truth of the Scriptures into a lie? which says, That God
wills that all men should come to the knowledge of the truth, that they might
be saved: and thou here has charged Christ foolishly and falsely, in saying
that he calls them to do that which he would not have them to do, when he calls
all men every where to Repent.

The Priest of the Presbytery belonging to Glascow summoned James Findly, and
William Gray, to be examined by him for Heresy as they say, and when they
appeared, they shut the door, and would let none hear their examination;
manifesting themselves to be in darkness, and afraid to bring their deeds to
the Light, left their deceipts should have been laid open, and reproved; but
they would not answer, until the doors were set open, and all people to here,
that would come in: Truth is bold, and seeks no Corners.

They Priests affirmed, that the Light which every one is enlightened withal,
is natural, etc.

Answ. Here they manifest their ignorance of the life of Christ, which is
spiritual, whose life is the light of men, and this is the true light that
lights every man that comes into the world; and this light is pure, that
Christ does enlighten every one withal; and whosoever does truth, love the
Light, and brings his deeds to the light to be proved, and by the Light is lead
to life; but every one that does evil hates the light, and will not bring his
deeds to the light lest they should be reproved, and so the light is his
condemnation, John 3.18, 19, 20, 21.

They affirmed, That Christ died not for all, contrary to the Scripture, 2 Cor.
5.15. as abovesaid.

They say that the Scripture is the Word of God, which is but a Declaration of
the Word, Luke 1.1. And Christ his Name is called the Word of God, Rev. 19.13.
The Scriptures are words of God, and Christ is the Word that fulfils, and ends
the words.

They affirmed, That men and women, and Children, should be condemned for Adams
Transgression, etc. contrary to the Scripture, which says, The Children shall
not bear the iniquity of their Fathers, nor the Fathers the Childrens; but
every one shall give an account of himself, and every one shall bear his own
burden.

They affirmed, That none could be perfect on this side the Grave; and that a
Ohilde of God cannot be perfect, as to have no sin at all.

Answ. Contrary to the Scripture, Mat. 5.48. Where Christ says, Be ye perfect,
as your Heavenly Father is perfect: And Christ does (...), nor command
impossible things; and the Apostle says, We speak wisdom amongst them that
are perfect, 1 Cor. 2. And let as many as are perfect be thus minded: and the
Child of God is perfect, and without sin: for whosoever is borne of God,
does not commit sin, and his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because be is born of God, 1 John 3.8, 9. It is as impossible for him that is
born of God to commit sin, as it is impossible for him, who is born of the
Devil to cease from sin.

They affirmed, That none was Ministers of Christ, but such as wait for an
ordinary and mediate call from Men.

Answ. Contrary to the Scripture, which says, The things of God knows no man,
but the Spirit of God. And contrary to Paul's Call, who says, Not of man, nor
by man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: for he neither received of man,
neither was he taught it; but it was given to him of God: and this was the
Gospel he preached (Christ within, the hope of Glory) and if any bring
another, let them be accursed, 1 Cor. 2. Gal. 1.1.12. Colos. 1.

They affirmed, That an oath was lawful to be taken, of men and women.

Answ. Contrary to Christ's Command, Mat. 5. who says, Swear not at all, etc.
and contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, James 5.12. who says, Above all things
my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath,
but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation.

They affirmed, That Bread and Wine is the Communion with Christ.

Answ. John, and the Saints had Communion with God, and his Son Jesus Christ,
and their Fellowship was in the Light; For, says he, if we walk in the Light,
as he is in the light, then have we fellowship one with another, and the blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.5, 7. And they who are in
the Light have fellowship with Christ, and receives every thing in the purity
from the Lord; but they that hate the Light, they remain in darkness, and
every thing to them is accursed; to the unbelieving, and disobedient their is
nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled.

They affirmed that sprinkling Infants is an Ordinance of Christ, when as
Christ never ordained such a thing, and their is no Scripture for it, let the
Priests of Scotland, or any of their brethren in England prove it if they can.

They affirmed, it was lawful for them be called of men, Master.

Answ. Contrary to Christ, his express words in Mat. 23.8.10. be not ye called
of men, Master, etc.

They affirmed, Tithes to be lawful for Ministers now, showing themselves to
be Antichristian, dark, and blind, denying Christ Jesus to be come in the
flesh, and saying that is lawful which Christ has disannulled, and made void,
and there is no Law in the new testament, that does allow of Tithes to be paid
to a Gospel Ministry, therefore not lawful. These are some of the false
Doctrines and Principles of the Presbyterians about Glasgow, Whereby it was
plainly manifest that they are guilty of heresy, and are heriticks, which they
would charge upon others; But true Light now shines, which makes deceit, and
deceivers manifest.

Henry Foreside, said in the hearing of several people, that Christ was not in
the Apostle Paul, etc.

Contrary to Paul's words in Gal. 1. After it pleased God, who separated me from
my mothers womb, and called me by his Grace to reveal his Son in me, etc. and
in 2 Cor. 13. Ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, and Christ in you the
hope of Glory, Col. 1. and Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates.

Peter Kid Priest of Douglasse, said, to preach that people should walk
according to the Light and law within them, is the Doctrine of Devils.

Answ. Paul and other of the Apostles, and Saints, and true Christians, who
believed in Christ had the Light shining in them, and the Law in them, and the
Spirit in them, and God and Christ dwelt in them, for their bodies were made
Temples of the Holy Ghost, as the Scriptures declare; and the law of the Spirit
of life in Christ Jesus, had made the Apostle free from the law of sin, and
death; and says John, these things I write unto you, that your fellowship may
be with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. This was the Doctrine of Christ to bring people to Light, Law, life and
spirit within, to worship God in spirit; and in truth, and all who draw out,
and lead people from this, are deceivers, and their Doctrine is devilish.

William Somerwell Priest, said, It was ill manners to to say thee and thou to
a man, etc.

Contrary to the Scripture, which all along does give thee and thou to a
particular, not only unto man, though never so great in the world, but also to
God himself, and unto Christ.

William Morton, Priest of Wonstone, summoned James Simmonton to his Sessions,
and being required to prove his Ministry, he said; he scorned to prove himself
a Minister of Christ, Contrary to the Scripture, which says, be ready to give
account of the hope that is in you, with meekness, and fear, to every one that
shall ask you. And when he was told of taking hire for his preaching, contrary
to Christ his Commission, (who says, Freely ye have received, freely give,)
then the Priest arose in arage, and called him base-born beggarly rascal;
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who says, Let no corrupt communication come
out of your mouth.

William Stockdale being in the Steeple-house of Lesmahagow, where John Lum,
Priest thereof was preaching; and he being writing some of his lies, the Priest
cried out, and said, There was never any since the world began was free from
sin, nor never shall be: write that said he.

Answ. Which is quite contrary to plain Scripture, Romans 6.18, 20, 22. Being
made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness; for when ye were
the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness, but now being made free
from sin, and become servants of God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the
end, everlasting life; for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord: And Paul said, Romans 8.2. The Law
of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin
and death.

A Relation of some of the Sufferings of Friends to the Truth in Scotland.
JOhn Roberton, called Lord of Ornock, publicly refused to enter Andrew
Hambleton, in Shawton-hill, in his possession under him, because he was
excommunicated by the Priests; Witnesses of this, Elexander Hambleton, and John
Strudders.

William Gray, James Findly, John Gray, Robert Smally, John Robine, was
summoned to be upon a Jewry at Dunbarton, and when they came there, and went
within the Bar, they pulled off their Bonnets, and bad them swear; unto whom
they answered they would not swear, But they will tell the Truth, and take God
to be their Witness upon it; but this they would not receive, for John
Callhonne, called the Sheriffs deputy, bad them swear by God, and hold up their
hands, or go into prison: and it was answered, we dare not transgress the
Doctrine of Christ, who said, swear not at all; he said, it was but the Law of
Christ that bad men not swear, but the Law of God bad men swear; and so would
have set the old law over Christ, who is the end of it, who forbids swearing:
And because they durst not transgress the Doctrines of Christ, in which the
Apostle lived, who said, Above all things my Brethren swear not at all; they
put them all five into Prison.

The Heads of that which past in Discourse betwixt the People called Quakers,
and the two Priests of Hambleton, in the Priests house: The Names of the
Priests are, Jam. Nesmith, and John English; in which Discourse they have
manifested themselves, and all the rest of their Generation to be none of the
Ministers of Christ, but the Ministers of Antichrist, who preaches another
Gospel then the Apostles did; as in the Discourse following you may plainly
see. And also some Reasons why we deny them.
First. JAmes Nesmith, said, There is no salvation in an ordinary way for
sinners, without external Revelation from the Scriptures.

Answ. Here all may see, they hold out another way to salvation, then the
Prophets and the Apostles did; for they said, Christ was given for salvation to
the ends of the earth, Isay 49.6. and there was not salvation in any other, nor
no other Name given by which any can be saved but by the Name of Jesus, Acts.
4.12. But that salvation they tell of, which is by external revelation from the
Scriptures, was never held forth by the Prophets, nor the Apostles, nor
declared of in all the Scriptures of Truth; therefore all may see they are such
as preach another Gospel then the Apostles did, and so are to be holden
accursed, and turned away from, Gal. 1.8.

Jam. Nesmith said, That Christ does not excommunicate the knowledge of
himself, but by the Scriptures, and that the Scripture is the means by which
the knowledge of God is imparted.

Answ. This is a lie, and Scripture contradiction, For Christ, who does
communicate the knowledge of himself, by his own Spirit says, none knows the
Son but the Father, neither does any man know the Father, but the Son, and he
to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.27. So it is not by the Scriptures
that the true knowledge of God is imparted to any man, but by Christ, 2 Cor.
4.6.

The second Priest, John English.
First, Said, the Vail that was over people in the time of the Law, was the Old
Testament, and it was taken away by the New Testament.

Answ. Sin was, and is the vail, by which the mystery was veiled all the time
of the Law until now: for when Moses is read, the same vail remains over their
hearts; for their minds was, and is blinded by the God of this World, lest the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God, should shine
unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. nevertheless, when their hearts shall be turned to the
Lord, the vail shall be taken away, 2 Cor. 3.16. which vail is done away in
Christ, 2 Cor. 3.14. and not by the Scripture which they call the New
Testament: and here John English is proved to be a liar, and of his father the
Devil, who is a liar from the beginning.

2. John English said, That the Gospel that was preached to Abraham, was the
same for matter, but not for substance; neither was it a clear Gospel.

Answ. The Gospel that was preached to Abraham, was the same for matter and
substance which Paul preached; for matter and substance is one, and it was a
clear Gospel; for Christ the substance was preached to Abraham: and Abraham saw
his day, and rejoiced, John 8.56. Therefore give over deceiving the people with
lies, and repent.

3. John English said, The Scripture is the glass by which we see the Face of
God.

Answ. This is a lie, and Scripture contradiction; for the Apostle says, God,
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. Mark the Priests ignorance or the Scriptures; and here all
may see that he is one of them that keeps people in darkness, from seeing the
face of God; and erres, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

4. John English said, The foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, was meant
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

Answ. The Prophets and Apostles meant what they speak, and the same foundation
which they declared of, and builded upon, did (...), Enoch, Noah, and others
who died in the Faith before the Old and New Testament was written, build upon;
which foundation was Christ, the Rock of Ages, the foundation of the chief
Corner Stone, 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Cor. 2.11. But thou art one of them that draws
people from the foundation of the Prophets, and the Apostles, to build upon thy
lies, and consequences; which building and foundation the Lord will bring to
naught; for he is risen to sweep away the refuge of lies, which thou and thy
generation has been covered with, and will make you naked, and bare; for your
covering is too short, that your shame cannot be hid any longer.

5. John English said, That they had their commission from Paul to give Bread
and Wine.

Answ. Here have thou made it plainly manifest, that thou and thy generation
are none of the Ministers of Christ, who say you have your Commission from
Paul, for giving people Bread and Wine: Paul never gave such a Commission to
any, neither does he say he had power to give any Commission, but declares
himself a servant; neither did Paul own any of thy generation of hirelings,
which drew people from the true foundation, but declares against them, and bids
people turn from them. Therefore give over deceiving the people, and repent,
and call not Bread and Wine any more an Ordinance of God, which thou say you
are commanded by man to practice, lest thy and their portion be in the Lake,
where there is Weeping, and Wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, which you cannot
escape, unless ye Repent; for ye are such as make the Word of God of none
effect, by your Tradition, and so are to be turned from.

Reasons why we deny them, and the Priests of their Generation.
FIRST, They are such teachers as walk in the steps of the Pharisees which
Christ cried woe against, Mat. 23.6. They stand praying in the Synagogues, and
are called of men master, contrary to Christ's command, who said, to his
Ministers, be not ye called of any man, master, and because they are such as
break Christ's command, therefore we deny them.

Secondly, They are such as preach another Gospel then the Apostles did, and
says, Salvation is by the Scripture, which is contrary to that which is held
forth by the Prophet, Isa. 49.6. Who said Christ was given for Salvation to the
end of the earth; and the Apostle said, their is not salvation in any other,
Acts 4.12. And because they preach another Gospel; therefore we deny them.

Thirdly, They are such teachers as say the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, is the foundation for Believers to build upon, which is contrary to
the Apostles Doctrine, who says, Christ is the Foundation, and chief Corner
Stone, Psalm. 118.22. Act. 4.11. Romans 9.33. 1 Pet. 2.7. Mat. 21.42. And because
they hold out another foundation, then the Holy Men of God did; therefore we
deny them.

Fourthly, They are such as take hire for their preaching, contrary to Christ's
command, who said to his Ministry, Freely ye have received, freely give, and
because they neither receive freely, nor give freely, therefore we deny them.

Fifthly, They are such teachers, who deny that the Grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared unto all men, and so would make the Apostle a liar, and
a false Minister, who says, in the 2 Timothy 11. The Grace of God that brings
Salvation has appeared to all men; and because they deny the Apostles
Doctrine; therefore we deny them.

Sixthly, They are such teachers as deny the Doctrine of perfection, which is
the Doctrine of Christ, who said, be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father is
perfect; and Holy, for I am Holy; which Doctrine the Apostles walked in, and
spoke amongst those that were perfect, 1 Cor. 2.6. And labored to present every
man in Christ Jesus: and because they are not found in this labor that the
Apostles was in, to present men perfect in Christ Jesus, but cries against it,
and preaches up sin for term of life, which is the Doctrine of Devils;
therefore we deny them.

Seventh, They are such Teachers as go into Cains way, and running greedily
after rewards and covetousness, Jude 11. contrary to the Apostles, who said,
he covered not man's gold, silver, nor apparel, Acts 20.23. therefore we deny
them.

Eighth, They are such as are made Ministers by the will of man, and persecute,
and rail against such as fear God, and are of a honest conversation; therefore
we deny them.

Nineth, They are such Teachers as add to, and diminish from the Scriptures,
unto whom the plagues of God are due; therefore we deny them.

Tenth, They are such as Ezekiel cries against in Ezekiel. 34. That feed with the
fat, and clothe with the wool, and make a prey upon the people; therefore we
deny them.

Eleventh, They are such teachers, as uphold a false worship in the I dolls
Temples made with hands, which Christ sent his Ministers to cry against; and do
deny the true worship, which is in Spirit and in truth; therefore we deny them.

Twelfth, They are such Teachers as keeps Drunkards, Swearers, liars, proud,
covetous, and all manner of vile persons in their Assemblies, and cast out them
that fear God, and are of honest conversation; therefore we deny them.

Written by one that Worship God in Spirit, and in Truth, and do deny all False
Worship, which men sets up; and is also a witness for God against all deceit,
and deceivers, known by the Name of Will. Stockdale.
The 26 of the last Month called Feb. 1657.
THE END.

