A LEARNED AND VERY USEFVLL COMMENTARY UPON THE WHOLE PROPHECY OF MALACHY.

BY That late Reverend, Godly and Learned Divine, Mr. RICHARD STOCK, sometime
Rector of Alhallowes Breadstreet, London, and now, according to the Original
Copy left by him, published for the common good.

Whereunto is added, AN EXERCITATION UPON THE SAME PROPHECY OF MALACHY.

By SAMUEL TORSHELL,

LONDON, Printed by T.H. and R. H. for Samuel Enderbey and are to be sold at
the Star in Popes head alley, 1641:

portrait of Reverend Stock Reador if ever Fame did fill thy ear
with name of Reverent Stock, behold him here,
Not in this Shadow only, but turn ore,
the Book, and venve this Stocks improued store.
There shall find mix't with Grave Divinity
a Prophets deep mysterious Prophecy.
then thank his care whose goodness does unlocke,
and publish to ye world (...) Rich a Stock.


TO The ancient Friends and Hearers of the Author, especially to the Right
Worshipful EDWARD RUDGE Alderman; To the Worshipful Captain JOHN VEN, Mr.
WILLIAM KENDALL, Mr. RICHARD ELLIS, with the rest of the Inhabitants of the
parrish of Alhallowes Breadstreet, LONDON.
MY own occasions, together with some other difficulties and impediments, have
hitherto hindered a purpose that I had, from the very first time that the papers
of this worthy man were entrusted to me, to communicate them to the World and
to you. But I have now done it, and I hope it is not too late, either to revive
his memory, or your remembrance of those things you have heard from him. I
will not believe that you have forgotten, or can forget a Pastor whom you did
so much love and reverence: For he was a burning and shining light, John 5.35.
and ye rejoiced in his light. I have taken this pains to peruse his notes,
Heb. 11.4.
that he again though dead might still speak unto you: and I do endeavor
that now after his decease you may have these things always in your
remembrance. 2 Pet. 1.15.
God was pleased to send you a rich treasure by his Ministry; 2 Cor. 4.7.
but this treasure was brought unto you in an Earthen vessel; and least happily
when that earthen vessel was broke by sickness and death, and the shards
thrown into the Earth, you saved not the treasure; I have now gathered some of
it, and kowing to whom it did belong, have brought it back to Restore it unto
you Now what remains, Ephe. 4.21.
but that you enjoy it and use it* let that be your care to be answerable to
the Doctrine you have received; to walk so as ye have learned Christ. If so
be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him as the truth is in
JESUS. This is the only thing that I have to say unto you; that your
conversation may tell the world you do remember him. Let him live in your
lives; That so even they who never knew him, nor ever heard him preach a
Sermon, may see by your practice what and how he preached And as ye have made
a Monument for him in your Church; set up one also in every one of your lives;
you shall thereby do him a greater honor, then that stone-work (though
otherwise a Commendable Testimony of your love and respect) can do him. Be
ye your selves his Monument, his Statue, Phil. 4.1.
his Trophee, 1 These. 2.19.
and as the Philippians and Thessalonians were to St. Paul, 2 Cor. 3.2.
his Crown of glorying. Be ye his Epistle known and read of all men: Let all
men see what he writ in you: What precepts of Holiness, of Righteousness, of
Temperance, Psalm. 45.1.
he wrote down in your hearts, when his tongue was the pen of a ready writer
so long among you. He was a Father I suppose unto many of you, I have heard
some of you profess it, 1 Cor. 4.15.
(though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many
Fathers,) If in Jesus Christ he has begotten you through the Gospel, be
followers of him, imitate him so, as that men may say of you, when they see the
grave and sober, and godly carriage of any of you, he has his fathers
Counteinance, he has his fathers Gate. He set a most fair Copy, do ye
imitate the hand. He did as his great Master, John 10.3.4. 1 Timothy 4.12.
he went before his flock: And was an example of beleivers, in word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in faith, in purity; In all things he
showed himself a pattern, a stamp, Tit. 2.7.
that is the Apostles word, such a stamp, (...).
as makes an Image of it in Coin, or such a stamp as Printers use, which
leaves an Impression on the Paper: be ye his Impression, be ye his printed
work; be ye the Commentary your selves, and then ye need not buy it at the
shops: He was Typus Gregis, be ye Antitypon Pastoris: Go through the world
like good and current Coin, with the right stamp. Mat 22.20.
Show whose Superscription and Image you bear; on one side Gods, on the other
side Cesars, and both stamped upon you by your Pastor, who was wont to Preach
unto you those two points, Holiness and Obedience. Show that you suffered him
while you sat under his Pulpit, to enter deep into your hearts: A deep stamp
is long before it is worn out; let it appear that these fifteen years since
he dyed, you have not forgotten the word of his exhortation. They hear best,
Luke 11.28.
that practice best: If any of you be profane and unholy, if deceitful and
dishonest in your dealings, if intemperate, voluptuous and wanton; ye might
happily be his Hearers, and in the throng, but none of his Disciples, but such
as listened with the other ear to your lusts. But I am persuaded better things
of you, Heb. 6.9.
and things that accompany salvation, though I thus speak: for I know your
husbandman was skillful, and the seed good. Math. 13.3. 1 Pet. 1.23.
Bear not therefore thorns and briars, for such ground is rejected and nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned; but rather show your selves to be the
earth that has drunk in the rain that came often upon you, and bring forth
fruit, that so you may receive a further blessing from God. Unto whose blessing
and most gracious protection I commend you, and remain,

Your servant in the Lord, SAM. TORSHELL.

To the READER.
THE holy Scriptures that had so many praises given unto them by the Ancients,
were by them much read and studied; who used also many ways of interpreting
them: we find their Commentaries, that is, (...).
writings in which they set downe-heads for remembrances: Interpretations, that
is, Enarrations, (...).
as they called them, or Examinations of the words: Significations, (...).
Scholies, that is, Glosses which they writ at their leisures in their ordinary
reading: Metaphrases, (...).
delivering the text in other words: Paraphrases, a larger and the noblest kind
of interpreting: and Homilies, sermons to the multitude, in which kind they
were wont to undertake whole books, as appears by S. Chrysostom. Aug. and
others. But afterward, as the skill in Hebrew began by degrees, after the
Apostles time, to be well nigh quite lost; so when the Greek sun did also set,
at length it came to pass that the Bible was scarce at all used. Till about,
An. 800. it was read over in greater Churches once every year; about which time
Paul Warnenfrid (usually called Paul the Deacon) at the Command of Charlemain
did inartificially divide out Epistles and Gospels, and writ Postils on them,
which soon came to be only in use, and all other parts of Scripture in a
manner neglected. After his time some wrote Commentaries, but rarely, as
Aponius on the Canticles, Claudius Sesellius on St. Luke, Angelomus the Monk on
the Kings and Canticles, VValafridus Strabus Collector of the Ordinary gloss,
and Haimo on S. Paul's Epistles, all of them much about Paul's time. But
afterward much more rarely, Paschasius Rabertus Abbot of Corbey wrote upon the
Lamentations, and Remigius Monk, and afterward Bishop of Auxerre on the
Psalms, Canticles and Matthew, about An. 880. Ambros. Ansbertus, a French
Monk, on the Canticles, anno 890. Bruno Archbishop of Colein on the
Pentateuch, an. 937. After him we find none till Paul of Jenoa wrote on the
Psalms and Jeremy, which was, anno 1054. only Bale mentions one Serlo a Monk
of Dover a Commentator, about anno. 956. And till 1100. or thereabouts, we
find some, as Oecumenius, and the two Anselms of Luca and Canterbury, and
Stephanus Anglicus, Rupert, Bernard, and Philip, an Abbot in Heinalt, a
familiar friend of S. Bernards. But when once School Divinity got the
Kingdom, all studied that, and laid the Scripture by. Peter Comestor indeed
had the Scripture by heart; but his brother Lombard brought Aristotle into more
request then St. Paul, as the Sorbonne at Paris complained. Then it was that
preaching on the Scripture had gone altogether out of use, had not Dominicke a
Spaniard, the founder of the Order of Preaching Friars, about an. 1200.
commanded his disciples to read the Scripture, and carry nothing but the Bible
with them when they went to Preach. And yet by these pretended friends of the
Scripture, was the Scripture likewise trampled upon, who preferred Dominick
before St. Paul, according to that Picture of them both in one table, John
Wolf. lect. memor. Tom. 1. Cent. 13. ad an. 1205.
which John Wolfius tells us, was not much after that time to be seen in Venice;
under St. Paul's was writ, By him you may go to Christ, and under Dominicks
Picture; By him you may go to Christ more easily. And so things stood till
these latter times, when about the time of the Reformation, the Bible was a
book scarcely so much as known: when Melancthon reports he heard some preach
upon texts taken out of Aristotle's Ethics; and Andreas Carolostadius was eight
years Doctor when he began to read the Scripture, and yet at the taking of his
degree had been pronounced Sufficientissimus. But that which I shall content my
self with as an instance for all, is that which is reported of Albert
Archbishop of Ments; who being at the Diet at Ausbourg, an. 1530. and finding a
Bible on the table, and reading some leaves where by chance he opened it,
said, Truly I know not what book this is, but this I see, that it makes all
against us. But when the knowledge of the tongues began to flourish, then the
study of Scripture revived: for till a little before the Reformation, there
were few or none that cared for, or indevoured any skill in the Greek, much
less in the Hebrew: yea most were then of John Dullards mind, who was
Schoolmasters to Ludovicus Vives, and was wont to say unto him; The better
Grammarian thou provest, Ludov. Viv. de cause. Corrup. l. 1.
thou will be the worse Philosopher and Divine; we know what opposition
Erasmus met withal in this cause: and Arias Montanus for his pains in the
Biblia Regia, was accused of heresy before the Pope, (it seems by his preface
before the Bible, they were Jesuits that so accused him) so that he was feign
to write an Apology for himself, Hist. Conc. Trid.
(which he did in the Spanish tongue) which is in Oxford Library: Yet at length
the Jesuits themselves, and others of the Church of Rome, were drawn to have a
better opinion of this kind of learning, and the learned party grew so strong,
that it came at least to a Consultation in the Council of Trent, about the
examining of the vulgar Latin translation of the Bible by the Originals. Friar
Aloisius of Catanea took the confidence to give an high commendation to
Cardinal Cajetan, as the prime Divine of that and many ages, who was wont to
say, That to understand the Latin text, was not to understand Gods infallible
word, but the translators: and therefore having himself no knowledge in the
Originals, he employed men to render the Scripture word for word unto him, and
so spent all his latter days, which were eleven years after his going Legate
into Germany. Upon this relation Aloisius propounded the examination. But there
were too many to oppose so good a proposition. They said it would be ten years
in doing; that if they did it they should open a gap to the Lutherans, and
overthrow many Doctrines of the Roman Church which were grounded on the Latin
translation; Amama has collected those particular errors, in his Cens Vulg.
Edit. c. 1. pro leg.
and that if they should do it, the Inquisitors would not be able to proceed
against the Lutherans, who would be always ready to say, It is not so in the
Original. These were honest men, and spoke plainly, by whom we come to know
what it was that hindered the work. Others were more fine, and they said, That
it was to be believed that the Latin Church was not less beloved of God then
the Hebrew or Greek Church, who had an Authenticque Text, and sure the Holy
Ghost dictated the Latin Translation, or if the Translator had not a
prophetical spirit, yet one very near it. But Isidorus Clarus a Brescian, a
Benedictine Abbot went against this unreasonable opinion, and said much against
it, which the reader may find in the judicious History of the Council.
However, the stream went to the approbation of the vulgar, only the Cardinal
Santa croce, that he might comply fairly with those that voted for a
correction, told them that there were no errors of faith in it, and yet yielded
that six might be deputed to frame a corrected Copy to print by. But what
correction was meant, appears by the preface before the Edition of Clement the
eighth, that it should be purged from the Errata of the Transcribers. And they
were long about this; the preface tells us, that Pius the IV. and V. labored in
it, and selected Cardinals, but the business was, through the occasions of the
Roman Sea, intermitted more then 20 years from the dissolving of the Council,
till Sixtus the V. performed it. Lucas Burgensis in a particular tract has
collected all the Corrections made in that Edition. That of Sixtus was two or
three years after purged by Clement the VIII. and yet Brugensis has found a
Catalogue of Errata still, and brings in Bellarmine confessing as much: and yet
the work from the first to the last was not less then of 46. years, and
boasted of with high and Papal language. Sixtus his Bull is now left out of
the Bibles, and so is Clements Breve Apostolicum out of most, Antib. Bibl. p.
162.
which yet the reader shall find carefully preserved and to good use, by Amama
in his Antibarbarus Biblicus. We for our part count no Translation
authentical, and esteem it a tyranny both in the Popish and Lutheran
Churches, that no man without circumlocutions and insinuations and apologies
may show the very least dissent.

But the strife about the Translation, equals not that which has been about
the Sense. The Acts that have been used by the Romanists for the settling and
establishing The Right of Interpretation upon the Bishop of Rome, have been
well known, whereby they have labored to make him the Oracle to the world, as
the Turkish Mufti is (by the relation of Busbequius) in those parts; Busbeq.
epist. 3.
finding it to be the most expedite way to gain the opinion of the public
and authorized interpreter. But we have little reason to yield over the Title
to him, knowing how ready he and his servants are to make advantage of every
thing that has any likelihood to advance them, yea how they wrest and abuse
Scriptures to the maintenance of every cause of theirs, especially the
intolerable pride, and usurpations of the Pope. Arch B. of Cant. in his 2 and
enlarged Edition of his most learned relation of the Confe. sect. 26. nu. 12.
p. 209.
An instance of this we have in that notable observation which my Lord of
Canterbury his Grace has made upon the Frontispice of John de Puente his book
of The Agreement of the two Catholic Monarchies; where the Text, Genes. 1.16.
is applied, as Innocentius had done long before, and the words Luminare Majus,
The greater light, are over the Portraiture of Rome. An observation out of a
Picture, whereby his Grace has done the same service for the discovery of the
Romish Arts, which that other noble protestant my Lord Duplessis, Myster:
Iniqui in presat.
did out of another picture or Frontispice printed before two books, one at
Bononia, An. 1608. the other at Naples, An. 1609. wherein Pope Paul the V. is
lively pictured in a Table with this Inscription. TO PAUL THE FIFTH VICE-GOD,
THE MOST INVINCIBLE MONARCH OF THE CHRISTIAN COMMON WEALTH, AND THE MOST STOUT
MAINTAINER OF THE PONTIFICIAN OMNIPOTENCY. This Table hangs within a
triumphall Arch, on either side hung with Crowns, Diadems and Scepters, after
the several fashions and wearings of the Kings of the whole world. At the foot
of the Arch, sit on the one hand Europe and Africa, with these words of the
Prophet, Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers, on
the other hand, Asia and America with the following words, With their face
toward the earth, they shall lick up the dust of thy feet. Esai. 49.23. Above
there are winged Schroles, in one upon the right hand over some ruins of
buildings, is that text in Jer. 27.8. but somewhat altered; The Nation and
Kingdom which will not serve him, that Nation will I punish, says the Lord,
with the Sword, and with Famine, and with pestilence. In the other on the left
hand, that place, Dan. 7.14. applied with more blasphemy, There was given him
dominion and a Kingdom, and all people shall serve him: his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed. Others also of them have been as bold with the holy
Text. The Bishop of Bitonto in his Sermon at the opening of the Council at
Trent, Hist. Conc. Trid. l. 2. ad. m. 15.45.
advising men to obey the Council, said, Else it will be said, the Popes light
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light. So applying
the Text, Joh. 3.18. But the judicious writer of the History notes it, That
many were offended with that speech. It will always prove an entangled title
to the Pope. Who then must be the Judge? Erasmus is feign to leave his Butcher
and Fishmonger wrangling in this point, Eaas Colleq. (...).
and when they have said all, yet unresolved. There are many that would cast it
upon the Fathers, and that we must stand to what they say: But that were to
make them not expounders, but lawgivers. We regard them highly, but yield them
not the Royalty of a Mint, as Mornay speaks: besides, we neither find all
difficulties explicated by them, D. Fr. White Orth. Faith. chapter 4. parag. 1.
nor in what they do explicate, an agreement. In the very Council of Trent,
another saying of Cardinal Cajetans, That a new sense of Scripture is not to
be rejected, though it be against the old Doctors, seeing power is left now
also to interpret; was by some much commended, who thought it a tyranny to
forbid the faithful the use of their own proper ingenie: others indeed
opposed it, accounting License worse then Tyranny, among others, Richard of
Man's a Franciscan friar, went so far as to say, The Doctrine of faith is now
so cleared, that we ought to learn it no more out of the Scriptures, which
heretofore were read in the Church for instruction, but now only are read to
pray by, not to study. There were not many that adhered to him; the better part
elivered themselves as Dominicus a Soto did, That it was fit to keep every wit
within limits for matters of faith and manners, but else to leave them to their
liberty for the sense. Others of them yet more plainly, That it was not fit to
restrain the understanding of the Scriptures to the fathers only, whose
expositions were most part Allegorical, seldom ltierall, and those fitted to
their own time. And many men have profitably used their liberty, especially
such as have sought out the literal sense. The Allegory, Luth. in Genesis 30.
Luther calls it a beauteous whore, that inticeth idle men, who think
themselves in Paradise and Gods bosom, when they fall upon such speculations:
Such was their interpretation, who by the clean beasts in the Arc understood
Virgins, and by the unclean, Married Persons. See Bp. Morton Appl. pn. 2. l.
5. Chapter 15.
And theirs upon Psalm. 74.13. Thou brakest the heads of the Dragons in the
waters, that is, Devils are expelled by holy water sprinkled by the Priests.
Luke 5.4. Duc in altum; that is, Peter go thou to Rome, the head and chief
City, and there spread thy net, 1 King 17.6. Crows brought flesh to Eliah,
that is, Laymen are to give all necessary things to Monks. Philol. Sacr. l. 2.
Tr. 2. pt. sect. 3. art. 4.
Solomon Glassius has collected many examples. I will only add that of
Antonius Archbishop of Florence, upon Zach. 11.7. of Dominick and his Order,
Zachariah spoke in the person of God, Anton. Hist. pt. 3. Tit. 23.
I took unto me two staves, the one I called Beauty, and the other (funiculum)
Bands: Beauty, is the order of Preachers, funiculus, the Order of Minors, who
are girt with a cord. Thus as the Camels they drink not of the fountain till
they have pudled it with their feet, St. Hierome had been much delighted this
way, Hier. in prolog ad Obad.
but found his own error. When I was young (says he) I interpreted the
Prophet Obadiah allegorically, because I was ignorant of the History. I thought
then I could read a sealed book. No man can write so ill, but some will like
it. Such a one praised it, but I blush't; I now freely profess, that was the
work of my childish wit, this of my mature age. But I shall not need to
enlarge against this, which even Salmeron and Ribera, and other Jesuits
themselves have inveyed against. But the literal sense is the most noble and
on all hands most allowed: And that sense our Learned and Reverend Author, Mr.
Richard Stock has every where sought and followed throughout this his plain
and most wholesome Commentary on Malachy, every where observing so many of those
circumstances as his Text would give him leave to observe, which Glassius has
put together into two verses;

Quis, Scopus, Impellens, Seeds, Tempusque, Locusque,
Et Modus, Haec Septem Scripturae attendito Lector.
The Author, Scope, Occasion, Theme, Time, Place and next
The Form. These seven let him attend that reads the text.
I have published him out of his own Original notes, and as largly as
himself writ: Only whereas on the third Chapter, verse the seventh, he had
more largely treated of the Doctrine of Repentance, upon the request of his
Auditory, who desired him to divert his ordinary course, as appears by his
Dedicatory Epistle, to the Lord William Knowls, that I have omitted, because
himself did publish it in his life time, Anno 1608.

I have followed his own manner in the publishing of this, and have set his
quotations of Fathers and other Latin Authors in their own words in the
Margin, and the Greek Fathers, rendered into Latin, because many readers
understand not the Greek, which is his own reason given in his Epistle to the
Reader, before that Treatise. Out of which Epistle of his I will also answer to
those that may dislike his frequent use of the Fathers, in his own words, If
any (says he) dislike my alleging of Fathers, (as some have my using of
reasons to confirm the Doctrine, but with very little reason as I suppose) I
must pray them to give me leave to use them, till I can see that unlawfulness
which they affirm to be in the practice; and to censure me in charity for the
use of them, as I do them for not using them. I will look as well to my heart
in the use of them, as God shall enable me, and when I shall see the hurt of
them, I will as much endeavor to avoid them; in the mean time I will make the
best use I can of them, to edify the Church of God.

But I will detain thee no longer in a preface, but commend the book to thy
reading, and that to Gods blessing.

Thine in the Lord, SAM. TORSHELL.

A Breviat of the Testimony given by Mr. Gataker, to Mr. Richard Stook, at his
Funeral Sermon.
THAT the Reader, if he were not acquainted with the Author of this Commentary
in his life time, may know what he was, I have thought fit to present unto him,
a briefer view of that more large Testimony, which Mr. Thomas Gataker,
preaching at his funeral, did deservedly give him.

After he has commended him for his unweariable industry and singular
proficiency in his own, and his ability and willingness to be helpefull to
others Studies, even while he was young in the College; He descends to the
consideration of him in his public calling, That he proved a painful, a
faithful Minister of Christ, a skillful, a powerful dispenser of Gods word.

The proofs of which were, his constant and incessant employments in Preaching
twice every Sabbath for many years; besides his Catechizing the younger sort
in the week days, (which he did with notable discretion, the males and females
apart, the riper and forwarder in the presence of the ruder and rawer, and then
the rawer by themselves; together with other offices of his Pastoral function,
privately performed.

Which Ministry of his was very effectual, so that besides many other
Christian Souls converted by him (in which success few Ministers were to be
compared with him) many faithful Ministers also received their first
beginnings of light and spiritual life and grace, from his Ministry; So that
he did not only win many souls, but many winners of Souls.

Those two things which make a Complete man, had an happy conjunction in him,
namely Integrity and Judgment. The proofs of which were, both the desire that
many had to use him for the oversight of their last Wills, and for the disposing
of their estates; And that so many reverend Ministers from all parts of the
Realm did by Letters or otherwise usually seek to him for the resolution of
their doubts.

As these made him a Complete man, so he had that which made him a Complete
Minister, namely, That he could speak his mind fitly, and That he durst speak
it freely. For the former, his ability to express himself, with clear
Method, sound proofs, choice words, fit phrase, pregnant similitudes,
plentiful illustrations, pithy persuasions, sweet insinuations, powerful
inforcements, allegations of antiquity, and variety of good literature; he
was such an one as many strove to imitate, not many of them matched. For the
other, his freedom of speech in reproving of sin even to the faces of the
greatest, many are able to testify, and some accidents made it more publicly
known, then his desire was it should have been.

Among other particular commendations of him, One was his zealous and earnest
pursuit of reformation of some prophanations of the Sabbath, wherein he
prevailed also for the alteration of some things in that kind offensive, as
well with the maine body of the City, as with some particular Societies.
Another was his pious care and diligence in the religious instruction and
education of those that were under his private charge, children and others.

In these and the like employments, he spent his time, he spent his strength,
till God put an end to his incessant labors here, and translated him to the
place of his endless rest.

February 1. 1639.
Imprimatur.

THO. WYKES.

The Sum or Argument of the whole Prophecy.
THE Israelites provoked to anger and heavy displeasure by their sins the
Monarch of the whole world: Wherefore he being thus displeased, sent against
them Nebuchadnezar, who took them, and carried the King, his Princes and the
whole people into Babel, after that he had spoiled their stately Temple,
destroyed their strong Walls, and laid waste Jerusalem it self; where they
endured 70. years exile and banishment: which years expired, they were again
brought to their Country, when and where better things were expected from
them, both in way of thankfulness, and in remembrance of their former
Captivity, lest a worse thing should afterward befall them. But they
forgetful of former things, both beatings and benefits, as children are,
returned to their sins, polluted the Divine worship, gave themselves to
diverse vices, began to make marriages with Infidels, again embraced Polygamy,
took up the custom of giving bills of divorce, committed sacriledges, cast out
strange contempts against God, and blasphemies: By all which the Lord being
again provoked, sent the Prophet Malachy to reprove them sharply, and to
threaten them severely with certain new judgments, and to the impenitent
certain and final destruction; yet in the mean time cheering up the good
with comforts, provoking them to Repentance, persuading them to faith in
Christ, refreshing them with many sweet promises.

Now it is no hard thing to make the Comparison, and apply these things to our
times, that it may appear, the handling of this is no unfit thing, but apt to
the time.

For the sins of the Land God was displeased, and gave over the people to
captivity (though in their own Land somewhat less than this, yet it was) both
of body and soul to a new Nebuchadnezar, which makes it the greater, the
Church and spiritual Jerusalem much defaced, the Relics of it partly put to
flight, partly to the fire. But see how good God was, after a time he brought
again our Captivity. After which he looked for better things from us, and
happily had them while the benefit was fresh, and the bondage yet felt. But see,
these are worn out of mind, and we again have committed great sins against
God, by which we justly have provoked Gods indignation against us, yea and
alas, we cease not to provoke it; for how great contempt of the service of God
is there in every place? what profaneness? what corruption of manners? what
unfaithfulness in covenant breaking? what uncleanenesse in marriage? what
horrible oaths? what fearful perjuries? what execrable blasphemies against
the Highest? not in mean persons, but of the highest ranks; not in Countries
only, but in famous Cities; not in mean men's Cottages only, but in noble men's
places and Palaces, in Church and Commonwealth: so that the Lord may say to
us, as he said to Israel by Malachy, Chap. 16. because neither honor nor fear
be performed to him. So that not only just are those plagues that are come
upon us, pestilence to the body now almost three years, and famine to the
soul begun, and threatened more, but also particular and general judgments.
Whatsoever is in this Prophecy, may justly both be threatened and executed upon
us; when it is just with God, where like sins are, to bring upon them like
punishments.

This is the reason of my choice, as also the sum and argument of this
Prophecy.

The parts of it are diverse. After the Inscription, or Preface, we have, 1.
Expostulations with the people and Priests touching their great and grievous
sins. 2. Threatenings of punishments deserved by them. 3. Prophesies of the
calling of the Gentiles, and the coming of Christ. 4. Exhortations to
Repentance, and exercise of the duties of piety.


All which are to be found promiscuously, and intermixed one with another; the
particular resolution of which is better in their place, and more profitable,
than now to spend time in pointing out every particular where it is to be found.

The time when this Prophecy was written, is, in general, after they were
returned from their captivity; more special, after Hagge and Zachary, the two
Prophets of the Church, and yet more, after the building and finishing the
Temple about some 24. Ezra 6.
years: for it was built in the sixth year of Darius King of Persia. Hagge and
Zachary the second year of Darius, (after some 41. years interruption of the
work, all the time of Artashashte or Artaxerxes Longimanus) prophesied, and
persuaded the people to build it; who by the favor and exhibition of the King
did finish the work in his sixth year, who reigned in all 30, after the
finishing of the Temple 24. After whose days, in the time of Artaxerxes,
Darius his successor, our Prophet began to prophecy, being the last of all
such as did prophecy till the forerunner of Christ John the Baptist.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE WHOLE Book of the Prophecy of Malachy, delivered in
certain Sermons.
CHAP. I.
THE burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by the ministry of Malachy.

2 I have loved you, says the Lord: yet ye say. Wherein have thou loved us?
Was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord? yet I loved Jacob, 3 And I hated
Esau, and made his mountains waste, and his heritage a wilderness for
dragons. 4 Though Edom say, We are impoverished, but we will return and build
the desolate places; yet says the Lord of Hosts, They shall build, but I will
destroy it, and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and the
people, with whom the Lord is angry for ever. 5 And your eyes shall see it, and
ye shall say, The Lord will be magnified upon the border of Israel. 6 A son
honors his father, and a servant his master. If then I be a father, where is
mine honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear, says the Lord of Hosts
unto you, O Priests that despise my Name? and ye say, Wherein have we despised
thy Name? 7 Ye offer unclean bread upon mine Altar, and you say, wherein have
we polluted thee? In that ye say, The Table of the Lord is not to be regarded.
8 And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, it is not evil: and if ye offer the
lame and sick, it is not evil: offer it now unto thy Prince; will he be
content with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts? 9 And now, I
pray you, pray before God, that he may have mercy upon us: this has been by
your means: will he reward your persons, says the Lord of Hosts? 10 Who is
there even among you, that would shut the doors, and kindle not fire on mine
Altar in vain? I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of Hosts, neither
will I accept an offering at your hand. 11 For from the rising of the Sun
unto the going down of the same, my Name is great among the Gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering: for my
Name is great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. 12 But ye have
polluted it, in that ye say, The Table of the Lord is polluted, and the fruit
thereof, even his meat is not to be regarded. 13 Ye said also, Behold, it is a
weariness, and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord of Hosts, and ye offered
that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick: thus ye offered an offering:
should I accept this at your hand, says the Lord? 14 But cursed be the
deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the
Lord a corrupt thing: for I am agreat King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my
Name is terrible among the Heathen.
The parts of this Chapter are two: 1. A Preface or Inscription. 2. The Oracle
or Prophecy.
1. The Preface in the first verse, general to the whole. 2. The Prophecy in
the rest.
1. An expostulation with the people and Priest for their ingratitude and
corrupting of his worship, from verse 2. to the 9. 2. A Commination of judgment
deserved by it; or a Commination of diverse judgments, from verse. 9. to the end.


In the Preface or Inscription we conceive two things: The substance and
circumstance of it.

1. The substance, being the subject or matter of the whole, is in that it is
called a Burden. 2. The Circumstance of the person, which is threefold.
1. From whom, as the Efficient. 2. To whom, as the Object. 3. By whom, as the
Instrument.
VERSE I.
The burden of the Word of the Lord to Israel by the ministry of Malachy.

THE Burden] Here is the matter or subject of this Book, or Prophecy: He
calls it a burden, usual with Prophets in their writings, all almost in some
place or other. But Nahum, Habakkuk, and Malachy thus begin their prophecies.
It signifies, as Hierome, a woeful and sorrowful prophecy, full of threats
and judgments; called therefore a Burden, because it presses those against
whom it is spoken, the hearts and spirits of them, as a burden the body, and
suffers them not to lift up their heads, and themselves, as in former times.
Some think it signifies not only this, but also the Commandment of the Lord,
by which the Prophet was burdened as from the Lord, that he should declare it
in so many words unto Israel: which they think follows thence, because it is
to Israel, not against; but I fear, this is somewhat nice, for it was so to
them, as it was against them for their sins, and that which is against, is as
much as a burden to the Prophet: but this must be understood Tropice, here
being a Synecdoche; for the whole Prophecy is not a burden, or threatening of
punishment, but part only of it, and so the whole is denominated of the part.

The punishment of sin, onus sine onere; but as a talent of Lead, spoken of,
Zach. 5.7. heavy and grievous; so is it here, and in many places of the
Prophets, as Nah. 1.1. Hab. 1.1. Jerem. 23.33. fine, he shows what is the
burden, I will cast you off, and send you into Babel captives, verse. 36. that
is, whosoever shall say, The burden, he shall for that word bear his burden,
that is, be punished of the Lord; it is proved further by Matthew. 7.9. Galat.
6.8. Hence is the complaint of David, Psalm. 32.4. Thy hand was heavy upon me.

Because sin, the deserving and procuring cause,

Because the wrath and displeasure of God,

Because none can give ease in it, or deliver from it,

This may teach us what to judge of those men who are in some affliction, under
a judgment, and yet find no burden, Indeed the living has laid it to his
heart, but so few have done it, that the dead are more than the living; not
only our wanton women, and voluptuous men, to whom that 1 Timothy 5.6. They are
dead while they live: but our worldly men, our ambitious and others all dead,
for this they have not felt. We sorrowed for fifty and odd thousands that dyed
in the former year; we have as much need to sorrow for so many thousands yet
living, and dead amongst us; they never indeed felt, nor yet do feel this
burden: Their irreligious carriage when it was here amongst us, both at home
and abroad, in the City and abroad, their small conformity since to the Law of
God, little reforming of their corruptions, nay, their monstrous deformity in
themselves, wives, and children, persuades my heart, as it is Psalm. 36.1. The
transgression of the wicked says within my heart, there is no fear of God
before my eyes: so that they had no feeling of this at all; for they who truly
felt it, would grow somewhat better, if not altogether reformed. If an
heathenish people, who knew not God, at the burden of the Word of the Lord did
so humble themselves, that the Lord said, Jonah 8.10. He repented of the evil
he said he would do to you, and did it not; what shall be thought of Christian
men by profession, living in the Church of God, if at the burden of his Word
they repent not, nor depart from their evil ways? but Isaiah 8.8. Though they
be stricken, revolt more and more: it is because they are dead men, and cannot
feel it. Oh then weep not for me, but for your selves, and children, as those
not for the departed, but for the living dead: for if it be true, The beginning
of the remedy is the sense and acknowledgment of the malady; how far are they
from cure that have not yet the feeling of it? I feared the Plague by a
natural infirmity, though God enabled me to abide upon my calling in the
hottest brunt of it, and mercifully preserved me hitherto to his Church, and to
speak this to you this day. But if it should now come by the providence of God
upon me, that he begins to threaten it to the City, I should willingly
embrace it, as thinking God to be mavelous merciful unto me, and whosoever
he should smite by it, to take it thus into his own hand, and not to leave us
to more fearful judgments, which I cannot say, but I marvellously fear, is
even at the door to the wakening of dead men and women, or the sweeping of
them away. I am no Prophet, I pray God my words be no prophecy; but what peace,
etc.

This ought to teach men in affliction, if a judgment come, and imposed by the
hand of God, to bear it patiently and meekely, as David, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. for
it is a burden. The way to be eased, is not struggling with it, but meekely to
bear it; for a prisoner to be free from his fetters, is not in the Jaylors
sight to seek to break them, or to file them off; that is the way to procure
more, or the longer lying in them: So, to be eased of a burden, is not to
wrestle with it when one is under it, but to go softly; there is more ease
while it is on his back, and sooner comes he to be released of it. A man may
with impatiency wrestle and use unlawful means to ease himself, and God
happly will let them prosper for a while; but after he will bring a more heavy
and inevitable burden on him, that with his former shifts shall make more heavy
to him. There is a fable, but it has his Moral for this purpose; A certain
Ass laded with Salt, fell into a river, and after he had risen, found his
burden lighter, for the moisture made it melt away; whereupon he would ever
after lie him down in the water as he travailed with his burden, and so ease
himself: His owner perceiving his craft, after laded him as heavy with Wool;
the Ass purposing to ease himself, as before, laid himself down in the next
water, and thinking to have ease, rising again to feel his weight, found it
heavier, as it continued with him all the day. The Moral is, that they who
impatiently seek means contrary to the will of God, to ease themselves of
their burden, shall have it more and more increase upon them.

That men should make a special restraint to themselves to keep from sinning,
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 20.22.
then let this restrain us, if nothing else will; let us imitate Porters, who
called, and offered money to bear a burden, will poise and weigh the burden in
their hands first, which when they see they are not able to bear, no gain
will entice them; so in this case let us do.

Of the Word of the Lord] The circumstance of the person sending, the
efficient, and author, as of other prophecies, so, of this; he comes not
unsent, he spoke not of himself, he came not without the Lord, but from him;
so he affirms, and truly, to get more reverence, credit, and authority with
them: and that it was thus from the Lord, and so Canonical, the testimonies of
Christ and his Apostles, alleging him diverse times for confirmation of
Doctrine, and reformation of manners; proves it: but he adds, the Word of
the Lord] not only to show that he had but the word, the rod, and execution
would come after, God making his word good: but as some think, to show that he
had not a free Embassage, but that he was to deliver it in certain and set
prescribed words. Sometime when Prophets were more frequent and perpetual in
the Church, and God spoke to them by dreams, or by visions, and apparitions,
they had diverse kinds of words, and had liberty for diverse manners of speaking
and delivery: But our Prophet was such a messenger, that the Commandment he
had received, and was credited with, he must deliver in so many words, and the
same he received them in, and so he does; for in the whole he never uses his
own person, but the Lord only, as Chap. 1.2. and 2.1. and 3.1. and 4.1.

Here we might observe, that the Writers of the Scriptures are not the Authors,
but God himself, of which Rev. 2.7. But one particular may we herein observe,
this following:

This Prophecy is the very word of the Lord,

Because this was written by a Prophet: Malachy for a Prophet, the last among
the Jews till the coming of John Baptist.

Because the Church of the Jews,

I take instructions from hence, with a sincere affection, dealing faithfully
with it as a faithful dispenser, giving to every one his portion, where and to
whom the Spirit of God has set them down, to Priest and people, to old and to
young, to married and unmarried, to the good and profane, without fear and
flattery, or any other sinister affections, remembering that this in the first
is in the whole, and to every verse, it is the word of the Lord, fearing to
corrupt, as well as to add, lest that I hear as it is Prove. 30.6. Add not to
his words lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar; remembering that of
Luke 12.42. that I may be a faithful and wise Steward, that I may obtain
that, Verse. 43, 44. which how soon it may be general, or to me in particular,
whether before I have gone through the whole, or this Chapter, or this verse, I
know not.

This teaches all to whom I am to speak: Israel said to Sihon King of the
Amorites, Judge. 7.24. so would not thou hear that thy Prince, Father, or
Master says unto thee; nay, will not Idolaters hear that which their gods say
unto them, how much more you that the Lord shall speak to? This is the word;
that we shall speak is but the delivering of it in more words, which is here
set down in fewer; pressing it at large, which is here set down more briefly;
this as a clew of thread wound up, by us it is but drawn out at length; yea,
and it must be heard as the word of God with all reverence, received with
humility, believed by faith, obeyed with care; for the Lord having spoken it,
it was not for the time and persons present only, but for all successive ages
and people. As the Laws of Princes, and Decrees of Parliaments are not only
for them that live then, but for whosoever shall afterward be borne subjects
to the same Sovereigns; therefore not any sin is here reproved, but it is
reproved in whomsoever it is found; nor is there any judgment threatened, but
menaced against the men of our time that hear it; not any duty commanded, but
it is appertaining to us as to them, because it is the word of the Lord, who is
our Lord as well as theirs, of the Gentiles, as of the Jews. I cannot say as
Daniel 4.19. fine, so the Prophecy is for others, and the interpretation of it
is for others, and judgments to your enemies; but as Peter, Act. 2.39. It is to
you, and to your children: so these things here commanded and reproved are for
you and your children. But why should I speak thus sharply unto you? Verily
because God will nevertheless bring these, if I should hold my peace, and by
speaking I may prevent he should not, if so be my exhortations this day may
find place in your hearts, and hereafter in your lives: But shall I come unto
you, not with a rod, but in love, and the spirit of meekness? 1 Cor. 4.21.
then as Chrysostom ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 27. by our mutual love, yours and
mine, by all the travel I have felt for you, till Christ be formed in you
fully, Gal. 4.19. give me that wherein I may glory before men and devils, and
in the presence of God. And what is my glory? but your progress and increase
in piety here, and your salvation in the life to come: Believe me, beloved, Si
fieri potest me pro vobis certamen been gerere, vos autem been gestae rei
praemia far, nunquam profecto vobis tantum turbationis ingererem; sed non
licet boc nobis, non licet inquam. Chrysostom. de virtut. and vitiis sermo. If
it were possible for me to undergo the Combat, and you to bear the Trophies
of the victory, I would not put you to so much trouble. But this may not be,
this may not be, for every one must live by his own faith, and pass to heaven
by his own piety and obedience: It is neither bought nor borrowed oil in our
Lamps will serve to enter in with the Bridegroom.

To Israel,] The second person to whom, as the Subject, to Israel; that is, to
the whole people who were lately delivered out of Captivity, and now enjoyed
their Land, and the liberty of Religion: and as men not sufficiently instructed
under the rod and cross, or forgetting their former calamities, returned to
their former corruptions and sins, whose sins were the worse by that they
had received, and made the more inexcusable; when they should have been
bettered by his mercies, they grew worse. By Israel he understands the whole
company, both Priest and people, calling it Israel, which for distinction was
before called Judah, after the rent happened betwixt the ten and two Tribes,
Judah and Benjamin, and some of Levi to the house of David, and the rest to
Jeroboam; for the ten tribes by Salmanassor were so led into Captivity, that
they never returned; he now called these two Tribes by the old and wonted name:
To Israel then his own people, chosen out of the world, yea, reserved to
himself from those ten Tribes, thus specially beloved, he sends, though with
grief thus threatening.

God will punish his, Israel, upon particular persons, on Moses, Numb. 20. on
Miriam, Numb. 1. David often, and other the good Kings who were punished,
proves this manifestly.

Because he loves his own, Nulla ira, magna ira.
the fondness of affection, not the favor of judgment, Prove. 13.24. It is
love because of that 1 Cor. 11.32. when we are judged, we are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

Because he would be justified, David's child denounced, and performed to
prevent or to stay the blasphemy of the wicked, 2 Samuel 12.14. as he insinuates
in his Psalm of Repentance, Psalm 51.4.

Because he may manifest his hatred of sin,

If God will, and must deal thus with his own, verse. 11. but let them know he
sees it, and go to Shiloh, verse. 12. and other Churches, and see what he has
done to them, and the like will he do to it, verse. 14. Let no particular man
think he may sin, as presuming he is Gods; for if he spared not Moses,
Miriam, David, and others, how him? could they not have challenged more than
he? or is it not likely that God would have spared them as well as he? Let him
think of that to Solomon: I will be his Father, and he shall be my son; if
he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of Iron, but my mercy shall
not depart from him, 2 Samuel 7.14, 15. if God make it true in him, it is the
best he can look for. If any ask, what benefit it is to be Gods? I answer,
much every way; as that God will pass by many infirmities of thine when thou
servest him, many sins of passion when they are not continued in: Have you
not heard of the patience of Job? Again, is it no benefit to be his Fathers
Heir, unless he may be suffered to do what he list without controlement or
correction? Besides, even this is a benefit; for if that be true, Let the
righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness, Psalm. 141.8. much more this,
when that we are chastned, that we may not be condemned, 1. Cor. 2.32.

This may serve for comfort when affliction and punishment is befallen one who
is his. Arc did stay upon the mountain of Ararat, after it had floted a long
time upon the waters, seeing he afflicts his own, yea more than the wicked in
this life, and yet still his people.

Israel having forgotten their late miseries and calamities, the sense and
feeling of them being worn clean out of memory, they return again to their
former corruptions and sins, and are newly threatened with other, and more
heavy judgments.

If men, Esaias, who reproves the people because they profited not by former
judgments, but remained obstinate, and in their sins, Chap. 1. ver. 5.
specially verse. 21, 22, 23. How is the faithful City become an Harlot, it was
full of judgment, and justice lodged therein, but now they are murderers; thy
silver is become dross, thy wine is mixed with water, thy Princes are
rebellious, and companions of thieves; every one loves gifts, and follows
after rewards; they judge not the fatherless, neither does the Widows cause
come before them: whereunto he adds, therefore says the Lord God of Hosts,
the mighty one of Israel, Ah I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of
mine enemies, verse. 24. To this I add Esaias 12.9.17.21. inferred upon verse. 13.
manifest by Deuteronomy. 28.45. Jerem. 5.3. John 5.14. An example of this also the
Ninevites may be, comparing together the Prophecies of Jonah and Nahum.

Because it cannot be equal and right, Joab gave not over the siege of Abel
till Shebaes head was given him, 2 Samuel 20.22.

Because it is dangerous for a people to harden them in their sins,

Because he must do it whether his own or not;

Learn then to fear before God,

By the ministry of Malachy, or by the hand of Malachy] The third person is
the Instrument, and by his hand, that is by his work and ministry: some
think it is said rather by the hand than the mouth, to show how uncorruptly
he delivered this; and not by the mouth, because the mind and mouth are more
apt to corrupt a message than the hand which carries sealed letters. But
without opposition, I take it to be the phrase of the Scripture, to note the
Ministry of him and others, as 1 Samuel 11.7. and 28.17. The Lord has done as
he has spoke by my hand; Malachy signifies my Messenger, or my Angel, whence
rises the error of Origin, as Hieronimus in hunc locum, that an Angel came,
and took the shape of man, and delivered this. But Hierome shows that the
nature of a person is not to be taken notice of from the notation or Etymology
of his name, for then, whereas Hoseah signifies a Savior, and Joel the Lord
God: these should not be men, but Angels, or the Lord, or the Savior of the
world; which if it follows not, then not this: But whether he was Mordecai, as
some think, or Ezra, as most, it is not certain: the conjectures of men for
the latter are probable, but easily answered: It is safer to content our selves
with that which is revealed, than rashly or slenderly to affirm any thing in
so weighty matters, especially when it is not so needful that we should
enquire into it; whether he had his name from his birth, or circumcision, or
it is a name of office, it is not known. It has ever been thought a vain
curiosity to make enquiry for the Messengers name and title, when the message
is most certain, Judge. 13.18. as here it is by the testimony of the New
Testament. There were in the Church three sorts of Prophets, some that were to
be perpetually in it, and to exercise a perpetual office to answer men when
they inquired of them after the custom of time, and manner, as Samuel, Hosea,
Elisha: Some for a time, both for this, and also to stand up in Gods person,
for some particular thing to foretell it, which being done, they ended their
office; as Amos, who prophesied for two years before the Earthquake. Thirdly,
some, who were only once to prophecy and foretell things, which done, their
office ceased; as Jonah to the Ninevites, Abdias to the Edomites, and of this
sort is our Prophet.

God in revealing his will, and publishing of his heavenly riches, I rose up
early, and sent my Prophets: In the New, as they were men employed under
Christ, Ephesians. 4.8. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. and
we are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.

Because Angels presence would have been fearful,

To honor the nature of man; for if to be man's, Poterat utique per Angelum
omnia fieri; sed abjecta esset humana conditio, si per homines hominibus Verbum
suum administrare nolle videretur. Aug. De doctr. Christiana, lib. 1. praefat.
but the humane condition had been vilified, if he had seemed not to
administer his Word by men unto men.

Because the message rather than the messengers should be regarded,

This ought to be matter of encouragement to the Ministers of God, that their
labor in preaching, Pharaoh did Moses, that they see their face no more. But
if none will, yet he will not suffer them to go unregarded, because he has
set them on work, they are his Ministers, as Esaias 49.4, 5. I said I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, yet surely my work (or
my reward) is with my God: And though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be
glorious in the eyes of the Lord.

To teach men not to be offended, David a Prophet, and Solomon a Preacher,
though not ordinary, could have made them and other Princes ordinary Preachers
and Ministers, but their greatness would have obscured his power. Why then
has he chosen mean men? That the baseness and mean condition of the person
might give place to his glory, that men might not dote on the person, but
delight in the ministry and message; therefore as Princes shut up their
treasures not in goodly and sumptuous chests, but in caskets of no price, and
of base matter, to deceive the thief, and to convay it whither they would have
it: so God these, to lay a stumbling block to the reprobate; but as many as
are called and chosen, to make it the power of God and the wisdom of God to
them. Nihil adeo est quod obduret mentes hominum, quam simplicitas divinorum
operum, quae in actu videntur, and magnificentia quae in effectu repromittitur.
Tertul. De bapt. lib. cap. 2.

Ipsi miramur quia credimus; caeterum incredulit as miratur, non credit;
miratur simplicia quasi vana, magnifica quasi impossibilia. Idem.


There Is nothing that so much hardens men's minds as the simplicity of Gods
works that are seen, and the greatness of the efficacy which is promised,
when as to the godly it is far otherwise. They are marvellously wrought upon
by them, because they look to him who works by them; here is the difference of
faith and infidelity, believers and infidels. We wonder because we believe;
incredulity wonders, but believes not; it wonders at simple things as if they
were vain, at great things as if impossible.

We are the Ministers of God, Vsura vero est auditae monitionis per opera
exhibitio: Your usury is to witness your profitable hearing by your works.
See then that you obey and do, that as Nathan said to David, 2 Samuel 24.13. so
I may to you, Now advise and see what answer I shall return to him that sent
me.

The burden by the ministry of Malachy,] Malachy must carry to this people a
burden, not only things acceptable, but displeasing and grievous.

The Ministers of God must not only serve him in preaching the Gospel and
comforts, but also threatenings and judgments.

VERSE II.
I have loved you, says the Lord, yet ye say, Wherein have thou loved us? Was
not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord? yet I loved Jacob.

I Have loved you says the Lord,] The second part of the Chapter is the matter
and Prophesies consisting in two parts: on Gods expostulation with the people
and Priest for their sins, and his judgments against them for those sins.
The first is hence to the 9. verse. Their sins are two: ingratitude, contempt
of him, and corruption of his worship. The 1. to the 6. verse. Their
ingratitude is expressed, that they did not acknowledge nor account of his
love, nor yet of his benefits, the fruit of his love, which he had from time
to time bestowed upon them, that they might by the greatness of the one, or by
the weight of the other, be drawn to perform the duties of Piety unto him
their God and King, who had deserved so well at their hands and of them. First
for his love.

I have loved you,] A speech spoken with affection, specially by valuing his
love, and disdaining to have it so neglected of those upon whom he had bestowed
it. Some think it is a speech imperfect, broken off, and interrupted with
grief, when he would have added more. I have loved you; grief not suffering
him to speak more. The supply may be, I have loved you always, but you
acknowledge it not, neither answered me with love again, but for this repayed
me with sins.

Love given to God, signifies not a passion nor affection, for there is no such
thing in God. Ira Dei non perturbatio animi ejus, sed judicium quo irrogatur
poena peccato. August. of the anger of God. De civitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 25.
So of this, it is no passion, but his free election to bestow, yea, an actual
giving to them the adoption of sons and eternal life. For God is said to be
angry, when he does that which commonly men do when they are angry; and to
love, when he does that which men do when they love. Now this cannot be
understood of his general love, of which all are partakers, men and Angels,
blessing, preserving, sustaining them: for then were it no great matter that he
affirms here to his. But of a special love, that is, his choosing of them to
be sons, and to bestow on them eternal life. I have loved you, that is, I
have chosen you to be my people, and I will be your God; to be my children, and
I will be your Father, and to give you the inheritance of sons, than which
what can be greater? Hierome thinks he denies now to love them, because he
uses the preter-tense. But it is no rule, when as the pretertense does often
include the present, Romans 1.24. Psalm. 1.1.

The first sin reproved is unthankfulness, the reproof being covertly
insinuated, rather than openly set down, under the recording and recalling of
Gods love and the fruits of it, whereof they had been partakers. Hierome
observes here, lest the punishment should seem unjust, and God should without
cause afflict them, and lay the burden upon them, he adds the reproof of
their sins. Hence we may observe.

The punishing and afflictions coming to men, Thou have fallen by thine
iniquity.

Now to the sin here reproved in particular, Isaiah 1.2. sets it before all
other sins. It is by the Apostle put among the sins of the last days, when
iniquity shall get the upper hand, and must abound, 2 Timothy 3.2. This sin is
committed five ways, or there are five kinds or degrees of unthankful men.
First, when men do not acknowledge God as the Author and giver of their
benefits and blessings, but find out others, as Hosea 2.8, 9. She knew not
that the Lord gave her Corn. Secondly, when men do forget him and his
benefits, against which David labored. Psalm. 103.2. Bless the Lord, oh my
soul, forget not all his benefits. And confessed among sins, Psalm. 106.7.
our Fathers remembered not the multitude of thy mercies. Thirdly, when they do
not give him praise in word and affection, do not utter it before men. Such
were the nine Lepers. Fourthly, when not only these, but recompense him evil
for good, as that, Isaiah 1.2. I have brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me. Deuteronomy. 32.5, 6. Fifthly, not faulty in any of these, but do
not walk worthy of such mercies, when he does not render according to the
benefit done unto him, as it was said of Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 32.25.

Because the contrary is a duty so often commanded, In all things give thanks,
for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you: Then the other must
needs be a sin.

Because the Saints of God have much labored against it in themselves and
others,

Because the contrary is the honoring of God, of him, and the araying of him
with honor and glory. Psalm. 50.23. Who so offers praise, glorifieth me. Then
this is a great dishonor, and then it is evil. That which is against the Crown
and dignity, specially immediately of a Prince, is heinous and grievous.

This being such a sin, thus committed, Therefore they sacrifice unto their
net, and burn incense unto their yarne, because by them their portion is fat,
and their meat plenteous; and so commit Idolatry with their friends, with the
earth and heavens, with their labors and hands. But say they be so far
instructed that they confess him the giver, yet how some have forgotten him
and his benefits. A second brings the oblivion of the first, a third of that,
etc. As one nail drives out another, but an affliction makes all to be
forgotten: as with men, one injury they do us, makes us forget they ever did
us good. But say benefits be remembered, and oftentimes spoken of, yet not so
much as the afflictions and troubles: or if at one time many words to express
the passion in suffering, few in receiving; or if of them, yet as Courtiers
brag of the Kings favor, as Haman, Ester 5.11, 12. more to magnify himself
than the Kings liberality: for a long story they will tell you of their wealth,
and honor, and children, and such like; but a few words, and that very
unsavourily will they drop out of praise to God. They make not their Song or
Psalms of thankesgiving as the faithful have done. But if any can plead not
guilty here, and be culpable in none of these, yet his unthankfulness appears
that he still remains in his sin, and rebels against the Lord; not only
offending him, but by those things he has received from him: more than any
married and modest woman will do to her husband, by the Rings, Chains,
Bracelets, Apparel, and ornaments he gave her to adorn her, so she might be
acceptable to him; not that she should give to an adulterer, to entice him to
folly. And yet what else do many, but by their riches and honors, their
health and beauty, by their strength and valor, and such like, dishonor him?
By their riches they wax proud against God, by their honors and high places
they oppress others without fear: health makes them study the adorning and
trimming of the body, by their beauty they entice others, by their valor they
contemn others, and like mighty Nimrods they tyrannize in peace and war: so
that God for all his cost has not Grapes, but sower Grapes, as Isaiah 5. But
say that herein they are not to be charged, yet are they ungrateful, because
they have not walked worthy of such benefits, because they have not rendered
according to their reward, and every benefit has not been answered with
obedience, and more care to please God.

To teach every man to labor to see and know himself guilty of this sin, In
conferendis beneficiis est liberalissima, ita in gratiarum actionibus
reposcendis est avarissima.
that in conferring of benefits he is most liberal, and most covetous in
requiring acknowledgment. This is most acceptable to him, like the scent of all
sacrifices, Levit. 3.16, 17. Let it repent us that we have deprived him of so
much as is due to him, and now strive to it, singing the songs of thankesgiving
with cheerful hearts when he calls us to it, not loving him otherwise than
he has done us, both in word and deed: ceasing to grieve him, seeking to
please him, and to recompense as he has rewarded us. Et si gravia
praeterierunt, tamen gravium memoria ne praetereat; non ut doleamus, sed ut
gratias agamus. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. ad popul. Ant. But Hom. 25. Vera gratiarum
relatio haec est, cum haec agamus unde Deus glorificari debet, cum ea fugiamus
a quibus jam fuimus liberati. Nam, cum Rege contumeliis affecto, cum poenas
luere deberemus, honorati fuissemus, and mox iterum affecissemus contumelia,
tanquam ingratitudinis extremae rei, maximam merito poenam, and priore multo
graviorem dare deberemus. Whereas on the contrary, to be truly thankful, is
a great treasure, it is the way to more riches, because a man does anew draw at
the Well of Gods bounty; for to him that has shall be given; if he use it for
his Masters glory: and the evil avoided which else would come upon them.

I have loved thee,] This is understood not of his general love, but his
special, and that after a special manner: not such as he loves whole mankind
by, but such as he loves his Church by. The love of a whole Family, of his
Spouse and children is different, one more excellent than other, and so both
more special and more excellent.

God, he loves his Church with a more special and excellent love, than he
loves either all creatures, or all mankind. So here, Septuag. read (...), a
peculiar people. Tit. 2.14. Now (...), est thesaurus prae aliis electus, and so
it is more excellent, and more dear and precious in Gods sight: these were for
themselves, and the Type of others. Hence is that, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen
generation, a peculiar people. Things elected are more specially loved; hence
are those comparisons to set forth this love, that he is the Head of his
Members, the Father of his Children, the Husband of his Wife. The Members are
better affected than excrements, the Children than servants, the Wife without
comparison, as himself is one flesh.

Because love, Non tam a veris rebus somnia superantur, quam haec terrena ab
aeternis illis absunt. Chrysostom. da. virg.
and lays up treasure, and gives knowledge and education. The servant is
provided for, the Child much more: so the things God gives being more
excellent, spiritual, Salvation, things belonging to it; but to others earthly
things only, 1 Cor. 9.11. There is a threefold state of man, as Divines
speak of him: Esse, been esse, optimum esse. First, naturae, secondly,
gratiae, thirdly, gloriae. The first of general love, the two last of special
love, which being those God gives his, and his only; then is it with a more
special love he loves them.

Because it is more constant and perpetual:

Because in general love only, sua dat, se dat, he gives himself. Hosea
2.19. Now as that of Samuel is true, 1 Samuel 15.22. Obedience is better than
sacrifice, because in obedience a man gives himself to God, but in sacrifice
he gives but of his, as Cain of the fruit of the ground. Abel of the first of
his sheep, and of the fattest of them; so in this.

This should provoke every one to labor for this love, the more rare, the more
dear, and more desired; but when they are rare and excellent, very precious
then most of all; such is this love. But how may we get this? Labor to be his,
and his children, and Church, so we all are. But he is not a Jew that is one
outward. But how may we know that we are his, and have love? How do commonly
men know they have the general love, and whence is their general brag of
it? If they have the fruits of his love, peace, prosperity, riches, etc. So in
this, if they have spiritual graces, as true saving knowledge, faith,
sanctification, love, meekness, zeal, which are the fruits of his special
love, Eccles. 9.1. No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before us.
They are things within us which must manifest that to us; for these then must
we labor that we may know we have it.

This must teach every one to be more thankful for this than he or others
would be for the general: August. Surgunt indocti and coelum rapiunt, etc. If
for these common blessings and love, how much more for the fruits of special
love and it? If to whom much, of them much in the former; how much more in
this? and of such as have his special love, he looks for obedience and honor,
wherein is their thankfulness. The Courtier that is advanced above others,
ought to be more respective of the Prince and his will, and with more care and
cheerfulness perform all obedience, and the duty of his place than others.
He that has his life, liberty, and living given unto him when all was lost, if
he shall not, if he should not respect him, every tongue would be ready to
condemn him: But if he should be made heir to the Crown, if his issue fail,
or he have no child, then more. So in this; and this not being, nothing will
more prove that they are not that they would seem to be, and that they have
not that they braggeon.

This is matter of comfort to as many as are indeed his, much more readily will
he give us other things, when he has given us himself, and has married us to
himself? Will a father see his child to want? will a husband let his wife want
when he is rich and able? if they should, yet will not God. Isaiah 49.15. Can a
woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb?
though they should forget, yet will I not forget thee: therefore they may best
have their conversation without care or covetousness; they need not swear or
deceive for gain, oppress, or offer injury to provide for themselves; they
need not profane the Lords day, nor use unlawful means to lay up for another
time to come: for he that does so specially love them, and has laid up so
great things for them, and given them the pledges of them already, and the
earnest of such infinite things, how will not he take care of them to provide
necessaries for them. He that in his general love feeds the Ravens, the Lions,
and Leopards; makes his rain to fall, and his Sun to shine upon the wicked,
and fills their bellies with his hid treasures; what will his special love
make him to his own? but many of his are oftentimes scanted. So the Physician
keeps his patient at a strait diet, when full dishes are hurtful unto him. And
God oftentimes gives not riches, because when they be humanae miseriae
remedia, the remedies of humane misery, they will make them instrumenta
voluptatis aut superbiae, the instruments of pleasure or pride, and he knows
their hearts better than themselves. But they often want much, and have scarce
to satisfy nature, when the wicked have abundance; but their water and brown
bread makes them look as well as all the full dishes of the wicked; as it was
with Daniel and his fellows. And the prodigal son had little to refresh him,
when his fathers servants had bread enough, because he abused his former
portion, and run from under the protection, and out of his fathers house. So
with them: At his return he had the fat Calfe killed for him, and apparel
and ornaments given him fit for a son.

To admonish every one that is his, Amos of it, Chap. 3.2. You only have I
known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will visit you for all
your iniquities. Heads of families correct all, and most where they love;
children before servants, and of them, those they love, if their love be with
judgment, and not blinded with affection.

Wherein have thou loved us?] Some take this to be a kind of prevention: the
Prophet knowing what this people would say, thus accused, for themselves, he
prevents; Ye will ask me wherein I have manifest any love unto you? my answer
is ready, and the proof manifest. Was not Jacob brother to Esau? but these are
more likely to be the words of the people, for so their ingratitude rather
appears, that they would not acknowledge the love of God, but some of
infirmity, some of malice and contempt spoke thus, Wherein have thou loved us?
In what special benefit have thou showed thy love unto us? Cyrill supposes
that it is likely they remembered the late captivity and calamity God had
brought upon them, which did so stick in their minds, that all the good God
did unto them before and since, specially spiritual, could not make them
acknowledge he loved them.

The corrupt nature of man is hardly drawn to confess and acknowledge sin,
ver. 6, 7. and Cap. 2.14. and 3.7, 8. Job 31.33. If I have hid my sin as
Adam, concealing mine iniquity in my bosom. Trem. more hominum, noting the
corruption of man to hide and cover it. It is manifest by Adams accusing Eve
and God, and Eve the Serpent, to cover their sin, Genesis 3.12, 13. Achan,
Joshua 7. who covered it till God had found him out. Saul, he covered his by
accusing of the people, 1 Samuel 15.13, 14, 15, 20, 21. David, 2 Samuel 11.6. etc.
yea, even when Nathan came to him, Cap. 12. who might, if he did not, take the
Parable to himself, before it was applied by Nathan. The Priests, Matthew. 27.4.
Gregory; They are like the Cuttle-fish, that when he perceives men go about
to take him, does so dye and color the water about her with a kind of black
moisture, that a man cannot tell where to have her: so these, and so others,
either by denying, as Matthew. 25.44. by defense, as Jonah, Jonah 4. by cautelous
answer, as Genesis 4.9. by a good purpose, as Genesis 20.6. by putting it off to
others, Adam to Eve.

Because self love bears rule and sway, Adam, concealing mine iniquity in my
bosom. The latter part Tremel. reads, Abdendo ex dilectione mei iniquitatem
meam. And this is to avoid both punishment from God, and shame from men;
naturally they know God is just, and out of his justice will visit the
iniquities of men: and they think him as man, and that the Proverb is true,
Hosea 12.8.
Confess and be hanged; supposing he cannot know, unless they disclose.
Therefore to avoid his knowledge, and so his punishment, they willingly smother
them. Again, to avoid shame from men, because they will even upbraid them with
their sins they have confessed, 2 Samuel 13.13.
though happily themselves more wicked, but more covert. Therefore they would
willingly, and by what means they can cover them. Oblectat sane flagitium, and
tamen ipsius rei nomen aures offendit. Chrysostom. Ser. de virtut. and vit.

Because he loves his sin, and is very loath to part with it.

How should this be accounted a corruption, when as,

It is one thing to commit sin openly, Non confiieri, sed profiteri.
another to confess sin with shame to himself, and glory to God. It is one
thing for Zimri, Numb. 25.6. to manifest sin, and another for David, when he
is reproved by Nathan, to confess sin. It is not the same: that Absolon
commit sin upon the housetop shamelesly in the sight of the Sun, to the
dishonor of God and his Father; and Achan confess that was committed with
shame to himself, and giving glory to God. To declare sin as they did, is
the height of impiety; but to confess sin as these, is the first step to
piety; and to cover them, gives small hope of recovering them: The ones
declaring, and the others cloaking, argue both their corruptions.

Then is the wisdom of the wise but foolishness,

To teach every one to see and acknowledge the corruption of his nature, he may
escape the punishment of his fault, Plus imo delinquit, quisecundum Deum
cogitans, evadere se paenam criminis credit, si palam non crimen admisit. Cypr.
de laps.
if he committed it not openly, and so if he cover it. Secondly, he brings more
and greater sins upon himself: Vt in corporibus qui vulnera neglexerunt,
febres gignunt and putrifactiones, and mortem denique, itidem and in animis,
qui pusilla dissimulant, majora invitant. Chrysostom. ad Gal. cap. 1.
As in our bodies the neglect of wounds may cause Fevers and putrifactions, and
at length death: so in our souls, the hiding of small, is to invite greater;
for both Satan is emboldened to suggest more, and, their conscience hardened,
they easily receive more. Thirdly, they bring more shame and punishment upon
themselves. If the smothering of it here, were the burning of it for ever,
their policy were not amiss: But when for all this it must come to judgment,
their cunning is but cruelty to themselves. What profit is it to a malefactor
obstinately to deny his fact to the Judge in his private Chamber, or before
some few, when he has favor promised him, and be made to confess it at the
Bar before the whole Country, when his own hand and his fellows in the
fact, shall be brought against him, without all hope of receiving any thing but
severity of judgment, where every excuse and cover he has had shall increase
both his shame and punishment?

Use 3. If this be the corruption of nature, and the sin of this people, let
us learn to cast from us the cloakes of shame, and, reproved for our sins,
and threatened, let us with the people at John's preaching, Matthew. 3. confess
our sins, that we may escape the wrath to come. What else is required of us,
than that the Church of God has usually done? as Ezra 10. and 1 Samuel 7.6. what
but that wherein we may glorify God, Joshua 7.19. for in confessing our sins
we give him the glory of his justice, as punishing where he was provoked. What?
but that we may disburden our selves, and get a wholesome and sovereign
medicine to our wounds. Our wounds have been grievous, as Isaiah 1.6. Our
sins as the infection have been declared unto us, our pride, covetousness,
etc. let us not cover them either by impudency, or infirmity: let not our proud
women say, their husbands would have it so, nor the covetous men, our wives and
children must be maintained so: let not the swearer say, he cannot be believed,
or utter his wares, or any such cover of state and condition, accusing sometime
God, sometime men; for he that threatens thus the green tree, what will he
do to the dry? the natural Olive, what will he do to the wild Olive?
Certainly it shall not be so easy to us as to them: but if all will not, let
me speak to as many as fear the Word of the Lord: Thou and thy house, thou and
thy wife and children, do not hide them, but confess: Remember that, Prove.
28.13. He that hides his sins, shall not prosper: but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy; so common in experience, that it is a Proverb.

Wherein have thou loved us?] This they speak, because of their late
captivity, as if for that one cross they were not bound to be thankful unto
him for the other mercies: or showing their blindness and corruption of
nature, that for one cross or affliction they acknowledged not, nor account of
other mercies.

It is the blindness of man's nature and his corruption, Haman, Est. 5.11, 12,
13. In Rebeckah, Genesis 27.46. Jonah 4.3, 9. in David, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. in a
multitude of both kinds. Psalm. 78.19, 20.

Because men usually live by sight and sense, not by faith,

Because the children of God, howsoever they have true faith,

This teaches us whence are so many strange practices of the wicked, Rebeckah
and others, their lives irksome and tedious unto them, and find no comforts in
all for one discomfort; like children, who if they have one of their trifles
they play withal taken from them, cast away all the rest in great discontent,
and can find no pleasure in it; like to men, who having an hundred Acres of
ground, if one be gained from them by Sea, or wreaked from them by title of
Law, take no pleasure nor joy in all the rest. So they in the loss of a Child,
take no pleasure, at least in their passion, nor account not of many other of
Gods blessings, which many of Gods, as dear to him as they, have not, or not
in that abundance: All this is from the corruption of their nature.

If this be the corruption of nature, Job stopped his wifes mouth, Job 2.10.
when she moved him to discontent and discomfort. And in the mean time let us
labor for good consciences and sound spirits, the feeling of Gods favor, and
assurance of his love; so shall we bear all our infirmities, Prove. 18.14. And
grief or losses to him shall be but as so many sparks falling into the the
Ocean. Chrysostom. de vita recta, Hom. 25 ad popul. Ant. 12.1. d. 2.

Was not Esau Jacobs brother?] Here is Gods answer to their murmuring question,
and as it were a plain denial of his love, proving evidently to them that he
loved them. Now he reasons not from common benefits, as that he had created
them, that he preserves them, that he gave them health and peace, prosperity
and comforts; having brought them from their captivity, and seated them in
their own land, etc. but demonstrated his love unto them from the beginning of
their nation, from their Head and Author. You, as ungrateful creatures, will
not acknowledge my love, this is your impudency: but see, I will make you
confess it. And first of all to fetch things from the very beginning, Was not
Esau Jacobs brother?] And so as if all things be considered, no cause why I
should love one more than other, they were both begotten of one father, both
borne in one womb, both successors of the Covenant, both boughs of one root,
both dug out of one rock; yea, if any privilege and cause of love, it was
in Esau, because he was the first begotten; yet I loved and freely chose Jacob,
yea, before he was borne, and hated Esau. But some will say, What is this to
this people? much every way; because these were two nations, that is, the heads
of them: so that what God did to them, he did to their posterity. Then it
follows to be reckoned as a benefit to them, and so proves his love, when he
had chosen them, and rejected their brethren, without any desert of theirs.
Then was their ingratitude so much the greater, and worthy the reproving.

Was not Esau Jacobs brother? yet I loved Jacob.] They were in many things
equal, and in none Jacob before, but Esau; yet here is a close preferring of
Jacob as chief man in the family, and notable as by somewhat in himself to
overmatch his birthright, and make him more acceptable, and more allowed of
God, which is his piety. The like is Genesis 5.32. Shem is put first, though not
the eldest of the three: for this, because he was greatest in Gods books for
his piety. In our common speech we so speak, when we show our account of one,
such an one, such an Earls or Lords brother; here though we speak of the
brother, we imply a greater dignity in the Earl: so was not Esau Jacobs
brother? here Jacob is preferred.

They who are in privileges of the flesh and worldly respects inferior by
much to others,

In the prophecy of Isaiah, the Lord comforts his holy Church, and tells her
she is precious in his sight, and honorable, and that he loves her, Esa. 43.4.
This people, the posterity of Jacob, were but a neglected people in respect of
other nations; the Lord found them in a desert land, in a wast houling
wilderness, not allured to become their Tutelar God by their greatness, or
the richness of their Country; yet he led them about, he instructed them, he
kept them as the apple of his eye, Deuteronomy. 32.10. The godly are many times as
stones disallowed of men, but chosen of God, and precious; as Christ also
himself the Cornerstone was, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.

Because God sees not as man sees, Barbarians did, Acts 28. and as Zophar did,
Job 11. But so does not God, he sees what is in the heart, and what does truly
deserve.

Then let not men carry themselves high upon the privileges of the flesh; as
Esau is no whit better for being the elder brother. Ismael was elder, yet
Isaac was accepted. One Nation may be more noble and honorable than another,
yet God respects not that: But in every nation he that seareth him, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him, Acts 10.35. Nabal may be richer, Achitophel
wiser, Absalom fairer, Tertullus or Herod more eloquent than many of Gods
people, yet less in Gods esteem. It is a greater honor to be the sons of
God, than the heirs of Monarchs, and so Moser counted it. He refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, Heb. 11.24, 25. And hence it is, that when the very
Disciples of Christ began to grow proud, that they could subdue devils, etc. he
corrects them, and tells them there was another thing wherein they were rather
to rejoice. Luc. 10.18, 19.

Let us learn to imitate God, Mary though she were poor and mean, Thou have
regarded the low estate of thy handmaid, Luc. 1.48. And this Saint James
teaches us, that it is not agreeable to the Christian profession, to have the
faith of Christ in respect with persons, to prefer a man because he has a
gold ring and goodly apparel: but says he, Hearken, my beloved brethren,
has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith? Jam. 2.2, 5.

VERSE III.
And I hated Esau, and made his mountains waste, and his heritage a
wilderness for Dragons.

ANd I hated Esau, and made his mountains waste.] Some think that this is only
added to prove his hatred to Esau; viz. You may easily see my hatred: when as
that famous mountain Seir, where there were so many Dukes, as Genesis 36.15. ad
finem, is now without any dweller, and all the Cities and habitations of them
are destroyed. Which thing as it is true, and we doubt not in part the meaning
of this place, yet not the whole, because the Lord aims not so much to set out
his hatred to Esau and his posterity, as his love to Jacob and his: therefore
there must needs be somewhat more in it, that is, the dissimilitude or dislike
effect, to show his love to them, which rises thus: Those whom I love, I keep
them in their country, and suffer them not to be led captive; yet if for
correction I suffer the enemy so far to prevail, I do again reduce them
into their own country, and give them their own land, and the comforts of
it. On the contrary, those whom I hate, those for their sins I cast into
banishment, and never bring home again: but let their land to be a dwelling
for beasts, Dragons, and such like. Now the former I have done to you who are
Jacobs posterity, and the latter to Esaus; now contrary effects have contrary
causes. So then as they may see in them my hatred, so in your selves ye may
apprehend my love, who are now at home in your own Land and Country, and
enjoy your comforts in your Country. This then apparently shows his hatred to
Esaus posterity, as in spiritual things, the Apostle being interpreter, Romans
9. so here in temporal things, and closely and by comparison his love to
Jacobs seed, and to this people. The first only to the children of promise,
but this to all, even the whole seed, and not they only which were blessed in
Isaac.

Exile and banishment when it falls to a man, or multitude; Thou shall beget
sons and daughters, but thou shall not enjoy them, for they shall go into
captivity. And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end
of the earth even to the other, and there thou shall serve other gods which
neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and stone. And the Lord
shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I spoke unto
thee; thou shall see it no more again, and there ye shall be sold unto your
enemies for bondmen and bond-women, and no man shall buy you. Going into
captivity, scattering and serving the enemy, are threatened as tokens of wrath.
Mic. 1.15. and 2.4. 2 Chro. 36.16, 17.

Because it is a judgment of God upon whomsoever;

Because it is a blessing, and so a token of the favor of God,

Many are banished and cast into exile for Christ and the profession of his
truth. Ergo.

It is true, Grecians they had an Ostracismus, a Law to banish every one that
excelled other in riches, or in honor, or favor, or eloquence, and wisdom,
yea, in their outward justice: As Aristides was banished Athens by the voices
of all, even a rustic who knew him not by face, but because they called him
just; so falls it out in the world, and in the kingdoms of it, that they do
expel those who profess Christ and piety, but that is nothing against this:
First, for that which Justine Martyr says, Epist. ad Diognetum, de
Christianis; Omnis peregrina regio, patria est eorum, and omnis patria est
peregrina: Every foreign Country is their home, and at home they are
strangers, and so they not banished wheresoever. Again, because this comes
only from the malice and displeasure of men, and is a favor of God, that they
are enabled to part with all for his sake, as Act. 5.41. so we may rejoice if
we be counted worthy to be exiles for his name; but this here spoken of comes
both from the wrath and displeasure of God and man. Further, as Causa, non
poena, the cause, not the punishment makes a Martyr; Salvian. Ex duobus
lethalibus malis levius, ut reor, est captivitatem corporis Christiani, quam
captivitatem animae sustinere.
So Salvian speaks of a double captivity, or of two sorts of captives; one
who are extrinsecus carne, captives outwardly in the body, others, intus mente
captivi, inwardly in their minds, and affirms, Of two great evils, I
suppose it is more easy for a Christian to sustain the captivity of his body,
than the bondage of the soul. Now they which are captives in body for this,
are freed in their minds; and e contr. they who hold them captive, are most
captive; for they are in their minds so, as 2 Pet. 2.19.

This may teach all such as may fall into captivity and exile, If any should
not, we may then use the words of Salvian. An credimus forte quod captivus
animo populus ille non fuerit, qui laetus tunc in suorum captivitatibus fuit?
captivus cord and sensu non erat, qui inter suorum supplicia ridebat? qui
jugulari se in suorum jugulis non intelligebat? qui mori se in suorum mortibus
non putabat? Quo ante.
they should learn to groan under it, as under the manifest sign, yea, and
the thing that is the wrath of God: for if they may and ought to apprehend Gods
displeasure, when their land brings not forth abundance to them and their use,
what, when it bears not them any longer? But this lesson you may teach those
that are in captivity, we neither are, neither are we in fear of it. I answer,
that men careful of themselves will learn and regard medicines or
prescriptions before they have need of them, especially if there be any
likelihood they may fall into a disease, lest the remedy not ready, the danger
may be, and prove the greater; and the knowledge of any thing is no burden. So
in this. But have we no fear of this, that we have no need to learn it? What
then meant this late and most horrible treason or practice, that every Nation,
Christian or barbarous, whether Turks, Tartars, or whosoever, heard of? If our
Papists, the greatest enemies of Christ this day the world has; if our
Pseudo-catholicks, the most despightfull enemies to the King and his posterity,
to the State and the prosperity of it, to the Church and the peace of it, had
prevailed in their designs, what would have been our condition but this?
Questionless either must it have come to cutting of throats, and the spilling
of our blood, after which the Scarlet-whore and her whorish brood has a long
time thirsted, or else this captivity and exile, if not carried out of our own
Land, yet made slaves in our own Land; for they that had remained, should have
served a stranger in their own land, Deuteronomy. 28.49, 51, 52. and verse. 66, 67.
for whereto else tended this, but to bring in a foreign power, to the
slaughter of most, and slavery of the rest?

Then is it a special favor to be acknowledged, Wherein have thou loved us?
when they had this benefit. But herein have thou loved us, that we are not
carried or taken captive, that our Cities and Towns are not laid waste: it is
for us in respect of many other deliverances, and preservations from dangerous
attempts; so of this last not the least, but that which is every ways the
greatest; for if it was the horriblest and most fearful treason that ever was
plotted, if the danger of overturning the Church and State the greatest, if the
confusion to us and ours the most fearful, if the greatest sign of Gods
wrath and displeasure, if they had prevailed not only to lay the
Parliament House wast, when they cried, Raze it, raze it even to the ground;
but to overthrow both Church and Commonwealth, when their condition that had
been blown up with the House, and then perished, had been better than ours
who were out of it: when our men were appointed for the swords and slaughter,
our Wives and Daughters for rapes and adulteries, and after to the Sword; our
children to have been dashed in pieces against the stones of our streets, our
Cities to have been set on fire over our heads, and all our wealth to have
been a prey for desperate and forlorn wretches: Then, that God has delivered
us from all this, it must needs be a token, yea, the greatest of his favor and
love. He that sees it not, is blind; he that sees it, and does not
acknowledge it, is unthankful; he that sees and acknowledges it, and does not
praise and magnify God for it, is very wicked and impious. If it had been the
preserving of goods alone from the spoil, if our Cities alone from burning, if
our children only from perishing, if our wives only from rapes and
uncleanness, if our lives alone from death, and our souls from the grave, the
least of these, and any one of them had been a special favor and sign of
his love, what, when not one of these, but all? The preservation of them
continually, and every day, when there is none that hunts so after them, and
seeks extraordinarily by malice to take them away, is a favor and a sign of
his love. More, when they had laid their counsels thus deep, and sought it so
dangerously, if he had revealed it half a year since in the beginning of the
plot, it had been a token of his good will: but when it was come to such
ripeness, and as there was but a step betwixt David and death, so not a night
betwixt us and confusion; it was much more. Therefore to set forth his love, he
brought us within the sight and smelling of the danger, that we might the more
account of it: Our Cities not wasted as Edoms mountains, is a token of his
favor.

His mountains wast.] Mountains are for strength, for the defense and
preservation of any thing, and by them is signified the greatness of Edom, and
all his power and strength; and Metaphorice, the great and mighty men, as Mich.
1.4.

No outward thing can privilege a man from Gods judgments, or be a sanctuary
to save any from his wrath and displeasure, when he will punish and execute his
wrath.

And his heritage a wilderness for Dragons.] Mount Seir it was Esaus
inheritage and his posterity, not only left then of his father, but given him
of the Lord: Joshua 24.4. Notwithstanding when they had defiled this with their
sins, as follows in the next verse, the Lord cast them out, and made it
cast them out, that it was no longer inhabited by them, but possessed by
Dragons.

They who defile their land and inheritage by sin and wickedness, shall be
cast out of it, Vide Mich. 2.10.

VERSE IIII.
Though Edom say, We are impoverished, but we will return and build the
desolate places; yet says the Lord of Hosts, They shall build, but I will
destroy it, and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and the
people, with whom the Lord is angry for ever.

THough Edom say, Quicquid in scriptura dicitur dehominibus malis, ad hoc
dicitur, ut civitas Dei ex comparatione contraria vel proficiat vel emineat.
Aug. De civitat. Dei. l. 16. c. 2.
] To evict this people more manifestly of ingratitude, he proceeds to other
benefits he had bestowed on them, as fruits of his love, and so proving that he
loved them. And this was but by comparison set down, insinuated under the
contrary, and in the amplification of the signs of his hatred to Esau and
Edom: for this here spoken was not for them, but for his own people. So here;
for when the contrary was to them, if this were hatred, that must be love; for
them then and their use are these things written. And the force of it stands
thus: See, it is my hatred to Esau and his posterity, that they are not
established in their own land, nor defended there in their coasts, but
destroyed and cast out, and justly for their sins, of which you are
eyewitnesses, that in them and their ruin I have magnified my self and my
Name. Then must it needs be love unto you, that having brought you from your
captivity, I have confirmed you in your Land, and defended it and you.

Though Edom say,] The first part is the anticipation or preventing of them,
setting down under their person the swelling and proud words and speeches they
would speak and utter: That is, I have said, I will lay her mountains and
Cities waste; but they in the pride of their own hearts, and confidence of
themselves and their own strength, as if they were able to resist me, and to
strive and stand against my power, utter such vain hopes and bragging thoughts
of their own, yet shall all be but in vain. Thus they say, We are
impoverished. The Idumeans being expelled their Country, carried into
captivity for their sins, and wandering in another and strange Country, are
not for all that humbled for their sins, nor seek not unto me: but in their
impoverishment and banishment they thus say, For all this we will return, and
be built: we by our own strength and power, in spite of who says nay, will
come home home again to our Country, shake off the yoke of our enemies, and
will build and establish Idumea again, and all our Cities.

The Lord he takes notice of, sees,

Because he might know to lessen or increase them;

Because he has tied himself unto this by his word and promise to hear and
regard their prayers and repentance, If my people which are called by my Name,
humble themselves, and pray, and turn from their wicked ways, and seek my
face, then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will
heal their Land. Now mine eyes shall be open, and my ears attent to the
prayer that is made in this place.

For the time past, Ephraim, whether he lamented his sins, and turned to God,
or as Edom he held out, and promised to himself the repairing of any loss
whatsoever, of his wealth, by following his Trade more closely; of his wife,
that he may have another, and money with her; of his children, he is young, he
may either have more, or he is eased of the care and charges of them: howsoever
every man's carriage and fruit has been, the Lord has seen it; which is
matter of comfort to as many as have been truly humbled, the Lord has seen
their hearts, heard their prayers, accepted their repentance, the fruit whereof
they now enjoy, that they live to praise God, Isa. 38.19. But it is matter of
terror to as many as either contemned this duty in others, making the public
humiliation a means or cause of increasing the Plague, or neglected it in
themselves, or performed it only in subtilty, making a show of that they had
not; seeming to be truly humbled, and willing to forsake their sins, when it
was but in cunning to get his hand removed, which seems to have been the
state of most: which howsoever it was not so well discerned then, yet it has
appeared since even to every man: Hyemis lucrum tunc maxim demonstratur cum
illa praeteriret; namque vernantes segetes and foliis ac fructu affluentes
arbores per ipsum aspectum clamant, utilitatem sibi ex hyeme factam, Chrysostom.
ad P. A. Ho. 18. Item e contra.
For the benefit of the Winter is chiefly seen when Winter is gone; for the
springing plants, and the trees clothed with leaves and fruit, tell us by
their pleasant show how they gained by winter: And if men, then God much more;
be not then deceived, God is not mocked. And as his taking knowledge of the
humiliation of the good be to reward them, what of your deceits but to
recompense? Though Pharaoh deceived often, and his own person escaped, yet the
Lord paid him home at last in the Red Sea.

For the present time,

Wicked men, Esau, when they are down and decayed, impoverished, or any way
afflicted, think to repair themselves, to overcome the judgment, and recover
themselves of themselves, and by means they like of, and pleases their
humor, without seeking the Lord; manifested by these Edomites, also by the
Ephraimites, the most of them, and the worst, Isa. 9.9. who said in their pride
and stoutnesse of heart, the bricks are fallen down, but we will build with
hewn stones.

Because they see these means to prosper oftentimes, Quando nihil est
infaelicius faelicitate peccantium, quae poenalis nutritur impuritas, and mala
voluntas velut hostis interior roboretur. Aug. Epist. St. Marcell.
which if they be cross at any times, they impute but to want of craft and
power.

Because they are ignorant of God,

Because they are no ways well persuaded of God,

This being so, consider if we have not many wicked men, Edomites who are
desirous and do practice to raise up themselves without the Lord by unlawful
means, and never humble themselves to him; and if formally they do this, yet
trust more to these. Amongst these the chief are our Papists, who having their
mountains and Monasteries laid waste, their habitations made a wilderness for
Dragons, and being impoverished by the just judgment of God upon them for their
Idolatry and mystical enmity against Christ, by the hand of King Henry 8. in
policy, and of Qu. Elizabeth of blessed memory, in piety and policy, they
resisting of God, as if they were stronger than he, have assayed as heretofore,
so of late to renew and reedifie their desolations. But by what means? not
precibus and lachrymis, the weapons of the Church; but by fire and sword, by
fraud and cruelty, seeking to build again their desolate places, and to lay
the foundation of them in the blood of the King and his seed, the Peers and
Prelacy, the Gentry and Commons of the Land, all which is without God; for he
will build his Church sanguine Martyrum, by the blood of Martyrs shed by
others, not by the blood shed by these who account themselves Martyrs. And
though some deny that they are not all such, and that it is against charity to
think so of them, because they seem now to condemn this more than barbarous
enterprise; I think (as every man abounds in his own sense) I should do them
no wrong; nay, every learned Papist, if he were in place where he durst speak
it, would not think I should do him wrong, if I should judge him, disliking
this which is so meritorious and commendable by their doctrine and practice:
for if for one, and the King, to lay their hands upon the Lords anointed, why
not for the rest? And for others of them; though a little humane pity makes
them a while to abhor them, yet the schooling of a Jesuit or Priest will
easily and in short time harden; and I doubt not, but he that seems now most
pitiful, would have been an Edomite, as Obadiah shows them what they were, by
telling them what they should not have been, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. But to leave
these, we have others, who imitate the Edomites, would raise up themselves by
themselves and evil means, not seeking to the Lord: he that is in disgrace
seeks to rise by undermining of others, and by flattery and fraud to make
himself great again. In sickness to expect his health by unlawful means,
or unlawfully using them, seldom, or not at all seeking the Lord: In poverty
and decay, by lying, and swearing, and deceiving, and breaking, which once
done, is better then many years trading.

Yet says the Lord of hosts.] Here is the second part. Gods threatening against
their swelling bragges; vowing as it were to disappoint all their Counsel and
endeavor: And to the end that they may be assured, it shall be so, the Lord
sets himself down, with such an adjoynt, as may assure them, he is able to
do what he says he will; for he that speaks this, is the Lord of Hosts;
such, and so great, and mighty, that he commands all creatures to help and
hurt, whom, and when he pleases; to save and to destroy, to further and
hinder; as the general Commands all the army, and all the Bands, so he all
creatures.

The Lord our God is the Lord of Hosts,

Because,

Because of his omnipotent power, his wise providence,

This may teach every man, Let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him,
curse David: who shall then say, wherefore have thou done so? So bid him curse
not as sin, but as a punishment or judgment, or chastisement; for he cannot
be author, but ordinator peccati, one who does dispose of their sin and
evil, to the end not they, but himself aims at. The malice is Shimeis, the
Lord he disposes it, to afflict David to humble him; so in every particular
thing, thy meat and drink, the air, fire, water, beasts, any creature, man,
great or small; if they hurt, say it is the Lord who bid them; complain to him
of it, seek to him for redress of it, humble thy self, and by the mediator
seek reconcilement: they who are annoyed by a band of men, or the wing of a
battle, will seek redress from their Captain, or General: So here, as Act.
12.20. Herod was highly displeased with them of Tire and Sidon, but they came
unto him with one accord, and having made Blastus, the Kings Chamberlain their
friend, they desired peace, because their Country was nourished by the Kings
Country: So seek to God on whom you depend. Otherwise, if Absalom will stand
out, when Joab, and the rest of the Host is sent against him, he must look to
be pierced with darts.

To teach every man who would have the Host of God to be for him, and with
him, to pray unto God, the Lord of Hosts, Jacob, when he feared Esau, and his
band, pray, Genesis 32.9. and found the fruit of it; cap. 33.4. Hence in the
Gospel, they sought from him the ejection and dispossession of Devils, of what
number and quality soever, the curing of diseases, the rebuking of winds and
sea, the conversion, or restraining of enemies; for he was the Lord of Hosts:
so must we still, for he is the Lord of Hosts. Means we must use; as for
defense, weapons; for health, Physic; as the Jews used the disciples, but he
must be looked unto on both sides; because he is the Lord of Hosts: for that
any can help, that is not from themselves, but from him.

If any would be free from their hurt, Israel and Judah, Jehoram and
Jehosaphat, each people with horses served other, when it was, I am as thou
art, then it followed, my people as thy people, and mine horses and thine
horses, 2 King. 3.7. So here. Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please God, he
makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. Many men would have all the
hosts of God, for him and his friends; but seeks not the favor of his love,
as if these being more then naturally his, could love where he hated, or where
he is hated. But he that would have all things serviceable, must seek his
favor, and to be at one with him: then Romans 8.28. We know that all things work
together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according
to his purpose. But who have more enemies then these? they make themselves as a
prey, all hate them: Answ. When their love and favor shall be better to them then
their hatred, they favor them, and shall do so; but when their hatred is good
for them, they profit by it, are exercised and purged, and made fitter for
heaven: The Lord is the Lord of hosts, who thus can make it work.

They shall build, but I will destroy.] He threatens to overthrow them, and all
the means they have to establish themselves, that though they prosper a little
by his connivence, and suffer them, yet they should fail of their hope, for he
would destroy all they had done.

All the hopes and endeavors of the wicked shall be frustrated and vain, The
wicked shall melt away, his desire shall perish: all their studies, counsels,
desires, endeavors; this has usually fallen out, as Hosea 10.6. Ephraim shall
receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his own Counsel.

No marvel then if we see every day wicked men disappointed of their hopes,
Haman, accusing, despising and maligning the people of God, have had like ends
and destruction: above all we may remember, as others, so this last enterprise
of the Papists, with joyful remembrance, I pray God with as thankful hearts
and lives, how God has disappointed the hope of our wicked, perjured, and
perfidious Catholics and Papists; who had thought to have built up
themselves, and to have reestablished all their Idolatrous estates, by their
bloody and cruel, barbarous and savage attempt; yet that they built, God has,
and none else destroyed, and we doubt not, but it will be to their greater ruin
among us: for howsoever the State has used too much mildness toward them,
yet they will, no doubt, upon this, lay to their hand, and draw forth the sword.

To admonish a State, as ours, that it will be in vain for them, Pharaoh
feared of Israel, (Exodus 1.10. Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest
they multiply, and it come to pass, that when there falls out any war, they
join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of
the Land.) more justly to be feared of these; for they never held it lawful to
take away lives of Princes, to take up arms against them, to depose them,
because they were Idolatrous, and rejected of God; But these do as Simanca in
his institutions, Tit. 23. sect. ij. and 13. and Dominicus Bannes in 22. Sum.
Tho. quaest. 12. Art. 2. that subjects are bound to deny obedience to such
Sovereigns, and to take up arms against them, if they have power to do it;
for by Heresy he is deprived of all dominion, and he expresses himself what
is meant if they have power, because, says he, with great detriment, with the
danger of life, and loss of goods, they are not bound to take arms against
them, or to exempt themselves from obedience, if they be not in danger of a
mortal sin, that is, of falling from the catholic faith: and therefore it
follows, that the faithful of England and Saxony are to be excused, who do not
exempt themselves from the power of their Princes, neither take up arms
against them, because they have not power to make their wars against their
Princes, and they are incident to great perils if they stir. By which it is
apparent that they wait but till they have strength, if their secret plots be
thus frustrated. So that he which will speak for favor to be showed toward
them, he is either ignorant of this, or else he is a secret enemy to the State
in plain reason, besides the judgments of God, who will overthrow, when men
think thus to build.

But I will destroy it.] The Lord takes this to himself, to overturne all
their buildings, and destroy their strength, and their kingdom.

It is the Lord, O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this Potter, says
the Lord? behold as the clay in the Potters hand, so are ye in my hand, O
house of Israel. Dan. 2.21. He changes the times and seasons, he removes
Kings, and sets up Kings; he gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to
them that know understanding. Luke 1.52. He has put down the Mighty from their
seats, and exalted them of low degree.

Because he is absolute Lord over all, The earth is the Lords; yea. 1 Samuel 2.8.
The pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world upon them.

Because the smallest things are not without, In omnibus quaedam dispositio
divina ordinat, quaedam potentia divina sustinet, quaedam sententia divina
judicat.
the falling of a sparrow, the putting down of one man's estate, and from his
estate, Psalm. 75.6, 7. in all these a certain divine disposition orders,
divine power susteines, divine sentence judges.

Because it happens unto them,

This may teach us when we see kingdoms overturned, vid. Mich. 1.15. I will
bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah.

If our bloody Romanists had prevailed in their barbarous, and cruel plot,

Then you justify their act and intent,

I justify them as much as Luke did Judas, and Herod and Pilate the Rulers and
the Jews; Gods and their ends were indifferent, God had done it to purge the
Land of us, and of our sins: and that in just justice, they of malice, and
for our principal good, the profession of Piety, and the Gospel, and the
hatred of their more then heathenish Idolatry.

To teach us if we would not be destroyed and rooted out, and e contra, Men
and Munition, wise counselors, grave Senators, valorous Captains, resolute
Soldiers are some helps and means; It may be good, to have peace with other
Nations and Kingdoms, about them: But to establish a State, to keep it from
falling, nothing can be sure, but to have peace, and be at one with God, that
we may have him our protector, then shall we not only not fall and perish,
Quis ei de saeculo m^tus est, cui in saeculo Deus tutorest, Cypr. de Orat. Do.
but be without fear. What need he fear the world, who has God to be his
guardian?

And they shall call them,] the second thing that God theatens is shame to
their destruction, reproach, and disgrace from other nations and people, scorn,
and contempt, expressing how great their misery should be, when as for it, they
should become a by word to other people and nations: They shall call them, that
is, other nations that live about them, or pass by them, or hear of them,
shall take as it were this parable against them; And say, this mountain of
Seir is a border of wickedness, a region whom God has cursed for their
sins, and laid wast for their iniquity, this destruction is not come unto
them by chance, or natural and humane revolutions, and courses of things, but
for their wickedness, and impious manners has God cursed, and destroyed them
for ever.

God makes men odious and contemptible among men,

The border of Wickedness the people.] from their judgment and utter
destruction, they gather their sin, and Gods wrath, as the cause of their
ruin and desolation.

From the general judgments of God upon a Country, Deuteronomy. 29.21, 22. and 1
King. 9.8, 9. and Jer. 22.8, 9. And many Nations shall pass by this City, and
they shall say every man to his neighbor, wherefore has the Lord done thus
unto this great City: Then they shall answer, because they have forsaken the
covenant of the Lord their God, and worshipped other gods and served them.

Because though it is read that he afflicts particular men, Job, the blind
man, and the Apostles, yet was it never read that he afflicted a general Land,
but for sin and iniquity, or a State generally: And the reason of this and
the whole is, because general judgments come upon the multitude who are ever
wicked, who have been a long time spared for the good, who now being either
taken away, or entangled with their sins, that is removed which hindered, and
so the wrath comes upon them: then by these judgments may the sins be noted.

Then have the ministers of God done us no wrong, the whole head has been
sick, and the whole heart heavy etc. Isa. 1.5, 6. It must needs follow that
such has been the state and time, covered with iniquity; for wise Physicians
do not administer Physic, for the whole, when one part only is ill affected;
nor just magistrates do not shake or smite all with the sword, when a few have
offended; much less will God, only wise, and the most righteous judge,
destroy the righteous with the wicked, send a general judgment, when but a few
have deserved it: one man's sins may be an occasion of it, but the merit is
general, as in David and his people. 2 Samuel 24.1.

If others, Daniel. 9. a 5. ad 15. So may we from our general judgments,
argue our general Apostasy and Impiety.

They shall call them the borders of wickedness.] The first of Gods witnesses
of such as give testimony to his judgments, and the uprightness, and justice
of them, is the heathen, and other nations, who know him not aright.

God will have witness and testimony of his judgments,

Because God will not only, as is said of wisdom, Balaams ass, to speak
against nature, so they against their minds.

Because they might be without excuse, Daniel inferres, Dan. 5.22. and without
doubt, that is it which does amplify the sins of men, to make them riper for
judgment, as of Cain and Lots daughters.

This may teach us, Israel sacrifice that to God, which they as Egyptians
worship as God, their lusts and affections and such like: Nor upon such, whose
persons for some private respects they hate; but others, whose persons and
sins they liked well enough before the judgment, yet now they speak of
them, and give testimony to the judgment of God as just: For, say they, he was
an adulterer, an usurer, an oppresser, or a grievous blasphemer; when they
live, not in the same judgments, nor in the same sins, but in as great sins
of another kind, living void of the fear of God, being wicked and profane;
therein observe the wisdom and providence of God, which makes even the wicked
to witness for him, who by his powerful providence makes the wicked (whether
in truth or hypocrisy it skils not) give testimony unto him, if the good will
be silent; as these hold their peace, the stones shall speak: one instance we
have worth the noting, agreeable to the times; our Papists, for their late more
then hellish plot, are taken, and nigh to their deserved ruin and confusion:
they who are out of the snare cry, It is just with them; whether they speak
out of ignorance and humane piety, or out of cunning and dissembling policy,
(very tolerable in their superstition for the Churches good) it skils not much;
as Philip. 1.15, 16. If such comparisons be not odious; howsoever God is
justified, and he has testimony of his justice from the wicked, while they
say; These are the border of wickedness, these are but a few desperate
Papists, and this is just upon them.

To teach men,

The border of wickedness.] That is, a Nation or Country, where the people are
mavelous wicked, who have this recompense for their wickedness; insinuating
in them the cause of their destruction, the mooving and deserving cause their
sins.

Men's sins are the causers and procurers of their own destruction, woe unto the
wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him.

And a people of whom the Lord is angry for ever.] Here two things are
intimated unto us, the one the cause in God, which moves him to punish the
wicked, his anger and displeasure, as sin the cause in themselves. Another
the perpetuity of their punishment, their destruction is for ever: first for
the cause, then the continuance.

When the Lord brings vengeance and punishment upon the wicked, fury is not
in me, by the opposition and comparison, we see his fury against the wicked:
he corrects his own in love, not in anger; but he is as fire, which has no
pity against wicked men, Romans 2.6, 8. who will render to every man according
to his works: but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth,
but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, and Romans 9.22. Jer. 10.25.

Because when he comes to judge them, he comes as a Judge,

Because the Lord accounts them as enemies and adversaries, Therefore says the
Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty one of Israel: Ah I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies, mourning that to them he must
come in wrath as to enemies.

This proves, that there is a manifest difference betwixt the afflictions and
corrections of the godly,

To admonish wicked men, to carry themselves very warily,

For ever.] The continuance and perpetutity of Gods wrath upon the wicked, it
is not for a while, but for ever.

The punishments and judgments of the wicked, they are utter and perpetual
destructions: So here, for ever. Isa. 27.7, 8. Psalm. 37.18, 19, 20. Jer. 30.11.
Mich. 7.10. And as in this life, much more in that to come. Jude, verse. 13.
Math. 25.

Because they have hearts, Romans 2.5.
no marvel though the other be fastened upon them.

Because justice requires to punish proportionably, their sins are infinite,

This,

To teach us to see the folly of the wicked, Job. 21.6.
Rev. 2.27.

Not to envy their prosperity, or be offended with their flourishing estate,
vide Mich. 7.10. ult.

VERSE V.
And your eyes shall see it, and ye shall say, The Lord will be magnified upon
the border of Israel.

ANd your eyes shall see it,] The second witness of Gods judgments upon Edom:
the Church, her eyes should see it: these God calls to give testimony of it; and
that they should be witnesses, without exception, he says, they should see:
for one eye witness is more then ten others, for it is a sense nothing so soon
deceived as the hearing; by it we judge more certainly: that is, I have said
it, it shall be most certainly, my threatenings shall not be in vain, for
your eyes shall see it; which, unless I make my word good, cannot be, and
thou shall be a witness? that thou may see, when no such thing is befallen
thee, that then I love thee: Seeing, after the Hebrew, is put for seeing with
pleasure and delight, when, or because that comes to pass, we wished: So here,
and Mich. 7.10. Psalm. 54.7, and 35.21.

To this, not to the second sentence some add, The border of Israel, and read,
from the border, not upon; and so it is they being safe in their own coast and
borders, should thence behold the judgment of God, so manifest and perspicuous
they should be, in the ruin and overthow of the wicked.

The judgments God threatens against the wicked, God is not a man, that he
should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent; has he said, and
shall he not do it; or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? 1 Samuel
15.29. And also the strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent; for he is not
a man, that he should repent. Hosea 13.14. Matthew. 24.35. Isa. 14.24.

Because he is without all change himself,

Because he cannot be resisted. Isa. 46.10. Romans 9.19.

The Church and Children of God,

As God will have testimony from the wicked, Pharaoh, and his people, and his
final destruction in their sight, they standing upon the shore, he and his
Host drowning in the Sea. Exodus 14. Hence is it, Psalm. 58.10. The righteous
shall rejoice, when he sees the vengeance; he shall wash his feet in the blood
of the wicked, and Psalm. 97.8. Sion heard, and was glad, and the daughters of
Judah rejoiced, because of thy judgments O Lord. Mich. 7.10.

Because they might fear,

Because they might magnify and praise him, his wisdom, where it seems to
be without partiality, as not this; yet is this far more acceptable to him,
their praises as their prayers, for they are done willingly, cheerfully,
sincerely, all which he loves. Besides, they are from those he loves, and so
the things better affected.

To teach every one that is Gods, David, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for
fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. And 2 Samuel 6.9. And David was
afraid of the Lord that day, and said, How shall the Ark of the Lord come to
me? And Act. 5.5, 11. And Ananias hearing these words fell down, and gave up
the Ghost, and great fear came on all them that heard these things. And great
fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as heard those things; not on
as many as take no notice of the judgments of God at all, as not of other of
his works; but as they think all things fall out by natural course or common
skill, and providing and forecast of men for good, so they think for evil;
and as they are not affected with Gods blessings to love him, because they are
common; so not with his judgments, but only when they feel them.

Your eyes shall see it.] Edom hated Israel, enemy unto her, whose destruction
as they sought, and had rejoiced at, so Israel would have been glad to have
seen Edom's, and for fear was ready to faint, as if they should never see it.
The Lord descends to her infirmity, and assures her, she shall see it.

The Lord he often descends to the infirmities of his, Cease from anger, and
forsake wrath; fret not thy self in any wise to do evil, for evill-doers
shall be cut off; but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the
earth: for yet a little while and the wicked shall not be; yea, thou shall
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. Psalm. 59.10. The God of my
mercy shall prevent me, God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies. And
Psalm. 54.7. For he has delivered me out of all trouble, and mine eye has
seen his desire upon mine enemies. Israel saw Egypts ruin, the Jews Hamans
and their enemies; Daniel his accusers, Dan. 6. Peter, Herod's, Act. 12.

Because he might strengthen and confirm the weak faith of his children,
David's, Psalm. 37. and their suffering at their hands: Therefore God deals with
them as Parents with their children, when they are not able to go alone and of
themselves, they have tressels and forms to go along by; so God affords these
helps.

Because he would assuage and appease their impatient minds that can hardly be
persuaded God is appeased toward them, O that my people had hearkened unto me,
and Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued their enemies,
and turned my hand against their adversaries. As then a father, to show his
child he is friends with him again, is content to throw the rod into the fire,
and to burn it before his eyes and face: so God, to show him pacified again
toward his people, is content in their sight to plague those he has punished
them by before.

But this must be understood not as a thing that God always does, but as it is
said of signs, that he gave some, though not many and usual, lest men should
depend on them, and be out of heart when they want them; yet some, for the
confirming of the feeble, and converting of the unbeleevers: so he does not
always show them the confusion of the wicked, their enemies in this life,
because he would not have them to look for it, and to inure them to go
without a stay, and to swim as it were without help, without blathers; and yet
sometimes, lest they should faint when they see the rod of the wicked rest upon
the lot of the righteous, and never turn again upon their oppressors: but if
ever he deny it, he gives them another prop, to assure them they shall see it,
though not now, when they shall judge with him the world and Angels.

To admonish the wicked enemies of Gods people, Haman himself would never have
given credit to it, that Mordecai should ever have seen him hang upon the tree
that he had prepared in his own house for Mordecai; or that the Jews that he
had enclosed by virtue of the Kings Letters, as Dear in a toil, should ever
have had their will upon his house, and see that end of his sons that after
they came unto; yet so it was, a thing so unlikely God brought to pass, even
he, 2 Pet. 2.9. He knows how to deliver his out of trouble, yea, and how to lay
trouble upon those that trouble them, to the refreshing and comfort of his; who
would have believed, at least not our Nobles, Knights, and Esquires, with their
dependants, who are now forth coming, with hundreths more of the said
associates? If the day before it had been told them, that the Church and
people of God should have seen them in hold, and see them come to their just
reward, to the ruin of themselves and their houses, when they intended all
their destructions, and to have subverted Church and Commonwealth: Or if it
had been told the Pope at Rome, whence this came, who would have been ready
to have done as Sixtus Quintus in his Consistory, when Clement the Monk and
bloody Parricide had stain Henry 3. King of France, 1589. a Catholic King,
his eldest son; did not punish it, but excuse it; not that only, but defend
it; not that alone, but praised it, and that with that choice and excellent
comparison from the birth of Christ, Heb. 1.5. commanding Heavens to open, and
receive therein the Parricide, and shut out the other, yea, and denied him the
prayers of their Synagogue, yea, Princely Funeral, yea, honest burial;
preparing the way to Heaven, not by the blood of Christ, but by the blood of
Kings; not by the Cross, but by a murdering knife. See the Martyrs of the
Romish Church, with what ashes it is increased. I have stepped aside; but to come
home, if it had been told him, I say, and all his slaves, and our fugitives,
and all his in other Countries, who were not without the knowledge at least of
these things, they would not have believed; but see it is even so. 2 Pet. 2.
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished. It were well for their own
good they would be warned at length, when they see God fights for us every
where, and watches over us in every place, and brings all their purposes to
naught. It were better if they, as the people enemies of the Church, Ester
8.17. became Jews, the fear of the Jews falling upon them; so they could
become Protestants, and renounce their Antichrist; our fear falling upon them,
when they see they are not only so bloody as Haman, but so bootlesse, before
such a thing befall them.

This may serve to cheer up and comfort those who are the Lords in the midst
of dangers and troubles, Mary, think we, in this Land lay looking daily for
death, when God by the death of one made an end of that bloody time, that had
cut off the lives of so many of Gods servants, and let them see even the ruin
of such as made full account of theirs. What hope had the Israelites, but to be
even eaten up by the Egyptians, and to be cut off, as one man; when God in the
turning of a hand overturned them that even opend their mouths, and swallowed
them up quick, and overwhelmed them before their eyes in the Red Sea. Little
thought Daniel, when he was cast into the Lions den, that he should see his
accusers devoured there before him. And very unlikely it was that Peter should
have lived to have seen Herod consumed with worms, and eaten up with lice,
when Herod had him forth coming, and had killed James before him, Act. 12. And
small probability, as we may now discern, was there that we or Kings, etc.
should have escaped the cruel designs of our bloody Edomites the Papists,
when their barbarous plot was come to the ripeness, and had been concealed so
many Months: small presumption was there that our eyes should see the times as
they are now, and the ruin of them who were set on murder and blood: yet may
we use that Psalm 48.8. As we have heard, so we have seen in the City of the
Lord of Hosts, in the City of our God, God will establish it for ever. And with
David, Psalm. 54.7. For he has delivered me out of all trouble, and mine eye
has seen his desire upon mine enemies; that we may learn to cleave to the
Lord who has thus fought for us, and let us see his salvation, and say as the
three resolved servants of God, Dan. 3.17, 18. If it be so, our God whom we
serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace, and he will deliver
us out of thine hand O King: But if not, be it known unto thee O King, that we
will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden Image which thou have set up.
So not to shrink from him, but say, we know our God is able to destroy our
enemies before our face; but whether he do or no, we will depend ever upon him.

Your eyes shall see it.] The Edomites, when the Jews were surprised by the
Caldeans, stood looking on, and laughing at their destruction, Obad. 12.13. Now
God tells them they should be served with the same sauce themselves, the
Jews should see their calamities that should befall them, and be comforted in
their fall, who rejoiced before over them in theirs.

It is a just and usual thing with God in the general, Edom, Obad. verse 15.
For the day of the Lord is near upon all the Heathen; as thou have done, it
shall be done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head. And
Prove. 24.17, 18. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart
be glad when he stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he
turn away his wrath from him.

Because he has made a law for the Magistrate,

Because of his own reason to the Judge,

Then you taught us false doctrine before,

This is not contrary to that, public enemies, here either of no enemies, or
private enemies, such as dislike us, and we them, for some sinister respect. As
it is lawful to kill a public enemy of a State, but not a man's private
enemies; so of rejoicing against the enemies of God and his truth, not their
own: Therefore says Solomon, Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not when thine enemy
falls, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth.

Then may men expect for this, retribution from the Lord, Constantine, son of
the Empress Irene, who put out the eyes of Nicephorus, and by retribution from
God, had his own eyes put out by the cruelty of his Mother, the very same day
six years, or there abouts. The like of the destruction of Jerusalem, that it
was as in the same day that they crucified Christ; Lege Eusebius. l. 3. c. 5.
fine, so it was by the same men that put him to death, the Romans, as Basil
observes. They are living who can remember in former Princes times, Henry 8,
Edward 6, Qu. Mary, how justly God did repay our Nobility, when they cut off
one another heads. The like may be expected in future time, as they have done,
shall be done unto them; nay, the like we have a comfortable aspect, or may
have, to see how God justly does make that true, 1 King. 21.19. And thou shall
speak unto him saying, Thus says the Lord thy God, Have thou killed, and also
taken possession? and thou shall speak unto him, thus says the Lord, In the
place where dogs lickt the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even
thine. When our Papists had thought our blood should have been licked up,
theirs shall be, God holding his own law, doing to them, as they would have
done to us; or seeing that is not done in the strict justice that God
requires, we may fearfully expect, for this sin of ours, this retribution
from the Lord, as in 1 King. 20.42. And he said unto him, Thus says the Lord,
Because thou have let go out of thine hand a man whom I appointed for utter
destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his
people.

To teach every man to take heed how he carries himself to others, Quod tibi
non vis, alteri ne feceris; and that of Christ, Matthew. 7.12. All things,
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets: Of which Tertul. God has measured out my
actions by my will, that I should not do that unto others, which I would not
have done unto my self; and should do to others, as I would have others to
do to me. And if that of James, will and shall be true, Jam. 2.13. He shall
have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy, and mercy rejoices
against judgment; how much more extreme cruelty shall be inflicted upon them,
who carry themselves cruelly to others? men should take heed then how they
abuse their power and authority, to the oppressing and wronging of the weak;
their skill and cunning to circumvent and beguile the simple; their countenance
and credit to use men at their pleasure, lest God meet with them, as he did the
Edomites.

In the particular, Solomon advised, Prove. 24.17, 18. It is a crime which Job
labors to clear himself of, Job. 31.29, 30. If I rejoiced at the
destruction of him that hated me; or lift up my self when evil found him,
neither have I suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his soul.
Teaching that a man should be free, not only from outward show, but from
inward touch of joy: the first is easy, partly by nature, and partly by
cunning, and hypocrisy, to cover it at least from a multitude or many; but the
other is hard, and the harder more commendable, more to be labored for; the
outward odious to man, so the inward to God, which look not in facie, but in
cord, as Cyprian: And a special means to make him turn his hands upon us.
Avoid it, labor against it, if it steal upon us, check it, repel and cast it
out.

And ye shall say, the Lord will be magnified,] The second thing in this
verse, the magnifying of God, the thing is a special effect, which Gods
judgments work in his people and Church, differing from the wicked and
Gentiles; for they see it, and but jibe and jest only at the Edomites, as they
had at Israel; but Israel sees it, and magnifies God for it: the words are
originally somewhat otherwise, the Lord does magnify himself, true, for so he
does, in destroying these; magnifies and honors himself, and they religiously
so confess it, and celebrate his magnificence and greatness for delivering
themselves, his Church and people, and destroying their enemies: hence we may
observe two things and lessons.

It is the glory of God to deliver his people, And therefore will the Lord wait
that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may
have mercy upon you; for the Lord is a God of judgment, blessed are all they
that wait for him. Dan. 9.15, 19. And now O Lord our God, that have brought
the people forth, out of the Land of Egypt, with a mightty hand, and have
gotten thee renown, as at this day, we have sinned, we have done wickedly. O
Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken, and do, defer not for thine own
sake, O my God, for thy City and thy people, are called by thy name, Psalm.
74.10, 11. O God, how long shall the adversary reproach, shall the enemy
blaspheme thy name for ever? Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right
hand? pluck it out of thy bosom.

Because he is their God and King, these his people and subjects. For God is my
King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth. It were a shame and
dishonor for a Prince to suffer his subjects, to lie in misery and distress,
specially if he be able to releeve them; e contra, it spreads his fame far
and near, when he succoreth and saves them.

Because they are rebels,

They shall say, the Lord does magnify himself.] That is, they shall give the
honor of their deliverance, and the glory of their preservation to God, when
the enemy is destroyed, and they safe.

The people of God in all deliverance and preservation from what danger soever,
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Hosea 14.3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses,
neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods; for in
thee the fatherless finds mercy. Examples of Moses and Miriam, with the
people. Exodus 15. Of Barak and Deborah, Judge. 5. Of Ester and the Jews, Ester
8. of Hezekiah. Isa. 38.

Because it is he alone, who is the deliverer and Savior of his people: means
he often affords them, It is he that gives salvation to Kings, who delivers
David his servant from the hurtful sword.

Because in this as in all other benefits,

This serves to reprove the common practice of men, or establishment, to the
wisdom of their gravest and experienced Senate; from sickness to Physicians
and such other means: not at all to the Lord, never magnify nor praise him;
God seldom made mention of, or only cursorily, and because of those who are
present, for which cause he often takes from them their means, that either they
may perish in new dangers, or else more sensibly discern that it is he that
gives deliverance.

To instruct all and every one, Behold, the days come says the Lord, that
they shall no more say, the Lord lives, which brought up the Children of
Israel out of the Land of Egypt; But the Lord lives, which brought up and
which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the North Country, and from
all Countries, whither I had driven them, and they shall dwell in their own
Land. Many are the deliverances, we have had, and this nation, from the tyranny
of Romes Church at the death of Queen Mary, from the invincible Navy 88. from
the Insurrection of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, from the
treason of the Duke of Norfolk and Queen of Scots, from that of Babington,
and his fellows, from Arden, Somervile, Parry, Cullen, Lopes, Squire, and such
like: yet now to this that it may be said, the Lord lives, that has delivered
his Church, from any one or all the former, but from the cruel, bloody and
desperate unmatchable plot of our wicked papists; which is the Lords only,
because the carriage of the thing was his, that he would have it wholly ascribed
to him. Therefore we may say, the Lord has magnified himself many ways, but
now he has surmounted them all: we ought then to magnify him, and give the
glory of it to him, not in word only, but for ever in deed; The Parliament,
King and Commons, to make laws more for his glory, against Sabbath breaking,
Oaths, Drunkenness, Usury, Oppression, to further his Church, and to remove
stumbling blocks: The Judges to execute them, Deus exonerans onerat. Bern.
without sparing and partiallity: All to obey God more constantly, and man for
God: For disburthening us of the danger and fear, he burdens us with more
obedience and thankfulness: This all should do, yet if it be not in general,
let every one for himself and his family, as Joshua, and mourn for the sins
of the time, God will mark him when he brings a general Plague, Ezechiel 9.
In times of danger, many are petentes, few promittentes, most few persolventes.
But we must not only ask deliverance, but promise new obedience, and perform
our vows, else let us look for that, Mat. 23.37, 38.

VERSE VI.
A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master. If then I be a Father,
where is mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord
of Hosts unto you, O Priests, that despise my Name? and ye say, Wherein have
we despised thy Name?

WE have seen the first sin reproved in this people, together with the
arguing of it, and the evincing of them of it. The second follows from this
to the ninth verse; It is contempt and profanation of Gods service and
worship; and in it, as in the former, we have first, Gods accusation; secondly,
the debating of it. And in this, first, their answer and excuse, secondly, Gods
reply manifestly evicting them of it. In Gods accusation, we consider the vice
he accuses them of, secondly, the persons. In the first, the thing and the
reason of it, which is first set down, then applied. The ground is a plain
Axiom, in nature, or a rule of nature.

A Son honors his Father,] Though the handling of these duties seem not
so essential to this place, aiming at his own honor, rather then theirs; yet
it being so necessary, and the contempt so great, it shall not be amiss to
stand upon it. The coherence and meaning is plain: we must speak, first of
the duty, then of party, to them: The duty is first, inward reverence, a
reverent affection to them.

Children, sons and daughters, Solomon makes it the part of a wicked child
to despise his mother, Prove. 15.20. he commands, not to despise the mother, no
not when she is old. Prove. 23.22. he threatens a fearful curse from God, to
such. Pro. 30.17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his
mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall
eat it. And if the King must be well thought of, Eccle. 10.20. how the parent
to whom our affection naturally is more? Chams curse came in part for his
unreverent thought toward his Father. Genesis 19.

Because God has made them reverent,

Because they ought to love them, Love disdaineth not.

Because else outward reverence is unsound,

To teach every child to see his sin, Chams dishonouring his father to his
brethren, rose from the disdaining of him in his heart in secret. But if it
has not broken out to this, but either grace has subdued it, or worldly
respect has made us smother it, yet must it be put upon the account among our
sins, when we humble our selves before the Lord for them; to get a discharge
of these as well as others.

To teach every child, and inwardly to have all honorable estimation of them:
for the Lord he looks into the heart, and this he requires, as the other, and
by all means labors against the contrary, and that which is condemned of God,
which will make them contemn the counsels and advice of their Parents, whose
persons they disdain in their hearts, and take every thing from them in the
worse part, and so make their whole government unprofitable unto them. Besides,
the fear of Gods curse threatened, Prove. 30. as he well said, he was a sinner
with a witness, whom the Holy Ghost gave witness against; so he is accursed
with a witness, whom the Holy Ghost so accurseth; for it (says Tremel.) God
will condemn and bring that person to some evil end or other, who shall
scorn and disdain his Parents; for his curses are not threatenings alone, but
inflictions; not denouncings, but performance. This were a good caveat to be
written upon the doors of young men's and women's hearts, to banish and keep
out unreverent and scornful thoughts of their Parents; and a sitter Posie to
be written upon the walls of Parents, than the vain inventions of Poets and
Painters.

The second is outward reverence, both in word and carriage toward them.

Children, verse 17. shows that in the whole outward man is required
reverence. Hence was the blessing of Shem and Japhet, Genesis 9.23, 26, 27. Hence
was the excuse of Rachel, Genesis 31.35. and the practice of Solomon, 1 King.
2.19, 20.

Besides those in the former point, this may confirm it,

To teach every one to see his sins past or present, yea, and when they have
children of years to discern such things, who see them unreverently use their
Parents both in gesture and speech, both with looks and words, who teach them
how to use theirs, while they let them see how they use theirs. Yea, diverse
Parents, (my self have been an eye-witnes of some) who teach their children
when they are young, not only to disdain others, but themselves; the father
teaching the child to scoff or miscall his mother, and delight in it; which
falls out justly, that they keep the sent of this liquor, and when they are
elder, so despise and contemn them. But if now when they find such things
from theirs, it is good to call to mind their own sins, and to think that
they thus use me, for I have used mine the like, and yet never repented of it.

To persuade every child (as before) to labor to give them all reverence both
in his word and carriage, Nonnunqua^ in parva deterius quam in majori culpa
peccatur; major enim culpa quo citius agnoscitur, co etiam celerius emendatur:
minor vero dum quasi nulla creditur, eo pejor est, quo and securius in usu
retinetur. Greg.
and the sins of children in this kind are in some sort greater than those in
the other of greater note: For as a man sometimes sins worse in a small than
in a greater fault; for the greater by how much the sooner it is acknowledged,
it is quicklier mended,; but the lesser, while it is counted almost none at all,
is therefore worse, because we more securely lived in it. So of this
particular, though disobedience and want of reverence differ in themselves, yet
is unreverence thus the greater, because it is accounted as none, and men lie
very secure in it. Therefore ought men to avoid it, and strive against it, both
because they are forbidden, and because as a little wound neglected, will
fester to a great one; so this unreverence accustomed, will break out to a
greater contempt and disobedience; and if Christ make him culpable of sin,
that says but Raka to his equal, and him of hellfire, which calls him
Fool, Matthew. 5.20. what shall he be worthy of that calls his Parents so, and
uses them most unreverently? And if 2 Kings 2.23, 24. Children, that mocked the
Prophet, were torn with Bears, how shall such things escape a judgment? They
shall not; for that of Solomon shall be true. Prove. 30.17. The outward
reverence must not stand in signs and words only, but as 1 John 3.18. speaks
of love: My little children, let us not love in words, neither in tongue, but
in deed and in truth; So say we of this; this reverence must appear in our
actions, and this will part it self into obedience and subjection: for the
first so much.

Children, and outward reverence in thoughts and words, but they must obey
them, as Christ shows by his condemning of the son who obeyed not, Matthew.
21.30. Hence are the Commandments, Coll. 3.20. Children obey your Parents in
all things, for this is well pleasing unto the Lord; in all lawful things: as
the like, 1 Cor. 9.22. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the
weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some;
as far as I may lawfully, not seeking my own profit; 1 Cor. 10.33. even as I
please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved; in all lawful things not seeking his own
profit, preferring the pleasing of them before it; the opposition being betwixt
his and their pleasure and profit, not betwixt their profit and pleasing of
God: So in this, not between Parents and God, but their will and their
Parents; showing that the son is not to obey his Father in what he will and
likes, but he is simply bound in all things, though never so dislike to him,
so they be not displeasing to God. Hence is the Commandment, but with some
limitation, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is
right. The Lord, when he commends the Rechabites, Jer. 35. does show this thing
as a duty.

Because it is a thing well pleasing the Lord,

Because if not in all things, but where they please,

To reprove all disobedience that is found in Children of all sorts to their
Parents, young and elder, and all ages. more for this: And know you, that if
you have, or may have children, and live to that, God shall make them revenge
your Parents quarrel, and contempt, to bring you to repentance, or to punish
you for it; and the more securely you now contemn the admonitions of the
Ministers, the more sharply shall God then punish you, and the more piercing
shall it then be unto your Souls.

Let this then admonish every child to give obedience to his fathers
commandments, For I came down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the
will of him that sent me; and therefore was contented to break himself of
his own will, rather then to cross his fathers will. Math. 26.39. so must
they. To obey them in things that are pleasing and profitable unto them, liking
them well enough, is not so commendable, because they may be led with these
respects, rather then duty or love; but in things difficult and hard, crossing
their will and affections, is a double obedience, and shall receive a greater
reward: Therefore endeavor thus to obey them, and God in them; it is not his
will of permission, but of command, wherein Gods law is broken, if they be
disobedient: And not so only, but he will reject all service done to them,
when they neglect that they owe to theirs: so that he will be deaf to their
prayers, contemn their service, his eyes shall be shut to their miseries; they
may pray, he will not hear; stretch out long hands, he will not regard; yea
cry to him, yet will he not accept: if the sighs of thy father, and tears of
thy mother, come up before God, for thy rebellions toward them, think that
thy prayers shall little be accepted of God. Number. 16.
If Moses his words to God for the rebellion of Corah before God, made not
only their sacrifice unacceptable, but brought a curse upon them; think of it,
and take heed of the like.

But some in this matter may doubt, and for it object and question thus.
Pomand. 17.
First, what if God commanded one thing, and men's parent another? It is
answered, thou must then answer with the Apostles. Act. 5.29. We ought to obey
God rather then Man; or hear from God. Mat. 15.3. why do you also transgress
the commandments of God by your tradition? for ever his command is above them
and theirs: else this were to make them gods, and God, man; and were a deed of
Idolatry performed unto them. Martin Luther said well, that in keeping of the
first precept, was showed obedience of all therest; for hereby we acknowledge
God to be our God in preferring his will, before the will of any other. And so
whose will we prefer before Gods, we take them to be our god. The Apostle
makes the Devil to be the Prince of this World; because men obey his will
before Gods, so in this: Therefore if the question be of these two, God must
first be obeyed. Honora patrem tuum, sed site a vero patre non separat, tamdiu
scito sanguinis copulam, quamdiu ille suum noverit creatorem: alioquin, Psalm.
45.10. Hieron. Ep. 8. ad Furiam.
Honor thy father; but so, as he draw thee not from thy true father, so long
acknowledge the bond of blood, as he acknowledges his Creator; otherwise as it
is, Psalm. 45. hearken, O daughter, forget thine own people, and thy fathers
house, says St. Hierome to Furia. And his reason is, Non es ejus cui nata es,
sed cuirenata, and quite grandi pretio redemit, sanguine suo.
thou art not his of whom thou were borne, but newborn, who has redeemed
thee with a great price, even his blood. And Clemens Romans Epistola. 4. to the
said purpose, Authors non sunt vitae nostrae parents, sed ministri; non enim
vitam praebent, sed ingrediendi in vitam exhibent ministerium; solus deus vitae
author and fons est. S. Clem. Romans Ep. 4.
Our parents are not the authors, but the instruments of our life, they give
not life, but are the means of entering it, only God is the author and
fountain of life; he is then to be preferred, and his commandment; and not as
many who have excuse for things they do, our fathers did so, or they commanded
us: In things, wherein God has neither commanded nor forbidden, it is
sufficient; but where either, there must they take notice of it, and obey him.
But yet he must do it with due respect and reverence, manifesting no contempt
of their authority.

Some will demand: The magistrate commands me one thing, Bouum non suo loco non
est bonum.
a good thing out of its place, is not good; blood out of the veins in other
vessels is hurtful, though in his place the life consist in it. A good thing
not done in his place, were better undone, yea it cannot be well done.
Moreover, we must distinguish betwixt the affection and action. A man may love
his parents better then the magistrate, but he must obey him rather; as he may
love a good man, better then a great man, yet in many cases he is not bound to
do so much for him. The first, because God has showed his special love more
to him, then them. The second, because God has given him a great authority of
command. So it is in this inward affection, and outward obedience, because the
bond of nature is stronger in the one, and the force of authority is greater in
the other. Finally, if the things prejudice the State, they must not be obeyed;
but if it do not prejudice the public good, and be much benefit to a private
parent, so the ends of the two be regarded, and no contempt of authority
showed, and a man be content to abide the penalty; A man may disobey, and
prefer Parents before Magistrates without sin to God. As in the case of
Hester and Mordecah: and the Jews and the Kings commandment.

What if my Father commands me one thing, Answ. As before, obey thy master, for
thy father has given over his authority to him, over whom he has no power,
for his power is not subordinate to thy fathers, as a Steward, or Tutor,
wherein there is reservation, but absolute: And thou art now of another
regiment and corporation. But yet as before, thy affection may be more to thy
Father, but thy labor and service to thy master, thou may wish his good
more; but thou must work for and procure the others good; for, for that end
thou wast placed under his power. But if without neglect of thy masters
affairs, thou may be helpful to thy parents, standing in need of thy help;
or by leave and consent, thou art no more free to refuse now, then before.

I am the Daughter of my Father, Hester, which serves both for a subject and a
wife. Hitherto of their obedience, now of their subjection and submission; and
this may consist in these things. First, for correction.

Children, A fool despises his fathers instruction, but he that regards
reproof is prudent. When the Apostle makes it a reason for subjection to God.
Hebr. 12.9, 10. it must needs hold in this: yea, the Apostles will carry it,
not only when they do it justly, and from sufficient matter, but for a wrong
cause, which the tenth verse shows, implying thereby that this submission is
required when they shall correct, of a spleen, or a humor, for their own
fancy and pleasure only without good ground or manner: may not this be seen by
that of Isaac submitting himself to his father, to cut him at his pleasure,
Genesis 22. yea of Israel to be circumcised; and of Christ to his mother. Luke
2.48, 49?

Because by this they show wisdom, Prove. 13.1. A wise son hears his
fathers instruction, but a scorner hears not rebuke; and they get and
increase wisdom; Prove. 29.15. The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child
left to himself, brings his mother to shame: for they learn to avoid the
like sins, and to escape greater strokes from their father. That which gets
wisdom, must be submitted to; The way of life, Prove. 6.23. wholesome things,
though bitter: To prevent greater evil, and bring health, we easily submit our
selves to the Physicians hand to receive.

Because they come from love, Prove. 13.24.

To reprove the stubborn and stiff-necked children of our age, who repine at
their fathers reproof, Eli, neglecting the rod when they were young, cockering
of them, that they get such heads when they are grown, that they will not
bear the rod; and better nothing at all by their reproves, but they live
often to see their perishing, as Eli did his sons. Whereas if they be duly
and maturely used to the rod and correction, they will be nothing so audacious,
and in the end a word shall do more with them than many stripes.

To teach children to give honor unto their Parents, more from Parents, of
whose love they cannot doubt. It is profitable says Chrysostom, Ho. 27. ad
pop. A. to have many admonishers and keepers, many reprovers, is profitable;
because as a beast that is hunted and set on of all sides, cannot escape: so
shall not a sin or vice, but when such as are so nigh us, who see in secret
and open, it is far better: But we could bear it if there were cause, and we
had deserved it; but when they do it without cause, as we think unjustly,
that is it which makes us repine. First know, that the Physician sees often
more than the Patient, so does the Parent: But if yet there be no cause, the
Apostle shows yet we should submit. And we should consider, as Hierome would
have Salvina to judge of his reproof, that it was ex abundantia amoris, and it
is his cujus votum est, te nescire, quae metuit. Besides it is more thank
worthy, when a man can, in such cases, suppress the rising and swelling of his
impatient and corrupt nature, only for conscience of the commandment: for
here being some conflict betwixt his word and our will, he takes trial of our
obedience, who has simply commanded subjection in this kind to children, which
is to be obeyed, as that thou shall not steal: Therefore should every one
endeavor to it, and think it is the part of a good child to kiss the rod
that beats, as the hand that gives.

The second thing, wherein their subjection is required, and submission, is for
their calling and education.

Children must submit themselves unto their Parents, Samuel to his Mother, he
yielded to her, to be set apart for the service of God, and to be brought up to
it. 1 Samuel 1.28. For that which she gave he performed. So David submitted
himself to his father to be a shepherd, and some of his brethren soldiers; So
Christ was disposed of by his Parents, when he was fit to teach others; and for
another manner of work, Luke 2.46. yet he went and was subject to them, and in
the same trade verse 51. and Mark 6.3. Justin Martyr thinks so: 'twas likely,
the wisdom of God to blind the wicked, and hide him from their eyes. Then as
1 John 2.6. He that says, he abides in him, ought himself also to walk,
even as he walked: so for this particular.

Because they in all reason are far better able to judge of them, As arrows
are in the hand of a mighty man, so are Children of the youth; happy is the
man that has his quiver full of them, they shall not be ashamed; but they
shall speak with the enemies in the gate; seems to insinuate somewhat, they
are as arrows of diverse heads, some fit for one mark, some for another, he
has them in his hand, and knows best which is fit for which.

Bcause they are not in their own power, but his, Jobs wife as part of
himself, but his children, as part of his substance and temporal goods; it is
equal then, he should have the disposition of his children, not themselves or
others.

It shall appear that he may dispose of them in Marriages,

To reprove the sins of many Children,

The third thing wherein their subjection is required, and submission, is for
their portion and childs part.

Children must submit themselves unto their parents, Abraham, that they in this
thing submitted themselves: At least no contrary thing is manifested of them.
Genesis 25.5, 6. As Adoniah is reproved for usurping the kingdom, and making his
fathers will for him, not content with his portion, so is it the commendations
of the rest of David's children, that they were content with their portions, and
never murmured that Solomon, not the eldest, but the son of David's age, had the
kingdom given him of his father, Kings 1. The rest of the Patriarchs are not
recorded to be malecontent, that Joseph had a double portion among them.

Because they must think,

Because the father best knows them, and with less partiality then themselves,
Isaac to Jacob, Jacob to Joseph, a double portion; all the other taynted with
some gross sin; for their goods they may and ought to dispose of according
to grace and virtue, which makes the youngest the eldest; and so, e contra.

Because they are able best to discern,

To reprove al discontented children, not content with the portion the father
has set out for them, Adoniah, making choice of his own portion; and if they
have not the allowance they would have, they think they may come by it as they
can, and whatsoever they get from their father, they think it well gotten, and
but of their own; and no sin. But see what the holy Ghost says, Pro. 28.24.
who so robs his father or his mother, and says it is no transgression, the
same is a companion of a destroyer; making such a son a companion and cozen
german to a murderer. At his death, and in his sickness, if either they be
privy to his will, or guess by his affection in his health, that that will not
fall to their portion; they desire to help to shorten his days, and hasten
his end: he shall hear news that they have shared for themselves, as Adoniah;
after his death, many a son shows himself graceless, telling abroad every
where, how unkindely his father dealt with him, that his portion was so small;
not remembering in the course of common society, de absentibus and mortuis nil
nisi bonum, much more for parents, whose infirmities must be covered being
living, more dead: neither remembering how little they deserved at their fathers
hands, or how unkindely they used him in respect of others, or how little hope
they gave him that they would use that well he should leave them, and by it be
profitable to God or man, Church or Commonwealth.

To teach every child to be content with the portion his father sets out for
him, living or dead, whether more or less, Jacob see good cause to disinherit
Reuben, and to pass by Simeon and Levi, and leave the Lordship to Judahs hand,
yea, if he shall skip over Dan and Asher, and the rest, till he come to Joseph,
from the eldest of all to the youngest, or state one, and bestow the double
portion on him and his, the rest must not be discontented with his
distribution, but give him leave to do with his own as he list; honoring him
thus, yea, and using his portion left thee for his honor, for increase and
advantage, as the Talents; that the world may judge of the justice and
uprightness of thy fathers getting of his goods.

The fourth thing in this submission is, to be disposed of for their marriages
and matching.

It is the duty of children to submit themselves to their Parents in their
matches and marriages; exempla sanctorum pro regulis sunt, ubi deest regula,
vel contraria non datur; Isaac submitted to Abraham, Genesis 24.3. Jacob to Isaac,
Genesis 28.1, 2. Sampson to his parents, Judge. 14.1. Rahel and Leah to their
father Laban, Genesis 29.19. yea, even profane and wicked have in some sort done
it: Ismael, Genesis 21.21. Shechem Hamors son, Genesis 34.3.6.

Because this is to honor them, as parents by their experience respect, and
are able to discern.

Because he may not dispose of the goods of his father without him,

This reproves those children that dispose themselves without their parents
consent, Esau and his posterity, in Judah taking his Hoasts daughter, Genesis
38.2. having Er and Onan, such as God would not endure to live, but slew them
himself. Yea, that may also be seen, Genesis 6.2. in the sons of Seth, the
Church which matched with cursed Chams seed of themselves, without parents
consent, had such a wretched posterity. This thing then is reproofe-worthy,
yea, damnable in children without repentance; parents are often causes of it;
and that first, to some it is Gods retribution, because they so served and
abused their parents: Secondly, because they give such liberty to their
daughters to wander, as Dinah; and so Ezekiel. 23.3. their breasts come to be
pressed, and the teats of their virginity bruised: or else their affections by
often meeting are so entangled and inflamed, as the fathers threats will not
loose it, nor the mothers tears cannot quench it. It was not so, Prove. 30.18,
19. it should not be so. Hierom to Demetr. Epist. 8.11. would not have Virgins
alone, solae sine matre: for in a flock of Doves the Kite often will prey upon
one when they are abroad; and it is a scabbed sheep that loves wandering, and
leaves the fold.

Thirdly, because parents do not take and use their right, and provide for
them in due time mates fit for them, which makes them provide for themselves,
not without sin, but greatly sinning; yet the parents partakers of it, and
oftentimes of much shame and grief, as it was with Tamar, Genesis 38.26. But
howsoever, one man's sin cannot excuse another, nor yet the parents the child's
sin, nor will not exempt them from the curse of God, when they thus match to
the grief of their parents, and the shortening of their days and life, by
whom they received life, and should have their lives continued and lengthened.

To instruct children to be subject to their parents, Isaac to Jacob, Genesis 28.
But what if he upon some sinister respect, defer and pass the flower of her
age? I answer; then has God ordained the Magistrate as for their punishment,
so for their relief, who is not to be sought to but when most urgent necessity
requires, when the opposition stands betwixt Marriage and burning, because
that reveals the fathers fault, and bewrayes his or her infirmity. But what if
he tender a match out of the Church, a Papist, or such like? Then must the
Child refuse with reverence, not disposing of himself; for as it were sin to
yield, so the other is sin to make choice of himself. But what if another
that is not so religious and so fervent a lover of the Truth, as is to be
wished? No direct deny all is lawful, but a wise delaying and a discreet
gaining of time to solicit God with their prayers, who has the heart of
their Parents in his hand, and to entreat them by mediation of best friends;
who if they can be diverted, it is well; if not, I know no warrant a Child has
to deny his fathers choice, (though he think, and it may be he might choose
better) and he may look for a blessing from God, if in duty he thus submit
himself to his Parents.

The last part of this honor is thankfulness, which Children must perform to
their Parents.

Children must perform all thankfulness unto their Parents: to get any thing,
that this is a part of honor Christ shows Math. 15.4, 5, 6. some think that
of Psalm 128.3. when children are made Olive plants, not Olives only, and Olive
branches, which was a sign of peace; so they to make peace and love betwixt
their parents: but plants, such as might stand under them, underprop and uphold
them in their weakness: and thus verily have good Children honored their
parents: so did the sons of Jacob Genesis 42.1, 2. so did Joseph Genesis 47.12. so
did Ruth, though but a daughter in law. To this purpose Paul forbids that the
Church should be burdened with widows, but their children and Nephews ought
to maintain them. 1 Timothy 5.4.

Because else he should not only be unnatural,

Because they had form from them, as body, and members, and limbs,

This reproves many graceless children, Solomon, Prove. 19.26. He that wastes
his father, and chaseth away his mather, is asonne that causes shame, and
brings reprovach, and so esteem of them, as God has marked them.

To teach Children to perform all thankfulness to their parents, Basil, who
feed their dams, as long as they fed them, and carried them, how much more
Christian Children? oftentimes when thy father is dead, his garment or his ring
is dear to thee, this thou carriest upon thy finger, and would not lose it
for any thing; think how should his body, when he is living, S. Aug. de Civ. D.
lib. 1. or if thou see others so esteem them; apply it to thy self, and give
them their whole honor; or else look for the shortning of thy days, and for
the like recompense from thine.

His Father.] Having seen the duty, we must proceed now to the parties, to
whom this duty and honor is to be performed; to the father and parents, as
their parents, authors of their being, or at least instruments of their being;
God being Principal.

Children must perform all these duties, this honor to their parents, all
their life long; nothing will free them from them, Joseph, the second in the
kingdom of Egypt, yet did not omit the least duty to his father; but
performed all in their places, obedience, subjection, mainteinance, reverence
in his infirmity and weakness, and his own greatness, Gen 48.12. (and
caeteris capiti) Solomon to his mother, 1 King. 2.19, 20. Christ to his
parents, Luke 2.51. Hence came the curse upon Cham, pronounced by his father,
and executed by God, notwithstanding what he had to say, and could hold out for
his defense: his father was drunk and like a beast, Genesis 9. But Shem and
Japheth blessed who did him reverence: To this purpose is that of Solomon,
Prove. 23.22. Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy
mother when she is old; howsoever unworthy of it, yet thou must perform it,
even to thy mother weaker by nature, subject to more infirmityes; by so much
more apt to despise them; more then, when the infirmity of their sex, and the
imperfections of the age are combyned together; yet we have no liberty to
despise or deny duty.

Because neither the greatness of the one, Chrisost. in Romans 13. non principi
sed principatui, that honor, obedience and subjection, is required not so much
to the Prince, as to the Princedome; not to the person, as to his place: So of
this, the honor is due not to the father, but his fatherhood; not so much to
the person of him as he is a man, and so either a bad or a good man, as to his
place and office, as he is a father: now he is a father, she a mother; though
of never so bad life or bad parts, and so to be honored: and the child is to
give it, not as a man; and so great or base, high or low; but as a child,
which he ever is, and so must always perform it.

Because they are the authors, or principal instruments of their lives;
Solomon's ground, Prove. 23.22.

This serves to condemn the Church of Rome, and their odious and impious
positions, Symancha. Justit. Cathol. Tit. 4. sect. 74.) see ye not these men
going against the current of humanity, and against the light of nature, and are
oppisite to the light of the word. Cham may not dishonor his father though he
be drunk, but he shall have the curse; how shall they escape it? But Heresy
is a greater sin then drunkenness: undoubtedly not as they count Heresy,
which is to differ from the Church of Rome in any thing, specially in matter of
the seven Sacraments. And what is this in comparison of that which makes a man
a beast; which is worse, says Saint Chrysostom, then to be a beast, because
istud naturae, illud culpae est: which some small difference from them cannot
make: But say it were greater, yet does it not therefore dissolve the knot, or
relation betwixt them; for it is not in the greatness of the sin, but when
such a sin can be given that does break the relation: for instance, Idolatry
is a greater sin then adultery, yet this, not that, breaks and dissolves
marriage: Because that, not this meets in cominterposition with the knot of
marriage. In that they being and becoming one flesh with another, 1 Cor. 6.10.
and so cutteth himself from her, he was knit to before: in this they are only
one spirit with an Idol, and cease to be one spirit with the Lord. So this, It
is not heresy for his greatness, that can dissolve this natural bond, which
is perpetual; for it cannot make that he had not his essence and being from
his father, and the duty depending upon this, obey thy father that begat thee:
has he begotten thee, it is no matter what he is, thou must honor him. Then
impious are their positions; but no marvel if they teach rebellions, and
diobedience, and murdering of Princes, if they allow dishonouring of parents.

To teach every child to perform this, honor his Parents, Joseph, Solomon,
and Christ, and nothing can be in thee that can give thee freedom from it,
when they did it, the two first ex debito, Christ ex placito, to fulfill all
righteousness, and give us example. Though then thou be married or advanced,
or howsoever, yet still they are thy Parents, and thou must not deny, but
perform honor unto them; for thou had thy being from them, and till that be
dissolved, thou owe them still the duties, the bonds remaining; yea,
whatsoever infirmity is in them, no sin dissolveth the bond, it makes not an
annullity of the duty: for as Gold is Gold, though it be smeared over with dirt
and filth; so are they thy Parents, whatsoever their lives and manners be.
Think with thy self, how their love made them bear with many natural
infirmities of thy Childhood, and not to neglect thee for the many untoward
carriages of thy youth, and not to cast thee off from them: And think what
duty now should bind thee unto; if they for their perfect love, and upon some
hope of comfort many years after, did pass over all, how much more thou in
duty and in lieu of thankfulness for that which thou enjoyest from them?
Children must not be like Flies (as Plutarch) which slip along the glass where
it is smooth, but catch hold of it where there are any scratches or flawes:
They must turn away their eyes from their infirmities, and forget their hard
usage, if it have been any; and not be undutifull for that, because they have
their being and education from them. Take heed of Chams curse, and seek Shems
blessing, by not seeing their infirmities, but covering and performing duty to
them; accounting it to be a sin to be repented of, when they cannot find their
hearts so cheerful in their duties as they ought, because of their Parents
infirmities.

A servant his master.] The second rule of nature, the ground or other pillar
of Gods reason against this people: For the meaning it is plain; the duties
here required are in the general the same for the most part with the former,
though not in every particular. The first is reverence, and this both inward
and outward; To join them together.

Servants must give all reverence unto their Master, Hagar did Sarah.

Because God has made them reverent,

Because his Commandments are spiritual,

This is to let servants see their sins past or present, Hagar despising
Sarah, looking scornfully upon her, which must needs argue unreverence in the
heart; for by these things many a man well knows what is in the privy Chamber
of the heart, and by this outward pulse thus beating, may we discern how the
inward parts are affected. For he that will speak so frowardly, and look so
scornfully and doggedly, as many will, it must needs show he has no reverence,
but his heart is full of despite and contempt; and he that will speak so to
his face, and in his presence, what will he to others behind his back, and in
his absence? Where is the fear and trembling Paul calls for? Where is all the
honor Peter exacts, when ye will thus bourd them often, thus disdain them?
when ye will answer them frowardly, or murmuring when their backs are turned;
when you tell their weakness not to your fellows, but to neighbors servants,
whereby their estimation is impaired. Think you the Apostles call for these in
vain, or shall such things go unpunished? Assuredly no: for when the Apostle
says to servants, to encourage them that are good, Ephesians. 6.7, 8. with good will
doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men; knowing that whatsoever good
thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond
or free; did he not mean the contrary? and would have you to understand, that
whatsoever evil thing a man does, that shall he receive of the Lord, whether
he be bond or free? so expect it in this particular; see then that, unreverent
and contemptuous servants; expect you to receive from the Lord some fearful
thing, and let it be a restraint in you of such irreverence in the things
spoken of, or the like. But of this sin Masters are often the causes of it, and
they that bring it upon themselves.

First, because they have been such servants to their Masters, and so have
lived in it ever since without repentance; even then when God recompenceth them
home, yet they will not remember their own sin, but are still brawling with
their servants, and so it is Gods just retribution: whereas if they would
repent of that, they should better reform this, Eccles. 7.21, 22. Take no heed
to all words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy servant curse thee; for
oft-times also thy own heart knows, that thou thy self have also cursed
others. It may be applied to this, though it carry somewhat more: That a
Master, when his servant revileth him, or uses him irreverently, should
remember even this sentence, to make him penitent and moderate.

Secondly, because they have remitted of that ancient severity in their
government, which we hear men, that can remember times that are past, speak
of; not having those strait eyes, nor hard hands over them as they ought, not
so sharply correcting them as the offense and nature of a servant requires; so
that they little reverence them, for they fear them not, because they forget
that of Prove. 29.19. A servant will not be corrected by words, for though he
understand, he will not answer.

Thirdly, because they bring them up too liberally for diet and apparel, and
so when the belly is full, and the back fine, the Master is not so regarded. A
servant is like in this thing to a Horse full fed and pampered, he will cast
his rider; like to Bucephalus, Alexanders Horse; while he was bare-backt he
would carry any man; but if once he had his trappings and furniture, none, or
hardly Alexander himself. It is the complaint of many, that servants are thus
insolent to themselves and others; many, though not all, are the causes of it
themselves; (somewhat there is in the nature of a servant and other things) for
they bring them up so delicately, as Prove. 29.21. He that delicately brings
up his servant from a child, shall have him become his son at the length.
Whatsoever their fare is, their apparel is far exceeding; a servant going
better than a man of his Masters place and wealth did some few years ago. And
though they will not allow it themselves, yet they can be content their
friends, or themselves, if their fortune be allotted unto them, should provide
it for themselves: And if, when they are thus gay without, they use them as
Hagar did her Mistress, when she was big with child, is it not just with them?
A great cause of this, is taking of Apprentices with great portions, and so as
Mulier cum dote, is imperiosa, so they and their friends. The cause you must
have such portions with them, more than in former times, is this, because they
must thus be maintained, more than in former times. But better it were that you
had less, and kept them more meanly; better for you, you should have more
reverence and respect: better for them, for thus you bring sin upon them for
the present, and in future time just contempt, as they have contemned you.

To persuade servants to use their Masters with all reverence and good respect
that may be, Naamans servants; how much more should religious Christian
servants, and the more Christian or religious, the more they ought to perform
this duty; not only not to contemn and despise, but to reverence them with
all the reverent carriage and speech that may be? and that not outward only,
but inward, for God requires more than Nature; his Law is spiritual, and he
will have all inward and outward respect, the heart as well as the tongue; and
the outward will not be, or not continue; or if so, yet not accepted of God:
yea, he that wants this, it can never be expected the other of obedience, etc.
and let him who looks and hopes to be one day a Master, and to have his
servants such as he would, be now such a servant as he should, Ephe. 6.8.
knowing that whatsoever good any man does, the same shall he receive of the
Lord, whether he be bound or free.

The second duty of servants is obedience, for whom men fear,

Servants must give unto their Masters and governors all obedience: hence it
follows, because they must fear, and whom men fear them they obey, when they
command: this proved, Ephe. 6.5. Col. 3.26. Titus 2.9. And this obedience if it
be such as Christians ought to perform, it must neytheir be clipped, nor
counterfeit, not in some things only, nor in show to the eye: for the first,
Col. 3.21. in all things, that is, in all lawful things, whether they be
liking, and tasting unto him or otherwise, though never so disliking, for he
must pleasure his master, Titus 2. q. for the 2 Ephe. 6.5, 6. Col. 3, 22.
singleness of heart is required, and eye service forbidden.

Because they are bound either by Indenture, or condition etc. then they must
obey.

Because they are maintained by them,

Because if in only things they like, they obey themselves,

Because in this obedience they serve God and Christ,

To let servants see their sins past or present, Barnard, si in hoc obedimus,
non autem in illo, fractus est nummus. This obedience is like clipped coin, and
will not pass for good payment before God, though thy master let it pass, and
be content to put it up; yet God will call thee one day to an account for it,
and though thou can keep it close from the one, yet thou can not conceal
it from the other: and as we see in money that is clipped, or a piece of gold
that wants a little of its weight, makes it refused in payment so the want of
obedience in any one thing, unless thou repent thee in regard of God, and make
amends to thy master for it, shall make God to refuse, and not to regard the
rest of thy obedience, because he requires it to be whole and entire. I, but
say thou do all, yet it is in the eye, and in presence or sight, murmuring
when he is gone, or regarding not: then says Bernard, falsus est nu mmus ejus,
plumbum habet non argentum, dolose agit sed in Dei conspectu. This obedience is
counterfeit, in stead of silver it is lead, he deals deceitfully with his
master, but he does it in Gods sight, whose eyes no man can bleare or beguile:
such servants let them know, though they may have their masters favor, because
he can find no fault with them, and can see no further then their outward and
open behavior, yet they shall never have but Gods displeasure, that regards
the heart more then the hand, the affection more then the action, and the
manner of doing of it, more then the deed: So that they, when they have
received their masters wages or his yearly allowance, or what other matter, of
no great moment for the most part, he shall think good to bestow on them; they
have, as Christ said of the Pharisees, who did all their works only to be
seen of men, they have received all their reward; they have all they desired,
and all they deserved; they can look for nothing at Gods hands for their
labor: And yet they shall have a reward from him without true repentance, lege
Talionis, such servants, who shall perform them such hollow hypocritical and
eye service, if they ever come to be able to keep any; or if this fear them
not, because they think they can hamper their servants well enough, and being
privy to their own corruptions they will provide for them; yet let them see
what follows, they shall have their portion with Hypocrites, as Christ said of
the bad servant, who played revels in his masters absence, Math. 24.51.

This may persuade and instruct servants, Nummus istae obedientiae, ut Deo
debitus, ita Deo solvendus, says one: As thy master constrayneth thee to obey
him, so thy God has commanded thee, and it must be paid and performed, not
according to thy masters power, but according to Gods precept, not so far as
thy master can urge thee, but as far as God requires of thee, and he is
sapiens nummularius, imo ipsa sapientia, cui necesse habemus reddere hunc
nummum obedientiae. He can easily discern, if thy payment be any thing faulty
or wanting: Learn then to obey in all things: thy masters will and command
must be thy rule and square of thy actions, and not thy own fancy, or pleasure:
Remember that of Paul: they must labor to please them in all things, Titus
2.9. Interest enim hoc, says Bernard, Inter conjugium and servitium, that
howsoever the wife is bound to obey the voice of her husband, yet he is
likewise to have regard of her pleasure; Genesis 3.17.
therefore is that, Genesis 21.12. And God said unto Abraham, let it not be
grievous in thy sight, because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman: In all
that Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy
seed be called; but in this service there is not this vicissitudo voluntatum
required, for that were to set master and man almost on equal terms; the
master is not bound to regard his servants mind, but he to observe his masters
pleasure, and therefore though the master may be somewhat cross and crooked in
his commandment, yet the servants obedience is not straight in Gods sight,
when it swarveth from that which he requires; he must then serve and obey in
all things. And as thus, so not with eye service, but as faithfully behind his
back, as if he were present: That which Aristotle said should not only be
true, Oculus Domini impinguat equum, vestigium domini impinguat agrum, the
masters eye makes a fat horse, and the masters footsteps a fertile field, as
contenting themselves with eye service, sight obedience; but Christians must
learn that of Chrysostom, God is (...), an overseer of their works, and a
rewarder of them, and so perform them as lawfully and exactly, when none is by
to take notice of it, as to do them in the sight and presence of others; they
that shall thus in conscience of Gods will serve them, as if they served them
in their persons, though their masters reward them not, yet will God, and if
they deal liberally with them, Gods reward shall be never the less; because
they serve the Lord Jesus, Ephe. 6.8. the servant shall have his reward as well
as any other in their place of obedience, Christ will make him his freeman, 1
Cor. 7.14. God shall bless him with good servants, and obedient here, and make
him partaker with the good servant hereafter, Math. 24.46, 47. that is,
partaker of his kingdom. But here may be moved the same doubts and questions,
which were in the obedience of Children. First, If God and my master command
diverse things, whom must I obey? God, for the reasons before, and that of
Christ, Math. 23.8. one is your master, that is Christ; that is chief and
principal, who must first and especially be served. But yet thou that are a
servant, take heed, thou make not an opposition, when there is none, yet at
least not in thy obedience, though there may be in his command, only to shift
off his service, and to ease thy self, or for other sinister respect; for this
know; that thou may do things at his command, which happily he commands not
lawfully, and which thou could not do lawfully without his command.
Instances will make the point more evident; for thee to withdraw thy self on
the Lords Sabbath, from public exercises is unlawful; But thy master
commands thee to stay at home, either whole or part of the day; I see not, but
thou may do it, and without sin: The master may command it without sin,
if he dwell far from neighbors, as in the Country, for the preservation of
the things God has given him; and if nigh unto neighbors, yet for his
children, who either must be troublesome to the congregation, as too many are,
and hinder many from hearing, or must be kept at home, which cannot be without
danger, if some one of discretion be not with them: here he may lawfully
command, and thou lawfully obey, which thou could not do without: But he
may do it unlawfully, when he has no such occasion, yet thou must do it and
may, so he employ thee not about servile works on that day, and in that time:
The reason is, because the Lords day may besanctified privately, and public
exercises are not of absolute necessity in the sanctifying of it; for then
prisoners and sick persons, and such as lie lame, should not be able to
sanctify it: They only are of necessity, when they can be had without
apparent breach of some other commandments; and yet may thou make this
unlawful to thee; when if thou be left at home, thy Master and Mistress are
gone to Church, but thou art with a child in thy arms, or without gazing at
the door, or gadding abroad, or having thy companions coming to thee, and
spendest thy time profanely, when thou ought, so much as may be, to spend
it in reading the word, meditating on that thou have heard in the forenoon or
former time, or such like. And in this thou must take heed how thou setst God,
and thy master, one against another: another instance, thy master commands,
that is unlawful for him to bid, not for the thing, but his affection; thou
must obey, having first wisely and humbly sought to turn thy master from such
a sin: As betwixt David and Joabs numbering of the people, 2 Samuel 24.2, 3. But
the thing he commands is unlawful, as well as his affection, I mean not
simply, but by circumstance or consequent, yet thou may obey, as being an
Officers Clerk to receive more fees then is due, being extortion; or a Noble
man's bailiffe his extreme rack rents; providing that in humility thou show
thy dislike of it, seek to reform it, or do it with sorrow and grief while
thou art bound to it, and get thy self rid of such a service so soon as thou
may. But if he command thee any thing simply that is sin, as to swear for
his gain, to lie for his commodity, to deceive, to steal, or any such things,
thou may not obey, and yet not rebel, but suffer.

If the Magistrate and my Master command diverse thing, whether must I obey?

The Magistrate, ut supra, and for the reasons there; besides, if it carry not
any excuse, neither is it any plea in law; my Master bids me do it; It must
needs follow that the Magistrate must be obeyed: It would not excuse Absolons
servants, their Master bade them kill Amnon, for which he was glad to flee; for
the power of the master is but subordinate to the Magistrate; thy obedience
then to thy Master has this restraint, because it cannot be lawful. But say
the Magistrate commands me that which does marvellously redound to the hurt of
my master, whose good I am bound to procure? If it be very profitable to the
Commonwealth, a public good must be preferred: if not prejudicial to it, so
there be no contempt of the Magistrate and his authority, he being content to
bear the penalty, if it be executed and exacted from him, I see not but he may
prefer his master before, as in the case of Children, and instance of Ester.

My Master and my Father are opposites, whether must I obey?

I answer as before in Children; there is somewhat besides in those who are
borne servants, Exodus 21.4.

My Master and my Husband,

I answer, his Master; the Master is to be obeyed, because he ought, Psalm.
15.4. not to change, though he swore to his hurt. Jacob, who would not labor
for his own family, but obey his Master, Genesis 30.30. For the woman, if she be
a servant borne, and given in marriage, as the manner was, still she was to
obey her Master. Exodus 21.4. If she be a servant by covenant, and consent of
her Husband, during the time of her covenant, she is to obey and keep the
conditions of the covenant; for he for the time has remitted his authority.

The third duty of servants is submission, that is, to their reproof and
corrections; for those men whom they fear, they will suffer both at their
hands.

Servants must submit themselves unto their Masters to be controuled and
corrected by them, for this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward
God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully, Tit. 2.9. not giving cross words one
for another. Hence is that, Genesis 16.9. And the Angel of the Lord said unto
her, Return to thy Mistress, and submit thy self under her hands. The example
of Abraham's servants is commendable, Genesis 17.23. his servants submitted to
Circumcision, and by proportion the example serves for this purpose.

Because if it be for well doing in conscience, it is thanke-worthy; and if it
be borne with meekness, the Lord shall give a man the more reward. 1 Pet.
2.19, 20.

Because they are called to this; Paul says, Coloss. 3.25. will right and
revenge them, etc.

To reprove many and most servants amongst us,

And be it, that some can thus subdue themselves, yet is it no more than the
Heathens and Publicanes will do: it is but Canina patientia, a dog-like
enduring, says Bernard, such as God will not accept, when either he dare not
whine, or has done some foul fact, and deserved it. But if they have not, or
think they have not deserved it, how ready are their answers? how soon will
they turn upon their Masters, and take the rod by the end? and if they be
rebuked, they murmr; if they be corrected, they either will resist, or
clamorously complain, or wickedly seek revenge. Let these know and see their
sin, and look for a recompense from the Lord; for, says St. Peter, they have
lost their thanks, it is not thanks worthy, if they had suffered for evil;
what when they will not? undoubtedly let them look from God, which rewards
every man, they shall have their recompense from him, if they repent not; it
may be in this life with the like, (if not in the life to come) with wicked and
lewd servants. But of this sin, if we may enquire the causes of it, we shall
find in many, to come from the Parents and friends, either in their education,
bringing them up cockeringly, never using them to reproves, to the rod, and to
the yoke; but as my young Masters, and such as never should come to serve; so
that when they must to it, by no means they can apply themselves unto it, but
in it endure and suffer nothing, not so much as sharp words, but no blows,
deserved, or not. But this is not all their fault, for it is seconded with as
bad when they are in service, and find some hardness, and as they only
think, sharpness; they remembering the fondness of their affection, complain
to them, who do not as they should, correct them soundly, and send them home
again; but go to their Masters, and expostulate the matter for them;
extenuate the fact, aggravate the Masters hard dealing, upbraid him with what
he gave him with his friend or child, and so animate them, that they will be in
nothing sufferers after, or never without grudging and repining. Another cause
is in the master, either because he was such, and is such because he has not
repented; and so it is Gods retribution, ut ante; or because he has been too
remiss to let faults, many and little, escape without reproof and correction,
that when he would for greater, he cannot subdue them; or passed by some
greater faults in some other of his servants for some sinister respect, as
because he would not be accounted cruel and severe, which in the justice of
God, and the cankred nature of another servant is paid him home, because he
never feared to be accounted cruel of God, and such an one as hates his
servant; for that will hold in servants, Prove. 13.24. He that spares his rod,
hates his son; but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes; and so being
ashamed in a licentious and corrupt age to be accounted hard and strait, he
has shame laid upon him by a rebellious servant, as we may apply, Prove. 29.15.
The rod and reproof gives wisdom, but a Child left to himself, brings
his mother to shame. A third cause is in the Magistrate, to whom the master
complains, as he may and must in a desperate cause, who by the servants friends
or means he makes to him, will either reprove and check the master, which he
ought not to do, though there be some small cause; nor, if great cause, yet
not before the friends or face of the servant, and little or not at all
reprove, or not severely correct that servant, by which not only he is made
more bold against his master, but even other servants are animated against
theirs, and the masters utterly discouraged to seek any help from them.

To admonish all servants to subject and submit themselves unto their masters,
to be reproved or corrected by them as well unjusty as justly, not answering
crosly, or rejecting their stripes. If they suffer justly, it is not
thank-worthy for a Christian, when a natural man will do the same; for nature
teaches that it is no hard dealing, when they suffer evil, that have done
evil before. Then, as Christ, except your righteousness exceed, etc. so
except your subjection exceed that which a natural man will perform, you
shall have no thank from God, no reward. How then must you exceed it? if not
only this, but even when you are wrongfully afflicted, reproved, and
chastised, in truth or in your apprehension of things, if for conscience sake
toward God you endure grief. 1 Pet. 2.19. Insipida and insulsa omnis tum
obedientia, tum patientia, nisi omnium quae agimus vel patimur ipse sit causa.
Bernard.
Obedience and patience are unsavory, unless God be the cause, and it be for
conscience.

But how far must we suffer? I answer, So long as he kills not, or dismembers
not; but if wrongfully he be corrected he may expostulate and defend himself,
in humility and meeknes; his master giving him leave, as Job. 31.13.

The fourth duty of servants is faithfulness, for those whom men fear, to
them are they faithful if they trust them with any thing.

Servants must perform all faithfulness to their masters; that is, not
purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things. Where, as faithfulness is expressly required, so
the contrary is forbidden, and manifested wherein that does consist, by the
contrary, in maintaining and not diminishing his masters state and condition:
This Christ teaches by the faithful and evil servant: Math. 24, 45.48, etc.
As also in the parable of the worldly wise, but wicked steward, Luke 16.2. Thus
Jacob played a good servant, Genesis 37, 38, 39. In this he was a good servant,
though faulty otherwise. 1 Samuel 25.14, 15, 17. Joab also, Chron. 21.3.

Because the commandment requires it of every man, one to another in common
justice.

Because the masters family is as a little common wealth as that is a great
family.

Because they are put in trust often with part or his whole state; where there
is trust,

Because by this means they shall adorn the doctrine of Christ which they
profess.

To let servants see their sins that they have not been faithful, shall
never be forgiven him, Many for the sickness times have in Gods Rols long
Records against them, yea great inditments they must plead guilty to, for which
some of their fellows have answered already.
for if he that deceives another, or defrauds and oppresses him, shall not
escape, he less that deals so with his master. But say he spends it not, but
convert it to his own use, and enrich himself by it? he is more bound to make
restitution, or let him suspect that of Augustine shall be true. Non remittitur
peccatu^ nisi restituitur ablatum. August.
The sin is not pardoned unless the theft be restored: and as long as he
keeps it, he keeps Gods curse with it, prosper he never so well for a while,
and if he leave it to his, that it will be a spark to burn up his house and
substance, in his sight; he shall leave the curse of God with it to his wife
and children, when he is burning in Hell for it and other sins; yet if many be
free from this kind of unfaithfulnes, yet how few can wash their hands from the
other, not upholding and increasing their masters state and condition; the
Apostle forbad not only stealing and pilfering, but commands all good
faithfulness, that they by all means possible should increase it, by all
their diligence, skill and speech; when as they have been sloathfull and
negligent, when they have by their carelessness lost their master somewhat,
which might honestly have been had, or not prevented some loss by their
wisdom and forecast, if they saw it coming; yea when they have murmured to
break their sleeps or mend their pace, to be are the heat in the day, and the
frost in the night, for their Masters special advantage and honest gain: they
have not performed this faithfulness in all these things: look upon your
reckonings, your guilty consciences; and know you that if God will recompense
your wrong to your master, Col. 3.25. he will much more recompense you for
them, if you repent not. Now the cause of this unfaithfulness (to say nothing
of Gods retribution and servants corrupt bearts) is to be found in some,
because they do not take strait accounts of their servants, but do it
negligently or seldom, by which he is imboldened to spend or enabled to shift
when his account is to be given.

Secondly in others, because they pass over apparent unfaithfulnes in some of
their servants, without due correction and punishment, and so other of their
fellows and themselves are heartned to the like, when they have no fear of
God, nor feel nothing from their Masters after their deserts.

Thirdly, from parents that allowed them to spend, and brought them up idly,
before ever they bound them, and from many a master who would be content his
eldest servant should keep good fellowship and company, and spend of his own,
to bring them customers, by which the rest have their teeth set on edge, in
their corruptions, and Gods hand is against them to punish them by others, when
they had no care of the former.

Fourthly, because they had no care to take such servants as are religious and
towardly, and such as know how to be faithful; nor yet to teach them any
religion, when they have them, that they might learn to be faithful of
conscience, and not for other sinister respect: and so when they have no care,
with Abraham, to teach their servants to be faithful with God, no marvel
though they be unfaithful to them, in their states, bodies, children, and in
all things.

This may instruct, Chrysostom. Hom. 16. in Tim. has these words; If not
otherwise, yet as servants obey and respect their masters, so let us the Lord.
They expose their lives for their ease, it is their work and study to care for
their masters, the things of their masters they care for all the day, but a
little part for their own; would God we could this exhort upon as good ground
and true, sure it is, so it should be; and thus faithful should every one be,
and if you be, look for Gods blessing by like servants, and a reward hereafter
with the good servants, if you be such of conscience, and for the Lord.

His Master.] As we have seen the duty and fear, so we must see the parties to
whom it is due to be performed: To their Master whatsoever he may be, so he be
their Master, it skils not, to him must they perform it.

Servants, must give this fear, Nabal, say he be profane and irreligious, an
Atheist or Heretic, yet they must fear, and in fear perform these duties
to them: this is that the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 2.18. and 1 Timothy 6.1. To
what servants speaks the Apostle, to such as did believe, and were come to
the knowledge of the truth; of what masters, such as yet were enemies to God
and his truth, loved not, knew not, had not tasted of the truth: Laban was an
Idolater, yet did Jacob give him faithful service, and all duty, yea a
churlish and deceitful unconscionable Master: Potiphar was an heathen, yet
Joseph feared him, and served him faithfully. The Prophet never forbade Naaman
his service to his Master, after he was become a Jew, that is, a servant of
God. 2 King. 5.23. He speaks to those who are free, not to bind themselves to
such.
hereto may we apply that, 1 Cor. 7.20, 21, 22. not to deny service, but to
alter the manner of service, before for fear of Masters displeasure, now for
conscience of Gods command, before their Masters only, now Christ in their
Master.

Because (as was noted in Children out of Chrysostom.) Non principi, sed
principatui; so Non magistro, sed magisterio. The fear is due, not to his
person, and so good or bad, high or low, gentle or churlish; but to his place
and authority, as a master, which he may be, of what quality or condition
soever he be, and from them as servants, whatsoever their persons, and quality,
and gifts may be.

Particularly for such as are religious, that they bring not dishonor upon
Gods Name and Doctrine,

For both, because it shall be more respected of God,

This will condemn the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, Peter and Paul,
forbidding fear and faithfulness to be performed of servants to their
masters, and them who put them in trust. Symacha says Instit. Cathol. Tit. 46.
sect. 74. that all keepers of forts, and all other vassals and slaves are freed
from the oath of subjection to their Lord and Master, he being an Heretic;
affirming that by it, he is deprived of his civil power he has over his
servants; the ground of the unfaithfulness of Sr. William Stanly in yielding
up Daventer, an act approved and commended by Cardinal Allen; how unlike are
these spirits to the spirit of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, who will have
faithfulness to the good and bad, to the Insidell as well as the believer;
shall not that be verified of them, Math. 5.19? But they will say, Heresy is a
greater sin then insidelity; first, I answer, not as they make Heresy, ut
ante; secondly, be that true of August. Sanata vulnere infldelitatis, sed
gravius percussa vulnere Idololatriae, yet all Heresy is not Idolatry,
neither can this, if it be, destroy the knot and bond of this duty, which is
not faith, nor the foundation of divine religion; but apolitique title, having
force and strength from the law of nature; which is not to be dissolved by
Heresy not contrary to it: And the Apostle; reason will be here, as well as in
Infidelity, it will make the name of God, and his doctrine ill spoken of. But
the truth is, this is but a shift of theirs, for they teach no faith to be kept
with such, and so no faithfulness with such as are heathen or Infidels: If we
may gather the less from the greater, Vladislaus (he was I take it the King of
Hungary and Poland) in abattaile against the Turks, Amurath the second of that
name.
had the better hand, so that the Turk offered to yield to any conditions;
whereupon, Vladislaus and the Turk swore to Articles of Agreement; but
presently a Legate came from the Pope, and urged Vladislaus to set upon the
Turk again, Eugenius. 4.
near vanquished already, telling him that the Pope had power to dispense with
his Oath; which he attempted, though sore against his will: Then the Turk
cried out, O Crucifixe, crucifixe, vide gentem tuam perfidam.
Oh thou crucified, thou crucified, take notice of thy treacherous people: And
so bestirred himself, that he overthrew Vladislaus, which has ever since
turned to the greatest detriment of all Christendom: out of this by proportion
we may see it is but a color of their distinction of Heresy and Infidelity.

To reprove all such servants as think they owe no fear nor duty, as other,
are guilty of sin before God, and shall have no reward from God, because he
does it not in conscience to Gods Commandment, but for sinister respect, for
which they may receive their reward from men, but a heavy one from God.

To persuade servants to fear,

If I be a father, where is my honor?] Here is the application of the former
ground and rule, to himself and them, not speaking in general, but applying
it particularly, teaching in his example what is the best and most profitable
kind of preaching, when application is joined with doctrine. Vide Heb. 12.1.

If I be a father.] Here is first the father-hood of God to be considered, and
so he is in two respects, of his Creation and Election; out of both we have
somewhat to learn.

Men in regard of their Creation being so the sons of God, Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father that has
bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee? Thus much David
prayed, Psalm. 119.73. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me, give me
understanding that I may learn thy Commandments; this shows he ought to pay
so much to God.

Because by all Laws humane and divine, of God, nature, upon him; for he has
received from him his being, that is, his body, with all his senses, and his
soul, with all the powers of it: then is he debtor to pay all these.

Because as nothing else,

This will serve to confute the dream of Libertines and Valentinians,

To teach men, are his, he their father that made them. For if a man build the
house, whose turn must it serve but the Lords that built it? if he plant a
Vineyard, who shall gather the Grapes but he that planted it? If a father beget
a son, whom shall he rather serve and honor than his father, which begat
him? And if this, then how much more to him that is the Father of Fathers, and
of all things in earth and Heaven? It is heard from many men, when they reprove
others for some dishonouring of God, and often, but as they think; It is not
for your profession; does it become a man of that zeal you make show of,
professing so greatly as you do. If they speak it that they are more bound,
it is true; but if that they themselves are not bound, and more than they can
perform, it is false; for wherein have they dishonored God by the profession,
that thy Creation binds not thee to do, or from doing? Set faith and
repentance aside, things invisible not commanded in the Law, what is it thou
art not bound to, either for piety or honesty, and that by the Creation? for
the Law holds fast there, and Creation only binds to all such duties. For even
as the Heathen man says, Aristotle.
A man can never return so much to his father as he ought, how can he to God,
who has given us more than all the fathers in the world? And if to dishonor a
father, be a vile crime in a son, what is it to sin and rebel against God,
who is father so many ways? Let every man then bethink himself of this, and
see in himself how many things he has to move him to honor God, though he
never look without himself; body, soul, all the faculties and powers and
parts of both, because his hands made them: And if the Axe may not boast it
self against him that heweth with it, Isa. 10.15. how may it against him that
made it? How may man dishonor his Creator? if not the Axe against the hewer,
how the heart against the master? Shall those hands made by him, those eyes
enlightened by him, that tongue made, and made speaking by him, dishonor,
provoke, and revile with oaths and blasphemies? if they do, know, that as all
things are possible with him, and like easy to him, he can destroy them as
easily as he made them, in a word, both. Oh then let those hands work the
works of God, let those feet walk the paths of God, those eyes delight in the
ways of God, and that tongue speak the praises of God, and that whose man
honor him that has made it; for thus he calls, If I be a Father, where is my
honor? if I have made you, where is the service you do me? Amongst men a
Chapman of credit pays as much as he received, and he would scorn not to be
accounted a good pay master, and yet such deal nothing so currantly with God,
neither when we look for so much from God. Man will not give God so much, give
him our selves, and that we have received, one will give him his heart, another
his body, not his heart; another will part both with him, as if he created not
both as one, as if his title be not as great to one as to another, or to the
whole, as to part: He is the Father of our spirits, and the Father of our
bodies; or if thou will give one, and not the other, thou condemnest thy self
by the one, for withholding the other; for his right is in this respect to
both, and must have both, and be honored in the whole. But why pay they as
much, because they would receive more, and have not yet enough? So in this no
man is perfect, though he have received much. And why has not God made him
perfect? Verily it was, as one said, not because he was covetous and niggard,
but because he was loving and bountiful, knowing that it was good for him to
be such an one; not that he should be poor, but humble; not as always needy,
but as always looking up to him, and remembering to honor him with that he
has given him, that he may receive that he wants, and further perfection: pay
then thy debt, and pay it to receive more, that thou may be perfect, and
think he speaks to every one; If I be thy Father, honor me; remember me thy
Creator in the days of thy youth and thy age, even as one says, so often as
thou breathest, so often thou ought to remember God. And seeing thy being is
ever in one, so thy thankfulness should be ever both for thy ever being. And
as Chrysostom, thou will say, Lord keep me as the Apple of thine Eye, he will
answer thee again, Keep my Commandments as the Apple of thine eye; so thou will come to God, and say, Lord keep me, for thou have made me; I am thine,
and the works of thy hands. God will answer thee then, Keep the words of my
mouth, and so honor me, for thou art the works of my hands.

The election of God,

Because his choice and adoption is so free,

Because it is so rare a benefit, not all, not many, few chosen. Benefits that
are rare, are precious, rara, chara, and so deserve and exact more: when as
then God amongst so many Nations of barbarous men, and in such a multitude of
condemned men, has called a man to so happy a condition, that he should be in
the number of those who are chosen, his sons, and to inherit eternal life; the
benefit being so much the greater, as the number is smaller, must needs bind
to this duty.

This may serve to stop the mouth of desperate wretches, e contra, whence they
give all liberty to themselves, and live licentiously, and dishonor God; of
these I would demand, whether they think the former testimonies, and this
particular preface was written by the spirit of Christ? If they say no, they
show themselves in the state of reprobation, what soever God has decreed of
them: If they say it is, then let them compare the spirit they speak with, and
this spirit by which these are written, and see themselves not to be led with
the spirit of Christ, which can not so contradict it self: It requires duty
and reverence, service and honor, because thou art his, thou will give none;
because, if perhaps thou be, thou need not, if not, it is bootlesse and
doubtful; in this thou determinest not to honor God, but to dishonor him.
Tell me this, thou thou art a father and disposest of all thy goods in secret
before ever thy son knows how, or has enquired, and used means to know how;
if he should set light by thee, and carry himself undutifully toward thee, as
if he would give thee an occasion to give all away from him, if thou have not
done it already; would thou not think it a mavelous preposterous and
impious course? and yet this is that which thou will do with God, like a
desperate miscreant, not knowing whether God has purposed thee salvation and
heaven, which he had disposed and made his will of in secret; yea, not taking
so much pains to search and enquire by the book of God, and the notes in it,
whether thou be in the number, but yer ever thou seek after it, to know
whether thou be in his book, so wilfully behavest thy self, as if thou
meantst to make him alter his will (if it were possible) if he were purposed to
deal well with thee before. But know thou, if he were purposed to disinherit
thee, yet thou ought to honor him because he is the father. And this without
all consideration of Heaven and Hell, much more if he have elected thee, and
thou be his son this way too, oughtst thou to honor him, And know, that if
thou be his, no such thought can possess thy heart long, less allow thy
mouth to speak it boastingly in a secure and careless course of life; what
may come from a man of a troubled mind and in a temptation, that is not to
this purpose, but the other can never be: Nay know, that God disposes all
things sweetly and orderly to bring a man to this end if he have once chosen
him; As a father that aims at some state of life for his son, as to make him
a Lawyer, or a Divine, he trains him up so, and brings him up in learning and
studies and directions.

This should admonish every one who by a divine search finds himself the son
of God by adoption or election, we are no more servants, but sons. Galat.
4.5, 6. But must we the less serve him, or not? this were a gallant Gospel
indeed. Nay we must the rather, because sons, Mala. 3.16. we must not change
our service, but the manner of our service; for he has made us to serve him,
Luke 1.74, 75. that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life; Not as servants for wages,
but as sons in a more honorable kind of service, with a free affection, in
no mercenarie manner, In primo dedit me mihi, in secundo dedit and se mihi, cui
debeo me, propter me debeo plusquam me propter se. Ber.
otherwise this binds us more then before, and to do more if it were possible
then the law requires. If the other, though free, yet not so rare, do bind,
how much more this so rare a benefit should bind us? In the first, he gave me
to my self; In the other he gave himself to me: To whom I owe my self for my
being, to him I am more indebted for giving himself to me; more is then due
unto him, and more must we endeavor; if our being, and being men require it of
us, what this being sons, without which it had been better we had never
been; yea, a thousand times? If his bounty in creating us, what his mercy and
love in electing us? The world, though peevishly and corruptly it upbraids
those that are Gods, and in some sinister and corrupt affection, challenges
more of them, then of others toward themselves, then toward God; yet those
who are indeed Gods, must think such speeches are goades to prick them
forwards to more: For God has done more for them, therefore more is required
of them; yea, more then they think they ought to perform: Every one must
argue as David, see 2 Samuel 6.21. And David said unto Michal, it was before the
Lord, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house, to appoint me
ruler over the people of the Lord, over Israel, therefore will I play before
the Lord: It will not serve and go for current if Gods children elected be not
more diligent to honor him, then others.

Where is my honor?] we have seen by what right God requires this; we must
see, now, the thing, it is honor, which is indeed childelike and filial
fear, to obey and serve him for love, rather then fear, as sons do their
father; and of this I will thus speak, first that men must give it to God, the
sons to the father. Secondly, how it differs from the servile fear. Thirdly,
the effects of it, that it may be known, whether had or no, and if not, it may
be sought, if had, it may be joyed in.

First that Men must give it unto God.

The Children of God, that is, his sons and daughters ought to honor him,
that is, to serve and obey him, to do the good he commands, not for fear of
punishment, or hope of reward, but for the love of good, and righteousness,
and his goodness and mercy, willingly and of conscience: hereto may we apply
that Psalm. 130.4. and Romans 12.1. and 1 John 2.1. inferred upon the second.

Because else they can not be sons and daughters, Servilis est timor quamdiu
ab amore non manat, qui de amore non venit honor, non honor sed adulatio. Bern.
Cant. 83.
whose nature is to obey their parents, and do them all service of love, fear
is servile, if it flow not from love: and the honor which comes not from love
is not honor, but flattery, a formal fawning.

Because if they obey him and honor him for hope of good, Est qui confitetur
Deo, quia potms est, est quoniam sibi bonus est, est quia simpliciter bonus
est, Psalm. 118.1.19. primus servus est and timet, secundus mercenarius and
cupit sibi, tertius filius est and diligit patrem.
another because he is good to him, another because he is simple good in
himself, Psalm. 118.1. The first is a servant and fears. The second is an
hireling and looks for gain. The third is a son and loves his father.

There are many promises of good things for obedience,

Without question whatsoever is written is for sons not servants, vide James
2.8.

This proves that many men's works and obedience are not the honor of God,

The second thing to be observed, is how this child-like and filial fear
differs from the other servile fear; and that it does in diverse things.

The first difference is in respect of the object, that is, of that which is
feared, that is sin; the one fears sin as it is sin, and because it is
sin: the other only the punishment of sin, and not sin at all but in
regard of the punishment; the former curbs the action only, Hosea 3.5.
the other the affection; the one likes and loves sin, but he dare not
commit it in regard of the danger that may ensue of it; the other hates and
abhors sin, and would not commit it though he might do it without danger
at all, as Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. And
because it deals with the affection, it is called a pure fear; Psalm. 19.9.
The fear of the Lord is clean or pure, for it purges the heart, as faith is
said to do, Acts 15.9. The other is a melting fear, but this is a purging and
refining fear.

The second difference is in their grounds, the one is grounded only uon the
wrath of God, and for his justice; the other regards them, but specially his
mercy and goodness, Psalm. 130.4. Hosea 3.5. The filial fear, to offend God
in regard of benefits past; the servile, for evil to come: Se ethe difference
plainly, Jer. 5.22, 23, 24. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? or will ye not be
afraid at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bounds of the Sea by
the perpetual decree that it cannot pass it, and though the waves thereof
rage, yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not pass over
it? But this people has an unfaithful and rebellious heart: they are departed
and gone. For they say not in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God,
that gives rain both early and late in due season: he reserveth unto us the
appointed weeks of the harvest. If you will nor have this filial fear, yet
at least shake not off this servile dread, if not fear in regard of good I
have, yet of evil I may do them.

By these two (for the present) may every one examine himself, whether he has
a servile or a filial fear. If thou fear as a Child, thou hate sin as
sin, because it is sin, thou art like a man that loathes a meat, and
therefore would not eat of it. If only a servile fear, thou loathest sin
for the punishment, not for it self indeed, but the sequel; like a man that
has a mind to eat of something that the Physician has forbidden him, and is
hurtful, and abstaines only because he dares not touch it for fear of further
inconvenience. If thou have the child-like fear* It is not the outward work
that dislikes thee, and external act of sin only, but even the desires, Ista
sagitta timor, qui configit and interficit carnis desideria. Ber.
motions and affections; for it is pure. That dart is fear which pierces and
kills the very desires of the flesh. If the servile only, then the outward
work only and practice of sin is feared; if a filial fear, then it will
grieve thee to offend, nay, to be provoked to offend so good and gracious, so
merciful and loving a father, who has been ever so gracious and good unto
thee. But if but the servile fear, then only when thou feel his hand, or
fear an imminent danger, or have the fresh remembrance of a judgment which
is but new taken from him, for which a Child of God must and ought to fear:
but then are not these the principal causes of fear in him, for these he
fears, and flies sin, but principally for the other. If a filial fear, thou
art afraid to offend in lieu of thankfulness, for thy being and preservation,
and all thy manifold blessings received already: If a servile, only for fear
of evils, or hope of that which is to come. It is the whip, the scourge, and
the rod that causes the hypocrite as an Ass, a fool, and a stave to forbear
and leave sin; but it is love, conscience, and obedience that makes Gods
Children willingly to abhor it. Nazianz. if thou be a slave and a
servant, stand in fear of the whip or the scourge; if an hireling, work for
thy wages, expect thy reward: but if over and above all these, thou be a
son, do good, because it is thy duty to please and observe thy father, from
whom thou have received so much good before.

The third difference of these two fears is this; the one is a loving fear,
and the other is a hateful fear; the first is joined with love, such as good
subjects bear to good Princes, and ordinarily children bear to their fathers.
The second is joined with hatred, such as servants bear to their hard and
cruel Masters; the one would, if they could, withdraw themselves out of Gods
government, and get out of his sight, as Adam, Genesis 3. as a fugitive servant,
as Hagar, Genesis 16. the other would not willingly away from God, but submits
himself unto him, and seeks as he can, to press nearer and nearer, as far
as he dare with due reverence of his Majesty, like the Prodigal son, who
came home to his father, and yielded himself willingly into his hands. And
therefore it is a true saying, that after sin the wicked are troubled, they
cannot get themselves far enough from God; and the godly are troubled, they
can not come near enough home to him: the one is afraid of the losing of God,
the other is afraid of Gods finding of him: of that, says Augustine, in 1 John
4. it is called castus timer, a chaste fear. It Is one thing to fear God, lest
he send thee to Hell, Aliud est timere Deum ne te mittat in Gehennam, aliud ne
ipse a te recedat ille non est castus qui non venit ab amore Dei, sedex timore
poenae, iste castus est quia venit ex amore Dei quem amlecteris. August. in 1 John 4
another lest himself depart from thee: that fear is not chaste, because it
comes not from the love of God, but from the fear of punishment; but this is
chaste, because it comes from the love of God, whom thou delightest in. So that
this filial fear agrees with the love of Gods Majesty, yea it rises out of
love, a man is afraid to offend one that he loves, but the servile fear is
joined with the deadly hatred of God. And so as it is said, whom they fear
they hate, Quem metuunt oderunt, and quem oderunt periisse cupiunt.
and they desire he may perish whom they hate. So it may be said of this, that
by it he is not homicida, a manslayer, but Deicida, a Godslayer, wishing there
were never a God to punish him.

The fourth difference of these two fears, is in their continuance, which is
manifest.

First, If we consider them in diverse subjects, for the one is but for a bront,
like lightning that gives a flash and is gone, and comes in an instant; never
ceizeth upon the soul, nor dwells in the heart. For instance we may take
Pharaoh, Exodus Chap. 27, 28, 29, 30. so Ahab, when Eliah had summoned him, he
fears, 1 King. 21.27. but soon after he goes fearelesse to Ramoth Gilead, 1
King. 22.26, 27. The filial fear is permanent, and constant, as the causes of
it are, Isa. 11.2. Prove. 28.14. For it is no natural work, but a
supernatural habit.

Secndly if we consider them in one subject, the one outlasteth and overlives
the other. 1 John 4.18. perfect love casts out fear; that is, servile fear,
but Psalm. 19.9. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever, that is,
filial fear, when it comes, it casts out that, because it brings with it
assurance of God favor. It remains still, having the less pain and trouble
with it the longer it lasts, and the more forward it comes to perfection:
And this fear is so lasting that it remains after this life; not that the
blessed shall fear either lest they should offend, for they are then without
danger of falling; but in regard of Gods power, and his incomparable, and his
incomprehensible graces, there shall be a reverent dread, and yet delightful,
such as the Angels have now in Heaven: As Angels fear, Isaiah 6.2, 3, 4. when
they are in the presence of God; for as we reverence a great man in regard of
his place, though he bear us no evil will, nor we expect any evil from him;
So no doubt, the holy Saints and Angels in Heaven in regard of God, though they
neither fear to lose him, because they can not fall from him, nor to offend
him, because there is no danger to displease him, yet they reverence him still
in regard of his Majesty, which they can neither sufficiently admire nor adore.

Now further by these two differences, as by the former, may every man examine
himself, whether he has a childelike or servile fear.

As by the first, whether thou love or hate God for fear: Deum tua peccata
vindicare aut non posse, aut nolle, aut ea nescire, vis ergo Deum non esse
Deum, qui vis eum aut injustum esse, aut impotentem aut in sipientem. Bern. de
Temp. 58.
would thou flee from God, when thou have offended, could thou wish he
were not? If thou desire that either he knew not thy sins, or could not or
would not punish them; then thou would that God were not, when thou desire
he were ignorant, or impotent, or unjust: And hence thy wretched heart under
this fear even hates God, thou have but a servile fear; but can thou yield
thy self to God, and draw near to him, fearing to be forsaken of God, being
willing to yield thy self into his hands? this is filial fear. There is says
Augustine an unchaste adulterous woman, who fears her husband, but she
fears him, because she loves her naughtiness, and therefore his company is
not delighfull, but burden some unto her, and loving evil she is afraid of
his coming, lest he find her so. There is a chaste woman, she loves and
affects her husband, and lives with him in good sort, and would never have
him out of sight; now ask them both whether they fear their husbands? they will
say they do; there is the same answer, but not the same mind. Ask them why?
and that will put the difference, Vna vox, non eadem men's.
the one answers lest he should come home and find her, and find out her
lewdness and lightness; the other, lest being present he should depart, and
lest he should love her less, and by any offense of hers be estranged. As he
much misliketh the former woman, so mislike thy self if thou fear God in that
sort, and carry thy self so to God in this sort, as thou would thy wife
should be affected unto thee.

By the second, is thy fear momentany, soon come, soon gone, do thou not
fear awayes? then fear thy fear it is not true. If thou have overcome thy
servile fear, and do not fear still, thou can not have true fear; for as
love expels one fear and casts it out, so it causes another, and that such a
fear as is never afterward extinguished, though the act and working of it be
sometime more fresh then others, yet the habit is never lost.

The third thing touching this filial fear is the effects of it. And these I
reduce to these heads, such as awful and dutiful children have, and so may
well be so resembled.

The first is a desire to know his will and pleasure, to find it out, and a
delight in doing of it: As a child will be desirous to know his fathers mind,
that he may not offend him, and be ready to do it of himself when he has
found it; hence that Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord,
that delights greatly in his commandments. See it by the contrary, Job.
21.9, 14 Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them;
Therefore they say unto God, depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. Psalm. 25.12, 13. What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he
teach in the way that he shall choose; his soul shall dwell at ease, and his
seed shall inherit the Earth.

The second is, a suspicion and jelousy of particular actions, lest they should
do that unawares, which might be offensive to God. A good child, if he doubt
to do ought that he thinks his father will not like of, he will first ask
the question, whether he will have him do it or no, and let it alone till he
know his mind in the matter: so a child of God, he will be careful to try
all his works by his will and his word, and to abstain till he know what his
good will, and his pleasure is. Thus was Job zealous of his children, Job. 1.5.
so of his own wife, Job. 9.28. Therefore the spirit commends him for a man
fearing God, and such as none was like, yea as the devil could find no fault
with him, Romans 14.5. he will be fully persuaded it is Gods will, before he do
it. 1 Thessal. 5.21. not enough to say, I do not know it unlawful; better
debarrre our selves of some lawful things, then do one unlawful. Eccles.
5.5, 6.

The third is, a wary shunning and avoiding of things he knows will offend, as
an awful child will hardly be drawn, or woed to do ought that his father has
expressly forbidden him, or that will displease him; as Jacob to lie and
deceive his father, Genesis 27. or if he be drawn, yet if his father come suddenly
upon him, and find him about it or beginning it, he will stay his hand soon
and be ashamed of himself: so the man that fears God, will not be woed and
urged to those things that he knows cannot but offend God. So Joseph, Genesis
39.9. There is none greater in his house then I: neither has he kept back any
thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife; how then can I do this
great wickedness and sin against God? Nehemiah 5.15. The former governors
that had been before me, were chargeable unto the people, and had taken of
them bread and wine, besides forty shekels of silver, yea even their servants
bare rule over the people, but so did not I, because of the fear of God. Or if
by case of infirmity or strength of temptation he be violently carried away,
yet if he shall but once seriously think of the presence of God about him, it
will make him for shame to stay, or break off the practice of sin, as in
David, 2 Samuel 24.10. David's heart smote him, and he said, I have done very
foolishly.

The fourth is, a grief and a fear to see ought done by others that may
provoke God to wrath, as a good child will be loath any of his brethren or any
of the servants should do ought that may anger his father, if it be but the
disquieting of him: so a true child of God will be vexed to see others take
such courses as may be offensive to his heavenly father. So that 2 Pet. 2.7.
and David, Psalm. 119.53.136.139.158. such are commended and marked, Ezechiel 9.
as they are condemned, 1 Cor. 5.1. who do contrary.

The fifth, a trembling at the wrath and anger of God declared for sin either
in word or deed.

First, in word at Gods threatenings either against him self or others, as a
child quaketh and trembles at his fathers chyding, though it be with some
others; so do the children of God commonly when they hear the wrath of God,
denounced against others, so is it, Isa. 66.2. Psalm. 119.161. 2 Chro. 34.27.
Jer. 26 18. Habacuk. 3.16.

Now secondly, if at his word, how much more at his rod; if when he speaks,
more when he beats themselves, or others: as a child if he see his father to
take the rod in hand to correct any of the family, he stands trembling, and
quaking, he fears lest he should have a wipe by the way; so the child of God
fears as before Gods face, when he sees the hand of God upon others, as when
he feels it upon himself, David, 2 Samuel 6.7.9. the Church, Acts. 5.11. Psalm.
119.119, 120. Habacuk. 3.16.

Now these being the effects, and as it were the fruits of this filial fear,
it shall be good for a man to examine himself by them, whether he have it, or
no; for by the fruits you shall know it: It is to be feared that if men will
do this seriously, but a few of those who call God father every day, will be
found to have this filial fear, and so his sons indeed. The first fruit, is
a desire to know, and find out Gods will, and then to do it; but alas how
many have we that refuse to seek after the knowledge of his ways; like those,
Job. 21.14. but say some will search the word, yet it is only to furnish
themselves with matter of discourse; and not to find out that which may serve,
to order and direct their lives; they are a curious kind of Men, and as Seneca
says, scholae non vitae discitur; they study school quirks, and not points of
practice, others are sorry many times, that they lighted on more then they
looked after: As the young man not answered to his mind, was sorry he had asked;
Luke 15.25. Bernard has observed of his expereince, Cant. ser. 74. many (says
he) have I known, made sad upon the knowledge of the truth, because they could
not so pretend ignorance as before. Ber. in Cant. sermon. 74.
Or if not this, but with the son in the Gospel stay, and do not, or
defer as Jonah, or do as Balaam, bless, when he would have cursed; so they,
their hands go against their hearts; these, and such like, must needs be void
of this fear.

The second is a jealousy over his particular actions; but how many run
headlong into all actions, never regarding what warrant they have for them;
that though never so many make doubt of them, and the lawfulness of them, yet
all is one to them, as they know nothing for them, so they know nothing against
them: and they either do as Peter, Luke 22.49.50. who cut off Malchus ear
before he could hear his answer; or as Prove. 20.25. do things first, and
examine them after. These are far from this fear; for where it is, there if
any doubt arise about an action that seemed indifferent before, he will be
jealous of himself, and walk the surest way, when he knows he may do or
abstain without offense, but he is in some suspicion of the other, he will
rather be sure to go on a good ground, than hazard the incurring of Gods
displeasure, though he lose somewhat, yea much, both of his profit and
pleasure, knowing the fear of God is opposite to this manner of walking, and
so it is made. Eccles. 5.1, 5, 6.

The third is a careful avoiding of known sins, and things that will
offend; but how many give liberty to their flesh, run with a full swinge into
the practice of sin, and never care to return out of it again; who vaunt of
this fear, and yet often vaunt of their sins, and never shame at them. Nay,
sooner shame and blush to be a man noted, to have a care to avoid the common
sins of the age; how have these men any child-like fear? will they account
that their children do lovingly fear them, when they run into all or many
things they know will displease them, and are ashamed to be accounted more than
ordinarily dutiful? Questionless no; then let them be their own Judges, and
shall; for they tell us, they have no fear, if that be their fear. Prove. 8.13.

The fourth is a grief to see others offend, but many boast of the fear of
God, and yet they delight and take pleasure in the sight and hearing of other
men's sins, never caring nor regarding what others do, so they be not like
them. They can daily see many Laodiceans neither hot, nor cold, amongst us;
many Ephesians, that have lost their first love; many Jebusites, Idolaters
amongst us, and swarming amongst us; these they see, and yet they sigh not at
it; nay, either take pleasure or make profit by it: it is but a boast, they are
void of the filial fear of God, because they have no care whether he be
honored or dishonored; pleased, or displeased; as if a Child could endure his
fathers dishonor, if not be revenged of them, for want of power and such like,
yet will he mourn and sorrow. How should I bear my fathers dishonor? and if
these, much more those who seek to draw others to sin, swearing, whoring,
drunkenness, and such like; they can have no true fear of God as Children.

The fifth, trembling at his judgments threatened or executed upon others. Many
say they fear God, and yet they can hear the wrath and judgments of God
denounced against sin, and it may be the sins they practice, yet are never
a whit moved at all, but go as they came, as if the Word were but wind: As
jer. 5.13. Their hearts melt not, nor they mourn not; nay, when they see Gods
judgments upon others, they censure and condemn them, but fear nothing
themselves; nay, often when they are in the same condemnation, if they be not
in the same punishment. Sure it is, they have no child-like fear at all, they
are worse than the beasts, yea, senseless things, who tremble at his voice;
and they show themselves Children of wrath: Only the children of wrath are
fearelesse of wrath, Soli filii irae iram non sentiunt. Bern.
as S. Bernard speaks.

If I be a Master, where is my fear.] The application of the second rule of
nature; we must speak of Gods Lordship, then of the fear he requires for it:
He is a Lord in respect of his creatures, either generally or specially: First,
generally, jure Creationis and gubernationis, by right of Creation and
government. Secondly, particularly, jure pacti and redemptionis, by right of
Covenant and Redemption. First, jure redemptionis, Exodus 20.2. 1 Cor. 6.20.
Secondly, jure pacti and conventionis, by right of Covenant and agreement.
Those who live in his Church, have made a Covenant with him by sacrifice, Psalm.
50. and have bound themselves by Oath to serve him, and have covenanted to be
his people, Jer. 40. Here he means both, but not of the whole in both, but
only of government and covenant: for the other in the former, and by these he
challenges obedience and service, as by the former; for that which is required
under honor, is here under fear; the same thing, but differing in affection
and some circumstances, as before. But first of his government and
jurisdiction, in respect of his blessings and preservation.

Men, in respect of Gods government over them, Job, Chap. 1.9, 10. shows that
Gods government requires this; and his answer to his wife, Chap. 2.10. also
shows it. That of David, Psalm. 71.6. is pertinent, and that of Jer. 5.24.

Because this is not less benefit than the former of Creation; once created,
showing in this no less power nor love than in the other; and if for that
obedience is debt, for creating in a moment; how much more for a continual
preservation?

This may admonish all men, Paul has taught it, Acts 17.28. But if thou do
believe it, that thou receivest such from him, and yet dare provoke and
offend him, I know not what name is evil enough for thee: so for this, if thou
acknowledge not all is from God, through his providence, and from his care,
that thou art as thou art, thou art not worthy the name of a son or servant:
but if thou acknowledge it, and yet shakest off his fear, and performest not
obedience to him, what name is bad enough for thee? nay, what punishment is
sufficient for such an offense? what then, if for life and continuance, how
much more for a well and wealthy being? when men's portions are made fatter, and
their state better, both than in former times, and also than thousand others;
Gods providence and care more to them, their obedience and service should be
more to him. And yet it is a lamentable thing, my eyes could cast out tears
for it in secret, (as the Prophet) to see many men risen of nothing, when they
had little, were diligent and careful to serve and obey God in themselves, and
in their families, and those who belong to them; but after that Gods government
was more good to them, and they prospering better by it, I know not how, such
is the corruption of our nature, they serve him now far less in them and
theirs; and yet it is thought excusable, as if a Subject, who lived under his
King, and that only lived without wealth, or honor, or advancement, or but
with a small pittance of these, and then gave him service and all loyal duty,
should after, when he had received these in bountiful measure, by his gracious
bounty and government, either less respect him, or be less loyal, or more
rebellious, and think it were tolerable enough, because he is now more
wealthy, worshipful, and honorable. But whatsoever he thinks, others would
condemn him, and every of these who deal thus with God; then shall they be
judged by their own mouth. Oh that they wuld indeed judge themselves, that
they be not judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.31. else undoubtedly he will judge
them, if his; in this life punishing them in those things which have made them
by their corruption less loyal unto him, as wealth, riches, honor, friends,
and such like; that he may so bring them home again, and let them see how they
have wronged him, for great things giving him less. If he done not, the case
is more fearful, he means to condemn them with the world. And though they
will not now acknowledge they injure God any wise in thus dealing outwardly
with him, yet the day shall come, and it is now at hand, when this injury shall
be made manifest, and when as these complaints, which are now made by us, shall
be heard, though men have now their ears so heavy, and their eyes so shut up,
and their hearts so fat, that they cannot see, or hear, or understand to be
converted and healed: It shall (says one) be equal and right with God, that
those who will not now open their eyes when there is time, and while the
multitude of blessings they enjoy by Gods gracious government, does invite them
to serve and fear him; yea, I say it shall be just and right that their eyes
shall be opened by the multitude of torments, which must continue for ever. But
of you who hear me this day, let me hope better things; nay, let me see them.

If I be a Master,] God is a Master secondly, by covenant, specially in this
place, for he speaks to such as profess him and his worship, and such as were
in his Church, and had made a covenant with him; as his subjects, he their God
and Lord. Psalm. 50.5. Jer. 50.5.

In the Church all ought to obey God,

Because if the former,

Because,

Because God took them into covenant, Chrysostom) far otherwise, he
receives them into covenant when they are able to do nothing, and maintains
them long before they can do any thing; therefore reason they should do him
service when they are able.

A reproof of many men, a tanto, though not a toto; so the same and greater
shall have greater punishment, howsoever they may carry it out for a time: Yea,
and howsoever some dream, all in the Church must needs be saved, though the
multitude without be condemned, yet they shall find as it is, Math. 11.22, 24.
so it shall be easier for those heathen, then for them; lesser shall their
torments be in Hell.

To instruct every man in the Church, To. 1.30.
If any man imagine that these set him at liberty, that is, carnal liberty, he
marvellously deceives himself: Truth it is, that it is true liberty, for the
service of God is most true liberty, but it is not their carnal liberty to do
as they list, but to follow the command of God, as the Centurions servants, for
they have their press money, or soldiers oath given unto them; yea, and being
so nigh brought to him, they owe more service, for their more honor, more
obedience: he that imagines it is an easy life to be a Courtier, to be
employed about the Kings person, in his presence or bed chamber, does much
deceive himself, as ignorant of such things; for though they have more honor,
more favor, and obtain many special suits for themselves and friends, yet
they have more labor, more watching; yea, more diligence and industry is
looked for, from them; and they usually perform; so in this, in the Church,
Gods Court, there is more honor, more comfort, more suits obtained, but more
service required, or at least more bonds of this service, and more reason they
should perform it. That Chrysostom. urges touching virginity of a woman, a
virgin and married, may be here applied; that if there be any liberty to mind
earthly things, to follow the pleasures of the world and such things, it is to
those who are out of the Church, not to those who are in it, further then helps
them to this service.

Where is my fear?] We have seen the reasons why this is due, and why God
does challenge it; we must now see the duty, and this is servile fear; fear
in general, is but the expectation of an imminent evil, this fear rises from
the consideration of the power and justice of God.

And of this, first, a man ought to perform, and give it to God.

Secondly, the effects of it; Of the differences were spoken before.

The servants of God (howsoever they be servants) even in the Church ought to
fear him,

Because he is able, Tully said) do more regard what he can do to them, in
whose power they are, then what he will do with them. For being able he may,
when he will, come upon them and destroy them, but being willing and not able,
he cnnot at his will; so in reason ought all men to deal with God, and toward
him.

Because his justice will not suffer him to pass over the breach of his law
unpunished,

Then in the Church must there be fear of God,

Then ought every one in the Church to endeavor to know his power and justice,
Ignoti nulla cupido, there is no desire of that which is unknown so nulla
formido, there is no fear; for fear rises not so much out of the outward
evil, as it does of the inward apprehension of it. And therefore not the
neernesse of the danger, but the conceit of the evil, raises the affection of
fear in the heart; therefore Isaiah says of some, that they go down
laughing to Hell, they play merrily upon Hells mouth, as the Child without
fear, plays uon the Cockatrices den, because they are ignorant what danger
they are in. So then it is not all who are in his power, and over whom his
authority and justice is, but such as know them for present, or how they may
feel them after, that fear and stand in awe of him as they should.

To teach men, if they have not the spirit of sons, Ahab and the Ninevites
for their repenting at the fear of his judgments and threatening: To show how
he will much more accept the repentance of his, yea, and to draw on such
servants to the like, for that is a special benefit to his Church, they be
orderly in the outward duty.

The second thing concerning this servile fear, is the effects of it, which
are these:

The first, that it is tanquam fraenum ad equum, as a bit and a bridle to men,
to withold them from sin, from the wilful practice of wicked things; it is
the strongest curb that can be to keep man's corrupt nature from running forth
into outrage, if it be surely settled once in them. Manifest in Laban, when he
pursued after Jacob: Genesis 31.29. And that of Paul, when he shows that the
want of this makes the open highway to the practice of all sin, Romans 3.18.
And that this should be such a restraint, it stands with reason; because there
are two maine things which draw men to sin, and the practice of wickedness.
The first is, the desire of some good men may get by the committing of it, but
this desire is crossed by fear, which is the strongest and most violent
affection of all others, and so stops the passage of all other desires; so
that it is neither profit nor pleasure that can make a timorous man hardy, or
can master and overcome fear in any man's mind, but it will overcome all
desire of them, and nodesire of it; nay, not the pleasure it self, all the
pleasure in the world cannot comfort a condemned person, nor banish fear out
of his mind, so long as the halter hangs over his head, so long as he daily
and hourly looks to be drawn to execution. But fear is able to expel
pleasure, and the desire of those things we love most; as in Sampson in
Dalilaes lap, when a noise of Philistims and a false Alarm was upon him. Gods
fear expells all other fears, as is manifest by the Midwives. Exodus 1.17.
Jer. 1.17. Isaiah 8.12, 13. As a stronger nail drives out a less, so the
fear of God other fears; the greater fear the less, the fear of Hellfire
will carry the mastery of all other fear. Luke 12.4, 5.

We may make use of this, The transgression of the wicked says within my
heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes: when as then men go on
in their wicked courses, and a small pleasure or desire of it will carry them
to the fulfilling of the lusts of the flesh, and to all voluptuousness, and
practice of all pleasure, a small fear make them commit any sin, and either
coveting some pleasure, or thinking to avoid some displeasure of the world,
they only neglect not the good, but make no bones to commit sin, and to lie in
it; they have not certainly come so far as to have this servile fear, and so
they are not sons, no not servants of God: nay, though they have the shape of
men, as Nabuchadnezzar had, yet they have not so much understanding as a beast,
less than he had. For as Bernard says, Diverse. 12. Let us lade and
over-burthen an Ass, and toil him with labor, he cares not, because he is an
Ass: but if we assay to put him into the fire, or thrust him into a Ditch or
Quarry, he shunneth all he can, because he loves life, and fears death. And
yet these run headlong to Hell, and break forth into all kind of impiety, as
the Horse into the battle, when they know these will work their everlasting
confusion.

This may teach every man who would keep himself free from the practice and
trade of sin, Ye also are turned away this day from the Lord: and seeing ye
rebel to day against the Lord, even to morrow he will be wroth with all the
congregation of Israel. Lo, to day he offends, and to morrow God will be
wroth, and he shall perish in his wrath, surely no profit or pleasure tendered
unto him, would make him incur this danger. And for the other temptation, he
would easily overcome it by this, even the fear of men's fear, with the fear
of Gods punishments, and say happily as David, though he spoke it more
sanctifiedly, Psalm. 119.161. Princes have persecuted me without cause, but mine
heart stood in awe of thy words. If he have this fear, hardly such temptations
will assault him. For as Chrysostom. Hom. 15. ad pop. Ant. If it be once known
and heard that an armed Soldier stands watching in a house for the defense of
it, there is neither thief nor robber, nor any that practices such evil,
will come near it. So, when fear is the keeper of man's heart, there is
neither the temptation of pleasure, or profit, or worldly fear will set upon a
man, but will fly away, or be easily expelled, subdued as it were by the
command of fear. God has set two Schoolmasters over us, Pudor and Timor;
shame and fear; that should lead an ingenuous nature; but if not that, yet
this should, unless we will be worse than beasts.

The second effect of this fear is, that it is tanquam acus ad filum, the
needle or the bristle to the thread: that is, that as they go before, and make
way for the thread, but abide not there when it is once come, but goes out
again: So this fear first enters the heart of man, and makes way for love
or the Child-like fear, that loving fear, first when he is converted; and it
enters in for this end, to bring or draw in love after it, and love when it
is once entered, casts fear out of doors, that made entrance before. 1 John
4.18. This is further manifest by the example of Paul, Acts 9.3, 6. and Josiah,
2 Chronicles. 34.19, 27. so Act. 2.37, 38. and 16.30. Romans 7.10.

Because God respects and accepts men to give them grace when they are
troubled, exclusive, none but them; this then must needs go before.

Because man's heart is not capable of grace without this; first,

This manifests that many men must needs be without grace, of grace, as John
Baptist was of Christ: As God appeared to Elias, so he approaches to the
soul, 2 Kings 19, 12, 13, 14. he was neither in the wind, nor earthquake,
which rended the earth, and clave the rocks, nor in the fire that devoureth
all before it, nor he went not before them; but he was in a soft voice which
came afterward: So is the spirit and grace of God, it goes not before the
servile fear, it is not with it, when it rends the hard hearts of men, and
when it melts and mollifies them with the fire of Gods wrath; but it comes
after, and speaks peace and rest to the soul, whereas many never tasted of
this fear, and show it by their lives they have no fear of God, nay in words
brag, they had never no such rentings, and meltings of heart, nay jest at those
which have, they show themselves, void of grace, of true grace; yea, many who
are not so outrageous, but civil, or rather secure, who indeed never felt any
such trouble, and fight in them, any such fear or terror, but all things is,
and ever was at peace within, they are men void of true grace and saving grace;
they may have the shadow and similitudes of grace, but no substance and truth
of it.

This may teach every man that has this fear in him, Bernard) has two feet,
the one of fear, the other of love; and when he would enter a man's Soul, he
is wont to send before, or step first in with his foot of fear, then after, his
foot of love; and the greater the fear is, which went before, the greater the
love is which follows after.

The third effect of this fear is, to make the party it possesses credulous,
apprehending every surmise against him, making him incline to the worst, and
forecast the utmost of the evil. As in that fear which the Jailer was possessed
with, Acts 16.27. he apprehended the worst and utmost. In Samuel and Josiah, so
in the Ninevites, Ion. 3.5. therefore it made them apprehend the worst, and
believe it would be so.

Because fear brings to mind a man's sins and deserts, him apprehend danger,
and deeper then indeed it is. As in the brethren of Joseph, Genesis 42.21. no
marvel then, if it make them easily believe that such things may fall upon
them.

Because they know by themselves,

This teaches us that undoubtedly there is a great want of this fear amongst
most,

Particularly, every man may try himself, Lot, when their father told them how
that God would destroy Sodom, Genesis 19.14. He seemed to them as one that
mocked; So when the Ministers threat particular or general judgments, he is
but as one that mockes, and because of Gods patience after their Preaching and
denouncing, thou think nothing will come; but say, as some have been heard
speaking, the Ministers do well to threaten sharply, and speak great words,
and tell the people of fearful things, but yet we hope for far better
things, fear thy self, because thou can not fear the things they speak,
and believe them, much less apprehend more, never casting the worst, but
making the best of every thing: this security argues that thou want this
servile fear.

The fourth effect of this fear is humility; for fear beats down the pride
of the heart, and makes men not stand upon their pantofles, man to man, not to
stand upon terms, as betwixt Benhadad and Ahab, 1 Kings 20.31, 32. so in this
where the fear of Gods power is, the former examples of Ninevites, Israelites,
Saul, Jailer, shows it plainly, as that Romans 11.20. Be not high minded, but
fear: a proud spirit and the fear of God can never agree.

Because they know there is no wisdom nor power against the Lord, Benhadad: so
women and friends, who sue to Judges for their friends, do petition them
submissely. Chrysostom.

Because it will make every man out of love and liking with all things he has,

This, as the former, shows that many men are destitute of this fear,
Zedekiah, Jer. 38.19. Like those rulers, who believed on Christ, but of a proud
and ambitious humor, they were ashamed to profess him. John 12.42, 43. They
thought it too base a matter to yield themselves to be governed by so mean a
man, as had none almost but a few Fishermen to follow after him; so standing
upon the reputation of their estate and places, they refused to submit
themselves to the means of Salvation, and continued in their damned estate.
How many have we like to these in all places, Cities, Towns, Villages, houses,
all full of them; as many as there are, so many have we, that yet have not this
servile fear.

Particularly, every man may try himself whether he has this fear or no:
Timor is, there is not Tumor, says Bernard; there this fear has pierced that
bladder, and let out all the wind in it; thou art grown humble and lowly, and
stand not upon the reputation or estimation of men, so thou may do what
God commands when he calls to any duty; but if thou do, there is no fear in
thee. For instance, thou have in the time of thy ignorance or profaneness,
either when thou wast a servant, defrauded thy Master to get a stock to set up
by, as is the custom of diverse; or being free and in Trade, thou have deceived
and defrauded many men, and the treasures of wickedness are yet in thy house.
Thou come to the Church, thou hear the Word, the Lord smites by the sword
of his mouth, and calls for this, that thou with speed make restitution; thou will not do it; why? thou standst upon thy credit; for if thou make open
restitution, then thou shall be accounted a fraudulent and deceitful man, and
every body will cast it in thy teeth upon any breach; if privately, thy credit
will so sink, for thon art not able to drive a trade as before, and to
maintain thy self, wife, and children. Know this, thou art void of this
servile fear, while thine heart is so full of pride, that it will not stoop
to God and his commandment; for if thou fearedst his power and justice, thou
would not stand upon this reputation with men: Can he not make thy
wickedness known to thy shame? and can he not make thee as poor to thy
dishonor? If thou did fear this, thou would never stand upon that. The
like may be said of men who make profession of conversion and Religion, and yet
neglect the duties of it, for fear of the scorns and reproaches of men, and
stand upon reputation; they have no fear. But if thou can be content to
hazard thy credit to obey him, that gives credit, and honor, and riches to
whom he will, and takes them from he pleases; it will prove to thy self and
to others that thou have this fear at lease, what else may be more; if not,
then the contrary; for there can be no place for fear, where the heart is
passed up with pride. To obey God in honorable things, and things to be done
without cross or hazard of credit, is but to serve themselves.

The fifth effect of this fear is diligence and carfulness, that is, it will
never let a man rest, till he have used all the means whereby he may have any
hope to escape that which he is afraid of. Instance for the fear of man in
Jacob, Genesis 32.6. etc. manifest in Ahab, 1 King. 21.27. Exodus 9.20. Acts 2.37.
Acts 9.6. Ninevites.

Because this fear is credulous,

Because fear breeds a desire,

This, by the fire; then the Word, when men are softened and mollified by this
fear: then the Word is most regarded, when the heart is wakened by the present
feeling, or fear of judgment to come. Questionless the general security that
has overgrown the whole body of our people, that they neither seek to escape
the vengeance to come of themselves, nor yet when the Ministers of God do with
one consent threaten them: though many John's have preached for a long time,
that the Axe is laid to the root of the tree, yet they come not to enquire what
to do, as the people did, Luke 3.9, 10. Our age as Chrysostom observed, is
like to the old world, our Cities like Sodom and Gomorrah, still secure. The
plague of God that was upon our houses and persons, has not wakened them, the
Sword that was even at our heels, has not made them shake off security, and
begin to fear: what is this but a fearing of some judgment that will make our
hearts to ache, and the ears of posterity to tingle when it shall be told them?
according to that of Jer. 2.19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and
thy turnings back shall reprove thee: know therefore and behold, that it is an
evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my
fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts. Yea finally, (to knit this
to our present matter) what proves this else, but that the men of our times are
so far from the truth of Christianity, howsoever they profess themselves to
be Christians, that they are not come so far as yet to be Gods servants,
worse than servants, yea than beasts, yea than Satan, Jam. 2. who believes,
and trembles.

This may teach every man to try whether he have this fear or no; such then as
feared the Word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh, made his servants
and his cattle flee into the houses. But as Gedaliah, when it was told him by
many the danger by Ishmael, he believed it not, and so would not prevent it,
Jer. 40.14, 16. and says, the Lord will do no such thing, and so will not
take the means to avoid them: thou have not so much as this fear. And do
thou think thy self a good Christian, when thou go not so far as
carnal, natural, yea, Heathen men have done? But is any otherwise affected,
when the Ministers threaten, when God thunders, and shows some manifest proof
or figne of an approaching evil? Is it to thee like as Dalilaes voice was to
Sampson? The Philistims are upon thee, making thee flee out of the lap of thy
pleasures, and all the delights of thy sins, in making thee to seek all means
possible to avoid the evil to come, by hearing, believing, repenting and such
like, then have thou this fear; which though it be not a purging fear, yet is
it a restrayning fear, not a saving fear; and grace itself, yet it makes way
for that, which never comes before. Endeavor for it, and strive to adjoyn the
other, that thou may begin a servant, proceed to a son, and so at length
abide in Gods house for ever, John 8.35.

Says the Lord of Hoasts unto you, O Priests] In Gods accusation we have seen
the ground and the reason of it; we are now to proceed to the accusation it
self, and here first, the Accuser, God; Secondly the accused, Priests; Thirdly
the Crime. It is not the Prophet who accuses them, who might happly be
suspected to have done it, on some humor, and heat, and some finister respect;
but the Lord himself, which the Prophet affirms to strike more reverence in
them to his message, and to affect them to look to their ways, and he is
called the Lord of Hoasts, who can easily punish all their ways, having all at
his command.

For the second, the persons accused are the Priests, yet not excluding the
people, as before the people were accused by name, and the Priests included;
and the Priests are alone expressed, not that they sin alone, but being chief
and greatest sinners, because the people might extenuate their fault by
ignorance, and by pleading example of Priests; but the Priests could have no
excuse, and the Priests duty was to reprove others for profaning Gods worship,
and give examples; and therefore by negligence, and impiety teaching the people
to be profane, they are justly here accused.

Ministers as well as others, are liable to be checked, and reproved by the
word.

Such as the Priests are,

The Ministers specially,

The sins of every man are so much the more grievous, the more they cross
the maine end of his particular calling and profession; treachery in friends,
their profession being fidelity. Micha. 7.5, 6, 7. Eccle. 10.5. the error or
the wrong is so much the more grievous, that it comes from the ruler or
Judge, who ought to do nothing but just, 2. Cor. 11.26. St. Paul reckoning up
his dangers, he reserved the last for the worst, in perils among false
brethren, Cant. 1.5. the Church accuses and complains only of her own
Mothers sons, as if they only had offered her the wrong, and yet who knows
not what hard measure was done to her in all ages by tyrants on the one side,
as Lions, and by heretics on the other, as Dragons; but passing by them,
complains only of those who seemed to be of the same body; other injuries
affected her nothing so much as this, Gen 3.12. Job 2.9. the serpent the devil
doing it, was nothing in respect that the women, their wives, their own flesh
given as helps for them, and comforts to them, should be hinderers and
destroyers.

Because where a man is bound to the duty by more reasons and bonds,

Because those things come commonly unexpected, David complain so much of the
injury of a friend, as a thing that came so unexpected, and did so pierce him;
Psalm. 55.12. And so may God say and complain of us.

Because every thing, the further it is out of his place,

Hence we observe that as all sins are not equal, but for the Priests and
Prophets to be ignorant, that should be instructers of others, where ignorance
is in the seat of knowledge, here it is the more heinous. And though both shall
fall into the ditch, yet more shall be his torments. So for injustice, for a
man to be robbed by a professed thief, or to be wronged by a Judge: So for
deceit, to be cheated by a man that lives by his wits, is not so much, as to be
deceived by one that he traffiques and trades with, who professes to deal
honestly, and uprightly; so for unfaithfulness in an enemy, it is not so much
as in his professed friend: so the same sins in the Church are more heinous,
then out of it, of Protestants, then Papists; for these profess all against
them, but they profess unfaithfulness, treachery, deceit, murders, treasons
against every Heretic, because he is ipso facto Excommunicated, and needs but
the Popes Excommunication, for more declaration of it, and more certainty, as
Thomas in summa, and Bannes upon it.

To teach every man as to avoid all sins, as heinous and displeasing unto God,
to handle the word deceitfully or corruptly, as Saint Paul speaks, or to wrest
the sense of it, as Saint Peter speaks to their purposes. And so as it is
Isaiah the 3.12. They that lead thee, cause thee to err. So the lawyer must
not use unfaithfulness or cunning dealing, he must search out the proper
grounds of the law, to direct his client to proceed warrantably, to see his
wrongs redressed, or recover his right; for, for him to spend his time in
devising quirks and distinctions, which may serve to obscure the truth, and
make contentions and suits rather then end any, or to delay his clients cause
when he may well haste it and bring it to an issue, and as many do use their
cunning to this purpose, it is the greater sin in them; so a Physician, and a
Surgion must employ all his skill to cure; for him to defer, and sometimes to
help forwards, and then pull backwards again, to make gain of his patient,
and empty his purse, and hurt his body, is very heinous; both of them worse
then thieves by the highway, making Gods ordinance a cover for their theft,
not so punishable by humane laws, but as culpable before God, and shall as
severely be punished. So if a son omit the honor due to his father, or a
servant the fear due to his master, is a greater sin; for others to do it
to the same men, is not so heinous; so it is the duty of a wife to be a helper,
that she must endeavor in all things: For, for her to be as Eve, who was given
as a comfort to make Adams life more joyous, for her to be a broker to bring
death, she that was taken from him as part, to be shot at him as a dart, to the
wounding and murdering of his soul, as Basil speaks; or for her, who was
taken out of his side, to guard and hemme in his heart, to be a ladder to the
Devil to scale the heart of her husband, as Gregory speaks of Jobs wife, was
more heinous then when the Serpent and Devil did it, who were professed
enemies, and so now, being directly against the end of her creation and
calling; and so of all, they are thus to think of their sins, and thus to
avoid them.

That despise my name,] The sin they are accused of is contempt of his
worship, not the omitting of it, or the not doing of it at all; but the doing
of it corruptly, carelessely and contemptuously. The name of God signifies,
First, himself; Secondly, his properties. Thirdly, his commands or his
authority; Fourthly, his works; Fifthly, his word and worship, which is here
meant, and which they not only omitted, which might be through ignorance or
some forcible temptation, but contemned or despised, for many could not pretend
ignorance, and at this time there was no persecution to compel them to
dishonor God: but many did it out of a base conceit they had of Gods majesty,
thinking any kind of service would serve the turn; the word signifies to
trample under feet, as we do vile things, Math. 5.13. 2 Kings 9.33. but did
the Priests do thus? Ribera answers, things are often said to be done, which
are intended to be done; because nothing is wanting in them why it should not
be done, who have a will to have it done.

Contempt of Gods name, that is, when men do indeed the works of Gods worship
and service, but do them negligently, Abel and Cain, though faith was the
main, yet how careful the one was, that thought the best was bad enough, the
other, the worst would serve, for he brought a Sacrifice. Genesis 4.3, 4. Hence
are the qualities of the sacrifices described in the Law; God requiring not
only Sacrifices, but such as were perfect without blemish, Levit. 22.20, 21,
23. Deuter. 17.1. But why this? but to show how he requires the manner of
doing, as well as the deed, and that he cannot endure corruption here. Hence
Saul labored to lessen the fault, because they saved the chiefest for the
Lord. 1 Samuel 15.15. Hence is that, Malach. 1.14. which we shall see hereafter.

Because this argues a great contempt of God, and as we may speak,

Because it is gross hypocrisy, when men do thus perform the act, Salvian
speaking of such as worship God corruptly, says, Non tam inanis criminis
fuisset ad Templum Domini non venire, quam sic venire; quia Christianus qui ad
Ecclesiam non venit, negligentiae reus est; qui autem venit, sacrilegii;
minoris enim piaculi reus est, si honor Deo non deferatur, quam si irrogetur
injuria: ac per hoc quicunque ista fecerunt, non dederunt honorem Deo, sed
derogaverunt. De gubern. Dei, lib. 8.

This being such a sin, argues the age we live in, guilty of a great deal of
sin before the Almighty; Ye despise my Name. The Word is preached and heard,
prayers are made, Sacraments are delivered and received, but alas, so
carelessly, cursarily and customably, that it is but the contempt of them, and
the contempt of God in them. How many Ministers preach the Word but for gain,
for vain glory, for law, and for custom, and not of conscience; as law and
customs bind them, when they have gifts and body able to do it, oftener to the
edifying of the Church; some in preaching make it serve their own turn, and
serve themselves out of it, and not God. How many hearers, that hear for law
or custom, that being present, sleep, or suffer their eyes to steal away
their hearts, or let their souls and minds be possessed with their several
fears, joys, pleasures, profits, that they are present in body, and absent in
mind, thinking yet that is good enough for the Lord. For prayer, how many
Ministers run it over like journey-workes without affection and zeal, making
the people to abhor the sacrifice of the Lord? How many of the people come
late, carry themselves without all reverence, sitting gazing, reading, and such
like, and there is no fault, all is well enough. The like may be said of
Sacraments, any preparation, any affection good enough, (but of the particulars
more afterward) How many that defer the service of God till they be old,
till the even; the morning and fresh thoughts of themselves and servants for
the world, for their Chapmen, not for God; drowsy prayers, spirits spent, good
enough for him. Here I may apply that of Seneca, Qui ut bonus sit in senectute,
differt, aperte ostendit, se nolle virtuti dare, nisi tempus ad omnia alia
inidoneum. Seneca.
He who deferres to be good till he be old, shows plainly he would not give
himself to virtue, if he were fit for any thing else. So of both these, and
their like, who show therein the contempt of Gods Name, thinking any thing good
enough for him.

To teach every man to labor to see and know himself guilty of this sin,
Paul, who is sufficient? so what is sufficient? what care, diligence, endeavor
of the heart and whole man? It is not the omitting of the worship of God, nor
the neglect to leave some things undone, that is only displeasing unto the
Lord; but when the Act is done, he may be as much offended: As here, the not
offering of the sacrifice was not the thing that displeased him, but when the
sacrifices were not so qualified as they ought, that he accounted contempt,
because it argued contempt: so in this, the quality of the service is that
which he accounts contempt, when they thought the deed was enough. The outward
work must be done as the sacrifice ought by them to have been offered; so God
has commanded, so must example be given to others; but the intention, the
heart is that which must make it acceptable unto God, as Gregory.

And ye say, wherein have we despised thy Name?] Here is their excuse and
defense, in which they add more impiety to their former profaneness; they
put God to his proofs, and seem to charge him for accusing them unjustly.
They stand upon their defense, Wherein have we, etc. we have highly thought of
thy Name, and spoken of thee most religiously, why then are we accused? But
observe we Gods reply.

VERSE VII.
Ye offer unclean bread upon mine Altar, and you say, Wherein have we polluted
thee? In that ye say, The Table of the Lord is not to be regarded.

YE offer unclean bread upon my Altar.] Here is Gods reply to their defense.
They who offer polluted things to God, despise his Name; but such are you, for
ye offer polluted bread upon my Altar: where we must examine the sense of three
words: First, Altar. Secondly, Bread. Thirdly, polluted or unclean.

First, by the Altar, there are some, and not of the meanest, who understand in
this place the table of Shewbread that stood in the Temple and Tabernacle,
just over against the Candlestick on the North-side, and the right hand of it.
In the Tabernacle there were three distinct places; the Tabernacle, the holy
place, and the most holy: The table of Shewbread was in the second, whither
the Priests only came. By the Altar then is understood the Altar of burnt
offerings, which stood in the outward Court, whither both Priest and people
came, and had like access when the Law was read, and their daily sacrifices
were offered. And thus does Theodoret and Cyrill understand it upon this place:
so that we expound not this by that which is in the end of the Verse, but that
by this, because we find in the Scripture the Table put often for the Altar,
but not the Altar for the Table.

Secondly, by bread, some understand only the Shewbread, as Hierome; some, of
bread which was offered with the burnt-offering on the Altar, Levit. 6.20.
Numb. 28.6. Some, not of the bread only, but of the flesh also, or whatsoever
thing else was offered there upon the Altar, which is the best acceptance; for
the word here used signifies not bread alone, but also other victual and meat,
as it is used in the word, and as Cyrill expounds this place, and some other,
for the bread of the sacrifice; and especially the Prophet himself, verse. 8.
when he shows that he meant the sacrifices and meat that was offered upon the
Altar.

Thirdly, by unclean, what is meant; it is agreed of by most, that it is not
any thing that is unclean by nature, or naturally; that is, such a thing as is
abominable to humane sense, as Ezekiel. 4.12, 13. nor yet any thing that is
unclean morally: as all things are said to be morally vile and polluted, that
God does disallow and dislike of; Nullum cadaver tam foedumaut faetidum (as
Gregory says) to us, as the sinners soul in the sight of God. But it is
mystically unclean, that is, in regard of some mystical signification, God
having pronounced them typically unclean, to instruct some further matter, that
thereby he would inure men the rather to abhor them. And thus are all things
said to be unclean which are prohibited in the law ceremonial; and so it is in
this place. But these things were either unclean by others, or of themselves:
in the first by touching a dead corpse, or any unclean thing; in the second
either in their kind, as Isaiah 66.17. or in quality only, that is, when it
comes by some accident, of which, Deuteronomy. 17.1. of this is meant in this place,
as the 8. verse shows.

And so here seems to be a double fault taxed by the Spirit of God; one in the
people, and the other in the Priests; and so a double duty exacted of them; the
peoples fault was in bringing of polluted offerings, and presenting them unto
the Priests; their duty was to have brought such as were sound, entire and
perfect; the Priests fault was in receiving them at their hands, and not
reproving and prohibiting them; his duty was to have instructed them what
sacrifice they were to bring, and to reject that which was unclean, and not
according to the Law. Now these sacrifices were to be clean, and pure, and
perfect, ad typum capitis, to show the perfect purity of Christ's humane nature,
2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 1.17. Secondly ad typum corporis, to show what they should
be who are members of him, and that offer these sacrifices unto God; that they
should be perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy 5. and Romans 12.1, 3. So that
then, besides that which has been spoken for the sacrifice, we may gather out
of the peoples fault, (comparing outward things with inward,) the type with the
truth, that seeing God reasons on this sort; if they who bring polluted
offerings unto me, contemn me, then such as come polluted in themselves, much
more.

They who come to the public service of God,

Because God else will not accept their service; for he first looks to their
person, sacrifice does not sanctify the person, but the person it: as Haggai.
2.13, 14. Proverb. 15.8.

Because else that which God offers and gives to them, Judas, Christ gave not
that which was evil; nor did he, being the Physician, give the poison; but
Judas being wicked, it became evil unto him: for as the spyder and the adder
turn good meat into poison; and as a corrupt stomach, abounding with choler
and such like, turns the meat they eat into choler, and the finer the meat
is, it is the sooner turned to corruption; so is it in this thing, Titus 1.15.
Unto the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled, and
unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled.

To reprove all such as have no care to purge and purify themselves before
they come unto the house of God, Cain was cast out from the face of the Lord.
Genesis 4.16. If he come nor, he shall suffer as contnmax, as rebellious and
disobedient; but he that comes polluted, with the filth of his sin unrepented
of, with a purpose to persist, he shall be punished as a contemner. They who
refused to come were shut out, but he that came in his old clothes, was bound
hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, Math. 22. he that is wilfully
absent, excluding himself from the society of the Saints, in the time of
grace, shall be barred their company in the time of glory for ever; but he that
presumes to appear there, with the guilt of his sin on him, shall have a
far greater portion in Hell fire, he shall suffer as in case of contempt,
like an insolent rebel, that bourdeth his Prince to his face in his own
Palace; and in the mean time all their prayers are unaccepted, yea they are
turned into sin to them, they obtain nothing of God more then he would give
them, though they never prayed, with which he feeds them but for the slaughter;
yea, and hence we profit not them by preaching, but make them worse; we are
not the savor of life unto them, but of death by the word, they are hardened in
their sins, by this two edged sword they are daily wounded; because their
sins are not wounded, their persons are, and the more fearfully, because
their wounds are not sensible; yea by the Sacraments the Devil, as upon Judas,
so upon them, takes more sure possession, and reigns in them.

To teach every one to labor to be holy when he comes to Gods house;
Bartimaeus, Mark. 9. we deal so when we go before Princes, as Joseph did, Genesis
41.14. much more we ought to do so with God. Moses and Joshua were commanded
to put off their shoes when they approached to God, and were to stand upon holy
ground: we are hereby taught, says Ambrose, Ep. 16. to shake off the dust, and
scour off the soil that our souls and lives gathered by fleshly occasions,
and worldly courses, ere we come to tread the Courts of Gods house. There was
a Laver of brass, Exodus 30.18, 19. for Aaron and his sons to wash in before
they offered any thing at the Altar, to show what we should do being made the
Lords Priests; to this David alluded, Psalm. 26.6. I will wash mine hands in
innocence, O Lord, and compass thine Altar. And this ought we to do, that our
prayers may be heard and be acceptable, that our hearing and receiving of the
Sacraments may be fruitful unto us; else Psalm. 66.18. If I regard wickedness
in mine heart, the Lord will not hear me: and we being corrupt, this must
needs be hurtful unto us, unless we learn that wisdom from the Serpent, to
cast our poison before we come to drink.

Out of the peoples fault, (comparing outward things with inward, the type with
the truth,) we have gathered, that the people that bring offerings to God, they
who perform any service to him, ought to be holy and pure; for if their
sacrifice, much more they. Now out of the Priests fault we may gather, that if
they ought to reject unclean and unfit sacrifices, then those also who brought
them, being unclean; yet they ought to put a difference, and to distinguish
betwixt the clean and unclean, to receive the one, and refuse the other, as
Levit 10.10. And so from the proportion we may gather some observation for our
times.

The Ministers of the Gospel and new Testament ought to make difference
betwixt the godly and the wicked, exclude the other from the public prayers
of the Church, and from the sacred Table of Christ: Hence is the command to the
Church of Corinth, and to the Pastor, as the principal man, 2 Cor. 5.13. Jer.
15.19. the Liturgy of our Church commends Ambrose, then Bishop of Millaine,
for dealing so with the Emperor himself, Theodosius the younger, till he
showed himself sorry for his sins. So 1 Timothy 1.20.

Because if they under the Law, Priests and Prophets ought to do it,
Augustine, Many things are tolerated in the darkness and dawning, which are
not in the day when the Sun is up: so must it follow, that that which was not
tolerable then, cannot be now.

Because by their continuance and suffering them, Chrysostom. separate the
infected and scabbed from the whole.

Christ admitted Judas to the Supper, a devil, after he knew he had taken
money to betray him.

First, Hilarie well observes) and so made him known, what he was, to the
rest, he sent him out of the way while he celebrated the new Passover.

This shows what manner of men they ought to be, Hierome, Sine crimine, non
sine peccato. Hence was it ordained, that whosoever of the Priests or Levites
had erred, and been defiled by Idolatry in the time of the Captivity, or of
any of the Idolatrous Princes, and so became a scandal, should not serve any
more in the Temple. Ezekiel. 44.10, 12, 13, 15. Neither yet the Levites that are
gone back from me, when Israel went astray, which went astray from me after
their Idols; but they shall bear their iniquity. Because they served before
thee Idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity, therefore
have I lift up mine hand against them, says the Lord God, and they shall bear
their iniquity. And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of the
Priest unto me, neither shall they come near unto any of my holy things in the
most holy place, but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations
which they have committed. But the Priests of the Levites, the sons of Zadok,
that kept the charge of my Sanctuary, when the children of Israel went astray
from me, they shall come near me to serve me, and they shall stand before me,
to offer me the fat and the blood, says the Lord God. 2 King. 23.9. And this
the Church after Christ did observe; for Cyprian, Epist. 2.1. mentions a
Canon made by him and other of the Bishops of Africa, that no Bishop or Priest,
that had been ordained in the Church, and after either had fallen into
heresy, or been touched with Idolatry, should be received again upon their
repentance, otherwise than as laymen. And Epistola 1.7. he chideth
Fortunatianus, who once was a Bishop, and had in the time of persecution burnt
incense to Idols, and after came home again to the Church, and would have kept
his place still. Audet sibi sacerdotium quod prodidit vendicare, quasi pest
aras Diaboli ad altar Dei fas sit accedere, etc?
Dares he challenge that Office or Priesthood which he has betrayed, as if it
were lawful, after he has served at the Idoll-stoole of the Devil, to draw
near to Gods Altar? Novatianus and Novatus made a Schism from the Church,
because one Trophimus a Priest, with some other, were received, after they had
fallen for fear in those horrible times. Cyprian answers, Epist. 4.2.
Susceptus est Trophimus, sic tamen admissus, ut laicus communicet, non quasi
locum sacerdotis usurpet. Cyprian.
Trophimus is indeed received, but admitted only into the place where Laymen
communicate, not into the place of a Priest. All teach, that such should not be
received; for what if Peter and Paul, (the example of the one, and the calling
of the other extraordinary) were received, yet the equity is great, that those
who must judge the leprosy of others, should be free from it themselves; or if
they be not, should be expelled as Vzzah, when the leprosy once sprung out of
his forehead. And that the Church should not receive Popish Priests to be
Ministers at Gods table, besides that it is like to be hurtful; because the
mystery of iniquity works thus cunningly, as they, Ezra 4.2. They came to
Zerubbabel, and to the chief Fathers, and said unto them, we will build with
you: for we seek the Lord your God as you do, and we have sacrificed unto him
since the time of Esar Haddon, King of Ashur, which brought us up hither. To
whom answer should be, verse. 3. Then Zerubbabel and Jeshua, and the rest of the
chief of the Fathers of Israel said unto them, it is not for you, but for us
to build the House unto our God; for we our selves together will build it unto
the Lord God of Israel, as King Cyrus, the King of Persia has commanded us. If
they have parts of learning, it were fit they should be employed otherwise
then in the ministry, to the scandal and hurt of many.

To admonish the Ministers of their duty, John would not the Pharisees and
Sadduces) till they confess their sins, and so give some tesTimony of their
repentance. But yet this must not be done upon every small infirmity, or hidden
sin, but for heinous sins, that are contagious in respect of the quality of
them, and are scandalous in regard of the opennesse of them; for hidden sins
must be left to the judgment of God, and infirmities must be otherwise dealt
withal, mildly and with less censures, Gal. 6.1, 3, 4. secretsins secretly
reproved, Math. 18. only public sins to be publicly censured, and the
offender to be excluded; and yet not at first, but, as in the matter of the
Leper, so, he must not presently expel him the Church, but admonish him the
first and second time, Tit. 3.10, 11. and then expel him if he persist
obstinatly in it; This being the last censure, and the greatest. As Physicians
seek all means to cure, before they cut off a member.

For the people to learn to submit themselves to the censure of the Ministers
of the Church, Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable unto
you.) to do as they say, and be ruled by their censure, and that, first, for
their own good, 1 Cor. 5.5. be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; Excommunitio
est medicina Eclesiae.
For even excommunication is the Churches medicine: It cast not off from the
whole Church, but from a particular congregation or one visible Church, to
keep him from infecting others, and to recover him from his own corruption.
The not yielding is the rebelling against Christ, who has so commanded his;
and not carrying his yoke here, is to deprive themselves of the Crown there;
yea, and when they are cut off from a particular Church, to persist and
contend, it is to cut themselves of from the whole; whereas to submit and to
seek, the effect off it is their good, as it was Onesimus his; and as a bone
that is broken, if it be well set, grows stronger again, so is it with them.

They who have the charge of others, Ezech. 33.8.
if they be not careful to censure them for them; so is it here, and verse. 9.
When I shall say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall dye the death: if
thou do not speak and admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked man shall
die for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yea, the
Magistrates do sin in not punishing. Nehe. 13.17. 2 Samuel 3.38, 39. and for
this is it thought, that law was made. Number. 35.31. Ye shall take no recompense
for the life of the murderer, which is worthy to die, but he shall be put to
death. For by that he should give others encouragement to kill, and make also
the sin his own; yea, and as the peoples sins are the Ministers and
Magistrates, so the Childrens sins are the Parents, 1 Samuel 2.29. Wherefore
have thou kicked against my sacrifice, and my offering, which I commanded in my
tabernacle, and honor thy children above me, to make you selves fat with
the first fruits of all the offerings of Israel my people, said the Lord to
Eli, when yet his sons only were guilty.

Because every man is commanded to reprove his brother, Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer
him not to sin: If he may not bear with the faults of his friends, less of
children, servants, subjects, people; where not only the general charge is in
the command, but a special one also, and so the twofold cord binds them.

Because every man is bound to prevent sin as much as lies in him, specially
the sins of his charge; but he that reproves not,

Because they are made keepers of both tables, Moses the Magistrate, for them
all, Exodus 19.

It shows the wretched estate of Ministers, Magistrates,

This teaches us, that those who have charge of others, they serve God
themselves, but they must cause others to do ikewise: as Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
and as Joshua, 24.13. the Master must look his servant keep the Sabbath; to
him is the command, Exodus 20.10. he must come with his train to the house of
God, Psalm. 42.4. he must prepare himself for the Sacrament, and charge his,
and sanctify them, Job. 1.5. yea, he must correct, censure, and punish,
unless he will have their sins fall on; him if he think he have not
personal sins enough of his own, let him be herein careless; but he that
thinks he has enough and too many of his own to answer for, let him seek to
restrain others committed to his charge, by his censures and power, that he may
be free from them: which is done two ways, and two things are required of him,
that he keep himself free from others men's sins: The first is, to pry and
enquire into the lives of those that are committed unto him, into their
carriage and behavior, that he may see what is amiss. It is enough for a
private man if he reprove an offender, when he sees him comitting sin, he is
not bound to enquire and take notice of what they do, or curiously to watch
over them; but not for a Magistrate, Minister, etc. He must, Prove. 27.23. be
diligent to look to the stateof his flock, and look well to his herds. The
Minister is Episcopus, a pryer, to signify it is his charge to pry and look to
the lives of those who are committed to him; and so ought every particular
master of a family, for his house is his Diocese, though he may not be (...),
to meddle in an other family, 1 Pet. 4.15. It is not enough for them to take
notice of things that are offended in the open view, but they must enquire into
their secret carriage; many imagine they are bound no further then to take
notice of open sins, and think ignorance of close crimes will excuse them;
but such affected ignorance, when they might have knowledge, increases the
sin; for they might either prevent it, or humble themselves for it, as Job,
or reprove them, as Elisha did his servant, 2 Kings 5. and free themselves from
their sin. The second thing is, that they have power to punish, when they
cannot prevent; It is enough for a private man, when he sees a sin, to reprove,
to bewail it, and pray for him that sinned; but not for him that has charge,
he must use the power of the sword, being a Magistrate; of the keys, being a
Minister; of the rod, being a Master, or Parent, yea and in obstinacy,
dis-inherit: as Abraham cast out scoffing Ismael and his Mother; and expulse
his house, as David said he would purge his house, Psalm. 101. And without this
can they not keep themselves from the sins of others.

To teach ever inferior to submit to his superior, as their power is. It is
profitable to have an enemy prying, profitable to have a child tell us the
cloak hangs awry, as Chrysostom. more profitable to have a friend, of whose
faithfulness we doubt not, and whose duty must make us bear with him, as with
Physicians, though they deal with us very homely.

And you say, wherein have we polluted thee.] The second reply of this people,
adding denial to denial; they would not grant that they did so, that they
offered polluted bread.

One sin draws on an other, the first a second, that a third, Leah said of
her son that her Maid Zilpa bore Jacob, Genesis 30.11. a troppe comes: we see
it in our first Parents, in David, 2 Samuel 11. in Asa, 2 Chro. 19.10. in Peter.

Because one sin must serve to bolster and uphold another, David, of which
Basil thus; the Devil seeing that after the doing of it he was ashamed of what
he had done, and willing to hide his shameful wound, he made that shame of his
a broker to another sin, and so drew him to draw one ulcer over another,
while seeking to cover his adultery with murder, he made him an author, and so
guilty of both.

This ought to teach men not to give place to sin, The beginning of strife is
as one that opens the waters: Therefore ere the contention be meddled with,
leave off: As when a man makes a way to a current or stream of a river, which
(when he has once let into his grounds) he cannot stay again, though he would
never so feign; so is the beginning of sin. To give the water passage, is to
let the tongue loose; for the careless mind slideth away by degrees till it
fall; and he that is not careful of idle and harmless words at the first,
comes soon to wicked and hurtful words at the last. Greg. past. 3. the like
may be said of other sins. The way to Heaven is upward, hard and difficult; the
way to Hell is downward: Now he that runs down a Hill, cannot stay when he
will; or, if he set down with himself how far, and where he will stay, he
is not like to observe it; so in sin, he cannot take up himself when he
would, to say thus far, and no further I will sin: for the corruption of
his nature is as fierce horses, and the devil as the driver; he shall not
command himself when he would. Did not David fall from idleness to wantonness:
and from adultery to murder; from a filthy sin to a bloody crime? did not
Solomon from excessive buildings, where his sin begun, for he was as long again
about his own house, as he was about Gods house, to abundance of wives; and
from the love of strange women to the service of strange gods? Did not Asa fall
from distrusting God, to the imprisoning of Gods Prophets, and from that to
oppressing of his people; yea from distrusting in God to trust wholly in
Physicians? and are we better then these? who was like them in Israel, and what
is our strength in comparison of them? It is good then that we withstand small
sins, and the first.

If any be overtaken with sin unawares, let him shake it off with speed, Job.
40.5. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed
no further. So, say thou, once have I sinned, but I will do not more; yea
twice, but I will proceed no further: And to lessen thy fault, excuse not thine
offense, seek no excuses and pretenses to cover or color it, for that will
bring thee to be more entangled; As one says, beginning are with more ease and
safety declined when we are free, then proceedings when we have begun: so
small beginings then continuance.
the further and longer, the harder it will be to rise; and the smaller the
sin is, the harder happily to rise; for he that falls lightly, he makes no
great haste to rise again; whereas he that falls hard and foul, he hastens to
arise; so in this. It is Satan's policy not to draw men to great sins at
first, but by degrees, lest they should abhor them, before the conscience be
inured and somewhat hardened. As the way to good is by degrees, because of the
diffiuclty of it; so to evil, because of the horriblenesse and shame of it:
And by one sin, if it be lived in without repentance, there is left in in the
heart a ore provocation to sin the same sin again; yea, and a greater
pronesse then before to any other sin whatsoever, of the same quality, yea and
of a step or a degree higher. Hay or stubble or any combustible matter, dried
and heated by the Sun, soon takes fire, the resisting of humidity is taken
away: So in this. For when temptation is offered to some or other sin, that
the conscience shall at first seem to make nice of, the corruption of the
heart will be ready to make answer, and suggest, that he may as well, and as
safely, do this as the former, there is no more danger in the one then in the
other; and therefore that it is to no end to make dainty of the one, seeing he
is so far engaged in the other. Therefore he that would be free from
greater, when the less has seized upon him, let him haste, and by true
repentance, as by an ejectione firmae, cast him out of possession: Take the
foxes when they are little, and if not at first, yet, as they come in by little
and little, cast them out by little and little; and go back again by degrees,
as the sun went back in the Dial of Ahaz.

This may teach every man to account it a mercy and goodness of God to him,
when he gives a means to prevent his entrance into a sin, or his continuance
in it, when he has slipped aside to any, though but a little one. St. Aug.
says, that Omne peccatum, etc. Every sin that God prevented in him, and kept
him from committing of it, he accounted no less mercy, than if he had pardoned
him. And doubtless in this respect the mercy is more; for while that sin was
prevented, more and, perhaps, greater sins were prevented in him. Men are
nothing so sensible in this, but it is their corruption; as they are not so
sensible of the benefit, being kept from transgressing the Law, as getting a
pardon after; nor in preventing a disease, as in removing it after. But the
merecy is great, whether it be by the voice of a Minister, if he open his heart
to it, or the voice of a judgment, or the voice of his conscience, or the voice
of the Spirit, Es. 30.21. It is a benefit when a man is settled or secure in his
sin, by any of these means to be admonished, as David was by Nathan, after
he had sinned in numbering the people, and Peter was by Christ after the third
denial; though it had been greater, if the admonition and prevention had
been at the first or second step. So should men esteem it when they are
turned, or turning to the right hand, or to the left, by pleasure or profit. It
is good that God will so admonish them, and prevent this, by whom or howsoever,
by publikc or private means, by good or bad. And let them hearken and obey,
and be thankful to the Author and the means; Nec ullus omnino sermo qui
adificat ad pietatem, ad virtutes, ad mores optimos, negligenter est audiendus,
quoniam and illic iter quo ostenditur Salutare De i. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 57.

Si corripuerit me justus in misericordia, id ipsum sentiam, sciens quia
aemulatio justi and benevolentia iter faciunt ei qui ascendit super occasum.
Bonus occasus, cum ad correptionem justi stat homo, and corruit vitium, and
Dominus ascendit super illud, conculcans hoc pedibus, and conte^ens ne
resurgat. Non ergo contemnenda increpatio justi, quae ruina peccati, cordis
sanitas est, nec non and Dei ad animam via. Bern. Ibid. Vnusquisque pro modulo
suo audiat, and sicut sibi conscius fuerit, ita vel doleat corrigendus, vel
gaudeat approbandus. Si se deviasse invenerit, redeat, ut in via ambulet: Si se
in via invenerit, ambulet ut perveniat. Nemo sit superbus extra viam, nemo
piger in via. Aug. in Psalm. 31. praefat.


As St. Bernard speaks, No word that edifies to godliness, to virtue, and
good manners, is to be heard negligently, because there is the way in which is
showed the salvation of God. And a little before in the same Sermon, says he,
The admonition of the righteous is not to be contemned, which is sins ruin,
the hearts health, and Gods way to the Soul. And as S. Aug. to the same
purpose, of public hearing and admonition; Let every one hear as he can, and
as he is conscious to himself, so let him either grieve, being to be
corrected; or rejoice, being to be approved. If he find that he has gone
astray, let him return, that he may walk in the way: If he find himself in
Gods way, let him walk on to the end; let no man be proud out of the way, nor
slothful in it.

In that you say,] That is, thus think in your hearts; and this is known to
God. It Is not likely they were so impious to utter their profane conceits of
Gods service; but as it is, Ps. 14.1. Psalm. 30.6.

Not only works and words, Corda, Deo and aures and os gerunt.
says St. Aug. As God said to Moses in another case, Exodus 14.15. so to the
wicked, Why cryest thou against me? when happily they speak no word, but only
blaspheme God in their hearts, as it is, Psalm. 10.13.

The Table of the Lord is not to be regarded.] They ask wherein they have
despised and polluted God: In that they think basely of his service, they
pollute him in polluting his Altar. They who think basely of Gods board, they
contemn and pollute God, whose board it is. By Table is understood, not that
of the Shewbread, but the Altar of burnt-offerings. And so is Ezekiel. 41.22.

Whatsoever abuse is committed in the worship of God, or against the means of
his worship, guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, that is, of a heinous
offense committed against his person: he is absent, so was God from the
sacrifices, yet he was polluted in them, because they were offered unto him. So
is it in these Sacraments of ours, because he offers them unto us, as signs
of himself. Hence it is, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me; and he
that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that
sent me. And wherefore they more than other men? but for this, because they
were the Candlesticks that held forth the light, they were they who brought the
Word to them, and that was it, not for their persons.

Because he that denies God all worship and honor, must needs contemn and
despise him;

Because he delights to magnify his Word,

Because he has given unto them things that are proper to himself; destroy,
and to judge, when it is he, that does it by it. Jam. 1.21. Joh. 12.47, 48. the
Passover is called Christ, and Christ it, 1 Cor. 5.7. 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.24.
Baptism is said to save us, Tit 3.5. and such like. It must then be the
dishonoring of him to dishonor them.

This proves that our times and age are full of many contemners of God,

To take heed how we use and account of the means of Gods worship, Luke 8.18.

The Table of the Lord is not to be regarded,] The reason they thought thus
basely of the table of Lord, was, because the blood and far powered upon the
Altar, were things but base and vile in themselves; so they thought of the
worship of God it self, not considering for what end God had appointed these
things to be done, and what spiritual use they were to make of them.

The maine cause and original of the common contempt and neglect of holy
things is, because men fix their eyes only on the outward means, and regard
not the end and use of them, and the grace and blessing of God accompanying
those base means, that he has sanctified in that sort, to all those that in
holy and reverent manner have to do with them; as is manifest here. As it was
with Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 5. who for a time contemned that which God
purposed him health by, because he fixed his eyes upon the baseness and
commonnesse of the means, the water of Jordan, verse. 10, 11, 12. so do men
these holy and spiritual things, because they look but unto the outward
things. To this purpose is that where Paul shows that neither Jews nor
Gentiles regard the Preaching of the word, for that they thus looked upon the
outward things. 1 Cor. 1.22, 23. The Jews require a sign, and the Grecians
seek after wisdom: But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews even a
stumbling block, and unto the Grecians, foolishness. As if he had said, the
Jews looked for strange, great worldly works to be wrought by the Messiah at
his coming, they dreamed all of an earthly Monarchy, and a worldly estate such
as Salomons was; which because they saw not in Christ's person, they would none
of: The Gentiles, and specially the Grecians, noted for learning, and the
Philosophers busied in the studies of humane wisdom, they look for deep
matters and profound principles of Philosophy, and finding the Scripture
written plainly ad vulgi captum, not in words of humane wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. for
this cause they contemn it, as too base a subject for them to busy their
brains, and take up their time with; and this made him in the 21. verse. to call
it foolishnes of Preaching, not ex animo, but ex eorum opinione: 1 Timothy 4.12.
thus much he intimates; Let no man despise thy youth, but be an example in
word in conversation etc. intimating, that without better carriage of himself,
his young years would be an occasion to hinder the profit of his ministry,
men would be apt to contemn the ministry, for some infirmity in the means:
This is intimated in as if the means and instrument were more glorious and
admirable, Luke 6.30.
good would be effected, and for the baseness of the instrument they contemn
holy things. This is that which the Apostles says, that men eat and drink
unworthily; 1 Cor. 11.29. because they put not a difference betwixt this
spiritual food, 1 Cor. 10. and that corporal food, because they judge not
aright of these holy mysteries.

Because men live by sense and sight,

this may teach us, as fishes with baits. It is wondered of many, why Idolaters
should brag so truly of a multitude as they do, and so many follow after them,
when the Gospel injoyes nothing so many: the reason is, because here all
things are plain and simple, as was said of Christ, There was no beauty in
them, for outward things, to make the flesh desire them; therefore they easily
and soon contemn them. Isaiah 33.
As God dealt wisely with the Church in her infancy, seeing her infirmities; so
have they dealt cunningly with his people; he to hold them to himself, they to
draw them from the Gospel. Because, says Chrysostom. the people of Israel, who
were brought up in Egypt, and had polluted themselves with Idolatry, would
have sacrifices and ceremonies, so that if they were not permitted unto them
they were ready against to fall to Idolatry, though God desired a people to
worship him in spirit and truth; yet he granted them unto them, dealing as a
wise Physician, who having a patient sick of a fever, by reason of heat
desiring earnestly cold water, and unless it be given him, he is ready to seek
a halter to strangle himself, or some ways to destroy himself; there the
Physician, compelled by necessity, gives him a cup of water prepared by
himself, and commands him to drink, but forbids him to drink of any other
but that; so God gave the Jews goodly ceremonies, but so as it was not lawful
for them to use any other. And then were they grieved, says he, when he showed
his wrath upon them, for making a calfe of their earrings, etc. So in cunning
and mischievous policy has the Church of Rome, when they saw how the nature of
man was affected with holy things, because of the outward means, when simple
and base, because the Gospel is such, they little regarded them; but glorious
things were those that affected them, therefore have they fallen from the
simplicity of the Gospel, to that whorish and Babylonish pride they are now
in; when it was with her, as Boniface the Bishop and Martyr said to one that
asked, whether it was lawful to administer the Sacrament in wooden cups, he
answered; In times past they had golden Priests, and wooden Chalices; then
would they brag of nothing such a multitude as now, when they have wooden
Priests, and golden Chalices, since Pope Urban has made all the ministering
attire golden and gay: and so because they are led by their senses, therefore
they are violently carried after this superstition.

This teaches us, Hierome said, putabant altari deesse religionis
sanctimoniam, quia deerat aedificationis ambitio, they thought the Altar was
not to be so religiously regarded, because it was not richly bedecked and
adorned: such are they as give no respect to the word, because the Minister is
of no great respect, but a mean plain man; who have not learned more to
esteem the earthen vessels for the treasure, but less to account of the
treasure for the earthen vessels. Hence many set light by the holy Table,
because they see nothing here but bare bread and wine, very base and mean
elements, such as they use ordinarily to feed on else where; and so, as a fool
or a natural, if he light on an obligation or a deed, he makes no more
reckoning of it, then of a piece of parchment and a little wax; because he
understands not the contents and end of it: So in these things, not
considering the end and use of them by whom they were appointed. As there are
some who overvalue these mysteries, specially the Sacraments, that tie the
grace of God inseparably to them, and make the opus operatum a matter of
sufficient virtue, that ascribe some divine power to the very outward elements,
and so bring a divine adoration of them; that of holy mysteries make magical
miracles, as the Church of Rome does; so again are there many in the Church of
England, that undervalue them, that make no other reckoning of them, then as of
ordinary elements, and repair unto them as to the bodily food, because they
are in nature and substance the same; the Doctrine here being the ground of it,
they being so dull sighted, they can look no further then that which is object
to the sense of them, they can see no end nor use of them more, no secret grace
nor virtue in them, and, that which is worse, will not submit themselves to be
taught, or if taught, not believe, when oportet discentem credere.

To teach every one in these actions sursum corda habere, aqua vitae in a vial
or glass, look both alike, but they differ much in work and effect, because
there is a kind of Spirit in the one, which is not in the other: so the Word,
and the Sacrament, though the same in substance with ordinary Bread and Wine,
yet they have a far diverse work, and effect with them unto those who receive
them with a holy heart and a faithful, in regard of Gods covenant (whose
seals they are) in regard of the mercy of God of which they more assure us; in
regard of Christ's Death that they represent unto us, and put us in mind of;
and in regard of the grace of Gods Spirit that accompaineth them in those that
so receive them for the effecting of these former matters.

VERSE VIII.
And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, it is not evil: and if ye offer
the lame and sick, it is not evil: offer it now unto thy Prince: will he be
content with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts?

ANd if you offer the blind for sacrifice,] The Lord proceeds to prove that
they despise him and his table, showing how they have erred both against his
law, and the rule of honesty and comeliness, Levit. 22.21, 22.

And if you offer the blind for sacrifice, it is not evil:] These words are
read of some by way of interrogation, When ye offer the blind, is it not
evil? Now a negative interrogation ever affirms strongly: q. d. it is very
evil, and yet ye do it. Hierom, Junius: others read these words by way of
affirmation, God continuing to tax their thoughts; you think it not evil, you
think it is good enough for God, you make it no fault; and this is the common
reading, which is more agreeable to the context: but the matter is not great how
we take it, both tend to one end and one effect, both a disliking and
disallowing of such sacrifice.

For the sacrifice here spoken of, some understand it only of the sacrifice the
Priests offered for themselves. Levit. 4.3. Heb. 5.3. Others for the sacrifice
the people brought; which when they were burnt offerings, which were all
consumed upon the Altar, the Priests nothing regarded; but the sinne-offering
to be eaten by the Priests, for those they were mavelous careful they might
be of the best; and some expound them of the peoples offerings in general,
whether they were burnt offerings, sin offerings, or peace offerings, or
whatsoever; and those words (it is not evil) some take for the Peoples words,
it is good enough for the Priests; or it is good enough to be burnt to ashes;
others make the Priest heartening the people in that practice, which is very
probable, God before directing his speech to the Priests. In sum, it is like
to be both, as both are here accused.

The Prophet had told them of their base thought of Gods Table: to this they
might happily reply or object; you take too much upon you, to see into our
hearts, and to censure our thoughts. to this the Prophet makes by insinuation
in an answer, though closely, that he need not to dive so deep, their life and
practice taught as much; a man might easily read the profaneness of their
hearts in the uncleanenesse of their gifts, and their contempt of God in their
carriage. The thoughts of men are known either immediately and directly by God
alone, Jer. 17.10. Matthew. 9.4. or mediately and indirectly, and so man may know
them; either as God reveals them, Ezekiel. 14.1, 2, 3. or as men discover them
by their actions, looks, or speeches; First, Matthew. 7.16. Ye shall know them by
their fruts: do men gather grapes of thorns? or figs of thistles? Secondly,
Isaiah 3.9. The show of their countenance does witness against them. Thirdly,
Luke 6.45. In this place the first is understood.

Now this people are not reproved for bringing no sacrifice, but faulty
sacrifice, faulty for quality, contrary to the Law. Levit. 22.21, 22. Now what
is spoken of their sacrifice, may be spiritually applied to ours, that we may
make some benefit out of this. The Sacrifice of the Church in the New Testament
are: First, men themselves, and that first in life, souls and bodies
consecrated unto Gods service, both in their general callings and their
particular places. Romans 12.1. Present your bodies a living sacrifice, not to
slaughter them, but the corruption of them. Romans 6.6, 13. Now the mortifying of
the affection kills not the man, Psalm. 51.17. As the Ram, not Isaac was
slain, though he was offered. Read Genesis 22. Mar. 12.33. 1 Samuel 15.22.
Secondly, in death, in offering their souls to Gods hand, Luke 23.46. Acts
7.59. and their bodies for testimony of the truth, being called to it. Phil.
2.17. 2 Timothy 4.6. Secondly, the Sacrifices of the New Testament are, some thing
from themselves immediately to God, as praises and prayer, compared to
Sacrifice, Psalm. 50.14, 15. Drink offering, Psalm. 116.31. Incense. Psalm.
141.2. Hosea 14.3. Apocal. 5.8. and 8.3, 4. Secondly, to man for God, as Alms.
Heb. 13.16. Psalm. 4.18. Matthew. 12.7.


Now as their Sacrifices signified ours, so their imperfection notes out ours:
The first is blindness, which in the Scripture signifies ignorance; as Rev.
3.2. 1 Pet. 5.9. showing that he detested such service as was done of ignorance
without knowledge. By lame, he may mean when things are done without mind and
heart, with the outward man, not inward; for fashion, fear, praise, etc. By
sick, when it is without spirit and affection: the spirit is gone when it is
without zeal, fervency, affection.

Offer it now unto thy Prince.] The second reason; they have offended against
nature and civility. He that offers the Lord of Hosts such things, as he
would not offer unto a man, which the Prince will not accept, says that the
Table of the Lord is not to be regarded; ye offer such etc.

Offer now unto thy Prince, Captain, or Ruler.] there was then no King in
Israel; for the kingly dignity was extinct in Jechoniah, Jer. 22. but they
only had Captains over them, appointed by the Persian King, to whom they were
in bondage: As Zerubbabel is called the Captain of Israel, Haggai 1.1. and so
it is made more offensive, that they used God as they would not do a mean
man, not a King, but a Captain: and it is as if God had said, Now make trial
of the good will of your Captain toward you, which is more familiar to you,
being a man, and inferior to a King; whom if thou labourest thus to reconcile
unto thy self, thou shall more offend, and excite against thee. What an
indignity is this then against me, that I should be no more, or not so much
accounted of, as a mean Captain? how should not this, in stead of reconciling
me, more displease and provoke me? And what can you look for from me, so
mighty a God, to defend and vindicate my glory and service from such
indignities, but wrath and displeasure? Will he be content with thee, or will
it please him? as if he said, undoubtedly it will marvellously displease him.

Or accept thy person, or accept thy face?] That is, will he kindly and
lovingly look upon thee, and grant thee the things thou desire? as Genesis
19.21. Job 42.8, 9. so here, Will he friendly respect you, and grant your
request? No, he will be more offended with you.

In the whole he answers, that they might object, that he took too much upon
him to pry into their thoughts and hearts; when he did no otherwise than
ordinarily he might do, judge their lives by their practices. The point then
is:

The wickedness of the life proclaims and preaches to men the profaneness
of the heart, as Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God;
they hve corrupted and done an abominable work, there is none that does good.
Was not this enough to convince them of impiety and Atheism before God which
searches the heart? So there is another way for man to know, Titus. 1.16. They
profess that they know God, but by works they deny him, and are abominable and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. And this is enough to
condemn them of impiety and profaneness, of contempt of God, want of the
fear of God, before man that sees the outward man only, and must by it judge
of the inward. Matthew. 7.16, 17, 18. Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? So every good tree brings
forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. A good tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit. Non ex foliis, non ex floribus, sed ex fructu arbor bona mal^ive
dignoscitur. Bern. Epist. 107.
A good or evil tree is known, not by the leaves or flowers, but by the
fruits. 1 John 3.10. In this are the children of God known, and the children,
of the devil: whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he
that loves not his brother.

Because the tongue will bewray the irreligiousnesse of the heart when it
speaks folly; If any man among you seem religious, and refraineth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. And Matthew.
12.34. O generation of vipers, how can you speak good things, when ye are
evil? for of the abundnace of the heart the mouth speaks. Hence is that,
Matthew. 26.73. So after a while came unto him they that stoody by, and said unto
Peter, surely thou art also one of them, for even thy speech bewrays thee.
Though the tongue may now and then prove a false glass, yet it is then, when
it makes show not of the worse, but of the better; as false glasses do
commonly make men seem fairer than they are, and not fouler.

Because the nature of man is so hypocritical,

This controuleth such rash censurers,

But do such wise men of the world these things without ground?

It cannot be, is by them noted as a Pharisee, that is, an hypocrite: That, as
he said, Non potest esse salvus, qui non vult esse malus; salvus saltem a
linguis maledicis; si it is, 1 Pet. 4.4. It seems unto them strange, that ye
run not with them unto the same excess of riot; therefore speak they evil
of you. But as S. Bernard said, that Balaam, when he thought to have cursed
Gods people for hyre, did bless them again and again, though against his
will: so these men more commend, than discommend these persons, where they
seek so to disgrace them, while unwillingly they heap praises as reproaches
upon them, and while they go about to back-bite them, against their wills they
acquit them, because the object good things instead of evil against them, as
if they could find no matter of evil in them.

But Matthew. 23.23. Christ condemns the Scribes for strictness in paying
tithes.

But the latter part answers the former, He that is faithful in the least, he
is also faiothfull in much; and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also
in much. It is a sure token of an hypocrite, for a man to live apparently in
the practice of any one known sin, though in other things he seem never so
strict. For Eccles. 10.12. Any one dead Fly corrupts the ointment. But to
condemn a man for an hypocrite, in being stricter than our selves in some
cases, and for being nice in matters of small moment; when the whole tenor of
his life is otherwise righteous also, it is to condemn him for that which
Christ will commend him for at the last, when no man shall take his praise or
his joy from him, Matthew. 25.21. But these men thus condemn themselves; for as
the Heathen Vt quisque optimus est, ita quemque optimum esse putat; so Vt
quisque pessimus, etc. as Heliogabalus thought every man dishonest in heart,
because he was so himself: so these men think that men cannot without
hypocrisy either be nice in small things, or very careful and zealous in
greater things, because themselves are not come to that sincerity, to make
conscietice of them themselves, and therefore if they should seem to do it,
they should but dissemble; and they measure other men's consciences by their
own. In a word, thus to judge is a most corrupt course; as if a man would
needs have it, that the tree is rotten at the root, because the fruit of it
seemed to be good, or at least because the fruit of it showed better and fairer
then the fruit of many other trees that grew near it. Then, as Math. 7.1. Judge
not, that ye be not judged. Else if thou thus judge Gods servants, take heed
of a censure from him, and, it may be, from those whom thou thus censurest,
because 1 Cor. 6.2. The Saints shall judge the world.

The second ground of these men's judging, is some strange judgment that befalls
them that seem thus religious and careful: for if one that has made
conscience of his ways be overtaken with any judgment, an unusual cross, or
dye suddenly, then judge they of him, as Jobs friends did of him, that God has
found out his hyprocisie; what would they do if he had dyed in that misery?
and yet might he have done well enough for all that, and did trust in God, Job.
13.15. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and I will approve my
ways in his sight. Thus the Barbarians judged of St. Paul. Acts 28.4. And so
the Disciples, John 9.2. But as men shall not be judged before God for that
they have suffered, but done; so men shall not be judged of men: for so Christ
showed, by crossing his Disciples judgment, John 9.3. as also theirs, Luke
13.3, 5. as he shows not only by this which might come from the malice of
Pilate, but from that of the 18. who perished under the Tower of Siloam; for
the like may befall to another and themselves.

But may not a man judge at all by Gods judgments?

Yes, Athens, when a beam of the house fell in a banquet, and knocked a
professed Atheist alone on the head; there is then some ground for our censure,
for then the word and work of God meet together, else there can be no
certain judgment, because, as it is, Eccles. 9.1, 2. I have surely given mine
heart to all this, and to declare all this, that the just and the wise, and
their works are in the hand of God: and no man knows either love or hatred
of all that is before them. All things come alike to all; and the same
condition is to thee just, and to the wicked, to the good, and to the pure, and
to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not;
as is the good, so is the sinner, he that swears, as he that fears an oath:
And that which is befallen another may befall thee; for it is no faith, but a
fancy, whereby any man thinks himself excepted from any outward calamity,
having no promise for freedom. Therefore should no man judge another, that
lives outwardly well, by ought that befalls him; for it may befall him, and
that in Gods justice, as Proverb. 24.17, 18.

This tells how it is warrantable to judge and censure of other men, such as are
wicked and profane, Alms and Prayers by vain glory, or want of sincerity,
are not good at all to the doer: but evil cannot be good by good intention;
for that which is evil in it self, cannot be made good to any for any end. And
so evil actions still argue an evil heart, as bad fruits an evil tree: And
so it is a very ridiculous thing for men to brag of a sound and good heart,
when their lives be as they be. For Jam. 3.11. Evil words, says the Apostle,
corrupt good manners, their own and others, much more evil works good men;
yea, they argue the doer corrupt within; for it is not the fruit makes the tree
bad, but it is the badnesse of the tree that makes the bad fruit; the fruit
discovers the naughtiness of the tree: For as the Adder has a sting before
he stingeth, so are men wicked before they work wickedness; then is it known
she has a sting, and they corruption: for as the mouth speaks from the
abundance of the heart, so the heart works from the abundance of the soul;
so that lawful it is for me to judge a common swearer, a known adulterer, a
manifest deceiver, an usual drunkard, etc. to have a corrupt heart: for when
the earth is broken up, and a filthy stench comes out, argues it not that
there was some dead corpse there? so when men send out cursings, blasphemies,
swearings, raylings, and such like, that a man should not be able to endure,
from whence issue these, but from a dead and a rotten soul? these carry about
them then the grave and sepulcher of the Soul. Now that which is said of the
words, may be applied to the works. As a man therefore coming to a tomb,
though never so costly and curiously, or so royally decked, yet if at some vent
be apprehend a filthy savor issuing out of it, he knows well there is not
only a dead, but a rotten carcass within; so when a man feels a filthy and
unwholesome sent, either of profane speech, or of dissolute life issuing from
the heart, which is the fountain of both, he must needs conclude, neither is
it against charity to censure it, that there is a soul not only dead and
buried, but even rotten in sin and corruption. Therefore let no man delude
himself, while he would deceive others, to bear men in hand that he is sound
at heart, when he is unsound and corrupt in his life; as if a man might
beperswaded that it is a vine or figtree which he sees hanging full of crabs
and wildings. Nay it must needs be otherwise; therefore as Christ said, Math.
12.33. Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; Or else make the tree
evil, and his fruit evil: for the tree is known by his fruit. If thou hate
sin, show it in thy life; if thou fear God, show it by thy careful walking
in his ways, and seeking to please him; If thou love the word, frequent the
assembly with diligence and devotion, and not carelessely and slippily: If thou
think reverently of the service of God, be careful reverently to address thy
self to the performance of it: Otherwise know, thy practice proclaims the
want of these things; and think not much if others judge thee by that, for thy
have their warrant from Christ their King; By their fruits you shall know them.

If ye offer the blind,] The Lord he requires not all the substance of a man
to his service, but a few things, and those not very costly, yet he requires
the choice and best in their kind, and they be accounted of better then any
others; the best should not be dear to them, nor too dear for him.

Men ought to offer their best things to God,

This serves to reprove all hypocrites, e contra. But how many have we that
think every thing is too much that they have, and any thing is good enough for
them? I say nothing of them who bestow all on pleasures, and give nothing to
the Lord portion, who, as they think playing better then preaching, bestow much
on Players, but nothing on Preachers. But I aim at such as account of
Preaching, and enjoy the benefit of the ministry, and yet a vain man will
bestow more on a player in a year, then they in many on a Preacher. Alms to
the poor, is a gift to God, as the Scripture teaches; but how many have we, I
do not say rich churles, like him in the Gospel, that will not give crumbs to
Lazarus, but, that will give something, but it is alms of moldy bread, tainted
meat, that scarce dogs will eat, or cannot be spent otherwise; whose rust of
their siver, and their motheaten gartments shall be awitnes against them, and
eat their flesh. Any thing is too much for these, nothing too good for their
bellies, pleasures, Jam. 5.2, 3.
or pleasant compaions who delight them. Miseri homines parasitis and
assentatoribus distribuert malunt, quam Christo qui tot sibi benecia contulerit.
Wretched men had rather give to parasites and flaterers then to Christ from
whom they have so many benefit. These shall have of the best, those of the
worst; these liberally, those sparingly. If I should tell you that a Citizen in
the end of the sickness being some few miles from the City, when the plague
was beginning hotly, going thither but of pleasure, at his meat would have
given a Crown for a set of Musicians to delight himself withal: when otion
was made in the company to give somewhat to the relief of the sick and poor in
that town, as men who could not forget the miseries of the poor, from the
experience of their own; he among the rest gave but a penny or two pence at the
most: I say if I should tell you of such an one, (I say not I know the party
and the thing,) I know you would all condemn him in your thoughts. But this I
say, I know many who will not stick to spend a crown, 10, 20, 30, 40 s, upon
one idle journey for their pleasure and delight, (which I do not simply
condemn,) when as it will grieve them, and they cannot smother it, to bestow in
a whole year upon the Lords Levites and his poor Lazarites, a crown or 10 s.
or the like portion far inferior to their ability; how are these not reproved
here? And if these, then those who give to the Lord not the flower and youth of
their age, but to the flesh and devil, and the dregs of their age to God;
their strength and health to the world, their weakness and sickness to God.
The first fruits are too good for God, though he call for them, the gleanings
are good enough. Many have children, some are of good parts, good gifts, and
towardlines; it is pity they should serve the Lord, andbe for his ministry,
they are fit to stand before Kings and in great places, Dan. 1.3, 4, 5. but if
any be of no gifts, he is fit for no others use, turn him to the ministry, 1
Kings 12.31. 2 Chronicles. 13.9. and this must be his refuge against poverty; many
betake themselves to the reading of the Word, and come to the Church when they
have nothing else to do, neither their bellies to feed, nor their backs to
deck, nor the world to follow, the weather not for them to walk in the fields;
as Luke 9.59, 61. Many will offer small and petty sins to God, that they have
no pleasure or profit, by, but retain their maine sins which give delight, 2
Kings 10.28, 29. Mark 6.17, 18, 20. Math. 23.23. yea many can be content to
part with their outward goods, not inward corruption, but buy out their sins
with alms, Mich. 6.6, 7. Now a number of such hypocrites as these are
manifestly here reproved, that they think things too dear for the Lord, and
please themselves, when they offer of the worst unto him.

To reach every man to honor God with the best he has, to think nothing too
good for him, Solomon's advice, Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy riches, and
with the first fruits of all thine increase. Defraud not his Levites of their
portion, thinking it too much that is bestowed on them; for 1 Cor. 9.11. If we
have so wen unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your
carnal things? Nisi dederit oleum populus, extinguetur lucerna in remplo Orig.
And Galat. 6, 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, make him that has taught
him partaker in all his goods. And if men be straitened this wise, it may be
just with God to take their Ministers from them.* Unless the people bring
Oil, the light will go out in the Temple: so in ordinary course and Gods
judgment. Feed the poor with the best, and deal liberally with them: Deuteronomy.
14.29. Nehe. 8.10. Make them heirs and co-heires with thy children and
kindred; as Chrysostom. When thou art dying and going, though it is far better
thou should nourish them living, and before thou depart. Hom. 25. ad pop.
Ant, remember God in the best of thy days, health, youth, strength, Eccles.
12.1. Deuteronomy. 6.5. If thou have children, think none too good for God to carry
Gods Name, to stand in Gods stead, 1 Cor. 2.16. and 5.20. And if God will have
him, if he be as Isaac, freely offer him; the better, the more acceptable to
himself. Give God the time that is meet, and he requires, though it be
precious to thee, and may be employed to profit otherwise, Exodus 34.21. Offer
to God the greatest and sweetest sins, nearest and dearest, Marth. 5.29, 30.
as Heb. 11.17. yea, give God the heart, and honor him with outward holiness.
Prove. 23.26. In all things be an Abel, not a Cain. Genesis 4.

The blind.] Sacrifices were Types both of head and body; and for body, of the
persons and service. And thus God rejecting their sacrifices for their
blindness, shows how he condemns blindness in those who serve him: And
blindness is ignorance, and want of knowledge. Revelat. 3. 2 Pet. 1.5, 9. And
so from hence observe:

Nothing that is done in obedience of God can be good,

Because the Lord respects not the outward show and pomp of works, (as the
multitude and greatness of them,) but considers them inwardly, whether they
flow from true obedience, or no. Now true obedience is then, when we believe by
the Word of God, that both he requires such works, and they are those which
please him. Now this cannot be without some measure of knowledge.

Because as he condemns the vain pomp and outward show of Hypocrites, so
does he all fained service and will worship, Isaiah did their works not in
conscience to God, but for some other end; so these can not, because they know
it not, and so it cannot be acceptable. He that does a man a good turn, and
meant it not, but aimed at himself, profit or glory, or whatsoever, cannot
look for any great thanks from him, for whom it fell out so well.

This confuteth Papists, as touching ignorance, Search the Scriptures, and
justly complain of their spirit contrary to Christ's, Dureus denies that this
is spoken to all Christians; for how should (says he) the ignorant and
unlearned search them? We answer, that if Christ had then spoken to the learned
only, his exception had been good; but if he preached to the whole people, as
then he did; if to all the Jews, why not to all Christians? Let them show a
difference; but if none, but that both Jews and Christians must by them have
the knowledge of Christ and eternal life, when these are common to all in the
Church, why not to other? when we urge that, Acts 17.11. The Bereans searched
the Scriptures whether those things were so. Bellarmine answers, that was
because they doubted whether he was an Apostle or no. The matter is not why
they examined, but that they did, and are commended for it by the holy Ghost,
that they compared his doctrine with the doctrine of the Prophets. Then ought
all Christians thus to do, to try the Spirits, for now may doubt be made, more
then at that time, 1 John 4.1. and no search can be but by the Scriptures, and
knowledge of them. When we urge that, Collo. 3.16. then they exempt the
ignorant, and say it is not for all, but commend unto us the decree of the
Council of Trent, who have allowed such to read as have license from their
Ordinary, upon testimony from their Curates that they are humble and devout
persons, Rhemist, praefat. that is, none but their Pope-holy, devout
Catholics, and yet the Apostle speaks generally; and if the People be rude,
and, as they still object, ignorant, we answer, that is no reason, or of no
force to prove they must be kept from the Scriptures; this is the way to make
them still rude: this ought not to be so, and that which is a fault in them,
can be no argument against this, as if a man should be denied the benefit, not
of light, but of salve because his eyes are sore. When we object unto them the
fathers, as Chrysostom. upon the place of the Collossians and diverse otherplaces,
or that of him, Hom. 2. in Math. and aliis: Hear I pray you, O ye layty, buy
you Bibles, the medicines of your souls, if you will buy you nothing else: get
the new Testament, the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles. To this the
Rhemists, praefat. sect. 14. answer, that he speaks this as a Pulpit man, not
as giving rules in the Schools. As if he would speak one thing in the Pulpit,
another thing out of it, or made the Pulpit a place to utter lies. These who
thus censure the fathers, no marvel though they often be saucy with Luther and
Calvin. But Bellarmine answers, de verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 16. that he spoke
that then, because many men were given to be at theaters and stage plays, and
other vanities, and never read the Scriptures, no not such as had
understanding; and he exhorts all, not that he would have all to read them,
but that they should do it, which could do it with profit: for he knew he had
to deal with those who need such amplifications: mark that Chrysostom. is made
an Orator, no Preacher; one that for advantage would speak more then he
thought. When upon Col. the 3.16. he exhorts not only in general terms, but
specially; hear O you worldly men, that have wives and children, he commands
you to read the Scripture, and not lightly and slightly, but diligently and
painfully: How can they restrain those with any conscience, to some, which is
spoken generally to all? And for this reason holds it not now, have we not
plays, they and we, theaters fuller then Churches, to the corrupting of the
minds and manners of our people? find we not many, of good capacity, more
affected with any thing then the scriptures? Then as necessary it is they
should be exhorted, and read them; and yet with them may a man read any thing
but Scriptures: by all which, as they themselves make gain of them, so they
make them and their sacrifices, service and obedience, whatsoever it is,
unacceptable unto God, because they are blind sacrifices, specially that, when
they teach them to pray in an unknown tongue, where every word must needs be a
blind service.

To reprove all such as keep themselves in ignorance and without knowledge,
being blind, they will be blind still; Duraeus the Jesuit said impiously, that
Christ left Pastors to to the people, not Bibles, they so practice; for they
will not once almost look in them, only they will hear from the Ministers, and
would to God they would hear constantly and carefully; they might have more
knowledge: but while they only hear, they remain still ignorant, and hearing
so carelessly, by ignorance they do the things that God has commanded now and
then, but without all true knowledge; and so make them unacceptable to God,
when they work by imitation, and often enquire of the lawfulness after the
deed.

To persuade every man, that has any desire that his service may be acceptable
to God, whatsoever it be, Gamaliels feet, and hearing the Ministers, but by
reading the Scriptures and word of God your selves diligently and painfully:
Col. 3.16.
for the Apostle so persuades, Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously
in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord; not, as
Chrysostom. well says, that the word should be in you, that is, come as a
stranger, and stay for a night, a season, and gone again; but it must dwell in
you, and that not sparingly, but copiously and abundantly. Chrysostom.
exhortation is not so necessary for these times and this audience, to get them
Bibles, for they must have them in their hands and houses; but to use their
Bibles, which most neglect. Therefore as he de Lazaro, Semper horter, and
hortari non desinam, ut non hic tantum attendat is iis quae dicuntur, verum
etiam cum domi fueritis, assidue divinaru^ scriptur arum lectioni vacetis. Quod
quidem and iis qui priv atim mecum ingressi sunt non desisto inculcare.
Chrysostom.
Hom. 3. I again and again exhort you, not only here to attend to the things
that are spoken, but when you are at home, to read the Scriptures carefully,
which I use to press upon them that are about me. If this may prevail, a
little more may that of Moses, Deuter. 6.6, 7, 8. and that of Christ, John
5.39. and the former of S. Paul. But alas, how may that complaint of
Chrysostom be applied, Homil. 13. in John, Quinostru^quaeso repetit domi
aliquid, out Coristiana dignum opus aggreditur? Quis Scripturarum sensus
perserutatur? Nemo sane: sed alve^los and talos frequenter invenimus, libros
quam rarissimos. Chrysostom.
Who is it, that when he comes home does any thing worthy of a Christian? who
is it, that seeks the meaning of the Scripture? None at all; we may ordinarily
find you at Tables or Dice, but very seldom at your Bibles. Does not he
describe many of our Christians, and their familes; and so, that being without
knowledge, all they do is unacceptable. Let us labor then for this knowledge,
and be not Idols in the Church, who have eyes and see not; and so much
knowledge is required, as there is capablenese and means.

And if ye offer the lame,] Lame sacrifices forbidden signified the dislike
that God had of such service as was done by halfes, in body, and not in mind;
e contra, inhypocrisie, for fashion and custom, and such like.

Lame service which is done to God, And Eliah came unto all the people, and
said, how long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him:
but if Baal be he, then go after him. And the people answered him not a word.
This God complained of, Isaiah 29.13. Jer. 12.2. Ezekiel. 33.31. Act. 4.36. with
5.1, 2. Math. 6.2, 5.

Because all and the whole is his,

Because this is to make a false God of him;

This condemns all presenting of the body before an Idol, Daniel chose
rather to be cast into the fiery furnace, then to bow to the Kings Idol. The
mother in the Maccabees, and her children embraced death rather then they would
ear swines flesh contrary to the law of God. Infinite are the Martyrs of all
times, who have courageously embraced death, before they would do any such
thing; who had been all very unwise, and fools, if this would have served, and
God would have accepted such lame sacrifice.

But for all this a man may go to mass, and such superstitions,

No more to the one then to the other;

But we go to make us abhor it,

This were as if a man should go into a harlots house or stews, Peter: This is
not the way to abhor it. But as he that would abhor uncleanenesse, or
drunkenness, must not take that course, to go to stews, or to frequent
tavernes, for that is to make him more in love with them; but must labor for a
chaste and sober heart, and that will make him abhor it; so here for a
religious and holy heart: for it is not the seeing of evil that makes men
abhor it, but the seeing of good. If men labor for true grace they shall
easily abhore sin; and in this, as in all others, evil must not be done that
good may come: Nay, though never so much good would ensue, yet when God has
forbidden it, when he dislikes it, it must be avoided.

This condemns all profane men who talk of serving God with their hearts,
day, is a day God has required men to do him public service in; how many
spend that day either in journeying for some small affairs, or withdrawing
themselves upon some small occasion, and yet tell us they doubt not but God
will accept their thoughts and their heart, as they ride, or the like: as if he
that dishonors God in his body, could honor him in his heart at one and the
same time; or, if he could, he would accept it: As if he could serve him
within, that rebels against him without: As if a child or servant could think
to persuade his father or master, that he respected and served him in his
heart, when he disobeyed and dishonored him in all his outward carriage, and
did not that he bade him: Nay, the contrary is most true; so for alms, that it
is enough to look upon the poor rufully, and speak mournfully to them, and
seem to have affections within, but their goods they bestow upon harlots and
vain persons, their labor and strength upon them; And yet they think God
will accept their heart. as if a subject should pretend a loyal heart to his
Prince, and think to be accepted for it, when he gives his goods, and spends
his strength in a service against him, serving his Enemy.

Here is condemned all lame service of God,

To reach every man to endeavor, Ananias and Sapphira, that he divided, them,
because they had divided that which they ought to have given whole unto him;
how will he accept a man that shall divide himself, when he comes to him?
Their heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty. Hosea 10.2. we must
bring both body and soul to the service of God, to pray with the mouth, and to
pray with the understanding, to hear with the ear, and to speak with the
heart; for the body has both os and aures, to speak to God, and to hear him.
Men must give God the bodily presence when he calls for it; they must come
to his service, but they may not leave their hearts behind them, or suffer
them to be carried away when they are present, but leave every thing, when they
come, behind them, that may hinder them; as Abraham did at the foot of the
mount: yea, when they would fall upon his service, as the fowls would upon
Abraham's sacrifice, Genesis 15.11. drive them away, and perform all duties with
the whole man, that it may be a whole, and so an acceptable sacrifice, 2 Samuel
5.8.

And sick.] Sick sacrifices of beasts were condemned, to show how God dislikes
that service that is without spirit and affection, faintly and drowsily
performed.

Sick service God dislikes, Aaron and his sons would not eat the sin-offering,
because they could not do it cheerfully, Levit. 10.19. He would have all
things done cheerfully, fervently, zealously, Isaiah. 58.13. 1 Cor. 9.17. Romans
12.8, 11. 2 Cor. 9.7. Eccles. 11.1.

Because when things are done dully and coldly by one,

This condemns those who condemn zeal, fervencie,

To teach every man to labor to do all things in the service and fear of God,
with zeal, alacrity and earnestness; things, pleasant or profitable; these
about pirituall things. As the vain men, or worldly men are tickled, and
marvellously affected with the things they go about; so ought men in the
service of God. And though happily it is not to be attained unto, to have as
fervent affections to the things of God, as carnal men have to the things of
the world, because they are wholly carnal, these but partly sanctified; they
have nothing to hinder them, these have great hindrances and pull-backs, even
their own corruptions; yet must they endeavor, what they may, to do every
thing with all cheerfulness, and even grieve to see them go about their
sports and profits, their delight and gain, with greater spirits, and more
cheerfully, then themselves about these holy things; yea let it grieve them
that they themselves follow worldly things more eagerly and affectionately then
spiritual things, and find greater cheerfulness in the one then in the other.
And so things done drowsily and heavily, without cheerfulness, shall not be
accepted.

But what if this affection be wanting,

Nay, Nehemiah unfit to pray, yet prayed, Chapter 1.4. Hanna, 1. Sam. 1. Our
Savior Christ himself, when his heart was full of sorrow (though this was in
him an infirmity without sin, though not in us, because of the corruption it
draws from our vessel, as new wine put into a mustie vessel.)

To teach men not to defer the service of God till sickness and old age,

To teach every one to whet on one another, sharpen: and Deutr. 6.7. whet, and
in general, Hebr. 10.24. provoke one another.

Offer it now unto thy Prince.] The second reason and proof of their offense,
because they had gone against civilitie and common honesty.

This is the corruption of man's nature, Nevertheless among the chief rulers,
many believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him,
lest they should be cast out of the synagogue; for they loved the praise of
men, more then the praise of God. Joh. 5.44. Yea in all things man is more
careful of all duties, and makes it much more heinous to fail in duty to the
one, then to neglect and set light by the other.

Because they see and converse with men daily, John gave him the lie, that
would brag of the love of God, when he lived in the hatred of men. 1 John 4.20.

Because love being the ground of all duties to God, or man, and affection to
man is natural, to God spiritual,

Because men have a carnal understanding, because they are ble to see what
they receive from men, but not from God:

Because men have perverse and partial judgments; for that which befalls a
man, every one thinks may befall him;

To teach every man to see the corruption of his heart, when when he finds
that he is in himself and others more careful of the duties that belong to
men, then to God; Augustine writ de mendacio, Nulla bomines graviora peccata
aestimant, quam quae huic vitae faciunt injuriam. Aug.
Men esteem those sins worst, that are most injurious to this life. And
again, Non odi^^us eos qui nulli molesti sunt, We do not hate those that live
in the practice of sin, be it never so great against God, as long as they are
not injurious and offensive to man, from this corruption is it, that men fear
man more then God, are more desirous to please him, to keep and recover his
favor then Gods. If a great man be offended with them, as Chrysostom, they
will entreat friends and neighbors and others, tend patiently many days,
entreat humbly once and again, a 100. times, and if he will not be reconciled,
they can not be in quiet: but when they have offended God, they can lie and
sleep securely, and take their ease, and follow their pleasures, shows not this
their corruption? From the same corruption is it, that if they receive any
benefit from men, or by them, they labor to be thankful, and to recompense;
but though they cannot but look upon some of Gods blessings, they return none
to him. As men are liberal in thansk for their feasts and refreshings, to the
instruments, not to the author: as Basil. As little children that think they
have their coats from the tailor that makes them, and brings them home and
puts them on, by reason of their weak conceit: from this corruption is it,
that men mislike disobedient sons and bad servants of other men; because it
may be their own case to be abused so by their own, and the bad example of
others may be a means to effect the like in theirs; when they no ways be like
affected when they are rebellious to the word of God. Masters will be bitter to
servants for unthankfulness, negligence and carelessness of their commodities,
whereas they never take notice of their lying and swearing, (that brings in
gain) of profaning of Gods day; because the one concerns them, and may be a
means of their danger and loss, and the other nothing so near touches them,
which makes God give them over to their corruption, to be more unfaithful to
them. To be brief, all hate a covetous man more then a prodigal man, and an
oppressor, more then a filthy liver, As S. Augustine says, because the one is
such as he is more like to injure us then the other; though the other dishonor
God as much, and do as much hurt. These and many such things argue directly
the corruptions of men, that prefer duties to men, before duties to God.

Thus ought we to labor against this corruption, and to strive to fear God,
friend in the world, and more sorrow for it; then shall we see him that is
invisible, as the Author of all our blessings, and praise him more than men;
then shall we measure sins, not as they are against us, but in themselves,
and against God, against whom they are principaly committed, and which makes
them sins: Not lae sio nostri, but offensa Dei makes them sins, therefore we
should hate them, those especially that least concern our selves, that our
zeal may appear to be a severity rightly grounded, and judgment well
informed, as David, Psalm. 69.9. The zeal of thine house has eaten me, and the
rebukes of them that rebuked thee, are fallen upon me: when for his own he
says, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did
it: but Gods wrongs he could not brook. As Moses for himself was very meek,
Numb. 12.2. but Gods dishonor Exodus 32. made him exceeding hot. Finally, let
us not be partial, and express it in exacting those duties of man, that we
are careless of performing in regard of God; like that people, Phil. 2.21: who
sought nothing but their own profit, and for their person, which overthrows
all both in Church and Commonwealth.

The thing he reproves them for, as contemners of him, is, that they had
offered that to him, which they would not do to man, and an inferior.

To offer unto God that which man will not accept,

Not because of the greatness of Gods mind,

Because it comes from the corruption of the heart; Who can bring a clean
thing out of filthiness? there is not one. So of this; and such an egg, such
a bird.

Because it is against the royal law; James in another case, James 2.8, 9. But
if ye fulfill the royal law, according to the Scripture, which says, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well. But if you regard the
persons, you commit sin, and are rebuked of the law, as transgressors; so in
this, being against the royal law, accepting persons, any before God, must
needs be evil and sin.

To teach men to examine their lives and their practices, Jephtha then answered
the Elders of Gilead, Did ye not hate me, and expel me out of my fathers
house? How then come you unto me now in the time of your tribulation? And yet
many men refuse the friendship and familiarity of God, by speaking to him in
prayer, and hearing him speak to them again in preaching, when they are in
health, wealth, prosperity, and flourishing estates; and think he should not
be strange to them, when they are in sickness and trouble and affliction,
never searing what is threatened, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. Because I have called and
ye refused, I have stretched out mind hand, and none would regard; but ye have
despised all my counsel, and would none of my correction: I will also laugh at
your destruction, and mock when your fear comes. Are not these then guilty
of this sin? And so in many other particulars, which men practice, may they
see themselves, if they deceive not their own hearts, that they are guilty
even as this people, and that God speaks to them also, as well as to the Jews.

He that shall find himself guilty of this, (as who is he that shall bring his
heart and life to this Touchstone, that shall not find himself exceedingly
guilty this way?) must humble himself, and repent himself for it, as for
other sins; which stands not in the sorrowing for, and disliking of that
which is past, but in striving against it for the future time; ever taking this
as a rule, for so God intends it, for reproving their corruption by this, he
intends it should be their rule to measure out duties to him, by that duty
which they owe unto man, and perform unto him; because they are naturally more
prone to the one than to the other. As he made the love of a man's self the
rule of his love to others, because it is more natural unto him by much; so in
this, when any man is then about duties to God, if not otherwise he have a
heart to do them, in all simplicity, yet, as Chrysostom. Hom. 16. in 1 Timothy if
not otherwise, yet, as servants obey us, so let us the Lord. So as we would
do duties to men, do them to God, if not otherwise; and think whether the
Prince, or a man of any worth, would accept such things from us. If God send
his messengers and Ministers to us, bringing glad tidings of peace, think we
if the Prince should send an Ambassador unto us with good comforts and great
promises, how would we hear him, and strive to it; how use him with reverence
and respect, by no means deny him any obedience, much less abuse him in word
or deed? So for the Ministers, if they were sent from men to men, what
faithfulness, care, and diligence would they use? Think when thou art to pray
to God, how thou would put up a petition to the Prince, with what
submission, reverence, attention, and humility. If thou art to come to his
Table, and called to it, think how if the Prince called thee to his, thou
would remove impediments, set aside excuses, come with all preparation as a
guest fitting his Table. God requires service of thee as his servant, think if
thou were the Kings servant in ordinary, what would thou do for the time
thy service is required: do that, and wholly that, and little of thy own, the
most of the day spent in his: So think if thou be Gods servant, what is
required of all the days of thy life; the chiefest and greatest part of it.
God requires alms and relief of thee, a portion for his servants and
household, his Levites and Ministers, and the poor. Do not use them as men do
the Kings takers, hide the best things from them, and think every thing too
good; thou know he will not then accept thy person, but be angry with thee.
So in this; Thou will say many Ministers are wicked and unworthy, so thou may
say of many takers and purveyours; yet if thou deny to them the Kings due,
though they shall be punished, yet shall thou be checked. So in this, look to
God, and not them.

VERSE IX.
And now, I pray you, pray before God, that he may have mercy upon us: this
has been by your means: will he reward your persons, says the Lord of
Hosts?

AND now, I pray you, pray before God.] After the Prophet had reproved their
sins, he comes to threaten them for them in the rest of this Chapter: and
these judgments or punishments threatened, may be reduced to these two heads;
they are either privative, that is, a withdrawing of Gods mencies, verse. 9. ad
14. or they are positive, an inflicting of a curse, verse. 14. The first is
double, a rejecting of their prayers and sacrifices, verse. 9. and a rejecting
of them who did pray or sacrifice, verse. 10. secondly, a removing of his
worship from them to the Gentiles; verse. 11, 12, 13.

In this Verse is the rejecting of their prayers.

And now, pray.] This some take to be an exhortation to Repentance, and to
seek the Lord; as Zephan. 2.3. but some, and the most; understand this
Ironice, by an Ironia, and think it is spoken in derision, like Isaiah 47.12.
1 King. 22.15 So here he commands nothing, but derides them who thought thus to
reconcile God by such sacrifices: As if he had said, Long may ye do thus, but
prevail nothing at all.

Pray before the Lord,] Some read, entreat the face of God, that is, the favor
of God; for so is face taken for favor, Psalm. 31.16. some read, Pray to turn
away the face of God, that is, his anger: as Psalm. 34.16. some before the Lord,
to the Lord himself, or in the place where he shows himself, seeking unto him
by prayer, Psalm. 27.8. And of these this is the most probable.

That be may have mercy upon us,] He alludeth, as it is thought, to that, Numb.
6.35. (.i.) that he would be gracious and merciful unto us, forgive us our
sins, and multiply his mercies and blessings upon us, (upon us) Prophet and
people: the Prophet puts himself amongst the rest, as partaker of the same
miseries and troubles.

This has been by your means,] Now the Prophet lays upon the Priests the
cause of this curse that is befallen the people: some refer this to the
former part, showing that they should pray, because they had been in fault. It
is true that they ought chiefest to seek to turn to God, that are authors of
his wrath; But then should this be taken by way of exhortation, not upbrayding.
But this is referred of some to the latter, showing the reason why God will not
hear nor accept, because they are authors of this evil, and therefore unfit
to pray to God for the rest. This has been by your means, by your fault has
this evil happened untous; for it is not so much the fault of the people, who
bring such imperfect sacrifice to the Temple, as yours who receive them for
gain, and neither reprove the impiety of the people, nor instruct their
ignorance, as by your office you ought.

Will he] That is, he will not; the Interrogation denies more strongly.

Regard your persons] will he accept your persons and faces? To accept ones
face is to show himself courteous and gracious to any.

He will give to none of you, nor accept your prayers. That which was spoken
closely by an Ironie, and carried the face of a permission or command, that is
now plainly and without figures spoken, showing that he rejected both them and
their sacrifices.

Says the Lord of Hosts] He that made all in Heaven and Earth, and is ruler
over all creatures, the mighty Lord. As it were to meet with the bse conceit
they had of God, preferring every mean man before him.

In the first place, of this covert rejecting of their prayers; and first of
the manner, then the matter. The manner is an ironicall speech, or speech of
derision.

It is lawful for the Ministers of God, Elijah. 1 Kings 18.27. And at noone
Eliiah mocked them, and said, cry aloud, for he is a God; either he talks, or
pursues his Enemies, or is in his journey, or it may be that he sleeps, and
must be awaked. Eccles. 11.9. Isaiah 44.12, 13, etc. 1 Kings, 22.15. Now
examples are warrants, where precepts be not against them.

Because this is a special means,

This refelleth their conceit, who deny any use of these things, neither
jesting. I answer, that there is an use of them and that in the Scripture, as
the former examples prove. be true that a man speaks one thing and thinks
another, yet the manner of his words and speech does bewray his mind, and that
indeed there is no contrariety; for the hearer may easily discern his mind. As
in that of Michaiah, 1 Kings 22.15. for verse 16. Ahab discerned well his
meaning, that he did but scoff at him and his false Prophets; so that he
speaks as he thinks, not for the very words, but for the matter of the words.
Neither makes the place in the Ephesians against this, because it forbids
scurrility, when men scoff and reproach others rashly, when there can be no
edifying of others, or good to the party, but their malice and disdain showed,
and as well the modest and temperate hearers, as the sufferers are offended;
which is that which differs far from these things; we can not bring these
within compass of a lie unless we make the Spirit of truth a lying Spirit:
And in these a man has no intent to have his words otherwise taken then he
means them.

This warranteth the use of them,

Now for the matter, and first for that which is general here in the whole, God
will not accept their prayers, that is the thing threatened.

It is a heavy thing, And when you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide
mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear: for
your hand are full of blood. Proverb. 1.28. Then shall they call on me, but I
will not answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.
Hosea 8.13. The contrary is promised as a blessing, and performed as a
blessing, and acknowledged as a blessing. Isaiah 30.19. Surely a people shall
dwell in Lion, and in Jerusalem: thou shall weep'no more: he will certainly
have mercy upon thee, at the voice of thy cry; when he speaks he will answer
thee, 2 Chronicles 7.14. Psalm. 116.1, 2.

Because it is a manifest sign that the persons are out of favor, and he is
dispeased with them: In sacrificiis quae Abel and Cain primi obtulerunt, non
munera little Deus, sed corda intuebatur, ut ille placeret in munere, qui
placebat in cord Cypr. de Orat. Dom. 11.
then the prayer; as first Abel was accepted, then his sacrifice. And what can
be more fearful, though it is not always felt, then to live out of favor
with God? If in the displeasure of a Prince, there be danger, more of Gods, to
carry Gods mark about with him, as Cain, that he is out of favor.

Because this is the means by which all blessings are obtained, Oration justi
clavis est coeli, ascendit precatio, and descendit Dei miseratio, Aug. ut nihil
sanctu^ nisi illo sanctificante, nihil potens nisi illo roborante. Prayer the
wall of the City. Ita nihil faelix, nihil anspicatum, nisi illo prosper ante.
Cipr.
as Elijah: it opens the right hand of God for blessings, shuts the left hand
from cursings. Now when a man can receive no blessing, neither escape any
curse, has no means for it, because as good be without the means, as when
they are not regarded; must it not be a heavy thing? Many things befall many
men without prayer, if that be no prayer which is without understanding and
affection; yet are they but common blessings, such as are common to them, and
other men; yea, creatures unreasonable and senseless.

Because, as one says, vere novit recte vivere, Augustine out of Saint
Cyprian, Quae implenda jubentur in lege, in oratione poscenda sunt; but if they
can not or shall not be heard in praying, where shall they have strength to
perform?

This notes the senselessenes of many men, Saul did the witches, things
condemned by him before. Secondly, because if those means be of force, and by
them they prevail, their hearts are cheared up well enough, little or not at
all sorrowing that he heard them not, not much caring though he did not.
Thirdly, if they prevail not by those means, yet never will they return
again to God, nor seek from him, if not the things, yet patience and comfort
in the want of them.

To teach the whole Church, and particulars of it, they knock, and it is not
opened unto them: And yet, they asked things agreeable to Gods word, such as in
their best understanding are for Gods glory, and their own good: yea, and
their prayers were made in faith, in fear, and with tears, not doubtingly,
rashly and carelessly, for which men had need to pray they be not imputed as
sins to them. I say they ought to grieve, not so much for the want of the
things, as because they are not heard, because their prayers are not received,
as David, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.

And now pray before the Lord,] It is an Irony deriding these, but yet
instructing others; as Michaiah 1 Kings, 22.15. though he derided Ahab and his
false prophers, yet he meant to instruct good Jehosaphat. And so here, though
those were unfit to pray, yet he teaches others what is a fit time, and when
men ought to humble themselves; now when judgments were threatened, and at the
door.

Then is it high time, Gather your selves, even gather you, O Nation, not
worthy to be loved; before the decree come forth, and ye be as chasse, that
passes in a day, and before the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, and
before the day of the Lords anger come upon you. So is the command, Joel 2.15,
16, 17. so has been the practice of the Church and Ministers. In Ester there
they fast when the Decree was out, before the Execution. Cap. 4.16, 17. So the
Prophets, Jer. 4.19. Micha. 1.8. yea, this is manifest in Nineveh and Ahab.

Because the Lord shall have his end and that he seeks for; Poenitentiam mavult
quam poenam coelestis Pater; Just. Mart. Apol. 2. for if he would punish, he
could do it without admonishing.

Because it is wisdom,

Because if it be not prevented,

To reprove and condemn the security of many, Jeremy complains of, Chap.
8.6, 7. I hearkened and heard, but none spoke aright; no man repented him of
his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one turned to their race, as
the Horserusheth into the battle. Even the Storke in the air knows her
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the
time of their coming; but my people knows not the judgment of the Lord:
preferring even unreasonable creatures, and silly birds before them, in their
kind more wise than they. Therefore it is, that they are ready to reproach and
deride the Word, specially if the blow come not with it: as Jer. 20.8. and say
as they, Jer. 23.33. What is the burden of the Lord? which is in them either
from the root of hypocrisy within their hearts, being always like to Haman,
Ester 6.6. When Haman came in, the King said unto him, what shall be done unto
the man whom the King will honor? Then Haman thought in his heart, to whom
would the King do honor, more than to me? He thought none to be so much in
the Kings favor as himself: So they think none to be in the favor of God
but they; if they see any thing upon others, they judge it is justly for their
sins: as Luke 13.1. But as for themselves, they are Gods white sons, they
shall never miscarry. Or it is from that trust and confidence they have in
their riches and estate, as Prove. 18.11. The rich man's riches are his strong
City, and as an high wall in his imagination. They are as Rebels in a strong
City well victualled, well armed, and well manned, that stand out at defiance
against all threats, and never will submit themselves; if ever, not till he
has made a breach upon them, thinking he is never able to do it till it be
done: And then, when it is too late, could they be content to do it; but it is
their folly and madness, losing their opportunity of submitting betime.

To teach every one to be wise to know his time, Chrysostom. Hom. 5. ad pop. An.
speaking of the Ninevites: Quomodo non mir abile, quod quando Judex sentcntiam
tulerit, per poenitentiam rei sententiam solverunt; non enim urbem fugerunt
sicut nos nunc, sed manentes sententiam repressere. Audierunt quod aedificia
corruerent, sed peceata fugerunt, non discesserunt quisque de domo sua, sicut
nunc nos, sed discessit de via sua. Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad pop. Ant.
When the Judge gave sentence, the guilty reversed the sentence by repentance;
they run not out of their City, but staying there, altered the sentence; when
they heard their houses should fall, they forsook not their houses, but their
sins. This ought men to do, betake themselves to the Lord, by forsaking
their manners, this is a wise man's part. Prove. 22.3. A prudent man sees the
Plague, and hides himself; but the foolish go on still, and are punished.
But where can he be safe, and be indeed hid, but with God himself? Prove.
18.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs unto it,
and is exalted. God must be the sanctuary to them against his own wrath, Psalm.
32.7. Thou art my secret place, thou preservest me from trouble; thou
compassest me about with joyful deliverance. And in conclusion, this may
instruct us and our times; God has spoken, the Trumpet has been blown, let
us fear, and think it high time e return to him; not deferring, lest the
next thing be the blow and the judgment, when it will be too late. Think we of
that, Heb. 3.7, 8. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
Meeting by this with the voice of Satan, Mihi body, cras Domino: nosce obsecro
inimici dolos; ut omnino a Deo averter is, consulere non audet: novit enim hoc
grave admodum Christianis, verum artibus insidiosis aggreditur, intelligit
autem quemadmodum nos praesens tempus libenter recipimus, omnisque actio humana
in praesens contendit and spectat: Quamobrem hodiernum tempus nobis furatur
astute, and spem facit crastini, postquam crastinum venerit, rursus malus
divisor sibi hodiernum, crastinum vero Domino dari petit. Basil. Exhortatio ad
Bapt.
says Basil, exhort. ad Bapt. who says, Serve me to day, and God to morrow. I
beseech you, be acquainted with the craft of the Enemy; he dares not advise
thee altogether and presently to forsake God, (for he knows Christians would
not endure that) but he deals craftily, being a Serpent, and subtle to
beguile, he steals upon us for the present, and puts off the next day for
God, and when that day comes, still he puts it off to the next. Therefore the
Lord, to meet with that, comes thus calling upon us, to day: partly, quia, qui
non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit: Because he that is unfit to day, to
morrow will be more unfit; and partly, for that this is the time, lest judgment
do come upon us, and we have no evasion; for we cannot tell what to morrow
may bring forth.

Before God.] Though he deride these, yet he directs others, and teaches them,
that in prayer they are before the Lord.

They who pray, Cornelius said, He and his company were, Acts 10.33. before
the Lord to hear one speak in his Name, and him speaking mediately to them,
more when they speak immediately to himself. Therefore was the Arc of Gods
presence ever in the Temple, before which they prayed, and from which they
received answer. Psalm. 84.7.

That he may have mercy upon us.] It is that they were commanded to pray for
before, and to require for the people.

In prayer men must not ask what they list,

To reprove all those prayers, not according to Gods will, but their own lusts
and fancies; whatsoever their vain hearts desire, that they utter before the
Lord, and make their requests unto him for it, never regarding whether good or
evil, how agreeable or disagreeable to the word, having their own affections
the rules of their prayers: such prayers they would be ashamed to put up to
men, as they prefer to God, making Christ a mediator for them, (if he will
do it for them) for things they would blush to desire the help of man in;
some praying, as Saint Augustine, who confesses of himself, that he prayed
to God to let him live a little longer in his sins; so they in their
corruptions, desiring still means and opportunities to fulfill their lusts and
desires: Some ask temporal things simply, as they, Psalm. 78.18. who asked
meat for their lust; who importune the Lord to prosper their journey and
endeavor for honors, as Balaam, be the means what may be, who have their
prayers sometimes in mercy denied, as Jam. 4.3. and sometimes in wrath granted
to them, as Psalm. 79.29, 30, 31.

Mercy] That is, be gracious and favorable unto us, and lift up his gracious
countenance upon us.

In prayer men ought especially to pray for Gods favor:

Because this is the fountain from whence all things else come, He who spared
not his own son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him
give us all things also? And the cause of that was his favor and love, Joh.
3.16. For God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Because no temporal blessing, asked neverso earnestly, Esan his blessing, can
be obtained, till a man have his sins forgiven. Hence, Math. 6.11, 12. the
petitions are joined with a copula as inseparable.

This reproves their folly and error,

To teach us to pray for temporal things,

For us,] Both Prophet and People; he would be prayed for as well as the
people, acknowledging, as it seems, those things in himself which he
reproved in them, the better to affect them.

No man is so excellent in the Church of God, of the rest. This the Prophet
shows, that he exempteth not himself, but would be prayed for as others. So
Hosea, 14. sure including himself. This our Savior Christ showed, when
teaching his Church in the person of his disciples to pray, he taught them to
pray one for another, and taught them they had need of the prayers one of
another. Math. 6. This is showed by Saint Paul's earnest request unto them. Romans
chap. 15.30. repeated to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1.7. so Col. 4.3. 2 These. 3.1.
and for the Saints, Ephesians. 6.18.

Because his excellency excludes him not from the communion of Saints,

Because his excellency is imperfect,

Because the excellency and goodness a man has, is (as Basil exhort. ad Bapt.
brings in some making the objection) The saurus servatu difficilis, Opus est
vigilia, we had need to be more watchful; and he advises to take three
adjutors, Orationem, Jejunium, Psalmodiam, Prayer, Fasting, and singing
Psalms. Now as for keeping of treasures a man will use other means and
helps, and all little enough: so in this should he be careful.

This reproves those who think they have no need of the prayers of others,
Hierome tells me directly, that some think they need not the preaching of the
Church, some not the prayers, but think they are able enough to instruct
themselves, and of themselves to prevail with God: which rises commonly,
either from ignorance, or knowledge; the ignorance of their infirmities, or the
knowledge of their graces, that makes them not desire the helps of others; as
Moses took Aaron and Hur with him when he went to pray, being privy to his own
infirmities. This makes them disdain others, being puffed up with pride, and
self conceit.

To instruct every man, be his excellency what it may be, David, and his men so
desired the Temple, Psalm. 84.1, 3, 7. So men in desiring them, show themselves
to delight in the presence of God, as gracious children in beholding the face
of their father) there is much profit to be had by them. Non parvus est fructus
domine, ut a multis tibi gratiae aguntur de nobis, and a multis regeris pro
nobis. August. confess. 10.4.
The benefit is not small, O Lord, that thou should be praised by many of
us; and prayed unto by many for us. For a man shall have not only the benefit
of the prayers of one or two, but many hundreds; and if one faithful prayer
prevail much, Jam. 5. how much more many? Thus shall he enjoy the communion of
Saints, which is a worthy thing; so shall he better increase in the graces and
blessings received, and keep that he has for the best here, and the most
perfect must not imagine himself to be already a burning and shining light
within the house of heaven, Sic ardens and lucens nondum in domo se esse
confidat, ubi sine omni timore ventorum accensum lumen deportatur, sed
meminerit se esse sub dio and utrague manu studeat operire quod portat, nec
credat aeri, etiamsi videat esse tranquillum; Repent enim, and hora quae non
putaverit, mutabitur, and si vel modicum manus remiserit, lumen extinguetur.
Bern. ser. 3. in vigil. not. Dom. l.
where once kindled there is no danger of any winds to blow it out; but must
remember that he is yet in the open air, and must cover and defend the light
he carries with both hands; nor be confident, though the air seem to be
calm; for sooner then he is aware, if he take away his hand, his light may be
pussed out, says Saint Bernard.

If the prayers of living Saints be so needful and profitable,

How profitable soever their prayers may be to us, Bernard. ser. 2. in vigi.
Not. Dom. that Apocal. 6.10. does prove it, because of the anser, verse. 11. yet
to desire their prayers, as those who are living, is not lawful, because it is
without precept or president in the Scripture, because it is agains reason and
the Scripture. For first, that they know not what we do; nor hear our
prayers, is manifest, Isaiah, 63.16. again, how should they come to the
knowledge of them, they in Heaven, we in Earth, and dispersed in many several
places? As for the answer of the Rhemists out of Hierome, against Vigilantius,
that they are in every place, because they must follow the Lamb withersoever
he goes, Revel. 14.4. if the place be understood of them, who imitate Christ
upon earth, and not of the souls departed, as it may be, at least it must be
unstood of all the lect, whereof part are in the Church in the earth; then the
conclusion must be, they who are upon earth must be every where as well as they
who are in heaven, which is most absurd. But admit it of the Saints in heaven,
how is it possible they should be every where? Not at one and the same instant,
they say, but such is their motion, speed and agaility to be where they list,
and their power and will is answerable, as ell as the devil can be every where
to work mischief. To which I answer, that their comparison is absurd, for the
Devils by propriety of nature, and the Lords permission, have such passage in
the would; So have not the souls of the Saints, for they are appointed by God
to rest. Revel. 6.11. and 14.13. What rest, if they must be tossed up and down
by the breaths of men, sometime in England, sometime in France, etc? But say
they did, how were it possible they should hear the prayers of all that call
upon them at one and the same instant, if they be not in many several places
at one and the same instant? And if it be impossible, the prayers must needs be
vain. Besides, if it were not, yet in that which Papists give their reason
for, it is made more abominable; that is, to make way for themselves to the
favor of God, even as by Nobles and great men we procure access to the King.
Numquid tam demens est aliquis, etc. Is there any so mad, says Ambrose in
Epist. ad Romans cap. 1. or so careless of his life, that he will give the
honor of the King to a Noble man, to procure him access to him, when he shall
be guilty of treason, when he comes before him. And yet they think they are
not guilty of treason to God, who under pretense of seeking God by Saints, do
give unto the Creatures the honor of God the Creator, and (forsaking the Lord)
worship their fellow servants. And though there be (says he) some reason, why
they should make way to a King by his Nobles and Pensioners, because he is a
man, and knows not who are fit to be trusted with the Commonwealth: yet unto
the Lord, who knows all things, and knows the worths and worthiness of men,
there needs no spokes-man, but only a holy mind: Thus far he. But to add to
him, that this thing is without precept in Old or New Testament, confessed by
themselves. Eccius grants, not in the Old, because the Fathers were then in
limbo, (a good reason against him) and the Israelites were mavelous prone to
Idolatry. Not in the New, lest the Gentiles should return to their Idolatry,
and lest the Apostles should be too vainglorious and ambitious, if they had
commanded it: and so a great difference, and strong reason why we may pray to
Saints living, but not to Saints departed.

Fur us.] He separates not himself from this Church for all the corruption of
it in Priest and people; he forsakes not their assemblies, but co^mmunicates
with them in their service and sacrifices.

Men ought not to separate themselves from a visible congregation or assembly,
a visible Church, for the abuse of it, Augustine Observes, that mourn for the
corruptions of the time, not who separate themselves from the Church. In the
New Testament we find not Christ, nor his Apostles to forsake the Church, but
remain in it, though mavelous corrupt; teaching, reproving, correcting,
mourning for it. So of the Pastors of the six Churches of Asia; their
corruptions noted, and their Angels biding with them. To this purpose is that,
Hebr. 10.24, 25, 38, 39.

Because no man ought to separate himself from the true Church of Christ: e
contra, corruptions in manners cannot make it no Church, when true faith is
taught and maintained.

Because separation and excommunication from a particular Church, is the most
heavy and greatest censure of the Church;

To condemn all those who withdraw themselves from our assemblies, because of
corruptions amongst us, Augustine answered Petilian, That he did not well to
leave Christ's heap of Corn, Non habes quod objicias, fiument is Dominicis
paleam usque ad ventilationem ultimam sustinentibus, a quibus tu nunquam
recessisses, nisi levior palea vento tentationis, and ante adventum
ventilatoris avolasses. Aug. cantr. Petilian. Cap. 1.18.
because the chafe was in it, till the great winnowing day; and that he showed
himself to be lighter chafe, driven out by the wind of temptation, that flew
out before the coming of Christ the winnower. What folly is it for a man to
leave the Jewels and Plate in the Cold-finers shop, because to the Iron tongs
and black coals? What warrant have they, when as Noah left not the Arc for all
the unclean beasts?

To teach every man not to be so offended for the corruption of the times, Si
amarent pacem, non discindere^t unit atem. Aug. contr. lit. Petiliani, lib. 24.
broken unity, says August. And in another place, A vessel of honor ought to
tolerate those things that are vile, Vas in honere sanctificatum, debuit
tolerare ea quae sunt in contumelia, nec propter hoc relinquere domum
claritatis Dei, ne vel vas in contumeliam, vel stercus projectum de domo sit.
Aug. contr. epist. Parm. lib. 3.5.
and not therefore to forsake the house of God, lest himself be cast out as a
vessel of dishonor, or as dung. That certainly which is, 1 Cor. 5.13. Put
away from your selves the wicked person, is to be understood of those who have
authority, which if they exercise not, is their sin, not mine, or thine:
Shall I forsake the good, and the Church where I may be safe, for their evil?
Nec quisquam sine consensu cordis sui ex ore vulneratur alieno. Let no man then
separate himself; for why should a good, pure, and sound member separate it
self from those that are corrupt, and cut it self off, both to make the whole
worse, and to lose to it self the good it might have by abiding?

For us.] The Prophet who had the least hand in the sins, and was the least
cause of the burden, he fears, and as it were mournes, and seeks how to
avoid it, when the Priests, who were the cause of it, are secue and careless.

It often falls out,

This has been by your means.] Here is the reason why God will not accept
their prayers, because they are authors and principal causes of the evil and
sins amongst them.

The prayers of hypocrites and wicked men,

Because they are not profitable for themselves,

Because they are in Gods sight abominable;

Balaam prayed for the people of God,

A truth it is, August. so answers Parmen. contr. Epist. Parm. lib. 2. cap.
8. proving they ought not to separate themselves, as they taught, because men
are pollured. But for the example, I think we may say, Balaam was not heard,
saving his judgment, because he certainly never prayed; he did prophecy
indeed in a certain former of prayer; therefore that speech of his is
accounted a blessing, because he did ominate and foretell happy things which
would befall to the people of God. But he never prayed indeed, for his heart
went against it, it was utterly against his will; who for the wages of Balac,
would rather have desired to curse; only he was compelled to it by the Spirit
of God. Therefore he was not heard, which prayed not; but the Spirit of God,
which in the good works the affections, and suggesteth words, did only put
such words into his mouth, for any good that should come by them to the people
of God, as for the terror and destruction of Balac, who had set himself
against the people of God, to show him, tha not they before him, but he should
fall before them.

This shows the folly and the vancity of the reason of some Popish and
Popishly affected, who plead for lenity, Darius did well conceive it. Ezra 6.9,
10. And that which they shall have need of, let it be given unto them, day by
day; whether it be young Bullocks, or Rams, or Lambs for the burnt offerings of
the God of Heaven; Wheat, Salt, Wine, and Oil, according to the appointment
of the Priests that are in Jerusalem, that there be no fault; that they may
have to offer sweet odours unto the God of Heaven, and pray for the Kings life,
and for his sons; for they often stand in the gap, and keep away much evil,
yea, they prevail for much good. One of these is better than a multitude of
others, (as Chrysostom. of wicked and godly, Hom. 26. ad pop. Ant. as one
precious stone is better than a thousand pibbles) And that breeds but confusion
and subversion of all, when we desire multitudes, as they do in Theaters, and
not an honest and good multitude. It is, I say, of force for the good, but not
for these wicked hypocrites and treasonable Priests and Jesuits, and all such,
specially understanding Papists, who have given up their name to Antichrist,
whose prayers cannot profit the King and State; who if they pray, pray but as
Balaam blessed Gods people, against their hearts; who if they could pray with
their hearts, yet should never prevail, nor be accepted, being as they are.
And to them we may use that of Tertul. Apolog. cap. 34. Esto religiosus in
Deum, qui vis eum imperatori propitium. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 34.
Be thou religious toward God, who would have him to be favorable to the
Emperor.

This teaches the fearful case and condition of that Church and State, him
to turn away his wrath, lest he destroy them, are men themselves who provoke
Gods wrath; of whom it may be said, as Ezekiel. 13.4, 5. O Israel, thy Prophets
are like the foxes in the waste places; ye have not risen up in the gaps,
neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel, to stand in the battle in
the day of the Lord: undoubtedly that State must expect a judgment from God,
besides that it is one it self, when God takes away good men, such as were the
Charets and horsemen of Israel, their defense and preservation, who prevailed
more by their prayers, as Moses, Exodus 17. then all the Host did by their
spears; specially when their successors are wicked and profane men, that
provoke God to wrath by their wicked lives. It goes hard with the Church when
her good Prophets are by God forbidden to pray for it, as Jer. 14.11. But yet
if they remain with them, though they cannot prevail at one time, yet they
may at another; but more hard when he takes them away, when they are without
hope of having them to stand up for them again; but worst of all when they are
such as are of lewd life, who thereby provoke God against them. Therefore these
both shoudl be mourned for, the loss of the one, and the succession of the
other: for the former are, as the King said, the Charets and the horsemen of
Israel, the latter are the Charets and horsemen against Israel; for not being
with it, they are against it: of good Ministers we may say, as Psalm. 127.4, 5.
as are the arrows in the hand of the strong man, so are they who are her good
Ministers: blessed is the Church that has a quiverfull of them, here is her
prosperity and peace; hence is the ruin and overthrow of her Enemies. And on
the contrary may we say of wicked Ministers, whose prayers shall never be heard
for the Church, but rather against it.

This granted, then have we a warrant to separate our selves from the Church or
congregation,

The Donatists made the same objection to August loco praedicto, to which the
sum of his answer is, that when they pray with the congregation, they are
heard, though for their own wickedness they deserve to be rejected, because
of the piety and devotion of the people who join with them; whence I collect,
that though the Minister speak the words, yet they are not his prayers only,
but the prayers of the Church: As in an other case, though the Minister deliver
the signs, yet it is not his sacrament, but Christ's, and so may be profitable,
notwithstanding the corruption and insufficiency of the Minister; soin this.
For this must be understood, that in the congregation some one must conceive a
prayer for all the rest, lest in a multitude there should be confusion and
tumult, if every one should in his own words utter his prayer in the Church;
therefore the Minister he is the mouth of the Church. If he be a faithful one,
he shall be heard together with the Church; if otherwise, not he, but the
faithful people, who speak to God by his words. But you will say then, what
loss have we if the Minister be wicked? I answer, many ways, because the
corruption of men is such, that as they like the Word and Sacrament worse,
because they dislike him that brings them, and find not such joy and comfort
in them, as by his hands they like; so they cannot be, nor are not so affected
to join in prayer with a man they like not, or think not well and reverently
of, to whose persons they have just exceptions, so their prayers are not as
they should be, neither he with that spirit and affection utters their
petitions to God; which might affect their hearts to more zeal in prayer.
Besides, they want the benefit of his prayers in pivate, who should mourn for
them, and pray for them, when they are following their necessary affairs, or
their convenient pleasures, or are living in their sins; be a Moses, to hold up
his hands for them, a Job, to sacrifice for them, as Jer. 13.17. or as Paul,
Act. 20.31. All which a good and faithful Minister will do, but he that is
not, will be as careless and secure as he can be, and never do it, or if he
should, yet not be accepted.

This has been by your means,] the sins of the people are imputed to the
Priests, because they taught them not better, nor reproved them of this, ante,
verse 7.

Will he regard your person,] He will not; your office and place and dignity
in the Church, shall not make him receive your prayers.

As God to elect and call men, Cain was the first borne, and had that
privilege, yet for all that God received not his offering, but Abels, Genesis 4.
so betwixt the Pharise and publicane, Luke 18.10, etc. as betwixt the rich men
and the widow. Mark 12.41, 42, 43.

Because he is no accepter of persons, Acts, 10. that is,

Because he looks not as man looks,

This will serve to check a corruption in our times,

Let no estate hinder a man from this service,

VERSE X.
Who is there even among you, that would shut the doors, and kindle not fire
on mine Altar in vain? I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of Hosts,
neither will I accept an offering at your hand.

WHo is there among you,] Here is the rejecting of them and their sacrifices
threatened, which is the maine point in the verse; but in the former part, as
diverse of the learned do so take it, he returns unto his former
expostulation, reproving the priests for their ingratitude and corruption of
his worship. And then it will be read, who is there among you that will shut
the doors: or do you kindle fire on my altar for nothing? And some expound
it, that the Priests would not so much as shut the doors till they had their
wages paid; others, that they did nothing in Gods service, but they were
rewarded for; God arguing their unthankfulness to him, by his bounty to them.
But others take the words as they are here read, both more agreeable to the
original, as also more squaring to the present matter, to show how he rejected
them and their sacrifice, when he wishes that some body would shut the doors
of the Temple, or that they would offer none at all, and so keep out the
Priests that they could not come to sacrifice any thing upon his Altar, which
he did so distaste and dislike: and so it is; I would rather you should not
offer at all, then as you do.

For the particular words. And kindle not fire upon mine Altar. q.d. that ye
might not come to offer upon mine altar, kindle not my altar, so in the
original, a Metonymia. In vaine] id est, to no end, the word signifies,
freely, Job. 1.9. for nothing, so unjustly without cause; Psalm. 69.5. so
scotfree, without punishment, Prove. 1.11. to no end or purpose. Job. 2.3. Pro.
1.17. so here.

I have no pleasure in you] The former is a wish, this is the reason of the
wish. All is in vain, and to no end, because I like not you, and will none
your sacrifices, he shows that he esteemed not these offerings, not from the
nature, but from the mind of him who did offer them. If he were endued with
piety and holiness, God would accept his offerings and service; If otherwise,
God would take no delight in them for all their offerings.

Neither will I accept an offering at your hands,] These offerings he simply
refuses not, being things he had commanded, but because they were offered by
them, quoth. I am so far from accepting at your hands these corrupt and
imperfect sacrifices, that if they were never so perfect and agreeing to the
laws of men prescribed, yet I would not accept; you please me not, your gifts
and offerings cannot be accepted of me: here is first a wish, and the reason of
it; he wished that they would offer no sacrifices to him at all, rather do him
no service, then do it as they did.

The Lord had rather have no service done unto him of the sons of Men,

Because this argues contempt of God, and, as we may speak,

Because the Lord has no need of the sacrifice and service of men; a man
cannot be profitable to him, neighbor. It is nothing to him that thou art
righteous, that thou prayest, or performest any other service unto him; Job
22.2. May a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise, may be profitable
to himself? therefore he, as a rich King, values not the gift, but the mind of
the giver; he looks more to the manner of doing, than the deed; he respects
more the heart, than the hand; the inward affection, than the outward action.
No marvel then if he had rather have nothing, than carelessly and corruptly
done. And this made him esteem more of the Widows two farthings and mytes,
than of the rich men's treasure. Deus puram magis conscientiam exaudit, quam
preces. August. contr. lit. Petil. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 53.
God rather hears a pure conscience, than prayers.

Phil. 1.15,

It is better in regard of others, Judas preached condemnation to himself, and
yet no doubt converted some, as the rest did. Noah was glad he could get some
to build his Arc, himself and his sons being no workmen fit for it, but it
profited them not a whit that built it; as good never have done it.

This may teach us what to judge of our Church-Papists, Shechemites were
greater sinners with Hamor and Shechem his son, in taking the Sacrament of
Circumcision for profit, and satisfying their pleasure, and to make a prey as
they thought of Israel, Genesis 34. than the other Gentiles who refused it. So in
this; they come to Church for advantage or profit, or saving of that they have;
then is it better they should not come at all. Nay not so, but it is less e
vill, not more good. The goodness is, that they labor to be instructed in
that they ought, and to know how they ought, and to endeavor to come with care
and conscience, as is required. In the mean time he that abstaines, and comes
not, is less evil than he that does come carelessly, etc.

Why then should Magistrates compel men to the service of God,

The Magistrate may not compel any man to do evil, Ad fidem unllus est
cogendus invitus, sed per severitatem, into and per misericordiam Dei,
tribulationum flagellis perfidia castigari. August. contr. lit. Petil. lib. 2,
cap. 38. And again, Si quae igitur adversus vos leges constitutae sunt, non
been facere cogimini, sed male facere prohibemini. Ibid.
he is not to respect the erroneous consciences of men, as not to suffer them
unpunished for evil doing, though they should pretend conscience in it; so is
he not to abstain from compelling them to that which is good: for, that evil
is adjoined to it, it is not his fact that commands, but comes from their
infidelity and corruption who are commanded, of which he cannot be accused,
when he has carefully endeavored, that they be duly and rightly instructed
and informed: for when he may say, the things I require are commanded in the
Scriptures, I have done my best endeavor, that you may know the truth, and not
perish; and I will not cease for hereafter to persuade, and exhort, and command
you; do you need the Scriptures? confer with the Ministers, pray God to open
your eyes; he has then done his part.

This teaches the fearful condition of such as only do and perform the
service of God, without understanding what they do, most unworthily they
intrude themselves to the Table of the Lord; God had as liefe have them away,
their room were as acceptable to him as their thronging, as his without the
wedding garment at the feast of the King. Matthew. 22.

This is their fearful condition; he that hears, is as though he heard not;
he that prays, as though he prayed not; he that receives the Sacrament, as
though he did not; and so of all the service of God, he is as acceptable to God
in not doing them, as he is in doing, and e contra, as odious.

Then a man had as good not do at all?

If any man do gather so,

This ought to instruct us that have any desire to be accepted in our service
of God, Samaria, if they enter the City there is death, if they sit still,
there is death also: So we, if we do not, we displease; if we do, and not as
we ought, we displease also. They had a third way to go out to the enemies,
wherein their difficulty was the greatest; but we have a third, wherein our
comfort is the most, to do them as he requires of us.

But some will object, who is sufficient for these things? And this is but a
cold comfort in a thing, that no body can do, and therefore we were as good to
do nothing at all; for who can do things as he requires?

I answer, that we may, that we may be accepted, and not abstain. It is a rule
indeed in matters indifferent which are left to our choice, to refrain from
them, because our weakness will bring forth some sin in the doing of them;
As in exercises and recreations, when they cause us to swear, curse, fret, and
lose our time: But in other things for which there is a commandment, and our
own experience teaches that we cannot do them, without defects and
infirmities, (As we cannot hear the word with that faith we ought, but
wandering thoughts, and sometime envious, covetous, ambitious desires creep into
our hearts,) yet must we do, and not abstain, our imperfections hinder them
from being perfectly good but not from being accepted, while we condemn our
imperfections, and desire to do better. And as the high Priest, Exodus 28.38.
did bear the iniquity of the holy things; so though our holiest offerings and
works of righteousness have defects and wants, blemishes and stains of our
corruptions, our high Priest Christ Jesus will acquit us of them, and procure
us favor and acceptance in the sight of God.

I have no pleasure in you,] The reason of his wish why he could desire they
rather should not do him service, then do it: and this carries the contrary,
I dislike you, I am angry and displeased with you, remaining in your sins and
corruptions.

The Lord has no pleasure in ungodly men,

Because the Lord hates iniquity, Psalm. 45.7. Deus odit iniquit atem, it aque
in aliis eam perimit per dawn ationem, ut in repnobis; in aliis adimit per
justificationem, ut in electis. August. ad Simplicianum lib. 7.} quaest. 2.
Col. 6 30. Tom. 4.
as Saint Augustine says, God hates iniquity therefore in some he destroys it
by damnation, as in reprobates; in others he takes it away by justification, as
in the elect.

Because as every one delights, and takes pleasure in his like, And men
rejoice, and account it a glorious thing to have children like themselves, and
take the more pleasure in them, when the succession is like to prove like: so
God in those that are most like him, because, says Cyprian, then the divine
gentry by their actions and practice may become more famous. Then must he be
displeased with these, because they grow more unlike him, and like to Satan his
Enemy.

Anger then simply in it self is not a sin, Moses, the Prophets, Apostles,
and all the Saints: Therefore Lactan. says, sine ira peccata corrigi non
posse, sin cannot be corrected without anger; for the sight of sin is so
horrible in it self, that he that is a good man cannot but be offended, moved
and angry with the sight of it. And he that is not moved at it, either allows
it, or does not much detest it, or is willing to avoid trouble in correcting of
it; hence the repressing of anger is a sin, being a great sin not to
repress, and that irefully, the sins which are under our charge; Quasi
gladio aciem, sic menti nostrae irae acumen imposuit, ut eo cu^ oportet utamur.
Chry. ho. 6. de laudab. Paul.
as old Ely: for God has given anger to the spirit of man, as an edge to a
weapon, that when it is needful we may use it, says Saint Chrysostom. This
then we ought to do, imitate these examples, and be angry with sins, and
correct them to our power: but Ephe. 4.26. this place does not simply forbid
anger, but corrupt anger, by which we offend God: Now anger is vicious and
corrupt; First, if a man be angry rashly, for no cause, or for small cause,
Math. 5.22. Secondly, if a man be angry for private injuries, not for them as
they are sins offensive to God, but injuries to himself: Thirdly, when the
anger that should be against the sin, is against the person, and turned to
his brother; and this is that there forbidden: and it is thus understood; be
angry, but not without just cause; be angry, not for private injuries, but
vices, as they are against the law of God: Finally be angry, not with your
brethren, but with their corruptions, and this is hence warrantable.

Seeing God will be angry with all, If they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments, then will I visit their transgression with a rod, and their
iniquity with strokes: wrath and displeasure follows the sinner, as the
shadow the body. But if God spare, and be not angry, that is, show it not,
Magna est ira non irasci; it is a sign of greater displeasure: The master that
respects his servant corrects him for a small fault; if he let him alone,
Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. 17.
it may be thought he does it till great faults be joined to it, land he may
either punish more, or cast him out of his house: so in this.

Neither will I accept an offering at your hand.] Because he is displeased with
them, therefore he will not accept their offerings, nor their service and
prayers.

The person of a man must first please God, before his prayers, The sacrifice
of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the righteous is
acceptable unto him. Hence Isaiah, 1.13, 19. 1 Pet. 2.5. And ye as lively
stones he made a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Christ Jesus, Hebr. 13.16.

Because all works are made acceptable to God by faith, Chrysostom. and without
it nothing is; Hebr. 11.16. Now faith is that which makes the person accepted;
for by it we are justified; Romans 5.1. and made the sons of God. Romans 3.26.

Because before they are strangers, Ephe. 2.19. yea and enemies,

This confuteth the Papists, who make good works the cause of our
justification and reconciliation to God; when, Augustine, Opera non praecedunt
justificandum, sed sequuntur justificatum, So that is as true, whenever they
come they are not acceptable in themselves, because they are imperfect, our
evil works are perfectly evil, and so deserve to be cast out of favor; but
our good works are not perfectly good, and so cannot procure favor of
themselves. us, but the treasure; and it is not the mouth receiving the meat,
but the meat that does nourish us; so in this. And being thus justified then we
work, and our works are acceptable, because we are first accepted in Christ.

To stir up every man to the trial of his estate and himself, whether he be
indeed reconciled to God or no, splendida peccata, August. so they are
altogether unacceptable to God, whether he hear, or give, or receive, or pay;
a heavy condition of a servant, that do what he can, yet he can not please.

But happily thou art desirous to know whether thou art reconciled or not;

I answer thee,

This comforts God children,

VERSE XI.
For from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, my Name is
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my
Name, and a pure offering: for my Name is great among the heathen, says the
Lord of Hosts.

FRom the rising of the sunne] Here is the second part of withdrawing Gods
mercy from these Jews. And this is the removing of his worship and word from
Jews to Gentiles, set down by a comparison of dissimilitude betwixt Jews and
Gentiles. The proposition of the Gentiles, and their great care and respect of
his worship, verse 11. the reddition of the Jews, and their corruption and
carelessness of his worship, renewing the former expostulation, verse 12, 13.
In this we are to consider the worship of God, and the circumstances of it. In
it we consider, 1. the ground of it, my name is great, repeated in the
beginning and ending of the verse for more certainty of the thing; 2. the
matter, incense and oblation; 3. the manner, and quality of it, pure, opposite
to the Jews profane and polluted service of God. The circumstances, 1.
persons, Gentiles; 2. place, everywhere.

Now for the meaning: The Papists have wrested this place, to establish the
doctrine of their Mass; but how absurdly shall appear, before we have ended
with the Verse; in the mean time we will search the true meaning of them, as
they ly in order.

For from the rising of the Sun.] These words express the place; some
expound them in the time present, and these either take them absolutely thus;
The Gentiles, though they have no knowledge of God but by nature, as much as
they may learn out of the great books, the Heavens and the Earth, and the
revolutions and changes of them, by the rising of the Sun, and the going
down of the same; yet they offer unto God oblations in their kind: Thus
Montanus. But this cannot b e, because of the quality of the sacrifice
following; for it is said to be pure, which could not come from them in that
dim light they had: Or conditionally, that the Gentiles would offer a pure
sacrifice, if God did reveal himself to them as he has to the Jews. But the
words are so absolutely spoken, they cannot thus be taken.

Others, with more general consent on all sides, take them in the future
tense, or time to come: that the time should come when the Lord should
translate his worship from the Jews to the Gentiles, and then should they
bring holy offerings: And this is after the coming of Christ, who should take
away the Ceremonies, and abrogate the form of the Jewish worship, and bring in
pure and spiritual sacrifices.

Now by this is noted the place, that is, through all the whole world. Psalm.
113.3. The Lords Name is praised from the rising of the Sun, unto the going
down of the same. Not that it should be at one time in all places of the
world, for that never was, nor shall be; but, as among the Jews, so in the
whole world, before Christ's coming, the greater part of them were wicked
Idolaters, and profane men. Isaiah 17.6. and 6.13. but successively, now in
one place, now in another, it shall be spoken and preached in all the parts of
the world before Christ's second coming. Matthew. 26.13. Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me,
and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the
earth for thy possession.

My name shall be great.] Here is the ground of Gods worship; The Name of God,
signitying diverse things, in this place may be taken either for himself, as a
man's name is put for his person, Acts 2.21. or for his excellency, majesty and
glory; as Name for fame. Exodus 34.5, 6. Phil. 2.9. Genesis 11.4.

Is great] Not that God is great or less, Magnum and parvum sunt ex iis quae
sunt ad aliquid. Aristot. but showed, or declared, or acknowledged to be great;
as the word sanctified is used, Math. 6.9. and the word justified, Math. 11.19.
Jam. 2.21.

Among the Gentiles] The persons, by condition Gentiles, or Nations, taken
sometime generally for a company of People consisting of many families gathered
together, Isaiah, 1.4. Ioh. 11.52. Secondly more particularly for all people
besides the Jews, all Infidels, Gods people being taken from among them only,
Isaiah, 49.6. And so it is amongst those who were not Gods people before,
amongst them whom the Jews accounted fools, and did extremely hate; spoken
as it were to provoke them to make more care of the worship of God, according
to the denouncing, Deuter. 32.21.

And in every place incense shall be offered unto me] The matter of this offering
or worship is first said to be incense, by which is understood prayer,
invocation and thanksgiving as, Psalm. 141.2. Let my Prayer be directed in thy
sight, as incense: and the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice.
Revel. 5.8.

Secondly, It is said to be an oblation or offering, by which is not understood
the Leviticall offering abrogated by Christ, neither the sacrifice of Christ
upon the cross, which none can offer but he; and which only was to be
performed and offered upon the cross before the gate of Jerusalem; nor the
sacrifice of the Mass, as shall after appear, but by this is understood a
man's self, every faithful man with all that he has; for every one of Gods
ought both to consecrate himself to the spiritual worship of God, and as it
were sacrifice himself, and also offer up the sacrifice of prayer and praise,
and of repenting, justice, alms and other things pleasing to God. Romans 13.1. 1
Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15, 16. Psalm. 4.6. and 5.19. And of this Irenaeus, Tertullian
and diverse other understand this place.

Pure] not simply without spot, Isaiah, 64.6. but as the Church is called holy
and without spot, Cant. 6.9. first, in regard the person offering it is in
Christ, and as his person has his obedience and righteousness applied and
imputed to it, so his obedience has Christ to cover the wants of it. Heb.
13.15. 1 Pet. 2.5.

Secondly, In regard of inward sanctification, the ground of it, the party
being regenarate by the work of his spirit, and so every action in him, part
holy and good, and well pleasing to God, as coming and proceeding from his
Spirit, though having a taste and sent of our infirmities, as water passing by
a Pipe or Channel. Romans 8.26. and 15.16. Acts. 15.9.

This, though a threatening, yet is according to that, Deuter. 32.21. and so a
kind of provocation to the Israelites, provoking them from the example of the
Gentiles with a holy emulation in piety and the worship of God. The Jews
embraced not sincerely the worship of God, but putting it as it were from them,
the Gentiles received it.

When one Church makes not account of the truth and worship of God, or does
reject it, another shall embrace it.

From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same,] The Lord,
though he had showed much mercy and goodness upon the Jews, he is not emptyed
by it, but has the like in store for others, the Gentiles.

The Lord is marvelous rich in mercy, and liberal in giving his goodness to
the sons of men, neither weary in giving, If any of you lack wisdom, let him
ask of God, which gives to all men liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it
shall be given him. Romans 10.12. for there is no difference between the Jew and
the Grecian; for he that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him:
he gives, at all times, Luke 22.12. his ability is great, Ephe. 3.20. the
effects prove it, giving more then they ask, to to Abraham, for one son
desired, he gave a seed as the stars in the heavens; To Isaac, Genesis 25.21,
22. to Jaacob, Genesis 48.11. To Solomon, Kings, 3.11. Vberior est gloria, quam
precatio, Ambrose in loc.

Because he is creator, and Lord of all, Abraham did, Genesis 25.6. yea and such
is his care, that he cannot endure their want. Now they are in themselves
continually wanting; though he give one thing, they have need of another; as a
ship and a net that must still be mending.

Because it is agreeable to his magnificency and greatness to deal thus
liberally;

Because it might be manifest the things they receive come to them not for
their deserts, or the merit of their prayers,



Ibidem, to all men.



To learn to be liberal and not weary of well doing.

From sun rising to the sun setting in all places and nations is the worship
and word of God propagated.

The Church under the times of the Gospel,

This overthrows the Church of Rome, Catholic says August. Epist. 48. ex
communione totius orbis.
how Catholic, when it is but a particular Church? what is Catholic but
universal? Now to speak thus, the Roman Catholic Church, is to say, the
particular universal Church; which in any reasonable man's ear is most absurd.

But some times particular Churches were called Catholics.

So they were; August. Cont. Epist. Fundani. cap. 4. Every Church did it, and
no one Church assumed this prerogative unto it self more then another; neither
was Catholic opposed to particular, but to heretical. The Catholic faith
was accounted the true faith, and the Catholic faith opposed to Heresy, and
the Catholic Church to heretical Churches: And in this kind the Church of
Rome can lest challenge it to it self, for it is least Catholic, being in
many things heretical.

The Jews corrupting and contemning the worship of God, the Gentiles are
called: through their fall salvation is come to the Gentiles.

God by the sins of man takes occasion to work good to others,

Because he may take from the wicked any just occasion of accusing his
providence and government,

Because he is most wise, do it; but of base lead to make pure gold is
admirable Alchymie: so to bring good out of good is Humanum, but good out of
evil Divinum.

Why then should any be punished for sin,

Such two objections were made to St. Paul, Romans 3.5, 6, 7, 8. absit, which he
uses often when he speaks of things, which should not once be thought, and
which the mind of a holy man ought to abhor once to think of: To the second
he answers verse 8. whose damnation is just; Showing that such an error is so
far differing from his doctrine, that he condemns both it, and the teachers
and suggesters of it. For good is not an effect of the evil, that it of it
self brings forth any such thing, but that comes by the wisdom power, and
goodness of God: He has given man a law that he must follow, and not do other
things upon expectation of effects; for a man may be condemned for the evil,
whatsoever effect it brings forth by the goodness of God, as Judas. And if any
man thus reason, it is as if he that had been sick of some desperate disease,
which when he is cured, and the skill of a Physician grown famous by it, he
will again surfeit to fall into the like disease, that the Physician might be
more famous; or as if poor men and beggars should resolve still to be in need
and to beg; because that might magnify the bounty and magnificence of the
rich.

When we see the hatred and malice of men to profit others, Persecuters unto
the Martyrs, says Saint Augustine, are as the hammer is to gold, as the Mill
to wheat, as the oven to bread, as the furnace to metal, profit them, work
them, and purge them, but no thank to them: it is not out of the nature of
them, but from the skill of the Goldsmiths, the baker, etc. for they would
consume the gold with the dross, the wheat with the chafe, and bruise them in
pieces, if he did not temper, and moderate, and use them for the good of them,
so it is in this. Romans 8.28.

We are in the latter days, will turn them to his own glory, and the good of
his Church. To converse among venomous creatures, to have to do with rank
poison, is fearful and troublesome, as they are simples and in themselves;
but when they are once skilfully tempered by the Art of the Apothecarie, when
the Physicians skill has made a just and good composition of them, then,
though it be not altogether toothsome, yet it is not so troublesome nor
hurtful unto men: So in this.

For imitation, Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7, 21. In the finnes of others, not to triumph
over them, but to bless the mercy of God, and magnify his goodness, that he
keeps us from the like, who have no less in us the seed of them, than they
have; accounting our selves as much beholden to God for keeping us from those
sins, as if we had committed them, and he had remitted or pardoned them to
us. As Augustine.

My Name is great.] Here is the ground of all the worship of God which follows;
being smitten with a reverence and persuasion of his greatness and Majesty,
they worship and serve him.

The ground and foundation of all true and sincere worship of God, Cap. 11.33,
34, 35, 36. when Pharaoh would give no leave to the people of Israel to worship
God, nor fear his Word himself, he said, Who is the Lord? Exodus 5.2. Matthew. 6.

Because greatness draws honor and reverence of it self. Chrysostom. tells
them it was their corruption, that they went not higher to see Gods greatness.

This discovers unto us a notable and devilish policy of Satan; Facillimum
est, contemnere Deum in imagine.
and impresse in them some base conceit of him, that their hearts might think
but basely of his worship and service. It Is a most easy thing to contemn God
in an image, says one. They persuade men that it is to help devotion, as
Jeroboam would make the worship of God easy unto the people, by setting up two
Calves in Dan and Bethel: 1 Kings 22. but as he made it to be abhorred, so
these make Gods worship not to be regarded, and men more cold in it.

This may teach us the reason of so much corruption in the worship and service
of God, proforma tantum: hence they prefer man before him, seeking rather to
please man, fearing rather to offend man, as if he had more rewards or
punishments than God to confer or inflict.

To teach us, to the end we may worship him aright,

Among the Gentiles.] They who were not his people, nor beloved, neither had
any thing that could deserve love, but rather hatred, are chosen and called of
God.

The election and calling of God, whether of a few or many,

And in every place.] Here is the place where the service of God is to be
performed, and spiritual sacrifice to be offered unto him; not upon the Altar,
or in the Temple, but every where, all places being indifferent, circumstances
regarded.

The Gentiles and Church after Christ, under the Gospel, there taken for a
public place, because of the opposition, verse. 22. which thing is apparent
through all established Churches that have been, or are, as the Histories of
all times show they had open places and meetings for their assemblies and
service of God, except in time of persecution. For the second, see Matthew. 6.5,
6. prayer in the closet. So Genesis 24.63. prayer in the field, Matthew. 14.23.
prayer in a Mountain apart.

Because then the Arc of Gods presence and his mercy-seat was in the Temple,

Because every one has a Temple about with him wheresoever he is, Quest. Had
not they so? Ans. Yes: but God had limited them.

Because the public place is most fit for public,

To show the error of those who think a public place better for their
prayers than private,

A direction to every man to perform the worship of God every where: Anna,
Luke 2.37. She was a Widow about fourscore and four years, and went not out
of the Temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day; which
was sine omissione, non sine intermissione, says Beda; and private service in
their private places: as God bestows private blessings privately upon men, as
remission of sins, and requires no witness: Is It not absurd, Quomodo non
absurdum, ut in quibus vus ipse beneficio afficit, solo testimonio nostri
contentus sit: nos autem in quibus ipsum colimus, alios testes quaeramus, and
adostentationem quicquam faciamus. Chrysostom. hom. 21. ad populum Antioch.
whereas God conferres benefits on us, he is content to do it privately, yet
we will never worship God but before witnesses, and for ostentation sake?
says Saint Chrysostom. Hezekiah turned himself to the wall, and prayed.

A comfort for all those who by any occasion may be excluded from the public
assemblies and places of Gods worship, Hezekiah in his bed, of Paul and Silas
in the prison, of Jonas in the Whales belly, of Paul upon the Sea, and in every
place where they held up pure hands unto him; he is the same still, and will be
found of them that seek him aright, every where. Princes have their times and
places, out of which if they be taken, and petitions put up, they that do so,
offend; and for favor carry displeasure. Sometime they are like to
Ahashnerosh, Ester 4.11. sometime as Darius, Dan. 6.7, 8. but God is ever ready
to hear.

Incense shall be offered, and a pure offering.] The matter of this worship.

The Papists affirm, that by this can be understood nothing else but the most
holy sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, offered in every place in the
sacrifice of the Mass; we understand it of spiritual sacrifices, not real;
whether is most probable we must enquire.

They, to overthrow ours, and to establish their own, say; Bellarm.
The word used for offering, Mincha, signifies an external sacrifice, which
was made of Oil and Incense, and so no spiritual sacrifice.

To this I answer,

Again, it is false which they say;

But secondly, spiritual sacrifices were amongst the Jews,

It is answered, here is never a word of a new Sacrifice, a pure one; Not
making the opposition betwixt new and old, as if they in the old Testament had
never used these sacrifices spoken of, but that they did not so frequently,
neither relied upon them so much as upon their external outward sacrifices. But
the opposition is betwixt the Leviticall sacrifices which were offered in one
only place, and for which God was offended that they were so corruptly offered,
and the clean sacrifices among the Gentiles.

Thirdly,

To this is answered, Jesus Christ, who by his blood has purged his Church,
that he might make it without spot, and so their sacrifices, they are pure.
Hebr. 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.5. And as for their Mass, it is most impure: and to have
it pure, they require the devoute and religious intention of the Priest, which
being wanting makes it impure.

But that this cannot be understood of the Mass, and the sacrifice in it, is
thus proved: we would demand of them, whether they take these words properly,
or figuratively; If properly, then this place must needs be understood of
legal worship, and so does not pertain to the new Testament; yea then must
they offer incense in the Mass as well as bread. If figuratively, then is the
Mass a Metaphorical and figurative sacrifice, and not a true, real, and
outward sacrifice, as they say it is. But if they will take the first
metaphorically, and the latter properly, besides the monstrous absurdity of it,
see what follows; the word signifies a sacrifice made of flower, oil and
incense, a breaden sacrifice, Levit. 2.1. then overthrow they their
transubstantiation; for if they offer bread, it is not his body: finally, that
this cannot be understood of the sacrifice of the Mass, is apparent from
circumstance of place and person; for this may be offered every where, that
not, but upon an Altar only; This by all the Gentiles, that by Priests only.

By this then we understand only spiritual sacrifices of the new Testament,
as it is usual with the Prophets to set them out by the names of the
sacrifices of the old Testament, that they might more familiarly show to them
of this age, that the Gentiles are called to the true religion.

Incense shall be offered] He shows that the Gentiles, called and converted
unto God, will worship him.

Those who are effectually called, In that day also shall the great trumpe be
blown, and they shall come, which perished in the land of Ashur; And they that
were chased into the land of Egypt, and they shall worship the Lord in the
holy mount at Jerusalem: Isaiah, 2.3. 1 Pet. 2.9. see it practiced, 2 Kings,
5.17. Moreover Naaman said shall there not be given to thy servant two mules
load of this earth? for thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt
sacrifice, nor offering unto any other God, save unto the Lord. Acts. 12.41, 42.

Because this is the end of their calling and conversion;

Hence we may gather why so many, and the most,

To instruct as many as are called and converted, Peter's wives mother delivered
from her fever, presenly administered unto Christ; when Elijah did but cast his
mantle over Elisha, 1 Kings 19.19, 20. he ran after him to serve him: they
must then remember Gods end, and not defeat him of it. They must remember what
they were, and see his mercy, what they are, and acknowledge his bounty, who
has of bondslaves made them free, of servants sons. If he had but delivered
them, all a man could do were little enough; more, that he has thus advanced
them. Therefore must they do him the more honor, and be more zealous of his
service and worship, and if they be upbraided for it, they must answer as David
did, 2 Samuel 6.21, 22. Then David said unto Michal, it was before the Lord,
which chose me rather then thy father and all his house, and commanded me to
be ruler over the People of the Lord, even over Israel: And therefore will I
play before the Lord, and will yet be more vile then thus, and will be low in
mine own sight, and of the very same maid servants, which thou have spoken of,
shall I be had in honor.

Incense and an offering] By the real and outward sacrifice of the Jews, he
understands the spiritual sacrifice of the Gentiles, and Church under Christ.

Under the Gospel Christians are freed from all outward,

Because their priesthood is only spiritual, And ye, as lively stones, he
made a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Because all those outward ceremonies were shadows and types;

Because ceremonies and sacrifices were given the Church for her infirmities,
Si quis uxorem habet propensam ad impudicitiam, eam certis locis concludit,
cubiculis and conclavibus, ut ei non liceat vagari, pro arbitrio; addit
praetere a Eunuchos, pedissequas and ancillas qui eam diligentissime
custodiant, ut, fides ejus non amplius esset suspecta: ita Deus cum Judeis,
Hos. 2.19. verum ille populus admodum fuit infirmus ac debilis and ad adulteria
idolatriae ultra modum proclivis; Quare Deus eam separavit a caeteris
nationibus, and in terra Canaan seorsim habitare voluit, a ceremoniis and
ritibus undique ceu a paedagogis custodiri; ut fides ejus non esset amplius
suspecta: ita ut maritus, sic Deus cum jam spiritum sanctum per Christum
ecclesiae donavit, custodiam ceremoniarum ab ea removit. Chrysostom.
St. Chrysostom. compares the Church to a wife, and God to a husband, and thus
expresses his purpose: If a man have a wife wantonly disposed, he confines her
to some certain places, to her chambers and private rooms, that she may not
gad abroad at her pleasure, and appoints her Eunuchs and chambermaids
diligently to attend her, that her honesty may not be suspected: so God dealt
with the Jews, Hosea, 2.19. that people was much inclined to adultery of false
worship, therefore God shut them up from other Nations, and made them dwell
alone in Canaan, and kept guard upon them with rites and ceremonies, as so many
pedagogues, that their faith to him might not be suspect. But now when God had
given his holy Spirit by Christ unto his Church, he removed from her the
custody of ceremonies.

Our bodies are real sacrifices, so are our alms.

The first is not outward;

Then are there now no external real Priests,

To meet with a generation that lives upon the earth who being careless of
God, his worship and service, Where with shall I come before the Lord, and bow
my self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, and
with calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or
with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my first borne for my
transgression, even the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? when they
could not endure what is told them. Verse, 8. he has showed thee, O man, what
is good, and what does the Lord require of thee? surely to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God. Any thing but that
they should do they pretend to be willing to do, like children, who like any
manner of education, but that their parents would bring them up in; If in a
trade, oh if they might follow their book, any thing but that they should, and
their Parents would have. So with these; they know not, or will not know their
own heart, which is naturally irreligious, and never will like that is
commanded, but would go a whoring with their own imaginations; and ever will
like that they may not have, or will not be accepted, when they contemn that
they have; and not respecting these, they cannot but contemn that is otherwise
enjoined, as Luke 16.30, 31. he said, Nay father Abraham, but if one come unto
them from the dead, they will amend their lives. Then he said unto him, if they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one
rise from the dead again. They are like to a woman, to whom one making love,
and desiring her person, she disliking his, answers him she will give him any
thing but her self, her riches, jewels, bracelets, and such like; only to put
him off, because she sees he desires her person only; and the other if he
would desire, she would soon deny him.

To teach us how we ought now with all diligence and frequency perform these,
Namaan; his servants came and spoke unto him, and said, Father, if the Prophet
had commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? how much
rather then, when he says to thee, Wash, and be clean? So say I, if he had
laid that burden also upon us, ought we not to have done both? how much more
when he has eased our shoulders? And if we should not, how should we be justly
condemned of unthankfulness? The Wife that newly married had a wise and strait
Husband, knowing her frailty and infirmities, and therefore set a watch over
her, and appointed servants to observe her, till her affection and faith were
settled, when she ought and did honor, and obey, and love him: If he free her
from them, and set her at liberty from that grievous bondage and tedious thing,
will she then honor him the less? Questionless she ought not, but if she
do, as the corruption of all is to wax worse by liberty, then is she
condemned of unthankfulness the more. So it is with us.

Incense.] The worship, prayers, and service of the Gentiles is resembled by
this, not only familiarly to show to them of that age, but to teach, that
their service, works, and worship is acceptable unto God, as such things are
acceptable to the smell and senses of men; for in them God took no delight at
all, neither could do, his nature being spiritual.

The works of Gods children, spiritual sacrifice is delightful and acceptable
to him, as sweet perfumes are to the smell of men.

And a pure offering.] It is opposed to the Jews sins, who offered unto God
polluted and unperfect sacrifices, not such as they ought, and such as were
according to the Law. But now their offering shall be pure.

The works, actions, Malachy, that the Gentiles converted unto God, their
works and worship of him shall be a pure offering. Thus St. Paul speaks of
the offering of the Romans, Chap. 12.1. that it is holy. Jude calls their faith
most holy, verse. 20. There were a few in Sardi truly religious, and converted,
their garments were undefiled, Revel. 3.4.

Because they are done according to his Word,

Because the parties are holy, they are a holy Priesthood;

But how can they be holy, when there is eadem ratio totius and partis. And the
Church for spots is compared to the Moon,

This is answered, that he is so, because he is in Christ, and non radiis
solaribus, sed ipso sole amictus; Revel. 12.1. as the Church is said to be
clothed with the Sun. Hebr. 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.5.

Thirdly, because of his inward sanctification,

This teaches what to judge of the works and worship of all that are uncalled
and unconverted, Unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving is nothing pure,
but even their mind and conscience is defiled. So far is it that they should
be merita praeparatoria, as some Papists speak of them; for unholy things
cannot please him, less procure or deserve good things from him: though they
do the things for matter good, yet a good thing is oftentimes marred in the
handling, and more when they are done by some men, and such men.

Secondly,

This comfort every one that is truly converted unto God; Jacobs did, lest
his Father should discern him: so his corruptions; yet then is he pure and
holy, and so pleasing to God, because he is in Christ, and he and his obedience
has put on the fair Robe of Christ's righteousness, which is not a scant
garment, as Bernard says, but one that reaches to the heels, and covers
all the parts of the soul, as Jacob had Esaus garment: And as if he looked
upon us in our selves, he should see nothing pure; so in him all things appear
as he is; yea, and because he is sanctified by the Spirit, those corruptions
that often hinder and ever taint the best actions, God accounts not theirs;
nay, he says they are not theirs, as long as there is a work of the Spirit in
them striving against them, and grieving at the sight and sense of them. That
which Bernard speaks of envy, Thou feel it, but agreest not to it; it is a
passion in thee that God one day will heal, not such a sin as he will
condemn thee for: so may we say of others, for they are not theirs; for, 1
John 3.9. his regenerate part sins not, nay, it abhors that the body of
sin has done, and works in him. Mark the words, says Bern. he does not,
but suffers them unwillingly to be done in him; as that, Romans 7.17. Now then
it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me. It is done
indeed in me, but not of me, while I consent not to it.

To teach every one that would have his offering pure, the corruption of the
flesh, God will not account his, nor impute to him, nor reject his service and
work for it. But 2 Chro. 30.18, 19. The good Lord will pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek God, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary.

VERSE XII.
But ye have polluted it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted,
and the fruit thereof, even his meat is not to be regarded.

BUT ye have polluted it,] This verse and the next is the second part of the
comparison, touching the Jews, and their great profaning and corrupting of
his worship; which is set down first generally, then in particular: and this,
first, in thought, in this verse; secondly, in word: thirdly, in deed, verse
13.

For the general, but ye have polluted it,] Wherein first, the person;
secondly the sin, you, with an Emphasis; you whom I have chosen of all
nations of the earth, whom I have beautified with so many benefits, and so
strangely preserved, Deuter. 4.32. ad 39. and many places of that nature.
Again, you who profess your selves in special manner to be my people, that
you should thus use me, who ought rather otherwise to have honored me, it is
in you the more heinous, to me the more grievous and offensive.

Polluted it, or my name] Their sinful Act: not that Gods name is, or can be
polluted by man's sins, more than the sun can be by a dunghill; but this is
spoken, first, because they polluted those things which he had appointed to be
highly reverenced, and set his mark or his name upon them, 1 Cor. 10.28. and
11.27. secondly, because God did so esteem of it in his acceptance, Acts,
9.5. Math. 25.40. thirdly, because they did as much as lay in them, in their
endeavor, nothing was wanting on their parts, Hebr. 6.6. and 10.29.

In that ye say,] The first particular, their inward thought; ye thus say in
your hearts, in your minds, you despise my name, my worship, and service: A
base conceit of the worship of God; Gods table, that is, his altar is polluted,
is not greatly to be regarded, as the words following show: Now they contemned
Gods Altar, says Saint Hierome, because it was plain and rude, not decked
with gold and riches, and the offering, because it was burnt to ashes;
Montanus, because it was served with fat and bread, things base and vile in
themselves; Palutins, because the heathen had polluted it, but the former is
more probable.

And the fruit thereof.] By it understanding the offering that was laid upon
the Altar; which made Saint Hierome translate it, quod super ponitur; And of
this offering, one part was for the Priest, the Lords Minister, Levit. 6.17.
and this they thought was not to be regarded; having come not to regard the
worship and service of God, they esteem not of his Ministers.

In the person, the Emphasis is double, first, that they upon whom he had
bestowed so great things; secondly, they who made such show of his service,
should contemn it.

It is nothing so great and grievous sin for men who have received small
things and blessings from God, Hear, O heavens, and hearken, O earth, for the
Lord has said, I have nourished and brought up children, but they have
rebelled against me, and 5.4. What could I have done any more to my Vineyard,
that I have not done unto it? why have I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, and it brings forth wild grapes? 2 Samuel 12.7.8. Math. 11.23, 24

Because the one has less,

As the husband man, the more labor and cost he bestows upon his ground, the
greater harvest he expects; when for equal pains and cost he looks for
equal fruit, as Luke, 13.7, 8, 9. Then said he to the dresser of his
Vineyard, behold, this three years have I come and sought fruit of this fig
tree, and find none: cut it down, why keeps it also the ground barren? And
he answered, and said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I dig
round about it, and dung it. And if it bear fruit, well; if not, then shall
thou cut it down.

Then the contempt of Gods worship and service that is in this City, the
strength, and the honor of the Land, he has crowned it with much honor, and
loving kindness, he has given it the Gospel, the watring and planting of
Paul and Apollo, more abundantly then any part of the Land besides: he has
freed it from the plague, he has delivered it from the sword, which should
have been first in the confusion, if the enemy had had his wished-for day;
howsoever it flatter it self in the strength of it, the wealth of it would in
that day have made it a prey. He has done this, and many more that I cannot
speak of, and yet the contempt of Gods worship, name and service, is in all
from the highest to the lowest: Like Magistrates, like subjects; like Minister,
like People; like Masters, like servants; parents and children, rich and poor,
bond and free, all contemners of the worship and service of God; which is the
more fearful and heinous sin, because of the riches of Gods goodness, his
bounty and blessings, and he takes it more hainously, that when he will visit
the land with another judgment, the sword or any other, as it was the first in
the plague, it shall be in the other, unles it repet, and grow more zealous for
his service and worship.

More particularly, there are many particular men in this City, receives
abundance of favor from the King, and requites him with contempt or treason? so
of a father and his son, of a servant and his master, etc. will they not take
it more hainously, and shall not all their benefits and favors increase their
faults? And are not Gods ways just, more equal, and far above the ways of
men. Then let me speak to you rich men, etc. I beseech you be deceived no
longer, you ought to be more religious, and more careful then others; I pray
you correct your error, and begin to be more careful, lest you be forced to
condemn your selves when it will be too late.

You, who profess your selves in special manner mine, and specially profess
my worship.

It is a far more grievous and heinous sin,

Because he does it of knowledge, Religio scientia Dei est, ac per hoc omnis
religiosus, hoc ipso quod religionem sequitur, Dei se voluntatem nossce
testatur. Sal. ad eccle. Ca. lib. 2.
as a man professing an Art, a fault in this work of his Art is more soul, then
in another man's work. Religion is the profession of God, and every religious
man, in this that he takes up Religion, professes that he knows the will of
God, says Salvian.

Because it is here as it were out of his place,

Because these things come commonly unexpected, David complain so much of the
injury of a friend, as a thing that came so unexpected, and did so pierce him.

To instruct the Minister whose sins and contempt of Gods worship he ought
specially to dislike, affected to his Master, the servant to his Lord. What God
most mislikes that ought they. It may be he may find these more kind, liberal,
and respective unto him, he must nevertheless reprove, and, if need be, use
sharpnes: The Physician that finds men kind to him, and to honor him, when they
are in health, will nevertheless, when they are fallen into a disease, use
sharp medicines, and it may be sharper to them then others, that he may the
sooner and sounder restore them. It is the sign of a false prophet, when his
mouth is not filled, to prepare and proclaim war, and when it is, to cry all
peace. Mich. 3.5. Thus says the Lord, concerning the Prophets that deceive my
people, and bite them with their teeth, and cry peace, but if a man put not
into their mouths, they prepare war against him.

To admonish all such as come nigh unto God by special profession, Moses said,
See, Israel will not hear, then how will Pharaoh? I wonder not many times to
see common Christians and carnal men to distaste reproves, when I find
professors so disliking them: but as their sins are the greater, sin
compared with sin, their reproves should be the sharper, as in diseases.

To teach every man to consider of his profession which he makes of Gods
service and fear; far more intolerable then his: So of sleeping, thy nod is
worse then his half hours nap; for to thee Christ says, as to Peter, Mark
14.37. Ideo Ethnicis deteriores sumus, quia meliores esse debemus, quia
pugnamus professionem nostram moribus nostris, nec sumus id quod profitemur:
Salv.
sleep thou? and so in every duty of Gods worship. We are then far worse
then Ethnicks, because we ought to be better; because our profession and
manners are repugnant, and we are not what we profess our selves to be.

Then better not profess at all?

Admit thy conceit: but what is gained by it? Paul says, Romans 2.12. For as
many as have sinned with out the law, shall perish also without the law: and as
many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law: and Christ, Luke
12.47, 48. That servant that knew his Masters will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: but he that
knew it not, and yet did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with
few stipes: for unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required, and
to whom men commit much, the more of him will they ask. There was one had two
sons, Math. 21.28. he that said he would not, and did, was commendable: do
thou like, and it shall be well with thee, but otherwise thy not profession shall
also condemn thee, and if it be less, yet if thou perish, thou have gained
little. The best is to profess and also perform with all care the service of
God, then thou shall be blessed in thy deed.

Have polluted it.] The act of these persons, the Israelites, the polluting and
corrupting of the worship of God. And here is the cause why God will take his
worship and word from them, they polluted and corrupted it, and made no account
of it.

The profaning of Gods name, ad 14. Jer. 7.13, 14. Therefore now, because ye
have done all these works, says the Lord, and I rose up early, and spoke unto
you: but when I spoke, ye would not hear me; neither when I called would ye
answer. Therefore will I do unto this house, whereupon my name is called,
wherein also ye trust, even unto the place that I gave unto you and your
fathers, as I have done unto Shilo.

This teaches us to behold Gods just judgment upon the Church of Rome,
Gratian, special the new Testament, so Panormitan; the Church can make moral
precepts mutable, so Gratian; with infinite such like. The worship it has
corrupted by unwritten and lying traditions, by such a burden of ceremonies, as
never any superstition had by the precepts of men and such like. That God has
dealt justly, he has taken from them his word, and left them in palpable
darkness more then Egypt, 2 Thessal. 2.11. And now are they as a man out of his
way, and yet thinks he is right, the further he goes the more he is out of his
way, and no hope of returning; because he persuades himself he is in the
right way.

This may make us fear that the day of the mourning for the Gospel is not
far,

The Church and the chief in it, the Magistrates are here admonished,

To teach every man as he desires there should be peace and truth in his
days, so to repent of his corrupting,

In that you say, the table of the Lord is polluted.] This is the first
particular; their thoughts, according to the phrase often used in this Chapter;
whence it is not only manifest that the Lord knows the thoughts of Men, and
the things they do in secret, but he reveals them to others, his liefetenants
upon earth, his Ministers and Magistrates to reprove, or correct and punish.

Table polluted,] They contemned the Table, because it was but rudely built;
and the offering, because it was burnt to ashes. Hierom.

The thing that makes men contemn holy duties, Vide verse. 7. ut ante.

And the fruit thereof, even his meat not to be regarded.] The Priests part,
they thought any thing would serve them; contemning Gods worship, they
contemned the means of his worship.

The contempt of Gods worship,

Because all the honor and account that the Ministers can have or look for,
is for their work, for the worship and service of God they perform amongst
them. 1 These. 5.12, 13. Now if their work once grow into contempt and
disgrace, they needs must; which was the reason why Demetrius pleaded so hard
for the honor of Diana, for their own gain and honor, knowing that they
were honored for her, who, if once dishonored, would make them to be
dishonored, Acts 19.24, etc. so in this, of the true worship.

Because the corruption of man is such,

This notes the cause why the worship of God and his service is in these days
in that contempt that we find it to be in all places: Micha can say or do can
be liked, Ahab dislikes his person. And again, e converso, this lays out unto
us why the Ministers are in such contempt, the worship it self is in contempt.
They are deprived of their double honor, in the most part, because the most
honor not the Word and worship of God. When as the message of David sent by
his servants, is misconstrued by the Ammonites, then are his messengers abused.
2 Samuel 10. so when the worship of God, then the Ministers. These are two
twins, as it were, the contempt of the one, and the contempt of the other; it
is hard to tell which first comes forth, happily some may think the one, some
the other; as with the twins. Genesis 38.28. etc.

This must instruct the Ministers of God, Paul persuades both Timothy and
Titus, and in them other Ministers; for his charges were not personal, nor
temporary; 1 Timothy 4.12. 2 Timothy 4.5. Titus 2.7, 8. for if all must so live and
carry themselves, that the Gospel of God may be well spoken of, and his
worship regarded; if servants, Titus 2.10. if women, even young women, verses
4, 5. if all professors, Titus 3.8. much more ought Preachers, they ought so to
handle those mysteries and worship of God, that they may strike reverence and
esteem into the people; so to carry themselves, that they may get account and
estimation to themselves, and so to the worship of God; for when the Ministers
of God handle the Word simply and profitably, and other parts of Gods worship
with great reverence, and when they practice it carefully, then will it be
better affected and reverenced of others; but when they handle them corruptly
and carelessly, when they are not the same men in their lives, they seem to be
in the Pulpit, they make the ordinances of God to be out of request, and to be
loathed, as Elies wicked sons made men abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17. both by their using of it, and carriage of their lives; for even
wholesome meate-men loath an unwholesome and sluttish huswives, or Cooks
dressing.

This may admonish all those who contemn the Ministers of God, who do scoff,
deride, and disgrace them most, would have his Tyrant to seem religious, that
his people might fear him, because they might think the Gods would help him,
if they should rebel or rise against him; so these, for one sinisterrespect or
other.

It has been a continual portion of the Ministers of God, ad 14.

Because it befell to Christ, The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
servant above his Lord. It is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master is,
and the servant as his Lord. If they have called the Master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his household?

Because the Ministers of God must deal with and reprove the sins of men,
Basil speaks, like Physicians, who make war, not with their patient, but
with his disease and passion; so not with them, but their sins; they think
he is their enemy, and makes war against them, therefore they speak evil
of him.

To teach us not to be offended, mockers. 2 Timothy 3.3. despisers of them who are
good; and therefore still will be, while the accuser of the brethren does rule
in the Air, and is Prince of this world, and does rule in the children of
disobedience, he will make them mock and despise, contemn and slander, and
oftentimes such as would make reasonable men afraid, lest their slanders
should be found false, yet that troubles them not, because they still hope it
will make for their advantage; he instructing them, who taught Machiavill,
Detrahe audacter, and aliquid adhaerebit. Machiavil.
Slander one confidently, and somewhat will stick to him. If that be true
which Tertullian writes Adversus Gent. Apol. cap. 1. Nihil iniquius, quam ut
oderint homines, quos ignorant, etiamsi res meretur odium. Tertul.
Nothing is worse than to hate men whom they know not, though they deserve to
be hated. What is it then that they should slander men whom they know not, when
the thing deserves great honor?

conceits and opinions of men. It is no new thing: if they did it to the green
tree, what will they do to the dry? if to those who have lived before, more to
these. It is that whereunto they were appointed, 1 These. 3.3. that of Christ
will be true, Matthew. 5.11, 12. Blessed are you when men revile you and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my Name falsely.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in Heaven: for so persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you: which if any incur not less or more in
his portion, he may fear and suspect himself whether he be Christ's or no,
seeing Christ so speaks, Luke 6.26. Woe unto you, when all men shall speak
well of you; for so did their fathers to the false Prophets: he may suspect
himself rather false than true. That of Plinius Cecilius, which he was wont to
set upon his Schools, may be applied; Sciamus eum pessime dixisse, cui maxim
sit applansum: We know, he that has most applause, has made the worst
Oration.

VERSE XIII.
Ye said also, Behold, it is a weariness, and ye have snuffed at it, says the
Lord of Hosts, and ye offered that which was torn, and the lame, and the
sick: thus ye offered an offering: should I accept this of your hand, says the
Lord?

YE say also, behold, it is a weariness.] The second corruption here reproved
is outward pollution, which is double, in speech and gesture: The speech some
expound as spoken by the Priests, taking up the breast or shoulder of a carrion
sheep which was his due, Levit. 7.31, 32. see what I have for my labor; but
the Priests themselves had a hand in this sin. This speech is expounded as if
it were spoken by a crafty dissimulation and arrogant bragging. See how I am
wearied with carrying this weighty sheep, when a man might have blown it
over; or they say, they are marvellously weary with carrying so weighty and
tidie a beast upon their shoulders, and that they might feign it by their
gesture, they show it by panting, and fetching their breath deep, and drawing
of it short, Montanus. Some expound, what a toil is this that we spend all in
the service of God; the complaint of the people, that they were at great toil
and pains, and excessive cost and charge in Gods service, as over-wearied with
labor, and eaten out and undone with expenses, especially coming so raw and
bare home; and therefore God was to content himself with it, though worse.

You have snuffed at it.] Either you blow and pant, as tired with bringing a
tidie beast; still their arrogant dissembling continued: or by a disdainful
and contemptuous gesture you show your unwillingnesse to serve God, and how
vile and tedious it is to you: it is the gesture of one refusing a thing with
disdain and contempt, as Psalm. 10.5.

Says the Lord of Hoasts.] Who is most good and pure, and a powerful and just
revenger of all such wickedness.

And ye offered that which was torn.] Their practice and dealing; their
Sacrifice faulty two ways: they brought blind and lame, or, if any good, not
their own. First, in manner of getting of it, it was such as was stolen; some
expound raptum, spoiled and wearied with beasts; raptus ex ore lupi, which was
dainty among the Heathen, as finer meat and the tenderer, so Calvine. If by
chance a sheep or other beast were wearied, or so, they would be content to
bestow it on God. But this is not like, for Sacrifices were brought quick, not
dead. But raptum, rather furto and rapina quaesitum, as Lyra; they brought such
to God as was gotten by evil means, thinking to stop his mouth, as man's, with
part of the booty. Psalm. 50.21.

Behold, it is a weariness.] The complaint of the people, thinking too much of
that they did in the service of God.

Hypocrites, Judas, John 12.5, 6. Why is this waste? murmuring at it, and made
a good color for it, that he might also infect others, pretending it for the
members of Christ, against the Head, by which he brought the Disciples into
the same sin with him. Matthew. 26.

Because love is the ground of all duties,

Because the motives of these duties, to come upon them that do them so. Now
natural and wicked men want spiritual eyes to see God the giver of all that
they have, and the reward for things to come, and what profit the service of
God brings to them; then no marvel though they think all too much.

Micha. 6.6, 7. here are hypocrites that thought not great things too much for
God.

This they offered, but they never did it. It may be a question,

This teaches that there are a great company of men in the Church who are but
mere natural men at the best, Quae diabolus imperavit, quam laboriosa? quam
gravia? nee difficultas fuit ejus man datis impedimentu^. Chry. ho. 19. ad P.
Ant.
many masters are there, who think much to give to God a whole Sabbath, who
will not remit their servants a piece of one of the six days: Many a servant
who can be content to toil himself more that day with the works of pleasure
and the works of Satan, then in the week with the works of his Master, but
thinks every thing too much for God, as Chrysostom. What commands does the
Devil lay on man? how laborious? how grievous? yet the difficulty is no
impediment to his commands. But here a little thing hinders, and they think
all too much: how much more show they themselves wicked men, who, like Judas,
find fault with others care or cost in the service of God, and draw others
with them into the same opinion, to think it is too much, when it is short of
that that is expressly required.

To teach every man, Judas; and to humble himself for it, for it cannot be
good, coming from this; and men cannot gather figs of thorns, nor grapes of
thistles,) to judge it to come from this, that his love is unperfect, as his
knowledge is, but in part; or from this, that he has not the feeling of Gods
love, his bounty and mercy toward him as he ought, neither knows the fruit of
this service.

To teach every one to labor against this corruption, and to withstand it,
Jacob and Shechem; another, delight in the duties, Isaiah 58.13. Psalm. 122.1.
John 6.34. give me a man that delights in any thing, and all is not enough for
it.

And ye have snuffed at it.] Their gesture, which as it notes their
unwillingnesse, so taken as some do take it, for panting, then it signifies
their arrogant dissembling, by which they made show as if they had brought most
excellent sacrifices, when they were nothing, and brought nothing but wild and
base sacrifices to God.

It is a grievous sin for men to make show of great care and diligence in the
service and worship of God,

Because it is gross hypocrisy,

Because offenses which are done openly, and committed apparently, do nor so
much offend a generous and valiant mind and man,

This will convince many of gross sin before God, who make such show of
great service of God, less. To say little of Papists, as of Monks who commend
their manner of worship or services, who brag that they are continually in
prayer, that they rise in the night season with the hazard of their health, to
keep watch for the salvation of others, and waste their bodies with watchings,
fastings, and other exercises; yet they think it skils not much what manner of
prayers, how without affection, being but, as Basil speaks, like the lowing
of so many oxen, though they be never so barbarous, yet God will accept. As the
Pope provided for his idle and unlearned Priests by his Canon; Quod verba Dei
non debent esse subjecta regulis Donati. To say nothing, I say, of their show
of service, nor of the lay Papists who make great show of great service by the
account of their prayers upon their beads, when few of them undestand what they
say; To say nothing of these who are without, and so what have I to do to
judge them; how many have we within, who are here convinced of sin, because
they make great show, and yet do nothing less? Many make great show of
serving God in prayer, others in hearing of the word, and therefore come
panting, and blowing, and sweating about such things, but do nothing less,
because it cannot be they can make account of Preaching who regard not Prayer,
nor they of Prayer who reverence not Preaching, because he can not delight to
hear God speak, that delights not to speak to God, and so e contra. And as
Bernard said betwixt prayer and fasting, so say I of this; prayer obtains the
power of fasting, Oration virtutem impetrat jejunandi, jejunium gratiam orandi:
noc illam corroborat, illa hoc janctificat. Bernardus.
and fasting the grace of prayer, this strengthens that, and that sanctifies
this. Finally, they who come to the service of God, as Ezekiel. speaks, shall be
answered as he says, for they make show and do not.

To teach every man to take heed of hypocrisy, Hierome says ad Rusticanum,
Epist. 4. Honor nominis Christiani fraudem facit magis, quam patitur, quodque
pudet dicere, sed necesse est: ut saltem sic ad nostrum erubescamus dedecus: So
is it true in in respect of men: but it cannot be so of God, who sees the
inward parts, Hebr. 14.13. but such deceit shall verily suffer from him, who
cannot endure hypocrisy; for such sons and servants he cannot endure, who
will say and make great show, but do nothing. Therefore ought every one, if
not to be as the windows of the Temple were, wider within then without, yet to
be no more in show then they are in truth, and to labor to do every thing
they make show of.

And ye offered that which was torn,] Their practice, and here the first
fault of their sacrifice, that they brought none of their own, but such as was
gotten by unlawful means.

Things taken from others by deceit, I hate robbery for burnt offering, Luke
11.41. Ephe. 4.28.

Because every man ought to offer unto the Lord of his own, not others;

Because this were to make God partaker of the sin, as much as in them lies,

Luke 16.9. And I say unto you, make you friends with the riches of iniquity,
that when ye shall want they may receive you into everlasting habitations.
Then is it lawful thus to dispose of a man's goods, though gotten by iniquity.

Christ indeed calls them riches of iniquity, inaequalitatis, unequally divided;
or because they were gotten by the sins of the grandfathers, or great great
fathers; or because they are matter of sin and iniquity; not that they are
either such of themselves, nor by Gods ordinance, who has made them, remedia
humanae miseriae, non instrumenta voluptatis and superbiae; but they are such
by the corruption and infirmity of man; as wine, good and neat, put into a
musty caske, will in time smell mustily like the vessel; so that as often as a
man drinks of it, he says it is musty: So riches good of themselves, yet
possessed by a corrupt heart, grow evil, that thou may call them wicked
riches, because they are causes of wickedness, as the Apostle speaks of
evil times, and so Christ calls them here, not persuading them of the riches
they have gotten by iniquity, to offer sacrifices unto God on the Altar of the
poor, or any otherwise to procure favor from God: but persuades them that
those riches which men commonly so use to pride, or voluptuousness, and other
sins, that they would use well to procure favor, and good will unto
themselves both of God and man.

This serves to show that many men's sacrifices and liberality is unlawful,
and no ways acceptable to God, Zacheus did, Luke 19.8. and out of the remnant
have given to good uses, when a mite had been better, and would have been
better accepted, then a Million without it; and for which now, though the loins
of many bless God for that they left, yet are they burning in Hell for it, if
that be true of August. Ep. 54. Macedo: as true it is according to the Analogy
of the Scripture. Sires aliena propter quam peccatum est, cum reddi possit non
redditur, non agitur poenitentia. sed fingitur; si autemveraciter agitur, non
remittitur peccatum nisirestituatur ablatum, sed, ut dixi, cum restituti
potest. August. Epist. 54. Maced.
If the thing for which the sin was committed, may be restored, and is not,
the man does not repent, but dissemble; but if he deal truly, the sin shall
not be remitted, unless restitution (if it may be) be made; and onething there
is, which is yet more unacceptable to God, and justly reproved, that they leave
behind them for such uses moneys to be employed by usury, by their companyes,
and other, wherein they are like to lewd voluptuous men, who having lived in
wantonness all their lives, leave their goods, and make their bastards their
heirs, that their shame might never be put out, but they might be like
Absolons pillar to all posterity: so these, that their infamy might remain,
and their reproach be never put out. If that conceit of some were true, that
Paul's glory increases, as the number of them increases who are won by that
he writ, I should then think that both their glory increases who get their
goods well, and have left it to good uses by lawful means; and their woe and
torment, who got it by unlawful means, and left it by unlawful means to
increase for the benefit of others. But I have no such warrant; only I say, if
restitution made passage for salvation to come to Zacheus house;
Non-restitution makes passage for condemnation to come to these men, or they to
it: Let no man think I speak this to discourage men from doing good, but to
direct them to do good after a good manner, and to free my self from
participating in future sins of such men; remembering how confidently Augustine
speaks it: Illud fidentissime dixerim, qui adse confugientem quantum honest
potest ad restituendum non compellit, socium esse fraudis and criminis.

To inform men for time to come to do that they do, David, that holy man of
God, would not offer to God of another, not taken by violence from him, but
though he would give it him freely; happily fearing lest it would not be so
acceptable when it was not of his own, though not gotten unlawfully, 2 Samuel
24.24. So should every man do that would have his offering acceptable to God;
they ought not to take from one to give to another, but of their own to give
to God, either mediately or immediately; for men may not do evil, that good
may come of it. Romans 3.8. Thou art lying upon thy sickbed, it may be thy
deathbed, which is the time when men distribute things of moment and
perpetuity. Think with thy self, that after death comes judgment, Hebr. 9. and
know that thou must give an account of thy goods, how thou have got them, and
how thou have left them. Therefore if thou have oppressed, or wronged, or
defrauded any by any means, make him restitution to the full; and if thy
ability be such, more than full, and of the rest give to the poor, and to good
uses: for if thou think the giving of these will excuse thee to the Judge
for the other, thou deceivest thy self; it were as if a Thief, being
arraigned for a robbery, should think to answer the Judge, and escape sentence
of death, because he gave much of it to the next poor he met: so in this; for
the Lord hates robbery for a burnt offering, and if thou would have a
blessing, Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, and leave it to be
employed lawfully, though less benefit come to the poor, and a shorter time,
not by that which is odious to God and man; for an Usurer is a reproach amongst
men, God casting that shame upon him; for how can thou answer Christ at that
judgment, how thou have left thy goods?

Now these Jews bringing such sacrifices of such things as were thus corruptly
come by, did it to appease Gods displeasure against them for the sin, and
thought so, as it were, to stop his mouth; whence some gather this point, not
unnaturally.

It is the custom and false conceit of a natural man, to think he may make
God a friend, They lie down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar, and
they drink the Wine of the condemned in the house of their God. It is spoken
of Idolaters, in respect of their Idols, yet it serves to show the nature of
men, who in their corruption think no better of the true God than a false god.
Micha. 6.6, 7. To this purpose may we apply that, Deuteronomy. 23.17, 18. for Gods
forbidding insinuates the pronenesse of man's nature to it, as in all the
Commandments.

Because God appointed sacrifices,

Because they think corruptly and wickedly of God,

Because it must be needs a vain and false conceit to imagine that should
appease him,

This may let us see the notable policy of the Church of Rome, Nummum addunt
nummo, and in marsupium suffocantes matronarum opes venantur obsequiis: Sunt
ditiores Monachi, quam fuerunt seculares, possideant opes sub Christo paupere,
quas sub locuplete diabolo non habuerant, and susp ret eos Ecclesia divites,
quos mundus tenuit ante mendicos: And Epist. 4. to Rustic. Contra omnem
opinionem plenis sacculis moriuntur divites, qui quasi pauperes vixerunt.
Hieron. ad Heliod. Epist. 3.
as St. Hierome said to Heliod. Epist. 3. They add money to money, and stuff
their purses, and purchase women's goods by flattery; they are richer Monks than
they were Seculars, and possess wealth under poor Christ, which they had not
under wealthy Satan; they are rich in the Church, who were beggars in the
world. And in another Epistle, Contrary to all men's opinions, they dye very
rich, who lived under a profession of poverty.

To overthrow the carnal conceit of natural men, sins, and often for those
sins by which they got them. Many men, when they spend the whole week in
sin, think to make amends for all, by acting some outward work of his
service on the Lords day, and think that their outward and customable serving
of God in the morning and evening pro forma tantum, should satisfy for the
sins of the rest of the day. And many when they have spent all their life in
sin, think by some doale or some gift to satisfy for all the rest, that the
Ministers can speak more of their gifts than of their sorrow and repentance; As
one says, sperans aut placaturum pro peccatis, aut placiturum non obstante
peccato. But to such I say, as Prove. 21.27. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination: how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? They shall
find they have trusted to a broken reed.

To teach every man not to let natural reason deceive him, The sacrifices of
God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not
despise. He that receives this from God, may have comfort that God will accept
him; as a Physician that directs a man to the only restorative.

Daniel 4.24. Redeem thy sins by Almesdeeds.

It is answered by some, that by sins is here understood the punishments of
sin, and they think that works proceeding from faith, prevail not a little
with God, to lessen and mitigate temporal punishments. But it is not like,
seeing he spoke to such a King who could not work any thing by faith at all.
But the word is not here, redeem, but, break off: If it were properly so
taken, then might men not only redeem the punishment of their sin, but the
sin it self, which opinion is not held. Again, if it be a redemption, it is
not to be made before God, but in recompense to those whom he has hindered;
and the Prophet speaks not here of the forgiveness of sins, as the old
Latin, Forsan ignoscet Deus; but of the prolonging of his peace and
prosperity, as Tremellius has it. Finally, the words are, break off, turning
from wicked ways, and seeking Gods will; and whereas thou have been an
oppressor of the poor, and an afflicter of men in misery, show thy repentance
by dealing mercifully with the oppressed, and having compassion on them, as
Zacheus. Luke 19.8.

VERSE XIIII.
But cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a Male, and voweth, and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, says the
Lord of Hosts, and my Name is terrible among the Heathen.

But cursed be the deceiver.] In this is contained the last judgment against
this people, and it is positive; as before he had threatened the taking away of
their goods, so here to inflict some punishment upon them. And in this we
observe, first the judgment, secondly the sin, thirdly reasons, whereby they
may be persuaded the judgment shall come, if they repent not themselves of
their sins, and perform their vows.

But cursed.] As woes in the Scripture, Matthew. 24. and Isaiah 5. and other
where, are twofold, so are curses: First, temporal, sending of outward
evils, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22. or turning of good things to hurt,
Psalm. 109.7. and 69.22. Secondly, spiritual, most fearful, Romans 1.28. Matthew.
27.5. 2 These. 2.10, 11.

The deceiver.] The sin is general, thus expressing the nature of an
Hypocrite, that he is a deceiver, one that carries himself craftily, who
casts and fetches about in his mind, how he may deceive both God and man, and
who deals craftily with the Lord.

Who voweth a Male.] The particular sin, vowing and not paying, when he is
able to perform; having a Male, that is, one without blemish, such as the Law
required: Here is thought to be Epitheti Eclipsis, as in Isaiah 1.18. wool for
white wool. But some understand by Male a perfect and absolute offering, the
use of the word being such in diverse Authors. Now the vow here spoken of, is
either the general vow of their Circumcision, or else their particular, when
willingly they vowed a thing, being not tied unto it by any Law, and dealt
deceitfully in that, which should make it the greater sin.

And sacrifice a corrupt thing.] a weak and feeble, so a corrupt thing: as it
were repenting of their vow, they bring unto him a corrupt, vicious, and
unlawful sacrifice.

The Lord is able, Ely, 1 Samuel 2.8. etc. and 2.12, 13. In David, 2 Samuel 7. In
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.30. The trials of Job show what he can do when he will
punish.

Because in blessing he can deal thus,

Because he is a true God, Jupiter, who they thought would be soon drawn dry,
if he should punish much and many, if send abroad apace his revenging arrows,
his quiver would be empty; not so with God, whose mercy is a treasure
inexhaustible, so his justice, not as the Sea; but as the fire, the Sun;
Chrysostom.

Because it more manifests his displeasure,

To stand in awe, Jacob was afraid of Isaacs curse, Genesis 22.12. much more of
Gods, being real things, and not verbal; for so is man's only, he is but the
mouth of God, and sure they are, they will light where he will lay them.

To instruct every man who finds Gods judgments, though they may be greatly
faulty, but look unto the Lord, and turn unto him; think not to make it good
again, or recover thy self, but think of the other curses God has
threatened, and know these must come, if the other do not reform thee, yea,
though he love thee. Physicians that desire the health of their patient, if
they can, will happily recover it by injoyning them abstinence, and fasting,
and a strict diet; if not, they will to purging, bleeding, and such like: so
with God, much more if he hate thee.

If thou be freed from any curse, be not secure,

The contempt of his worship he has threatened with the deprivation of it, the
taking of it way; now it may be thought, this would not much trouble them who
thought it a weariness, and could happily be content with it, and in their
corruption account it a blessing; he therefore threateneth the punishng of it
with positive curses and plagues.

The contempt and corruption of Gods worship and the means of it, as of the
Word and Sacraments, and such like, Elies sons, Acts 20.9. Eutychus.

Because most men find no judgment in it at all,

Because these being most sensible, men are by them usually made more careful
of his service, either in hypocrisy, Ahab and Saul, and others, or in truth,
as Manasses.

This may teach us a point which few men have thought of, and nothing indeed,
such offering of sick, lame and blind unto the Lord, such offering of corrupt
things unto him. If this be true, that such are accursed of God, then the
other must needs be certain. The Philistims had the Arc of Gods presence, 1 Samuel 5. But because they used not it as they ought, therefore verse 6. they
were smitten: so had the men of Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6. but because they used
not it as they ought, therefore the Lord slew among them fifty thousand
threescore and ten men, verse 19. The Gospel, the means of his worship, as
the Arc of his presence, has been amongst us, but we have not used it well,
therefore has the hand of God been heavy upon us, as upon the Philistims; the
number the Lord has slain, has surmounted the number of them of Bethshemesh.
If it were just upon them, it is so upon us: And though this be removed, yet we
cannot but fear that the curses of God hang over our heads still, seeing this
sin is not repented of nor amended amongst us.

This serves to meet with the corruption of those, Isaac said, I have blessed
him, and he shall be blessed) God has accursed him, and he shall be accursed.

Cursed be the deceiver.] The parties upon whom this curse must fall, they are
accounted deceivers, they deal deceitfully in the service of God, not serving
of him as they are able. There are two parts of this deceit described, or it is
made to consist in two things: The one, they serve him not as they are able;
the other, for a time they make a great show, and promise piety, and great
duties of holiness; but eftsoone repent themselves, and had rather omit it
altogether, or perform it negligently, because it will be with some cost and
expense of their goods, that he fears he should be a pooreman, if he should be
faithful and constant in the service of God: for the first it is said, he has
a male; for the second, he voweth and sacrifices a corrupt thing.

For the first;

He that deals deceitfully in the Lords service and worship, cursed is he
that has a male, and offers a corrupt thing, Jer. 4.22. It is made a sin
that procured destruction upon the land, that they served God, not with their
best wisdom; hence was the curse upon Cain, Genesis 4.3.5. Hagga. 1.2, 3, 4, 5,
6. And Solomon is taxed that he bestowed twice as much time in building his own
house, as Gods house: and Acts 5.

Because he contemns and despises the Lord,

Because he goes flat against the maine scope,

This teaches many a man what he may expect from God for his service he does
to him not a blessing, Bernard speaks tractatu de gradibus humilitatis, can
vigilare in lecto, when they do Dormirt in choro, they can as, Mich. 2.1.
Devise iniquity upon their beds, or as they, Prove. 4.16. Who sleep not unles
they have done wickedness, or as the shepherds, Luke 2. who watched in the
night for their own flock, that they have wit and skill at will for the
world, which if they would cause their ear to hear, as Solomon speaks, and
set themselves to it, might conceive, and their memories are able to keep evil
things, when as one chest will hold gold as well as Iron, if it were put in,
and one war the impression of a golden seal, as well as of lead. These have a
male, etc. for their state, they pretend they are not able to give more then
they do, which is little God wot, to the poor, or to the Church and
maintenance of Gods worship; when as they know, and God knows they can bestow
much more on their pleasures, on harlots, and wicked persons, oftener feasting
sycophants, flatterers and lewd persons, then the members of Christ; some that
have borne place, being known to have had more players the corrupters of youth,
and ofner, at their table, then they had the poor and preachers, the
converters of Souls; and their ability would bear that well enough. These
have a male, etc. And that shall be true, Isaiah 29.15, 16. Woe unto them that
seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, for their works are in
darkness, and they say, who sees us? and who knows us? your turning of
devises shall it not be esteemed as the potters clay? for shall the work say
of him that made it, he made me not? or the thing formed say of him that
fashioned it, he had no understanding? the world sees it, and mockes, and jests
at it; God sees it, and will judge it; these are deceivers and dissemblers of
the world, and one day shall be uncased, when to their sorrow they shall hear
the curse.

To teach every man to labor against this deceitful dealing with God, Be not
deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also
reap. If Jacob was afraid when he went about to seek a blessing, lest his
blind father Isaac should discern him and his deceit in dealing with him, and
so he might get a curse where he thought to have had a blessing, Genesis 27.12.
how ought men to take heed and fear to dissemble or deal deceitfully with
God, even the alseeing God, but to serve him with the best things we have, for
faculties of mind, etc. Let us be Abels, and not Cains; Genesis 4. If we would be
blessed with the one, and not accursed with the other, serve him with our best
affections, best spirits, best time, best instruments. David was at a great
quaere with himself, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits toward me? as thinking he had nothing good enough; so should we
think and so perform, that we may be blessed and escape the curse.

Now it is said, he is accursed that has a male and offers a corrupt thing;
if he have it not, the curse is not belonging to him, but God will accept that
he has.

They who are Gods, when they serve him,

Because of that, 2 Cor. 8.12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that a man has
not: God respects the mind more then the gift, as in the widows mite, and the
cup of water; so does he the mind rather then the service, for it profits not
him, nor he stands in no need of it. And the willing mind is, that a man with
all his heart would do more if he were able, which God seeing he accepts that
they have.

Because they condemn and dislike their imperfections themselves, Bernard of
envy: Thou feel it, but agreest not to it, it is such a passion as God one
day will heal in thee, but not condemn thee for.

It affords comfort against the temptations of Satan,

And voweth and offers a sacrifices or corrupt thing.] The second part of
their deceit: they made great show and promise of great things they would do,
but they repented themselves, and they omit them altogether, or perform them
very corruptly.

He that deals deceitfully in the Lords service and worship, ad 32. Acts 5.

Because he robs and spoils God, as it were taking or keeping from him that
which is his; for vowing it to God,

Because they serve not God, but themselves,

This may teach many men, that they may justly look for the curses of God upon
them and theirs, if they be not upon them already, because they have so often
vowed and promised great care and diligence in the service and fear of God,
and performed very little or none at all to him; sometime in health, sometime
in sickness; sometime in danger, sometime in deliverance; they promised great
things unto the Lord, but they have played the couzeners with him: It was but
to serve their own turn for the present, nothing they have performed, or
nothing as they ought and promised. To say nothing of necessary vows, how
carelessly they are found every way performed; as the vow of Baptism, when men
live more like Infidels than Christians, at the best but as Jews, resting in
the outward ceremony; or but outwardly civil and honest, never labor for any
inward sanctification, any sincere holiness, any conscience of Gods Will;
offer fleeces for the flesh, and skin for the beast: The vow of Parents
promising to bring up their children in the fear of the Lord, as was
commanded, Ephesians. 6.4. but they take only care for the body, not for the soul,
and to ingraft Gods fear in them: Qualis crescerem tibi, aut quam castus,
dummodo essem disertus ut discerem sermonem facere quam optimum and persuadere
dictione. Aug.
Such as Augustine confessed to God his father was, who troubled not himself,
says he, how I prospered in thy service, or how chaste I were, only his care
was that I might be eloquent, and learn to speak well; so they for worldly
things. Thirdly, the vow of married parties, who made a covenant before God,
and to him, Prove. 2.17. which is broken by many means, amongst many who think
the Covenant unviolated, if they commit it not outwardly and actually; when as
wanton words, and looks, and lusts break it.

To say nothing of these, for which many have either the curses of God, or have
them hanging over their heads; But voluntary vows, men in some trouble or
sickness renew their vow of obedience, as Israel, Hosea 6.1, 2. but when that
is once past, either they do not care for keeping it, or think they are
discharged well enough, if they do a few days hear the Word, or perform
some one or two good duties, and after give over again, unlike David, Psalm.
119.106, 112. The Prophet tells them they are accursed, better it had been for
them never to have vowed it at all; for though without it it is a sin, yet
now it is the greater sin.

To teach every man to take heed how he vows anything unto God; the consent, or
contrary to the mind of the superior; Numb. 30.6, 9. So Papish children,
contrary to Parents minds, enter their rules. Fourthly, when it hinders a man
from the duties of his calling; as those who leave their calling and goods to
profess wilful poverty, or become Friars Mendicant. 1 Cor. 7.22. Fifthly, when
there is put holiness in it, and it is made meritorious: If it be faulty in
these or any the like, then is sin committed in the making of it, and so a
curse follows it; but if not, then the curse follows the breaking of it.
When then it is so hard a thing to vow, and not to have sin cleave to it, if
there be any fear of sin, there will be rashness avoided in it; and if
there be any fear of the curse, they will not be so rash, lest they provoke
God. Eccles. 5.1.

To teach every man, when he has vowed, David said, and did; Psalm. 66.13, 14.
I will go into thine house with burnt offerings, and I will pay my vows which
my lips have promised, and my mouth has spoken in my affliction. If a man vow
when he is in custody or restraint, that when he gets liberty, he will go
and dwell in a place where the Word is; if the Word go from thence, he is not
bound, Ruth 1.16, 17. Again, in cases of necessity, as a man bound to abstain
from Wine, yet if Physicians counsel it for his health, he may use it; as Jer.
35.11. yet so, as he have a special eye to the maine end for which his vow
was made: as suppose Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.23. to abstain, yet for his often
infirmities he may drink.

For I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts.] There is Gods first reason,
why they ought not to corrupt his worship, and deal thus deceitfully with him,
his greatness and power, who is able to punish them for evil doing.

Men ought to obey God, Vide verse. 6. where is my fear?

And a great King.] It is the Kingdom of power, not grace; he by his power is
absolute King, great, and the greatest.

The Lord he is the absolute King of all men and Angels,

Because he has created and does sustain all,

Because else there would be no order, Lactantius de falsa religione, lib. 1.
cap. 3. he gives this as a reason for the order of things, because there is
but one God that governes all: For as in an Army, if there were as many
Generals as there are Bands, Companies, and Wings of the Battle, it could
neither be instructed nor governed, because every one would stand upon his own
wisdom and counsel, and such dissension would rather hurt than profit. So in
this world, if there were multitudes of Governors, if God were not the sole
King and Governor, there would be nothing but confusion and disorder.

Uses of this we have before, verse. 4. The Lord of Hosts.

FINIS.
THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE PROPHET MALACHY.
AND now, Oye Priests, this commandment is for you.

2 If ye will not he are it, nor consider it in your heart, to give glory unto
my Name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will
curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not
consider it in your heart. 3 Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and cast dung
upon your faces; even the dung of your solemn feasts, and you shall be like
unto it. 4 And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you; that
my covenant which I made with Ley^, might stand, says the Lord of hosts. 5 My
covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave him fear, and he feared
me, and was afraid before my Name. 6 The law of truth was in his mouth, and
there was no iniquity found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and
equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. 7 For the Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the
messenger of the Lord of hosts. 8 But ye are gone out of the way ye have caused
many to fall by the Law: ye have broken the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of
hosts. 9 Therefore have I also made you to be despised, and vile before all the
people because ye kept not my ways, but have been partial in the Law. 10
Have we not all one father? has not one God made us? why do (...) transgress
every one against his brother, and break the covenant of our fathers? 11 Judah
has transgressed, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem:
for Judah has defiled the holiness of the Lord, which he loved, and has
married the daughter of a strange god. 12 The Lord will cut off the man that
does (...) both the master and the servant out of the Tabernacle of Jaacob, and
him that offere^ (...) o^^ering unto the Lord of hosts. 13 And this have ye
done again, and covered the altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and
with mourning: because the offering is no more regarded, neither received
acceptably at your hands. 14 Yet ye (...) Wherein? Because the Lord has been
witness between thee and the wife of thy (...) against whom (...) have
transgressed, yet she is thy companion, and the wi^^ of thy covenant. 15 And
did not (...) take one? yet had he abundance of spirit: and wherefore one?
because he sought a godly seed: therefore keep your selves in your spirit, and
let none trespass against the wife of his youth. 16 If thou hate her, put
her away, says the Lord God of Israel, yet he covers the injury under his
garment, says the Lord of hosts: therefore keep your selves in your spirit,
and transgress not. 17 Ye have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say
wherein have we wearied him? When ye say, every one that does evil is good in
the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them. Or where is the God of
judgment?
VERSE. I.
And now, O ye Priests, this commandment is for you.

THE parts of this Chapter are Curses and Judgments, threatened against 1. the
Priests. 2. the People. In the first verse is noted the preface to the Priests.

He applies his doctrine to the Priests.

It is the duty of the Minister,

Because he is the Lords Steward of his household, Let a man so account of us,
as of the Ministers of Christ and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Moreover,
it is required in Stewards, that a man be found faithful.

Because if they deal thus faithfully,

To condemn those who teach only general things,

To stop their mouths who say, the body, they cannot for the soul; nay that,
which for the body is complained of, as dishonest and unfaithful when it is
not done, they cry out of it, if it be done to the soul. In the body, for the
health of it, men can endure not only prescription, but application of
Physic; yea, of sharp, bitter, and biting things. If they send for a
Physician who feels their pulse, discerns their urine, and conceives of
their disease, and yet fall only to discourse of the excellentnesse of
Physic, and other diseases, and never come any thing to theirs at all, they
would happily judge him a great Scholar, but no wise man, nor fit for a
Physician; and happily call in question his fidelity. But for the soul, if the
spiritual Physician apply any thing, if it have any sharpness in it, if being
with them, and living among them, and seeing their estate, he touch them, and
apply it to them, he is accounted no wise man, hapily a busy and indiscreet
fellow. The Physician takes not the way to save their bodies, and he is cried
out on: the Minister takes the way to save their souls, and he is cried out
of. The Physician that will prescribe, and see his patient take it, and come to
see how it works with him, is much commended for his honesty, care and
fidelity: But if the Minister do the like, he is busy and meddling; but he that
will please men, is not the servant of Christ: and these must know, when he
deals with their particular sins, out of a general text, he has his
warrant enough, such as shall acquit him.

To teach the hearer to endeavor to apply that he hears delivered to
himself, and to learn what is for him,

O ye Priests.] It may seem he goes too far in dealing with the Priests,
who were the greatest men the time had, except their Ruler, who then was no
King, and Malacchy but a mean man, as other the Prophets were; and yet he
deals with the Priests, not excepting the high Priest himself. Besides, this
corruption was the personal fault of the people, and the Priests might excuse
themselves, as not to be reproved for other men's faults: yet he deals with them.

This commandment is for you.] The reason why they are reproved, because the
charge hereof was by God laid on them: God had commanded them to look to this;
he is thought by this, to cut off every excuse which might be made against his
reproof, either why they have not done it, or why hereafter they should not do
it. As for the people, they might say, they were bare with their long journey
and cost of building, and they were grown old, and if they were not tolerated
thus to do, they would bring nothing at all, and his worship would fall to the
ground. The Prophet answers, That God has commanded, and therefore they are
to do it, whatsoever come of it.

Whatsoever God commands men, Abraham obeyed God to go out of his own
country when God called him, not objecting the inconveniences, Genesis 12.4. And
when to offer up Isaac, not objecting, as he might if he had consulted with
flesh and blood, infinite things against it. Genesis 22. Hereto is that, Exodus
34.23.24. Levit. 25.20. Galat. 1.16.

Because all inconveniences in the world,

Because God is able either to take away those inconveniences, Daniel, and the
three Children.

To reprove all those who refuse to obey those things they are taught and
showed, or he shall not be stripped naked of them all, and be left alone to
answer for his disobedience. Men are taught they ought to deal plainly and
truly with others in weight and measure, to speak truth, and not to lie, and
such like: They see then they shall not grow rich as others, and be esteemed of
as others, as they think; and therefore they choose rather by such means to
grow rich, then to obey God: as if their coming into the world was only to
get riches, and not to honor and obey God. Teach them to be liberal unto the
poor for good causes, and to make them friends with the riches of iniquity,
Luke 10.9. and that God will give them use for it: They will answer or think
as the widow of Sarepta did, 1 Kings 17. they have little enough for themselves
and theirs, and they fear to want before they die, or not to leave enough for
theirs. As if that they left behind them were theirs, and not rather that they
sent before. As Princes have more use of that they send by their Harbingers,
then of that they leave in their standing houses: so should they have more
profit by that they give before, then that they leave behind. Persuade them to
make restitution of that they have wrongfully taken from men, or else God will
not justify them but condemn them, Micha 6.10.11. They see they shall call
their names in question, they pretend slandering of the Gospel. To these I say,
Saul disobeyed God, as he pretended to sacrifice to God, or to have that he
might, and not for private use; but it excused him not, he lost his kingdom
for it: let them take heed they lose not the kingdom they say they hope and
look for.

To teach every man when he has a commandment of God, Abraham, and of the
faithful. What though inconveniences will follow? what though the world shall
condemn us, and the wicked flout us, and the Devil and our own flesh set
themselves against us? Deny thy self as Abraham did, and thine own reason;
dispute not of the commandment of God, but obey, and commit the event to God.
Worthy is that saying of Quihabet certum Dei verbum in quacunque vocatione,
credat tantu^ and audeat, and dabit Deus haud dubia, secundos exitus. Luth.
Luther to be written in the tables of our hearts: He that has Gods word for
what he does in any calling, let him believe, and go boldly on, and no doubt
God will give a good issue. If God command them, and they see great
inconvenience, pass and mount over them all by thy faith, as Abraham did, and
believe, Genesis 22.8. God will give an evasion, and thou shall have occasion to
say, verse. 14. In the mount the Lord will provide. And as Philo, when he
pleaded the cause of his Nation, being brought to a great exigent before
Caligula, said; It cannot be but that Gods aid is near, when all men's help
fails us.

This commandment is for you.] The care of Gods service, to see it be done as
it ought, to direct the people, to reprove their corruption, to refine their
corrupt offerings, belongs to the Minister; of which I have spoken in the
former Chapter.

VERSE. II.
If ye will not hear it, nor consider it in your heart, to give glory unto my
Name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will
curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not
consider it in your heart.

IF ye will not hear it.] In the matter of this curse we consider, first, the
exception, which is treble, to hear, and apply, and give glory to God. The
sum is, repentance; unless they will consider things well, and enter into
their hearts, and return to do things worthy their place, and fitting their
calling, these things must come upon them: so that without this, these must
come, nothing can hinder it.

There is no means to keep away or turn away Gods judgments, Except thou
repent.

In the particulars, the first is, to hear; they were the Ministers of the
Assemblies, such as were able to teach others, why should they hear? or what
need of hearing? Yet they must hear.

They who have knowledge and understanding of the word of God, He that has
ears to hear, let him hear, as often in the Gospel, and Matthew. 13.9.43. 1 Pet.
2.2. Heb. 6.1. Acts 13.42.43. and 17.32.

Because,

To bring to mind those things which they know and believe:

To stir up their affections,

To teach men to examine themselves hereby after hearing, Naaman the Syrian did
from the Prophet, with a resolution to serve no God but the God of heaven; not
his old Gods, his belly, or his purse, or his lust, the world, sin, or any
other.

Nor consider it in your heart.] The second thing in the exception, the
considering of that they have heard. The word is, put, or lay it upon your
heart, an Hebraisme signifying to attend diligently, and to set a man's heart
upon that which is spoken, or to lay it surely up.

It is required that men do not only hear the word,

Because it is a right treasure, and gold, Psalm. 19.10. Rev. 2.

Because it is a Sword, whereby a man may defend himself, him, will be without
his sword, but carry it ever about with him.

Because it else will never be profitable unto them for salvation,

This is to reprove all careless hearers, Mary kept all those sayings, and
pondred them in her heart.

To show the reason why so little profit comes by the Word;

To persuade to hear with all diligence,

To give glory unto my Name.] Here is the third thing in this exception, to do
things worthy or fitting their ministry or calling, they may thereby glorify
his Name; that is (this being made opposite to that which was in the former
Chapter of polluting his Name) they may make his worship to be regarded and
honored. These Priests must not only hear and lay up the Word and
Commandment, but also obey and do it, if they will escape the curse, and enjoy
the blessing. And if they be careful in their place, to reprove, teach,
direct, to reject their corrupt sacrifices, then should his worship be
uncorrupted, and kept pure.

Men must not only hear and believe,

The Ministers of God, as they should be; Gods worship will not be corrupt, but
keep very holy and pure: So here. This is manifest by the dedication of the
seven Epistles to the Churches, to the Angels of them; because they being
faithful, there would be no such carelessness and coldness. Hence are the
charges given to Timothy and Titus by Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 5.21. and 2.4.1. and
that 2 Timothy 2.2. All the time Eli was young, and able to look to the worship
of God, being faithful, it was pure, and the offerings of God regarded, 1 Samuel
1.2. So of Iehoiada, 2 Chronicles. 24.2. Hence that, Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore
unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. Hence is that of Hegesippus in Eusebius, while the Apostles lived, and
they who heard Christ teaching, the Church remained a pure and incorrupt
virgin; but when that age was past, error and corruption was spread abroad.

Because while they are faithful and watchful,

Because the people shall by their diligence be armed by instruction to discern
and withstand corruption from without,

Then most commonly, if not always, e contra, for such people, such Priests,
such followers, such guides. Travelers will hardly go before their guide, but
follow after him. It may sometime fall out otherwise; but that happens, as
many a careful master has corrupt servants, though he have never such care
over them, because his neighbors do not carefully and straightly bring up
theirs: so from the neighbor parishes: But where the Ministers are jointly
faithful, they have not that corruption which otherwise would be.

To teach as many as desire and love the pure worship of God, Eli be any way
disenabled, and his successors be Hophni and Phineas, given to their bellies,
to idleness, to profaneness, and yet they may carry it out, as they, with
little or no check, and not be compelled to other carriage; how shall not the
offerings of God and his worship be contemned? If Wolves be among the Flocks,
and the Shepherds be asleep, and watch them not by night, in season and out of
season, how should they not be spoiled? The nature of man of it self will be
careless enough of the service of God, how much more if they have corruptions;
nay, if it want encouragers, but find bad and corrupt examples.

To admonish the Ministers,

I will even send a curse upon you.] The curse in general, which is not for
their sin so much, as for their impenitencie: for so the coherence shows,
and this his long patience toward them.

I will even send a curse.] For the contempt of his worship comes many plagues
and curses upon men. vide cap. 1.14.

Upon you.] Though his Priests, and dear to him, yet that would not save them.

No person can be free from the judgments of God, Eli and his sons, 1 Samuel 4.2
Sam. 6. Vzzah. Luke 1.18.20. Acts 5.

Because when he cannot be sanctified in them, he will be glorified, Levit.
10.3. that is, Salomons justice, that he put a murderer to death, and a great
on, Ioab: so the more that he put him to death at the horns of the Altar, 1
Kings 2.31.

Because he might either purge their present condition,

Then from the judgments of God upon men, Si videris sacerdotem indignum, non
ob id calumniari sacerdotium debes, neque enim calumnianda res est, sed ille
solum meretur oner ari convitiis, qui tanto bono abutatur. Non enim si Judas
proditor fuit, hoc Apostolicae professionis crimen, sed unsus tantum viri men's
improba fuit: and medici quidem multi carnifices sunt, qui pro medelis venenum
propinant, nec tamen arte^ vitupero, sed qui art sua iniqu^s abutitur: and
nautae quamplures navigia amiserunt, nec ars navigandi tamen little perversa
voluntas jure damnanda. Chrysostom.
If you see an unworthy Priest, you may not presently slander the Priesthood;
but him who abuses it. If Judas were a traitor it was his own fault, and not
to be laid to the Apostolical profession. Many Physicians are murderers, who
poison in stead of curing; yet I condemn not the Art, but such as abuse it.
Many Mariners make shipwreck; yet we condemn not the Art of Navigation, but
their badnesse. And men's minds, who in such things must needs be occupied,
should rather exercise themselves to meditate of the justice of God, and to
justify him that spares not sin, no not in those who are most nigh unto him,
giving a purgation, as it were, to his own house, as David said he would do to
his, Psalm. 101. And laying the fault where it is, not upon the profession, but
the person. In this Jobs friends were better then many, who of the two, when
they could not sound the depth of Gods dealing, they accused him rather then
his profession, that he had been but an hypocrite in it. And as not another
profession, so never his own, where he finds Gods judgments in it. As many
men draw near to God, and take some holy profession upon them, and think then
all should be safe with them, and then fear nothing; which when it befalls
unto them, begin to contemn their profession, as the Jews, Jer.
44.15.16.17.18. so they. But as the Jews never considered their present
corrupt service of God, nor their bypast corruption and Idolatry unrepented
of, verse. 21. whereby they might have seen that it came upon them for that, not
for their profession. So with these.

To teach all, who draw near to the Lord, why should he think to escape? nay,
he shall the less escape then an other further from God, because he has these
examples, and has not feared; 1 Pet. 4.17. And for profession, as Salvian, of
a particular sin; yea, of all: Licet grave in omnibus praecipue in it is tamen
quae in consimili crimine etiam prof^ssio sanctitatis accusat.
nay, he ought the rather to labor for more holiness, the nearer he comes to
God, and to avoid even the less corruptions; for the Lord will less bear it
in them: for he will be sanctified in them that draw near unto him; if not by
their holiness, yet by his own justice in punishing them more sharply; to the
end that as the wax, the more nearer it approaches to the fire, so much more
the heat of the fire approaches in melting of it: so the holiness of God may
better be known in uncasing of such hypocrites, or hypocrisy approaching to
him; and so he may be the more glorified of the people in such judgments.

And will curse your blessings.] The first particular curses in cursing their
blessings already bestowed on them; which is either by taking from them the
power they have to nourish, and he has by his ordinance given unto them; or
else so that they shall not be comfortable unto them; or else in making them
turn to their hurt.

Then does God curse men when they have abundance of outward things,

All creatures have the power to help,

This teaches why the rich as well as the poor must pray,

Not to trust and rely upon them, A man's life consists not in the abundance of
things which he possesses.

Not to fear or distrust when our means are never so small, nay,

Yea, I have cursed them already.] An amplification, or confirmation by way of
correction; showing how they had not profited by his judgments, though they
were upon them, and had been long.

The judgments of God profit not the wicked, Pharaoh and his servants, Saul
and his court.

Because they are ignorant and blind,

Because they are like to the servant in the Law,

To put a difference betwixt the good and bad, Noah, the more the waters of the
flood increased, the higher it was carried, and came nearer to heaven: So they.
But the wicked are more hardened, as the Smiths Anvill, or Stithie.

This may teach us, that nothing but the Word is able to win men unto God, and
to bring them out of their sins and corruption;

To teach men not by their affliction,

Gods judgments not regarded,

Because ye do not consider it in your heart.] The reason of this curse,
because they had not applied themselves to the Word, and it to them, but had
rejected it, and made light by it.

When the Word,

VERSE. III.
Behold I will corrupt your seed, and cast dung upon your faces, even the dung
of your solemn Feasts, and you shall be like unto it.

BEhold, I will corrupt your seed.] The future judgments prophesied of, two in
this verse, Famine and Reproach. Thus has God decreed to punish those; but
before he will execute, he makes it known to the Prophet, and tells him what
he will do.

When the Lord purposes to bring a judgment upon his people,

I will corrupt your seed.] The first judgment in this verse is, Famine: for
the seed corrupted that it can bring forth no fruit, must make that, must cause
famine.

For the iniquities of a land and people,

Because this,

Because as S. Chrysostom speaks, Indigni sunt uti creaturis Deum
glorificantibus ipsum blasphemantes, quoniam filius contumelia patrem
afficiens, servorum ministerio fungi non est dignus. Chrysostom. Hom. 25. ad pop.
Antioch.
they who blaspheme God, deserve not the use of those creatures which glorify
him; because the son which reproaches his father, is unworthy of the ministry
of servants.

Because it is just with God to starve their bodies,

To inform men's judgments,

To teach us in our land, and time, what we may expect, Nathan the Prophet
speaks, We are the men. Therefore what expect we else? nay, what can we
expect better? And if we have not been bettered by Gods hand, as David called
the pestilence, It is better we fall into the mercy of insensible creatures,
then into the cruelty of unreasonable men.

To direct men when they are under such a judgment, David took this course,
though it was long before he did it, to enquire of the Lord the cause of their
famine in the end of the third year; and understanding why it was, and that
the satisfying of the Gibeonites.

I will corrupt.] The word signifies, to rebuke: i. I will with a word of my
mouth destroy it.

God is able with his bare Word to bring judgment and destruction upon a whole
land and people,

Because he made all things with ease,

Because he is Lord over all,

To teach men not to rely,

To let us see the fearful condition, is (...) be out of Gods favor, by whose
breath they stand and live, and w^^^ withdrawing his breath, they come to
nothing? If he be so able, why does he so suffer them? It is from the abundance
of his patience, not w^^^ of power; which abused by them, increases his wrath
and their sins, and will make that he will come the more suddenly and heavily
upon them. The heavier the weight is that is hung at the clock, the wheels run
swifter, and the hammers strike sooner and smarter.

To teach every man to take heed how they offend or displease God, as they love
themselves, or any thing they have,

And cast dung upon your faces] The second particular in this verse, for laying
shame and ignominy upon them.

God makes men, Ministers and others,

Even the dung.] These Priests had thought to have gotten love, estimation and
credit, by bearing with the corruption of the people, not reproving them for
teir sacrifices they brought, and their carelessness in Gods service; but this
God will turn to their shame.

When men think by unlawful means to get credit, Haman, Ester 6. and 7. And
of Herod, Acts 12.21. of Philat, Joh. 10.12. From henceforth Pilate sought to
loose him; but the Jews cried, saying, if thou deliver him, thou art not
Cesars friend: for whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar.
But see what Eusebius reports, Neque illud a nobis ignorari debet, eum ipsum
Pilatum qui servatoris neci interfuit, in tantas calamitates incurrisse, ut
necessitate adductus, sibi propria manu mortem consciscaret, suorumque scelerum
ipse vindex extiterit. Eus. hist. l. 2. c. 7
We are not to be ignorant, that the same Pilat who was interressed in our
saviors death, fell into so great calamities shortly after in the reign of
Caius, that being driven by necessity, he slew himself with his own hand, and
became himself the revenger of his own wickedness.

Because this will manifest his power,

Because he is zealous of his glory,

This may show the folly of those men, Hier. against Heloid. speaks of out of
the fable, that when he could do no good to be famous for, or so famous as he
would, he set Diana's Temple on fire; and when none accused him for the
sacrilege, he went raving up and down the streets himself, crying, that he
kindled the fire. And being demanded by the Ephesians, why he did so, Vt quia
been non potera^, male omnis bus innotescerem.
he answered; Because I could not get fame by doing well, I would get it by
mischief. But it was his shame and ruin; and so may these look for, though
they may prosper in it for a while: as they in building of Babell, yet shall
they fall by it. And that they would stop their mouths withal, will be the
means to open them the wider, specially if ever there fall a breach betwixt
them, they will show them directly, that they gained not by their courses, and
the contrary to that will follow, which we read of David, 2 Samuel 6.22.

To teach every man to take heed how he seeks reputation and name by bad
courses, Had Zimri peace, that slew his master? So, had such a one credit, that
left his honesty? And God shall do to him as here is threatened. A man may
happily build up his house by oppression, and usury, and cruelty; but in a few
successions, in a few years it comes to nothing: holds not in the third heir.
A man may seek to rise like Haman, and be aloft a while, but he shall be cast
down. A man may get a name a while, but it will not last long; partly because
it is vana, quia vani sunt filii hominum; because it is not in himself but
other, Merces congregatas in saccum pertusum ad thesaurum in alieno ere
constitutum qua arcu non clauditur, nec seras habet: Bern. de adventu Domini,
Sermon. 4.
as wares put up in a broken bag, as a treasure laid up in another mouth,
not locked in a chest, nor made fast with bars, as Bernard has it. And
partly, because God will cast dung into his face. The best glory is for well
doing: that is in a man's self, not in another power, 2 Cor. 1.12. That is
laid upon a good ground, that is certain and unmovable. It is from God, and
those who have his Spirit, Vera gloria est a Spiritu veritatis: True glory is
from the Spirit of truth.

Dung in your faces.] The Lord had honored these Priests very high, they had
dishonored him; he threatens marvellously, and the more to disgrace and
dishonor them.

The more God has honored and advanced men, Iezabel, 2 Kings 9.37. of
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.7.8.9.10. of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.27. ad finem. Of Capernaum,
Matthew. 11.22.23. Manifest in the Jews, who were the mirror, now the wonder of
the world: it was once spoken of with admiration, now the byword.

Because, according to their privileges abused,

Because his judgments in them will be more perspicuous,

If thou see men lifted up to honor and high place,

To teach those whom God has advanced and honored more then others with any
privilege of knowledge, wisdom, Nimrods of the earth, and fight against God,
and his cause, and his Church, and dishonor him, and think to carry it away
without dishonor from him; nay, they shall be more dishonored, and more vile
then any others. * For the greater grace sinners have received, if they sin,
their punishment shall be so much larger. Chrysostom. Mighty sinners shall be
mightily tormented, Hierom. ad Heliod. Quanto major gratia, tanto amplior
p^ccantibus poena. Chrysostom. And, Potentes potenter tormenta partientur.
Hierom. ad Heliod.
It were good all that are above others, would write it in their houses, and
every where they come, and keep it in their hearts. And such as are above
others in their places in the Church, would remember that, Matthew. 5.13. Ye are
the salt of the earth; but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it
be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be
trodden under foot of men.

And you shall be like unto it.] Or, it shall carry you away; meaning, thta he
would add confusion and destruction unto their shame.

Shame and disgrace brought upon Ministers,

Because this argues a great height of wickedness,

Because when God has smitten men in things that are so near unto him,

To teach us, Baals Priests, for deceiving the people, in contempt, with not
affecting them to make them return from their Idols to the living God.
Therefore shame and confusion came upon them, as we have seen. So of others, if
they be in contempt, etc. And as of them, so of Magistrates, and other
particular men. For as a sickness caused by man's misdieting of himself, or
otherwise by his default, and not speedily cured, is a forerunner and procurer
of a greater disease: so is it in this case.

To teach every one that is in any reproach or contempt, he is, to think of it
as the harbinger of confusion and destruction, if he be not affected with it to
repentance. Therefore should he labor to lay it to his heart, and be humbled
for it, and reformed by it: he should be occasioned by it to search his ways
and his conversation. If it befall him for righteousness sake, he has wherein
to rejoice; if for his infirmities, and unjustly from those who reproach him,
yet he should see whether it is not justly from God, or no: for that may be
justly from him, which is unjustly from them. But if indeed justly for his
dissolute and loose life; then is not to be expected any thing but the
confusion and destruction of his person, unless that make him to humble and
reform himself: for when hard and bitter words prevail not, then masters go
to beating and punishing with blows. So does God.

VERSE. IV.
And ye shall know, that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my
covenant which I made with Levi, might stand, says the Lord of Hosts.

ANd ye shall know.] The Prophet proceeds to the causes of this
condemnation. These are three: the first is, because they had neglected their
care of Gods worship, not of any ignorance, but against their knowledge: for
they knew that the duty belonged to them, and the commandment was to them. For
thus it is to be read: For you know.

Their sin is the greater,

Now the knowledge here spoken of, is of two things: of their duty, and what
they ought to do; and of their dignity, and what God had bestowed upon them.
And both makes their sin the greater, because they have gone against their
own knowledge, and Gods kindness. That though God had bestowed great
blessings upon them, they had forgot it, though they knew it, and were
unthankful unto him.

Unthankfulness is a sin, vide Chap. 1. verse 2.

I send this commandment unto you, that my covenant might stand.] They must
perform, that is their parts or else he would perform no covenant with them.

God will not, covenant and conditions. The covenant of God is either general
or special. The general, either legal or Evangelicall. All which requires
the conditions to be performed on man's part, if he would have God perform; or
else, etc. Levit. 18.5. Gal. 3.11. Mark. 16.16. 1 Samuel 2.30. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

Because their not performing,

When they perform,

Romans 3.3.4.

That will not follow from this,

Many enjoy Gods blessings,

They enjoy not the blessing of eternity,

If in our observation we find, the truth and fidelity of God, in this kind;
especially in temporal things; he gives spiritual, an ounce of which is
better then many a pound of the other. And if he breaks not, that promises
silver, and gives the greater sum in gold: so not God. If he promise
deliverance, and gives patience under the cross, which is better for the
sufferer, he still performs, because such things had those exceptions: And so
in many other things, but this especially, when the good things promised are
not performed, the cause is in our selves and other men, why they are not
performed, and not in God; because we perform not conditions. And this being,
makes us, not him, covenant-breakers, who have made our selves incapable, and
unworthy of his blessings, and so have freed him from his promise, by our
breaking with him. Now he that is freed, cannot break covenant, though he do
not the thing before covenanted.

To let us see the folly of those men who think to have Gods promises
performed unto them, with men: and sees not that he is deceived, and sees that
these are but things that are common things, wherewith he is but fatted for the
shambles, and such as are reserved for his evil. And for time to come many
doubt not but they shall obtain great things in this life, and that God will
give them honor, and favor, and riches and abundance, though they never keep
condition with him. Fools and blind, who know they cannot live, except they
eat; not reap, except they sow; not recover health, except they use physic,
and the means appointed: And yet think, without performing the grand means
and condition with God, they shall have what he has promised; and so happily
they may: But as Israel had a King in Gods wrath, and quails in his
displeasure: And as the Physician gives his patient liberty to eat what he
list, when he is out of all hope, and despaires of ever recovering him. Many a
man persuades himself that God will save him, though he never was able to
perform the condition of the Law, neither ever endeavored to perform the
condition of the Gospel. Truly this is not to believe, but deceive himself
with an opinion of faith, he neither having the knowledge of the promises, the
ground of it, nor works the answerable fruits of it. And so has but a vain,
foolish, and dead faith. But he shall know his folly, when God shall manifest
unto him, that he is not bound to perform promise, because he never kept
condition.

To teach every man that has any desire that God should perform covenant with
him, Cum dominus promittis ne dubites sed illa fac, per quae tales attrahere
poteris promissiones. Chry. hom. 25 ad popul. Anti.
He must first Week to know what they are God requires of him, and then do
them: for without that he cannot do. And his searching for knowledge must not
only be for the general, but for the particulars of his place, what command
is sent to him; and then faithfully do it, that Gods covenant may stand: We
must repent, believe and obey the Gospel and Commandments of God: For it is
godliness that has the promises, and shall have the performance. Let such a
one remember, 1 Timothy 4.8. and Prove. 21.21. Yea, he may assure himself, that if
he apply himself to that which God requires of him, and he has covenanted
for, he shall be sure to find him that has been a willing promiser, a most
faithful performer. For parum erat promissio, etiam scripto se teneri voluit.
Aug. in Psalm. 119. And so no good thing that he has promised shall fail, but
shall all be made good, Joshua 22.15.

My covenant with Levi.] Here is the honor and dignity he had bestowed upon
them, having made a special agreement and covenant with them.

The Lord has specially honored his messengers and servants the Priests in
the old, I will be their God, they my people; but has made a particular and
special agreement and covenant with them: So here, and Numb. 8.13.14. Thou
shall set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them as a
shake offering to the Lord. Thus thou shall separate the Levites from among the
children of Israel, and the Levites shall be mine. 1 Samuel 2.28. And I chose him
out of all the tribes of Israel to be my Priest to offer upon mine Altar, and
to burn Incense, and to wear an Ephod before me; and I gave unto the house of
thy father, all the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel. Joh.
15.15. 2 Cor. 3.6.

Because they are of his privy counsel, and know his secret. Surely the Lord
God will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets unto his servants the
Prophets. Privy counselors are specially honored and have a particular
covenant made with them.

Because they are his messengers, his ambassadors,

No reason why the great and rich men of the world should contemn the ministry
for their children, as too base a thing, Amos, who was believed to be the
brother of Azariah, the King of Judah, thought it no base thing his son
shoule be a Prophet; neither Christ himself to be a preacher.

This may be a caveat for men to take heed how they abuse or injure the
ministers who are so near unto him, Haman, because he would have them
honored; but if not, but they abuse and disgrace them, and use them as the
Ammonites did David's servants: Let them take heed they stink not in his
nostrils; for if Princes be tender hearted and stone affected, with the
injuries of their common subjects, and will revenge them; what will they do
for their counselors, their ambassadors? And yet mean men will now abuse
them in words, and contemn as far as they can for the law of man, if they
sing not placentia, if they teach cross to their humors; but their portion is
with the Lord, and so is theirs who so abuse them. And one day they shall both
know whether is better to reprove and lift up his voice and spare not, or to
spare and reform nothing.

It may comfort the minister against contempt when he is faithful, Balaak said
to Balaam, Numb. 24.11. Therefore now flee unto thy place, I thought surely to
promote thee to honor, but lo, the Lord has kept thee back from honor: yet
it is not so: for that is the true honor which God gives, and will give, and
no man can take; and they ought as it is, 2 Cor. 3.12. seeing they have such
hope, to use boldness of speech.

This may teach what manner of men Ministers ought to be, ed 10. how
unblemished the Priest should be: for if the whole people must be holy, more
they. And if they must be careful of their offering and sacrifices, more of
themselves. And if they be not, then ought authority, like Ashpenaz, Dan.
1.3.4.5. to choose out the most unblemished, and look to them, and suffer not
them to be good fellows, gamesters, and such like.

Covenant with Levi.] They took not this calling to themselves, but were chosen
to it of God, and he made the agreement and covenant with them.

None may take this calling upon them, Paul 1 Timothy 3.2. whereto else may it
tend? if every one may intrude himself into the Church and the calling,
without the call of it; and that, 1 Timothy 5.22.

Because it is a sin unto them who shall, Vzzah, 1 Chronicles. 13.10. and Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.18.19.

Because else the Church should be too much burdened:

Because, 1 Cor. 14.40.

This serves to confute all Anabaptisticall dreams,

1 Cor. 16.15. Now brethren, I beseech you, Stephanus, that it is the first
fruits of Achaia, and that they have given themselves to minister unto the
Saints.

The meaning is not, that they called themselves, resolution of thehir own
hearts, and not contemning or neglecting the calling of God by the Church.

To let private men and women see their danger in meddling with those things
which are proper to the Minister, Vzzah, if Vzziah were smitten, how shall they
escape? whether they can pretend the authority of the Church, as in the Romish
Church they can, for women to baptize, yet shall they not escape for excuse of
necessity; it will not serve, because that it is not from God, but it is from
man's folly, or ignorance. If it be objected, that it is not then a Sacrament
which is given by them, when they have no authority to deliver a Sacrament; I
answer: yes, for the Seal is the Princes, although some other then the Lord
Keeper set it to by some indirect dealing. And though such a Minister sin in
dealing with the Word and Sacraments, yet are they such to the hearer and
receiver. Again, that which S. Augustine Vera sacramenta licet non very
ministri quia dant non sua, sed Dei, Aug. lib. 2. cont. Petil.
has in his second book against Petill. They are true Sacraments though they
are not true Ministers; because what they give is not their own, but Gods.

To teach every man to be sure,

VERSE. V.
My covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave him fear, and he
feared me, and was afraid before my Name.

MY covenant was with him of life and peace.] The dignity bestowed upon these
Priests consisting in the special Covenant, is here amplified by the parts of
the Covenant. First on Gods part, which is double, a Gracious promise of life
and peace, and a faithful performance.

My Covenant was with him of life and peace.] That is, I covenanted with him,
and took him into favor, and made a league and agreement with him; and by my
covenant I bound my self to give him first life, that is, length of days here
on earth; Saint Hieroms opinion of the life of grace here, and of glory
hereafter, is not greatly probable, hardly any instance of the like
interpretation, and that peace following after, not so to be understood of
spiritual peace, but of an outward prosperity in this life: and so they who
incline to Hierom in the former, understand it. And it must needs be, according
to that which is Numb. 25.12.13. Wherefore say to him; Behold, I give unto him
my covenant of peace, and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the
covenant of the Priests office for ever; because he was zealous for his God and
has made an atonement for the children of Israel For the covenant of peace is
expounded by the perpetual Priesthood. And in other places the branches of
this covenant are set down in the abundance of outward things, by the offering
and other means both to the Priests, Numb. 18.8. ad 20.26.30. and for the
Levites, Numb. 18.21.24.31.

And I gave them him] Gods performance; As I promised him these things, so I
did very certainly and assuredly perform to Aaron, and Phineas, and others, who
did perform conditions and covenant with me; and will do to as many as shall
so deal also with me.

For my fear.] Now he comes to the second, containing the conditions performed
by Levi, and these are the fear of God and humility. Some read it; I gave him
my fear; which is true, and agrees well with the doctrine of faith: for the
fear of God is the gift of God, Jer. 32.40. but the words are otherwise: I
gave him these for the fear wherewith he feared me. Because he believed my
word, and honored me in his place, and looked to my worship in himself and
others, I honored him, and gave him these things.

And was afraid before my Name.] Iunius reads it: He was destroyed for my
Name: i. for not honoring my Name, Numb. 20.12.24.28. But the whole speech
here is against it: for he intending to set forth the care which Aaron and his
sons had of the worship of God, and to commend him rather then tax his
infirmities. It is rather, he was humbled before me, he walked humbly and lowly
and did all in humility, not lifting up himself either for his high calling,
or for his faithful service. The parts of the covenant which is the Priests
dignity. And first on Gods part, and first his promise.

Long life and the length of days is the blessing and gift of God, The fear
of the Lord increases the days; but the years of the wicked shall be
diminished, and 16.31. Exodus 20.12. Deuter. 25.45. 1 Kings 3.14. And if thou will walk in my ways to keep mine ordinances and my commandments, as thy
father David did walk, I will prolong thy days. Psalm. 91.16.

Because God will be glorified by his in this life, I will not dye, but live,
and declare the works of the Lord. Now the longer they live, the more they may
glorify God; then it is a blessing.

Because it is a blessing to help many,

But many of the children of God dye untimely,

This is not simply a blessing, Ieroboams good son was, that he might not be
infected with the sins of his fathers house, and not afflicted with the sight
of those horrible judgments that were to fall upon that graceless family;
which was no ill bargain to be taken from earth to heaven, from the conflict
to the triumph, from the battle to the victory, from men to God, and to the
company of his Angels and Saints.

This is to admonish old men to be thankful unto God for his mercy in
preserving them so long, use this as a blessing of God, that he may glorify
him more, and fit himself more for him and for his service; imagining that as
old age is a blessing, so is it a bond, that he should perform; as Psa. 71.17,
18. O God thou have taught me from my youth even until now: therefore will I
tell of thy wonddrous works. Yea, even unto mine old age and gray head. O God
forsake me not until I have declared thine arm unto this generation, and thy
power to all them that shall come. And if he have borne it in his youth it will
be less burdensome in his old age, for to others it is heavy.

Then is it lawful for a man to pray for long life, David, Psalm. 102.27. so
Hezekiah, Isaiah 38.3. True it is that a Christian man should be equally
prepared to life or death; for in things wherein a man cannot certainly know,
which will make more for the glory of God, and their own good and salvations;
the will of man should be equally prepared for both, lest it should resist God;
so in this. And because he should less torment and vex himself with the
desire of life or fear of death; yet is it not unlawful for him to pray for
life for the grounds before, so he pray for it as for other things,
conditionally. Truth is that of Solomon, Eccles. 7.1. The day of death is
better then the day of ones birth, because of miseries and fearful times,
when it is like as August: to be Diu vivere, diu torquere, to live long, to be
vexed long: Or as Cyprian, Non solum fidelibus inutilis non est mors,
verumetiam utilis reperitur; quoniam peocandi periculis hominem substrahit, and
in non peceandi securitatem constituit.
Death is not only not unprofitable to believers, but profitable; because it
sets a man out of danger of sinning, and puts him in a security of not sinning.
Yet proves it not that it is the more to be desired. When as a man may show his
patience, and spiritual fortitude in his own miseries, and the more he
suffers and conquers, the more he shall be glorified. And in other men's
miseries he may show piety, comfort and good will toward other, and mercy to
them in their miseries, and find himself the more mercy. And his sins he
may break off, not by ending his life, but by amending of it, and by true
repentance. And so his age may be a crown of righteousness. He is a wise
Physician that knows how to temper his medicine, that it will confirm health:
And he is a wise man who learnes so to live, that a good death may follow after.

Peace, plenty, prosperity, a prosperous estate, Bodily exercise profits
little: but godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the promise of
the life present, and of that that is to come, Deuteronomy. 28.1. Psalm. 84.11.

Because they may by them be better able both to glorify God, Because he might
encourage them against all the discouragements they shall find in professing
his fear,

They who have the true fear of God, Chrysostom. (...). 16. ad popul. Antioch.
He first makes men fit to use and dispose the riches he means to give them,
and after gives them riches. Nisi hoc fecisset, divitiarum erogatio non donum
sed ultio fuisset and poena.
Which less he had done, the bestowing of riches had not been a gift, but a
punishment and revenge. This public and general charter of God has these
exceptions.

To teach every man what is the nighest and readiest way, An heritage is
hastily gotten at the beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed. But
poverty shall come upon him. Prove. 28.22. A man with a wicked eye hastes to
riches, and knows not that poverty shall come upon him. And he shall be
guilty of much sin, and bring much sorrow upon himself. Prove. 22.20. 1 Timothy
6.9.10. But they who take the right way shall be sure of them, and not find
sorrows with them. For so Gods blessing makes rich, for they shall have them
by virtue of his covenant, and as testimonies of his love, which is far
better then far greater riches, if it be but a pittance.

And I gave them him] That he had promised, that he performed.

God in his will and decrees, covenants and promises,

To comfort those who live in toruble and affliction in this life, Remember the
promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to trust. It is my
comfort in my trouble; for thy promise has quickened me. As Abraham said, Genesis
22.8. God will provide; it may be in this life, but if the leaves fall, the
roots are sure to stand; though earthly things are not always performed,
because they are not absolutely promised, yet heavenly and eternal shall.

My fear.] Or for the fear wherewith he feared me.] The conditions on the
Priests part are fear and humility.

Though men be bound to do and suffer whatsoever God shall lay upon them; and
when they have done all, both are,

Because of the imperfection and corruption of men;

Because he is faithful, and having promised, must,

This is to encourage and hearten us to obey in all things with cheerfulness,
and to bear all things with patience by the hope and expectation of these
things. Heb. 10.32. ad 38. and 11.24.25.26. Mat. 5.11.12. 2 Cor. 7.1. Indeed
the most ingenuous, filial and acceptable service, is to obey for the love of
God, and that simply without respect of reward, but because of our infirmity
that cannot, and Gods mercy who has so provided for our weakness. For as S.
Chrysostom speaks, Oportet in rebus gravibus and molestis, non labores sed
praemia considerare; ut Mercatores non marst pericula, sed lucrum spectant: Ita
and nos caelum and Dei praesentiam. Chrylost. ^n Job. Hom. 7.
We ought in grievous and irksome things, to consider not the labors but the
rewards; as Merchants mind the gain, not the dangers of the sea; so must we
look at heaven and the presence of God.

For the fear.] These blessings of life and peace are promised for Gods fear;
and this is the condition he required of them for them.

He that would have the blessings of God performed to him, Levi, he commends to
posterity, and commands the performance for the obtaining of the other. Deuter.
5.29. Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to keep all my
commandments always: that it might go well with them, and with their children
for ever. Psalm. 115.11.13. Prove. 14.26.27. Luke 1.50. This fear of God is a
continual reverent awe of him, rising partly on consideration of his power,
and partly of his mercy. First, it is a reverent awe, serve the Lord in fear,
and rejoice in trembling. Secondly, continued not only for a brunt or in some
judgment, as those in Jonah 1.16. but Prove. 28.14. Blessed is the man that
fears always; but he that hardens his heart shall fall into evil. Thirdly,
the grounds, 1. Gods power, though there be no expectation of evil, as we
reverence a man of authority, though he bear no evil will unto us, but good,
even for his authorities sake. 1 Kings 19.13. Heb. 12.21.2. his mercy because
he has showed them mercy and goodness, both in soul and body. Psalm. 130.4.
Hos. 3.5. Job 1.9.

Because only they must have them to whom they belong;

Because in covenants no man may expect another promise,

It is matter of comfort to as many as live in the fear and continual awe of
God: abundance, greater then they, and happily when they are such as perform
no condition with God at all, but are Atheists and profane blasphemers, and
wicked miscreants, and such like: for this should rather comfort them: if he do
so in his general providence to those who have no promise, what will he do to
those who have the promise? And if he feed the swine, will he starve the
children? If the doggers be full, and corn-fed, will he destitute the children
when the bread is theirs? He will not sure. It may be they shall not have
things superfluous to abuse unto wantonness, and so to grow worse; but they
shall have that which is necessary and fitting for them: And that little is
beter then the others much.

To stir up every man that has not this fear,

But because many take the comfort to them, who have no part in it, and
persuade themselves they have this fear, when they have no portion of it; we
may not unprofitably call to mind the five effects, as five notes to know this
childelike fear by, handled Chap. 1.6.

He was humbled before me.] The second thing God commends in these as the
thing he delights in and approved, and as the condition on their parts, for
which he gave them his blessings, is humility.

He that is humble and lowly in mind shall receive the blessings of God;

VERSE. VI.
The law of truth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity found in his
lips; he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity.

THe law of truth was in his mouth.] Here begins the second reason given of the
Lord, why he would bring these judgments upon these Priests; namely, their
dissimilitude with the former and first Priests, with whom he made the
covenant, and to whom he did perform it, Aaron, Eleazar, Phineas. And in this
the order observed is, he sets down in the first part of the comparison,
their good and worthy parts which were the predecessors, verse. 6. and the
reason of it, verse. 7. There are four worthy parts reckoned of theirs. And
these were not of private and particular parts, as they were private men; but
they were such parts as were in them as public persons: As if it had
reference with the former, he said, he did not only carry himself and approve
himself a good and godly man; but he showed himself a wise and complete
Doctor, both in teaching the Law and Truth of God, and giving most wise, grave,
and wholesome counsel.

The law of truth was in his mouth.] The first part of the predecessors, which
was commendable in them, he was ever most studious of the law of God, and most
skillful in it, and taught it most sincerely to his people, ever teaching most
sound doctrine to them, that they might observe my precepts.

And there was no iniquity found in his lips.] The second thing commendable; he
never propounded or taught any error, he never deceived any of my people to
draw them from my true worship; but taught ever that which was wholesome and
good. Iniquity is commonly taken for the pervertion and depravation of the
known right, and is opposite to equity and truth.

He walked with me in peace and equity.] The third thing commendable; the
sum of it is, he lived and performed the duty of his place without all
negligence and unfaithfulness, approving himself to God and men. He walks
with me, i. he was most careful to please me, and to approve himself unto me,
to worship me as I required, and followed not the wickedness of the age, nor
was corrupted with the depravations of the time, whereby men were depraved in
my service and fear, as Genesis 5.22.

In peace.] That is peaceably, not provoking me to anger; but cleaving fast
unto me, and obeying my will, so that I had no cause of expostulating or
quarrelling with him. Cyril says, To have peace with God, is nothing else but
to desire to know and do that which God requires, and to offend him in nothing.

And did turn many from iniquity.] The fourth thing commendable in them, was,
that by their exact walking, and faithful teaching, they helped to turn
others from their sinful ways. Out of the coherence, that from their
personal and inherent virtues, he proceeds to the virtues of their place, and
their public actions and carriages; we may note:

It is not enough for a man to be honest and good in himself, public, he
must be good and faithful in that, if he would be approved of God: As if he
be a Magistrate, or Minister, or officer, or master of a family. As this is
manifest in the coherence: so by that, Genesis 18.17.18.19. and Exo 18.19.20.21.
Hence is both the co^mendations and blemish of old Eli, he was a good Priest, a
good Magistrate, but a bad father; in the more public, good; in the less,
defective, 1 Samuel 1.2. Hence we read in Scripture, the commendations of good
governors, and Kings, both for their private parts, and their public
virtues: In themselves fearing God, and in public discharging their duties
sufficiently and faithfully. And in the new Testament we find not only
private and personal duties prescribed to Masters, Fathers, Husbands, to
Ministers and Magistrates; but specially public, Ephesians. 5. and 6. Col. 3. and
4. 1 Timothy 3.2. etc. Tit. 1.6. Hence the commendation of the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, though he was defective in personal, Rev. 2.2. and the
reproof of the Angel of Pergamus, verses 14.15.

Because he more glorifies God: for though his good works, Regis ad exemplum,
etc. but because they may command and compel more.

Because this will blemish the other their private parts, Eli, and the Angel of
Pergamus.

This may let all those see their error and corruption, Abraham; nay, he
knows the contrary, that they took the place with no mind to do any such
duty, and so execute it still. So of Magistrates and Ministers. They are
brought, or thrust themselves, before they be called upon the stage of the
world; and when they are on it, do no more then make a dumb show, perform no
more then lookers on, or but things that must be done of course, and would be
though they slept: which is the fault not only of men profane, or but civilly
honest; but of men who profess the fear of God; and may well be thought to
have some good measure of it, and go for good and truly honest men. Yet it is
their blemish, that they are careless of the duties of their place. That as he
said, An evil man may be a good Citizen: we may say, Good men are evil
Citizens, Masters, etc. which blemisheth much their private graces in the sight
of God and good men. And upon many has, and does, and will bring particular
and temporal judgments, from their families, and servants, etc. For this is a
grand cause why good men, fathers of families, have such graceless children,
and corrupt servants, Ministers such untoward flocks, Magistrates such people.

This may admonish and instruct all that have the faith and fear of God,
Cypriansec. de zela and livore, that performs holy things and is not a
consecrated Priest, does things in respect of himself, childish and
unprofitable though they may be good to others. So he that does things without
faith and the fear of God, they are unprofitable; yea wicked and damnable
sins, howsoever they may benefit others; so may I say of these; but yet this
had, will not bear out, nor excuse the negligence and not doing the duties of
his place. It may make the infirmities of them passed over, but not defend the
omitting of them. Therefore to be accepted of God, men must also be careful of
that: Masters, etc. The excuses that commonly are pretended will not go for
current; servants will not abide with me, if I instruct, correct, and restrain
them, as duty and reason requires. First, see whether thou art not the cause
why they are so untractable, either not seeking by prayer a blessing upon thy
government, or dealing hardly and passionately in thy government, as if thou
hated them, rather then loved good things, or thy servants see thee do
contrary to that thou directs them; for if none of these, God will persuade
them to be tractable and bend their hearts, or else know that he would have
thee purge thy house of them, as David said and did his, of his said lewd
servants; lest as God prospers a bad household for a good servant, so he curse a
good household for a bad servant. Ministers excuses of the untractablenesse, and
unwillingnesse of their people which may happily come from their former
negligence, or indiscretion; or if God do not bless his labors to them, his
reward shall be never a whit the less, nor he less acceptable, so he do his
duty. Magistrates and Officers, that they shall be accounted busy, officious,
and pragmaticall, and it may be when they are out of their office they shall
have actions against them for this and that usage; they may happily be justly
so accounted, because they follow and do things in humor not in conscience.
If they do not, they need not doubt of Gods protection, and of good success,
and should rather fear an action from God then men, besides the loss of the
good they may have by doing it. But to all I say as she said to the Heathen
King, do me justice, or else cease to be my King. So let them either do the
duties of their places or else never take them, or speedily give them over, and
leave to be masters, etc. Or else they must know that if God will not justify;
he will condemn.

The law of truth was in his mouth.] He taught the truth and word of God, and
nothing but that, and that wholly.

The Minister of God must deliver to his people,

The law of truth was in his mouth.] He taught the truth and nothing else but
the truth, and the whole truth, all the truth not keeping any thing from them.

The Minister must deliver to his people the whole truth of God,

Because else he cannot be free from the blood of his flock, sanguinis, i.
caedis, says Chrysostom, upon Acts 20.26. For if Paul be free from their
blood and from their murder, because as he said Acts 20.26.27. I take you to
record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have kept
nothing back, but have showed you all the counsel of God. Then will this by
the contrary follow.

Because else they should not be faithful neither to him that sent them, nor
to them over whom they are set; And as for the rest, it is required of the
disposers, that every one be found faithful.

This will cross their opinion who affirm many things in the word, are unfit
to be delivered and taught to the people, Whatsoever things are written
aforetime are written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope. If Deuter. 29.29. The secret things belong
to the Lord our God, but the things revealed belong unto us and to our children
for ever, that we may do all the words of this law. Why should they not be
taught? It is certain that many things ought to be spoken wisely, discreetely,
in their fit and due times; but yet all things must be delivered. That which
Hierom counseled Laeta for her daughter, that the book of Canticles she
should read last of all the Scriptures, when without danger she might, lest in
reading it in the first place, she should be wounded when she was not able to
discern spiritual things and spiritual love under carnal words. It may be a
rule for all things of the like kind: for as Hilar. Psa. 134. As an unskilful
man coming into a field abounding with wholesome herbs, passes by all, as of
no more use then the grass; but a skillful one otherwise: So of the
Scriptures. Vt imperitus in agrum salubribus herbis divitem venerit; omnia
inutilia and promiscue genita existimans praeteribit, peritus contra; Ita de
Scripturis. Hilar. Psalm. 134.
And as Bernard; Why may I not draw a sweet and wholesome repast of the Spirit,
out of the sterile and insipide letter, as grain from out the husks, as the
nut from out the shell, as the marrow from out the bone. And as Basil; Quidni
dulce eruam ac salutare epulum spiritus, de sterili and insipida litera,
tanquam granum de palea, de testa nucleum, de osse medullam. Bernard. in Cant.
sermon. 73.
All bread affoords nourishment for health; but of no use oft-times to the
sick or queamish: Omnis panis nutrimentum affert ad salutem, aegris autem
saepe inutilis; sic and omnis Scriptura mundis munda. Basil ad Chyl. de solita
vita.
so is the Scripture pure unto the pure. And if any seem unclean and uncomely,
it is to those that are such in themselves. For other things that men think
unfit to be taught because of the greatness of the mystery, and the depth of
them; I say as to the former. If Paul have written of election and reprobation,
and has said, All things that are written are profitable, and are for
learning, in the same Epistle where he specially handles those things, why
should they not be taught, but with wisdom in their place. That which S.
Chrysostom speaks in another case, we may apply to this: Magister literarum
puerulum de gremio matris acceptum and ignarum omnium, primis tantummodo imbuit
elementis, quem rursus alius magister accipiens perfectioribus instruit
disciplinis. Chryl. Hom. 9. in Genesis
A petty Schoolmaster, that takes a young child from his mothers lap,
ignorant yet of all things, only teaches him his first letters, whom another
master takes, and instructs after in higher learning: so in the knowledge of
the Scriptures. For as all men cannot dive, and fetch precious stones from the
deep, but he that is cunning, and has the Art of it: so not all, but the
wise, can either teach or conceive the deep mysteries. First children must be
taught letters, then sillables, after words, then construction, and after all
the matter. So is it here.

This teaches the Minister of God how diligent he ought to be, Daniel did,
Chap. 9.2. his time must not be spent in hunting after profits and preferments,
not in idleness, pleasures and pastimes, more than such recreation as is
helpful to make him fit in body and mind for his Ministry: Ars is longa, and
vita is brevis, therefore had he not need to lose no more time then needs
must, but spend it so, as that the Scripture may dwell in him, by which he may
be made perfect to his works, 2 Timothy 3.17. Then must he be instant to teach
it, cap. 4.2. To deliver the whole counsel of God. But no man knows the whole
counsel of God, how can he deliver it to others, and many have not life and
time to deliver it? If any man know it not by his own fault, not searching for
it, not studying and endeavoring, it will not excuse him, but condemn him the
more. If God hide something from him, it is, without doubt, such a thing as is
not so profitable to be known or taught, and not required of him. If God
shorten his days, and that in the first year, or second of his Ministry,
there is no more required of him then he can perform, so the default be not
his.

To teach the hearers, that they must endeavor by diligent hearing,

And there was no iniquity found in his lips.] The second commendable part in
them; they never taught error, nor deceived his people with lies.

The Minister of God must not corrupt the doctrine of religion, Aarons
commendations, it is others commandment. Hence are the reproves, Isa. 3.12.
Jer. 23.13.16. Ezekiel. 13.10.14. Acts 20.29.30. 2 Cor. 2.17. Gal. 1.8. Jude verse.
13.

Because when he exhorts and persuades,

Because he being a guide of others, a leader of the blind,

This shows how far the Priests of Popery are from being true and
commendable Priests before the Lord, but lies unto their people. For as they
have turned the truth of God into a lie, hardly holding any one point of the
truth truly and incorrupt, but having falsified all the truth of God: so that
which they specially preach unto the people, are lying legends, the false
reports of lying and false Saints, their lying miracles of foolish, childish,
ridiculous impossible things that were done by them. That Paul said of the
Cretians, Tit, 1.12. so I may truly of them. It were infinite and unprofitable
to enter particulars: This one thing may sufficiently prove that they have no
meaning the people should be taught the truth, seeing it is manifest they
forbid their Priests to read such things as they may understand the truth by,
to teach the people, or to see more of the truth then ordinary men do. For
there was an inhibition by his Holiness, that no Priest should be allowed to
read Bellarmine, because he has more truly set down the truth, as we hold, and
more largely then others have done: therefore none may read him without special
license, lest they should see the truth; and none must be licenced but such as
are sufficient grounded Priests, that there is no fear they should receive any
tincture of the truth, being such obstinate heretics already.

He walked with me in peace and equity.] The third thing commended in him; his
sincere, faithful and upright walking in his place and calling.

The Minister of God ought to walk with God in peace and equity;

Because they are ever to be near unto the Lord his remembrancers for his
people:

Because they must deliver his will to his people, Elies sons.

To reprove the Priests of Popery, which we may have enough to say out of
Bellarmines defense of John 23. lib. 4. de Pont. Romans cap. 14. He was accused
in the council of Constance for denying the resurrection of the body, and
everlasting life. Bellarmines first answer is, that he is not bound to defend
him; because he was not certainly and undoubtedly Pope: For at that time there
were three Popes, Greg. 12. Benedict. 13. and John 23. and whether was, could
not be determined, they all had many and singular portions. (A monstrous body
which had three heads or no head.) He answers secondly, that he had no such
error imputed to him for certain: for, says he, there were 53. Articles put
up against him; but all touching his life and manners, and were proved by
witness. And other Articles were objected without witness, whereof this was
one. Then was he found faulty in his manners in 53. crimes. His third answer
is, that this was only proved against him by the rumor of the common people,
who seeing John of so dissolute a life, begun to think and to speak it abroad,
that he believed neither eternal life, nor the resurrection of the body: for
it had been unpossible he should have lived so, if he had been persuaded of
either. Now if the head be thus, the whole body is sure no better, they so
depending upon him as they do. For to use Pintus similitude in Isaiah, one of
their own against themselves. As in a fish, the head being corrupted and
putrified, the whole body is corrupted: so says he for a Commonwealth (I for
their Church) when the principal is corrupted, the other must needs be: and he
that would know whether the fish be corrupted, must behold the head which is
first corrupted. So in this.

To admonish the Ministers, ite, but to him who said, venite; how should they
else prevail with God for his people? or with the people for their God, when
they make themselves unacceptable of God? yea, hateful by their sins, and
the offering of God and his service loathsome, and to be abhorred of the people
for their corruptions. The Lord forbad to Aaron and all his for ever, strong
drink, Levit. 10.9. forbidding by it all excess which might make them any
ways unfit for the service of God. The penalty is death; how shall they escape
Gods judgments who are drunkards, deceivers, swearers, and such like?

This commendation given to the Priest, may teach also a general instruction
to all.

Every one that walks with God, cleaves to him in uprightness,

Some Papists would hence gather, that a man may be perfect in this life: For
out of this will follow, say they, that the high Priest was perfect. I answer,
that if either they knew themselves, or knew the Scripture, they would never
gather any such thing; for who knows himsselfe, and finds not himself at the
best estate full of corruption? as Saint Paul did, Romans 7. Or who knows the
Scripture; and can be ignorant, that he was never yet found since the fall of
Adam, which had not his taint and corruption? Not the dearest Saint of God. And
for the particular, Aaron the high Priest had his sin diverse times: For he
yielded to the people to make a Calfe, Exodus 32. He ate not the offering
according to the Law, Levit. 10. And so transgressed, that God threatened and
performed it, that he should not set foot in the land of Canaan, Number. 6.2. If
this be so, then could he not be perfect.

But how is it true,

It is true, legis, which has all the points and parts of justice, and all the
perfections of all parts which some call, Perfectio gradnum obedientiae, which
was never in any but Christ, and Adam for a while. Another Evangelii, which
has all the parts of true justice, but it wants the perfection of those parts.
As a child has all the parts of a true man in the infancy, though it want
perfection of stature, and tallnesse, and strength, which is called of some,
Perfectio partium, because all are there in truth; which is nothing else but
the conversion of a sinner, with a purpose, will and endeavor, with integrity
and sincerity to please God according to all his commandments. And thus was Job
just and perfect, Noah, Zachary and Elizabeth, etc.

He walked with me in peace and equity.] Therefore in peace; because in equity,
being upright in his conversation, he had peace with God, and peace with
himself.

They who walk uprightly, e contra Isai. 57.20.21.

Because he is justified, Bona opera sequuntur justificatum.
as fruit from the life of a tree. Now he that is justified, and he only, has
true inward peace, Romans 5.1.

He that walks not uprightly,

And did turn many away from iniquity.] The fourth thing commended in him, that
he labored so diligently, and so effectually, and walked so carefully, that
many who were borne and bred in sin and iniquity, and continued in it as
slaves of Satan, were turned from it to God and godliness.

The Minister of God must and ought to turn many from sin and Satan, to God
and godliness; that is, he ought so to teach,

Because he shall be free from their blood and perishing, Ezekiels parable,
Chap. 33. a watchman set up of themselves, shall answer for their bodies, if
they perish for want of warning; what shall he do that is set up of God?

Because if God do make his labor effectual, Chrysostom. Non minus praemii, if
he come without them, he shall not lose his labor, but less sure, because of
that, Dan. 12.3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament: and they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the
stars for ever and ever.

This reproves and condemns all Preachers and Ministers,

To teach all Ministers so to preach, Isaiah 55.10.11. Surely, as the rain
comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but
waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and bud, that it might give
seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats: so shall my word be, that goes
out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish
that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I send it: And if
he do waste himself, hazard his life, and spend his strength, and gain but
one, or few, it will be the recompense of his labor. The Captain that redeems
and recovers but one captive, whose freedom is desired by his Prince, shall
not lose his reward, though he shall have greater that recovers more. So in
this. Dan. 12.3. And if God do not bless his labors, yet if he be not wanting
in his duty, care and endeavor, but be found wise and faithful, he shall be
rewarded. Isai. 49.5. And now, says the Lord that formed me from the womb to
be his servant, that I may bring Jacob again to him, though Israel be not
gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be
my strength.

This may teach us why the Ministry of the Word, often spoke of before, but
then it was borne; because they probably conjectured, he meant not them, but
when he has been a while with them: that it is like he may know them to be
guilty of that sin, though happily, and ten to one, he did not, then is it
tolerable, because they think he would separate them and their beloved sin,
their profitable and delightful sin. All the while he will preach peace and
comfortable things to them, and bring the word of reconciliation, and tell them
of Gods love, and Gods mercy, and that he is sent to woo them to be married
to God: all that while he shall be kindly welcome. As he that should sue for a
Prince, to win the love of a woman to him, all the while he tells of his honor
and riches, and beauty, and such things, he shall be kindly welcome: but if he
come to tell her, that she must separate her self from some place and company
she loves well, and change her manners, and forsake her friends and fathers
house; he shall find his entertainment, both for usage and countenance,
changed: So in this. Which makes oftentimes Ministers, if they be not the more
faithful, grow cold and careless, and so fall into many grievous sins.

And turn many from iniquity.] In themselves, and of themselves by nature,
they were in iniquity, carnal, and sold under sin, Romans 7. till the Minister
by the word brings them out of it, and turns them to God from sin, and makes
them his.

No man naturally is Gods, but a slave to sin and Satan,

Turn from iniquity.] Their conversion to God,

Those who are truly called and converted, are turned from their sin and
corruption; that is, washed, cleansed and purged from them, 1 Cor. 6.11.

VERSE. VII.
For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law
at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.

FOr the Priests lips.] In this verse is the reason of the precedent duties
required in others, and commended in those with whom God made his covenant at
first, generally commanding a duty of the Priest, or a double duty, because by
knowledge and law some understand two several things. It depends upon the
former thus: These things he ought to do: for he ought to be a man of
knowledge, etc. Some read them, Does preserve, in the present tense; but
commonly it is read in the future: Not to note out a promise, as if the Priests
lips should never err, but should be so kept, that he might not err. But it
is a commandment, showing how he ought to be qualified.

Shall keep.] It is not, says S. Hierom, shall bring forth, or produce: for
that was spoken before; but shall keep, that he may speak it and produce it in
time, and may give his fellow servants their portion in due time. Some take
knowledge here for the understanding of the spiritual and heavenly mysteries,
as the Law after, for the rule of the composing of their manners and actions:
And these are said to be the Priests, because they must study the books of
divine wisdom, by which they become more wise and more learned then the rest
of the people.

And they should seek the Law at his mouth.] That is, they ought to require
from his mouth who ought to teach it them, Levit. 10.9.10.11. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.
The Law, says Bernard lib. 2. de Con. sid. Non nugas profecto, vel fabulas:
Not toys and fables. S. Cyril, Ait nomine legis contineri omnium ad been
vivendum necessariorum cognitionem.

For he is the Messenger of the Lord.] This is a reason for confirmation of the
former; he must be a man of wisdom and knowledge, because he is one God has
made choice of, to be his messenger to carry and declare his will unto his
people: He is called Angelus, not that he was so by nature, but by office.

In the verse we observe two things, two duties, and one reason enforcing both.
The first is the Ministers duty, he must be a man of knowledge, learning and
understanding.

The Minister of God, Elisha knew well, therefore 2 King. 2.9. he asked a
double portion of Elijahs spirit. Matthew. 13.52. Every Scribe which is taught
unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto an householder, which brings forth
out of his treasure, things both new and old. Therefore are they compared to
stars, Rev. 2.1. Made the light of the world, Matthew. 5.14. To prove that
stars should have light, that the eye should have sight, were needless: for
all know and will confess it, Tit. 1.9. Gods stewards, of whom as they must be
faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. so also skillful, seeing he has the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, Haggai 1.13. he is the Lords messenger. 2 Cor. 5.20. in
Gods stead.

Because he is Gods messenger, Paul, 1 Cor. 5.20. Gods Ambassador; now
necessarily it follows, that the Messenger and Ambassador of a Prince should
know and understand his Masters will, what he is to speak and to deliver in
the name of him that sent, to those to whom he was sent: so in this.

Because he ought to instruct the ignorant, Timothy and Titus do run.

But this cannot be done, except he be a man of knowledge and understanding of
the word.

This admonishes all those, Multo fuisse satius manus suas in spinas
imposuisse, quam earum impositiono Sabbatium ad gradium designasse Presbiterii.
Marcianus.
which have no skill in War and Marshall affairs, that when the field is to
be fought, are not able to lead their bands and to go in and out before them,
can never answer it to their Prince if it be known, that this is the cause why
the Battle succeeds so badly, why so many perished and the enemy gathered
ground upon him. So in this. I think too many may say of those whom they have
ordained, as Marcianus said, when he heard how Sabbatius demeaned himself whom
he had ordained a Presbyter, It had been better he had laid his hands upon
thorns, then by the imposition of his hands to have designed Sabbatius to the
degree of a Presbyter.

This reproves those who think any body sufficient for the Ministry: As
corrupt Patrons and Parents and such like; ungodly Patrons to enrich
themselves, and better their state and portion, think any body sufficient to
discharge, if he can change Peter's voice, Acts 3.6. Silver and gold have I
store; or if he want that, if he can part stakes, and divide it, take thirds,
or stand to his courtesy, though he have not a whit of Elisha's spirit, nor
any knowledge in his lips; such a one, if they may be judges, there is none to
him, as David said of Goliahs sword, and more fit then one that has Elisha's
double spirit doubled upon him, and will look as he may to have that which God
has given him. If we will make them judges, either the Apostle Paul forgot
himself, or the Printer, by negligence left out a word, 2 Corinthians. 2.16. for
it should be, Who is not sufficient for these things? But these Ieroboams,
which bring in Ministers of the lower sort of the people; because they fill the
hand, shall have Ieroboams punishment, 1 Kings 13.33.34. Qui potestatem facit
volenti Ecclesi^m corrumpere, is certe author fuerit coru^ omnium quae perdita
illius audacia turbaverit, Chrysostom. de Sacerd. 3.
Like to these are carnal parents, who bring up their children only so far
as they may be capable by the law of a living; but care not for other
sufficiency: only perhaps for credit and complement sake, that they be able
now and then to make a Sermon in some place of honor and fame: And they will
provide and purchase livings and benefices for them, and thrust them into them.
To these, and their like, I may apply that, Dan. 1.10. And to these may I
adjoyne those Ministers which themselves having knowledge, yet I know not out
of what corruption it comes, they think a few men of learning is enough. If
a few Parishes in a City or Country have learned men and preachers, as if all
Ministers should not be men of knowledge.

To reprove all Ministers who are ignorant, Samuel was in his childhood of the
voice of God, 1 Samuel 3.4. So unable are they for that place. Like to Balaam,
Number. 22. that though God forbad him, yet for gain he would needs go: So these,
for the wages of iniquity, when as God, by denying them gifts, has said, Go
not, yet they will threap kindness of him, and will go. As Ahimaaz, 2 Samuel
18.23. that would needs run to carry the King news from the Camp; but when he
came he knew nothing: So these, needs must they be Ministers of the Gospel,
Messengers of glad tidings, such as will carry news from the King to the
Camp: but when they come to tell their message, they know nothing, no more, or
often not so much as many of their flocks, as Hosea 4.4.

To admonish every man how he takes this calling upon him, Bernard.

Whether if he have not gifts,

He is, though not such as he should;

From these words some of our Papists do gather that the Priests could not
err; and so by consequent not now the Bishops, nor a Council. The reason is,
because this is a promise, and God keeps his promises.

The Council of Chalcedon not denied to be a lawful Council, equalled the
Bishop of Constant, with the Bishop of Rome in authority, honor, and other
privileges; save only in precedence, which they say is an error.

The first Council of Nice decreed, That those heretics who followed Paulus
Samosatenus, should again be baptized; as Cyprian and the Anabaptists.

The second of Nice decreed, That Images should be worshipped, and that Angels
had bodies, and that the fowls of men were corporal: Why else did Augustine
appeal from the Council of Africa, where Cyprian was present, to the
Scriptures, affirming, we may not doubt of the Scriptures, but of them it is
lawful, lib. 2. de Baptist. cont. Donatist. cap. 3.

Concilia plenaria errare posse, dicens: If the Qu. be of the authority of the
Pope, whether greater then a Council: Hierom answers: Si authoritas quaritur
major orbis est urbe. But ask the Council of Constance, which deposed John
23. and chose Martin 5. Either the Council erred, or else Martin was no
lawful Pope: Then all his successors were schismatickes, no lawful Popes.


To this I answer: It is no promise, but a commandment, showing what manner of
man a Minister ought to be: The same which the next sentence is.

Again, I affirm, that if it be a promise, it is general: for the reason is
general to all, yea and particular to every one. But the Scripture is
manifest, that both particular Priests, and general Councels of Priests have
erred. In general are these, Isaiah 59.10. Jerem. 6.13. and 14.14. which places
show, that the most of the Priests and Prophets were then corrupt. Now if there
should have been a Council gathered of these, what good might be hoped for
from them, by going to the Council; they might have changed their places, but
not their minds; they would have been the same in a Council they were at
home. Besides, is it not manifest, that Councels have erred? 1 Kings 22. But
Bellarmine happily will answer, they were a Council of Prophets, not Priests,
gathered by the King, not the high Priest. Then see a Council of Priests
gathered by the high Priest erring, John 9.22. and 11.53. and Mark 14.64. But
Bellarmine will say, that a Council of the Jews lawfully called before
Christ, could not err; but he being come, they might. The ground must be,
because they are not Priests, neither the high Priest; but this is false: for
the Priestood of Aaron was not abolished till Christ became a Priest, which was
not till his sacrifice: for if they had been, then had he sinned in
communicating with them. And if this were so, it were marvel how the Rhemists,
and the general Popish argument will hold, who by the example of Caiaphas,
Joh. 11.49. proves, that the Pope cannot err, though he be wicked: for if he
were not a high Priest, then holds not this argument; but he was a high Priest,
and they all Priests, and yet they erred, and so may it err. More ingeniously
deal Hosius and Canus, affirming, the Council did pronounce a right sentence,
when they condemned Christ of blasphemy, that they might establish this, a
Council cannot err.

And they should seek the Law at his mouth.] The commandment touching the
people, showing what they ought to do.

The people of God, and they who be of his Church, hear and receive the word
of God at the mouth of the Ministers. It is not spoken exclusively, as if these
must only hear from the Minister, and not to read themselves: for that is
commanded, Joh. 5.39. but principally they must hear it from him, and
ordinarily when he speaks the Word, they must not withdraw themselves, but
must hear. This is the order God has ordained in his Church: This is that is
commanded here: so Hag. 2.12. so Jam. 1.16. Isaiah 2.3. To Gods house to hear
and be taught, there speak the Ministers, Heb. 13.17. Then must they be heard.

Because they are begotten and borne again of the seed of the Word;

Because, Chrysostom, Hom. 11 ad pop. Antioch. Se quisque per seipsum non
facile emendare potest. Men are so partial in judgment, so perverse in
affection, oftentimes blinded by one means or another, they see not what is
fit for them; and if any thing dislike them, not willing to take it to them,
then had they need of another.

This will convince of sin all those who hold either in opinion or practice,
to themselves, then God has, who has commanded it, who has given Pastors and
Teachers to the Church, who has bid them preach in season and out of season.

Secondly, they are begotten already, therefore they need not hear. Nay, they
are therefore not begotten, because they think it needless. For there cannot
be life, but there ^eill be a desire of food. They cannot be Gods, but they have
his Spirit; and where his Spirit is, there cannot be contempt of his ordinance:
but it argues they have not his Spirit, nor are not begotten.

Thirdly, you cannot prove we ought to hear so often. Thou must learn and
hear from him the whole Law of God, which cannot be heard in a man's life in so
seldom hearing, as they can be content only to hear, and much less learned.
If they must hear out of season, then oftener then they would, or do. But shall
I tell you the true cause of this refusal? It is either pride of heart,
whereby they are puffed up with their own knowledge, and condition, and think
they know as much and need no more, and are, as the speech is, as well as meat
can make them; which is plain hypocrisy: or it is pride of state, when they
are puffed up with their wealth and state, and think it enough for the poor
to receive the Gospel, and press upon it. It is not for their state and
worship to be over attendant, to strive and thirst after the Word, they come
more to honor the Word, or to be well thought of by men, then for any good
they look to receive by it; which is a spice of Atheism: or it is because of
the guilt of their consciences, who find the galling of the Word, who think
if they should continually hear it, they should have no quietness in
themselves at all, when they can hardly quiet themselves that hear so seldom,
which is carnal security; or else he that has them in a snare at his will, is
afraid to lose them: And when he finds that one Sermon makes Agrippa almost a
Christian, he is afraid of a constant hearing, lest they should become
Christians altogether, and he be cast out, knowing the Preacher is the power of
salvation.

To teach every one to make conscience of this duty, David, to go into the
house of God, so shall we subscribe to the wisdom of God, who has so
ordained, and given men gifts, not in vain, not for themselves, when as little
would save them, but as teats to the mother, and Art to the Be to make honey,
etc. so shall we be begotten of God, to be sons, or reformed of God to be
holy sons, or repaired by God, who decay in mind as well as in body, and had
need of continual instruction as of daily eating. For our work is not like
others, says Saint Chrysostom, who find it as they left it.

They should seek the Law.] This is the commandment touching the people, that
they must receive the Law from the Ministers mouth; and not only receive it,
but seek or require it, as it were exact it, as men do for their due, or as
servants require their portion from the Steward when he was slack in giving.

The people must not only hear and receive the word of God at the mouth of
the Ministers,

Because it is that which will make men rich spiritually with riches of faith
and piety,

Because here Christ, Peter answered, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the
words of eternal life. Hence the Gospel is, The grace of God bringing
salvation, Tit. 2.11.

Because without this,

To convince of sin all such,

The Law.] That is, the simple and plain words of God, not trifles, and
fables, and other vanities of wit, but the whole Law, whatsoever he is bound to
deliver.

The people ought to hear and receive,

Because they are his people, which requires they should hear and affect his
words, his laws, his will and his precepts, and them all.

Because the whole is either concerning God or themselves;

This will serve to reprove many, Aug de Civ. D. lib. 16.2. And sometimes for
those things which signify something, are those things which signify nothing
added. As the ground is only plowed and rent up by the plow share, yet that
this may be, other parts of the plow are necessary. And humility, if they had
any, would teach to suspect their own wisdom, in not seeing the use and end,
the profit and fitness of things, rather then questioning and reasoning
against God. Others can be content to hear all pleasant things, as the
promises and mercies of God, but judgments and reprooses, threats and checks,
that they cannot brook; like unto those, who in medicines affect only the
smell or trimnesse, or gayness of them, as pills rouled in gold, but cannot
away with the force of purging and preserving. And see not that a great company
more go to hell by presuming in their lives, then by despairing at their
deaths. Some can willingly hear that which concerns other men, and their
sins, their lives and manners, but nothing touching themselves at all, and
their own sins: As men can willingly abide to hear of other men's deaths;
but cannot abide to hear of their own. Oftentimes they will make the Minister
to believe as they did, Jerem. 42.5.6.7. Then they said to Jeremiah, The Lord
be a witness of truth and faith between us, if we do not even according to all
things for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us, whether it be good
or evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord God, to whom we send thee, that it
may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the Lord our God. But when he
shall declare unto them the will of God, that crosses their affections, they
will entertain him and answer, as Chap. 43.2. Thou speak falsely, the Lord
has not sent thee to say thus. These and such like are here reproved and
convinced of the breach of this duty, that they receive not, nor desire the Law
of God.

To admonish every one to labor for hearts willing and desirous to receive the
whole law and word of God,

For he is the Messenger of the Lord.] The reason of the former: The Priest is
Gods Messenger, therefore must he be such and such.

The Lord he uses the ministry of man in revealing his will to his people,
Rev. 3.14.

VERSE. VIII.
But ye are gone out of the way: ye have caused many to fall by the Law: ye
have broken the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts.

But ye are gone out of the way.] Or, Ye have departed from that way. The
second part of this dissimilitude follows now in this and the next verse,
which contains their degenerating, and so their corruption, verse. 8. and the
iteration of the judgment, verse. 9. And in the 8. verse there are three
corruptions, these Priests be challenged withal, wherein they are most unlike
to the former Priests. You are gone out of that way: that is, from the piety
and faithfulness of those Priests who lived in the first age, and with whom I
made the covenant at first. They neither swarved from that rule, but you have
forsaken and contemned my law, and followed your own devices, and sought your
selves and the establishing of your dignity more then my glory, and have sought
how to make a gain to your selves of my worship: You have done this who have
the same place, enjoy the same privileges, have the same portion of tithes and
offerings they had.

Ye have caused many to fall by the Law.] The second difference and
diffimilitude: That whereas the former Priests by their care and diligence in
their places, recovered and caused many to return from their sins, and the
breaches of the Law, and to walk uprightly by it: They on the contrary, by
their defect and want in teaching, and their passing over their sins as if
they saw them not, that they might purchase grace, and procure commodity to
themselves. As also by their wicked example they were the cause of the fall of
many; that is, that many have sinned, and were not punished, as the word
sometime signifies. By the Law, is not meant, as if they did so teach and
temper the Law as sometime the Priests did, in giving liberty by it to sin,
as to hate their enemies, to lust and covet, so nothing were outwardly acted:
but that they caused many to stumble and go contrary to the Law.

Ye have broken the covenant of Levi.] The third difference: They kept my
covenant and were faithful, and I performed whatsoever I promised to them; but
you have broken covenant, and gone clean contrary to the agreement which
passed betwixt me and your predecessors in whose loins you were, and who made
the covenant for you; and so by your iniquities have caused me not to perform
to you peace, plenty and prosperity, with length of days. From the general I
observe this:

Men, Iehosaphat, 1 King. 22.43. and of Josiah, 2 King. 22.2. On the contrary,
it was reproved in Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21.12. and in the Jews, Joh. 8.39.

Because God has therefore written these;

Because it will not profit them to have descended from,

Then are they justly reproved, Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 17.3. that he walked in the
first way of his father David, and not that he imitated him in all things. Is
it approveable to follow those who are far inferior to him in all things?
Nay, it is that which shall improve their sin, and inhance their punishment, as
Isai. 14.21. with 65.7.

To provoke us to read the Scriptures,

But ye are gone out of the way.] They had erred from the truth and good ways
of their predecessors.

The Rulers, Governors, The Law should not perish from the Priest, nor
counsel from the wise: God threatened the far contrary, Ezekiel. 7.26. and
Micha. 3.6. That the Sun should go down over the Priest. And see the event
of this, Isa. 56.10. Zephan. 3.4. Jerem. 6.13. and 23.13. But this was in
Israel only: yea, see it in Judah, Jerem 23.14.16. and not in Prophets only
but Priests, 2 Chronicles. 36.14.

Because their knowledge, be it never so great, is but in part, Vulgar illud
maxima pars eorum quae scimus, and minima pars eorum quae ignoramus.
and imperfect, 1 Cor. 13.9. Now they who are ignorant in part, may err in
some things. Ignorantia erroris matter. Bernard ad ^^^t nisi ignorando errare
non potest. August. En^hirid. Seeing a^^^en are in part ignorant, then they may
err; yea the Priest, Heb. 5.2.

Because they are but in part sanctified, and every man has some part of the
old man in him, as Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 11.5. who had gone as far as any other,
confesses of himself, Philip. 3.12.13. Romans 7.17.24 Therefore may they in
part strive against their own judgment, and be drawn by temptation to defend
error. Sometime against their own conscience: for though error in judgment,
arise ever of ignorance; yet error in act, as in teaching, in defending and
maintaining of error, is joined often with knowledge, and arises not out of
ignorance, but want of grace and sanctification.

Because the promise of incessant assistance, Christians nor as teachers, which
they had already but as Apostles. 1. To be planters of new Churchs, and new
government. Now that this was promised to them only, I prove; for it is added,
he will show you the things to come; a privilege that no Pope or Patriarch
ever durst challenge; and if not this will pass by virtue of that promise, why
the other, when they are both in one and the same promise: therefore it was to
them alone; yea not so much as the extraordinary Prophets of the old Testament,
had it either promised or performed, as Greg. super 1 Reg. 3.8. observes: for
they had not the Spirit extraordinarily always infallibly guiding them, save
when they came with some special message from God, which is manifest by the
error of Nathan, when he was out of his message, 2 Samuel 7.3. And of him that
was deluded by the false Prophet after he had done his message to Jeroboam, and
made to transgress the commandment of the Lord, 1 King. 13.2.18. and 19. which
he would not have done if he had not been deceived: for before he would not do
it for all the Kings offer, verse. 7.8. and in Jer. cap. 42.4.7.

This serves to confute the doctrine of Popery, Peter did from Antioch thither,
Bell. de Pont. Romans 4.4. For Councels, that a general Council may err, if the
Pope do not confirm it. Ibid. 4.3. And e contra Idem de Conc. author 2.2.5.
But if all be true that we have showed, he may err. But Bellar. de Pontif Romans
4.3. proves he cannot: for Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not, and so for the Pope, and so he cannot err. It is answered: First,
that by faith is not here meant an historical faith, but a justifying faith;
not a general faith, but a particular; nor that by which we believe God, but
in God: which fails not by error, so it be not fundamental: for so should we
condemn all who ever have lived: But when a man does fall wholly from grace,
and cease to be a member of Christ. And that it is so, appears out of the
drift and scope of our Savior Christ. for his drift was to arm and protect
Peter against that trial and temptation that he then foretold him of: not
against error in teaching the Church, but against Apostasy in time of trial.
Therefore says Theophilact in Lucam, he shows him the particular temptation:
for our Savior would not arm there where he was not to be hurt, where there
was no danger: not put an helmet upon the head when the heart and breast was to
be stricken. And thus much Bellarmine confesses, when he makes Peter's fall to
be a matter of fact, to cast utterly off his former profession, and not of
faith; and therefore it was perseverance in the habit of justifying faith, not
infallibility in the matter of historical faith that Christ prayed for; which
so differs, that a man may have the one, that is, justifying faith, and yet
hold an error not fundamental to the death, as Bellarmine contends for the
Fathers, diverse of them. And the other, that is a right belief of the general
points of religion, and yet not have justifying faith, nor saving and
sanctifying grace, as Bellarmine contendeth the Pope cannot err, and yet
confesses he may want saving grace.

Secondly, it is answered, that that he prayed for here, was a thing not proper
to Peter, but common to all the Apostles, yea all the elect; and if the gift
and grace be common to all, and conceived, Joh. 17.9.10.20. by the same person
in effect the same for all: upon which ground the ancient Fathers apply this
place to all the Apostles; yea to all the elect: and if to all, then helps it
them but a little.

The second proof he cannot err, is Matthew. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not
prevail against the Church: whence they first reason, that the foundation and
roof of the Church cannot err: such as Peter and the Popes his successors. I
say nothing that it is not yet proved, that the Pope is Peter's successor: nay,
it is manifest, that he succeeded rather Simon Magus then Simon Peter. But I
say, that Peter is not the rock. In the words, says Augustine, there is
difference betwixt Petrus and Petra, both in the Greek and Latin. Again, the
rock here is not Peter, but Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. and 3.11. whereunto agrees
the Fathers, and their own writers, and also late writers; whereby all color
of argument taken from this place for the Pope, is utterly quashed. But grant
that they beg: then must it either be in regard of his person; but that
cannot be: for the Church cannot be builded upon flesh and blood; Or in regard
of some superiority and place above the rest. But as that cannot be proved: so
the contrary is manifest, 2. Cor. 12.11. Or of his doctrine taught by him, and
of the faith of Christ confessed by him, and so it is true. Now this was common
to him and all the rest. For as John is called a Pillar, Gal. 2.9. so was James
as well as Peter, and all the rest, as Revel. 21.14. To which is that, Ephesians.
2.20. with whom the Prophets are joined, because they writ the Scriptures,
which is indeed the foundation of our faith; they being put for their writings.
Out of all which nothing will follow for the Pope, or nothing in special
manner.

I will trouble you with no other reasons, only I will show you this challenge
is false, because many of them have erred. The first shall be Marcellus, or
Marcellinus. who offered up sacrifice to Idols, and by the Council of Sessa
was made to recant it. The second Liberius, whom Hierom and Athanasius affirm
to have been an Arrian, one that denied the Deity of Christ. Thirdly, Thirdly,
like to him was Felix, who was an Arrian, as the same Hierom writes. Innocent
the first made both Baptism and the Eucharist necessary to salvation of
infants. Augustine lib. 1. contra Julian. Peligian. cap. 2. The latter of these
errors was condemned by the Council of Trent, Sessio. 5. sub Pio quarto, Ca.
non 4. Fourthly, Leo the first, who died as Arrius did, an Arrian. Fifthly,
Siricius accounted Matrimony, pollution. Sixthly, Vigilius accursed all who
affirmed, that there be two natures in Christ. Seventhly, Honorius the first,
which taught, as Melchior Canus confesses, that Christ had not two wills or
operations. Eighthly, In Concilio Romano.
Pope Stephen the sixth, he abolished all the Acts of Formosus his
predecessor, and commanded all that had received Orders from him, to be
ordered again: and thought that the Sacrament depended upon the virtue of the
Minister. Ninthly, in concilio Ravennae habito John 9. disanulled all the Acts
of Stephen: and Sergius the third, all that Formosus had done: And so that
which John had done and approved the Acts of Stephen. Some of these must needs
err. Tenthly, Gregory the seventh, whom Cardinal Benno in his writing of him,
who lived at the same time, makes an Heretic, a Necromancer, a seditious, and
a Simonist, and an adulterer, not the worst Bishop, but the worst of all men. A
right Hellebrand. Eleventhly, Celestinus the third allowed heresy to break
the bond of marriage, and that a man might marry again if his wife fell into
heresy, and e contra. So Alphonsus de Castro. Twelfthly, John 22. or 21. who
held that the souls separated from the bodies, saw not God, nor rejoiced not
with him, before the day of judgment, and was forced to recant it with sound
of trumpet by the University of Paris, for fear of losing his Popedom, as
John Gerson writes in his Sermon of Easter. Thirteenthly, John 23. or 22. was
accused in the Council of Constance for denying eternal life. and the
resurrection of the body.

All which, with many more, prove manifestly against them, that the Pope can
err, and has erred, and so may still. Bellarmine, I confess, has a great
many of shifts and evasions to clear his holy Fathers, but they are so light
and foolish, they are not worth the studying on for the most part.

This teaches us how dangerous a thing ignorance is, able to distinguish
neither the one nor the other. If it were infallible and certain, that their
guides could not err, nor their Ministers be deceived, it were no matter
though they were never so ignorant; but when it is most certain that they are
subject to it, and their erring will not excuse the people, though the other
answer for their abusing and mis-leading of them; their ignorance is very
dangerous, and that implicit faith (Popery so much commends) damnable. And in
them and others, who would persuade the people they may be ignorant, and a
little or no knowledge is required of them, it is suspicious, as if they meant
to make a prey of them, and to broach some errors among them: For then (says
Chrysostom) thieves go to stealing when they have first put out the candle;
and then do men utter their bad wares, when they have dim and false lights.

To persuade all men to labor for knowledge, The rich man is wise in his own
conceit: but the poor that has understanding can try him. And God, often to
the simple, reveals things, when hid from wise, Matthew. 11.25. to humble them,
and know themselves but men.

It is a thing that cannot be denied, because stories of all times do
manifestly prove it, that sometimes errors and heresies have so much
prevailed, that the most part of them who held and possessed great places of
office and dignity in the Church of God, either for fear, flattery, hope of
gain, or honor, or else misled through simplicity, or directly falling into
error and heresy, and departed from the soundness of the faith, so that the
sincerity of religion was upholden, and the truth defended and maintained only
by some few, and they molested, persecuted and traduced, as turbulent and
seditious persons, enemies to the common peace of the Christian world. To say
nothing of the times of Christ, and after him of the first Churches in the
Acts. This was the state of the Christian world in the time of Athanasius, when
in the Council of Seleucia and Ariminium, the Nicence faith was condemned, and
all the Bishops of the whole world were carried from the soundness of the
faith, save Athanasius, and some few Confessors banished with him. So that
Hieron. contra Luciferam, Ingemuit totius orbis, and miratus est factum se
Arrianum. So Hilarious contra Aux. Episc. Mill. complained that the Arrian
faction had confounded all. Paphnutius in the Council of Nice for the marriage
of Ministers, was alone.

But ye are gone out of the way.] Though they succeeded them in their places,
yet not in their faith, not in the truth of doctrine.

There may be an ordinary and external succession of place and person without
succession of faith and truth of doctrine. Isaiah, Jeremy, etc. It must needs
be that there was a separation of these two. In particular, it is manifest in
the time of Elijah, 1 King. 19.14. So when wicked Ahaz was King, 2 King. 16.11.
Vriah the high Priest corrupting the worship. In the Church of the Jews in
Christ's time it was so: for they condemning Christ and his followers as
schismatic, Joh. 9.22. and 12.42. This is further proved, Acts 20.29.30.
These had their succession from the Apostles, and held the same seats, the same
places which the Apostles held, yet had snot the same truth and faith. So out
of the Ecclesiastical stories it is manifest, that the Arrian Bishops, as
Eusebius Nicomediens. and Eustathius, and others did derive their succession of
place, persons, seats and Churches, from the Apostles. For they were called,
chosen, and ordained, after the custom of the Church, and had no new, but the
lawful calling. So of the Donatists, and Paulus Samosatenus in the Church of
Antioch succeeded Peter, as well as they did at Rome. And the Greek Church,
judged by the Papists, schismatic, has her personal succession not only
1200. years, as they confess, from Constantines time, but long before, from
Andreas the Apostle, as Nicephorus lib. 8. Chronol. cap. 6.

Because the grace of God, as they can their places and seats: for John 3. as
the wind, so the Spirit, blows where it lists. Not living men can make others
whom they gladly would, partakers of their faith and truth: how should the dead
and departed? living men more likely.

Because as in a common wealth, new Lords new laws, Himeneus and Alexander,
that they made shipwreck of faith, 1 Timothy 1.19.20. So of others.

Then falls to the ground the doctrine of Popery, Peter's successor, no not in
place, but to be proved only by tradition, and not to be deduced out of the
Word, as Bellarmine de Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap. 12. confesses. And so the maine
point, whereon the government and Hierarchy of the Papacy depends, has no
word in the Scriptures to prove it: and so the whole is hanged upon the
conjectures of men, as upon a rotten thread. For the Scripture not affirming
it, what assurance can there be for matter of faith, the matter must needs be
suspicious and doubtful? Again, even the histories, which is their proof,
are in such various opinions, that a man can hardly tell whom to follow,
touching Peter's coming to Rome, and his immediate successors. Some say he came
to Rome in the first year of Claudius the Emperor, some in the second, some
in the fourth, some in the tenth, and it may be that none of these is true:
sure it is, all cannot be true: For his successors, Tertullian makes Clement
his next successor. Optatus names Linus, and then Clement. Irenaeus makes
Linus, then Cletus, then Clement. If they differ thus, what certainty? where
should faith find any sure ground? If then the succession at best is
questionable and doubtful, if it may be certain, and yet be dis-joyned from
the succession of faith, as it is most certainly in them, and true faith only
makes a Church: then can this be no true note of the Church.

To teach us not to be deceived with the glorious show and great boast of such
succession; but a very dead carcass; whereas true faith, without any such
outward succession, establishes and makes a Church. And indeed one of the
purest and most excellentest Churches was without such a succession. For the
Church, of which Christ in his own person was Author and Master, in which the
Apostle was brought up and instructed, had no succession. And yet none will, or
dare deny, that it was the best and purest Church. For whom succeeded Christ
and his Apostles? Did he succeed Aaron and the Leviticall Priesthood? Did he
elect his Apostles out of them? Nothing less. For he succeeded not Aaron, but
Melchisedech, being a Priest after his order, not the others: and so the
succession was interrupted for many hundred years, and so may be still. And on
the contrary, there may be succession and no true Church, when the faith is
corrupt, and not sound, which made the Fathers when they speak of succession,
not urge a naked and external succession, but a true succession, and such as
was joined with the succession of faith and religion. Non sanctorum filii sunt,
qui tenent loca sanctorum, sed qui exercent opera eorum. S. Hierom.
They are not the children of the Saints who hold their seats, but who follow
their works. Nonex personis fidem, sed ex side persons probari oportet.
Tertul. lib. de Prescr. avers. Haeret.
We must not prove the faith from the persons, but the persons from the faith.
So say we, let them prove the persons from the faith, and not faith from the
persons. They have not the inheritance of Peter who have not the faith of
Peter. All which shows they would not have us to stand upon the succession of
the place and person, but the faith and doctrine. Non habent haereditatem
Petri, qui fidem Petri non habent. Ambr. lib. 1. de poenit. c. 6.


This will prove our Church to be a true Church, Jeremy, Ezekiel Joel, Hosea,
Amos had, who were called extraordinarily, or John Baptist, John 10.41.
Besides, what miracles needs there, when as our Pastors either deceased or
living, bring in no new doctrine, or new faith, nor erect a new Church, but
restore the old faith, and repair and purge the Church foully corrupted. And
whereas they deny us any ordination of Ministers, because they which are
lawfully ordained, must be by an Apostle, or one succeeding him immediately;
they be all fictions of their own, without a word of the Scripture: for they
are true Pastors, which are called of their flocks, and of the lawful
Magistrate, teaching the people, and doing those things which good Pastors
should do. And for Bellarmines distinction of calling or election, which he
acknowledges was sometime alone of that the people did choose, and grants may
be good, but not ordination. It is answered, if election be good, we contend
not much about ordination: for they who have authority to choose and call, have
to ordain, If an orderly ordination be not to be had. And finally, if all
Bishops should be Arrians, and such as would ordain none but them of their
own sect, as sometimes they were, must ordination by them be necessary, or we
must have no Ministers.

Then ought men to labor for knowledge,

Ye have caused many to fall by the Law.] The second thing reproved in them,
in seducing or mis-leading others, making them to fall into sin.

It is a manifest corruption in the Ministers of the Church,

And this is done either by not preaching, or very negligently, that they
cannot know what to do, and so must needs sin and offend. Or by not
reproving, by which they do not think their sins to be sins, but remain
in them, according to that, Levit. 19.17. or by dawbing, as Ezekiel. 13.10. and
promising life unto them, notwithstanding their sins, as verse. 22. or by bad
example, as Gal. 2.12.13.

Because it is against the main and principal end of his calling,

Because he crosses the desire of God,

This will convince many Ministers of corruption and degenerating from the
Prophets and faithful Ministers of God,

This may serve for an Apology for the Ministers of God, placentia, and waken
never a secure man out of his sin, they would cunne him more thank, and all
speak well of him. But woe unto you when all men speak well of you, says
Christ, Luke 6.26. this is a sign of a false Prophet, a corrupt Teacher: but
blessed on the contrary, verse. 22.23. when they speak but that which he has
commanded, and do but that he has enjoined them, Isaiah 58.1. For want of
which he reproves and threatens the false Prophets, and will condemn all
Ministers. A Physician has two sons of a Prince committed unto him, the one
taken with a frenzy, the other sick of a lethargy, upon pain of the Princes
displeasure if they mis-carry and be not cured by his default, for him to lose
life for life, if he should be heard and seen chiding and beating, and binding
the one, and pinching and nipping the other, and using all such means as might
cure them, he were not to be blamed.

Ye have broken the covenant of Levi.] This is the third thing, and the
general of the former; the former being a proof of this, that the covenant
was broken when they had failed in these particulars. Of the covenant and the
conditions of it, and so of the keeping and breaking of it, has been spoken
verse. 4. and 5. One thing may we observe, which will serve for more general
use, which is from this, that by two particulars they are made guilty of the
breach of the whole covenant.

One or two particular offenses makes a man guilty of the whole covenant which
he has made with God. Jam. 2.10. He that is guilty of one is guilty of all: so
much the nature of a covenant will carry. For when it stands on several
conditions on both parts, when any condition is broken, the whole must be. In
this the general on man's part is obedience, the special are the particulars
of that obedience, which are the several commandments and branches of them:
he then that is guilty of one branch, and has broken it, is guilty of that
commandment; and he that is of that, of the whole, whereof that is a part; and
so faulty in one, he is in the whole guilty of the breach of the whole
covenant, and the whole law, Jam. 2.10.

VERSE. IX.
Therefore have I made you also to be despised and vile before all the people,
because ye kept not my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

THerefore have I made you to be despised and vile before all the people.]
Therefore have I also made you to be despised. This is the repeating of these
judgments, against these Priests for their corruption, and for the
dissimilitude and unlikenesse which is betwixt these and their predecessors. If
we consider the verse in it self, here is a judgment not threatened, but
executed; not imminent, but present, and the deserving cause of it: First,
general, Not kept his ways: secondly particular, being partial in dividing
the law.

Therefore.] That is, because you have thus broken covenant with me, and have
declined and turned out of the way of your predecessors from the truth they
held, and the faithfulness they practiced and performed, I have made you
despised. Private and personal sins are often turned by the perverseness of
men to the disgrace of the calling; but here the faults and corruption of the
calling, neglecting or corrupting those duties, makes their persons in
contempt, which is that here set down.

I have made.] It is others malice so to do it, or their corruption, or some
other respect; but it is my judgment, I have brought it justly upon you.

I also made you.] You first broke my covenant, keeping not my conditions, and
I also by judgment have now broken it with you, and brought this contempt upon
you. And this have I done, because you keep not my ways, because you had
little care of your carriage and behavior toward me, and of my ways to
glorify me; but neglecting my precepts, have made my honor to be contemned:
therefore have I given you up to scorn and contempt, and specially have I laid
it upon you for this, That you have been partial in the Law] Which is as much
as you have accepted persons. He accepts persons, who being Judge, is not drawn
or led by the laws or by justice, but beholds his person which is brought into
question, and is so moved and affected with it, that he favors it against
right, either because he is his friend, or because he is mighty, or terrible,
or poor, and to be pitied, Hierom. So in the Church the Minister he accepts
persons.

The judgment upon these Prophets for breaking of covenant with God, and
dealing unfaithfully in their places, is shame and reproach.

The hatred, And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a
perpetual shame which shall never be forgotten. For it has relation in
special to the Prophets, and Mich. 3.7. Zach. 13.4. Examples in Elies sons,
1 Samuel 2.24. the faltering Prophets of Ahab, 1 King. 18.40. for that they
killed them, came from hatred. And in Amaziah, Amos 7.17.

Because it is a just rule of equal recompense, Wherefore the Lord God of
Israel says, I said that thine house, and the house of thy father should
walk, before me for ever. But now the Lord says, It shall not be so: For them
that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be despised.

Because it is most equal,

Hence we learn why the Clergy of the Church of Rome is in that just
contempt and hatred that it is every where; Riberah upon this place speaking
thus: Hoc non tam exponendum, quam lugendum est, Quid sanctius aut honorabilius
sacerdotio? Quid autem nunc despectius saceraotibus? cur id, nisi, quia vita,
nostra dignitatem nostram dehonestamus?
This place is not so much to be expounded as lamented. What is more holy, more
honorable then the Priesthood? and yet now who are more despicable? and why
so, but because we dishonor our dignity with our lives? How their wisdom,
and profession, and practice, is as Jam. 3.16. sensual, earthly, and
divellish, I have not long since showed, how justly they are then in contempt,
need not to be proved. Let me add to that has been said, the opinion of
Bernard of the Court of Rome, that you may judge what the confines be; he
writes thus to Eugenius, lib. 4. Amongst these, you being their Pastor, walk
decked with much precious apparel: If I durst speak it, these are rather
Pastors for Devils then for Christ's sheep. Your Court usually receives good
men, but makes few good, there the wicked are not made better, but the good
far worse.

This teaches us,

To teach the Ministers, if they be in contempt, despised. The world will tell
him happily, that the way to favor, and love, and account, is to be corrupt
and careless in his place, to do somewhat, and not much. Balak told Balaam so,
Number. 24.11. but he speaks like an heathen King, and they as deceivers.

Have I also] You begun and broke covenant with me, and now I have broken with
you; not I, but you began first, I only followed.

The Lord never breaks covenant with man, He went out to meet Asa, and said
unto him, O Asa, and all Judea and Benjamin, hear ye me: The Lord is with you
while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if
ye forsake him, he will forsak you, Jer. 22.13.16.17. etc.

Because he is immutable,

Because he is most just, Suum cuique. Now while a man performs his promise,
and cleaves to God, he will not withold, or forsake any thing: for promise is
debt.

To teach what is the cause why man often enjoys not many of the blessings
which are promised. though he did once make a covenant with him; yet he is not
the man, because he has not performed his condition. Like Israel, Isai.
59.1.2. Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save: neither
his care heavy that he cannot hear: But your iniquities have separated between
you and your God; and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not
hear.

To instruct a man how he may enjoy the blessings and promises of God, whether
one or other: he must keep promise with him, and perform all the conditions on
his part. It is in him to have them or reject them from himself: for if he
perform his conditions, God will not fail in his; else he must hear what
David heard, 2 Samuel 12.8.

Then Gods faithfulness depends on man's.

Not his faithfulness, but his performance:

I made you to be despised.] It was others malice and corruption, but Gods
judgment.

As other judgments which befall men, so this of hatred and contempt and
reproach; it comes from God, though man be the instrument of it; therefore
says God, I have made you vile, Jerem. 23.40. Psalm. 44.13.14. and 107.40. 2 Samuel 16.10.

Because all evil, as in the City, so in every place comes from the Lord, Amos
3.6. the evil of punishment. Now such is this.

A question may be made, whether this be a sin or no?

It is not simply a sin to despise the wicked, Augustine speaks of that of
Shemei: Deus non est tam Author quam ordinator: The disposer of his corruption,
not the Author of it, for they having this venom by nature to hate and
contempt; God leaving them as he justly may to their own corruption, and they
will be hating and despising. Now he does order and dispose of this at his good
pleasure, and makes it fall where he thinks best, where he would punish, and
for what end he purposes, not for what they intended: As Solomon, Prove. 16.1.
The preparations of the heart are in man, but the answer of the tongue is of
the Lord. Meaning in the general that God disposes of all: so in this, not
unfitly.

This may show the folly of those who despise and set naught by the despising
and reproaches,

To teach men when they are in such judgments, David's thoughts; they cursed,
because God bids them curse, they reproach and contemn them, because he has
so made them, and then to imagine and consider that he who set them on must
snap them and check them. He must only charm these Adders that they sting
not, or he only must cure their biting; therefore must they by prayer seek
unto him for the removing of them who must take these from them, so David
prayed, Psalm. 119.39. Take away my rebuke that I fear: for thy judgments are
good. And if he a King of that magnificence and greatness, of that power and
authority could not have them removed but by seeking to God; if he could not
cure the biting of a dead dog, as Abishai calls Shimei, but God must do
it; how then shall any other inferior man be able to help himself and remove
it without him? Thirdly, he must humble himself and remove his sin which is
the cause of fit; for if he remove no judgment unless man remove the cause;
if he give not favor in the eyes of men, unless they have favor in his own
eyes first, If Prove. 16.7. When the ways of a man please the Lord he will make
also his enemies at peace with him, Then must they turn unto him, and forsake
that which is displeasing, and do that which is acceptable. And if a reproach
be, as they say of words irrevocable; yet will God do him good for the others
evil, 2 Samuel 16.12.

But ye have been partial in the law.] Their particular sin, why he would
lay this judgment upon them; their accepting of persons in the work of their
Ministry.

As it is in a Magistrate, as offenders for doing so. It is proved by the
command to Jeremy, Chap. 1.17.18. Hence is the commandment indefinite and
general to preach to all, and to reprove all. Ezekiel. 3.18. It is that Paul
teaches. 2 Timothy 2.15. And that which he seems to reprove in Peter and
Barnabas, Gal. 2.14. The examples of evil and good Prophets and Ministers show
this.

Because as Iehosaphat said of judgment,

Because they ought to be faithful disposers of Gods mysteries,

To reprove all Ministers who are partial in the law and dividing of Gods word
and mysteries, Pighius and Nicolas Cusanus a Cardinal of Rome; writes to the
Bohemians, Epist. 2. Epist. 7. This understand that the Scriptures are fitted
to the time, and diversely to be understood, so that at one time they may be
expounded according to the common and customable course, but change that and
the sense is changed. So that it is no marvel if the custom of the Church at
one time interpret the Scriptures after this manner, and another time after
that; and according to this they so deal, for time and persons, and so prove
partial in the the whole. One thing amongst other argues the partiallity of
the high Priest of Rome, which they wuold persuade us is part of the Law and
Word of God; that is Purgatory: which they dispose in respect of persons, the
rich and great ones able to give much, shall not long be in it; they who can
give less, the longer, they who are able to give nothing, perpetually. If he
had any charity in him of which they brag much, he would free all, and
freely, seeing they teach it is the Popes peculium; but if he had but equity
and justice in him, he would free one as well as another, and not accept
persons, and be thus partial. But not to trifle with them. The partiallity is
oftentimes too papable in the reformed Churches and the Ministers of them, when
in dividing the word they look not as the Cherubimes to the Arc, they to the
word to speak as it would teach them, which is not partial, but to those who
sit before them and apply it so, making it as some write of Manna, that it
tasted after every man's pallat and stomach, so this: But they are guilty of
this sin, and though as fools and wicked persons, they enjoy honor for a
time, yet they shall have dishonor, Prove. 3.35. It is said of the Panther that
he is so greedy after the excrements of a man that if they be out of his reach
and natural power, he stretches himself so much that he kills himself in
the end: so may I apply it to these.

To persuade the Ministers of God not to be partial, Elihu Job 32.21, 22. I
will not now accept the person of man, neither will I give titles to man, for I
may not give titles, least my maker should take me away suddenly. Remembering
that as Saul was put out of the Calendar of Gods Kings, for his partiallity,
and is accounted to have reigned but two years, when he did many more: so shall
they be out of the number of Gods worthies if they be partial, whereas their
uprightness and faithfulness will with the good Steward bring them into the
joys of their Master.

To persuade our hearers to give us leave to divide the word without
partiallity,

VERSE. X.
Have we not all one father? has not one God made us? Why do we transgress
every one against his brother, and break the covenant of our fathers?

HAve we not all one father?] The second part of the Chapter begins here and
continues to the end, containing the reproof of diverse particular vices in
the people of Israel in general, both Priest and people, in this tenth verse
he reproves their injurious and unequal dealing in the general.

Have we not all one father?] Some understand these words with the next verse,
as if it were a reason spoken in the defense of their taking of Idolatrous
wives, by them who had done it; their reason is thus: That seeing that they had
all one father, which was Adam, and all one Creator, which was God: there was
no reason why they should not marry with them. But others do understand them
as two main reasons against their marrying them, urged by the Prophet from God
himself: and so the expounding of the words will rather confirm, and the
greater consent of the learned old and new, go that way. Hierom says that the
people being returned out of captivity, the Princes and Priests, and people put
away their wives of the Israelites kindred, which by reason of their poverty,
and injury of the long way, and weakness of their sex, impatiently bearing
the labor, were wasted, and became both infirm and deformed in body;
whereupon they matched with strangers, who were fresh in years, beautiful and
comely, the daughters of rich and mighty men; as we may see in the ninth of
Ezra, that is with the Canaanites, Hethites, Pheresites, Jebusites, Ammonites,
etc. Therefore they think the Prophet here reproves them; first for their
marriages, and after for their divorces, Verse 16.

There are two special and chief causes of love and good will amongst men;
the one is kindred, affinity, or consanguinity; the other is one and the same
society of religion. First, nature compells men to affect and love earnestly
those who are borne in the same family, descended from the same parents and
stock; which bond cannot be violated or broken off without great wickedness.
Secondly, men reasonable and wise, do think those specially to be affected by
them, who are companions with them in the same religion and worship. And though
this is the most worthy and sure, yet the other goes before, and first carries
sway with men because it is by nature bred with them, and continued from their
infancy. And these two they are here pressed withal, as those which condemns
their fact, dealing thus to put away the daughters of Israel, the worshippers
of the true God, and to take unto them the daughters of the heathen,
worshippers of the false Gods. For the first of these reasons, it is here said,
Have we not all one Father? That is, are we not all men and women descended
from Abraham by one Isaac, from Isaac by one Jacob? Why then should we thus
do? dismiss those, or pass them over, and join our selves to the kindred of
the heathen and strangers? And for the second he says, Has not one God made
us? Do we not all acknowledge one God the Creator, and worship and serve him
with duty? Do you dismiss those wives, who acknowledge the same Creator with
you, and worship him, and take unto you those who worship Idols for him, and
put their trust in them? To create, or the Creator, is not here taken in that
common sense, as when we speak of Gods creation of the world: for then could
this be no reason against, but rather for them, as some would make it a reason
in that sort which the Prophet labors to confute. But this being against
them, must not be taken in that sense, but in another sense, as there is a
special use of it in the Scripture, when it speaks and deals of some new
and secret disposition of things, as Jer. 31.22. And so it is used, Isaiah
65.18. of such a special creation is it here meant, where love and duty is
specially due unto those, who are of the same religion with us, who follow the
laws and statutes of the same Creator and Author.

Why do we transgress every one against his brother?] It is taken by some to
be the reproof of their vice, though closely, or not so openly, as verse. 11.
it is set down: i. seeing we are of one kindred, descended from one father,
why do we thus transgress one against another, either putting away, or
refusing our own kindred in respect of strangers and aliens? Brother, here
some interpret either the sister or daughter of our brother; or rather
according to the use of the Scripture and Hebrew, which by brother understand
the female as well as the Male. And the application according to the occasion
either both, or but the one: Both, as Jam. 1.2. and the one, as here upon this
occasion, must needs be the female.

And break the covenant of our Fathers.] Some thinks that this is applied unto
the second reason; because the covenant of the Fathers was, That they all, and
their whole posterity, should acknowledge and worship one God only: and one
people should be consecrated to one and the same God. Others think, by
covenant is meant the Law of God, a thing usual in the Scriptures, and that
Law which God gave unto our Fathers, that they should not take the daughters of
a strange God to wife, or of another nation.

Others think the reason stands thus; making a third reason of it; because
God, when he made covenant with the Israelites, did it not with those more then
with these, with one more then with another, but with all alike: so that they
who despise others, violate the common covenant, as if it were only a covenant
made with them.

The conclusion of all is thus framed: If you be all one in body and soul, and
by Law, why do you contemn one another?

Generally, in that he used reason, and not the bare authority of God, which
had been that he well might, we observe this:

Men who persuade others to good, or dissuade them from evil,

Have we not all one Father?] But in this verse, as I said, I take not to be
reproved any particular sin, but generally their injuring, and dealing
unequally and unjustly one with another. And this the first reason by which it
is reproved, condemning this, because it was against nature, they being all of
one parent, all one flesh.

Nature it self,

Because unreasonable creatures, as beasts and birds,

Because it is the rule and voice of Nature: Quod tibi non vis, alteri ne
feceris.

To condemn men, not only as irreligious, sin without controulment, yet
should they not without condemnation: for even that, Romans 2.12. will here have
place, and shall condemn them by the very light of nature, and now double
condemn them; because the light of the Word has shined in a dark place, and
they have loved darkness more then light.

To teach every man, e contra, or a private man, nature and humanity ought to
keep him from the one, and hold him to the other. Omnia animalia naturalibus
munimentis providentia coelestis armavit. Homo accepit proistis miserationis
affectum, qui plane vocatur humanitas, qua nosmet invicem tueremur. Lactant. de
falsa ^^pientia, lib. 3. cap. 20.
The heavenly providence has armed all beasts with natural defenses; but man
in stead of them has the affection of pity, which is called humanity, by
which we are defended. This very thing ought then to bind men.

It is hard from many men when they reprove others for transgressing and
injuring others: It is not for your profession, it does not become a man of
that zeal and profession as you do. If they speak it that they are more
bound, it is true; but if to excuse themselves, or others, as if it were little
or no sin in them, then it is their corruption, and is false: For wherein
does their profession bind them, which nature it self and humanity binds
them not to do, or from doing? Undoubtedly in nothing, though it bind more: he
is as well bound, that is bound in a single bond, as he who is tied in a
double; both are bound, though not alike. Set then religion aside, which
follows in the next place, and even nature it self binds every man to these
duties, and from the contrary. and whilst nature lasts, and is undissolved,
the bond is never cancelled. Therefore must every one remember it to do good,
and not hurt, even all the days of his life, to those to whom nature has
bound him. Contrary to that some perform for a while, but as if nature died,
they living, do not continue it: as for instance, betwixt man and wife, many at
first do, but continue not; betwixt parents and children.

Has not one God made us?] The second reason by which he reproves their
injuring and transgressing against others; because they were all of one Church,
professed one religion, and served one God.

Religion, Thus shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive now, I pray thee, the
trespass of thy brethren, and their sin: for they rewarded thee evil. And
now, we pray thee forgive the trespass of the servants of thy fathers God. And
Joseph wept when they spoke unto him. Manifest further; because the foundation
of religion, which is the word of God, commands love to neighbors, and so
under that title, other men, Levit. 19.18. Romans 13. Tit. 2.11.12. Jam. 1.27.
even so far that it comes to enemies, Prove. 25.21. Exodus 25.4. Matthew. 5.43.44.

Because, as it is natures voice: so somewhat differing, Quod tibi vis, alteri
feceris, Matthew. 7.12.

This will serve to condemn men as irreligious and profane, Ismael did Isaac,
by mockings and reproaches, yea sometimes more then the servants of a strange
God will do; that as an ancient Writer said, As Moab and Ammon came from the
seed of Abraham, and yet hated the seed and kindred of Abraham: So, he of
heretics, I of Christians, they say they profess Christ, and yet none so
much as they, hate the generation of Christ his seed. May we not say of them,
as Revel. 2.9. They say, they are Jews and are not, but are the Synagogue of
Satan. Again, as 1 Cor. 11.18. When ye come together in the Church, I hear
that there are dissentions among you, and I believe it to be true in some part:
so I hear, that there are some who make the profession of religion but a
cloak, the better to transgress against their brethren, and under that color
to deceive or injure them; and I believe it to be true in some part, that some
do it that they might better overreach or deceive, and plainly injure others.
So did Simeon and Levi, the two sons of Jacob, to be revenged on the
Shechemites, but they had Jacobs curse, and Gods with it: so shall these have
so crossing of God, that that which he would have as a main reason to tie them
together, and keep them from transgressing one against another, they make but a
mask for their iniquity. Verily offenses must come, but woe to that man by
whom they come, it were better he had never been borne. And when Christ shall
come to judgment, howsoever he may carry it out in the mean time, this will
not then serve, Luke 13.26. and Matthew. 7.22. For they shall have the answer in
both places: and if they be excluded for not helping, Matthew. 25. how shall they
be for transgressing against them, and hurting them?

Now that the spirit of God by the Prophet has joined these two, and added
religion to nature, as that which strengthens, yea makes men perform duties
when the other cannot, or is corrupt. From thence I observe this instruction:

The only means to keep men in their duties one to another,

Why do we transgress every one against his brother?] The word signifies to
deal disloyally, traitorously, and unfaithfully. And so he accuses them of
perfidious and unfaithful dealing one with another, that they did not keep
their promise, word and covenant one with another.

Perfidie and unfaithfulness in word and promise, They shall be truce
breakers. Saint Paul makes his apology, that he was not guilty of this, 2.
Cor. 1.18. James commands the contrary, Jam. 5.12. For this cause was Saul's
posterity punished, because he had broken the covenant made with the
Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.6. And Zedekias, because he had broken his oath and
covenant he made with Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Chro. 36.13. In regard whereof Ezekiel
says, Ezekiel. 17.15. but he rebelled against him, and sent his Ambassadors into
Egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. Shall he prosper? shall
he escape that does such things? or shall he break the covenant of God and
be delivered?

Because it excludes men from Gods Kingdom, e contra, this excludes, and
nothing but finne will do that.

Because fidelity and faithfulness is not commended for a small matter or
virtue; e contra this must needs be a great vice.

Because it is an enemy to all humane society and fellowship,

To convince the age as guilty of great iniquity, so guilty of perfidie and
unfaithfulness, many a husband to the wife, the particular here spoken of and,
e contra, putting one another way, or taking others with them, when they
promised the contrary, but of that after. Many forsaking one another in
extremity and sickness, when they promised, and that without exception of
any sickness, still to cleave to them: In many as it is infidelity to God, so
is it perfidie to their husbands, and so e contra. Many masters unfaithful to
their servants, not teaching, not bringing them up as they promised, not
providing for them things necessary in health and sickness. Many servants
unfaithful to their Master, like Judas, like Siba, more then Gehezi that took
but the gain his master refused, they that which is proper to the master. Many
men one with another deal unfaithfully, promising things they either cannot,
or never mean to perform, or know cannot be so; many a seller promises his
ware shall prove thus and thus, when he knows the contrary. Many a buyer to
pay at such and such a day, when he never intends it, and knows before hand he
shall not be able. Many promising only to be free from the importunity of
some, or trouble of others, only is a matter of complement without any
conscience of it, when it is once passed them; they are guilty of perfidie and
unfaithfulness, and besides are drawn to many wicked and rash oaths, for
deceiving they are not believed, which makes them add to confirm their
credit, heady and rash oaths.

To persuade every one to avoid this, August. So unfaithfulness in the
smallest things is the most displeasing to God when fidelity was so easy;
therefore must we be careful to perform in all things that we promise, and
therefore be careful how we promise, that it be of things in our own power,
or probability like to be in our power. In many things whether we will promise
or no it is in our power; as Acts 5.4. but when it is made we are bound to the
performance of it; yea, though it cannot be performed without great loss and
hindrance.

And break the covenant of our fathers.] That is, offend against that law
which God gave unto our fathers, it being usual in Scripture to call the law
by his name and covenant, Psalm. 119. And this is the royal law according to
that, James 2.8.

Why do we transgress, etc. And break the covenant of, etc.] It is therefore
accounted a sin because it breaks the covenant, the law which God has given
unto his people.

Every thing is good, Whosoever commits sin transgresses also the law:
for sin is the transgression of the law. And by that, Romans 7.7.

Because the Law and Word of God is the perfect rule of all actions,

Because whatsoever is just is good, e contra.

Because whatsoever is agreeable to charity,

This will confute a point of Popery whereby they allow things to be done,
Gratians decrees, Malum factum excusatur per bonam intentionem. And again,
Excusatur malum si sit bono zelo propter bonum. And upon this ground they allow
murdering of Princes, massacring of people, treason in subjects, treachery in
servants, disobedience in children, that they may dishonor their parents, deny
them, and forsake them, so it be bono zelo propter bonum. And be lawful to do
any thing. And this must make it good, contrary to the apparent word of God
here, and that Romans 3.8. so contrary is the spirit of Antichrist to Christ's
spirit.

To convince amongst our selves men who allow and maintain many sins, because
they are profitable to others, and not hurtful to them; and therefore they
think they may be done though they be contrary to the law. One or two
instances. Many hold an officious lie lawful, because it may stand with
charity, when it is profitable for their neighbor. But if against the law and
word of God which forbids lies, how should it not be sin and unlawful to
be done? besides they must understand that charity, which is the sum of the
law, has reference toward God, toward our neighbor, and toward our selves.
And so is this against charity, though helpful to thy neighbor, in whose
favor it is told. First, because it is repugnant to verity, and therefore to
charity: for God, who is Truth, has forbidden all untruth, as that which is
opposite to him, and so cannot stand with the charity and obedience we owe to
God. Secondly, it is to the hurt of the teller, because, Psalm. 5.6. The lying
mouth destroys the soul. So it cannot stand with love which a man owes to
himself. Now then, though a man may help his brother and neighbor with the
loss of his goods and hinderance that way, but not necessary with the hazard
of his life at all times, but never with the hazard of his soul, as every liar
shall do. Again, things must first be considered whether lawful or no,
whether agreeable to the word, and then whether profitable or hurtful, that is
a second affection of things, and a second consideration. They cannot be
lawful but they will be profitable, though not in our carnal apprehension, nor
unlawful, but unprofitable, though we always see it not. A second instance
is, for the matter of usury; many allow it if it be moderate, and if it be not
joined with the hurt but the profit of the borrower. But whereas usury is
simply unlawful and evil, I may answer with some of the learned; when men
make question of moderate usury, whether that be lawful or no, Chemnitius.
they might as well make question, whether moderate adultery, or moderate
lying, or moderate theft be lawful: for as they are things in themselves
unlawful, so is this. Again, I answer, it is very hurtful, and against
charity: for though it be not against the profit of the particular, yet is it
against public charity: for usury is many ways noisome to the common wealth,
as is easy to be showed. Again, it is against charity and our allegiance to
God, who has forbidden it, denounced his judgments against it, made gracious
promises to them who will do the contrary. Lastly, it is against love we owe to
our own souls; for whosoever puts out to usury, or takes increase, he
shall not live, but dye the death, Ezekiel. 18.13. But for the benefit of the
borrower, if it sometimes so fall out by the providence of God, and his pains
and hazard, that is no thank to the lender: for it is without all question, he
never intends it, though he may sometimes pretend it, and so though it might
make it no sin in it self, yet that makes it sin to him: for gain the
borrower or not, he will have security for his principal and gain, and an
absolute covenant, and makes no provision for the borrowers indemnity, for he
will have it, lose he or gain he, all is one to him. And so it falls
sometimes out against charity, but if not it is ever against charity in them.
Calvin, who is much pretended for the defense of this: and indeed, upon Ezekiel.
18. says, that a man may in some cases take usury, and cannot precisely be
condemned for it: yet in the same place he says apertly, we must always hold
it to be a thing scarcely possible, that he which takes usury, should not
wrong his brother. And therefore it were to be wished that the very name of
usury were buried and utterly blotted out of the memory of men; but howsoever
it may be profitable, and as they think so agreeable to charity; yet it is
unjust in it self against the law of justice, then the rule holds, Romans 3.8.

To teach men when they have done any thing, Judas and the Jews. If then a man
has done any thing and it is fallen out to the profit of man, and to the glory
of God; it is never a whit better for him, unless he find the thing he has
done to be agreeable to the word of God; for if he have done evil and good
come of it, it is no thank to him, but to the providence of God who so
disposed it. So if a man be about to do any thing, if not agreeable or
repugnant to the word, he must not think it good and lawful for to be done,
because he sees it may profit man or honor God, as if he had need of his lies
and unlawful actions; neither if he be to do that which is agreeable, he must
not think he must abstain and not do it, only because he doubts of the
consequent of it, but that is lawful and which he must do by his place that
he ought to do, and leave the other to God; for not the effects make a thing
good, but the ground of it; not the fruit makes a tree good, but the roots of
it. A man may spoil a good action agreeable to the word by his corrupt end,
affection, or defect of faith; but he can never make it good, by them nor any
thing else, if it be not with that agreeable.

VERSE. XI.
Judah has transgressed, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in
Jerusalem: for Judah has defiled the holiness of the Lord, which he loved,
and bath married the daughter of a strange God.

IVdah has transgressed,] In the former verse he has generally reproved them
for transgressing one against another; here he sets down one particular, their
refusing of their own kindred, and marrying of strangers, whereby they were
both injurious to their brethren, and transgressers against God. The sin is,
that they have married with the daughters of Idolaters: the heynousnesse of
which sin is amplified from the persons, as that it is Judah which has done
this evil, whom he had chosen before all the world; and specially reserved to
himself in the defection of the ten Tribes, they whose name is Faithful, is
become unfaithful, from whom no such thing was expected, that they should do
so, yet they had transgressed. From the subject. In Israel among that people,
whom the Lord has enriched and endowed with so many blessings and benefits.
In Jerusalem, in the place which he chose to place his Sanctuary, which was the
Kings seat, and mother City; whence whatsoever comes, whether piety and
honesty, or the contagions of vice and iniquity, may and will easily spread
themselves abroad. For the thing, it is called an abomination; that is, such an
evil as the LOrd abhors. Abomination generally is taken for any thing that
is done against law and right, against some ancient decree, or the custom of
laws and manners. As generally, Genesis 46.34. Hence in Scripture is this word
Abomination used so much, when it speaks of mixing of seed, when caution is
had, left any thing be done but that which is right and lawful.

It is amplified further, because they have polluted Gods Holiness.] By
holiness is here meant that holiness which was in this people, because they
were dedicated to God, and the inheritance of the Lord, and his own proper
people, gotten and purchased to himself; which holiness they had violated, in
that they had mixed themselves with strange women. Thus Hierom expounds these
words, and it is most like to be the meaning: for so is it taken, Psalm. 114.2
Judah was his Sanctuary, or holy place: That land was dedicated to God, and
possessed of God, and by that is made holy; and there he exercises his power
by directing and governing them as his own people, and those who are dedicated
to him.

There are some who understand by it the bond of marriage, ordained and
sanctified of God in Paradise. But the words following, argue the first
exposition more like to be the meaning, Which he loved.] That is, which the
Lord loved; which is spoken of this people and land.

And has married the daughter of a strange God.] In the original it is, Has
the daughter: but the meaning is, Has married the daughter; that is, such as
profess and worship a strange God: not that they were Gods, or thus
acknowledged by him, and the Word; but it is an usual thing in the Scripture,
to call things not as they are, or as the Scripture judges of them, but after
the affection of those of whom he speaks, as 2 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.19. So these
were not true Gods, nor no Gods indeed, but so accounted of. And this name is
communicated to them. Origin. hom. 14. in Numeros, has this rule, That
wheresoever the name Jehovah is, there is meant the true God, the creator of
the world; but the other names of God, are attributed both to the true God, and
to false Gods.

Judah has transgressed, an abomination is committed.] Thus the Prophet
speaks, not for the particular only, but the general, that transgressions,
even all, are an abomination to the Lord, those things he abhors: And so
that is the point.

Transgression and sin, Moses, as Levit. 18.26.27.28. Deuteronomy. 20.18. Hence he
speaks of particular sins, as Prove. 11.1. and 12.22. Rev. 2. Hence he is
said to abhor the man that is wicked: not that he does his person, as he is
his creature, which he loves, but as he has made himself such, Psalm. 5.6.

Because he is righteous and holy himself:

Because he loves his creature, and sin is that which destroieth it.

This may let us see, Vera calamitas Deum offenderet and eorum quae ipsi non
placent ali quid facere. Chrysoft.
by reason of their sin: God hates their sin, and abhors it, and them
for it. How fearful then is their condition: for he cannot hate but
unreconciled; his face and hand shall be against them for their sins, Revel.
2.6. Object. Then is every one in a fearful case: for all sin, even the best.
Ans. The first is true, yet follows not the second; because though they sin,
and have it, yet they hate it. Now God only hates men for their sin, when
they love it; not when they hate it, and he will only then judge them, when
they will not judge themselves, 1 Cor. 11.31. As in a land and state, when the
Magistrates will not punish, then God will go the circuit, and hold an Assize,
and bring his plagues and judgments upon them; but when they do, it is an
explication of his wrath: so in a particular man, which is a little world, a
little country.

To teach us,

For imitation; must do it, for that God commends in the Church of Ephesus,
and so commands in others, Rev. 2.6.

In Israel and in Ierusalem] The people and place which he enriched with such
benefits, and honored with such privileges, made it the place of his worship,
and the Kings seat: therefore them to do it, it is more heinous.

Their sin is the greater, and more heinous, Vide cap. 2.12. Doct. 1.

For Judah has defiled the Holiness of the Lord.] This is a further
amplification of their sin; because it did pollute the people and place
dedicated to the Lord, and so made holy to him.

Sin is a filthy and polluted thing, Uncleanness. Hierom translated it as
the word will carry it, Menstruata, menstruous; then which, says he, Nihil er
at in lege immundius, quae quicquid tangebat, immundum faciebat, Rev. 3.18. Thy
filthy nakedness. And Micha 2.10. Because it is polluted.

To teach every man to be willing to receive a reproof, Chrysostom ho. 17. ad
popul. Antioch. Put on auquerly or unhandsomely, if a boy tell thee of it thou will not much blush because it is no great shame, the greater shame were to go
with it so out of order; And if dirt be upon the garment or face, and one tell
thee of it, thou will thank him and take it kindly, how ought thou in this?
for by this, reformation may be had, and thou may be made clean and kept
clean; for though it is somewhat difficult and hard for a man to part with his
sins and overcome them himself, yet if he have many admonitors, or be often
admonished; at length he may be rid of them.

The holiness of the Lord.] So is the Church called, either because of Gods
presence which makes it holy, or else because they were dedicated to God, and
made his proper and peculiar people: for sanctified in Scripture, so signifies,
to be set a part to a holy use and a sanctified end; as is said of the Sabbath.

The Church and children of God must be holy unto the Lord, must they be
continued to holy things by his service as they are dedicated. James 1.27. Pure
religion and undefiled before God even the father, is this, to visit the
fatherless, and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world. To which we add 1 Pet. 2.9 Romans 6.13.

This condemns all late repentance, ex professo, they must needs be impure.

And has married the daughter of a strange God] This is their sin that they
had married with Idolaters, with them who were of a false worship, and
worshipped a false God.

It is a sin and impiety for Christians and Gods people to make marriages
with Infidells, Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor with their Gods,
Neither shall they dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for
if thou serve their Gods surely it shall be thy destruction. In particular,
Deuteronomy. 7.3. Neither shall thou make marriages with them neither give thy
daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter unto thy son 2 Cor. 6.14. Be not
unequally yoked with the Infidels: for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what conmmunion has light with darkness? The
proposition of the Apostle is general, forbidding all society and fellowship
with them, much more then this, then which nothing is more strict, and by none
men are so firmly knit together as by this. And by the name of yoking he
seems to allude to the type of the law, when God commanded that men should
not plow with an Ox and an Ass together, Deuteronomy. 22.10. whereunto also belongs
the prohibition of the like, Levit. 19.19. which God spoke not for them, but to
teach man.

Because it is dangerous, Solomon and Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 31.6. yea with the
whole people of God, Number. 25.2. Now that which fell out with such great men,
and with such multitudes is danger, it may fall out with others, inferior,
fewer, simpler, and weaker. Nay the Lord says without any may bees, that it
shall befall unto them. Deuteronomy. 7.4. For they will cause thy son to turn away
from me; and to serve other Gods: then will the wrath of the Lord wax hot
against you, and destroy thee suddenly. And the reason of that is, because
being confident in their own srength they tempt God. And so it is just he
should give them over to see their own weakness.

Because it cannot be but that the service of God which every believer is bound
to perform even in his private family must either be omitted altogether,
Michal. And to this may I apply that of Chrysostom. Sicut mulier adjutrix est.
sic saepe insidiatrix fit: and sicut portus est conjugium, ita and saepe
naufragium parit. Chrysostom. hom. de libel. Repud. Reason 3.
As the woman is an helper, so she often becomes a traitor; and as marriage is
an harbor, so it often causes shipwreck.

Because it must needs be prejudicial to the education of their Children:
When the parents consent not betwixt themselves, how should the children be
brought up in piety and the fear of the Lord? Nay the children will ever follow
the worse side, though it happen to be the weaker, because nature is so capable
of error and false worship, over that it is of the true. Hence hardly an
Idolatrous King made mention of in the stories of the Scriptures, but their
mothers are named with them, as they who prevailed with them for false worship,
more then the fathers did or could for the true. But against this Doctrine
there are certain objections, by which some would prove that it is lawful to
marry with those who are of a contrary Religion.

Those inhibitions are general for all of a diverse religion,

Salmon one of the Princes of Judah married Rahab the harlot, a Canaanite,
Math. 1.5. Judah married a Canaanite, also, Genesis 38.2. It may be there was some
mystery in that of Rahab, to show that Christ would not only save that which
was lost, but honor them also.
Moses the daughter of Iethro, Joseph of P^tiphar. Solomon the daughter of
Pharaoh.

Solomon is condemned for it, by the Scriptures. Judah was a wicked man, no
matter what he did. Joseph and Moses went before the law, but yet no doubt they
had them to embrace the true Religion, and they were converted. As the
Scripture speaks manifestly of Rahab. And so it might be lawful. Though there
be of the learned who think that they might not marry any of those nations,
though converted, because God has so utterly banished those nations from his
people, that without some special dispensation they might not marry with the
converted. Deuter. 21.11. Therefore lawful to marry such.

Because it is lawful by a special warrant and dispensation; therefore it
follows it was simply unlawful, for else there needed no dispensation.
Again, all the signs set down in that place show rather that the Lord did
dislike it then approve it, and that he did yield so much, it was because of
their incredible wantonness and corruption. First, she must shave her head,
that whereas the hair is an inticer or that which gains the unclean
affection, he liking her in that, when she was shaven might begin to dislike
her; and her nails must be pared to make her more deformed; and her garments
must be changed, that whereas some garish apparel was as a snare to an
unchaste heart, she being put in modest apparel and plain, he might less
affect her. And she must mourn thirty days, that if for her pleasantness and
cheerful carriage she deceived and delighted him; now in her mourning and
dejected countenance she might less affect him; finally, if he disliked her
he might neither make her a servant to himself, nor sell her to another; which
thing they accounted a burden. By which things God endeavored rather to cure
such an inordinate love and affection then to give liberty to it. Finally, some
add that these were used for signs of her repentance and renouncing of her
false worship; and if she were converted, then was it lawful.

If such do match together,

Many of the learned do think it is none, Tertullian has called it stuprum.
The ground of all their reason is, because God has forbidden such marriages to
be made, therefore they ought to be dissolved, but this (saving their
judgment) is not universally true, but rather that many things, quae fieri non
debent facta valent. For instance in the like. There is a twofold infidel, one
who does openly profess it, and deny some maine Article of faith, as that
there is no such Trinity in the Unity. Another, who professes in words and
denies it in deeds, and is in heart an infidel. It is not lawful to marry
with either of these, being known, not the later. But say a man or woman do
marry, and after it appears, whether is it a lawful marriage or no? I
presume, no man will think that after the knowledge of it, there ought to be a
divorce made. But to unfold this as I think more fully, I would demand this
question, whether if one of the parties fall after the marriage into heresy?
whether stands the marriage good? or whether ought there to be a divorce?
Papists generally think there should be a divorce a Thoro, non a vinculo, a
divorce unknown to the Scriptures. Celestinus thought a vinculo, though
Innocentius was much against him. Many of our learned men think it will break
a contract, not a marriage; only they hold liberum divortium; That is, when
all the means and ways are taken to bring them from their error and heresy,
and the party infected will not dwell with the other, or not without
blaspheming or reproaching of Christ, they may freely with consent one depart
from the other; but if he will abide in peace with the sound party, he or she
is not to put him or her away, which by proportion is gathered from that, 1
Cor. 7.13.14.15. which place though it be understood of those who were found in
their heathenish marriages, and visited, so of the grace of God: And so as
Tertullian says, allows not the faithful to make marriages with the
unbeleevers, yet it affoords some equity and direction when they are once made;
and so that they are lawful marriages de facto, though not lawfully made de
jure.

VERSE. XII.
The Lord will cut off the man that does this: both the master and the servant,
out of the Tabernacle of Iaakob, and him that offers an offering unto the
Lord of hosts.

THE Lord will cut off the man that does this] In this Verse the Prophet
threatens the judgment of God against them for this sin, even the cutting
of them off from the tents of Iaakob, whosoever commits any such thing, whether
he that teaches, or is instructed, Priest or people, whether he stand out
obstinately or hypocritically, he would seem to appease his anger by some
offering.

The Lord will cut off.] The Lord will not put up this injury done to him and
his daughters; but whatsoever he be that either shall do this hereafter, or
has done it and repents and reformes it not, every one of them will I cut off
and destroy. Hierom observes it here as worth the observation, that he cuts not
men off from pardon, or the hope of it; for he says not, the Lord curses him
that does this, but he that shall do it, prolonging his curse as it were for
the time to come, that he might provoke the offenders to repentance.

Will cut off.] It is a phrase like that Genesis 17.14. Exo. 12.15. which
Tremelius thus interprets, that is, both here and in the world to come, he
shall be cut off from the company and society of the Saints and faithful. The
Metaphor, as some probably think, is borrowed from Physicians, who cut off the
body putrified and rotten members, and have often occasion and necessity so to
do. As if the wicked were but rotten and putrified members in the Church.

The man that shall do this.] A sentence without exception, whosoever he be,
it shall be all one to him, who accepts no man's person.

Both the master and the servant.] and particularly, both master and servant.]
The Interpreter in the Latin, has Master and Disciple, or Scholar; following
rather the signification then the original: for that is either he that
watches and answers, or he that exciteth and answers. But for the meaning,
some difference there is: some understand by the watcher or exciter, the
teacher, who watches that he may teach true things unto his scholars or
hearers, and excite their minds; by the answerer, the scholar or hearer, who
follows the master, and for further instruction ansereth to his demands, or
questions. And so by this should be signified, that both the people and the
Priests, who were authors and warranters, or assurers of their course by
precept or practice, should perish together. Others take it more generally, and
more probably. The meaning is, one and other, and all; not one man of those
shall escape, who are defiled with these profane marriages, no not any one of
those families shall be left alive, but be cut off.

Out of the Tabernacles of Jacob.] That is, from Gods people, or Gods Church;
some think it is taken for the Cities of Jacob, as they think it to be taken,
Psalm. 87.2. But all is to one purpose: for those Cities were part of the Church.

And him that offers an offering unto the Lord.] Some understand these words
particularly of the Priest; who, as we may read, Ezra 9. and 10. were not free
from this. So the Chaldie Paraphrast interprets it, and Cyril: showing that
though he came nigh to the horns of the Altar, yet should he not be there safe
with his sins. But some understand it more generally, though they should be
very liberal in offerings unto me, and think so to escape my wrath; yet though
they should be as liberal as the hypocrites, Micha 6. yet should not that
help: for they shall perish with their offerings.

The Lord will cut off.] Though the Magistrate will not look to this evil,
being careless or corrupt; though he cannot, because many are wrapped in it, and
the multitude too strong for him; or howsoever it be not punished by man, yet
the Lord will not let it escape his hand, but he will cut him off.

When men, Adam, the Prince of the earth, and Magistrate of his sons, let
pass the murder of Abel, because Cain was his first borne, and his
possession: yet the Lord did lay to his hand, and did punish him, Genesis 4.11.12.
etc. So of the sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.23.24. and 4.11. not simply a judgment
to fall in battle, but because it was prophesied of them, Chap. 2.34. This is
manifest further out of the story of Achan; while by ignorance of the fact,
Joshua did not punish it, the Lord did it in the whole people; but after the
knowledge of it, when Joshua had punished it, the Lord put up his sword, and his
wrath ceased, Josh. 7. To these we may add that of Numb. 25.3.4. etc. the
cause of the great famine, 2 Samuel 21. was the Kings not punishing of a sin
committed by Saul's house; which done, the famine ended.

Because, as Iehosaphat told the Judges,

Because impunity from the Magistrate, in foro conscientiae, but in foro civili.

This shows the folly of those men, purse will carry it out well enough, that
no punishment shall come upon him, or take hold of him: and then he sleeps
without fear, when he is as a man that has escaped the rage of a fool, and
is fallen into the power of a Bear robbed of her whelps. As Masters, if they
live in oppression, or usury, or deceit, or drunkenness, or adultery, or some
such like, and can escape the Magistrates hands by the means they make; fear
nothing: That is their folly, there is more cause of fear, God will take them
into his hand. Many servants, when they have injured and dealt deceitfully with
their Masters, stealing from them, or serving them with eye-service,
mis-spending their goods, and not furthering, by their endeavors, their
profits, if they can escape their masters hands by lying or shifting, or
dissembling, or by his negligence, lenity, or remissness, they never fear:
this is their folly, there is now more cause of fear, God will take them into
his hand, to cut them off by the plague, or some other judgment. Finally, let
these and all the like, see their folly, that think there is no fear if they
can escape the hand and sword of man by such means; yet there will be no
escaping of the hand of God, who will, as he says, send serpents that will not
be charmed. Jerem. 8.17. O consider this ye that forget God! as if he would
not judge the earth when men neglect it, least he tear you in pieces.

The cause why God sends general judgments upon such a City or Land as ours
is; muneraoris, or manus, or officii. For if these did not let them, but they
would purge the land from the blood, and the adulteries, whoredoms, thefts,
oppressions, blasphemies, and such things wherewith it is defiled, there would
never come any such general judgments. For if the Justices at the Sessions
should reform thoroughly, and deliver the goal every one to his several
punishment, the Judges should have little cause to ride circuit, or if they
did, but to make short ones. So if Magistrates, God would not punish, or if he
did, yet not so long as three years famine, and three years pestilence: So
that of all the enemies of a Commonwealth none is so great as remiss,
careless and corrupt Magistrates; for they are a cause of Gods general
judgments, when as their severity would prevent. And none such a forerunner
of some general judgment, as they and their remissness; and in a Magistrate,
it is better for the general good, that he be too severe punishing some he
ought and might spare, then remiss passing by others that deserve it. As a
Surgeon better too deep or too nigh, then too little in tenting or cutting.

To teach every inferior not to seek and labor to escape the hand and
punishing of the Magistrate or his superior, who is as a Magistrate unto him,
his master or parent, if he have offended and deserved it, specially remaining
by that immunity impenitent in his sin; for besides that it is sin to him so
to avoyde it, it will be but a further means to bring him to the hands of God,
who will punish him more severely and fearfully, cut him off from the tents of
Iaakob. If any say this falls but out seldom, here and there one; and so no
such fear of it. I answer with Cyprian l de laps. Plectuntur interim quidam,
quo caeteri corrigantur, exempla sunt omnium, tormenta paucorum. These few
should be warning to others lest they also perish. Again, are there but few?
who can remember the many thousands that God has taken away and cut off by the
plague? of inferiors and servants and such like, whose superiors had been
remiss toward them, and yet say this befalls but to few. Or lastly, who can
think of many thousands who are lying broyling in hell, and so cut off from the
tents of Iakob by the Lord, though man winked at them, who happily if they had
felt the severity of magistracy might have been saved, and yet say there is
but a few. And though many yet have escaped, and do or may escape, though the
plague renew upon us, with their adulteries, etc. because this is but the poor
man's plague or the servants; yet who sees not that even for the rich and the
masters, the Lord has a plague for them, as Micha 2.3. and happily will it be
for them, if 1 Cor. 11. they judge not themselves.

That does this, or that shall do this.] God will not presently smite them
though they have committed this offense, but he will wait for their return,
and if they continue to do it, then will he cut them off. Hence the patience of
God to sinners waiting for their conversion. vide Revel. 3. and Isaiah 30. or
rather I observe, that though the Lord a long time spare the wicked, yet he
will visit them and pay them home in the end, Isa. 26.14.

Both the master and the servant.] Both him that wakeneth and exciteth, and him
that is wakened, and answers the call: meaning the whole house and family
should be cut off.

God judgments against the wicked rest not in them only, and destroyed all
their memory.

Out of the Tabernacle of Iaakob.] That is, take them out of the land of the
living, brings death upon them and puts an end to their days, and lets
them be no longer among the living. Though it may reach to their cutting off
from heaven; yea, it contains this; whence,

It is a judgment to the wicked to be cut off either naturally or violently,
untimely, or in his ripe age,

And him that offers an offering.] Or him also that offered. Though he offer:
noting the nature of men that when they are convinced of their sins they
think to please God by outward things, as sacrifices, or fastings, or outward
hearing, and multitude of prayers, though they continue in their sins.

It is the nature and practice of carnal and natural men, Saul, 1 Samuel
15.14.15. And Hezekiah when he was led by nature and the common course of men,
2 Kings 18.14. So in them, Mich 6.6.7. and Isai. 58.2.3. etc.

Because it is natural unto them, Adam and Eve dealt with the Lord, Genesis 3.

To see the policy of Antichrist and the Church of Rome: Sicut cor- Pus Domini
semel oblatum est in cruce pro debita origi nali sic of fertur jugiter pro
nostris quotidianis delictis in altari. Thomas de sacra Altaris.
So as the body of our Lord was once offered upon the cross for our original
debt, so it is continually offered upon the altar for our daily sins. And
Catharinus in libro impresso Romae, writes: Christi passionem pro originali
tantu^ ^eccato satisfecisse, and actualibus baptis. antecedentibus, missam vero
satisfacere pro peccatis baptismum and primam justificationem sequentibus.
Catharinus in libro impresso Romae.
That Christ's passion made satisfaction only for original and such sins as
went before baptism: but the Mass satisfies for sins committed after
baptism, and our first justification. Finally, to say nothing of their Jubilee,
and their Ladies Psalter, and her Pantofle, and an hundred such things.

And him that offers an offering.] Though he offer an offering, and think
thereby to escape, and appease Gods wrath, yet shall he not prevail, nor
escape.

In vain do men think to appease the wrath of God, escape his judgments,
when he is angry and threatens, by any outward means, as offerings, fastings,
prayers, and such performance of parts of his worship, they remaining
impenitent in their sins, and keeping them still. So is it here, and manifest
in that Micha 6.6.7.8. and Isaiah 58. a 2. ad finem. Psalm. 51.16.17.

Because God is a Spirit,

Because all offerings a man brings to God,

Because they show more contempt against the Lord,

By the former point we saw the policy of Popery, Sirs ye know that by this
craft we have our goods. Their impiety then is this, that they hold them in the
error, that these things will please God, and will not till they perish by such
a conceit; like deceitful and unfaithful Lawyers who to get money and gain to
themselves, persuade their Clyents, term after term, till the day of
hearing come, that a plea they have drawn for them will hold good, and then
they confess themselves to be in an error, when sentence goes against them,
and they deprived of their heritage; like unskilful or unfaithful Physicians,
who finding what kind of physic their patients passet does best relish,
though it be neither of force to preserve or recover him; yet to keep
themselves in request and practice ever prescribe him that, though he die for
it in the end. Such Physicians are they of no value. If any man think I
slander them, because they talk much of penance and confession and such
things; I answer, I do not; to instance in one: The schoolmen teach that
salvation is in the sacrament or sacrifice of the mass, as health is in a
medicine, which cures though the party do nothing to help, never believe,
only receive it. They teach then that these reconcile without repentance. I
deny not that our latter Papists, when they find things written, scanned, and
so prove scandalous, they have helped things with their late expositions; but
it is one thing what they are forced to say by argument, another thing what
they commonly teach to the people, who have the one taught to them without the
other. They deal like some Physicians, who when they have to deal with common
patients, who favor no religion, and think indeed health is in their power,
and their medicines, they promise them simply and absolutely health by them:
But when they have patients that know religion, or find a Minister with them,
who knows health is not in their power or medicine; then they tell them they
must look to God, and reconcile themselves to God, and then by his blessing
they shall do them good. So these.

To let us see the folly of those men, Jacob. But fools and blind! why should
they imagine that should help them, which will not another, neither ever would?
Is not he the same, and is there not still the same means to appease him; that
which could not then, can it now? If the body be to be cured, if any thing be
brought unto them, they enquire who ever used it, and what effect it had with
them; and if they hear of many who did use it, and none ever recovered by it,
they will never trust to it; and yet for the soul they will go contrary. But
if these do not appease him, why are they commanded, or why is that? Heb.
13.16. To do good, and distribute, forget not: for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased. I answer, they are commanded for other purposes, as duties and
testimonies, and signs of thankfulness: for it follows not that there is no
use of them, unless this be; God ordained them for other purposes. And as it
is in salves, they cure that they were ordained for, says Chrysostom. For the
salve for the eye cannot cure the cut of the hand. And for that, Do and live,
that is understood of the whole and of perfect doing, which is impossible for
any, because of their weakness, Romans 8. And that of the Hebrews does not tell
us that that does appease God, when he is angry, but that they please him after
he is appeased, and reconciled: for then he accepts them graciously and
favorably. For so much rises out of Heb. 13.15. Let us therefore by him offer
the sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruit of the lips,
confess to his Name. Where he makes mention of Christ, showing that they
please him, coming from faith in Christ. But when a man lies in his sin, and
so purposes, and is without faith and without Christ, all the sacrifices of
such a wicked man are abomination to the Lord; more when they are offered with
a wicked mind, of deserving at his hands, and derogating from Christ, and
making him to justify the wicked.

To teach us now that the Lord shows himself displeased, August. de rectit.
Catholicae conversat. So shall not his prayers and other things prevail all
the while hatred and other sins remain. All the while that Achan and his
execrable booty was in the Lords Camp, the tears and prayers of the whole
prevailed nothing. Joshua 7. but he taken out of the way and stoned, they
prevailed. To prevail then with God, and to have him reconciled, and to escape
his displeasure these cannot do it, unless we cast out the execrable thing.
If Moses and the Rulers will hang up the heads of the people before the sun,
and Phineas execute justice, the plague shall cease; if every one will do so
with his sins, he shall not be cut off, or if he die he shall live. The
Marryners who were in a storm, Jonah 1. took the contrary course to help
themselves, and save their lives, by unlading their Ship, and casting all into
the sea, but it served not the turn, nor helped them till Jonas was cast into
the sea upon whom the lot fell, who had offended; so in this: many may give
their goods, etc. and yet it will not serve; cast lots, it will light upon thy
sins, and if that will not be cast into the sea, think that there will be no
calming of it.

Now before we leave this verse, it may be some Papists will gather hence as
from the like places, that the Church stands not of the elect and
predestinate only, as we affirm, for none elected can be cut off from it,
specially if we understand the cuting of them off from the everlasting
Tabernacles. Therefore they now condemn this in us as the counsel of Constance
condemned John Husse and burnt him. But this, neither any the like place
confuteth that we hold, who do not deny that wicked men and reprobates may be
of particular Churches, but not of the Catholic; of particulars, because to
be in a particular Church is nothing else, but for a man to join himself in
that society, which professes true religion. But to be of the Catholic
Church is to be joined to Christ as his member, and to draw life from him; so
that he does not, neither can perish, In a particular Church then may wicked
and reprobates be, as bad humors and rotten members are in the body, but not
in the Catholic Church, which is Christ's body; which as his natural body
could not see corruption, neither can it have any such corrupts parts, and as
no part of it could be cut off, no more of this; for where the head is, there
shall all the members be, whereas then they shall never come where Christ is,
they cannot be members of him, and so no parts of the Catholic Church. But
are they not parts of the particular? they are; but yet it follows not that
every one in them is part of it; for as every ward or street of London is part
of the whole, yet follows it not that every one in them is part of it, for
forrainers and strangers may be in it. There is none of the Catholic, but he
either is or has been in some visible and particular Church; yet it follows
not that all that are in it, are of it. And by this may be answered all those
parables and other places they bring out of the Scriptures to prove that wicked
men are of the Catholic Church, for they are all understood of particular
Churches, where the wicked are mixed inseparably with the good, as Chafe is
with the Wheat in the field and barn, as Lees with the Wine, in the Terse and
Hogshead; yet is neither the Chafe Wheat, nor the Lees Wine, neither they the
Church.

VERSE. XIII.
And this have ye done again, and covered the Altar of the Lord with tears,
with weeping, and with mourning: because the offering is no more regarded,
neither received acceptably at your hands.

AND this have ye done again.] The Prophet proceeds to a second sin in
this people and to reprove it, going from their strange wives, to their having
of many wives, to multiplicity of them which is reproved in this verse and 14.
and 15. Of the whole we have two parts: 1. his reproof, 2. his exhortation to
the contrary, fine v. 15. In the reproof as the vice is checked, but not so
openly as the former, yet necessarily out of the 15. verse it follows, that
the grieving of their wives was by taking other wives to them. Now the
amplification of this sin, or the haynousenesse of it, is set forth two
ways: First, because it was injurious to their wives and themselves, verse 13.
Secondly, because it was against the institution and ordinance of God, verse
14.15. Now the first against their wives, because they grieved and vexed them,
and against themselves, because they made their own offerings to be rejected of
the Lord.

And this have ye done again.] And this sin have you committed in the second
place which comes here to be reproved a among these particulars, you have
taken not only strangers but you have joined them to your lawful wives and
taken them with them, and made them to mourn and weep

And covered the Altar of the Lord with tears.] The Israelites women or their
own proper and lawful wives, finding that they took others to them, and
finding them in their places where they ought to have been, and who had only
the right unto them, they wept day and night before the Altar of the Lord, as
it were accusing his providence, that he did not releeve, and redress their
injuries.

Ye have covered.] He accuses not those who did weep, but those who were the
cause of their weeping.

Ye have covered.] That is, you have made your wives by your carriage and
dealing toward them to cover. So Cyrill interprets these words; and that
both because the place must needs have it so interpreted, as also from a common
and usual kind of speech. For when we do any thing compelled or drawn to
it, either by some vehement love or hatred, or pity of any man, or by some
other affection, he is said to do it by affection of whom we are compelled or
drawn to it. As if a man could not bear the desire he has to his absent
friend, or his dead son; we say his son or his friend will not let him rest
or be in quiet; for he is often said to do, that does so work, and moves him
either by counsel or command or implusion though by another. That instance in
this case we may give. Zach. 11.13.

Cast it into the Potters field.] It is a Prophecy of the money which Judas
should take for the betraying of Christ, and what he should do with it: And
when he was to do it and did cast it into the Temple. Math. 27.5. It is spoken
here as if Christ did it, or should do it; not that he personally did it, but
because he moved Judas, and after a sort compelled him to do it.

Now the greatness of these women's sorrows are increased or amplified, that
they were so affected that tears came from them; and if it be thought that it
is easy for that sex to shed tears yet this comes not from the composition,
but the extreme grief they sustained, when they came to so many, as it were
cover the Altar of God, even that Altar where they sought for ease and comfort.
And further to amplify it, it is said with weeping and mourning; that is,
their tears were joined with sobs and sighs, and outcryes, by which the
sorrow and anguish of their mind was increased, when as God would have his
Altar without all spot or injury most pure, sacred and consecrated to him,
insomuch as he forbad the stones of it to be wrought or cut with any instrument
of iron; it must needs be ungrateful and unacceptable to him when it was
covered and compassed with tears, sighs, and lamentations of those who were
in misery, vexed by their husbands and their concubines.

The Altar of the Lord] This amplifies further their sorrow, that they came to
the Altar of the Lord to complain, as being without all hope of help from
man, and all means, and had only God to fly to and his help; for it is a
figne of great oppression when as men miserable and affected with injury, come
mourning and lamenting to Gods Altar to complain to him, as those who have no
help, no defense in the counsels or help of men, none in the Judges and
Magistrates of the time, against such injuries.

Because the offering is no more regarded.] Or so that your offering.] It is
that which contains the injury to themselves, for by these tears and
lamentations of the wives, the anger of the Lord was so stirred up against them
that he says all their sacrifice and offerings were not accepted or regarded
of him. i. The tears of your oppressed wives are as a veil upon my Altar, and
do all so cover it, that your sacrifices, and oblations cannot be seen, or
make me not accept them when their cries and their prayers come both before me,
they do so trouble and corrupt your prayers and so hinder, that they are not
heard of me at all.

Ye have done again.] In the second place adding this sin to the former, a
greater to the less. Some who were single took strange wives, and when others
saw that was borne withal, and the magistrates did not control and punish
it, they proceed to this, that having wives of the daughters of God, they took
to them the daughters of a strange God.

Corruptions suffered in the whole Church and particular members, and not
reproved, punished and corrected,

And covered the Altar of the Lord with tears.] The first reason condemning
this poligamy is drawn from the grief of the wives, and it stands thus: That
which is a grief to the wife, and fills her heart with forrow and anguish,
even then when she comes to Gods Altar, Gods service ought not to be done by
the husband, but such is this.

The husband ought not to do that which will grieve and vex his wife, and make
her unfit for duties to himself, Laban saw by the light of name, which made
him take an oath of Iaakob Genesis 31.50. If thou shall vex my daughters, or shall
take wives beside my daughters; there is no man with us, behold God is witness
between thee and me. This made Rebekah so urge Isaac for the departing of
Iaakob. Genesis 27.46.

Because a man must not do that which may grieve or offend a weak brother, to
drive him back,

Because she is the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3.7. Luther speaks of it, as a
Knife with a tender edge, men will not cut stones, brass, or iron with it.

Because she is partaker of the same and manifold graces of life, government
and superiority because God has thus honored her, he must not be grievous to
her.

To reprove all such husbands as make no care at all of grieving and vexing
their wives, Sarahs may de, as Abraham did, though Sarah never give her him,
and so driving them into diverse passions and distractions; making them forget
both their sex and their duty; and hence comes oftentimes so many complaints of
wives when the husband is the cause of it. As if the head should lead the body
through fire and water, through mire and dirt, through woods and thickets,
where it receives much hurt, and then complain of the hurt and pain that it
suffers; so many by their strange behavior draw themselves into contempt and
make their wives undutifull, and then exclaim against them when they should
condemn themselves, they have gone against the rule of God, and so have
brought the curse of God upon them.

To instruct every man to abstain from vexing and grieving his wife, either by
his absence or presence, but to dwell with her, Solomon has said, Prove. 21.9.
It is better to dwell in a corner of the house top, then with a contentious
woman in a wide house. Prove. 19.13. The contentions of a wife are as a
continual dropping. If she be, as one says, like a vine that were planted in
the flowing sea, which prospers least when the water is lowest: so his
fellowship sweetest when he is furthest off. If as many women, who tell us they
make themselves fine and trim to please their husbands, and yet are least trim
when they only enjoy them, but only when they are to show themselves abroad,
which in many, is rather to please others then their husbands; (I censure not
all) so they have no cheerfulness and loving carriage in them when they and
their husbands are alone, never so merry as when he is absent, never so solemn
and drooping as with him, as if his company were a burden, and his presence a
clog unto them; who can to any body else, put on cheerful looks, have lively
spirits, and find talk enough; but with their husbands can find none, but
sit heavy a whole dinner and supper while, and not a word from her, no token
of her joying in his company. And upon every discontent, be strange a day, two
or three, looking he should seek to her. I say, by such dealings she has
forfeited her right; and though it be Summum jus, and so summa iujuria, to
take it, such a forfeiture, or rather it is indeed injustice, yet if het do
take it, it is but just upon her; and though he be not fit to do it, yet she
has deserved to suffer it.

And covered the Altar of the Lord with tears.] The general of these words we
have heard, the particulars we must examine. These women, though heavy in
heart, and full of grief, yet would they not desist from praying to God, and
performing their service and offerings to him; neither does he for that reject
them and their offerings, though he be their husbands afterward, who were the
cause of their grief.

Though men cannot perform the service and worship of God with that
cheerfulness and perfection which he requires, Moses to Aaron. Levit. 10.16.
The practice of Nehemiah, Nehem. 1.4. of David, Psalm. 42.5.6. of Zachary, Luke
1.22. of Christ, who might stand for all, Matthew. 26.38.39.

Because many so have obtained a blessing, They that sow in tears shall reap
in joy, as the Jailer, Acts 16.29. came trembling to Paul and Silas, but
departed with joy of heart, verse. 34.





And covered the Altar of the Lord.] These did not seek to revenge themselves,
they resisted not by giving injury for injury, dealing with their husbands as
they had dealt with them; but patiently bore it, and committed it to the Lord.

Men who re injured,

To teach every man to bear patiently the injuries done unto him; Hezekiah,
spread the letter of the King of Ashur before God; with Joseph, carry the hard
speeches of his brethren to his father. If he have the same spirit, he must
have the same mind which was in the Lord Jesus, and leave vengeance and
recompense to him to whom it belongs. Thou art injured, deprived of thy goods,
beaten, reproached, and greatly hurt this way; expect the sentence of the
Judge. If another man's servant shall reproach thee, thou will not beat him thy
self, but complain to his master: how much more ought thou to do this in
respect of God, who has said: Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it?
Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad pop. Antioch. But thou art desirous to be revenged; that
is the way not to revenge: for that is a true, though a strange position and
speech: That they are only hurt and injured, who hurt others, and injure them.
And the injury which is done to others, hurts none but those who do it, so
those who suffer do not repay, or be brought to sin. For example; what was
more unhappy then Cain? The death he brought upon Abel has made him that
suffered it, to be accounted just in all ages; and him that did it, a parricide
and murderer. What was more miserable then Herodias, who desired John Baptists
head in a dish, and so plunged her own head in the eternal fire and flames of
hell? What worse then the Devil, who by his malice made Job more famous, that
as his glory increased, so did the others torments? So now. And if men be not
brought to commit sin, and this in particular, what hurt have they by it? It
is another truth, that there is no man hurt but of himself: for admit a man
have his goods taken from him, Nemo laditur, nisi aseipso. Chrysostom.
or other injuries done to him, if he fall not into sin by it, keeping the
injury boiling in his stomach, or falling to revenge impatiently, or
blaspheme, or such like; if he do, then is he hurt, and greatly, not of
another, but of himself. Example Job and Paul. These and the like should
persuade us to patience, and not to resist. And why should such things be hard?
If I let him alone, he will be worse. Have thou more care of him then of thy
self? But are not these words of corruption and pride, who establish things
against God? Admit he be hurt, yet God ought to be obeyed. Neither ought we to
make laws against that which God has ratified; but it will hurt neither thee
nor him: for Prove. 15.1. A soft answer puts away wrath, but grievous words
stir up anger. And if thou would do thy self and him good, the more he is
in choler and heat, the more yield thou: for this heat had need of the greater
remedy. And the more reproaches there are, there is the more need of patience
and gentleness. And when the fever is hottest, there is most need of cooling:
so when a man is angriest, of yielding. But this will be a reproach, and there
is no manhood in it? Nay it is no reproach, but compassion and humanity.
Finally, in all these things thou shall find that true of Abigail to David, 1 Samuel 25.31. Then shall it be no grief unto thee; nor offense of mind unto my
Lord, that he has not shed blood causeless, nor that my Lord has not
revenged himself: And when the Lord shall have dealt well with my Lord,
remember thine handmaid. And of him touching her, verse 32.33. Then David said
to Abigail: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet
me. And blessed be thy counsel, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this
day from coming to shed blood, and that mine hand has not saved me.

Because the offering is no more regarded.] Or more plainly: So that I will no
more regard your offerings.] The second reason condemning Polygamy; because it
makes their worship and service unacceptable to God, while the injuries they
did to their wives, and their sighs and tears came before him, and were in
his ears, as the blood of Abel, calling rather for vengeance, and a curse, then
a blessing. Now, a general from this, is this:

They who come to perform any service to God, Vide Malach. 1.6.7.

Further, a more special thing hence may we observe:

They who grieve, oppress, and injury others, whatsoever he be, Wherefore have
we fasted, and thou see it not? we have punished our selves, and thou
regardest it not. Behold, in the day of your fast you will seek your will, and
require all your debts. Behold, ye fast to strife and debate, and to smite with
the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do to day, to make your
voice to be heard above. To this purpose may that be applied, Prove. 27.13. He
that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, shall also cry, and not be
heard. And that may shadow it, Luke 16.24. Old Isaac accepted the prayers of
Jacob, and his voice the better, because of his rough and hairy hands; but with
our Isaac it is clean contrary.

Because they are in their sins, But if ye do not forgive men their
trespasses, no more will your father for give you your trespasses. For if they
who remit not other men's injuries against the mare incapable, what are they who
do injure others and oppress and wrong them? Nay if they had had remission,
yet the guilt of them would return. Rediunt dimiss a peccata ubi fraterna
charitas non est. As the parable shows, Matthew 18.34. Now where a man's sins
are, there his prayers must needs be unaccepted.

Because the cries of those who are oppressed and injured are in his ears,
James 5.4. speaks of one kind.

The judgments of God are upon us, and that justly,

VERSE. XIV.
Yet ye say, wherein? because the Lord has been witness between thee and the
wife of thy youth, against whom thou have transgressed, yet she is thy
companion, and the wife of thy covenant.

YET ye say, wherein?] The second thing by which the Prophet condemns this
sin of poligamy is, that it is against Gods ordinance, which is set down in
this verse, and that which follows, part of it. The sin is that which is
against the ordinance and institution of God, that ought not to be done; such
is this. Now it is against his institution, because it is against that
covenant, whereof he is both Author and witness. The way of setting down this
is, by way of question and answer, from the people, and to them from God,
depending upon the former. The Lord had told them it made their prayers to be
rejected. They ask why it should be so? yet ye say wherein, or wherefore, for
what cause, or what reason there was why their offerings should be rejected,
and why he would not receive their prayers? As men that would not acknowledge
that there was any sin or fault in them, but put him to his proof how he would
make it good, and show them wherein they had offended, not willing to confess
unless he can wrest it from them.

Because the Lord has been witness.] The Lords answer showing directly that
there was cause, because they had been injurious, not only against their
wives, but against God, who was witness of the Covenant they made betwixt
themselves, which Covenant as it was Gods, ordained by him, that they should be
one flesh, so was it made, he being present, and called upon by him, as
witness when he bound himself to take her for his only wife. So that
witness between thee and thy wife is witness of that Covenant that is passed
betwixt thee and thy wife, and which he ordained. Who is the wife of thy youth]
One whom thou have had from thy youth, who has been long delightful,
comfortable, and amiable unto thee by her beauty, helps, and cheerfulness,
and other fruits of her youth and of marriage, when thou being in thy youth,
married her a young Virgin. And so it is no new reason, nor yet any strange
and obscure name of your duty mutually to be performed, that it may be
accounted either a small thing, or is to be denied and lightly regarded, but it
is most ancient and of long continuance, even from your youth; neither is there
any thing committed by her why thou should violate thy faith and break thy
covenant with her, for so that, against whom thou have transgressed.] Is to be
read, with whom thou have dealt unfaithfully, breaking thy covenant.

Those words, has been witness.] Some understand as if it were meant, that
he were witness of the injuries and indignities done against them. And that
howsoever some would lessen things, yet the Lord took notice of them, as great
injuries: yet this meaning the very tenor of the words will not carry it, for
it is not he is witness of, you have been unfaithful to them, but between
thee and her; with whom thou have dealt unfaithfully. Others would have it; he
is witness: That is, he has contested betwixt thee and her; that is, has
commanded how thou should carry thy self toward thy wife, when he said,
Genesis 2.24. Therefore shall man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh. But though some of the
learned, as Hierom and Cyril incline to this, it seems to me somewhat violent.

Yet is she thy companion.] This is added to amplify the crime of
unfaithfulness, because she was united to him in nighnesse of blood, being
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and in society of life admitted to a
partaking of his government and goods, or companion of his bed and government,
and that by a covenant made betwixt them, whereunto he had bound himself: Yet
is she, says the Prophet; that is, for all that she is thus, thou have dealt
thus and so with her. Some; for all thou have dealt thus with her, yet is she
thy companion, etc. and not that other thou have taken, and put her away, or
forsaken her company.

Because the Lord has been witness between thee.] Gods answer, showing their
sin in a more heinous degree, not against their wives and selves, but against
him.

They who break covenant, which is of the husband to her, must be understood
of the wives to him. So the Prophet here condemns the man's perfidiousnesse as
a sin to God. And as much Solomon insinuates for the woman, Prove. 2.17. Which
forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God That a
lewd woman dealing unfaithfully with her husband, sinned against God, in
breaking the Covenant whereof he was Author. This is further proved because
their natural duties are commanded of God, as Ephesians. 5.22.25. Collo. 3.18.19.
and other places.

Because whatsoever is against the Commandment and Word of God, is a sin
against him, though immediately it hurts man.

Because God gave him to her, and her to him, ad 20. where recompense is to be
made to the father, for the injury that is done to the daughter; for if there
be an injury against him, that is but in Gods stead, and his vicegerent, what
to himself.

To persuade husbands and wives not to transgress or injure one another, not
to deal unfaithfully one with another. Joseph dissuaded his Mistress, and
restrained himself, Genesis 39.9. so should they one with another, when occasion
and opportunity is given, or infirmity is ready to over-sway, they should say
one to another: How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
The duties of the husband conditioned at the Covenant were to love his wife, to
be faithful to her in his body and goods, to dwell with her, to govern her,
to instruct her, be an example to her, give her due benevolence of maintenance
and employment, and such like. And of the wife to love and be faithful to him,
to fear and obey him. In any one of these to fail, is to transgress against
the Lord. And though sometimes in their corruption they could consent to
transgress one against the other; as the husband that his wife should be a
harlot, and prostrate her for gain to another, or that he might without her
reproof be an adulterer and e contra: And so it may seem to be no injury,
because of that, that volenti non sit injuria: yet is it a sin, against God,
and that which may procure the curse of God upon them, to the ruin and
destruction of the whole family together with them. It is usual with men, that
they are careful not to transgress one against another in those things
especially which are against the law of the Prince; therein they will refrain
themselves, that they trespass not, though they take some liberty in lesser
things. If married folks can transgress in any thing which is not against God
and his law, let them take liberty to themselves; but in things that are (as
what omission of duty, or commission of contrary, be it less or more, is not?)
let them refrain themselves, and that in the least: For though a friend may be
a mediator betwixt them, and reconcile them soon, yet who shall reconcile them
to God? It was a weighty speech, spoken gravely, of old Eli to his sons, if
they had had grace to have thought of it, 1 Samuel 2.25. If one man sin against
another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who
shall entreat for him? which may be applied to this.

To teach man and wife, Fathers, Hierom and others, amongst other things,
condemn second marriages so greatly as they did. Not considering that as
Chrysom. Portus est conjugium sed saepe naufragium parit: non juxta suam
naturam, sed juxta sententiam little, qui illo male utuntur De libello repudii.
Therefore to avoid this, they who are in this state, ought to humble
themselves, and seek to be reconciled to God, as well as mutually with
themselves. And for that end, besides the prayers with their families, they
ought either jointly or severally in prayer to confess these sins, and humble
themselves daily to God, as they happen to be daily or usual offenses.

The Lord has been witness between thee and the wife.] This is, he is
witness of that covenant which passed betwixt them; because it was made in
Gods sight, and presence of the Church; there they plight their troth each to
other, which was made and confirmed by the invocation of his name.

The Lord he is witness betwixt every man and his wife,

Because it is made by his authority in his presence,

Because he sees all things in every place, good or evil,

To teach men to be wary how they come to the making, Athanasius in another
case, but somewhat like: Si in Paganorum judiciis regem terrestrem testem
citare fas non est, utpote major e^ and iis qui citant, and iis qui judicant.
Cur Deum increatu^ ad res creatas invocamus, facientes ut Deus ab hominibus
contemnatur. Athanasius.
If in Pagan Judicatories we may not call an earthly King to attest, as being
greater both then them that summon, and then them that judge, why shall we
rashly require the increated God to be witness to creatures, so causing God to
be despised of men: so in this. For what is this else, but as much as in them
is to bring him into contempt, as he that will witness such unlawful things,
or else to provoke him by some extraordinary, and fearful judgment to
renounce witnesse-bearing to such deceitful covenants? And though men may
imagine, if there be some precontracts before, or some other thing which may
make this unlawful; That yet they can cover it well enough: either they have
agreed not to challenge it one of another, or there was no witnesses. Yet let
them know there is now a witness who knows the former well enough, and he
that in truth will be their Judge, and both witness, and accuser, and Judge.
And though it be not lawful for earthly Judges to do so; yet is it for him.
And such shall know that he will not be mocked and abused, do it to the King,
or Captain, or any man of account, and see whether he will bear it at thy
hands.

To teach those who are in this state, Laban took an oath of Jacob for his
daughters. Genesis 31.
but to themselves, or some third perfon which will look to the performance of
it, if his daughter would remit it; so in this with God, who certainly will
exact it at the hands of both of them each to other; and will not fail the
trust he has taken upon him. If it were but for his presence only and because
he was by, it should strike a reverence and a care to keep it, as that Math.
14.9. Herod for the oath sake, and them that sat at meat with him, performed
what was promised; so more of this, he for his inferiors, they for their
superior, and Lord; he for them who only would condemn his rashness, but
could not punish his unfaithfulness and promise breaking: they for him who can
do both, and will do both. Men will not break their faith given but in table
talk; if they do, it will be a shame to them, though it be but in small
things. What a shame is it then to falsify that faith that is given in the
presence of God and his Church? Therefore let every one remember their
covenant, and their duties of them, and do them; he is witness, Judge, and
revenger.

The wife of thy youth.] She whom thou have had from thy youth, then taking of
her, and have had the comforts and helps by her ever since.

It is fit and convenient when a man is purposed to marry, wife, Prove. 5.18.
Let thy fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the wife of the youth.

The wife of thy youth, against whom thou have transgressed.] Now that she is
old, the heat of thy love is cooled, her beauty being decayed, or her portion
spent, or such like; now thou have cast her off, and set her by, and taken
another, which ought not to be, but thy love should be continual.

The wife must be beloved, Let her be as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe: let
her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and delight to her love continually.

Yet is she thy companion] This amplifies their injury and indignity done to
the wife, seeing she was by Gods ordinance and his own covenant admitted into
the participation of household matters and government, made his yoake-fellow,
and his wife, and helper; and by these two rights and titles remained so still.

The wife is her husbands companion, Also the Lord God said, it is not good
that the man should be himself alone, I will make him an helper meet for him.
First, to bear him children: Secondly, to keep his body chaste. 1 Cor. 7.2.
Thirdly, to tend his person in sickness, and in health. Fourthly, in
governing his house, children, and family. Hence is that Genesis 3.12. To be with
me; some read to be my companion, and fellow to help me; she that thou gave me
to be adjutrix, she is insidistrix: yet noting what she should be. Hence it is
that the spirit of God in the commendations of a virtuous woman sets down so
many proporties of a good huswife, and one that takes care of the government
and household affairs. Prove. 31.11.13.15.21.23.27. The heart of her husband
trusts in her, and he shall have no need of the spoil. She seeks wool and
flax, and labors chearefully with her hands. And she rises while it is yet
night, and gives the portion to her household, and the ordinary to her maids;
she fears not the snow for her family: for all her family is clothed with
scarlet; her husband is known in the gates, when he sits with the Elders of
the land. She over sees the ways of her household, and cateth not the bread of
idleness. Hence is the practice of Rebeckah, Genes. 27.46. And of Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.

Because she is partaker of the honor with him, onus, and the burden with him,
and care with him; if she command with him, seeing she rules and reigns with
him; for this government is an Aristocracie.

Because his cares and troubles are increased by her and hers. Chrysostom. de
virginit. 52. fine.
is like him that walks in a brake of briars, or a thicket of thorns, and
some thorns sticking in his graments; if he turn himself about to avoid one,
he catches, and is catched by another. So here.

Because he has endowed her with all his goods, bona animae, corporis and
fortunae, that she has right to them all as himself. And wherefore all this,
but to take care with him? beasts have fodder; servants meat and drink for
their labor and care, she the right of all for his endeavors.

It reproves the neglect of these duties,

Yet is she thy companion, and thy wife.] Though the men had taken other women
into their beds, and adjoined them to them, and so indeed commit adultery,
which breaks the marriage knot, yet because by a lawful Judge and Magistrate,
no divorce is made; the Prophet tells him she is his wife.

When adultery is committed, Abraham with consent of Sarah, took Hagar, who
can excuse him of adultery? yet was Sarah his wife still, else should the seed
in whom all the nations of the earth was blessed and the first, be an
adulterous seed, Genesis 16. So after her death of Keturah and his Concubines,
Genesis 25. So of David when he married Bathshebah, though it is most probable he
had no wife, yet he had Concubines, then afterward, as 2 Samuel 16.21. shows,
yet still was she his wife, and so accounted to his dying day; so of others
might be said. Besides, though Christ has allowed it to the innocent party,
that he or she may commence the action, and being judged, put the other away:
yet no where has he commanded it, that he should put her away, which if she had
ceased to be a wife, he would. Math. 19.9. Again, only he that joined them
can separate them, and make them not man and wife, which is God only: that he
did by the Minister, this by the Minister and Magistrate, Math. 19.6. Hierom
reports of Fabiola, that without the judgment of the Church, or Magistrate,
she put away her husband, being a vicious and an adulterous man, and full of
all filthy lusts. But though he writ not the rest, yet others report, that she
was made to do public penance, not that she made a divorce, but that she
did it of her self without the judgment of the Church.

Because as private and clandestine and secret marriages are not allowable for
manifold inconveniences to all,

Because they are man and wife till a just cause be justly known to the
contrary, that cannot be in private,

Because if the adultery be not known to the innocent,

Because it is a punishment of a fault committed,

To reprove those who think it to be in the power of the innocent man or woman
to make the divorce after once just cause is known, of themselves,

It reproves those who as unsoundly, as boldly, but if he do it, without
repentance, in private injuries, not prejudicial to the common good, I think
he is not reproveable. So in this. And though it were horrible for a man to
bear such an indignity from his wife, if she shall continue in it, to bring
the judgment of God upon him and his house; yet if he pass it over once or
twice upon hope, he is not an adulterer, though he go in unto her: for they are
still man and wife.

To instruct married parties, Joseph, Mat. 1. may by proportion instruct men
not to traduce their wives so soon as they have offended, but seek to
reclaim them privately. Men that have taken a wound in some secret and
uncomely part, will assay to cure it privately, before they go to a Physician:
They should do so in this. If any man, says one, have an unsound tooth, how
putrified soever it be, will not forthwith send foir a tooth-drawer to have it
pulled out: neither if his hand be ulcerated and wounded, will he forthwith
call for a Chyrurgian to cut it off; but he will rather use all means
possible, and assay every thing to cure it, and keep it still. Reason, because
no man hates his own flesh; why not then the same to his wife, which is his
own flesh?

VERSE. XV.
And did not be make one? yet had be abundance of spirit: and wherefore one?
because he sought a godly seed: therefore keep your selves in your spirit, and
let none trespass against the wife of his youth.

ANd did not he make one? Thus is it to be read, and not, Has not one done it?
being referred to God. And so S. Hierom upon this place. And Chrysostom. de
libell. repud. The sum and meaning is; Has not God made man and woman, and
ordained by his perpetual and inviolable decree, that they shall be one flesh,
even they two, and no more, that mankind might be increased of them joined
together by a perpetual knot of matrimony. And this set down briefly by the
Prophet, has our Savior Christ set down largely, and explained, Matthew.
19.4.5.6.

Yet had he abundance of Spirit.] This is added for amplification of the
former: As if he had said, this did not God at the first, because he wanted
spirit to make more women for one man: for he had abundance, to make as many
women as he would, or he had remainder of the Spirit. As some taking that the
Prophet alludeth to, Genesis 2.7. The Lord God also made the man of the dust of
the ground, and breathed in his face breath of life, and the man was a living
soul. And after making woman of his rib, he breathed into her breath of life,
as it was the remainder of the Spirit; and though he had abundance more,
because he had denied, that they two should be one, and not more.

Because he sought a godly seed.] Here is another amplification of it, from one
special end of marriage, which is the propagation of the Church, and to have a
religious and holy posterity, such as might worship the true God, which will
not come from the other, but rather increase the Synagogue of Satan, and make a
profane seed: for taking to them the daughters of a strange God, must needs
have a corrupt seed, they following the mothers; and if of their own, yet to
do a thing so contrary to Gods commandment, must needs bring a curse and a
profaneness upon them; and an adulterous seed prove an idolatrous brood, and
it being the fruit of their perfidy and unfaithfulness, can have no blessing
from God.

In this verse the Prophet condemns Poligamy from Gods ordinance, as a thing
against it, because he was the author of marriage; which he made but to be of
two, and ordained they two should be one, and but they two; and so hence we
have a doctrine which is the description of marriage.

Marriage is a lawful conjunction of one man and one woman, He shall cleave to
his wife, which is meant of a carnal conjunction and copulation, whereby they
are, as it were, incarnated one to another. That as Eve was flesh really of the
flesh of Adam, so she was given to him by marriage, that she might again be
one and the same flesh with him, by a holy conjunction of their bodies. Hence
follows it in the same place, They shall be one flesh. And this Chapter
explaines Mat.h. 19.5. For having repeated the institution, he adds for
conclusion, and for further confirmation verse. 6. Wherefore they are no more
twain, but one flesh. Now when we speak of a conjunction, we understand not
that only which is after the consummation of the marriage, carnal copulation,
and knowledge one of another, as it is commonly taken: for without that, though
it never follow, there may be marriage, and this marrimoniall conjunction, as
we commonly receive the marriage to have been betwixt Mary and Joseph: but also
that voluntary and free covenant which is passed betwixt them, by which the man
has power over the body of the woman: and so e contra, he is become her head,
and she subject to him, as the body to the head, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
7.

Because God would have a holy seed,

Because he,

Because he that committed adultery,

This serves for that end the Prophet speaks it, Zane de operibus Dei p. 659.
b.
Adam and Eve were but two, and God said, they should be one flesh. And his
son, which came from the bosom of the Father, says, They two shall be one.
The reason that some give, to excuse at least, if not make lawful the Polygamy
of the Fathers, for the multiplying and increasing of mankind, might here have
better taken place, seeing whole mankind was to be derived from them, and the
earth to be replenished from them: and seeing to them was the commandment
given, Genesis 1.28. Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. If God
did not permit it to them, it must needs be apparent, that it was not from the
beginning, but has since crept into the world by the corruption of man. But of
this afterward.

This condemns all divorces, Moses permitted to the Jews: for when God has
said, they shall be one, they make them two, as if his law were not perpetual.
And when as Christ has said, Those whom God has joined, may no man sever,
they take upon them to sever and dissolve themselves, at their pleasure. The
decrees of the Medes and Persians were not to be broken, no not by the Kings
themselves, much less could any subject do it. But these decrees are far
surer. But such men are grossly impudent, as take upon them to dissolve, if
not to give her a bill of divorce, and so put her away; yet many send them home
to their friends, and separate themselves from them, and live very
reproachfully.

This condemns all adultery, and all adulterers, Chrysostom making the
comparison betwixt theft and adultery, says: Gravis quidem res fur, sed non
tam gravis quam adulter Ille enim etsi frigidam, causam habet, tamen ex
pauperie necessitatem tretendere potest, hic vero nulla ipsum cogente
necessitate per dementia sola in peccati voragimen corruit. Chrysostom. Hom. 10.
ad pop. Antioch.
It is an heinous thing to be a thief, but not so heinous as to be an
adulterer. The thief, though his excuse be but a sorry one, yet may pretend he
is forced by poverty; but the adulterer having no necessity, only through his
own madness rusheth into the gulf of sin.

Yet had he abundance of spirit.] He could have made more women for one man,
for it had been as easy for him to have created more souls and breathed them
into more bodies, as he did but one, and gave her to Adam. Insinuating that the
spirit or soul of the woman, as of the man, was created immediately of
nothing, and not made of the substance of the man, as her body was. And from
this I would gather this general.

The souls of men are not propagated with the seed and substance of the body,
from the souls of their parents, expressed the conjunction of marriage to have
said, this is now flesh of my flesh, and soul of my soul; then as he did. To
this we add Eccles. 12.7. Dust returns to the earth as it was, and the spirit
returns to God that gave it. And Isaiah 42.5. and 57.16. The souls which I
have made, Zach. 12.1. The Lord forms the spirit of man within him. Heb.
12.9. God is the father of spirits. Where the Apostle makes the opposition,
not denying God to be the Author of our bodies, as of the souls, but that by
the parents, this immediately, else should there be no opposition.

Because Adams soul was not made of the substance of his body, Eves: for
though it is not said of her that he breathed into her the breath of life, as
of Adam; Therefore says Tertullian and some others, she had both from him. But
August. in 10 lib. sup. Genes. says, that this concludes the contrary: for if
God had created her soul after another manner, then Adams, the Scripture would
not have been silent in it, no more then it is in the new manner of the
creation of her body. Therefore that which was spoken of the man, must be
understood of the woman; and if of her, then of others, for there is no new
manner of creation of man.

Because if it were propagated,

This serves to confute their opinion, August. in lib. 10. sup. Genes. That is
God do now create souls, how should that be true, that in the seventh day he
rested from all his works, i. the works of creation, as it is generally
taken; how then should he create souls? To answer, I demand whether that Christ
his soul was propagated from his Mother, or created? If they say it was
propagated, they must needs say it was tainted with sin original: If they
say it was created, which the learned affirm, S. August. and others, because it
could not betainted with sin, then have they answered for us, that souls are
now created. And the meaning of God ceasing from his work, is that which the
learned give, that after the sixth day he crated no new kind of creatures or
things, though he do still make particulars of kinds.

Secondly, they say, man begets a man, and the mother brings forth a man of
body and soul like themselves. But admit this, they beget and bring forth
only one part, and not the whole, then they beget and bring forth not like
themselves.

In answer, and demand, did not God make Eve of Adam? It will not be denied;
yet did he make but her body, and created her soul? And if that speech be
true, why not this? though but the body only is propagated.

Again, I demand, brought not Mary forth our Savior Christ a true and perfect
man, and like her? It is granted; yet was his soul created of God, and not
propagated, confessed of all. Then so in this. And the reason is given, because
in the body which is traduced and propagated from the parents, by virtue of the
seed, there are qualities and conditions found by which it is made capable of a
reasonable soul, and so because of that, the soul it self is said to be
propagated from the patents. And thus the school probably disputes.

Thirdly, they say, if God create all souls, then his which is begotten by
adultery, and so is the author of sin, or else a coworker, or a worker with
the adulterers.

I answer first, a difference is to be put betwixt the action and the evil of
it: God who works in the action, is free from the evil: as in the betraying
of Christ and murdering, all move in him and work by him, but the evil is of
themselves.

Secondly, it is answered by some, that there must be put a difference, betwixt
the action of an adulterer, and his will. The action simply and of it self is
not evil, but of things indifferent, or naturally good; the will is evil. God
works in the action, but approves not his will. S. Hierom, and S. August.
Epist. 28. ad August. set it out by this similitude. The earth has this
goodness from God in it self, that what seed soever men cast into it, it
keeps it and nourishes it, and it brings forth fruit, whether the seed be
lawfully taken out of a man's own store and garner, or it be stolen; neither
for thy theft or corruption refuses it to take, to nourish, and to return
with fruit. Yet will none for this accuse the goodness of the ground, nor God
who has made it fruitful for this purpose: so God, who is goodness it self,
if any go in unto a woman, whether lawfully, or unlawfully, does not cease
according to his decree, and first ordering of things, to work with a man in
framing the birth, and creating the soul, yet approves he no more his
adultery, then the others theft; but condemns and will punish them both.
Lastly, by this reason a man may deny God to have any finger in the framing of
the body, as that he should not create the soul.

Fourthly, they say if souls be thus created, then how should they be infected
with original sin? Is it because it is joined with the body? but how should
that be when as a corporal substance can have no power over a spiritual? and
how should God be free from sin, but be Author of it, when he joyneth a pure
soul with a sinful and corrupt body? To this I answer, first, for the first
part. That in original sin, two things are to be considered. First, Adams
disobedience, as the head and root of all others, imputed most justly to them,
as to his members. The reason is, because as Adam received his justice for them
all, so did he his injustice and sin, being not a private man, but the head
and fountain of all mankind, in respect of both, where they are called not
personal justice or injustice, but original. The second is the corruption of
the whole nature and the propension and inclination of it to evil, which is
the punishment of that disobedience which from him to his whole posterity, is
by the just judgment of God derived and propagated. Now when we say that from
the conjunction of soul and body, it is defiled and infected with both these,
we mean not as when a piece of gold falls into the dirt or mire, or as wine
that is put into a musty caske is corrupted by them: But because the first is
imputed to the whole man this disobedience oif Adam, as if it were his own;
for as when he is made a member of Christ by the holy Ghost, the righteousness
of Christ is imputed to him, and he is truly called a just man. So, so soon
as he is made a man and the member of Adam, this is. And secondly, because of
the guilt of that disobedience, the corruption of nature and the propension and
inclination to evil which they usually have called contagion, is by the just
decree and ordination of God derived into the soul, he having so decreed from
the beginning, that if Adam had stood and not sinned, his whole justice should
have been propagated to his posterity, whence it is called original justice.
So he falling and all his posterity sinning in his loins, the whole corruption
of the nature of Adam, which followed that disobedience, should flowfrom him as
from a fountain into all men, that is, both into the body and soul. Whence it
is called natural corruption, and original sin. Thus then is the soul
infected, as the body, but yet not from the body by any physical contraction
or contagion, but by this course, and has no need to be propagated, or else it
cannot be infected by original sin.

Now that God by this means is not the Author of sin, or the pollution of
the soul, because he has joined it to the body, is manifest, because he never
infused any evil either into the body or soul, for he tempts no man, James 1.
Again, God has decreed before all times and so would perform, to join the
soul and body together, as well if Adam stood, as if he fell. Now what reason
was there that sin coming between, or God foreseeing it, should hinder his
decree, because of it. This decree being most holy and just, he therefore in
joining these together, has done that which he most holily, justly, and wisely
decreed. And that corruption followed upon this, is not from the conjunction,
for then it would have been, though Adam had not fallen, but by the default of
man, who is in this thing to be blamed not God: And so neither the propagation
of original sin, neither any just imputation that can be laid upon God, can
overthrow the creation of the souls, or establish the propagation of them.

This may teach us the excellency of the soul above the body, Ambrose.
in nature not inferior to the Angels. And this ought to stir up in every man
a more special care for the soul, then the body; for the health, happiness,
and felicity of the one, more then of the other. Not as many who bestow more
case upon their dogs and horses and other beasts, then upon their souls, and
yet they would not be accounted dogs and beasts: But their bodies they only
seek to pamper, and starve their souls, and suffer them to perish: for that
they care, and this they neglect: they are like unto those who having a ruinous
house, regard it not, and only seek to themselves goodly orchards: or those
who are consumed by a disease, neglect the care of their health, and make them
apparel of cloth of gold and silver, and such like. Or like a sick woman who
neglects the means of her recovery, and only labors and endeavors to have
waiting maids, Jewels and other ornaments. How foolish are all and every one
of these, in every sober man's judgment? Then what wisdom is it for men not
to regard the soul, laboring with sin, and to prepare themselves with all
endeavor starely houses, great Lordships, many troops of servants, dainty
fare, and fine apparel for the back and belly. As if this, not that, were
more excellent; as if the body, not the soul were of so excellent a nature, as
if man had begotten that, not this. But seeing it is contrary, our care should
be contrary, as Iaakob laid his right hand upon the younger, but his left upon
the elder, so our best care and the strength of our thoughts should be for the
soul, younger as much as it is, then the body; they should but be left hand
thoughts for the body, vide Bern sermon. 6. de advem. dom. s. d. e.

To instruct parents to take more ear for the souls of their children then
usually they do, seeing they are thus created, so in a more special manner
Gods. The little care they take for it, and the great care for the body, tells
us, that they believe this is theirs, and not that. And as men care more for
their own then for other men's, and many a man bestows more cost and care upon
a house of his own erecting, then of one of his fathers providing: so in this.
But the contrary should be, that they should principally care for this, and for
that, but in respect of this. God having to dust and ashes joined so excellent
and immortal a soul, put in such an earthly tabernacle so excellent a Prince.
Though they ought to have care to keep that in reparation and tenantable, yet
their special care should be for this; for the diet, the clothing, the
admorning and the beautifying of it, with good graces and virtues; whereas
contrary the care of parents now is, only for the bodies of theirs, how they
may cloth them with scarlet, with pleasures, and hang them with rich ornaments
oif gold upon their apparel, 2 Samuel 1.24. to set them out with Lawnes and
Cambrickes, and deck them with all the vanities spoken of, Isaiah 3. as if they
would provoke God to plague both body and soul. But is it any marvel, when
most parents care only for their own bodies, and not for their souls? How
should they care for the souls of their children, seeing charity ever begins
at home? To them the Prophet speaks, at least by way of allusion, as it is
applied by some of the learned, Haggai 1.2.4. They say it is not yet time to
look to Gods house and his work: that when they are old, they are afraid to
be young Saints, they or theirs, they let Gods house lie waste, and his field
grow over with weeds, the souls of themselves and their children. If they
would consider their ways in their hearts, they should find God plagues us
for this sin, as for others, verse 6.7. If any man should hang thy house, and
adorn it with cloth of gold, and hanging of Arras, and should compel thee to
sit naked in ashes, would thou take it well? thou would not. Now not
another, but thou thy self adornest the house of thy soul with gold and
pearls, and suffers thy soul to sit in filthiness and corruption: so of thy
children. How shall God take it at thy hands? Know thou not that the Prince
of the City ought to be magnifically decked? Chrysostom de diversis hom. 70. Let
every man then remit off his care for the one, and increase it for the other.
And let it not be true in this, that the Kings work and the Church work, is
most negligently looked to. But as Kish, Saul's father, ceased earing for the
Asses, and cared for Saul, who must be King; so for the soul, seek to have it
nourished, and decked, and adorned.

And wherefore one? Because he sought a godly seed.] The end of marriage noted,
and the reason why still God appoints but one for one, and has not allowed
Bygamy, or Polygamy, but codemnes it. Of which then first.

Polygamy is simply wicked, impious and unlawful; this is, Tertullian after
his fall, disputes against it, or how hotly soever Hierom opposes it, under
the name of Bygamy, against Iovinian and others. Secondly, when one man has
two or many wives, and e contra, of which is here spoken and condemned.
Further, it is condemned by the Scripture, Genesis 2.24. Cleave to his wife, not
wives. Hier they one flesh, one cannot be so with many. And if any except that
two is not there expressed, he may find it, Matthew. 19.5. Further, verse. 9. And
if he that puts her away, may not do it, what he that keeps her? If adultery
in the one, how not in the other? Prove. 5.18.19. None of which can be, if many
wives be taken, 1 Cor. 7.2. To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife,
and let every woman have her own husband. His wife, says the Apostle, not
wives; and her own or proper husband, not such an one as is common to her and
another, Ephesians. 5.25. Christ had and has but one Church. So Jerome reasons
against Iovinian, inveighing against Lamech the first Polygamist, who as he
says, had divided one rib into two.

Reasons against this, besides that the Spirit of God has here set down, we
add these: First, no man may take that which is another, and give it to
another, without the knowledge and consent of him that is owner of it. Now the
man has not power over his own body, but his wife, 1 Cor. 7.4. And if it may
be supposed she may remit her right, besides that she has no power to it, for
God gave it her but for herself, and not to translate it whither she will. In
God himself remains the full right, who will not remit it if she will.
Secondly, they must not defraud one another of their company, fellowship, and
due benevolence, 1 Cor. 7. But this they must needs do if they have many. So
we may see it, Genesis 30.15. Thirdly, because the love betwixt them ought to be
in the highest degree, being one flesh, and one bone. In respect of her, he
ought to love none else. Now friendship and love in the highest degree, says
S. Augustine, by the light of reason, cannot be betwixt many: for the more it
is extended to many, there must needs be remission of it toward every one. And
in Polygamy it is manifest, that for the love of one the rest are contemned,
and made as handmaids to her, and she only rules. Fourthly, because heathen
men by the light of nature have condemned it, though some of them did practice
it, as Laban, Genesis 31.50. If thou shall vex my daughters, or shall take wives
besides my daughters: there is no man with us, behold, God is witness between
thee and me. Also the Roman Emperors, Dioclesian and Maximian decreed, that
none under the power of the Romans, should have two wives, seeing that in the
edict of the Praetor, such a man is to be accounted infamous. Diverse such laws
there are: so that Arcadius and Honorius would not permit the Jews their
Polygamy; Socrat. hist. lib. 4. cap. 26. edit. Christopher. p. 672.
only Socrates reports in his Eccles. hist. lib. 4.31. that Valentinian
having Severa, married Iustina. And to cover his filthiness, made an Act that
it might be lawful for a man to have two wives; but that law was rejected and
condemned afterward, and that very shortly.


This being a truth, Bernard Ochin, who has written certain dialogues, and
labored to establish this against the word of God. Infinite it were to trouble
you with all, yet some: The greatest is the examples of many of the holy
Fathers, as recorded in the Scripture, who had many wives, and are no where
reproved. I answer; First, it follows not, Their reproof is not set down,
therefore it was not: for seeing the Prophet Malachy reproves it, why may it
not be supposed others did so? Besides, many things were done, that we never
find reproved, which argues not the lawfulness of them. The incest of Jacob
and Lot, David's judgment against Mephibosheth and with Siba, and such like.
Thirdly, if it were not, yet we live by precept, not example. Fourthly, the
multitude, nor the greatness of offenders will excuse, neither can antiquity
prescribe against the word of God. But as for the Fathers, it is answered by
the learned: First, that God remitted his law to them, which appears, say
they, because he neither reproved it by his Prophets, neither did he at the
publishing of the Law, expressly condemn it, as he did some others, as
incest, Levit. 19. before they think Jacobs marriage of two sisters was
lawful, therefore he remitted his law: yet so, as they were not without all
sin in it. For sin they consider either as an aberration or turning aside
form the perfect rule of God, and so they sinned: or else that which offends
God, so that it provokes him to punish; and in this sense they sinned not, God
thus remitting the Law. Others excuse the Fathers because they did it, and God
so permitted for the increase of the Church, and not for any filthy and unclean
lust to satisfy it: which was true in some, though it hold not in others. As
Solomon and some others who cannot be excused of incontinencie. Some excuse,
from some probable ignorance, that either they knew not the Law, or they
thought not of it, and so, though not no sin, yet a less sin. Some, the
succeeding ages by their predecessors, that though their examples make not
sin to be no sin, yet to be smaller sins to offend by their example, who
were otherwise good and holy men, then when any thing is done with a wavering
conscience, and men are boldly, the first that do it, for they are to be
judged to sin by error of judgment, then perversity of affection. Finally,
it is probable, that God did wink at that in this people and their
progenitors, for thepropagation of his people, and to give passage to the
fulfilling of his promise of the increasing of them; and though God used that
fact of the fathers well, yet will it not follow that they sinned not, when
they turned aside from the word of God; but if they sinned in it, and so
persevered, and dyed impenitent, what shall we think became of them? It is
probable they never repented, either because they thought they sinned not, or
else because they well discerned not their sin; and yet might be pardoned it,
and were. It is true, to have Gods mercy for pardon requires repentance, yet is
it not necessary that every man should expressly repent himself of every
particular sin. How many things are done, which are not rightly done? yet not
done wickedly by us, but in a conscience not well informed, and so knew it not
to be sin? And how many which are forgotten that they were done? and yet by a
man's general humiliation for all his sins, and craving pardon of unknown
sins, Psalm. 19. pardon is obtained: And those fathers often in their lives
confessing themselves miserable sinners, and humbling themselves, no doubt that
repentance, and faith in Christ to come, did save them.

But 2 Samuel 12.8. David had his masters wives. It is answered by some that he
did, because God remitted his law to him. But others, it is never read that he
took any one of them to wife; neither is it said so, but though the phrase,
into thy bosom, is commonly understood of marriages, yet it signifies there
only power and authority: that is, I have given thee all thy masters goods,
and have not excepted his wives, that thou may have them under thy power as
other things, Tremolius thus i. res and personas etiam intimas and charissimas,
eorum qui prius tui er ant domini, subjecitibi.

But Deuteronomy. 25.5. the brother was to take the wife of his elder brother
deceased. It is answered by most that it was an extraordinary example, and a
special thing, but no general rule: for else incest might be proved by it, if
it were general. Others answer, that it must be taken and understood, if he
have not a wife before. And so much they think those words carry, if brethren
dwell together. And a reason of it is, because it is not like that God would
have a man to neglect his own seed, and his own wife to raise up seed to
others, but only he would have his brother substituted in his place.

I omit many more of no great weight, though of some show, against all which
the truth will stand and prevail.

To perswde the men of our age against it, Church or by reason of their
ignorance and rudeness, winked at it: yet as in another case. Acts 17.30. The
time of this ignorance God regarded not, but now he admonishes all men every
where to repent. So may we say in this; specially seeing Christ by himself and
by others his Apostles, has declared us the law of the creation, and brought
it to the first institution, he beingas Revel. 1. Alpha and Omega; and as
Hierom applies it to this when he found all things at his coming brought to
Omega, to an extremity and height, he reduced them to Alpha, to that which was
in the beginning. And if it were then granted to be no sin, yet will it be
now. They who excuse the fathers, make as of man, so of the world, four ages:
the childhood of it, the youth, the man's estate, and the old age. Now many
things are fitting for children and may be tolerated in them, which may not be
in men of riper years: as S. August says, inold time for men to go with
garments having long sleeves and skirts, it was an argument of softness and
wantonness. But now if they should wear them with either, they should be
noted. They say again, that that was the time of darkness, ours of the
light; for though they were light in respect of the Gentiles, they are
darkness in comparison of us. Now many things are tolerable in darkness,
which may not be borne withal in the light. Then in this, as in many other
things, we must not study what was done or borne withal, but what is lawful
for us to do, and walk not in this, and many other things, as others have
done, but as God has spoken.

Now we may add to the former words, and collect out of them, that when it is
said, Did not he make one, who is the Author of marriage.

The first instituter of marriage is God, And the rib which the Lord had taken
from theman, made he a woman, and brought her to the man. Hence that Prove.
2.17. It is called the Covenant of God, called so properly because he is the
Author of it. Hence, Math. 19.6. whom God has joined together.

Because the breach of this ordinance either in man or woman,

Because though parents and friends, House and riches are the inheritance of
the fathers, but a prudent wife comes of the Lord: and 18: 22. he that
finds a wife, finds a good thing, and receives favor of the Lord.

This teaches us, Innocent says, it is to live inthe flesh, and calls it
Bed pleasure, and uncleanness; when he would condemn Ministers marriage by
it: so Siricius and others, have spoken most wickedly and despitefully of it;
allowing simple fornication before it, in their Priests.

And wherefore one? because he sought a godly seed.] The end of marriage in
the holy intent of God, to have a holy seed, the Church and religion
propagated and increased. The meaning is not, as if holiness and
sanctification came by nature, which is only of grace, for of such holiness
he does not speak, but the word is the seed of God: that is, that their
children might be the sons and daughters of the true God, and pure religion,
for it is here, as the contrary was before, Verse 11. The daughters of a
strange God, such as professed the worship not of the true God. The meaning of
this is manifest by that which we have in Ezra 9.1.2. the holy seed matched
with the people of the land; namely they who profess true religion, and the
true God, with those who falsify both. Also 1 Cor. 7.14. where holiness is
nothing but to be within the Covenant and professors of the true God and
religion. God then ordained marriage for the procreation of Children, and that
holy ones, the propagation of the Church, and the increase of such as should
truly worship him.

The end of marriage, the most proper and excellent end of it, Lombard has a
speech, Post lapsum hominis conjugium remedium est quod ante laepsum duntaxat
officium suit. Lombard.
After man's fall marriage is a remedy, which before the fall was only an
office. The whole is true, but it is not the whole truth; for it is now
officium, as well as then, to procreate children and propagate the Church; now
that this is the end, that shows: that he prohibiteth and reproves so often
unequal matches with infidells, because though that may increase mankind, yet
not the Church: for that will spread rather idolatry then the true worship.
Deuteronomy. 7.3.4. and Ezra 9.1.2. Hence it is that amongst the people of God, that
virginity was a grief and barrenness, a shame and so taken and accounted;
because they could not increase the Church: for the first, see Judges 11.37.40.
for the second, see Luke 1.25. Hence the Apostle forbids to take into the
Church young widows, for the service of the Church, but will have them marry
for the increase of the Church. 1 Timothy 5.14.

Because this to bring forth children,

Because this is the duty enjoined them from God,

To reprove many who when they seek a wife or a husband, Again, in the use of
marriages; many men and women, though they desire some children, not many; and
those they have, they may happily give them civil breeding and education, and
bring them up in knowledge of humane things, arts and sciences, and such like,
but no instruction of religion. That which S. August. complains of to God as
touching his father, may many justly complain of their parents. Non satageret
idem pater, qualis crescerem tibi, aut quam castus, dummodo essem disertus. So
they have little care for piety and religion, to inform them and instruct them
that way, but that they might as he says, ut discerem sermonem facere, quam
optimum and persuadere dictione. Confess. 2.2.3.
To be either an eloquent Divine, or an absolute Lawyer, or a fortunate
Merchant, or such like.

That seeing there are three special ends of marriage; parentum exempla decere
possunt, magis quam vox. St. Hierem. That when they are gone, they may praise
them, as Augustine did his mother, Majore solicitudine me parturiebat spiritu,
quam carne pepererat. Confess. 5.9. Their care was more to bring them up
religiously, then their pains was to bring them into the world: they loved
their souls better then their bodies; and they desired more that they might be
Gods sons and daughters, then theirs: by which they shall increase their glory,
for they who beget many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever.
Dan. 12.3. And they who shall increase Gods Church here, he shall increase
their glory, as they his worship.

to marry, for though marriage be a remedy, yet is it not only, nor
principally, for both this is an end and more principal. They who can preserve
their chastity in virginity, may desire it, but not absolutely, but in respect
of some troubles, and encumbrances, which for the most part accompany marriage,
yet they may marry, for this end, which is the more excellent: I do not say
they are bound to marry for this end, because marriage is of those things which
are indifferent, as Bernard speaks of virginity; It is not commanded, but
advised, and only they who cannot contain, are commanded to marry; yet as
there is more necessity in marrying for that end, so there is more religion in
this end. In that a man principally respects himself; in this God, the
increase of the Church, and the enlarging of the kingdom of Christ, that which
Saint Augustine speaks de bono conjugali Cap. 15. may be applied here, Iustus
qu indo cupit dissolvi and esse cum Christo, tamen sumit alimentum non
cupiditate vivendi, sed officio consulendi, ut maneat, quod necessarium est
propter alios. Sic misteri foemin is in re nuptiarum officiosum fuit sanctis
non libidinosum. Quid enim sit eibus ad salutem hominis, hoc est concubitus ad
salutem humani generis. And so specially for the Church and increase of Gods
Kingdom: for though he can make children of stones, yet has he ordained this
means: Therefore little reason and less religion has the Church of Rome to
prefer virginity before holy marriage; for besides that may be said to them,
it were better they would approve virginity by their deeds, then praise it by
their words. And as Hierom adfuriam; why does the tongue sound out chastity,
and the whole body show forth uncleanness? Or as Epiphanius of the Origenists:
You refuse marriage, but not lust. It is not holiness but hypocrisy that is
in honor amongst you. Besides this, virginity is never save only in some
respect better then marriage, but marriage is oftentimes absolutely better then
virginity, and by no reason more then this; because this may increase the
Church, and bring forth sons and daughters to God, not that. Neither is it
against this, that some object, that Christ says, That after this life there
is no marrying at all, and that, 1 Cor. 7.38. He that gives her to marriage
does well, but he that gives her not to marriage, does better. For the first,
it is not against us, seeing we speak of the state of this life only; after
which, as there shall be no marriages, so no vows of virginity. And as for S.
Paul, Better with him, is as much, as fit, or more commodious. For if it were
simply better, it were never lawful to do otherwise, which he allows.
Therefore he thus spoke, not for the nature of the thing, but in respect of
circumstances, as you may see, verse 26.28.32.35. Finally, if virginity be the
more holy, why have they made marriage a sacrament rather then it? Sure, if it
were more holy, it should rather be a sacrament, then marriage.

Therefore keep your selves in your spirit.] The dehortation of the Prophet
from this vice, and the better that they may do it, and not transgress, he
persuades them to labor for sober minds, and chaste affections: from thence
rises this sinning against their wives, which would easily be avoided, if
their minds were sober and chaste.

The way for a man to keep himself from actual and outward sin, and the
practice of it, is to labor to keep his heart pure, Keep thine heart with all
diligence: for thereout comes life. Put away from thee a froward mouth, and
put wicked lips far from thee. Let thine eyes behold the right, and let thine
eye lids direct the way before thee. Matthew. 15.19. Out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, adulteries, etc. and Jam. 1.13.14. 1 Pet. 2.11.12.

Because the heart and spirit is the fountain of actions, e contra.

Because it is the commander of the whole man, the whole life.

Romans 7.25. Then the flesh, and outward parts, follow not the mind and the
heart.

There is no opposition there betwixt the inward and outward,

Then may a man certainly judge a man to have a corrupt heart, when he has a
polluted outward man, and conversation. Vide Malach. 1.8. Doctrine 1. Use 2.

To reprove such as judge men to have corrupt hearts for the care and
uprightness of their lives. Vide ibid. ex Use 1.

To teach men,

And let none transgress.] The dehortation from the evil, and the outward
practice of it. Of the particular has been spoken in the former verses: yet
somewhat hence. It may be that some may think this speech hangs that way, that
it may seem to favor freewill, to call upon them to abstain from evil, which
if it were not in their power, it were in vain thus to speak to them. I
answer: this is no more then other precepts and exhortations in the word, which
do but teach us what we ought to do, not what we are able, which is but to
make us assay, and when we find not power, then to seek it elsewhere. Lege
opern^ dicit Deus, Jae quod in be Jege fidci dicitur Deo, da quod iubes. Aug.
de spirit. and lit.
In the law of works, God says to us, Do what I command thee: In the law of
faith we say to God; What thou command us, enable us to do. God therefore
thus speaks to man, to make him speak again to him, commanding that he may
require and obtain to do; seeing, Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you
both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. Bernard in the audience
of some, commending the grace of God, as that which he acknowledged in God did
prevent him, and he found did make him to profit, and he hoped would perfect it
in him, Bernard de gratia and lib. Arbit. initie.
giving all to grace, and taking nothing to himself. One replied, what then
have thou done, or what reward can thou look for, if God work all? To whom he
answered, What counsel then do thou give me, or how would thou advise me?
Give glory, says he, to God, who has prevented thee, excited thee, and begun
this good in thee, and for that is to come, live worthily, that thou may
approve thy self not unthankful for those thou have received, and fit to
receive more. Bernard replies, You give good counsel, but that is, but if you
could make me able to obey and do it. For it is not so easy a thing to do,
as to know what ought to be done; for these are diverse things to lead a blind
man, and to give strength to the weary. Nec quivis doctor statim and dator erit
boni, quodcunque docuerit. Duo mihs sunt necessaria, doceri and juvari. Tu
quidem homo recte consulis ignorantiae, sed (si verum sentit Apostolus)
spiritus adjuv at infirmitatem nostram Romans 8. Inso vero qui mihi per os tuum
ministrat consilium, ipse mihi necesse est ministrat per spiritum tuum adjut
erium quo valiant implere quod consulis. Ecce enim ex ejus munere velle adjacet
mihi, perficere autem non invenio, nisi qui dedit velle, det and perficere pro
bena voluntate.
For whosoever is a teacher, whatsoever he teaches, cannot bestow goodness.
Two things are needful to me, to be taught, and to be helped: thou being a man
do well instruct my ignorance, but the spirit helps our infirmities, Romans 8.
yea, he that gave me counsel by thy mouth, must also send me help by his own
spirit, that I may be able to do what thou advisest: by his grace I am
willing, but cannot perform, unless he that wrought the will, do also work
the deed of his good pleasure. And when to this he replied, Vbi ergo sunt
merita nostra? ant ubi est spes nostra?
Where then are our rewards? or where is our hope? He answers with that, Tit.
3.5. Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the
holy Ghost. Hence I gather, and upon this infer, that God that calls upon us
by his word to do, must give us also power to do: then therefore he calls,
because he would have us cry to him for help. And as S. Augustine: O man!
acknowledge in every precept, O home in praeceptione cognosce quid debeas
habere, in cerreptione tuo te vitio non habere: in oratione unde accipias quid
vis habere. De corrept. and gratia, c. 3.
what strength thou should have; in every reproof, what strength by thy own
fault thou want; in every prayer, whence thou may have what thou want.

The hands must be purged as well as the heart: the outward man as the inward.

VERSE. XVI.
If thou hate her, put her away, says the Lord God of Israel, yet he
covers the injury under his garment, says the Lord of bostes: therefore keep
your selves in your spirit, and transgress not.

I Hate putting away, says the Lord God of Israel.] In this verse the Prophet
proceeded to the third maine sin here reproved in this people, Divorces; not
simply condemning divorce, as if in no case it were lawful, but for every
vain cause, and light dislike, when they hated or disliked them, for that to
put them away, is that he reproves. In the verse we observe two things: First,
the reproof of this sin: secondly, an admonition general, including the
particular. In the first, which is the sin, we observe the amplifications of
it, which is first from Gods hatred: Secondly, from an effect of those
husbands, who used and practiced divorces, that they made the law of God a
covert, to cover with it that violent injury and indignity they did to their
wives, as men cover the body, and defaults of it with their garment.

If thou hate her, put her away.] Some think this depends upon the former,
as an objection made by this people in their own defense, against the former
accusation, as unjustly cast upon them, because they had not committed
Polygamy, seeing they had put away their first wives, and that according to the
Law, Deuteronomy. 24. The Prophet answers, the Lord hates putting away, and will not
endure that they should make his Law a cover for their iniquity. Some, as S.
Hierom, understand them as words of the Priest and people in their own
defense, pretending the law of God for that they did; but most take them as
Gods words, showing his dislike of their dealing. And if the words be read
thus, as our vulgar translation has them: then they think them spoken by an
Irony, which they manifest, as they suppose by the words following, by which
they take a judgment to be threatened. And they think it is manifest by the
like, Eccles. 11.9. but seeing the words in the original will not bear the
reading, neither the second sentence will carry the sense they would have of
them; They must be thus read: For I hate putting away; or, putting away is an
hatred unto me.] It is a thing that I am so far from approving and liking, that
I utterly hate and abhor, whatsoever Moses for the hardness of your hearts did
grant unto you, and so remitted the judicial law, that it proceeded not
against you to death, as adulterers, when you had put them away for slight
causes, and married others; yet that has not excused it before me, but that it
is still a sin, and odious unto me. It is that which my soul abhors.

Says the Lord God of Israel.] This he adds for confirmation of the former.
That the Lord God of Israel does affirm and testify this; who has before
professed himself Author of the conjunction betwixt them, and witness of that
covenant: And does profess himself protector of the whole Nation of the
Israelites; and therefore with what indignation must he needs behold their
dealing with their wives? and how can he suffer that indignity, they are
offered to be put away, and others taken in their places, specially when they
are strangers and infidells?

Yet he covers the injury under his garment] The second amplification,
because they pretended law for that they did, covering it by that, as the body
with a garment, which makes him to abhor it the more, to pretend his law for
them when it is clean against them, and all that was, was but a permission by
Moses in his care and compassion of the women who were abused by them.

To the former sentence some add, [for] being a particle which has the force
not of a cause, but oftentimes of an affirmation; and to this, [because]
showing that therefore he hated it the more, because they thus covered it.

Says the Lord of hosts.] He that is able and can command all the hosts of
heaven and earth, to revenge the injuries and indignities done to his people
and daughters.

Therefore keep your selves in your spirits.] The admonition such as we have
had before: that is, seeing you know what the Lord hates, and what he loves and
likes, look well to your selves, and your own hearts; take heed of
transgressing and dealing perfidiously with your wives.

Divorce, that is, for a man to put away his wife for any cause save only for
the cause of adultery, and for adultery, Moses, does show and teach, Mat. 5.32.
Mat. 19.9. It has his force, I say unto you, that is, many assign other
causes, but I this one, only adultery. To this we may add that the Apostle
allows not a man to put away his wife for infidelity, 1 Cor. 7.12.13. only if
the infidel will depart and make a desertion, he sets then the believer at
liberty, but else he allows him not to put her away. And if not for Idolatry,
then not for other causes of far less weight.

Because as Christ himself gives the reason, Adam and Eve were man and wife
before they were parents; and they were man and wife, that they might be
parents. And again, the bond is greater, because the good is more public,
for this, for the propagation of mankind, that only for the good of the
parents. Now then if the bond be greater, and that is not to be broken for any
cause, then not this. If that, rather then this, then not this for small and
frivolous causes; but only for that which he who bound the knot, has allowed
the dissolution of it.

Because this were for man to take upon him to sever that which God has
joined,

To reprove all those who allow and contend for many other causes that divorces
may be made, besides adultery; Moses: but we must understand that that law in
Deuteronomy was a civil and judicial law: And Christ he meddles not with
civil or judicial courses, but morrall things. For they who govern common
wealths, propound this end unto themselves, that if two evils, or two
inconveniences happen and meet, they admit the less, lest they fall into the
greater. As in some Cities they have admitted stews and harlots, to avoid, as
they say, greater evils, which the law of God will not suffer in his common
wealth. And so to this purpose of marriage, when unhappy, unfit, and unequal
marriages are made; the one of these two inconveniences seemed to be
necessarily; that they who hated their wives, would either perpetually afflict
and vex them, and at length kill them, or they must have liberty to put them
away. The permission argues no simple lawfulness.
This latter was thought more tolerable, therefore it was allowed in that
common wealth; but so allowed as if God by it would make them keep their
wives, and use them better. For first, God would have him make a bill of
divorce, by that to affect so hard and cruel a husband, and to drive him to
consider what an unfit and unworthy a thing it was for him to put away one he
had enjoyed so long; for we use to weigh more those things we write, then those
we speak. Secondly, that if he put her away, he was not allowed atall to take
her again, and therefore to make him not to do it, but advisedly, when
happily upon second thoughts he would not do it. Thirdly, if he gave her a
bill of divorce, it must express the cause why he did it, clearing her that it
was not for adultery, and accusing himself that it was for some other slight
cause, which he ought and would, if there had been any love in him at all, have
covered. All which shows, that God did it for their infirmities, and would
have restrained them from it by this means; and that he granted unto them was
only judicial, that is so much as might free them from the hand of the
Magistrate, that they were not punishable by him, but not that which made it no
sin against the law morrall; and before him, they were only freed in fore
civili, non conscientiae. It is like to our law of usury which frees men from
punishment of the law if they take not above such a sum, but frees them not
from sin before God, providing for the good of the borrower, both that they
might borrow, and when they did, not be too much oppressed; but so, he that
lends is an usurer, and so a thief before God: So in this. For the Lord as a
wise lawgiver, in his judicial laws, permitted in a civil respect some
things evil in themselves, for the avoiding of a greater mischief; not to
allow or justify the same from the guilt of sin, as before him in the court
of conscience; but to exempt the same from civil punishment in the external
court before the Magistrate: such is this we speak of. Hence it is that we
read not in the Scripture of any man of note for piety and holiness which ever
used this, or ever gave any wife a bill of divorce. For whereas Abraham put
away Hagar and Ismael, it is not against this, for as he did it by the counsel
of the wife, so by the commandment of God, Genesis 21.12. And none that were
godly using, or practicing it once, though they were subject to the same
inconveniences that others were, and so shows that they held it not simply,
and in conscience lawful.

Again, they say that 1 Cor. 7. the Apostle allows divorce for another cause.
It is answered, that the Apostle speaks not of a divorce, but of a disertion,
not of putting away the wife for any fault of hers, but when she forsakes the
husband, for the faith and piety that is in him, and so e contra; for the
Apostle only says, if the unbeleeving depart, let him depart. But allows not
the believer in any sort to put away the unbeleever; nay, commands him to live
with her, if she will abide with him. And so only enjoyneth him to suffer a
disertion, not to make a divorce. And so this establishes no other cause.

Again, they say, if for adultery, then much more for crimes greater then it,
and so there are more causes of divorce. This will be answered out of the
former: for if the Apostle allow not for infidelity then not for greater; for
that is sure far greater; and if their reason were good, then would this
follow: infidelity is a greater sin then adultery, therefore ought a man to
be put to death for that, becauses for this he owes to dye by Gods law. Again,
adultery does not make the divorce, because of the greatness of the sin, but
because of the opposition of it to marriage, it is far more contrary to it. The
reason is, because in marriage man and wife ought to be one flesh. Now adultery
is that which does divide them, and make not one, but two. And so does neither
infidelity, blasphemy, idolatry, neither any such sin. For these and the like
sins are more repugnant to God, and separate men from him more then adultery,
but it is more opposite to Matrimony; which is manifest, because amongst
infidells, idolaters and blasphemers, marriage is good and lawful, though not
holy.

Other things they object, as coldness and inability of some incurable
disease, if the one go about to kill or poison the other, if the civil laws
allow it. But they are answered, that some of these may hinder a marriage it be
not, not break it when it is. In others the Magistrate is to be looked to for
help. The laws of Magistrates causing divorce for other things, if they be
capital they ought put them to death, and so end the controversy. If
criminal, of less force, their law is against the law of God, and not
tolerable.

To reprove and condemn all those who practice contrary, their lawful wives
in many years before, hearkening to such bad counselors, as Memucan was to
the King Ahashuerosh, Ester 16.19. persuading him to put away Vashti for one
disobedience, and for some miscarriage to send her away, and take another in
her place; forgetting as S. August. speaks to Polletius, that they are
Christians, and therefore that they ought to be prone and inclinable to mercy
and indulgence, and not be so hard and cruel, not remembering the example of
Christ who pardoned the adultresse. Joh. 8. showing how full of love and
compassion husbands should be toward their penitent wives, if in adultery,
much more in less things, and offenses: but these are like those who August.
speaks of, who because of their bitterness to their wives, that they might
do it with less reproof, have razed out that Chapter, or that story at least
out of it, so they could be content to raze this out; but heaven and earth
shall pass when this shall stand; and they who fear not to offend against it,
shall feel the weight of Gods anger hereafter; for his anger and hatred will
be punishment and judgment.

Not as the Disciples inferred upon it. If the matter be so between man and
wife it is not good to marry. For they are well and with good reason, checked
by him, seeing verse 11.12. as he said unto them, All men cannot receive this
thing, save they to whom it is given, for there are some chaste who were so
born of their mothers belly: and there be some chaste which be made chaste by
men: and there be some chaste which have made themselves chaste for the
kingdom of heaven. He that is able to receive this, let him receive it. For to
some who cannot abstain, marriage is as necessary as meat, drink, and sleep,
as Luther said sometimes; foollishly cavelled at by our Papists. That is then
not the use of it, but this; for men to be wary how they choose, and women how
they are persuaded, or give consent, seeing it is a knot not to be broken
again for any dislike, or discontents whatsoever, save only in the matter of
adultery. If it were a matter as common bargains be, that a man might lose his
earnest, if it were with some hazard of his honesty and good report: Or if they
were taken, as some men take prentices, upon liking; or buy horses to lose so
much, if they dislike and return them; or if Solons law were in force, that he
who did put away his wife should give her dower and portion with her again, it
were the less to be thought of; but when it is so dissoluble, not to be loosed
or broken, but perpetual, it requires a great care, when it is stronger and
firmer then the bond betwixt parents and children: Therefore should the man
take heed how he chooses, for beauty, for profit, and great portion; and not
for wisdom, and virtue, though the other things be not in the like
proportion. What is more profitable then the Be, says Saint Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 50. yet has it a sting? What fairer then a Peacocke, but the comeliness
only is in the feathers, not the fruit. So, many with their great portions,
and great beauty, have often their stings, and are not fit helps; that a man
had better buy a wife, then be bought to her, specially when there is no
parting. And better to have had the contemptible Ant, as he speaks, which is
the mistrisse of wisdom, the meaner and the more huswifely, who may soon be
worth her portion in good comfort and contentment; so the woman how she is
won, or persuaded for the person or riches, or kindred of a man, because he
is able to cloth her in fine apparel, to deck her with gold and pearl, and
many such things, having no wisdom to govern or instruct her, or to bring up
his children in the instruction of the Lord, no love but lust, for seeing the
knot is perpetual, and no cheyce allowed again, she may buy all that dear
enough. Therefore it is good to be advised in their choice, lest repentance
should come too late, and be bought too dear, and yet make no amends, for they
cannot be free. If the law of polygamy were in force, that a man might have two
wives, the one hated, the other beloved, or this of divorce, he might put her
away at his pleasure upon dislike, and so e contra, the matter were small, and
men might be as careless of this as of the other things; but when as he has
made one for one, and made the bond so inviolable, that there is no parting
till one be the others Executor: seeing things are thus, it is not good not to
marry, but to be careful how he or she marries. Chrysostom persuading men to
be careful of their souls, reasons thus: Omnia nobis duplicia Deus dedit,
duos oculos, duas aures, duas manus, duos pedes, singitur horum alterum
laedatur per alterum necessitatem consolamur: animam ver o unam dedit nobis, si
hane perdiderimus, quanam vivemus. Vide Chrysostom, he. 12. ad pop. Ant. So God
has allowed us two friends, or two servants, or two houses, or two coats, one
may supply the want of the other; but one wife, and her for life, and the
term of a man's days: how ought he to use her well and choose her carefully?
and so of a woman.

I hate putting away] Thus he first condemns this sin, because it is against
his will and mind, that he dislikes and hates it, and by this disswades from
it; not that we must conceive there is any such passion in God, or affection,
but these things are as August. speaks of anger: so of this. Non est
perturbatio a nimi ejus, sed judicium, quo irrogatur poena peccate. Aug.
It is not any perturbation of his mind, but the judgment by which he inflict
punishment upon sin. And so in the whole he disswades from this, because else
Gods judgments and punishments will come upon them, howsoever they escape
men's. Now this is not proper to this, but common to others, whence we have a
general doctrine.

Men ought to avoyde and eschew unjust divorces, and punishments, which thing
is manifest in the law, when as every prohibition is not without a threat and a
judgment. Hence that Deuter. 28.15. And in the particulars through the whole
law wheresoever God forbids any sin, usually there is a judgment joined with
it. The spirit speaks not so in vain, but that he would have men to avoid
them for those. The point is proved. Genesis 17.14. Exodus 22.22.23.24. Isay 1.20.
Romans 6.23. Solomon often threatens adulterers with shame and poverty and
disease, to restrain them from it. And S. Paul with the judgments to come in
the life to come. Hebr. 13.

Because of their corruptions,

Because as the malice of Satan has feared men,

Because by them they may subdue and tame their flesh and the corruption of it,

If fear of judgments be a means to restrain men from sin, Vide Mal. 1.6.
first effect of servile fear. Use 1.

To teach every man who would keep himself from it,

Says the Lord God of Israel.] This for confirmation; not the Prophet, but the
Lord the master, and not the Minister speaks this which is thus set out to
show the care he had of that people, that he had taken the protection and
defense of them. Now this people being a type of the Church, as well as the
Church, it may teach us this.

God is the protector and defender of his Church and children, Vide Revelation
2.1. Christ walks in the midst of the golden Candlestick.

Yet he covers the injury under his garment.] The amplisying of their sin,
that they pretended the law of God as a cover of it, that it might be no sin
unto them.

It is a thing which makes their sins the greater, Iezabell, 1 Kings 21.13.
and of them, Joh. 19.7. the Jews answered him, we have alaw, and by our law he
ought to dye, because he made himself the son of God. And James 2.8.9.

Because the law was given either for a light and lantern to keep men they
should not sin or transgress, Peter. Now to pervert it to the contrary, is
to abuse the law, and so to add to their former sin this second, and to
increase both. To make that which is good, cause of sin.

Because this argues that the sin is not in infirmity, Hierom, Oceano, of
some, who non voluntatem legi, sed legem jungunt voluntati: frame the law to
their wills, and not their wills and ways to the law.

To condemn and convince of greater sin all such sinners as do not simply
sin, Make them as Aug. of the Donat. Accipientes ergo perverso
corde-Scripturas non cas faciunt obesse nobis, sed sibi. Cont. lit. par. l. 2.
c. 1. Non periclitor docere ipsas quoque script. sic esse ex Dei voluntate
dispositas, ut haereticis materiam subministrat cum legam oportere haereses
esse quae sine Scripturis esse non possunt. Tertull. praescript. advers. haeret.
and either Fathers or Councels, or the Pope must impose a sense upon them, not
draw it out of them, and so have no error, but either by the letter or the
enforced sense they will maintain: as by these words, he that takes not up his
cross and follows me: certain Monks made them crosses of wood, and carried
upon their shoulders. Cassianus Colla 8. Cap. 3. By those words, Here are two
swords, the Popes temporal and spiritual jurisdiction. By those, The Lord
made two great lights; the Sun the greater: therefore the Pope is greater
then the Emperor. By those, They that walk in the flesh cannot please God.
Innocent condemned marriages, and stablished single life, and many such things.
Like unto these are many other, who search the Scripture, for no other
purposes, Affectus locutus est and non intellectus. Bernar. sup. Cirat. ser.
87. A.
but to see if they can find any thing in it, which will defend them in their
sin. Therefore we shall find a voluptuous man, who has no knowledge in the
Scripture, for to further his salvation, has that to uphold uncleanness, Acts
15.29. words without sense. The wanton for her painting, That oil makes a
cheerful countenance. The drunkard, that Wine was given to make the heart
cheerful. The covetous, that he who provides not for his own, as worse then
an Infidel. The Usurer has his distinctions of biting and multiplying usurie,
of lending to the poor and stranger, and to rich and brother, of putting money
into the bank, and such like.

To teach every man to take heed how he goes about to cover any sin he has
committed, Adams was, who accused both Eve and God; The woman thou gave me,
the word thou gave me. But to avoid this, we must endeavor to read the word
without prejudice, or being fore-possessed with opinion. Many men make the
Scriptures favor their errors, because they read them with resolute minds to
hold that they have, and so seek but to confirm themselves out of that they
read, and apply it to their errors, and not their minds to it; and sometimes
stick upon the letter, and sometime make it speak that it never thought;
knowing not that it is like to a fertile field, which brings forth many
things which nourish the life of man, without any seething or roasting by the
heat of the fire. Some things that are hurtful unless they be boiled. Some
things unboyled offend not, and yet having felt the heat of the fire, are more
wholesome. Some that are in their kinds profitable for beasts, though not for
men: So the Scripture has some things literally understood, which profit and
help; as, Hear O Israel, etc. Others, unless they be mitigated by the heat of
the spiritual fire, and be spiritually understood, hurt more then profit, as
that, Sell thy coat, and buy a sword; If he strike thee on the right cheek;
turn to him the left; Take up his cross, and follow me, and such like.
Therefore at all times it is not good to take the words, but labor for the
sense, specially not in those places where they seem to favor any thing
condemned in plain words in another: for there, says Augustine, is certainly
a figure.

VERSE. XVII.
Ye have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied
him? When ye say, Every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord,
and be delights in them. Or where is the God of judgment?

YE have wearied the Lord with your words.] The Prophet proceeds now unto the
last sin reproved in this Chapter, which was in this people; the former was
touching men, this is concerning God: the former dishonesty and unfaithfulness
toward men, this impiety against God. Before he accused them, as some speak,
of felony, now of treason: before for their deeds, now for their words and
speeches, contumeliously uttered against God; denying the providence of God
both over the good and bad, not providing for the one, and not punishing the
other. It is thought that the Jews being now returned out of Babylon from
their captivity, and saw both the Babylonians, and diverse other Nations and
people, to abound with wealth, ease and glory, though they served their Idols,
and themselves the only worshippers of the true God, to be in want and
poverty, they thought and spoke, that God he regarded not them that worshipped
him, but the wicked were good in his sight, and he delighted in them. Or at
least if it be not so, where is God that judges uprightly?

Ye have wearied the Lord with your words] Some think the weariness here
spoken of, is a fainting which comes from too much striving and laboring,
whence comes a remitting of the care and endeavor which he took before time.
And so the meaning they would have to be; You say the Lord, who is merciful,
and abounds with mercy, and has been ever constant in it, and prone to it;
he is now wearyed in descending and providing for, and in doing good unto those
that serve him. And so it should not be a weariness imposed upon him, but one
that is imputed unto him. And so only in opinion it should be so, and not in
truth; but how this will agree with the Prophets answer to their demand, I
cannot see, neither can it possibly: for then he would have said, In that ye
say, the Lord has no care, or has cast of the respect of his; but he speaks
otherwise. The meaning is, then you have grieved and vexed the Lord with your
speeches and reproaches and blashemies against him. It is spoken after the
manner of men; because they are so, with the speeches of others, like that,
Isaiah. 43.24. Thou have wearied me with thine imquities.

Yet ye say wherein etc.] Their answer for themselves putting him to his
proof, and to make good that he had spoken, and show wherein; else would they
not confess their faults.

When ye say.] Though not in his hearing who was able and would reproove them;
but amongst the ignorant people in companies, where they came, still
inculcating and repeating such things, and so make them cast off all fear of
God, and care of honesty and piety.

He that does evil.] Not the good nor the righteous is respected of God, but
the wicked; for they flourish and prosper, and he is good in his sight, that is
approved of God.

From men they proceed to approach to God and to impeach, and disgrace him, and
cast reproaches upon him; and being unfaithful, injurious, and unjust to men,
they are irreligious toward God.

They who are unfaithful and unjust toward men, econtra. So much this
insinuates: and that 1 John 4.20. If any man say I love God and hate his
brother, he is a liar; for how can he that loves not his brother, whom he has
seen, love God whom he has not seen? And James 1.27. Pure religion, and
undefiled before God, even the father, is this, to visit the fatherless, and
widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world. Tit.
2.12. Matthew. 25.42. Not that men shall not be condemned for irreligion, but
that this is manifest to others, and shows that there can be no religion.

Because men they see,

Because care of religion proceeds from the love of God,

To teach us not to wonder, of the Lords day, little or no love of the word,
zeal for Gods glory, care of his worship, hatred of idolatry, and such like,
but econtra much and great profaning of the Lords day, etc. We are in the age
wherein charity is grown cold, and iniquity has gotten the upper hand. It is
true which August. says, Euchi 1. ad Laur. 117. Regnat carnalis cupiditas ubt
non est Dei charitas And it will be as true if ubi, be placed before regnat,
for there can be never any true and constant love to religion, where there is
not true love to God; that cannot be, unless men be sanctified and
regenerated. Now sanctification, is as some say of hearts ease, that grows not
in every man's garden, less is it in every man's house; so not sanctification,
it is few men's hearts, and manifest not to be there where there is injustice
and dishonesty, no love of God: and would we marvel to see men perform no
duties to those they are known not to love? Love and affection being the
ground of all duty, if not, why this? Nay rather seeing the wickedness,
injustice and oppression of the time is such, we should rather wonder there is
any religion at all, then that there is no more, that there is any love to the
truth, etc. then so little.

To teach us what to judge of many men who seem religious, Gamaliels feet,
have Christ to teach in their streets and Churches, he shall eat at their
tables and houses, and yet they are workers of iniquity, live in some one
gross sin or another, of injustice and oppression, deceit or
unfaithfulness, and uncleanness; yea, after they have been convinced by the
word, remain still in them; know them to be but hypocrites, they may talk of
religion, but they have no truth of it, they may have the show of goodlinesse,
but not the power of it: They honor the word and Ministers only, as Saul would
have Samuel to accompany him, for his own honor before the people, or some
other sinister respect. It is not a sure consequent a man is careful of the
duties of the second table, and therefore religious, because hitherto by nature
he has been so; and there are some civil hypocrites as well as religious
hypocrites; but the contrary co^sequent is good: And oftentimes the issue of
things proves not to be good; for though they hold out a while in such
profession, yet at length they fall away, either when some trouble comes for
it, that they may enjoy their lives and liberties, and so their sins. And so
as Inst. Martyr Apol. Ret. Christian, made his reason, that they were not as
they were accused voluptuous, intemperate, and such like, because they so
willingly embraced death for their professions sake; for then they would have
renounced that, and deceived Princes to have enjoyed these: So on the contray.
Or else they after twice or thrice standing, are deprived of all that, as
Sampson was of his strength by Dalilah.

To teach every man that would either preserve himself from irreligion, or
approve that to others, that he seems to have, keep himself from, or to put
from him all injustice, dishonesty, and unfaithfulness toward men: For else
this will abandon religion out of his heart, and devour up all true profession,
as Pharoahs lean kine devoured his fat; and this will make men judge, as well
they may, and with warrant, that there is no truth of religion in all that
show. I deny not but a man may have the truth of religion, and should have
wrong done him if he be otherwise judged of, and yet lie in some sin against
the second table; either because he knew it not, or the strength of the
temptation has blinded him, or the blow he had by it, has for a while
stammered him, as did David. But if they be once convinced of it and wakened as
David; If Nathan have reproved them plainly, yet not so particular, yet so as
they knew they were the men, if they hold on in that sin, it will soon make
them irreligious; for it will make them out of love with the word and
Ministry; and then he that judges shall have his sentence sealed up by God:
And Christ shall make it good with that Luke 13.27. I tell you I know ye not,
whence ye are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

Ye have wearied the Lord with your words.] Their words were against God, they
spoke wickedly, and blasphemy against him.

To blaspheme God,

If this be such a sin,

To teach us to resist and reform this vice, and works with all humility, and
honor. Give him as much honor as to our garments which are more precious then
others; for how is it not most absurd that a man having one garment more
excellent then others, cannot endure it continually to be abused, and yet
rashly and upon every occasion abuse the name of God? Let us not think those
excuses of necessity, and we cannot be believed, will go for current before
God, or he provoked me; for so the first blasphemer could have said for
himself. But as no man will drink poison willingly, or upon any necessity, so
should he not take an oath. De probo dicturo dicimus, o^ tuum ablue and ita
commemora: nunc vero nomen super omne nomen venerandum, in omni terra
admirabile quod audientes Daemones horrent, temu arie circumferemus. O
consuetudinem! Chrysostom. ho. 26. ad pop. Ant. And to make a more speedy
reformation, write upon the walls of thy house, and of thy heart that same
flying book: Zac. 5.2.3. And think this is flying to judgment; and so fly
thou as fast from thine oaths: And as the Egyptians thrust Israel out of
Egypt, because for them the first borne of the King and peasant was slain: so
do with your oaths.

Ye have wearied the Lord with your words.] The Prophet says not barely, your
words are against the Lord: As Isa. 3.8. but the Lord is wearied, and vexed
with them; speaking after the manner of men, who are vexed with things that
displease them; and so noting how greatly God was displeased with these sins,
how they offend him.

The blasphemies, Ira in deo non est affectie, sea poena in nos ea vocabulo
noms nature. Chrysostom.
it argues they are offended and displeased: hereto belongs these and the like,
Psalm. 106.29. Thus they provoked him to anger with their own inventions, and
the plague brake in upon them, Isaiah 63.10. but they rebelled, and vexed his
holy spirit: therefore was he turned to be their enemy, and he fought against
them. Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy spirit of God.

Because it is the transgression of his law, Joh. 3.4.

Because he is most holy, just, and good; yea, goodness, justice, their like:
so are they distasted and displeased with their unlike, and that which is so
contrary to them. The more righteous the Judge is, the more he hates iniquity
and sin; he is righteousness it self. The sun is the greatest enemy to
darkness, because it has light of it self, and as it were, is light it self.

Because it works the destruction of the creature,

For sins past which a man has committed, Semper in amore cautel. la est nemo
melius diligit quam qui maxim veretur offendere. Sal. Ep.
To God, because where men love, they are loath to offend, and grieved when
they have displeased them: so that it is a note of a graceless child, one
without any love to his father, that is never grieved when he sees his father
grieved and vexed with his lewdness, and evil carriage: he may be a child,
but he is a prodigal son, and shall never be accepted till he return and
show himself grieved, that he has grieved him. True love seeks to please the
beloved rather then it self, and is more grieved that it has displeased such
one, As Salvia: Qui satis ailigunt non cito offendu^tur: sed si no^ facile
offendunt.
then if it had offended it self: And whereas men are more displeased of the
loss of their own pleasure, then to the displeasure of God: how can it be but
that self love is above Gods love? As ( Salvia says) whom a man is loathest
to offend, he most loves, of himself, or God: but where Gods love reigns as
it ought, there this dislike and grief will be: And if this should not make
them dislike and grieve; yet if any man indeed love himself, he will dislike
and grieve for them; because if he do it not voluntarily, As Chry. of man:
quifuerit sub vinculis bonus, nunqua^ erit profecto bonus: simulac enim vi
nullacogitur: liber ipse ad ingentum subito conversus iterum descesset So I of
this grief.
he shall do it by force and constraint; for if he judge not himself, and so
take revenge of himself for his offending of God; the Lord will, and make him
grieve, though oftentimes not as he ought, * (because such grief in judgments
is not always true grief) yet he shall grieve as he would not; for God will
bring upon him that which will make him grieve, some judgment or other, to
show that as he loves them who love him, so will he grieve those who grieve
him; which if it be come upon them, they shall find that true that a disease,
is not so soon removed as it is easily prevented. So here. And that it will
grieve them, as in diseases; not the disease, but that they neglected the
means by which they might have prevented it.

For the time to come men ought to put away their sins, the old; for it is
that which is a grief unto the Lord and his Spirit: and should not men avoid
the grieving of God? not words and works which are against God, and do
displease him? If sin were a thing which God regards not, and he were no
ways affected or moved with it; to grief or displeasure, less matter were to
be made of it; it were no great matter though men satisfied themselves and
pleased themselves, but being as it is so displeasing to the Lord, and such a
grief unto him: It is not only to be sorrowed for committed, but carefully to
be avoided. If he be a foolish son, that is an heavnesse to his mother, Prove.
10.1. What is he that is a grief to God his father? how foolish and wicked is
he? One asked this question to one about to sin: Tell me what thou think;
will he pardon thee or no? whatsoever thou answer it shall be against thy
self: Ablatus erat a peccatoribus timor, ne posset esse cautela, And tanta
animorum vel potius peccatorum caecitas fuit, ut cum absque dubio nullus perire
vellet, nullus tamen id agcret ne periret. Salvia.
if thou think he will not pardon thee, what folly and desperateness is that
to offend a mighty Prince without hope of pardon? if thou think he will; what
ingratitude, and impiety is it to offend so gracious and good a God? so when
thou art about to commit any evil, or do omit some good formerly practiced,
and as thou would be thought to have done it of conscience, and so it may
be, though now asleep. Tell me, I say, what think thou, do thou grieve
and displease God, or is it liking to him? Answer what thou will, thou shall
not avoyde, but be taken: If thou say or think it does not displease him, thou
think wickedly, and shall know it, Psalm. 50.21. but if thou think it
displease him, what a desperateness is this to provoke such a great God, so
mighty a Prince? And though thy sins bring thee in never so much pleasure and
profit for a time, never so much contentment and satisfaction, yet while God is
displeased and offended, yea, grieved with it, think the end will be worse for
thee: For do they provoke me to anger, says God, and not themselves to the
confusion of their faces? As if he said, As Cyprian de lapsis. Plus imo
delinquit, qui secundu^ hominem Deu^ cogitans, evadere se poena^ criminis
credit, si non palam crime^ admisit sun^.
do they imagine I will long bear my grief, and go mourning away, and not
pay them home, and ease my self; yes, they shall find that I have said,
Isaiah 1.24. Therefore says the Lord God of Hoasts, the mighty one of Israel,
ah! I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.
Therefore let men put away their iniquities, cease of firming, and not grieve
the Lord. Let no man imagine that this he will not part with, but yet do
something which may please God: As profane Esau with his father; Genesis 28.8.9.
for if they do, it shall be with them as with him, though his father meant to
bless him, yet God would not have it so, though men and the work bless them,
yet shall it not be so.

For imitation, if God be grieved, at the sins of others, vide Mal. 1.6. in
properties of filial fear: And if it do grieve them indeed, then will they
not use familiarity with those, whose words and works are bitter and sharp
swords, grieving God, and grieving them; where there is a necessity of a man's
calling, there to come when he shall hear and see such thing is one thing; but
where no such things, he that can take pleasure or delight in their companies,
may fear he is not affected, or is benumbed by present condition: if a little
pleasure, or profit of his own make him endure much disgrace to God.

When ye say, every one that does evil in his sight.] Their blasphemy was
spoken herein, that they said God respected and loved the wicked.

For men to think, David confessed ceazed sometime upon himself, Psalm.
73.12.13. This is that which Elihu charge Job withal, Job 34.9. For he has
said, it profits a man nothing that he should walk with Ged.

Because this is to make God wicked;

Because he makes God to do that which he accounts abominable in others,

How then shall we excuse the Apostle from blasphemy, that God justifies the
ungodly?

Well enough,

To convince many of sin, which oftentimes is heard from them, that they
censure and condemn and cast our of the favor of God, and make them to be
hated of God, who indeed are in his love and books; as if he did condemn the
righteous, and only because their lives and carriage is reproved by their
piety and study of holiness, and condemn them as hated, because they strive
to come most nigh God. To whom we may apply that of Tertullian. Apol. adversus
gentes. Quanto magis hos denotasset Anacharsis imprudentes de prudentibus
judicantes, qua^ ins musicos de musicis. Tertull. Apol. adversus gentes.
How much more would Anacharsis have noted these men of folly being unwise? yet
taking upon them to censure the wise, then for men unskilful in music, to
censure musicians. But this is not their expressed sin here, though employed;
but when they make and affirm men to be in the favor of God, and approved of
him, who are wicked and evil. How many confidently glory of themselves that
they love God, and are beloved of him, when some of them are like him, Deuteronomy.
29.18.19. being known, and noted for wicked man, and yet boast of his love?
what is this but blasphemy, to say God justifies and approves the wicked? But
if they be not apparently wicked, but civil hypocrites, and live in no gross
sin of the second table, but are void of the truth of any duty; but are
without all goodness, specially in respect of the first, whereby they are
wicked: (for if it be true, satis est hoc mali nihil boni fecisse; then is he
wicked that is not good) and for such an hypocrite to flatter himself, and
boast of his love, to God, and God to him, makes him so much the more wicked;
for he adds to his former sinnnes, this blasphemy, chalenging God that he
justifies the wicked ones, and that he approves, and likes of him, being
wicked. Now as they are guilty of this, in respect of themselves, so are they
for others; for men that are their friends by whom they reap profit, from whom
they have countenance, and of whom they are honored and advanced, be what they
will be, how wicked, or how ungodly soever; yet they tell them, and so flatter
them, as the blessed and beloved men of God.

To teach every man to take heed of this blaspemy, speak wickedly of God: And
if it be dangerous slandering a State, or a just Judge, saying he justifies
the wicked; how much more this? But if we must be judging, labor to judge
righteous judgment, and account men beloved that are good, and them hated that
are wicked.

He that does evil is good in Gods sight.] So they judged from outward things;
the ease, plenty, and prosperity which idolaters had, and for that accounted
them happy, and beloved of God; but the Prophet reproves them, as measuring
God by a false rule, themselves hated, because of their long crosses, and
others beloved because of their long prosperity.

As they are not to be accounted hated of God,

Because these states are common to both;

Because God less loves where outward things are, August. gives the reason why
he chose not the wise Scribe, or Philosopher, not the Senator, not the rich
Merchant to be his Disciples; because they would say they were chosen for such
things. And therefore these argue rather not love.

By the way, Comes Ecclesiae. And no society has had more afflictions then it;
but if it had not, yet if it will not conclude that one man is beloved, and so
two, etc. then not a multitude.

This confutes the common judgment of most men, because they knew not the law,
and themselves happy because they knew, when they knew nothing as they ought to
know; as these for knowledge, so they for riches: As among the Egyptians; he
only was accounted rich that had his heard full of white kine: So now he only
beloved that has his purse and treasures full. How usual this manner of
judging is, is too too apparent; but how fallacious and deceitful it is, may
be as apparent; like that of Sinionides, who would have wealth better then
wisdom, because the wise stood with cap in hand to the rich; so they the
wealthy then the poor, because they would have it to argue more favor, and so
judge a man how wicked, at least, how ungodly soever he be, if he have riches,
and be in prosperity and plenty, and others hated; but these condemn the
generation of Gods children: as Psalm. 73. yea, they judge and condemn God
himself, as if he loved the wicked.

To teach us, My brethren have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
respect of persons: for so much it will carry, though more. We have a proverb
which may confute these conceits, and better inform us; for usually we say
not, he is beloved of God that is rich, but he is rich that God loves, and so
he is; for he is rich that a Prince loves, though he possess him not with
lands and livings; because his love will ever administer that which is
necessary for his place and state; but this is true, especially if we
understand it of such a Prince as is not mutable in his mind, not mortal in
his nature; he is rich that such a Prince loves, which is only God. But admit
this; yet how shall a man know that God loves him, or how may a man judge who
is beloved, if not by these outward things? I answer by another question: how
do Courtiers know Princes love them, how children that their fathers love them
as children? The first is not from common gifts which are Princes larges, they
cast at all adventure, but their special places of honor and dignities. The
second not that they have meat and drink, apparel, and such things
necessary, common to htem, and servants; but that they have inheritances and
portions provided for them. So not these outward things common, nor common
graces, knowledge, utterance, etc. but particular graces, faith, hope,
sanctification, and such like; he that is rich in these, is beloved oif God.

Or where is the God of judgment?] Their blasphemy consisted on two parts: one
that God should favor the wicked and reprobate. Another that if that be
denied, it will follow that God did not judge and govern things upon earth;
for if he did, then would it not go so well with such wicked. They deny not
here by this interrogation, that there is a God of judgment, but from the
prosperity of the wicked, that he shows himself careless and remiss in his
government, and so in this thing, calling it into question.

For men to deny or doubt of the providence of God, David pray so earnestly for
Gods judgments upon the wicked, that it might appear that his providence was
over the earth, Psalm. 58. per totum. Insinuating else that they would from
their prosperity deny his providence: He notes of himself, that from their
prosperity he was tainted and infected with this, had not the waters of the
sanctuary cured him, Psalm. 73.17. And shows directly, that others seeing it by
reason of the infirmity of the flesh, and astonished at the greatness of their
prosperity, and their own misery, called into question the providence and
administration of God, Verse 11. Example of this is in Gideon, Judges 6.12.13.
Then the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, the Lord is
with thee, thou valiant man. To whom Gide on answered, ah, my Lord! if the Lord
be with us, why then is all this come upon us? and where be all his miracles
which our fathers told us of, and said, did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt?
but now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us into the hand of the
Midianites.

Because they see not how they can escape the former,

Because as S. Peter speaks,

To teach us when we hear many men wrangling and jangling against the
providence oif God, not able to look to things past, or forsee things to come.

To teach us to take heed oif any such corruption as this is, David go into
Gods Sanctuary, and consider not the beginnings nor the present state, but the
ends of these men, which will manifestly prove his providence, Gods dealing
with them and his own; like to Princes with their Hawke and Partridge, oir
their states being like the Partridge, and the other as the Hawke. The second
is, the time present, that this diverse dealing of God with them, argues his
providence, because it is the way to salvation for the one, and to destruction
for the other. As it argues the skill of the Physician and his wisdom, having
to deal with two patients; one desperately sick, and he cares not for his
health; the other so sick as he may be recovered, he uses diverse dyets and
manner of usage: So God deals with his.

THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE PROPHET MALACHY.
BEhold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and
the Lord whom ye seek, shall speedily come to his Temple: even the messenger of
the Covenant whom ye desire: behold, he shall come, says the Lord of hosts.

2 But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure, when he
appears? for he is like purging fire, and like fullers soap. 3 And he shall
sit down to try and fine the silver: he shall even fine the sons of Levi, and
purify them as gold and silver, that they may bring offerings unto the Lord
in-righteousnes. 4 Then shall the offerings of Juda and Jerusalem be acceptable
unto the Lord, as in old time, and in the years before. 5 And I will come near
to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the soothsayers,
and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that
wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages, and vex the widow and the
fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear not me, says the Lord of
hosts. 6 For I am the Lord: I change not, and ye sons of Jaacob are not
confirmed. 7 From the days of your fathers, ye are gone away from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them: return unto me, and I will return unto
you, says the Lord of hosts: but ye said, wherein shall we return? 8 Will a
man spoil his gods? yet have ye spoiled me: but ye say, Wherein have we
spoiled thee? In tithes and offerings. 9 Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye
have spoiled me, even this whole nation. 10 Bring ye all the tithes into the
storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith,
says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven unto you, and
power you out a blessing without measure. 11 And I will rebuke the devourer for
your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall
your vine be barten in the field, says the Lord of hosts. 12 And all nations
shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a pleasant land, says the Lord of
hosts. 13 Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord: yet ye say,
What have we spoken against thee? 14 Ye have said, It is in vain to serve God:
and what profit is it that we have kept his commandment, and that we walked
humbly before the Lord of hosts? 15 Therefore we count the proud blessed: even
they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God, yea, they are
delivered. 16 Then spoke they that seared the Lord, every one to his neighbor,
and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. 17
And they shall be to me, says the Lord of hosts, in that day that I shall do
this, for a flock, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that
serves him. 18 Then shall you return, and discern between the righteous and
the wicked: between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.
VERSE I.
Behold, J will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and
the Lord whom ye seek, shall speedily come to his Temple: even the messenger of
the Covenant whom ye desire: behold, he shall come, says the Lord of hosts.

IN this Chapter are two things laid down: one an answer to the blasphemies
reproved, verse 17. of the former, which is contained in the 6. first verses.
The other, an expostulation or contestation with them, of their profaneness,
obstinacy and other impiety, ad finem. For the first. The sum of it is thus.
Hitherto has God so showed himself a most equal and upright Judge, that yet
before he manifested himself a most merciful father, and never yet condemned
and punished any people, or any Nation with destruction, banishment, or other
punishment, but he first by his Prophets or by other means, endeavored to draw
them to repentance and their duty, from their madness and corruptions. And so
it comes to pass, that either truly repenting and desiring the mercy of God,
they obtain pardon, or remaining obstinate and impenient, they are most justly
punished. Now this ancient manner of showing his judgments, either privately
or publicly, God commands here to be expected: for he says he is about amost
excellent work, whereby he will make manifest to godly and sound hearted men,
the greatness of his mercy, and will give proof of the severity of his
judgments to the wicked, and those who are obstinate in their sin. The manner
how this is expressed unto us, is, by a Prophesic of two persons to come; the
one of John Baptist, the forerunner, calling men to repentance, and showing
Gods purpose both touching the godly and the reprobate: The other of the Ruler
and Savior of the world, the Judge of quick and dead, whose admitable power
is manifested both ways, both in saving of the good and faithful, and in
judgeing and punishing the wicked. The Prophecy is then of two persons, and of
their duties. The first is John Baptist, the son of Z^charias, who was and did
show salvation a coming, and teach men the means how they might obtain it,
who for the similitude of his mind, manners, studies, and whole life, was
called another Elias; for to understand this as the Hebrews did of an heavenly
Angel, is marvelously absurd, seeing our Savior Christ in the Gospel, has
manifestly affirmed, that it was John. Math. 11.10. who was sent not by the
council of man, neither came by his own ambition; but by the authority of God
he undertook this duty.

Behold.] Signifies a certain and a most famous and public thing. And
speaking of this he uses the present tense; he notes the certainty of it,
that is as sure as if it were already done, and as sure as if it were beheld
with their eyes. But there is in this thing a difference betwixt the Prophet
and the Evangelist, one giving it to Christ, the other unto the Father; diverse
reconcile them diversely, but that which seems most plain and true is this:
That some works are proper to the persons, to every one in their essential
proprieties; as to beget, be begotten, and proceed; and these are not
communicable, but some are external and common, and sometimes are given to one
person, sometimes to another, to manifest the unity of essence in the trinity
of persons. As Isaiah 6.1. I saw the Law sitting on a throne. Some think, St.
Basil and others, that it was the Father who appeared in that vision. Yet John,
12.41. It is given to the son. And Acts, 28.25. Saint Paul gives it unto the
spirit. So that which is spoken of the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 7.21. is affirmed of
the Father. Heb. 1.1. now like to these is this. The sending of John being
common to both, is by the Prophet given to the Son, and by the Evangelist to
God, or by Christ in the Evangelist, to show that he was one in nature with the
Father, and another in person. Now Angel here is a name noting an office or
ministry, and not an essence or nature. Cyr^llus

He shall prepare the way before me.] The effect of his office and ministry,
to make ready for Christ: that is, by preaching says and repentance, he might
fit men ready to receive Christ whom he preached, not to come but declared and
pointed at him being present, and already come. And so he differed from all the
former Prophets. In which state he denied himself to be a Prophet. John, 1.

And the Lord whom ye seek.] The next Prophecy is of Christ himself, and the
Lord whose coming the person is described in this verse, his power, verse the
second, and the effects of that power in respect of the godly and elect, verses
third and fourth, and of the wicked and reprobate, verses five and six.

First of the coming of Christ, which is described to us, first when he should
come, speedily or immediately; that is, when John had once entered his office
and begun to preach, Christ should come preaching also repentance and the
Gospel, and so he did. Mark. 1. Secondly the place where he should come; that
is, the Temple. By which what should be meant; diverse men have diverse conceits.
Saint Cyril understands the womb of the virgin. Saint August and Theod. the
humanity and flesh of Christ; because of that, destroy this Temple. John 2. but
neither of these can be, seeing, John must first be sent to preach, which was
not till Christ was thirty years of age: for his sending was not his birth,
but his office, or for it. So Christ's sending was not his incarnation, but his
office; for then is he said to come, when he began to preach, work miracles,
and execute his function. So John 1.26, 27. and Math. 3.11. By Temple then we
understand literally the Temple at Jerusalem, and in it the Church; for in it
Christ ought to be, to teach, to do, and execute his calling and function, by
the decree of God. And there to build himself that spiritual Temple, which is
made of living stones. And this some gather from the preposition El ad, which
signifies not only the place, but notes the cause and end as well, and so it
is both to the Temple and for it; noting the spiritual Temple to the material
Temple, and for the spiritual, that the type, this the truth.
Now the person of Christ is described. First he is called the Lord, that is
King and governor of his Church, of whom is that, Psalm. 110.1. Which Lord the
Prophet affirms that they desired, the Jews all of them, some in one
respect, and some in another desired him: some as an earthly King, and
deliverer, and some as a spiritual King, and the true Messiah, who should be
their redeemer and savior, from sin and the wrath of God, Luke 2.25.38.

Even the messenger of the Covenant.] The second description of his person,
that he is the messenger or Angel so called, because he was to reveal his
Fathers will to his people, and to be their Prophet to teach them what God
requires of them. Called the Angel of the Covenant, partly because he was
promised, and God did so Covenant with them to be their Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15,
16. and Rom: 15.8. and partly as some think, because he it is that makes the
Covenant, betwixt God and his people, being mediator of it; and partly because
he is the messenger of the new law, or the new testament, wherein heavenly
blessings are promised unto us. So St. August. de civit. Dei. 18, 35.

Behold he shall come.] The concusion for confirmation of the former to
establish the certainty of it. i. At the time appointed he shall certainly
come; so God has decreed it, and the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Some
understand these words of his second coming, as the others of the first. As
August. and Theodoret. But Cyril and Rupert otherwise, as we; and the third and
fourth verses prove it, because those things are exercises of the Church upon
earth.

In the Prophecy we first observe what touches the forerunner. That he is
sent, and the end of his sending.

I send.] Math. 11.10. It is said God the Father sends, noting the unity of
essence.

Christ is God equal to the Father and coeternall with him.

Christ he sends Ministers and appoints them over particular charges,

My messenger or Angel.] John is the inessenger of Christ, one by whom he would
make his will known: and the spiritual and heavenly verity manifest unto his
people, which is not peculiar to John, but that which is given unto all the
Ministers of God, and so teaches us a general thing.

The Ministers of God are his messengers and Angels to receive from him and
reveal to, go ye and teach. Luke, 16.29. Abraham said unto him, they have
Moses and the Prophets; let them hear them.

Because of man's infirmity, Now therefore why should we die? For this great
fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, we
shall die. For what flesh was there ever that heard the voice of the living God
speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived? Luke 1.11, 12.
Then appeared unto him an Angel of the Lord, standing at the right fide of the
Altar of incense: And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled: and fear fell
upon him. As also his superstition who would leave attending the message and
worship the messenger. As Revelat. 22.8. But he willing to have the message
rather regarded, sends it in earthen vessels.

Because they might know better and more fitly, know the infirmities of men. It
is the reason the Apostle gives, why the Priesthood was taken from men, to be
for men in things appertaining to God. Heb. 5.1, 2. Which is that the Apostle
said. 1. Cor. 9.20. Unto the Jews I become as a Jew, that I may win the Jews:
to them that are under the law, as though I were under the law, that I may win
them that are under the law. Which was, says Augustine; Compassione
misericordiae non simulatione fallacia. fit enim tanquam agrotus qui ministrat
agroto; non cum sefebrem habere mentitur, sed cum auimo condolent is,
quem^dmodum sibi ministare vellet, si ipse aegrotaret, and sic spse aliis
aegrotantibus ministrando compatitur: August. Epist. Hierom Epist 9.
In compassion pitying them, not in dissimulation to deceive them. He became as
a sick man himself, to tend the sick, not feigning that he had a fever, but
with such a tender and condoling heart, as he would be tended with, if himself
were sick.

To confute those who think any sufficient for the Ministry, Vide. Cap. 2.
verse 7. doc. 1. use 1.

To reprove all ignorant Ministers, Vide ibid. verse 6. and 4.

Vide ibid. doc. 2. use 1.

To teach men, to make conscience to hear the Ministers. Vide ibid.

And he shall prepare the way before me.] Here is John's office, alluding to an
harbindger before a Prince, whose duty it is, to prepare the way for his
Prince: remove all lets and impediments, that he may pass more easily and more
freely. So ought John according to that, Luke 3.4.5. And it is all ohe with
that. Luke 1.17. To make ready a people for the Lord. To whom he would come.
John's preaching then is the preparing of a people: and Christ comes when men
have entertained that.

Men who would receive Christ, If any hear my voice.

He shall prepare the way] John prepares the way for Christ, by preaching
repentance, and bringing men to the sight and acknowledgement of their sins:
which is manifest by his preaching. Matthew. 3.2, 3, 7, 8.

As Christ comes to none, but such as have received the word: John's coming,
and preparing, says it is like, as when the sick is admonished, oif the
coming of the Physician, that he knowing and feeling his disease, might
reverently receive him, and submit himself to him. So in this. And to this
end, belongs that. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden,
and I will ease you. As also when he sends his Apostles abroad. Matthew. 10.6,
7. But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go,
preach, saying, the kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Luke 1.76, 77. And thou babe
shall be called the Prophet of the most high: for thou shall go before the face
of the Lord to prepare his ways. And to give knowledge of salvation unto his
people by the remission of their sins.

And the Lord whom ye seck.] The second Prophecy touching Christ the Lord; In
this verse he Prophesies of his person and coming; and he is first called the
Lord, that is King and Governor of the Church.

Christ is the Lord and King,

Whom ye seek, whom ye desire.] Christ was desired, and sought for of the
Jews, two ways; as they were diversely affected, some were mere natural men:
they sought for him as a temporal deliverer: others had faith, and they sought
for him as he was a spiritual deliverer. It is like in all circumstances, he
means here, the faithful seeking of him, and their desire, who desired his
coming.

The fathers in the old testament sought for, Abraham, being the father of the
Church, and and so has the more weight, for he desiring of it, they must
needs. John 8.56. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day. And more
generally. Luke 10.24. I tell you many Prophets, and Kings desired to see the
things that ye see. And 2.25. Old Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel.

Because they had so many promises of his coming every where,

Because they had so many Prophesies and promises of his sufferings,

This condemns the Anabaptists, must needs have more then temporal things,
they looked after: when the Prophets did so often and so fully, speak of his
outward baseness and sufferings. As Isaiah 53. By whom they would not look for
outward things, so many as were enlightened; like unto the An baptist, is the
Catechism of Trent In explicatione symboli, making a difference betwixt Church
and Synagogue: they say, that Synagogue is therefore applied to the people,
that were under the law, because like bruit beasts, (which most properly are
said, to be congregated and gathered together) they respected, intended, and
sought nothing, but only outward, sensible, earthly, and transitory things;
Who, if they sought for Christ, and desired him, and waited for salvation by
him, must needs wait for more.

To teach us, that now we have the enjoying of that, Abraham, he rejoicing and
desiring him being absent, but they contemned him being present. As if he
expected, that if they were the children of Abraham, they should have more
rejoiced in his presence, and in him being come, then he could desire the day
and coming. And so ought we to do. Seeing Christ says, Luke 10.23.24. Blessed
are the eyes, which see that ye see; for I tell you, that many Prophets and
Kings have desired to see those things that you see, and have not seen them:
and to hear those things which ye bear, and have not heard them. It is that
which if we see indeed by faith, makes us happy; For though we cannot see him
now bodily, or hear him personally, as they who lived in same age, yet we may
both hear the sea him in the preaching of the Gospel, face of face. As 2. Cor.
3.18. And so ought to rejoice in him; Not as Christ says of the Jews touching
John, John 5.35. They rejoiced for a season in his light: but more constanly,
and if we have faith, so well will. S August. de doctr. Christi 1.38. says,
Juter temporalia atque aterna hoc interest, quod temporale aliquid plus
diligitur, ante quam habeatur, vilescit autem cum advenerit, non enim satiat,
animam, Aeternum autem ardentius diligitur adeptum, quam desid^ratum. August.
de doct. Christi. 1.38.
This is the difference betwixt things temporal, and eternal; that which is
temporal is more affected be fore it is enjoyed, but when we have it, we grow
weary of it because it satisfies not the soul. But that which is eternal, is
more loved when we once enjoy it, then while we look for it.

To teach us, if they desired so greatly his first coming, Bernard, in
infirmitate, ut justificat, in weakness, to justify us. This shall be in
gloria, ut glorificat; In glory, to Crown us. The spirit of God, Revelat.
22.17. Uses a borrowed speech from a Virgin espoused desiring the day of
marriage, that as she desires it much more then her espousalls, though that
she did; so ought they, and as she desires his person, though in infirmity and
baseness, but more when he is in glory, and comes to endow her; yea, possess
her of infinite riches, possessions, and glory; So it should be in a soul
espoused to Christ. If they desired him as a servant, and we ought to rejoice
in him, while he was in the shape of a servant; how ought we to desire him as a
King? If his standing at bar, where he was condemned as a Malefactor: how his
coming in the clouds, when he shall sit upon a glorious Throne, and come in
the glory of his Father?

Shall speedily come.] The time immediately after John begun his office; And
this was fulfilled, Mark 1.14.15. which serves to the proof. As that this is
the Messiah, whom the Prophets foretold of; So to prove the truth of the
Prophesies, and that the old and new Testament answer one another, as the two
Cherubims looked face to face: And that as one says. Testamentum vetus erat
veluti quodam cor tina, in qua divina mysteria tegebantur, quae suerunt in novo
Testamento reserata.
The old Testament was as a curtain close drawn; within which, divine
mysteries were hid, which in the new Testament were exposed to so open view.

Shall come] The coming here is not his birth, no more then of John, nor his
bodily coming, but the execution of his Ministry, coming, preaching,
working miracles, instituting, and celebrating Sacraments, or other duties of
his calling: which though it might give us just occasion, to speak of his
prophetical office which also may be observed, when he is called Angel or
Messenger; Yet hence may we observe, that the Ministry is not so base a
thing, as it is commonly esteemed. Vide. Mala. 2.4.

Unto his Temple.] They who literally understand these words, do by them, prove
Christ to be the true eternal God of Israel, one with the Father; for that
Temple was consecrated but to one God of Israel: and the Prophet here
appropriates it to Christ.

Even the Messenger of the Covenant.] Christ called the Messenger, because he
declares unto us the will of his Father, is the Prophet of the Church, and to
it.

Christ is the principal Prophet of the Church,

Of the Covenant.] Christ is so called, because God covenanted with the
Fathers, or promised them, he would give him them to be their Prophet.

Christ was promised to the forefathers; Oracles of the Prophets. As Deuter.
18.18. Isaiah, 9.6. This is that generally affirmed. Romans 1.1, 2.

Because he loved them, therefore he promised him unto them.

Because in his love, he desired to save them:

To teach the excellency and worthiness of the Gospel; Moses accounted but of
the sight of the promised Land a far off, and rejoiced in it; They who
enjoyed it, were much more bound to rejoice, in such a performed mercy of God.
If the Fathers, Hebr. 11.13. When they saw the promises, but as mariners upon
the sea, within the kenning of the land, and the sight of wished for Cities,
which they never came to, much more we who do enjoy them performed; least if we
delight not in the knowledge, and live in the faith of them, we see them not.
Luke 17.22.

If God in his love, promised them Christ, Chrys^. the Jews obeyed in the
candle light, how much more we, in the sun light? So if they for the
promises, we more for the performance. If Courtiers give all attendance for to
rise, more, when they are ^isen.

Behold he shall come.] This is to be understood, of the first coming in the
flesh, and infirmity, not his coming in Glory. And so some take this, to note
his coming in the flesh; so his humanity.

Christ came into the world and became man,

He shall come, says the Lord.] In this coming is noted the execution of his
office it self; and this, says the Prophet, the Lord says: as noting unto
us, that Christ did not take this office to hunselfe, but he was sent of God,
and called to it of his father.

Christ did not take this calling unto him, I will raise them up a Prophet.
Isai. 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, and has anointed me to preach,
etc. John 20.21. As the father has sent me, so send I you. John 5.37. The
father himself has sent me.

Because it is an honor to be but Gods Ambassador, under Christ,

Because all might understand and know,

Because he only knew the will of God, and was able to manifest it; No man
has seen God at any time: the only begotten son, which is in the bosom of
the father, he has declared him.

This commends unto us the special love of God,

To teach every man to hear and receive Christ, appointed him and sent him, As
Matt. 17.5. While he yet spoke, behold, a bright cloud shadowed them: And
behold there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, this is my beloved son,
in whom I am well pleased, hear him. The commandment is direct, if we make
conscience of any command; we ought of this. It is not left arbitrary; and if
it were, yet our own good should draw us to it; for by this we have the
knowledge of God, and so of salvation. So that if there be any desire of this,
we will hearken to that. But it is not arbitrary; and besides the neglect of
it, is threatened with a very heavy wrath and judgment. As Acts 3.23. For it
shall be that every person which shall not hear that Prophet, shall be
destroyed out of the people.

VERSE. II.
But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure, when be
appears? for he is like purging fire, and like fullers soap.

IN this verse, the Prophet goes forward to describe Christ, and first from his
power, which is set down to us two ways; one by way of interrogation, which
carries with it a kind of admiration; the other by two similitudes. In some
part is his power respecting the wicked, in some other respecting the godly;
the first position respects the wicked. Who may abide the day of his coming?]
That is, which of the wicked. i. the day of Christ's first coming how
tolerable, acceptable, and delightful soever it be to the godly, how weak and
base soever in the outward show, with what outward weakness and infirmity
soever he come, yet will it be to the wicked full of trouble, terror and
disquietnesse. Thus the Prophets and oracles of old did fortell it should be,
and this the Evangelists, and writers of the new Testament have showed it to
be, and that at his coming the wicked were marveilously troubled and
disquieted.

Who shall stand when he appears?] Or who shall stand to behold him?] This
touches the godly: who can with his eyes behold such a light and such Majesty?
A metaphor borrowed from the sun, whose brightness the eyes of men are not
able to behold. i. the glory of the Son of God shall surpass all
understanding, and that goodness which he shows in becoming man, and
conversing with them, for their conversion and salvation.

Who shall stand?] That is, says one, who thinking of these things, does not
faint as overcome with the admiration of it; so that as a man whose legs are
not able to bear, he falls down.

For he is like a purging fire.] The first similitude expressing the power of
Christ drawn from fire; noting out unto his, how he works both with the
godly and wicked; for as it is the nature of fire, not only to separate dross
from the metal, and join things which are of one nature together, so things
that are good, it makes more pure and perfect, but things that are impure, it
consumes and turns to naught: So Christ by his word destroys the wicked and
unbeleevers, and such as resist his will; but saves such as are chosen, making
them more and more pure and perfect.

And like fullers soap.] Or like the fullers herb; an herb that fullers
use, by which they purge and take out of garments, blots and spots of long
continuance in them, and makes them bright and pure; as it is noted, Mark. 9.3.
S. Hierom, in Jer. 2.22. The fullers herb, as it is commonly seen in the
Province of Palestine, grows in green and moist places, and to wash away
spots, has the same force that Nitre has. Signifying, that God makes the
souls of his by his grace, most pure and most holy, that their works shine
forth.

But who may abide the day of his coming?] By this some think is meant the
trouble and destruction that fell upon the wicked at his nativity. Because of
that, Mat. 2.3. and 21.10. But taking his coming to signify here his office,
and the execution of it, and so the preaching of his word, as in the former
verse. The meaning I will take to be this; None of the wicked shall be able to
abide his preaching and ministry; but the preaching and the ministry of it is
that, which will cast them down and destroy them, wound them and kill them.

The preaching of the word by Christ and his Ministers,

Who shall endure when he appears?] This sentence diverse of the Interpreters
take to be but one with the former, and the same double for the admiration of
the power of Christ, in such weakness able to confound and overturne
whatsoever, or whosoever stands against him. But others understand it, as a
distinct sentence, and read it somewhat otherwise: Hierom according to the
Hebr. Quis stabit ad videndum cum? The Septuagints, Quis far poterit ut
aspiciat cum? Simile a sole and oculis. Who that has but his natural and
blind eyes, is able to behold him, and understand the great mysteries of
salvation he brings, and is hid under the veil of his humanity? As if he said,
no natural man by his own understanding is able to see and conceive these
things, they are hid from him, or too deep for him. That which is gathered
hence is this.

No natural man of himself is able to behold Christ,

For he is like a purging fire.] The first similitude by which he sets forth
the power of Christ, comparing him to fire; and this is to show his dealing
with the wicked, to whom he is a consuming fire, and so are they rather to be
read; for neither does the word signify purging, neither yet seems he to
speak of his purging power touching the godly, for that follows in the third
verse. Therefore it is to be understood of his consuming power, by which he
confounds the wicked, and destroys them. Now generally hence I observe.

For that it is usual with the Scripture speaking of God and his power, his
justice, mercy, tender regard of his, and such like, to set them down by such
things as are common and familiar and every day or usually occurrent to the
eyes and ears of men.

And like the fullers soap.] The second similitude to show his dealing with the
godly, his own, that he is like the fullers soap, or the fullers herb, which
as it has a nature to purge and take spots out of garments, so it makes them
to have a luster and glorious show or color, making them fresh and white,
Mark 9.3. noting the effect of Christ in his, that he makes them white and
pure; for though it is true that this herb does purge away blots, and so
might note the purging away of corruptions from his, yet because that is the
next similitude: I observe this here.

Christ is to his, as the fullers soap, or the herb of the fuller, Jonathan
did to David after their league; or else in the life to come by full perfection
inherent, when they shall be like him in holiness and glory: Or it is
partially and begun in this life, whereas they are enlightened, as the Moon
by the Sun, yet have their spots their errors, so are they sanctified, and
put in a new hew, as the fuller does a cloth, or garment, yet the old threeds
appear in them. Of this is it here spoken, and for this is he thus called, and
to this tends that, 1 Corinthians 1.30. But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who
of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption: And Cap. 6.11. and such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God, Heb. 2.11. Ephesians. 5.26.

VERSE. III.
And he shall sit down to try and fine the silver: he shall even fine the
sons of Levi, and purify them as gold and silver, that they may bring
offerings unto the Lord in righteousness.

AND he shall sit down to try.] He shall sit down to try and fine the silver.
The third similitude by which Christ is described, is, from the Goldsmith. The
sum is that as he sitting in his shop by his furnace, does purge the dross
and corruption from the silver, so will Christ purge corruption from those
which are his.

He shall sit.] Noting the diligence and constancy and care of Christ in this
work. i. He shall not do it lightly or cursorily, but seriously and
dilligently, being marveylous attentive upon the work, for then we sit when we
would do any thing seriously, and with all care and endeavor. So Psalm. 1.1.
and 50.20.

And fine the silver.] Septuag. and fining as silver, or as a man that fineth
silver: for the Hebrews often omit the note of similitude; and the people,
some think is compared to silver, because they are so excellent in respect of
others, which are but iron to them. Some because silver has this of it nature,
that it is most mixed with other mettalls and mineralls, and by the fire is
made most pure: so they by the virtue of Christ's death.

And he shall purge the sons of Levi.] The parties whom he should purge;
understanding not those who were such by nature, but such as were spiritual
Priests, such as were true, and lawful Priests, dedicated to the perpetual
and holy service of God.

And purify them as gold and silver.] He expresses the same thing again and
again, that it might be more certain and firm, and to show that their purity
should be very great; for these metals are of all others most accurately
purged with the fire, lest any rust or dross should remain with them.

That they may bring offerings] Here is an effect of Christ purging of them,
that their sacrifices being polluted and corrupt before, should now be pure and
holy, and be made acceptable to the Lord. In these words are noted the purity
of them: in the next the acceptablenesse of them.

Christ is to his as a Goldsmith, this life, where as all is pardoned, so
purged, but not whole sin; neither if it were, can he be perfectly free,
because living in an infected air, they cannot but draw in some corruption,
which though it prevail not to death, yet it will corrupt them still, and
infect them. But Christ he purges them; and hence is washing of us given unto
him, Revel. 1.5. and cleansing, 1 John 1.7. And the baptism of spirit and
fire, Matthew. 3.11. that as fire he takes away dross and rust. Hence he is said
to be Jesus, Matthew. 1.21. because he saves his people from their sins: not a
culpa only, and a poena, but a contagione. Hence that Romans 6.3. we are
partakers of his death, to make us to dye to sin, and sin to dye in us,
Galat. 6.14.

Because he might make way for holiness and purity, August. de doct. Christi.
lib. 2. cap. 16. Therefore to make way for that, Christ first must purge us
from sin.

Because he might make us like him,

Because we might serve him;

To try and fine the silver.] Dross is not easily separated from metal and
silver, but with the violence and heat of the fire is it tried and fined:
insinuating unto us by this, how hardly, and with what force sin is separated
from us; how close it sticks by us, and with what a do it is separated.

The sins and corruptions of Gods children sit close to them, of sacrificing,
Galat. 5.24. Of mortifying. Collo. 3.5. of cutting off, and pulling out the
right hand and right eyes. Mat. 5.29 30. proved also by that. Jer. 13.23. Can
the black Moore, change his skin? Or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also
do good, that are accustomed to do evil. And Mich 6.7. Men will give any thing,
rather then part with sin.

Because it is natural unto them, as to others, diseases stricke the fastest,
and most heard to be cured: so it is of sin.

Because besides nature, jura didicit immitare naturae. Saint Chrysostom. But
when custom and nature are joined together, who or what shall alter them? No
wonder so much preaching, and so little prevailing with men, to remove their
sins: and the Ministry so unacceptable. Mich. 6.7. and Mal. 2.6.

To teach every man not to look to be separated from his dross,

The silver.] The Church and Gods people thus compared, in respect of their
excellency, because it and they are more excellent then any other society.

The Church is the most excellent society in the world. Golden candlestickes.
The Churches of Asia among other reasons were said to be golden, in regard of
their excellency and dignity, which they have in Gods account: that as gold is
the most precious metal, and much accounted of men, so is the Church much set
by of God; It is dear unto him as the apple of his eye, Deuteronomy. 32.10. Zach. 2.8.
It is a Diamond among an heap of pebles, the members of the Church, are
Jewels, as we have it afterward, verse 17.

Out of this place of fining and purging, some Papists, catching at shadows,
when they have no substance; would prove and establish their purgatory, where a
company of souls, are holden in with paper walls, and grievously tormented
with painted fire; which poetical fiction, and Papal fancy, as we deny, so
cannot this place possibly induce us to believe it, seeing God himself has
taught us no such thing, neither in this place, nor in any other. For what if
S. August and some others have applied this place to purgatory? for he was
never resolved, there was such a place, but thought it credible and not
impossible, there might be such a place, but never once definitively determined
of it. Euchri. ad Laurent. 69. besides Epist. 54. Maced. p. 2. Morum
corrigendorum nullus alius est quam in hac vit a locus: nam post have quisque
id habebit, quod in hac sibimet acquie sir et. Epist. Ma. ced. 54. p. 2.
There is no other place of amendment but in this life; for after this, every
one shall have, what he merited here. Now this place is apparently understood,
of purging men from the sin and corruption, and not from the punishment; And so
cannot be understood of their purgatory, where only the punishment is satisfied
for. Besides the end of this purging is, that they may be fit to offer up
lawful sacrifice to God, but in theirs the souls offer up no sacrifices, say
no Masses there. Besides this purgation is only by Christ, through the
sanctification of the holy Ghost, being the only purgation that the scripture
acknowledges, and therefore this cannot be an impeachment of that. John 1.29.
John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says; Behold the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world. Arguing a want and weakness, in his
payment, if after it men must pay for it. But that there can be no such thing,
neither can any such thing stand with the Justice of God, I prove thus: By a
reason which Tertul. deresurrectione carnis; and other of the Fathers use to
prove the resurrection of the body; For if in course of justice, it be
necessary, that the body which has been partaker with the soul, of all that
has been done, either in righteousness or sin, be also partaker of the reward
of either: and hereby there be enforced necessarily a resurrection of the body,
to be joined with the soul, to be partaker thereof. We must from the same
principle of justice conclude, that if there be a Purgatory, it should be as
well for the body as the soul: because the body has been partaker of those
pleasures and delights, for which they tell us, that the souls pay dear in
Purgatory fire. But they deny any Purgatory for the body, therefore they cannot
truly affirm there is any for the soul. For thus shall the judgments of God
be just, (says Epiphanius in Ancorat.) whilst both participate, either
punishment for sin, or reward for virtue; which just judgment they greatly
impeach, by laying upon the soul only, the punishment of those sins which have
been committed by the whole man.

He shall even fine the sons of Levi.] The parties whom he should purge, and
fine, his own, called the sons of Levi, because they were, and are spiritual
Priests.

All they who are Christ's, are truly spiritual Priests.

And purify them as gold and silver.] Thus Gods people and his Church are
compared, and resembled, not to base, but to the most excellent and most
precious mettalls.

That they may bring offerings unto the Lord.] Here is the end, why they are
purged, and purified by Christ; to offer up sacrifices, pure ones, and such as
should be acceptable. Verse 4. Now these offerings are Evangelicall, not
Legal, their persons, prayers, praises, alms, and such like. vide. Cap. 1.11.
offering.

Offerings in righteousness.] Their sacrifices shall be pure, opposite to the
sacrifices of the Jews which were corrupt, and polluted.

The works and worship of such as are purged, Vide Cap. 1.11. A pure offering.

Offerings in righteousness.] Some of our Papists, understand this place, as
that Cap. 1.11. of the sacrifice of the Mass, and the offering up of Christ in
it.

But by these real, and outward sacrifices, are understood the spiritual
sacrifices of the Gentiles and Church under Christ.

Under the Gospel, real sacrifices, to be offered immediately to God, and of
them are only required, spiritual sacrifices. vide Cap 1.11.

VERSE. IV.
Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be acceptable unto the Lord,
as in old time, and in the years a fore.

THen shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be acceptable.] In this verse
is noted, the acceptablenesse of their sacrifices: the sum is, that if every
any of the sacrifices of old, offered by Abel, Abraham, and other of the
Patriarchs, were acceptable, then undoubtedly these; those being only the
figures and shadows of the other.

Of Judah and Jerusalem.] By these is understood the whole Church, wheresoever,
in Cities, or Countries; so that some particular, should be figured by these,
as by Judah, the universal Church dispersed; by Jerusalem, the Metropolitan
City, the Apostles sea, and seat, that is Rome, is boldly affirmed, but barely
proved by Ribera; for why this more then Antioch, where Peter first sat; or
Jerusalem it self, where James was; or Constantinople, and other Cities, where
other of the Apostles were? it is more then he can give us any reason for.

As in old time, in the years before.] Showing, that God is the same to his,
and will receive as acceptably their sacrifices, and offerings, as ever he did
in former times.

As; in this place has not the force of comparison, or equality, but of
indication or showing; or, as some, of correspondency, of the thing figured.
Sicut, signifies similitudinem, non aequalitatem: as Levit. 19.18. Some would
have it to have the force not of similitude, but certainty. That, as they were
acceptable to the Lord, and Scripture, which is truth has said it, so as
certainly shall these sacrifices be accepted.

Then] When they are pure, and their offerings pure; not else, though they be
Judah, and Jerusalem, whatsoever their number, glory, and dignity is.

God accepts no man's prayers, vide Cap 1.9.

Then shall they be acceptable.] When they are purged, and not before.

A man's prayer shall not be accepted, unless he be purged, and e con tra, vide
Cap. 1.10.

As in old time and the years before.] Here is amplified the former, the
acceptance of their offerings, either by similitude, as those, so these, or
the certainty set down, that as certainly as they were received and were
acceptable, so certainly should theirs be.

It is as certain a truth, that God will graciously, Abel, Abraham, Iaacob,
the holy Patriarchs, and other of the forefathers: now this is certain, for it
is apparently set down in the Scriptures, as Genesis 4. and 22. and such: then the
other, the 11. to the Heb. proves the one, and is applied, Cap. 12.1. to prove
the other manifestly unto us. For they are brought only for a provocation to
those duties, but as an assurance of the like acceptance. To this purpose, for
prayers, is that, Jam. 5.16.17.18.

Because God, as he is ever one, and the same in himself,

Because they have the same thing,

Because they have the same spirit, helping their infirmities;

Then have we no need at all to pray, Iaacob and the Patriarchs to Abel or
Abraham, not the posterity ever to them, not the people to their Prophets
departed; not in the Gospel ever found either Precept or Practice of it; nor in
the Primitive and first Church, for diverse hundred years after Christ. If
Bellar. l. 1. de sancto. beatit. C. 20. give us it for a reason, why the
Fathers before Christ, neither prayed in particular for the Church upon earth,
neither were prayed to, because they were absent from God, and did not enjoy
his sight and presence, but were in Limbus, and not in heaven. The same reason
can e give them that for a long while after Christ there was none, because it
was doubted in the Church, whether the faithful departed out of this world be
immediately received into heaven, and enjoy the happy presence of God, or
whether they remain and stay in Abraham's bosom, or some place of rest, till
the day of the resurrection; yea, Iraencus, Just. Martyr, Tertullian and
others, thought that they abode in some part of hell, or in some hidden and
invisible place, sequestered from the presence of God til the second coming of
the son of man. Therefore must it follow that invocation is but an innovation.
But to conclude, seeing they know not our wants, nor can take notice of our
prayers, and hear us, neither can we have any certainety of it; if it were so,
and are certain from the word of God, that our prayers shall be heard as well
as theirs; We have not need to pray to them, nor reason to induce us to it; we
neither in this nor any other thing adore them, but as S. August. de vera
religione. 55. We honor them for imitation, but adore them not for religion.

This teaches us the privilege,

To encourage every one that is Gods,

VERSE. V.
And I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness
against the soothsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages,
and vex the Widow and the fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear not
me, says the Lord of bosts.

AND I will come near unto you in judgment.] The Prophet having spoken of the
effect of Christ's power touching the godly and faithful; and in them he
speaks now of it, in respect of the wicked, whom he would judge and condemn;
neither should there be any evasion from his judgments, neither any way to
escape them: Seeing he will be both witness and judge, from whose knowledge,
and power, and uprightness they cannot exempt themselves. And this is
contained in the fifth and sixth verses, and has two general parts; the first
is the judgment, the second is the certainety of it from the immutability of
God.

And I will come near unto you in judgment.] i. You do much detract from me,
and disgrace me, as if I regarded not what things were done here below, but
only beheld them a far off, and let things run as they would; but now I
will come near unto you, and seeing you say where is the God of judgment? I
will come to you not as you would, to revenge others for your sake, but to
exercise severe judgment against you. And so he speaks here of a perfect and
sensible judgment, which they had thought and judged to be far off.

And I will be a swift witness.] Another effect: i. I who am the judge, will
also be a swift witness, I will come speedily, and speedily will I lay open
all your sins, for all your windings and turnings, all your secret concealing
of sins is known to me; you think that I am slow in executing of judgment, but
I will come sooner then you think of, or will be profitable for you, for to
your destruction I will be swiftly present. And all your hypocrisy shall not
help you, for I will find out these sins which you cover by fraud and
cunning, and cloak under one thing or another, and cover by some colors: he
notes such sins as were wont to be done in secret, and for which it was hard
to find witnesses to evict them and punish them. There shall want no witnesses
for these things to prove them, though you do it in great secret; I will be the
witness of it; and for these he numbers up certain particular sins, such as
were done in secret without witnesses. The first he calls soothsayers; some
think the word signifies such as we usually call Juglers, such as make things
seem otherwise to the eye then they are. And under this he comprehends all who
use any enchantments, or magic, and have society with devils: the other
particulars see in their places as they follow.

I will come near to judgment.] They because of the long patience of God, put
far from them both him and the day of his judgment, and thought no evil
should come unto them; but he threatens them for the abuse of his patience,
that he would certainly visit and judge them. The Lord properly cannot be
said to be far of, seeing ubique totum est, and so neither to come near
properly, but he is said to come, cum manifestatur, and to depart, cum
occultatur, but ever present either hid or manifest, August. Now when he
manifests himself either in mercy or judgment he is said to come near, as
in this place.

Howsoever the Lord spare long,

And I will be a swift witness against the soothsaiers.] Another effect as
some would have it, or the manner of his proceeding; first swiftly, then by way
of witness, and evict them before he condemn them. His swiftness is not
simply, for he is slow to wrath; but in respect of them, who thought judgment
far of, and promised themselves safety, as before, he would come upon them
swiftly, unlooked for.

The judgments of God come upon the wicked,

A witness.] If he will be a witness, then a true witness, and so knows
all they do, their wickedness, else should he not be a true witness.

The Lord he knows all the ways of the wicked,

To admonish men to take heed what they do,

To teach them when they have sinned, or keep good things from them, either
present or future, and all because he knows them, and is merciful and just;
so neither the corruptions of others like themselves, approving and applauding
their evil, nor their own cunning either in staying the passage of man's
judgments against them, or in smothering humane testimonies and evidences, by
which they should be cast, shall defend them from their just recompense, and
keep evil things from them, both present and future, and all because he
knows them, and is most just. In vain is it then for them to take this
course. As it is a marveilous vain and bootlesse thing for a malefactor to
endeavor to get his examination taken by a Justice, out of the Court from the
Clearke of Assise, or to bribe and stop the mouths of those who should give
evidence against him. To inform the Judge and the Jury, when the Judge
himself was a witness of the fact, and is ready both to inform the Jury, and
to give sentence according to his own knowledge.

A witness.] i. As a guilty person is condemned by testimony of witness, the
crime proved and manifest, so will I give sentence against the wicked, of those
things which I know they have done.

The Lord proceeds not to judgment, Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. Infinite are
the examples of known sinners, as the old world, Sodom and Gomorrah, Nadab and
Abihu, Core and Dathan, etc. Matthew. 25.

Because he is most just, De non existentibus and non apparentibus cadem ratio.

Because he would manifest his justice to men,

If we see one afflicted, punished, we accounted upright, Chorah, and all their
company, Achan and his, when some sinned only in the known sin, yet others
were punished. We must conclude that it is most just, from this ground, that he
proceeds never but justly, though it be secret from us.

For imitation, first for the Magistrates, Gods upon the earth, for so will God
himself do, and they executing his judgment, ought to proceed no otherwise,
lest they fall into injustice. They ought to not to proceed for any hatred to
their person, or their profession, or for any other sinister respect upon
accusations half had, and slender, or no proofs. The Lawyers say, that it is
unjust not to weigh and consider the whole Law, but to give sentence from some
part of it. Veritatem inauditam si damnent leges praeter invidiam iniquitatis,
etiam suspitionem merehuntur alo ujus conscientiae, nolentes audire, quod
auditum damnare non possunt. Tertull. Apolog. adversus gentes, Cap. 1.10.
If the laws condemn truth unheard, besides the nute of injustice, they will
cause a suspicion that they are conscious of some unwillingnesse to hear, lest
after they had heard, they could not condemn. As Tertull. speaks: So of
Magistrates. Therefore in things not manifest, not proved, or by such witnesses
whose persons are infamous, their credit suspicions, such as may be suborned,
or do things of spleen and malice, which may happily appear to them, they
ought to take heed how they judge; and as they have power, rather reprove then
condemn.

Again, in the second place, every man ought to judge righteous judgment,
when he judges and censureth the actions of other men; but secundum alligata
and probata, not out of his own humor, out of the dislike of their person,
justifying some because they have affection to them, condemning others and
their actions, because they dislike them, or condemning some men's doings, only
for the name they have: Like unto those who being sick of a feavour or frenzy,
being deceived by the similitude of right lines drawn upon the wall, thought
they saw some deformed and ill shaped creatures: (ut Aristot.) So they out of
sick diseased and corrupt minds, do not only deprave the right lines, that
is the famous and good actions of others, but account them as vices, and turn
them to their reproaches and infamy. If that for men's words be true which
Luther used to say, Sceleratu^ est cu^ nover^ esse pium and sanu^ alicujus,
sensu^ ex verbis incommode dictis statuere errorem. Luther.
It Is a wic ked practice, when you know a man's mind and meaning to be good and
so und, yet to catch at his words (it may be not so fitly delivered) to accuse
him of error. So for men's actions, out of some infirmities, or upon some
suspicions, when they know nothing but good in them, and yet believe every
report against them: As Tertullian said it was with him, and other Christians
in his time; Credunt de nobis quae non probentur and nolent inquirere ne
probentur non esse. They believe things of us without trial or proof, and
will not examine whether they be so, lest they should be proved to be otherwise.

Against the sooth-sayers] He numbers up the particular offenders, he would
deal with, not that he would deal with men, no, but alleging these as a
taste of others, or as the sins which then ruled and reigned amongst them,
but we may observe that here are numbered not sins of one kind, not against
the second Table only, or first only, but against both.

The Lord will judge, punish, and destroy men for irreligion, e contra, and for
both, manifested here, for they are joined together as it were, in one
condemnation: proved further, from the threatenings, and executions, laid down
in the word, where we shall find the Idolater, the Sabbath breaker, and
swearer, etc. threatened, and punished as well as the Adulterer, murderer, and
other dishonest, and unjust persons. In Deuter. 28. All the curses repeated,
respect the whole law, and all the commandments, as well as any one, or of
either of the tables. Ezekiel. 22.6.7.8. Hosea 4.1.2. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. 1. Tim.
1.9.10. Galat. 5.19.20.21. Revel. 21.8. Every where offenders against both
Tables, are joined together.

Because as Jam. 2.11. He that said, thou shall not commit adultery, said also,
thou shall not kill: now though thou do none adultery, yet if thou killest,
thou art a transgressor of the law. So he that commanded obedience to the one,
and forbad disobedience, did so to the other: and so he is disobeyed and
provoked in the one, as well as the other.

Because the curse was not an appendant, to one Table,

Then under the Gospel, there is use of the law moral:

This may teach many in the Church, judging and condemning, one another, and
remember not that the Judge stands at the door, ready to judge, and condemn
them both: seeing he commands both, he will condemn for the neglect of
either: and the curse is to him, that neglects religion, and the first Table,
as well as the second, and honesty.

To persuade these hypocrites, Paul, so the Lord will not suffer him to live,
but his judgments shall be upon him, and condemnation in the life to come. But
if a man be just, chaste, merciful, and such like, though he know not religion,
be without the fear of God, and care of his service, though a swearer, and
blasphemer, a prophaner of the Lords day, yet he may do well enough, and no
fear of perishing, or judgment, and so will they speak, both in life, and
death; which is all one as if they should think, a man which is guilty of
felony, murder, and such like, must needs be judged by the law of the land; but
if not of these, though he be a traitor to the Kings person, yet is there no
fear. But if a traitor shall die though not guilty of felony, and a felone,
though not culpable of treason, by the justice of man's law; much more they who
shall separate these two Tables. Therefore must we endeavor, to be religiously
honest, and honestly religious, to avoid the transgressions of both Tables,
and to do the duties of them; lest if we separate these, we lay our selves open
to the judgments of God in this life, and separate our selves from the
comfortable, and happy presence of the Lamb, and him that sits upon the
Throne.

Against the soothsayers.] The first particular, whom he will judge, and under
this all of the like kind. Such Deuter. 18.10, 11. Let none be found among
you, that makes his son or daughter go through the fire, or that uses
witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a marker of the flying of fowls, or a
sorcerer; or a charmer, or that concelleth with spirits, or a soothsayer, or
that asks counsel at the dead.

The Lord as he will judge, and destroy all other Malefactors, For all that do
such things are an abomination to the Lord: and because of these abominations,
the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee. 2. Kings 17.17, 18. And they
made their sounes and their daughters pass through the fire, and used witch
craft, and enchantments, yea sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the
Lord to anger him, therefore the Lord was exceeding wroth with Israel, and put
them out of his sight, and none was left but the tribe of Judah only. Mich.
5.12. And will cut off thine Inchanters out of thine hand, and thou shall have
no more soothsayers. In the new, Gal. 5.20, 21. Revelat. 21.8. Sorcerers shall
have their part, in the Lake that burns with fire, and brimstone.

Because they are gross Idolaters, and the art they use, Tertul. l b. de
anima. calls second Idolatry: for as in the first, he fained himself to be a
God, so here an Angel, or one that is dead, and such like, and in both, he
seeks to be worshipped, when as then they are worshippers of the devil, taking
from the Lord, that was his, most grateful and acceptable to him, invocation
and his worship, and giving it to his most deadly and greatest enemy; How
should he put it up, and not be revenged of such a generation?

Because they bewitch, and deceive many, Simon Magus. Acts 8.9. When as
therefore they so strive against the glory of God, and salvation of others; no
marvel, if the Lord will judge and destroy them.

To stir up the Magistrate to draw forth the sword of justice against these,
and to cut off all such workers of iniquity, Thou shall not suffer a witch to
live. Levit. 20.27. And if a man or woman have a spirit of divination, or
soothsaying in them, they shall die the death: they shall stone them to death,
their blood shall be upon them. So did Saul while he was assisted of the Lord,
and Josias 2. Kings 23.24. And this as well such as hurt as help, and though
they do neither, yet if they have familiarity with a spirit, as both the law of
God, and our Land requires. And slender it is which is objected, to say now
there are none, when this place speaks of the time of the Gospel; and never
would the Apostle have threated any if there had not been such sins, and
such offenders, to have thus fought with a shadow.

To persuade men to avoid this sin,

To dissuade men from seeking to soothsayers and sorcerers, Saul, 1 Samuel 28.
This may dissuade, because they shall be partakers of their sin, and
consequently of their punishment, and be judged by Christ; for judging these,
he will judge them who communicate with them in the same sin, yet is it
lamentable and fearful to see what flocking there is of men, but more of
women, to men and women who cannot choose but be witches, and have familiarity,
or commerce openly or closely with the Devil, sometimes for things lost,
sometimes for barrenness, sometimes for long and extreme diseases of their
children; not fearing this, that Christ will judge them, then those who
communicate with them, and are the causes of their practices: for as no
receivers, no thieves; so no frequenter to those, no such, specially such as
are called white and good witches, or sorcerers; but they will say they are
bewitched, Ergo: they may seek to be helped. Answer. As if there were not a God
in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Beelzebub the God of Ekron. 2 Kings 1.3.
Or that God were not able to dissolve the works of the Devil; Did Job this,
when no doubt he discerned, as well as these, that he was bewitched? But ease
and deliverance often follows after this. In possessions, Devils depart, in
other extremities things are appeased. Answer. This is nothing; for first
Devils know how to agree among themselves to deceive men, and none of us would
trust or commit his business to one that is deceitful and perfidious. Now the
Devil is not only a liar, but the father of a lie. Secondly, if health and
ease follow, it may be it is the effect of the lawful means which was used
before, and God seeing how corrupt and impatient thy heart was to abide his
leisure, and make use of them, gave thee over to thy corruption, and let thee
have thine own will, even then to use such an unlawful means, when health
and ease was at hand, as if it had been an effect of that, to confirm thee in
thy blindness and infidelity: or lastly it may be like that Deuteronomy. 13.3. Thou
shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or unto that dreamer of
dreams: for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God with all your heart, and with all your soul. And therefore for thee
to take heed how thou hearkenst to these, lest thou bewray thou love not the
Lord. But they use nothing, but good words and lawful means, prayers, and
herbs, and simples, and such like; I answer, first with Saint Chrysostom.
Christiana mulier est haec excantans, and nihil aliud loquitur quam Christi
nomen. Chrysostom. ho 21. ad popul Antioch. Propterea namque mag is odi and
aversare quod Dei nomine ad contumeliam utitur quod se dicens esse Christianam,
gentilium opera facit. Etenim and Daemones Dei nomen fatebantur and tamen erunt
Damones. Chryso.
she is a Christian women that uses the spell, and nothing but the name of
Christ. They spoke these words before going, when they excused themselves for
the like. He answers, For that cause hate and detest her the more, because
she vilely abuses the name of God, profes. sing her self a Christian, she does
the works of an heathen, for so the Devils confess the name of God and yet
were Devils still. For they said, Luke 4.41. Thou art Christ the son of God,
yet he rebuked them and cast them out. Therefore I would entreat you to beware
of this deceit; for as they who are tempering bitter cups for children, first
rub the mouth with honey that that headless age when it shall perceive the
sweetness, shall not feel and fear the bitterness; and they who give
poysonfull herbs, give them the titles of medicines, that no man then reading
the superscription of a remedy, should suspect poison: So deal these. Besides
in their herbs, the Devil is but Gods Ape, who seeing him not do things,
but by means, uses the like that no man might suspect him, as he appeared in
like habit to Samuel. But to conclude, what color and covert soever is made,
Christ is the witness, and knows all, and he will be the Judge to reward all
who shall thus pollute and defile themselves.

And against the adulterers.] The second particular, adultery in the Etymology
of it, is a going up to another man's bed. As Genesis 49.4. Thou wast light as
water, thou shall not be excellent because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed:
then did thou defile my bed, thy dignity is gone. In the nature of it, it is
the carnal knowledge of a woman, who is bound to another man; but no doubt in
this place not only this, but under it, fornication and wantonness, and all
uncleanenesse is contained, as in the commandment.

the Lord as he will judge,

This ought to make every one fly adultery, Job speaks of, Cap. 31.9.10. But
if these be not feared because they befall in a few, and yet may he be of the
few, yet this should, Eccles. 11.9. that Christ will judge him and condemn
him, exclude him heaven, cast him into hell, and the fire that burns for ever.

And against false swearers.] The third particular, which is not set down
barely as the others, but with this addition of falsely, or vainly. The reason
is, because to swear is not simply unlawful, as the other, but a thing that a
man is oftentimes bound to for the glory of God, and for the profit and
necessity of others; so it be by the Lord alone, and taken in truth, not
swearing a lie and false thing, in judgment, advisedly and upon necessary
occasion, in righteousness, promising by oath nothing but that is lawful and
just, and undertaken for the glory of God, the discharge of duty, the appeasing
of controversy, the satisfying of others, and the clearing of a man's
innocence. But these and their like being wanting, it is a false oath, and men
swear falsely.

The Lord he will judge and condemn all false swearers, Thou shall not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain: Not guiltless, but under that bitter
curse of condemnation, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Zach. 5.2.3.4. James 5.12. But before all
things my brethren swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any
other oath; but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, be nay, lest ye fall into
condemnation.

Because he hates such oaths, let none of you imagine evil in his heart
against his neighbor, and love no false eath, for all these are the things
that I hate, says the Lord: now hating these, he must needs for them, hate
those that love and practice them; and hatred will procure judgment, wrath,
and destruction.

Because swearing by others they are idolaters: oath is not only God
ordinance, but a special part of his worship, both because there is
invocation, and because it is in the first table commanded, and of the solemn
form of imposing an oath, which was this, give glory to God, Josh. 7.19. And
the solemn rite of taking an oath among the Jews, which was to stand before
the Altar, 1 Kings 8.31. and was a custom among the Athenians and Romans.
Then to give Gods worship to another, is idolatry, and idolaters must be judged
and condemned.

Because, if rashly by him,

This may show us the fearful estate, not of a few, but of a multitude, and
whole troops of men and women, state of every swearer, the plague of God tends
upon their house, the volume of curses is hovering and flying about their
houses, and this fire hanging over them, and still by their oaths, as the
Faulconer by his Lure and hallow, calling this to fall upon him; and their case
the more fearful, because custom has made them when they swear they deny
they did, and if they be evicted for it, they account it as nothing, no more
then an ordinary speech: As Saint Chrysostom. ho. ad Baptiz. si quis jurantem
increpaverit, risus movet, jocos narrare putatur. But the same day, or the day
after that Lots sons in law mocked and despised their fathers admonitions,
the fire of God devoured them and their City, Genesis 19. So may it upon them;
pity then their fearful conditions, and fear and fly their society, their
fellowship, their families; for though thou have escaped hitherto, yet when the
flying book enters in at their doors and windows, thou may happily be
there then, and partake in their plague; but in truth thou have not escaped,
but as they by the custom of their own sin are grown senseless, so thou
by theirs art grown less to fear an oath then thou did before, and so have
got more hurt to thy soul, then ever they shall be able to do thee good to
thy body and state, howsoever thou promise thy self great things by them.

This may serve for secure men, Chrysostom dissuading from this sin, and
persuading little, at length breaks forth into this: Vtinam mihi liceret
frequenter jurantium animas exuere, and ipsorum oculis subjicere vulnera and
cicatrices, quas quotidie capiunt a juramentis nec admonitionis, nec concilii
indigeremus, quoniam vnlneram aspectus omni sermon potentius. Hom. 14. ad pop.
Antioch.
I would I might uncover and lay open the souls of ordinary swearers naked,
and set their wounds and skarres before their eyes, which they daily receive by
oaths: then there would be no need of admonition or counsel; because the
sight of their wounds would more prevail then all my words. This would I wish,
to give them the sight of their sin, and the guilt of it, but if it prevail
not, I would I could give them the sense of it, that I could make them see and
believe the judgments and punishments which belong to it, that the flying
book full of curses is long since come abroad, and is ready to seize upon
their houses and persons. That Christ will certainly as he hears every oath,
so judge them for it, and lay heavy plagues upon them. Me thinks this should
be like the Ship-masters voice, Jonah 1.6. What meanest thou O swearer? call
upon God that thou perish not. And so to be careful to avoid them themselves,
to reform them in theirs: not swearing for gain, less for pleasure or
vanity: not for courtesy, as in sitting down, and taking places: not in
passion, and such like, but remembering the law, thinking of the judgment, not
forgetting the Judge: and so not alleging excuses. Jam. 5.12. But before all
things my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any
other oath; but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; least ye fall into
condemnation.

And against those who wrong fully keep back the hirelings wages.] The fourth
particular is oppression: and the particulars of this, are several: this the
first, that when a man has hired and used another, and had his labor, and
sweat, whether he were hired by day, week, or year, whether by day, or by
whole, if they retain their wages, from them unjustly, deny it them directly,
or under some color, or diminish it; or defer it: which is an injury unto
them, he will judge them.

The Lord he will judge, and condemn, and destroy, all such as keep back
their hirelings wages, We unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness:
and his chambers without equity: he uses his neighbor without wages: and
gives him not for his work. Jam. 5.4. Behold, the hire of the laborers,
which have reaped your fields (which is of you kept back by fraud) cries, and
the cries of them that have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of
Hoasts.

Because they transgress the law of justice,

Because they are cruel, and unmercifull: Thou shall not muzell the Ox that
treads out the Corn. God speaks not for oxen, but for men, and if mercy be
not showed here, then Jam. 2.13. There shall be judgment merciless, to him
that shows no mercy, and mercy rejoices against judgment.

Then are there many in this City, many (I fear, nay,

To teach those, who have servants, or use hirelings, you, else you have a
Master in Heaven: give it them chearefully, fully, readily, not fraudulently;
else this Master shall be your Judge: and he is the witness of all your fraud:
if you have done it, do it no more: and for that is done, make them
restitution; search your books, and see wherein you have defrauded them. Deuteronomy.
24.14.15. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant that is needy and poor,
neither of thy brethren, nor of the stranger that is in the land within thy
gates; thou shall give him his hire for his day, neither shall the sun go
down upon it, for he is poor and therewith sustaineth his life, lest he cry
against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.

And vex the widows.] The second particular of the fourth kind of sinners,
whom the Lord will judge: namely, such as vex, injure, and oppress widows;
howsoever this with those which follow, are usually joined together in the
Scripture, yet because he that does any one of these, though he do them not
all, shall be judged of Christ; I will speak of them briefly and severally.

The Lord he will come near to judgment, to punishment, Ye shall not trouble
any widow, nor fatherless child. If thou vex, or trouble such, and so he call
and cry unto me, I will surely hear his cry. Then shall my wrath be kindled;
and I will kill you with the sword: and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless. Deuter. 27.19. Cursed be he that hinders the right of
the stranger, the fatherless and the widow; and all the people shall say, so
be it. Jer. 22.3.5. Matthew. 23.14. We be unto you Scribes, and Pharisees
hypocrites, for ye devour widows houses, even under a color of long prayers:
wherefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.

The sin is made the greater, because it is colored, and the punishment
threatened to be heavier; but a woe is denounced against them, because of the
simple sin.

Because they are guilty, There shall be judgment merciless, to him that
shows no mercy: and mercy rejoices against judgment.

Because God he professes himself,

This may admonish those, This will make them like unto the Lord
to defend the widows cause, when it comes before them: or what power soever
they have in their hands, as Isaial, 1.17. Plead for the widow, whether she be
rich, or poor: for if rich, it is but justice: but if poor, it is both
justice, and mercy. That many will do, and it is less thank worthy: because
they are able to recompense them by some gratefullnesse, and other means; In
whom there is a show of justice, but no justice indeed, and in truth, but a
desire of gain. The other is the harder, and as just, so merciful, and has
the promise of good from God: as in the general, Luke, 14.14. And thou shall
be blessed, because they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed,
at the resurrection of the just. Those shall be recompensed of men, these of
God. This they ought then to do chearefully, and not as the unrighteous Judge,
unwillingly, but as Job, 31.16. who would not suffer the eyes of the widow to
fail.

Then may all those, who are vexers, oppressors, Boez, Ruth 2.20. for they
soon cease to do good, both to the living, and dead; And doing thus to
kindred, what can be expected of those who are not allied to them? but that
they should leave them destitute, and soon subvert their cause, or not right
their wrong; but be readier to vex them: some, as the Creditors of that widow,
2. Kings 4. (thoughin this generally, this City less capable, if they find any
reasonable dealing.)

This may persuade every one to avoid this sin, before the Lord. Deuter.
26.13.15. Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, I have brought the
hallowed thing out of mine house, and also have given it unto the Levites, and
to the strangers, to the fathers, and to the widow, according to all thy
commandments, which thou have commanded me: I have transgressed none of thy
commandments, nor forgotten them. Look down from thy holy habitation, even
from Heaven, and bless thy people Israel and the land which thou have given us
(as thou swarest unto our fathers) the land that flows with milk and honey.

And the fatherless.] The third particular of oppression, when they injure,
and vex the fatherless: such as are without all help, and hope.

The Lord will come nigh to judgment, Ioh shows this was just with God. Job
31.21.22. If I have lift up my hand agarnst the fatherless, when I saw that I
might help him in the gate: let mine arm fall from my shoulder, and mine arm
be broken from the bone.

Reasons as in the former.

To persuade, forma pauperis: and respect the justice of it, as if they were
rich: and do for them that which is right, so shall they show themselves Gods;
for where the name is given to them, there the duty is enjoined them: Psalm.
82.1.2.3.4. For the Magistrate is specially ordained for these, not for such as
are great men, who neither will do right, nor suffer wrong: able enough to
right themselves, and defend their own causes: or not so much for these, as for
the poor orphans, widows, and such like; As the defense is for the little
coppes, and small trees of grooth, not for the great oaks, they have not such
need of fencing against beasts, as those.

Then may many men, as they must live miserably all their lives with, if they
accept them; so far different in nature, state, religion, and such like: or if
they accept not, when they, tender of purpose, such as they know, they will not
regard, then make they a further commodity of them, that they happily recover,
not that oppression of many years, if they do in all their lives. Others that
are Guerdons, and Tutors having their portions, give unto them such liberty,
that by their indulgences, they grow unthrifts, that of their possessions and
mooveables, they often interest themselves, and strip them of all, often
defrauding them of many things, wherewith they were put entrust; many feed them
with money, and inwrap them into bonds, to be paid when they come to years,
treble, and quadrible, that they are often out of their wealth, before they be
at years. Many Executors put in trust with the whole estate, make their
fathers conditions far worse, then it was: that in this case that part of the
proverb is true, There is never any dead man rich: that is, so rich as he is,
or was accounted before, and in truth was: yet Executors, extenuate, and lessen
his state, to better themselves: counting him a bad Cook, who cannot lick his
own fingers: In this number of sinners, may go many fathers in law, who
marrying the widow to enrich her to himself, cares not how he defraud the
children: many mothers to advance themselves, care not what become of the
children of their own bodies: with infinite such, which happily many men of
more experience, could better decipher them; but if there be others, not
touched by me, he that is both witness, and Judge, sees all, and will judge,
and indeed does judge, the former oppressions, in the age before, by that which
is in our age, and will this, by that which is to come. I will make your
children fatherless, and so helpless. As Samael to Agag, 1. Sam. 15.33. But
besides all this, he will fearfully destroy all such.

To persuade, all guilty persons, though not before men, Are yet the treasures
of wickedness, in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is
abominable? and set it on with verses 11.12.13. shall I justify the wicked
balances, and the bag of deceitful waights? for the rich men thereof are full
of cruelty, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is
deceitful in their mouth: therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting
thee, and in making thee desolate because of thy sins. For no restitution, no
repentance; Chrysostom ho. 5. de paeni tent. To. 5. p 734 a.b.c. 2.
where there is knowledge, and ability of all, without a man do it.

And oppress the stranger.] The fourth particular, injuring, and oppressing of
strangers: some were strangers by nature, but proselites to the religion of the
Jews; and these, I take it, are not accounted strangers, nor so called; they
had happily a note given them, and signification of it, that they were of some
other country: As 2 Samuel 11.6. Vriah the Hittite, and 1 Samuel 26.6. Abimelech
the Hittite; but they were as if they had been borne in the Land, and of these
I take it he speaks not here: but others were only peaceable in the Land and
State, living, or trading with them, and though not professors, yet not
persecuters, or open opposers and disturbers of their religion.

The Lord will judge,

Reasons first and second, as in the former.

Because no man ought to oppress his neighbor,

Because the Lord he loves the strangers,

To instruct all in authority to use their authority in the defense of the
strangers right, Thou shall not deliver the servant unto his master, which is
escaped from his master unto thee: he shall dwell with thee, even among you in
what place he shall choose, in one of thy Cities where it likes him best: thou
shall not vex him. (It was not a refuge for every wicked man, but for him that
was known to be cruelly used, and fled to them for the name of the Lord.) Then
must also be Sanctuaries to strangers distressed.

To teach us what their portion shall be from the Lord who grieve and vex
strangers; Chrysostom ho. 46. operis imperfecti.
but also strange ones, that are excluded from their own damme: So does the
true Church, and so has ours; which these men hate, and would have them
excluded, only for their own profit and gain; and therefore are they ready
to favor any against them, as much as in them is, to hinder their right, and to
pervert their justice. They tell us they grow rich amongst us, and get the
wealth when many are impoverished; but is their eye evil because the Lords is
good? or do they hate them because he prospers them? So did the Egyptians, the
Israelites: But by what means grow they rich, otherwise then by following a
lawful calling, and laboring as thou do? and if thou be poorer, it is
because thou art idler or more wicked. The Lord taught the contrary by that
Law, Levit. 25.47. etc. And by that which he allows unto them, one and the
same Law, as to him that was born in the Land, as is often showed and repeated,
save in the matter of remitting debts, in the seventh year, Deuteronomy. 15.1.2.3.

And fear not me.] The fith sort of sinners that the Lord will judge, are in a
more general kind such as fear not him; that is, such as have no continual
awe of him, in respect of his power and mercy, for these and the fruits of them
to avoyde evil and fly from finnes. Now in the conjunction of these is noted
by some, that this is the root and cause of others. i. such and such have they
done, and this is the cause, hence it comes because they fear not me.

The want of Gods fear wheresoever it is, The fear of the Lord is to hate
evil, Deu. 5.29. Deuteronomy. 42.18. and 39.9. Then the contrary where it is not, for
take away the cause, take away the effect. And so the latter is proved, and by
that Genesis 20.10.11. Then Abimelech said unto Abraham, what saw thou, that
thou have done this thing? Then Abraham answered because I thought thus, surely
the fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my wives sake.
Exodus 1.17. Psalm. 36.1. Amos 6.3. Romans 3.18.

Because as August. in Psalm. 79. Omnia peccata duae res faciunt, cupiditas and
timor: proponitur praemium ut pecces, facis propter quod cupis, terreris minis,
facis propter quod times, August. in Psalm. 79.
Two things cause all sins: desire and fear; there is a reward proposed that
thou may sin, thou do it because thou desire the reward, thou art
terrified with threatenings, thou do it for fear of smart. Now where the
fear of Gods power is, it will expel all such desire of pleasure or profit;
for fear is the strongest affection, and stops the passage of desires; as
in a coward, and one condemned. And the less fear will be overcome of a
greater, as a strong and great nail drives out a small one. Luke 12.4.5. And I
say unto you my friends, be not affrayd of them that kill the body, and after
that are not able to do any more: but I will forewarne you whom you shall
fear; fear him which after he has killed has power to cast into hell: yea I
say unto you, him fear. Now where this fear is wanting, no marvel if they
fall either for desire or pleasure into many and strange sins.

This may teach us what to expect from men who want the fear of the Lord: They
will sin for a piece of bread, banks from the sea, and the bridle from the
horse, whither will not that flow, and whereinto will not he break? such and
so unruly is the corruption of man, if it have not this bank, and this bridle
to keep it from outrage, murder, adultery, perjury, oppression, and
injustice, or any sin will be nothing in their hands. What will they not dare
to do? If Kings command, they will murder innocents, not as the Midwives: If
Queens enjoine, they will accuse, judge, condemn, and execute the guiltless;
as those wicked Judges, 1 Kings 21. did innocent Naboath upon Iezebels letters.

We learn what to judge of men, vide Cap. 1.6. first effect of fear.

That we may be free from these sins, vide ibid.

Says the Lord of hoasts.] This is added for confirmation that none should
promise to themselves safety for any outward respects, as if he could not
punish them. vide Cap. 1.4.

VERSE. VI.
For J am the Lord: I change not, and ye sons of Iaakob are not consumed.

FOR I am the Lord: I change not.] This some take as a reason to confirm the
former judgment threatened; that as he was the Lord of hoasts able to do all
what he would, so is he in himself and in his decrees immutable, as he cannot
change, no more can they be changed, Quod est 9. Be ye well assured of this,
that as I am Lord and Jehovah, eternal and without change, so are all my
judgments, and whatsoever I have spoken, that know you, they shall come to
pass in their time, and not one thing shall come to the ground, howsoever they
are not so speedily as you think executed, yet they shall, for they cannot but
be accomplished.

And ye sons of Iaakob.] And that you are not consumed and destroyed already
for these sins; do not think me mutable or your selves without merit, that
you should be spared; but this is merely from my mercy, and love, and long
suffering, I have not dealt with you according to your sins.

God is immutable,

He is immutable in his will and his decrees.

And ye sons of Iaakob are not consumed.] I change not, therefore are you not
consumed; for being in my self merciful and long suffering, yea, mercy and
patience it self, I have spared you, when you deserved long since to have
been confounded and destroyed by my judgments: and this by resemblance may we
interpret out of Lam. 3.22. It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not.

That men escape destruction,

Because sin deserving Gods anger, i. Such are our sins, that if he should
deal righteously with us, we miserable wretches had been ten thousand times
utterly undone, but we are preserved in the midst of our distresses. Ergo,
Not from us but his infinite mercy, Isaiah 1.9. Except the Lord of hoastes had
restored unto us a small remnant: we should have been as Sodom, and should
have been like unto Gomorrah.

Because without the pardon of those sins the wrath cannot be avoided, nor
destruction escaped, Tibi soli cu^ soli reddenda est ratie de peccate, qui
solus es sine peccate, Ruff. He only can pardon sin, against whom only it
is: Now he pardons sins in mercy, and so David prays there for mercy;
Gratiae tuae deputo and misericordiae quod peccata mea tanquaem glaciem
solvisti: gratiae tuae deputo and quaecunque non feci mals, August. confess.
7.2. cap 7.

This will confute the doctrine of Popery, prayers for the dead, whereby they
thought to bring them remission of sin. Breviar. secund usum Sarum in vigil.
mortuorum. O God of the faithful! the maker and redeemer of all men, give to
the souls of all the faithful deceased, remission of all their sins, that by
godly prayers they may obtain the pardon which they always desired, through
Christ our Lord. And again, Lord we beseech thee, let the prayers of thy
humble servants be helpful to the souls of all the faithful deceased, that
thou may both relieve them from all their sins, and make them partakers of
thy redemption, who live, etc. Now hence I reason, that if by their prayers
they would help the faithful, whom they presumed to be free from purgatory,
to bring them remission of sin, can they make us believe that they intend
only deliverance from the pains of purgatory, for such as are there, and not
from the guilt of sin, by their sacrifices and masses? Again, it is
manifestly false, that the sin pardoned, yet the punishment should remain;
yea, it is against the justice of God, and so cannot be unless he can cease to
be God: for the instance of David, 2 Samuel 12.13.14. and some other of Gods
children whose sin remitted the affliction remained, is not against this,
because in him it was not a punishment, but a clearing of the justice of God,
before the wicked, as the place shows, and in others they are but purgers or
preventers.

To teach the Church and every particular, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name give the glory for thy loving mercy, and for thy truths sake.
For considering the height of our sins, the greatness of our iniquities and
rebellions, whereto else can it be ascribed? And his mercy has drawn him to
spare us, partly for our selves, and partly for posterity, and those who shall
come of us: As Saint Chrysostom, hom. 80. ad popul. Antioch. for our selves,
that his mercy might draw us to repentance, and to fear him for posterity.
Parcit frequenter radici ut fructus conservet, and qualiter audi: Terah pater
Abrahae fuit Idolorum cultor. sed in hoc mundo impietatis poenas non dedit, and
merito. Nam si Deus praeveniens cadicem praecidisset unde tantus fidei fructus
exortus fuisset. Sic Esau fornicator fuit and immundus, and matricida, and
patricida, and fratricida quantum in ipsius fuit proposito, and Deo exosus.
Mal. 1.2. Quare non perditur? quare non exciditur? Bonum est vera,
dilectissimi, causa dicere, si succisus fuisset maximam eleemosynae fructum and
justitiae mundus amisisset, and qualem audi: Esau genuit Raguel, hic Zara, hic
Job. Vides quantus tolerantiae fructus esset perditus si praeveniens Deus a
radice poenas exigisset, Chrysostom. hom. 8. ad popul. Antioch.
He spares oftimes the root, that he may preserve the fruit. And hear how
Terah, Abraham's father, was a worshipper of Idols; yet in this life God
punished not his impiety; for if God had cut down the root, then whence had we
had such great fruit of faith as in his son. So Esau was a fornicator and
unclean, and as much as in him lay a murderer of father, mother, and brother,
and of God hated, Mal. 1.2. Why is he not destroyed, why is he not cut down?
Truly, beloved, to tell you the cause, it was good to be so. Esau begat Raguel,
he Zara, and he Job; you see what plentiful fruit of patience had been lost,
if God preventing had stricken the root. So of us that we might leave the
seed of the Church and piety behind us. This is mercy, but the former the
greater; else we have as little profit of it, as Terah and Esau. And it is to
be acknowledged the special mercy of God, when others perish and their works
like that they escape. As Saint August. de Not and great. 8. c. 5. of the great
salvation. Vniversa massa poenas debet. Qui ergo inde per gratiam liber antur
non vasa meritorum suorum, sed vasa misericordiae nominantur.

To teach men when destruction and calamity is at hand, Verius acjucundius
gaude bis de bona conscieutia inter molestias, quam de mala inter delicias.
August.
you shall rejoice more cheerfully and more truly with a good conscience in
the midst of troubles, then with an evil in the midst of many pleasures. Now
thus it is from the feeling of the mercy of God and remission of sin. Si Deum
benevolu^ habeas licet in furnacem cadas, ne desperes, sicut si succenseat
licet in paradiso sis ne confidas. Adae peccanti nihil profuit paradisus:
pueris been agentibus nihil obfuit fornax. Chry. ho. 4 adpo. A.
If you have Gods favor, despair not though you fall into a furnace; whereas
if he be angry you may not be bold in Paradise. Paradise did no good to Adam
sinning, and the hot furnace could do no harm to the three Children that were
innocent: And if they obtain this, it shall not only be their sanctuary thus,
but it shall be to them as a fountain whence all blessings, as rivers shall
rise and spring. It will be like the Philosophers stone, that will turn all
metal into gold; so this, all miseries into happy comforts: Even like the
Arc brought into the house of Obed Edom, 2 Samuel 6.11. that brought a blessing
upon the house, and all that he had: So Gods mercy brought into the heart, will
be the cause that they and their house, and all that they have, shall prosper
and be preserved for ever, to his glory and their eternal comfort.

VERSE. VII.
From the days of your fathers, ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and
have not kept them: return unto me and I will return unto you, says the Lord
of hosts: but ye said, wherein shall we return?

FRom the days of your fathers are you gone away.] In this verse begins the
second part of the Chapter, containing an expostulation with this people, as
touching their sins mixed with an exhortation to repentance, which of some is
accounted the third part of this Chapter. Now in this verse are both these: a
reasoning with them, as concerning their sins, and an exhortation to
repentance: the first has the reproof in general, for committing evil, and
omission of doing things commanded, and a denial of it by the people. The
second has an exhortation to repentance, with the promise of a gracious
acceptance.

From the days of your fathers etc.] The general reproof or in particular,
for committing things forbidden, and omitting things commanded; but in these
first words their sins are amplified from the time and continuance in them.
i. It is not yesterday, or a few days since you transgressed against me: your
sins are not of short time, and small continuance, but you have been long
rebellious against me, even since the days of your fathers, so long have I
been patient toward you, so much are you the more hardened in your sins,
and have the less to say for your selves, and I may the more justly punish you.

The exhortation to repentance is pressed and urged with the benefit that will
follow it: God will return to them, and by this promise would he entice and
provoke them, meaning he would declare and make manifest he was appeased
toward them, mitigating and lessening their punishments and calamities, and
restoring many blessings unto them. This of Gods returning is figurative, for
he properly cannot be said, to change either place or mind. Cujus est
deomnibus omnino rebus tam fixa sententia, quam certa praesentia. Vide August.
de Civ. D. l. 15. Cap. 25.

But ye say, wherein shall we return?] The Propher returns to his
expostulation with the people, about their sins, and here reproves them for
their impudent hypocrisy, and pride; that they said, they needed no
repentance, or returning to God, being guilty unto themselves of no sin, no
transgression, or falling away from God. i. What have we committed, or when did
we fall from the Lord? Thou calst us to return; They had so long accustomed
themselves, and not to restore, and pay unto the Lord, that was his, that now
they say, they ought no such thing; now these words contain the continuance of
their rebellion, or obstinacy.

When men once give way unto sin, and entertain it, Sodom, etc. Isaiah 65.2.
and Hosea 10.9. Ob Israel thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah. That is,
either from the time of the Judges, when they made war against the Benjamites,
touching the Levites wife, from which time they continued Idolatry, or as some,
from the times of Saul or Solomon: example of David's sin for many months, for
not repenting, he continued it, but Solomon many years.

Because the preserver of men from sin, is the grace of God: Abimelech, Genesis
20. or particular, as Isaiah 30.21. restraining, or sanctifying grace; now this
the Apostle calls fire, 1. Thessal. 5.19. or compares it to it: that as fire by
withdrawing of matter, oil from lamp, or fuel from fire, or by adding
contrary, as water; so the spirit is quenched, or forced, to recoile by sins;
no marvel then, when the resister is gone, or grieved, if there be long
continuance.

Because custom is another nature, and things by custom,

Because the custom of sinning, takes away the sense of sin: Consuetudo
peceandi tollit sensum peccati
lest feeling how it wounds, and pierces him: but finding for the present
sin pleasant, or profitable, no marvel if he continue it, and say, Prove.
23.35 They have stricken me, but I was not sick: they have beaten me, but I
know not when I awoke: therefore will I sccke it yet still.

To teach men, to take heed, how they give way to sin: part with it, and shake
it off, lest custom and continuance follow; So that when he has a will, he
shall have no power to rise out, he will be so entangled; as with him that
takes up money for necessity: he shall easily find, that he may continue it,
and be in the usurers bonds, upon good security: but when he would out of them,
the longer he has continued, the less he will find himself able, and so be
desirous to continue it, till he have stripped himself out of all: so in this,
then must he labor to rise out of them, and give no place, nor way to them.

Then it is a goodness, Vide Mal. 1.7. doctr. 1.

Now in that they had continued thus long, and were not consumed, it commends
another doctrine.

The Lord is long suffering,

Gone away from mine ordinances.] Reprooving them for their sins, he tells
them that is sin, which is disagreeing to his laws and ordinances, to his word.

That is evil and sin, Vide Cap 2.10. Doctr. ulti.

And have not kept them.] They are accused, not only because they committed
things contrary to the law, but because they did not things agreeable to it:
not only committed the forbidden, but omitted the commanded.

They do not only sin, Power out thy fury upon the families, that have not
called upon thy name. Dent. 28.58.59. and 27.26. Matthew. 25.

Because the law is affirmative,

Because they go against love, profitable to them; for so it is said, to be
bountiful, that is helpful. 1. Cor. 13.4. But specially if we consider,
Peccatum est, cum vel non est charitas quae esse debet vel minor est quam debet
August: de perfect. justitiae Cit. coelest. Ra. 15.
that every man must love God above himself, and man as himself, now to omit
any thing that is good for himself, is a breach of charity, to himself, then
so of these.

Sin is an action, but the omission, is only a privation: that is, an omitting
of that which ought to be done; how can it then be a sin, and they sin who omit
it?

There is an action, in sins of omission, thus: It is a sin of omission, not
to love his neighbor: not to come to the congregation, to hear the word, and
receive the sacrament; in these there is an action; for sometimes they are done
upon purpose, and deliberation, and so he that offends, will not love his
neighbor: will not go to the assembly; and here is a plain action of his
will; but sometimes they are omitted, because a man thinks not of them: not of
any purpose, or contempt; now here though there be not an action of the same
kind, yet there is an action repugnant to the law; he thinks not of the
assembly, because he would walk, or take his recreation: and these actions are
repugnant, to that good work; and sometimes the action is not at the same
time, but went a little before; As a man gives himself to excess, and
drunkenness overnight, and after cannot rise in the morning, to be present
there; here is an action, though not at the same time, and of the same kind,
yet that which is the cause of that omission. All sin is not an action, it is
only true of sin of commission, which is some positive act done, which the
will should not consent to do: sin of omission, is but a privation of good. As
the School, and Basil. Malum boni privatio est, caelitas ex oculorum
perditione provenit, sermon. quod D. non est author peccati. Facere cordis
cogitare est, quia corporis est cogitata proficere. Chrysostom. ser. de levium
criminum periculis.

Then many men, if they will look upon their reckonings, true repentance, must
not look to have peace, but a controversy, with God. And if Judge. 5.23. Meroz
was cursed, not for fighting against Gods people, but not assisting them, in
the battle against the mighty. If Moses was punished with deprivation, of the
possession, or fortage, of the Land of Canaan, not for dishonouring of God, but
not sanctifying him, in the presence of the children of Israel. Number. 20.12. If
the rich man was cast into the torments of Hell, not for taking away food from
Lazarus, but because he did not relieve his wants, Luke 16. How shall they
escape the curse, inherit the Kingdom, the spiritual Canaan, how not be
tormented in Hell?

Then let not men think much, Tertul. nusquam and nunquam excusatur, quod Deus
damnat. So it cannot be but sin, which God is displeased withal.

Return unto me.] In this exhortation following the reproof, there may be
noted from the Coherence, two points:

First, the patience of God toward sinners, waiting for their return.

Secondly, that none is so desperately sinful, but there is hope he may
return and be converted.

And I will return unto you.] Here is the promise annexed to the former
exhortation, to draw them to hearken to it, and obey it: a promise of
remooving, or mitigating of their calamities and plagues; and first in the
general, observe, they must perform, and do their parts, else he will not do
his.

God is not bound, Vide Cap. 2.4. I sent this commandment that my Covenant
might stand.

Again, if they repent, he will return, remove, or mitigate, their plagues,
and punishments.

Repentance is the most certain means, If I shut the Heaven that there be no
rain, or if I command the Grasshopper to devour the Land, or if I send
pestilence among my people; If my people among whom my name is called upon, do
humble themselves, and pray and seek my presence, and turn from their wicked
ways, then will I hear in heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and will
heal their Land. Jer. 18.7.8. I will speak suddenly against a nation, or
against a kingdom to pluck it up, and to root it out, and to destroy it. But
if this nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I
will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them. And 26.3. If so be
they will hear ken, and turn every man from his evil way: that I may repent
me of the plague which I have determined to bring upon them, because of the
wickedness of their works. Luke 13.3.5. We have examples David and the
Ninivites, and such like: Now I say, remoove, or mitigate, because they are not
always taken away when the party repents; After David's repentance the child
died, and the sword departed not from his house. And the Prophet Mich. 7.9.
brings the people humbling themselves under a corporal punishment.

Because God is just; Peccatum genuit dolorem, dolor contrivit peccatum, ut
lignum vermem vermis Ilgnum Chrysostom. Reason 2.
Sin begets sorrow, and sorrow destroies sin, as the wood breeds the worm, and
the worm eats the wood; yea repentance punishes, 1. Cor. 11.31. repentance
prevents, or remooves punishments.

Yet though the punishment be mitigated, it is not always remooved, because in
his love and wisdom he discernes it good, it should still remain, as a
chastisement, not punishment, both to humble them, and prevent sin in them, to
be a terror, and an example to others, and to justify himself before men.

To see the necessity of repentance, and to exhort us, to fall upon the
practice of it, eriously, and speedily: That that is threatened, may be
prevented, so that we take the right course. Rev. 2.5. I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remoove thy candlestick out of his place. There is the
threatening against the Church of Ephesus, but the next words show us the way of
prevention; Except thou repent.

But ye say, wherein shall we return?] The Prophet having reprooved them in
the general, in the beginning of the verse, proceeds now to particulars, in
these words: and this by occasion of the former words, which notes out to us,
their spiritual pride, that conceived of themselves, to have no need of
repentance, for they were righteous, and had not any such sin in them, that
they need returning.

Spiritual pride, is an odious and vile sin. Revel. 3.17. I am rich, I stand
in need of nothing.

VERSE. VIII.
Will a man spoil his gods? yet have ye spryled me: but ye say, Wherein have
we spoiled thee? In tithes and offerings.

WIll a man spoil his gods?] The Prophet proceeds to other sins, and a great
one, horrible, and impious sacrilege, which was committed by these, in
detaining from God his tithes, and first fruits: and in reprooving this he
argues, first, from the general right, then from the fact, and thirdly from
the event. The general right, is, no man ought to spoil another, or defraud
him: fraud and rapine, is a heinous kind of injury, and so the more great and
grievous, when it is joined with greatest audaciousnesse, and contempt; as if
they defraud, and rob him, to whom they owe much, whose authority they ought to
reverence, and whom they ought greatly to honor: As the Prince, and the King,
the Judge, and the Priest. The force of this reason, stands in the
interrogation, will a man spoil his gods? An argument from the comparison of
the persons, betwixt man, and God; the one so common and mean, the other so
excellent and great; It is a sinful thing, and blame worthy, for men, to
injure men, even the meanest; much more an honorable man; as the Prince; but
most wicked, and impious, to deal so with the great, and glorious God, their
Prince, and Governor.

Yet have ye spoiled me.] Here is their fact, amplified, from the persons who,
and to whom: ye, me; you whom I have enriched, with so many great, and
extraordinary blessings, and benefits, and who ought specially to honor, and
worship me, and give me all that you possibly can. The word translated
(spoiling) is used among the Hebrews, to signify the taking away of another
man's goods, and specially by fraud: As in that Prove. 22.22.23. And so the
meaning is, will a man spoil his God? that is, take away by fraud, that is his
Gods: but you have done so to me; you have taken away my goods, and the things
that belong to me, by fraud, and deceit.

But ye say, wherein?] This is the exception of this people against that the
Prophet has accused them of; and it is by denying the fact, and think so to
reject the fact from themselves, and put God to prove when, and wherein they
had done any such injury to him.

In tithes and offerings.] The Lord proceeds, and replies, showing them wherein
they had spoiled him, and were sacrilegious, in that the tenths and first
fruits, which the Lord had appointed for his Priests, and the officers of the
Temple, they had fraudulently, or violently, or howsoever detained from them.
By offerings is here understood, the first fruits, which they were to bring,
and offer to the Lord, toward the maintenance of the Tabernacle, and the
offices of it. He reprooves them here of sacrilege against God and his
worship; and in condemning of this, to aggravate the greatness of it, he
shows how affectioned Idolaters, and superstitious men are, unto their false
and feigned gods, to give to them, and and not to dispoile, or take any thing
from them: for so much the interrogation shows, Will he? He will not, but
deal most liberally with him.

Idolaters at all times, are, and have been very liberal, And thou did take
thy garments and deckedst thine high places with diverse colors, and plaiedst
the harlot thereupon: the like thing shall not come, neither has any done so:
thou have also taken thy fair Jewels made of my gold, and of my silver, which
I had given thee, and made to thy self images of men, and did dest commit
whoredom with them. And tookest thy broidered garment, and coveredst them: and
thou have set mine oil and my perfume before them. My meat also which I gave
thee, as fine flower, oil and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou have even set
it before them, for a sweet savor: Thus it was says the Lord God. Exodus 32.3.
They brake off and gave away their golden earrings to make an Idol. 2. Kings
16.3. and 17.17. They bestowed their children on Idols. Judge. 17.3. The mother
of Micha gave 200. shekels of silver, to the founder, to make a graven and a
molten Image.

Because this is a voluntary and free service, of their own heads and
inventions: now we see in all things, men spend more freely,

Because Idolatry and superstition, is natural, and sensible, agreeable to
nature and sense, and so more pleasant and delightful:

Because Idolatry is accounted adultery, an Idol, a harlot; an Idolater, an
Adulterer, passim in Scripturis. Now, as one says, non minor superstitionis
qua^ libidinis impetus adrapiendos homines. Men are as mad upon an Idol as upon
a harlot, and as they will spend all to satisfy their lust: so to follow their
superstition.

This may serve to reject, (D Bishop prefat:) they must first presuppose and
indeed prove, that it is the truth which they profess; and that theirs is the
true religion, else may any idolater in the world make the same reason for
himself, and so may an adulterer plead for favor, because he has been at
such cost and charges with his harlot, and endowed her and hers with such great
riches; but if not the one, why the other? why might not the Canaanites by the
same reason have pleaded for favor from the Israelites? Deuter. 6.10.11. Yet
it was not any motive to bring favor unto them, nay for all that they were
commanded to destroy them: And can the Church have a better guide, and
Christian commonwealthes, a better example? But it may be that they suppose
that this should prove that their superstition is true religion, because they
thus decked it and bestowed infinite cost otherwise upon it: By the same reason
may any idolater in the world, plead that it is the truth and the true worship
of God, seeing their bounty toward their false Gods has been equal in most
things, and superior in diverse to this of theirs; yea, by this reason might
many a harlot plead against the lawful and just wife, that she was not so, but
her self, because she lives in the house, and is maintained daintily, and
gorgeously, when the other is excluded and shut out in poverty and misery; but
if not this, why that? but in all this I grant them but that, which may easily
be proved to the contrary, that our ancestors in the first institution of these
things, did not intend the Popish faith and relition.

Then is it not to be wondered at, Manna, that it fitted and was tastfull to
every palate according to the humor of it; so may we more certainly say of
this, as has been diverse times showed, that it is fitting to the ambitious,
covetous, voluptuous, licentious, and every one of what affection soever; is it
any marvel then though men be marveilous liberal, when as every man that
has it, cares not what he bestows upon his humor? besides their doctrine of
merits has brought them in no small gain, specially from men who lie a dying,
who to enrich them (though they labored all their life to enrich their wife
and children) yet care not how poor they leave them then, because they are so
taught that by such means they may redeem their soul; and satisfy for many
things they else might suffer; what will not a man give to save his life when
he is upon the gallows; more in this.

Yet ye have spoiled me.] Their fact and offense, in the relation and
comparison which stands thus; they, that is, idolaters, will not spoil, but
they will cleave fast unto their Gods, and be very devout, yet ye have not done
so to me.

Idolaters often cleave faster,

It should teach us in that to imitate them, lest they rise up in judgment,
and condemn us: For all people will walk every one in the name of his God,
and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever.

Have ye.] Upon whom I have bestowed many and great things, yet have ye spoiled
me, and so makes their sin the greater.

They who have received more from God then others, vide Cap. 1.12. but ye have
polluted it.

Spoiled me.] They took away and withheld the maintenance of his Ministers,
who were the instruments and means of his worship; therefore he accounts
himself to be injured and spoiled. Hence a general doctrine.

The injury, contempt, and abuse committed against the means of Gods worship,
is held to be done against God himself. vide cap. 1.7. The table of the Lord
is not to be regarded.

In tithes and offerings.] This is that wherein they had offended, and God
complains; he was spoiled because the portion of their goods which was due to
him, they had kept from his house and Ministers.

It is a sacrilegious and impious thing, For behold I have given the children
of Levil all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their servie which
they serve in the Tabernacle of the congregation, Deuter. 12.19. Beware that
tho for sake not the Levite as long as thou live upon the earth. And 14.27.
Nehem. 13.10.11. And I perceive that the portions of the Levites had not been
given, and that every one was fled to his land, even the Levites and singers
that executed the work. Then reproved I the Rulers, and said, why is the house
of God forsaken? and I assembled them, and set them in their place. Luke 18.12.
1 Cor. 9.7.9.10.11.13.14. Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.17.18.

Because this is to rob and spoil God, Also all the tith of the Land, both of
the seed of the ground, and of the fruit of the trees, is the Lords it is holy
to the Lord. Things are said to be the Lords, either by a common duty, and as
it were the homage that all creatures owe unto the Lord as their Creator, or in
respect of his rule and government of them: for this all things are his, both
good and bad, of which that is, Psalm. 24.1. The earth is the Lord, and all that
therein is: the world and they that dwell therein. Or in respect of a propriety
and immediate right he has in them; and so are tithes, for in the other
respects the nine parts are his, as the earth is his: Then must this needs be
usurpation and sacrilege, to keep it from the Lord, and his deputies, upon
whom he has bestowed them, Numb. 18.21.

Because they are called holy to the Lord, Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. Even of
things separated by man to the Lord, which might not be altered, Levit. 27.28.

Because without this mainetenance the worship and service of God must needs
fall to the ground, Orig. Nisi dederit oleum populus ex ing^etur lu^er^ain
templo. Org.
Vulesse the people bring oil, the lamp will go out in the Temple. Then it is
impious to withdraw this.

Because it is impious to retain the hyre of a labourer in the things of this
world, and the body, is it not more to retain his who labors for the soul?
unless men think they may require his blood for naught,

Because it is impious and a breath of the eight commandment to keep a man's
own from him,

Because the withholding or withdrawing of this,

What do you account or call the mainetenance of the Minister?

I answer, renounce his patrimony, that takes the mainetenance of the Church,
which they will not yield unto; nay, reason is for the contrary, seeing that
they may use both for the better credit of their ministry, and the better
performance of the commandment, 1 Timothy 3.2. To keep hospitality. Secondly,
then should that law be in force, Numb. 18.26.28. And so there must be a high
Priest or chief Bishop to receive this, as the Pope did, and which is now
appropriated to the crown, but men will not contend for that. Thirdly, then
that law of the tithe of the third year should be in force, Deuter. 14.28.29.
which is not approved or allowed. Fourthly, then should I condemn all those
Churches and Countries where no such law is observed; but men are otherwise
maintained, (though questionless nothing so fitly and competently) as living
in a gross breach of the moral law. Fifthly, then should I free all Cities
who have not fields, nor Vineyards, Oxen nor Kine, Sheep nor other things that
are titheable, from being bound by the moral law to pay and give mainetenance
to their Ministers; because I find not, neither directly in the word, nor by
collection gathered by any, that Merchants and tradsemen were bound to pay
tithe of their merchandise and trades; but no reason, but 1 Cor. 9.11. And that
they should give mainetenance to those who watch for them, and must give an
account of their souls. These with the like reasons have prevailed with me to
settle upon this, that tithes are not due by a perpetual and the moral law,
as if nothing else might come in the place of them: Yet I say, that tithes in
our Land and Church, and in diverse other Churches of Christendom, where there
are thing titheable, have their ground from the word of God. First, in respect
of the equity of the law of God, being this, that the Ministers ought to live
of the people, and to have sufficient and competent means by them; for the
Oxes mouth must not be musled, he that serves must live of the Altar, and so of
the Gospel: which equity and substance of the law is moral and ought always
to continue.

Because the laws of the Land and of the Church, have confirmed this ancient
constitution, (which in it self is different, the general laid down in the
word, and the particular man has appointed) and so tithes may be said to be by
the law of God, because they are by the law of man agreeable to the word, which
laws God has commanded to obey. Thirdly, because tithes have Been dedicated
to the Church and Ministers, by men themselves, and in that dedication there
was neither error nor superstition. Therefore due, and not to be taken away, no
more then Ananias and Saphira might take away any part of that which they have
vowed to the Church; only, happily according to the rule of the law they may
be redeemed, but not with less, but with a thing of the same value, or rather
according to the law, Deuteronomy. 27.31.

Now further I say,

Because the Ministers lives are subject to the same wants that other men's
lives are;

Because 1 Timothy 3.2.

Because when the Minister shouyd receive all good things for his maintenance
and necessity,

Because that as the blessing of God was upon the people,

Now as for Cities where there are few or no things titheable, there the
maintenance is and must be such as the law has provided, if it be sufficient
to maintain a Minister, that labors amongst them, in such sort as he may
not be distracted with want or burdened with cares, or his Ministry disgraced
by his poverty; which if it be not, either by reason of his charge or the
hardness of the times, there ought to be an addition according to men's
abilities; and in places where the law has provided little or nothing, there
are the people bound to provide their laborers their hire; not upon charity or
alms, but as a matter of justice, according to that 1 Cor. 9.1. As he that
goes to warfare, may of duty and justice require his wages of those for whom
he fights; he that planteth a vineyard may of duty challenge to eat thereof;
or he who feeds a flock may of duty challenge to eat the milk of the
flock. Then the Minister doing all these, may challenge his maintenance of
duty, and they in justice are bound to give it him; yea part of their goods
being due to the Lord as a homage or quit rent of all their goods,
acknowledging that they hold and have all things they possess and enjoy from
him; and therefore owe all service honor and obedience unto him. Now tseeing
he has no need of these things himself, but has given hem to others, his
Ministers, by whom he will receive them, and communicate by them spiritual
things also, not taking his own for nothing; these must know that though no law
of man bind them, yet are they bound to give of their goods, and with some
proportion of the tenth, for a better rule they cannot have, to the maintenance
of the Ministry.

This accuses and convinces all those of sacrilege and impiety, jure fori,
it is not jure poli, as Saint August. in another case;and we shall all appear
before such a Judge, as no law but the law of the highest can be pleaded. And
all the laws of men shall lie in the dust, as themselve. To these may I add
donatives, which at the suite of these parasites, the Pope would give to one
man or more, the fruit of the Church to be used at his pleasure, yea reserving
nothing for the Church, but left the care to his devotion, if he could get a
man for forty shillings, or a canvas doublet; yea, of this sort are these
leases allowed by them to be let by the patron, Bishop, or incumbent, to alien
ate these things from the Ministry, and then rob the Church and spoil the
Lord. To these I may add portions and pensions, immunities, privileges,
customs, and prescriptions, which also came from them, and have crept into
reformed Churches. All which, are their kind and measure, guilty of this
sacrilege, but there are other without pretense of law, which rob God and the
Church. As patrons, who taken for the defense of the Church, who think they
may bestow the living of the Church as they think best, and therefore lay them
to their houses for provision, and get a Chaplain, like one of the knights of
the post, that cares not for an oath, Upon hope of better preferment.
to swear he is free from simonie, when he has agreed for a living of an 100.
pound per annum, as the Levite, Judge. 17.10. which arises from either the
blindness of their minds, or the love of wordly things, or envy and evilnesse
of their eye and heart; but whatsoever the cause is, the fact is no less then
sacrilege, and they to answer as before; such also as abuse their Ministers by
fraud or cunning, or power to detain part of the due, or for the quality of
the tith, to pay the worst and vilest unto them.

VERSE. IX.
Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have spoiled me, even this whole nation.

YE are cursed with a curse.] This verse contains the event; Gods curse upon
them, for that they had done, as a proof they had sinned, else had not such a
thing, come from the just God: he cursed them with penury, and want, and
famine; they pinched him, and he them; yea they had thought in the famine to
have kept the more to themselves, and they had the less, for keeping from him
that which was his; for spoiling him, he justly and worthily spoiled them; and
so by their own craft, had they deceived themselves, and diminished their
store, when they thought to have increased it; And so he points them out the
cause, why this was befallen them.

Even this whole nation.] The subject of the punishment, the same who were the
subject of the sin; even all, rich, and poor, high, and low, from the
highest, to the lowest, had spoiled God; and therefore he laid his plague, as
large, and with as full extent. The judgment and curse of God upon this
people, was a famine, as the verses following show. And they having pinched
him, he does deal so with them, paies them home in the same kind. In the
general thus:

It is a just and no unusual thing with God, to punish men in the like kind,
Vide Cap. 1.5. Your eyes shall see it.

Now for the particular, that the curse, and this curse, is upon such as spoil
the Lord, and his Church, we observe.

God will justly punish with his curses, and specially with famine, and
scarcity, Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5.1.2. etc. does prove it; the curse being
upon them for withholding that from the Lord, they had voluntarily given unto
him, for the curse ws not for the lie, and dissembling, though it were the
heavier for that, they having bound two sins together; like to this, though
not in all things, the same is that, Hag. 1.6.9. Ye have sown much, and bring
in lit tle: ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled:
ye cloth you, but ye be not warm: and he that earneth wages, puts the wages
into a broken bag: ye looked for much, ana lo it came to little, and when ye
brought it home, I did blow upon it. And why, says the Lord of Hoasts? Because
of mine house that is wast, and ye run every man unto his own house. And
Deuter. 26.12.13.15. when they have given the tithes to the Leites, they may
pray and expect a blessing; it seems therefore to teach, that without that,
the curse must be upon them.

Because it is just with him, to curse those who hinder his worship, Elies
sons, for making his sacrifices to be abhorred: Sam. 2. how then by whom they
are hindered from being performed at all?

Because he will curse those,

Because it is just with God, to deny men food for the body,

Hence we may observe, Paul professes, that he took wates, 2. Cor. 11.8.
though he oftentimes holily boasts with the Corinthians, that he preached
freely, and took but what was voluntarily given, as likewise others did: lest
if they should have demanded the tithes and Priests livings, they might have
been thought, that gain was rather sought by them, then the glory of God, and
salvation of his people: And therefore the Apostle Paul wrought with his hands,
before he would give any such scandal, having gifts that were extraordinary,
that without study, they were able to preach: Besides, that similitude of
Chrysostom. is not without sense, That as a new Physician coming unknown into a
City, at the first. will administer to all, and heal all gratis, that he may
be known, but his skill being known, will after take wages: so Christ at first
in his disciples, preached freely, but after when he had begot faith in men,
then he took his due, specially extraordinary gifts ceasing, that they did all
things with extreme labor, for the good of their people: neither in reason
can they be alms; because they are wages or a reward of their labor. 1. Tim.
5.18. The labourer is worthy of his reward, and alms do exceed the desert of
the beggar, or almsmen, but not in these things, seeing, 1. Cor. 9.11. If we
have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your
carnal things? And there is no comparison, betwixt spiritual and carnal
things, but specially seeing Gods curse upon them, who do withhold it from them.

To teach men, Male parta, male dilabuntur. And if curses be not upon many, yet
as Jam. 5.1. they shall come upon them; and God will take as much from them
another way, as they do this way from him. Let me use the words of August. The
Lord says, give me tithes, else if thou will not give me the tenth, I will
take away the nine parts. And doubtless, many men if they could discern this,
as well as other things, whereby they have sustained loss, they should find
that they have gained little at the years end by keeping the Lords due, from
his Ministers, but have lost a great deal more by it.

For ye have spoiled me, even this whole nation.] The repetition of the cause
of the curse, showing how justly he had generally sent this plague and curse
upon them, because they were generally thus corrupted.

When sins are grown general, it is usual and just with the Lord,

VERSE. X.
Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord, of hosts, if I will not open
the windows of Heaven unto you, and power you out a blessing without measure.

BRing ye all the tithes into the siore house.] Having thus reproved and
threatened them, he begins to exhort them, to change that course, and leave
their corruption, promising that he would change things to the better, so they
would change.

Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse.] The exhortation not any longer
to deal fraudulently with God, to bring what you list, and keep back what you
list; but bring my whole due, and all the tithes into the treasure, that the
Levites and Priests, may be nourished, who do me service, and serve at the
Altar; or as some, that my worship may still be maintained, the fire and lamps
go not out.

Prove me now herewith.] The exhortation is enforced, first, by a promise of
great increase, contrary to their own opinions, whereas they thought they
should have less, he promises it should be far better with them. The manner
is thus, he would have them make proof of him, bring the tithes, and make
trial if he will not be constant in his goodness and bountiful in giving; do
it but for one year, and the next, which if it should come to pass, according
to this, the Prophet says, yea and much more abundant, then let them hold on;
but if not, then for hereafter let them do as pleases them. But this is not
against that, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6. where men are
forbidden to try the Lord, in things not written or commanded, but here they
are commanded.

If I will not open the windows of Heaven.] Namely, to make plenty, for
drought made ever a dearth with them; and so he promises abundance of rain
which ever made plenty. i. I will send and shower down on you as much rain,
as if the windows of Heaven were open. The manner of speech is an oath, and so
set down imperfectly, and is thus to be supplied; else account me a liar, or
such like: for it is usual with the Scripture, that things which are fearful
to be spoken, or carry with them blasphemy, to be silent, and let men rather
conceive of them, then utter them, or use some honest and comely speech.

And power you out a blessing.] Because the windows of Heaven were once opened
for a judgment; Genesis 7. and might so be again, therefore he expresses his
meaning, that it should be for a blessing, to make things prosper and
fruitful, he sending them the first rain and the latter, in the earing and
the harvest.

Without measure.] The original, that shall not suffice. i. I will give you
such an abundance of fruit, that your garners and barns shall not suffice to
contain them; as the rich man's barnes did not suffice, but made him consult to
make greater. Some interpret these words, more then enough, as much as should
suffice and more, that they should have such abundance, that there should be
sufficient, and more then they needed: and the more to confirm them he adds
the next verse.

VERSE. XI.
And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destory the
fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the field, says the
Lord of Hosts.

AND I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes.] I will not only give you
abundance of rain, but take from you other devourers of the fruits of the
earth, which it has brought forth: meaning the Caterpiller, Cankerworme,
Grasshopper, etc. by which he did as often afflict them with famine, as by want
of rain. And so God destroying these devourers, they should have the fruits of
the earth, and not be deceived of their hope, when they looked for the fruit of
the vine; for God prospering, nothing shall devour. The exhortation is to pay
tithes, and deal faithfully to bring all unto him.

Men ought to give to God and to his Church and Ministry, his whole due and
full right, to deal faithfully with him, and give all their tithsas, here; and
all their honor, their double honor; 1. Tim. 5.15.16. and that wholly, not in
part: so much is also insinuated by that, Levit. 27.31.33. The Lord would not,
that the Levites should gain out of other men's losses, but because the people
used to make a gain craftily, by turning the tithe into money; he meets here
with their deceit, lest the Levite should lose any thing of his due; which is
also the reason, that God would suffer no eprmutation or commutation fo the
beast, or redemption: because then nothing that was good should have come to
the Levites, no far or well fed beast; and so he should not have had his due;
because they were so griping and covetous; and so their evil manners have
brought forth a good law. To these I add, Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy
riches, and with the first fruits of all thine increase. Acts 5. Gal. 6.6. Let
him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him, partaker of all
his goods.

Because they have as much right to the one part as another,

Because if he labor carefully and painfully,

Reprofe of many, who though they give somewhat to the Minister, one would
think worthy of his tiths? for though to one Minister some might be like them.
Gal. 4.14.15. The trial of me which was in my flesh, ye despised not, neither
abhorred: but ye received me as an Angel of God, yea, as Christ Jesus. What was
then year felicity? for I bear you record, that if it had been possible, you
would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them unto me. Who yet
afterward changed; so do they: But that which is due, is due, whatsoever he
be, and howsoever he deal, or how worthy, or unworthy, they must deal
faithfully: yet the unfaithful servant, must remember that he is subject to
his judgment, who condemned the slothful and unprofitable servant, and cast
him into utter darkness.

To persuade men to deal faithfully with the Lord, Frederick said, de papa and
clericis, of the Pope and his clergy, Detrahamus illis nocentes divitias, hoc
enim facere opus est charitatis.
so say they,* Let us take from them the riches that do hurt them, for this is
a work of charity. I answer, I plead not for too much, but for a convenient
maintenance; I commend them not, that are worse by their abundance, yet are
they men like others, and have the same infirmities, and too many of these
objectors, though not to all, may I say: hypocrites, pull out the beam out of
your own eyes; who more corrupt, careless, and proud, then they by their
abundance? Yet would they think it a bad conclusion, that they should have
their riches withheld from them. But do they think the portion of tithes, and
the like; too much for them? happily they are unequally divided by the law, let
that be remedied, and there will be found little enough. But is this to much?
What think they of Gods proportion, who allowed to his, not only tithes, but
first fruit and offerings, which came to no small matter? Besides, as much land
as the greatest City came to, if the description of Saint Hierom be true, who
ad Dardanum says, that the length from Dan to Beersheba was 160. miles; the
breadth from Ioppa to Bethleem, 46. miles. Now the Levites portion of land was
48. Cities, Number. 35.7. every City had in Suburbs, 2000. Cubits from the wall
round, verse 5. which will afford a large portion to the Levites of this land.
And is it too much now for the Ministers to have proportionable tenths, and a
little glebe? But let these men take heed, lest the love of the world, and the
deceitfulnes of riches, have not excluded the love of God our Savior, as Joh.
and the care of his worship and honor, and lest the envy and disdain, which
usually is in the world, toward the Ministry be in them, when they think
nothing enough for themselves, to have and join house to house, and land to
land, till they dwell as Princes of the earth alone; but if any portion be
allotted to the servants of God, as a reward not only of their former studies,
but also of their present labors, it is thought too much; and of them who will
give the Lawiers freely, for the maintenance of their titles, and often but
quarrels; nd to the Physician a large fee for taking care of their bodies; but
the Minister a small pittance, for the saving of their souls: which of many,
make men fear, they never reaped spiritual things by us, though they hear us
often, because they never part with any temporal things to them, or not
without grudging and repining, or but in a marvelous slack and pinching
measure. The man who has received health by his Physician, and right by his
Lawier, will give him both his fee, and reverence; if not, they acknowledge him
but slenderly; So in this: And so men stop their ears to this of the Prophet;
yet for all this, think I it not tolerable, that a Minister should neglect the
care of his flock, while he has charge of them, but strive to do it, because,
1. Cor. 9.16.17. Though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to rejoice of: for
necessity is laid upon me, and woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel: for
if I do it willingly, I have a reward: but if I do it against my will,
notwithstanding the dispensation is committed to me. For this will not be a
plea for the Minister, at Christ's judgment seat, when he must give an account
how he fed the flock of Christ: It may be a plea against them to condemn
them, not acquit him. Therefore should it not be so, that though they keep him
poor, which is their sin, he should shut peace out of his own heart, which
would not be, if he labored painfully, and looked to the Lord for his reward.
And to say to his flock, as Saint August. to his, in Psalm. 146. decimas vis,
will you make choice to pay tithes? Then let that be my portion. And yet this
is no great matter, for the Pharisees whose righteousness you ought to exceed,
pay their tithes.* Yet you give scarce the thousand part: yet if thou will do
no more, Tu vix millesimam das.
do so still, I will find no fault, for I so thirst after your weldoing, that
I refuse not your very crumbs.

That there may be meat in my house.] Which is not, as some interpret it, that
the Priest and Levites might be maintained; but rather as others, that the
offerings of God might be continued, and so his worship maintained.

The maintaining of the Ministry is a special means to further the worship of
God: on the contrary, the withdrawing of that, When the Levites were neglected,
the house of God was forsaken, and that Numb. 18.21. that they might be able to
do him service, and so his worship be maintained, Prove. 3.9. for by the paying
and giving to them maintenance, is his honor procured, and that those
comparisons, 1 Cor. 9. prove no less: for as the wars must needs be
unfought, if the soldiers be not maintained, etc so must Gods service needs be
neglected, if his Ministers be not maintained.

Because the Ministers else cannot, Paul to timothy, 1 Timothy 4.13. Give
attendance to reading, but must needs entangle themselves with the affairs of
this life, as 2 Timoth. 2.4. that is, about private affairs, and so much needs
neglect the public worship of God.

Because the seed of the Ministry will decay; Noah and his family: So it is
in this; therefore maintenance must be proposed, and if it fail, the work
fails.

This notes unto us the vile impiety of the man of sin, the Pope of Rome,
low a rate by composition, namely ten or twenty Nobles, that no man of parts
and gifts was able to live of it, but one that had some other trade to live by,
which he followed closely, or no other means, and so he made this his last
refuge: and by this means they did more overthrow the worship of God and his
Church, then by all the persecutions they used or can, which they learned from
their Grandsire Apostata Julian, who by this means is noted more to have
overthrown the Church, then all the persecuting Emperors before him. Because
they took away Presbyters, and their martyrs blood was the seed of the
Church; but he took away Presbyterium, the Ministry, in withdrawing the
maintenance from the Church, and so overthrew the worship of God. In the same
steps has this his son Apostata, and others his slaves followed, by which
they have made more decay of the worship of God, then by any means whatsoever.

This teaches us the cause why in many places the worship and service of God
is not performed, or carelessely and slubberd over, Damasus, Deuteronomy. 3. * With
what face, Qua front, qua conscien tia etc. Damasus Deuteronomy. 3.
with what conscience can ye receive oblations, who can scarce for your selves,
much less for others, make prayers unto God? speaking to lay men, but they are
guilty of the hindering and overthrow of his worship, and that not only of the
present hindering of it, but leaving things still alienated to their posterity,
and keeping the Church without hope of having them restored; they are guilty of
the overthrow of the worship of God after them, so that when they are dead, yet
their sins shall live.

To teach men willingly and cheerfully to give to the Churh that which is in
law and conscience due unto it;

And prove me herewith.] Make trial of me, of my goodness, and
bountifulness in giving, and faithfulness in keeping my promise.

The do men make trial of the goodness, Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God,
as ye did tempt him in Massah, but ye shall keep diligently the commandments
of the Lord your God, and his testimonies and his ordinances which he has
commanded thee. And thou shall do that which is right and good in the sight of
the Lord that thou may prosper, and that thou may gee in and possess
that good land which the Lord swear unto thy fathers. And by that, Matthew.
4.6.7. for if it be tempting of him to seek and to look for his promise and
faithfulness in things not commanded, either omitting the commanded, then e
contra, Hag. 2.18.19. I smot you with blasting and with mildew, and with
hailean all the labors of your hands, yet you turned not to me, says the Lord
Consider I pray you, in your minds, from this day and before from the four and
twenteeth day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the
Lords Temple was laid consider it in your minds. That is, because they had
begun to build the Temple, het would bless them, by that they should try his
goodness, Isaiah 1.18. If you will repent and do as you ought, then shall you
see and try how good I will be, and Isai. 7.11.12.

Because it is no unfaithfulness of od,

Because it is no faithfulness nor goodness of God to give things that he
has promised as blessings, Magna est ira Dei peccatoribus non irasci. Saint
Hierom. And that, Hosea 4.14. And so to bless them and give them the things he
has promised; they not performing, is a hurt to them, and a curse rather then
a blessing.

Then have we many more tempters of God, do, but rather the clean
contrary;for whereas he has promised all earthly blessings to such as fear
him and keep his commandments, Levit. 24.1. howsoever they have cast off his
fear and the care of his commandments, yet they doubt not but to enjoy his
blessings; and they will put him to the trial whether he will be his words
master or no, and make no doubt but to find him performing these to them; and
often when they enjoy some of these things promised, it may be in a plentiful
measure, their deceitful hearts flatter them that they come from the
faithfulness of God and his goodness, though they never did the things he
required to be done: and as in earthly things, so in spiritual things and
matters of salvation they no less tempt God; because they persuade themselves
to have and obtain remission of their sins though they never repent; to have
salvation though they live in blindness, ignorance, and infidelity, or
unbelief; though he has promised none of these, but upon condition that they
know him, and believe, and repent, John 17.3. and 3.16. Acts 2.38. Must not
these then tempt God and not try him? had not Christ tempted him when there was
an ordinary way, if he had taken the extraordinary at the suggestion of Satan,
because of Gods promise? should not they tempt him, if when they should pass
over the water, upon some man's suggestion they should refuse the bridge or
boat and leap into the water, because he has promised to give his Angels,
etc. It will be granted; yet because the Lord has appointed an ordinary, and
the promise is only in their ways; that is, doing that he has commanded. Is
it not then so in this? And if in those kinds they can look for no
performance of his faithfulness, why in this? but that they are deluded by
Santan and their corruption, and as fools led to the stocks, and as oxen to
the slaughter.

Seeing God has put himself and his faithfulness upon their trial, and is
so content, that they do not tempt him,

If I will not open the windows of Heaven.] The blessing promised as the
second reason to make them to bring tithes into his house, and not to withhold
the portion of his Ministers, then he will give them plenty.

The Lord he will bless with plenty and abundance all such as deal faithfully
with him, Prove. 3.9.10. Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the first
fruits of all thine increase, so shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and
thy presses shall burst with new wine, Haggs. 2.20. Deuteronomy. 26.12.13.15. God
would not bid them pray for a plentiful blessing, but that he meant to give it
them, for their bounty to him and his Levites.

Because of that, In as much as ye have done it unto these, ye have done it
unto me, is true in this. Now such is the magnificence and greanesse of his
mind, that he will give much more then he received, as Princes in the
greatness of their minds, give many fold more then they receive; much more
will God, even an hundred fold.

Because it is a special means for upholding and maintaining of his worship
and service;

Because the Ministry of the word and the labor of the Ministers is for the
good and nourishment of the soul,

This serves to meet with the covetous distrustfulnesse and distrustful
covetousness of many, 1 Kings 18.19. Iezabell fed 400. false Prophets at her
table, whereas they contrary, which must needs come from covetousness, making
a man diffident, that they shall never be the better or the richer at the
years end, but so much the poorer.

To persuade men to give unto the Levites and Ministers all their due; that is,
a competent maintenance among them, Chrysostom speaks in 2 Psalm. ho. 9. that
any man would be ashamed to be the disciple of a beggarly master, and so while
they are kept too too bare, the credit and honor of their Ministry, yea the
fruit is hindered. If thy father of thy body and flesh should be so bare,
would thou not be ashamed at it? and if thy spiritual father be driven unto
it, do thou not for very shame hide thy self, or else put to thy hand to
take that shame both from him and thee? Or if this move thee not, will not that
which he speaks in Tim. 2. See I pray you how great absurdity there is of
these things: should the Pastor not be able to keep a man to tend upon him, so
that he must make his own fire himself, and fetch water, break his sticks
for his fire, and go often to the market for things necessary, can there be a
greater perversity or greater disorder? Those holy men, the Apostles, thought
it an unmee^e thing, that he which should attend upon the word, should be
employed so much as to the service of the poor widows. Finally, if this do
not move thee, the good of thy soul and the spiritual and heavenly things,
such rich treasures these earthen vessels do bring unto thee: yet let this,
that if thou will give God, his tenth, he will increase and multiply thy ninth,
even in abundant measure. As August. speaks, that thou shall not only reap
by them better things, spiritual things, for a few earthly, but for them from
God abundance of earthly things, for that shall be true, Prove. 11.25. The
liberal person shall have plenty and he that waters shall also have rain.
And that 2 Cor. 9.6.7. This yet remember, that he which sows sparingly, shall
reap also sparingly, and he that sows liberally, shall reap also liberally.
As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give, nt grudgingly or of
necesity for God loves a cheerful giver. Neither let them answer as the widow
did to Eliah, 1 Kings 17.12. And she said, as the Lord thy God lives, I have
not a cake, but even a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a
cruse; and behold, I am gathering a few sticks for to go in and dress it,
for me and my son, that we may eat it and dye. Or if thou do distrustfully
so a while, yet seeing thou have the word of God here, more then she had, verse
14. The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil
fatle. Then believe and give. Verily, if this be true the Prophet says here,
many men might have more then they have, if they had for the glory of God, for
the service of the Church, and the work of the Ministry, more liberal hearts
then they have? Verily, it is an evil spared penny that loses a man a pound;
and that which men think they have spared to themselves, and gained in keeping
it from God and his Ministers, either the Prophet says not true, or it loses
them much more. Nay, that they give, though they may seem to have cast it away,
yet they shall find it, and with advantage: and if they had eyes to see it,
nothing more gainful then this, and that is given to the poor. Then as
Chrysostom. for one, let me apply it and speak of both, ho. 53. ad pop. Antioch.
so use thy riches, or that which thou have, that they may bring increase: let
God then be thy Creditor, not other humane things; bestow them upon the
Ministers and the poor, not upon thy belly, upon the humble not honorable,
upon liberality, not covetousness, upon sobriety, not intemperance: What will
thy belly afford and recompense thee with, that spends most? Dung and
corruption. What vain glory? Envy and hatred. What covetousness? Care and
grief. What intemperance? Hell and the unsatiable worm. Let God then be your
Creditor, which promises and will perform such great things. And as Paul
exhorts the Corinthians for the matter of the poor; so I for the Levite and
Minister. 2. Cor. 8.7. Therefore as ye abound in every thing, in faith and
word, and knowledge, and all diligence, and in your love toward us, even so see
that ye abound in this grace also.

I will open the windows of Heaven and power you out etc.] It is the rain
that is the means; but God is the Author of the blessing.

Whatsoever the means may be, that God does use convey his blessings of peace,

And power you out a blessing.] You that shall obey me, and sear me, and walk
in my ways.

Plenty, Vide Mal. 2.5.

Without measure.] In marveilous great abundance, and very liberally.

The Lord when he gives to his,

And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes.] If the Lord should give rain
in abundance, and by it should rise weeds, that should either choke the corn,
or other creatures, which commonly arise of wet, or by any other means, and so
devour their fruit, and their hopes be cut off, they should but have little
profit or benefit; that what was given one way, was taken away another:
therefore the Lord promises to take away such devourers, such creatures as
might destroy the fruit of the earth, when it was sprung up.

Every creature is at Gods command, at his beck to be restrained or set on, to
help or hurt, to punish or preserve, Vide Cap. 1.4. Lord of Hoasts.

And they shall not destroy the fruit of your ground.] For their sins and
iniquities they had destroyed it, but now that they are received into favor
and mercy they shall not; but receiving, them to mercy, will withdraw his
judgments from these things, he smote for them.

As God often punishes men,

Because, that as his hand was against them for man's cause only, seeing they in
themselves deserved no such thing,

Because, as by smiting and cursing of them,

Then has the Popish Purgatory, David who had the punishment continued, when
his sin was pardoned. But we deny that, or any other to be a punishment, for
that has ever reference to sin; for all afflictions are not punishments, but
may for many other causes, be laid upon men. Chrysostom. ho 1 ad popul. Antioch.
has numbered to us eight causes, yet are they not all. 1. Quod cum facile in
ariogantiam propter meritorum magnitudi nem and miraculorum tollantur, ipsos
sinit affligi. 2. Ne caeteri majorem habeant de ipsis opinionem, quam humana
patitur natura and insos deos non autem homines esse arbitrentur. 3. Vt and Dei
virtus apparet per aegretantes and compeditos, exuperans and prodicationem
augens. 4. Vt illorum pati entia manifesta fiat. 5. Vt de resurrectione
cegitemus, cum enim virum justum and multa plenum virtute innumera passum mala,
and sic hinc digressum videris, oportetex hoc omnino aliquid de illo judicio
cogitare, si enim homo pro se laborantes sine praemiis and retributione abire
non permittit. Multo magis eos, qui tantum laboraverunt, nunquam in coronatos
remanere Deus decerneret. 6. Vt omnes in gravia incidentes, sufficientem
consolationem and mitigationem habeat in eos respicientes, and malorum quae
ipsis accidere recordantes. 7. Ne quando exhortamus eos adillorum virtutem and
cuique dicimus, imitare Paulum, imitare Petrum propter gestorum excessum
alterius ipsos naturae participes fuisse cogitantes, adimitationem torpeatis.
8. Ve quando beatos, vel miseros censere oportet, discamus quos quidem beatos,
quos quidem miseres and aerumnosos putare debeamus. Chrysostom. ho. 1. ad. popul.
Antioch.
First, God suffers holy men to be afflicted, because otherwise they soon grow
proud, of the greatness of their merits and miracles. Secondly, Lest others
might have a greater opinion of them, then is fit, and count them Gods rather
then men. Thirdly, That Gods power may appear, more abundantly and beyond
words, through the weak and unable. Fourthly, That their patience also may be
manifest. Fifthly, That we may be put in mind of the resurrection: for when we
see a righteous and virtuous man suffer many evils, and so die, this must offer
us some thoughts of the day of judement: for if a man suffer not any, that have
taken pains for him, to go away without recompense and reward; much less will
God suffer such, as have endured so much for him, to remain uncrowned. Sixthly,
That all that fall into calamities, may have sufficient consolation, and
mitigation, looking on them, and remembering what they endured. Seventhly, That
when we exhort you to their virtues, and say to you, imitate Paul, imitate
Peter you may not be slothful to imitate them, thinking because of their great
actions, they were partakers of some other nature then you are of. Eighthly,
That we may be able to judge aright, who are indeed happy, and who truly
calamitous and miserable. To these may be added, Ninthly, for clearing of his
own justice, as in David. Tenthly, For purging yet corruption from them, the
rod of correction. Eleventhly, To draw them from the world, the nurses teate,
as the prodigal son was. Twelfly, To prevent sin like Hoseahs hedge,
Hoseah 2.6. Thirteenthly, To make them fly to God, and to love him, as the
child to his mother, when feared of passengers. And many other such causes, any
one whereof, if they can show in Purgatory to be incident to the souls
departed, it were something to strengthen their exception, but nothing to prove
the thing, when as the pains of Purgatory are satisfactory. And if God in
showing mercy, and pardoning sin, does remove the punishment from the
creatures he smote for their sin, he will much more from themselves, their
bodies, but especially from their souls.

Neither shall their vine be barren in the field.] This is added, as some
think, to amplify the goodness of God to his people, when they had returned,
and he had received them to mercy, because the year which was commodious for
the field and the corn, was incommodious for the trees and the vines:
Therefore when all things should prosper well, it was a special proof of the
goodness of God, and his good providence over them.

The Lord to show his goodness and mercy, Lazarus, and the Shunamite. 2. Kings
4.36, How many wonders wrought he in Egypt for his people, how wonderfully did
he sustain them in the Wilderness? And hereto I apply that, Isa. 59.16.

Because it makes his goodness and mercy more sensible to his own, who being
compassed with infirmities,

Because his power might be more manifested, and magnified unto all men, who
oftentimes in ordinary things give more to the means then they ought, and
less to the Lord then his due, yet in extraordinary are driven to give him the
whole, if they acknowledge him at all.

This may note out unto us, thousands, and ten thousands in our streets: That
our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be none invasion, nor going out,
nor no crying in our streets. Blessed are the people that be so, yea, blessed
are the people whose God is the Lord: but adds more specially, that their
blessing is, to have the Lord for their God; who if this be not enough, can
moreover do such and such things for them, far beyond the ordinary course of
things. It is a happy condition for subjects, when they may have under a Prince
ordinary favor, and benefits, and the due course of Laws, and the proceedings
in them, for the righting of their wrongs, the procuring of their rights,
maintenance, and countenance of their peace and state; but the condition is
accounted the better, when the Prince will use his Prerogative, to procure
extraordinary things for them. So in this: specially when this shall not be, as
often falls out with some Princes prerogatives, prejudicial to others, but for
their sakes profits others. As the extraordinary giving of the host water. 2.
Kings. 3.14.17. And that which Tertul. has Apol. adversus gentes. Mareus
Aurelius in bello adversus Germanos exercitus, etc. Tertul. Apol. adversue
g^ntes
Marcus Aurelaus in his war against the Germans, his army being destitute of
water, by the prayers of the Christians, he procured that it should not perish
with thirst, they obtained rain from God.

This may be matter of comfort, unto those who are indeed Gods, truly
reconciled unto him, and partakers of his mercy; when they know, that rather
then their good should not be procured, if ordinary means be not sufficient,
the Lord will work extraordinarily: not that it warrants any to neglect
ordinary means, for that were to tempt God, or to expect for extraordinary,
while God affoords ordinary; for that were presumption and not faith; but when
they fail, then to rely upon this, they shall then show themselves the
children of the believing Abraham, if with him, they answer and appease their
souls, as he his son. Genesis 22.8. God will give an evasion, God will provide.
And as Moses to the people in a strait, Exodus 14.13. Then Moses said to the
people, fear ye not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord which he
will show to you this day. For the Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, ye
shall never see them again. For he has done it before, and his arm is not
shortened, nor his affections to his changed: If then he dealt so with Abraham,
with Israel, with the Church in Esters days, they may expect the like;
provided, they be to him as they were, and it be for his own glory, and their
good, as that was. And if they be, then may they more expect it, because it will
be more for his glory, because the means by man's corruption, often obscureth
and shadoweth his glory, men attributing more to them then is due, and less to
God then is his right.

VERSE. XII.
And all Nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a pleasant land, says
the Lord of Hosts.

AND all Nations shall call you blessed.] The second benefit, that shall come
to them in obeying God, and bringing his tithes into his house, a good name,
and honor and estimation. In former time ye were in contempt among the heathen
and barbarous, because of your poverty and want and penury, with which I had
cursed you, for not bringing my tithes; but now when they shall see the
blessing increased upon you, they shall say, seeing your plenty, that you are a
people dear and beloved of me.

For ye shall be a pleasant land.] Saint Hierom would have it, a Land desired,
for the fruit and plenty of it. But why ye, and not it? It is the Hebrew
phrase, giving to the possessors, that which is proper to the earth. As Deuteronomy.
28.3. Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed also in the field. For it
is the field that is blessed with increase: but some think the sense will be
more plain, if you understand, As, ye shall be as a pleasant land, that is
flourishing and prospering and abounding with riches.

The Lord will bless with honor and credit, Obadiah. 1. Kings 18.13. To the
widow of Sarepta. Cap. 17.15. And to the Shunamite. 2. Kings 4.8. For to this
may we apply that, Matthew. 26.13. Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this
Gospel shall be preached throughout all the world, there shall also this that
she has done, be spoken of for a memorial of her. This is that Nehemiah had,
and prayed for. Nehemiah 13.14. Remember me, O my God! herein; and wipe not out
the kindness, that I have showed on the house of my God, and on the offices
thereof.

Because by this, they honor the messengers of God. 1. Tim. 5.17.

Reasons 2. and 3. vide 1. and 2. in the promise of plenty.

If this be so, that honor is their due from the Lord, them when they have
done, and bring the contempt of many others upon them; for by want they either
preach not, or they preach unfaithfully, pleasing, and not wholesome,
toothsome, not saving things, and either will bring contempt upon them, and so
utterly hindering the glory of God, and the salvation of his people. Do they
think then to have honor of God? many can be content to entertain Ministers
in their houses, at their tables, specially strangers, rather then their own
painful Pastors, but with Saul's humor, 1 Samuel 15.30. not to give them
honor, but to honor themselves. Many are heard glorying that they have a
Minister in their house, and they give him twenty pound or thirty pound, per
annum, when their hearts tell them that they deprive him of eighty, as due to
him as the rest, they enjoying the impropriation, being a thing, for ought I
can see, under correction of the law, against right or reason; both in respect
of the people, that they should have their tithes for nothing, performing no
duty or service unto them, and in respect of the Minister who does the labor,
and they enjoy his wages: And these men think to be honored before the people
for them, and by them; but if that be due to such as deal liberally with them,
which is rather in giving them more then their own, then in keeping any thing
back from them; if they by this, dishonor them, let them look for dishonor
from him, when they thus provoke him. If the Prince be offended to see one of
his common soldiers disgraced, and pinched of their wages; if one of his Guard
and nigh attendance, wherein the safety of his person consists, his anger
would exceedingly be kindled; but if his son, says Cyril, I would apply it,
if himself, his own homage and tribute denied him, would he honor such?

To persuade men to give unto the Ministers,

All nations shall call you blessed.] They should be honorable and famous for
their outward prosperity: besides the general doctrine we may observe some
particulars.

The Lord sometime makes his Church famous and honorable in the eyes of the
world, Joshua, and diverse of the Judges, then their victories and taking the
land, here their often deliverances, and forty years peace and plenty
together, witness the books of Judges. In the times of David and Solomon his
son, that they came from far to see the plenty and prosperity: and so of
diverse others of the Kings times. Amongst other that is specially markeable,
and of special note when they were in captivity, yet for deliverance famous,
Ester 8.17. In all and every Province, and in all and every City and place,
where the Kings commandedement and his decree came, there was joy and gladness
to the Jews, a feast and good day, and many of the people of the land became
Jews, for the fear of the Jews fell upon them.

Because God has promised such things unto them,

Because wicked men should see that, Moses bush, Dum persequitur floret, dum,
etc. Hilar. de Trinit. cap. 7.
while it is persecuted, it flourishes; while it is contemned, it increases;
while it is wronged, it orecomes; while it is oppressed, it grows; and then
stands, when it seems thrown down. Now in this, I say, the Lord does
oftentimes thus bless his Church, not always; for even under the law when
this was more specially promised to them under the Gospel, and when they were
led more by these, because of their childhood and infirmity, they had them not
always, then less under the Gospel. Besides, Jer. 12.1. Psalm. 73. 2 Timothy
3.12. John 16. ultimo 20. Heb. 11. Israel in Egypt, in Canaan by Philistimes,
Ammonites, Midianites, Babylonians, Persians. The Primitive Church for 300.
years after Christ, after it was persecuted by the Arrians, Goths, Vandals,
yea after that it had Christian Princes, yea and much misery the Church has
felt from the Turks. All which shows, this is but sometime, not always. This
may be because it is with the Church, as Salvian once complained. Ipsa Dei
occlesia quae, etc. ^alvian D. l. 3. de Imber.
The very Church of God, which in all things ought to please God, and to
appease him; what is it or does it else but imbitter or provoke him, or besides
a very few who fly from evil? what is almost the whole society of Christians
any other, but a very sink of sins?

Against the dream of Anabaptists, Pharoahs dream, so in this; and that the
mother is devoured of the daughter; but yet this sentence and opinion must
needs condemn all the generation of Gods children, who sometimes have had such
abundance, plenty, and prosperous estate, and that which has been, may be;
for as there is no new thing under the sun, so nothing has been, but it may
be renewed.

This will confute the doctrine of Popery, the Church, for being but sometimes
befalling it, it cannot note the Church, which is certainly known only by
such things as are infeparable, which this is not, being oftener under
persecution then in prosperity; and how otherwise seeing here it is but a
stranger and sojourner, compared to a Dove lodged in the rocks, Cant. 2.14. to
a ship shaken with the winds, but not sunk; to a house upon the rock beaten
with wind and weather, but not cast down. Therefore is it but a weak
argument which Bell. Sad. Stapl. and others use to prove the true Church, and
to deny ours to be; and indeed no other then that which the Heathen and Pagans
have used against Christians. Symachus against whom Prudentius writ in an
Epistle to Theodosius the Emperor, which is in Ambros. Epist. 30. used this
argument, and almost no other, to prove that the Emperor should still abide in
the religion of the Romans, because that Commonwealth was most flo urishing
and prosperous, so long as they worshipped Jupiter, Apollo, and other Gods.
Also the old Tyrants, Persecuters of the Church, were wont to impute to chance
the cause of all calamities and miseries; for they used to say when calamities
were upon them; we are now less fortunate then in former times, because we
suffer the Christians, and because we do not with that religion and devotion
worship Jupiter, and other of the Gods, as we did before, therefore are the
Gods angry with us: so the Papists from a temporal felicity measure piety, and
gather that God does favor them, because he gives them these outward things,
by it would condemn us and al other Churches. But if the Heathen reasoned
absurdly, they conclude not well, but very impudently; but if the conclusion
would follow, it would be on our sides rather then theirs; who have for these
48. years not been inferior to any Kingdom in the world for peace, plenty
and prosperity, and specially when we have been most severe not in
persecuting, but correcting of their impieties and Idolatries, (For projustitia
persequentes persecutores sunt, propter flagitium correctores, August. contra
lit. Petil. lib. 21. ca. 84.) And for victory in war, which is the
principallest they stand of, we have given them more foiles then ever they us,
and have often carried the day and triumph both by sea and land, blessed be our
God for it. Therefore must they let this argument, this weapon go, or else we
will sheath it in their own sides.

If this be a blessing, August. de Civit. D. l. 1. c 7. Quisquis non videt
caecus, quisquis nec laudat, ingratus, quisquis laudanti reluctatis in sanus
est. And yet seeing it is no perpetual blessing, but such as the Church is
often deprived of, and has been, let us see we walk worthy of it, lest he
pull us down as low as he lifted us up high, and make us as vile as he has
made us honorable. As he did diverse times with his people, Deuter.
29.22.24.25. which was then and shall be when they are worse, and walk
unworthy of this, and we be as Salvian, ad Catholicum Ecclesiam. lib. 1. Ac sic
nescio quomodo etc.
I know not how, but thy felicity flights against thy self; so much as thou
art increased in people, thou art almost as much encreast in vices; by how much
thou have more abounded, thou have lost in discipline, and thy prosperity has
brought with it a great increase of evils; for the professors of the faith
being multiplied, the faith it self is lessened; and her children increasing,
the mother is sick: and thou O Church of God! art made weaker by thy
fruitfulness, and the more children, the less strength, for thou have spread
through the whole world the professors of thy religious name, but not having
the power of religion, as if thou were rich in men, poor in faith, wealthy in
multitude, needy in devotion, enlarged in body, strengthened in spirit, etc.

VERSE. XIII.
Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord: yet ye say, What have
we spoken against thee?

Your wards have been slout against me.] Your words have been stout against me,
faith the Lord of Hosts. The Prophet proceeds to reprove this people of
another sin, and to expostulate the thing with them. The sin of it is, the
denying of Gods providence, both over the evil and good; not punishing the
one, and not providing for the other. This people afflicted of God with penury,
and want, for other of their sins, but especially for spoiling God, his
Levits and Church, they thought and spoke blasphemously against God; but
accusing his providence, as not regarding those who worship and profess him,
but such as dishonored him, and were wicked, and never would they accuse
themselves of their sins: which is that he says, their words have been great
against him, they spoke hard and odious things of him, as the words following
show, that these were they.

Yet ye say, What have we spoken against thee?] They answer for themselves,
not denying simply that they had spoken any such thing, but putting God to his
proof, as thinking that he did not know nor understand; as those who had
oftentimes said among themselves, that God regarded not the things here below,
neither took notice of what men did: Therefore this question of theirs tends
not to any denial of the deed, but to the tempting of God: For if he could
not, or did not answer directly, and show them what they had said; then would
they conclude, as before they had, that he did not regard nor understand the
things that were said and done by men: which if he did, then could he tell in
particular what words they had spoken against him, and not thus insist in the
general.

Your words have been stout.] Observe:

God takes notice of the words of men, as well as their actions, and will
reprove them for them, and call them to an account and judge them, Jam. 2.12.

Your words have been stout against me.] They deny the providence of God, and
his wise disposing of things upon earth among men, as the verses following
show; and so are accused to have spoken against God himself, though they have
not denied him, or blasphemed him.

They who deny the providence of God, they say, How does Bod know it? or is
there knowledge in the most High? If it be referred to the tenth verse, it is
the infirmity of Gods people: if to the ninth, it is the pride of the wicked.
In either, it is a sin against God. And that, Psalm. 94.4.5.6.7. They prate
and speak fiercely: all the workers of iniquity vaunt themselves, they smite
down thy people. O Lord, and trouble thine heritage: they slay the widow and
the stranger, and murder the fatherless; yet they say, The Lord shall not
see, neither will the God of I cob regard it. Such were they, Zeph. 1.12. And
at that time will I search. Jerusalem with lights, and visit the men that are
frozen in their dregs, and say in their hearts, The Lord will neither do
good, nor do evil. Job. 22.13.14. But thou say, How should God know? Can he
judge through the dark cloud? The clouds hide him that he cannot see, and he
walks in the circle of heaven. Ezekiel. 9.9. Then said he unto me; the iniquity
of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, so that the land is full
of blood, and the city full of corrupt judgment. For they say, The Lord has
forsaken the earth, and the Lord sees us not.

Because God does challenge these things unto himself, The eyes of the Lord in
every place, behold the evil and the good. Psalm. 28.18.19. and 34.15.16. Then
without sin this cannot be denied, which were to give God and his Truth the
lie.

Because by denying this, they deny the wisdom, the power,

Then have we many proud speakers,

question the providence of God, lest they be found fighters and speakers
against God, and that proudly and contemptuously. For what if they cannot see
God, how he does it, yet seeing they see it is done, and the world and all
things in it governed after a mavelous manner, they ought to believe it is
so? If a man shall see a ship come sailing into the haven; or standing upon the
shore, see it go along upon the sea, and often sailing prosperously in the
midst of great tempests, though he see never a Mariner, never a Master and
Pilot, yet he doubts not but he is there. Or as Gregory Nazi anzen: If thou
hear a Harp sound of diverse strings, and all keep one harmony, thou will
conceive of one that strikes them, though thou see him not: so in the
government of the world. Yea, when they cannot see the reason of things that
are done, yet men ought to admire the wisdom of God. As in States, men do
give more to the wisdom of those which hold and sit at the stern, and
govern the State, that they think well of things done and projected, though
they see not the reason; nay, when their reason is contrary. Finally, well and
with good reason may they imagine, that if a Father will govern his house, and
a King will not forsake his kingdom, God will much more govern the world, and
not forsake it. And if a ship, though well built and strong, as Chry sostom,
cannot be preserved in the sea without a governor; no, not a day in the
midst of the waves, nor the body separated from the soul, how should this
be? All which may keep us from denying the providence of God, and so speaking
against God.

VERSE. XIV.
Ye have said, it is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have
kept his commandment, and that we walked humbly before the Lord of hosts?

YE have said, it is in vain to serve God.] The Prophets replication in the
person of God, showing them wherein they had profanely and impiously spoken
against God; and this their impiety consisted herein, that they said it was a
needless and fruitless thing to serve the Lord, and that a man's labor should
be in vain that should busy himself about it, and restrain himself of
other things, of his pleasure and profit; and they affirm it to be a needless
work, both in respect of God, who was to be worshipped, and in respect of
those who should worship him; for the first, some understand these words. i.
God is far above man neither has commerce with him; if he have, yet God has
no need of these things which men possess, neither does he desire, he is not
affected nor bettered by the worship of men. Then is it in vain and foolish,
for men to bestow their pains and labors in those things which never help
nor profit him they do them for. Now these things profit not God, therefore
they are vain in respect of him.

And what profit is it, that we have kept his commandments?] Their second
proof they have in speaking thus against God, because it is not profitable to
men who worship and serve him; and first, they deny it any ways profitable to
do the good God has commanded, and that there is not with him any reward for
well doing. And secondly, that it is as little profitable to abstain from
evil, and that we have walked humbly before him, which is (as I take it) not
to be understood of that humiliation which is in repentance, as some think;
but as some others, it describes one who having piety, and the fear of God
before his eyes, neither hurts any man, and being hurt of others, does not
violently revenge himself, but rather suffers all things, then proudly does
any thing, and commit their cause to God as the just revenger, knowing that
vengeance is his; to which purpose they understand those words before the Lord
of hoasts; that is, before God the revenger: and so they account the
observation of piety and religion not profitable to men, as that which did not
make the worshippers prosperous, nor keep them from injuries, nor defend them
grieved: And of both these they give themselves for instance, and speak out of
experience; that they had found none, and so chalenging themselves to be just,
religious, and godly, and so endeavored their own honor, and to detract from
the providence of God and his worship; and it is worth the noting, that they
produce not others of the godly, but themselves: for the first might easily
have been refuted, either by producing the examples of those who have had
testimony of their piety from God, and where they enjoyed his blessings; or
else by answering them, that neither they, nor any other, were able certainly
to judge whether those they named, did truly and sincerely worship God or no,
and embrace piety: for no man can be a certain witness of another
conscience, his own he may well know; therefore these brought not forth others
against God, but themselves.

The misery, poverty, affliction, videca. 2. ver. ult Doct. ult. proofs.

Reason and Use 1.

To teach us to suspect our conceit or judgment when it carries us that way,
to question and reason about Gods providence, he did not dispose of the things
here upon earth, because things go thus among men; and to check our selves,
suspecting our wisdom that cannot see the causes of things, and Gods course
in disposing of them, when he deals diversely and not as we would think reason
he should, yea and ceasing from our wisdom to search into things more then we
can comprehend. An tu cum medieum sepius, etc. Chrysostom. de vig.
When thou see a Physician sometimes cutting, sometimes burning the same
ulcer, yea and often times missing his art; yet thou do not unmannerly object.
But in God, who never erres, but disposed all things rightly and orderly
according to his wisdom, thou a poor mortal art busy to know the reason of
his counsels and doings, and do not ascribe all to his infinite wisdom. Is
not this extreme madness? but admit it lawful and fit to enquire, he
certainly is purblinde that cannot see even the special providence of God,
when the hands of God go thus cross, like old Iaakobs hand upon the heads of
Joseph's children, and think with Joseph that they should be otherwise; for is
it not a special wisdom in a Physician to keep some whom he loves in a
strict and spare diet, and others of whom he has not, neither has cause to
have the like care, to give them liberty to eat and drink what they list? Is
it not special providence in a father if he keep his sons bare, and have a
strait hand over them all the while they are at none-age, and suffer servants
to have more liberty? Not of a husbandman to keep the sheep he would have live
longer, and have wool and lamb of them, when those he means shall soon come
to the shambles he feeds, and in a large and fat pasture. And is it then want
of wisdom and providence in God if things thus go with his and the wicked?
Nay, is it not the wise providence of God to put his children in such a
condition as they may most show the graces they have, and grow toward that
they want, and ought to have, and the wicked in such a state as may most
manifest their corruption, and by which they may best fulfill the measure of
their iniquity? Now for the first, is affliction of any kind, Psalm. 119.
Before I was afflicted I went wrong, etc. Adversitas magis auget etc. Greg.
Epist. 26. Narsae.
Adversity enlarges our desire to God, as the seeds covered with ice, are more
fruitful. And, as in trees, if one pluck off the fruit and the leaves, and
loppe of the boughs too, so the stock remain, the tree will grow fairer: so
if the root of godliness remain though riches be taken away, and the body be
afflicted, all will tend unto greater glory.

Ye have said, it is in vain to serve the Lord.] In a more particular
examination of these words, other things are to be observed: as first, that
they are said to have spoken against God and blasphemed him, because they
account the service of God of no profit nor fruit.

For men to think or speak that it is a fruitless and unprofitable thing to
serve God and to obey and worship him, to study piety and godliness, is a
wicked speech and blasphemous thought against God: For that, are these here
challenged. It is that Jeremy accuses the men and their wives, the women, and
all the women in Pathres of, Jer. 44.15.17.18. David confesses this had ceased
somewhat, and for the time, upon him, Psalm. 73.13. This was that by which the
Devil provoked Jobs wife to tempt him, and so was her blasphemy, Job 2.9. And
Micha 7.10. Job 21.15.

Because it is flat contrary to his word,

Because by this they make God unfaithful, and so no God,

Because by this they deny the bounty and liberality of God, and is a great
prejudice to his honor, and glory,

Then have we many who must answer at Gods judgment seat, for blasphemy and
proud speaking against him;

To teach men when they see those who profess the feate of God and piety,

To instruct men who do profess the fear and service of God, to walk
carefully and prudently in their callings,

What profit is it that we have kept his commandments?]

That hypocrites and wicked men, challenge to themselves, righteousness and
obedience in the pride of their heart, when they have no such thing, verse 7.
Wherein shall we return?

It is the property of Hypocrites and wicked men, Iehoram. 2. Kings 3.13. And
Elisha said unto the King of Israel, What have I to do with thee? Get thee to
the Prophets of thy father, and to the Prophets of thy mother. And the King of
Israel said unto him, nay: for the Lord has called these three Kings, to give
them into the hand of Moab, i. it is but your spleen against me, to upbraide
me with any such things; because I favor them more then you, but if it were a
finne, yet is not that the cause; seeing these two Kings are in the like misery
with me. So far were they, Jer. 44.17.18. from acknowledging their sins, the
cause of any misery, either present or falling upon them, that they thought it
came because they had not gone forwards in them. This is the cause, why the
Prophets when the people were in any judgment, did still put them in mind of
their sins, and cleared the Lord, and put the people often to accuse God if
they could. Mich. 6.3. And when they threatened any to come, they ever produced
and alleged their sins.

Because being ignorant and blind men, Paul Romans 7.8. they seem to be living.
Peccatum mortuum quod non agnosceretur. Chrysostom. And so it does not accuse
them, which makes them not accuse themselves, but God rather.

Because if by the preaching of the Minister,

and give glory unto God; as bringing that justly upon them; and not only so,
but confessing that it is his mercy, that they are not consumed: As Lame n.
3.22. their sins deserve so much more then they feel or bear: It is a good
probable note that they are Gods; not certain, because men may do it in
hypocrisy, being wrung from them by their extremities, and do it in some
sinister respect, as did Indas and Pharaoh. But on the contrary, do men
justify themselves, or extenuate their sins? I say not only to men or to an
enemy, when it may be lawful for a man to stand on his integrity, and ever to
cover his infirmities, but to God and to his Ministers, as these here: And as
many men lie sick, and for ought they know upon their death beds, and the
Minister shall press them with their former lives, and their sinfulness, and
not their friends only seek to lessen them, and speak of their orderly and
good carriage, and show themselves to be discontented, they should be disquieted
with any such thing, it is a very fearful thing; being a sign that in
themselves they justify themselves, and think God deals but hardly with them,
and they have deserved no such thing; but to these we may say as Christ to the
Pharisees, Luke 16.15. Ye are they which justify your selves before men; but
God knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men, is
abomination in the sight of God.

This may let us see the necessity of the word of God; as at all times, Blessed
is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord! and teach him in thy Law. Because,
of verse 13. They shall escape, when the other who want it, shall perish. And
so the best time for Ministers to work, and the best opportunity is, when the
affliction is upon them. Job 33.16. Then he opens the cares of men, even by
their corrections, which he has sealed: and they being as metal, heated and
softened, the hammer will best work upon them, and then may they be best
bended, and applied to good.

VERSE. XV.
Therefore we count the proud blessed: even they that work wickedness are set
up, and they that tempt God, yea, they are delivered.

THerefore we accounted the proud blessed.] These had denied the providence of
God, and his government of the world, by the small profit that came to such as
had care to keep his commandments and walk in his ways: now they assay to
deny it, by the prosperity of such as transgress and contemn him: yea, by
this they would not only disgrace piety, but prefer iniquity before it. For
now they make the study and endeavor in impiety, to be honest and profitable;
when of piety it was unfruitful, for the one neither brought honor nor
profit, to them who embraced it: the other brought both.

Therefore we account.] As some, and now we, or we also, i. out of our own
experience, we who have been diligent in our duties, forward in piety,
followers of modesty, imbracers of temperance and al other virtues, have only
got this by it, that we cannot without envy speak of the happiness and
prosperity of those, who have taken a clean contrary course: for our
obedience, piety, and humility has made us but base and contemptible in the
eyes of men, whereas others by their pride and arrogance, have gotten a name
and renown unto themselves.

Even they that work wickedness are set up,] or, are built up. The meaning is,
they are increased in wealth and abundance: They who had nothing while they
lived in upright and just courses, and could get nothing by plain and honest
dealing, now that they are grown corrupt, and fallen into wicked and lewd
courses, and used cunning and deceit, they have gained unspeakable wealth, and
from nothing are so risen, that they are equal to any in wealth and dignity:
for this sense is by the phrase of the Scripture to be built up, Psalm. 127.1.

And they who tempt God, they are delivered] Not only they who injure and
oppress men and commit wickedness, by fraud and deceit, and such like; but
they who contemn God, also are happy; such as set light by his power and
judgments, and of set purpose, committed and undertook heinous sins, to
try whether he was so just and severe a Judge and revenger, as he was
accounted to be: and yet for all this boldness and contempt, we see they go
free without any punishment, which if God were such a one as he is accounted, a
severe Judge and revenger of the injuries against men, and indignities against
himself, he ought not to have overpast, but to have showed it in this. And
thus these wicked men think they have sufficiently proved, that God has not a
care of the things done upon the earth.

Their second ground on which they deny Gods providence, is, the prosperity of
the wicked, or making him to love them. Vide doctr. 2. in verse ult. C. 2.

They that work wickedness are set up.] Many wicked men prosper and increase
in the world: these men speak so here out of their observation, as a truth,
though it be evilly applied and used against God, as Jobs friends wrested many
general things against him, which were true in the general, but corrupted in
the application.

Oftentimes it falls out, Lo, these are the wicked, yet prosper they always,
and increase in riches. Job 21.7. Wherefore do the wicked wax old and grow in
wealth? Jer. 12.1.2. O Lord! if I dispute with thee, thou art righteous: yet
let me talk with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked
prosper? Why are all they in wealth that rebelliously transgress? Thou have
planted them, and they have taken root: they grow and bring forth fruit. Thou
art near in their mouth, and far from their reins. Psalm. 17.14. Men of this
world, who have their portion in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with
thine hid treasure; their children have enough and leave the rest of their
substance for their children.

Because God does use them to punish and correct his, Vtitur in salut em suorum
irrationali and insensibili etc. Bern. degr. and lib. arbit.
for the good and safety of his people, he uses the irrational and insensible
creature, as a laboring beast or an instrument, which when the work is done,
is of no further use; he uses the reasonable creature but ill affected, as his
rod of correction, which when his son is beaten, he throws into the fire as an
unprofitable twig; and he uses good Angels and men, as coadjutors and fellow
soldiers, whom when the victory is had, he liberally rewards. Now for this,
every one must have their proportionable strength and power: and so the wicked,
therefore they grow.

Because by it many are and may be tried, who live in the Church, When the
wicked come, the man is tried.

Because his judgments and justice might be more eminent, and perspicuous,
when he shall cast them down that are aloft and were in the eyes of men for
their greatness and riches, and glory. For as in States, though a thousand
petty thieves be hanged, yet nothing such notice is taken of the justice of the
State, as when one great offender of some great note and eminence is executed,
and has the censure of the law executed against him.

Do they not then deceive us, or go about to do it, Jeremy, or would have
persuaded him that the worship of the Queen of Heaven, was rather the better,
then the worship of the King of Heaven, and earth, because they prospered for a
while in outward things, more in the one, then the other. Jer. 44.16.17. And so
may any Idolaters persuade us.

To teach us not to wonder or be offended, Phoenix builds her nest with hot
spices: neither is it our disadvantage, that we should grieve though they be
our rods, for that were too childish to grieve, to see willowes and birch trees
grow, because rods are made of them, when as it is not in them they hurt us,
but in our selves: for if it were not our own sins, they should not be our
scourges, as rods should never hurt children, nor they find the smart of them,
that rebel not against their father and governors: less should we so be
offended that we should turn into them, for that were as if a travailer should
join himself with a rout of thieves, upon hope to keep that he has, and
incur by that means the common justice of the land, to lose all, and life
with it. Vide August. in Psalm. 91. Nullum mare tam profundum quam est Dei co
gitatio ut mali floreant etc. Consider that they must be scourges, remember
these are to try, forget not that they shall make his justice more eminent.
That as the state carries some to execution by posternes and by-gates, and
others through the market place. So God some to hell and destruction by poverty,
others by plenty; some by baseness, others by honor: in the mean time they
know they stand but upon slippery places.

And they that tempt God yea, they are delivered.] Such as live wickedly and
contemptuously against him, escape his judgments, and often are delivered,
when others fall in them.

It oftentimes falls out with wicked men, such as live in the contempt of God,
Ioab and Shimes, escaped in the plague.

Because the Lord is very slow to wrath, Jonah gave, why he went not to
Nineveh, fearing God would spare when he had spoken, and so call his word into
question. Jonah 4.2.

Because their iniquities are not yet full, nor they grown ripe for the
harvest,

Not to think it strange if we see wicked men, profane men, contemners of
God,

This may instruct men, Vnusquisque consideret non quid alius passus sit, sed
quid pati ipse mereatur nec evasisse se credat, si eum interim poena
distulerit, cum timere plus debeat, quem sibi Dei judicis censura fervavit.
Cyprian de lapsis 21. As he that has escaped a serpent, and is fallen into the
power of a Lion: Therefore let every one examine whether it be a blessing to
him to be thus delivered, if the patience of God has brought him to repentance
and reformation: but otherwise thou art delivered rather in anger then in
mercy: and art deceived as the sick man that thinks a good turn is done him,
when he has what meat and drink he desires; unless that which the fire could
not soften, the sun do, and that thy heart relent as Sault at David's
kindness, who had spared his life, when he might have taken it away. 1. Sam.
24.17.

VERSE. XVI.
Then spoke they that feared the Lord, every one to his neighbor, and the Lord
hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them
that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.

THen spoke they that feared the Lord.] The Prophet having reproved the
blasphemy of the wicked, and showed their grounds on which they denied the
providence of God, he now answers them: First, in this verse. by opposing unto
them the contrary opinion, of these who did truly fear God. Secondly, verse. 17.
By a sweet promise on Gods part, of great goodness and mercy toward the
godly, who rested in his pomises. Thirdly, verse 18. Denouncing a judgment
which the wicked should have experience of, when they should see the difference
betwixt them, and those who feared him.

Then spak they that feared the Lord.] In this verse the Prophet brings in the
godly answering and encouraging one another, contrary to that which the wicked
had said. And so it is. i. The godly of those times, though happily but few, at
what time the wicked spoke thus blasphemously, did mutually exhort one another
not to faint or be dismayed by those speeches of the wicked, or by them to be
drawn from their piety to wickedness and corruption, but they had their
mututall speeches to further one another in their good course, as the others
had to harden one another in their wicked courses. But what said they? St.
Hierom, and some others think that the Prophet has not told us, but that
telling us the just did speak, it must be supposed that they spoke fitting and
good things in defense of the providence of God and his government, and such
things as they had learned by the Scriptures and had received from the
instruction of their teachers: but saving their judgments I rather incline to
those who think the words following to be theirs, and not Gods words, who
seems not to speak till the 17. verse: Thus then in comforting one another
they said.

The Lord harkened and heard.] i. Howsoever they imagine that the Lord sees and
hears nothing, respects nor regards what is done or said; yet he has
heard and does most diligently observe what is said and done; for so much
hearkening does carry and will import; namely, care and diligence: As Psalm.
5.2. 2 Chronicles. 6. And so by this they confirm the contrary to that which the
wicked had said, that God did not regard, that it is manifest that he hears
their words, not a word drops from them which is unknown to him; much more,
all their actions are diligently and attentively regarded. And that it may
appear it is not for a space or a short time, but perpetually; therefore he
has a book of remembrance, which is not spoken, as if God had any such book,
or stood in need of it, as if he were subject to forgetfulness; but it is
spoken in respect of men, by which they may be assured that the will and decree
of God touching them and the wicked, is certain and constant; which is better
expressed by a book, then by words; for that which is written is more durable,
and permanent, whereas things spoken vanish away, and are blown away in the
air.

For them that feared the Lord.] That is, for such as fear him, that he will
not forget their labors and obedience, but will recompense and reward it, even
to their very thoughts and intents, thinking and remembering his commandments
to observe and do them.

Therefore spoke they who feared the Lord.] The Prophet answers the blasphemy
of the wicked in this verse, by opposing unto them the contrary opinion of
those, who did truly fear God. And in this: First, their encouragement.
Secondly, their ground. First, Gods hearing and regarding. Secondly, his
certain decree for showing good to them.

The first thing here is the encouragement one of another.

It is the duty of every one fearing God, But exhort one another daily while it
is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. And 10.24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to
good works. Mich. 4.2. And here we may make that general which was spoken
particularly to Peter, as to all Ministers, so to Christians, Luke 22.32. I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: therefore when thou art
converted strengthen thy brethren. So Baruch and the Princes did help one
another, Jerem. 36.11.13.15.16. When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the son
of Shaphan, had heard out of the books, all the words of the Lord: Then
Michaiah declared unto them all the words that he had heard, when Baruch read
in the book in the audience of the people: And they said unto him, sit down
now, and read it, that we may hear. So Baruch read it in their audience. Now
when they had heard all the words, they were afraid, both one and other, and
said unto Baruch, we will certify the King of all these words.

Because they are Gods, such as have received this honor to be called his, and
to be his; therefore reason as sons,

Because they are members one of another, Ephesians. 4.25.

To convince their error, who think it only a duty appertaining to the
Minister to exhort and stir up others, Caine, of a wicked and graceless man.

To condemn their practice, who either out of this error of their mind, or
out of the corruption of their heart, August? As that member which has no
feeling of the weakness and fainting of another, and seeks not to support it,
may be materially but not formally of the body: so in this. Or if they be, yet
can they not avoid to be guilty of their falling away and perishing; as he
that sees his neighbor fainting or perishing, and he able to sustain him,
and both knows and has that might help him, and does not, is guilty of his
perishing.

To teach every one to practice this duty, and to show that he is possessed
with the fear of God, by exciting and exhorting others, them, and the gain of
it should incite them. As S. Chrysostom. of converting, I, of keeping and
confirming: When, non minor virtus quam quaerere, parta tueri. If one should
promise thee a piece of gold for every man whom thou reformest, thou would
use all thy study and endeavor, persuading and exhorting. But now God
promises thee not one piece, nor ten, nor twenty, nor an hundred thousand, nor
the whole world, but that that is more, the Kingdom of Heaven, as a recompense
of thy labor in this kind: What excuse can we have after such a promise, if
we neglect the salvation of our brethren? If Physicians for a piece of gold
will come to strengthen the body: If Lawyers will defend a man's title, how
ought we the soul for so much? and that we may do it, we must take but the
Apostles lesson, Heb. 10.24. to observe one another, not to triumph over their
weakness and infirmities; but as Physicians that enquire into the state of
their Parients bodies, and into their carriage and diet to cure them. We had
need of others help, because the gift we have is apt to decay. 2 Timothy 1.6.
Wherefore I put thee in mind that thou stir up the gift of God which is in
thee, by the putting on of my hands. These. 5.19.20. Zach. 4.1. And the Angel
that talked with me, came again and waked me as a man that is raised out of
his sleep. And the profit of this duty will be great: for as Prove. 27.17. Iron
sharpeneth Iron, so does man sharpen the face of his friend.

And the Lord hearkened and heard] So they arm themselves against those
instances given, with assurance that the Lord did regard things done.

The Lord he takes notice and knows all things that are done and spoken by
men, He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that formed the eye,
shall he not see? And Psalm. 139.4. for there is not a word in my tongue, but
lo, thou know it wholly, O Lord!

To teach us to keep a watch over our mouth and lips, not let them run at
random, i. for quantity, let our words be few, be not talkative, let them be
like Gods, Psalm. 12.6. The words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver,
tried in a furnace of earth fined seven fold. Prove. 10.20. the tongue of the
just man, is as fined silver, but the heart of the wicked is little worth,
Eccles. 5.2.3.6.7. For as a dream comes by the multitude of business, so
the voice of a fool is in the multitude of words. When thou have vowed a vow
to God, defer not to pay it; for he delights not in fools, pay therefore
that thou have vowed, for in the multitude of dreams, and vanities, are also
many words but fear thou God. If in a country thou see the oppression of
the poor, and the defrauding of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the
matter; for he that is higher then the highest, regards, and there be higher
then they. The wicked talk boldly, their tongue walks against heaven, Psalm.
73. but God in heaven hears what is spoken in earth; therefore consider that
of Solomon, Prove. 10.19. In many words there cannot want iniquity, but he that
refraineth his lips is wise. Secondly, for quality look to the matter of
speech, that it be godly and religious, Ephesians. 5. Let not foolish talking be
once heard amongst you, as becomes Saints, but let it be savoury, Collos.
4.6. Let your speech be gracious always, and powdered with salts that ye may
know how to answer every man If a great man overheard us, or one we stood in
awe of, we would be careful of our speech.

An encouragement for Gods children, God stands in the assembly of Gods, he
judges among Gods. So in the assembly of Saints; servants if they perceive
that their masters overheare them talking of any thing, or oversee them doing
of any thing, speak and do well; this is eye service or ear service, yet God
would be served with eye and ear service, and he that sees in secret will
reward openly. And the words are Attendit Jehovah and audit. He hearkened and
heard; he so hears that he also attends or regards it. A man may overheare a
thing and not regard it, and so as good as he heard it not, Eccles. 7.22. But
God as he hears, so he regards. Contrary to that the wicked say, Psa. 10.
That God regards it not. Zeph. 1.12. But God does regard the words of the
tongue, because he has made a law as well for the words as deeds. God made the
tongue, and therefore will have the fruit, 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are bought for a
price; therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, for they are
Gods, so with tongue as well as hand; and therefore we must look to give
account of words, as well as of our actions: Matthew. 12.36. But I say unto you,
that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof
at the day of judgment Jude verses 14.15. And Enoch also, the seventh from
Adam, prophesied of such, saying, behold the Lord comes with thousands of his
Saints, to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among
them, of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed and of all
their cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against him. Plumea
verba, plumbea pondera, windy words, if they be wicked words, lie as a dead
weight on thy soul. Take heed of lifting up his name, take heed of an oath,
for it brings an heavy burden. But it is our encouragement I say, that God
rewards us for good words as well as for our deeds, though they seem to be but
little worth, they are arguments of a sanctified heart, and of the fear of
God: as it is, Matthew. 12.34.35. O generation of vipers, how can you speak good
things when ye are evil? for of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things,
and an evil man out of an evil treasure brings forth evil things.

And a book of remembrance was written before him.] That is, he keeps the
remembrance of the things he knows.

The Lord as he sees and knows all things, so he remembers them, Iaakob,
surely I will never forget any of their works. Heb. 6.10. For God is not
unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor of love, which ye
showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered unto the Saints, and yet
minister. Psalm. 139.2. Jer. 44.21. Psalm. 56.8. Thou have counted my wanderings,
put my tears into thy bottell, are they not in thy register? Dan. 7.10. Revel.
20.12. A similitude taken from Kings, who have things written for memory, Ester
6.1. though God need not.

Because of his eternal and infinite apprehension,

Because he is absolutely perfect,

Isaiah 43.25.

Gods forgetting of sin,

To let us see the folly of wicked men, sin of Judah is written with a pen of
Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, and graven upon the table of their
heart, and upon the horns of your Altars. Yet they by all means labor to
forget it, and if they have escaped and prospered with it for a month or two,
or a year or two, etc. they think also God has forgotten it. But do they
not deceive themselves? when with God is no oblivion, no forgetfulness. What
benefit can they then get by this? even as a malefactor that has committed
some heinous offense, whom the Magistrate lets alone to see what he will do,
whether he will seek his pardon or no, and he goes about to corrupt or remove
all that should give evidence against him, when it is in the power of the Judge
both to be witness and Judge, and proceed of his own knowledge, and out of
his own memory of the act, and who also cannot forget: So here. What got the
sons of Iaakob by smothering their treachery to their father and brother. It
may terrify the wicked that every evil word is registered, Matthew. 12. and
though God should not, the Devil would keep them in mind to accuse them, Rev.
12. yea, and their own consciences, Gods register book.

To instruct every man to keep his books of account well, Chrysostom would
have a man not to forget his sinnnes after pardon. Non ut teipsum, etc. Chryso.
ho. 12. ad popu. Antioch.
Not to consume thy self with the thought of them, but to teach thy soul not
to grow wanton, nor to fall into the same sins again. But most necessary
before, that he may have God to forget them, who as he justifies him that
condemns himself, pardons him that accuses himself; so he forgets his
sins who remembers them himself, in that forgetfulness is incident to him.
And as Saint Ambrose, Novit omnia Deus, sed etc. Ambrose.
God God knows all things, yet he expects thy confession; not that he may
punish, but pardon thee. So the Lord remembers all, yet he expects the sinner
should remember him of them, not that he might punish them, but pardon them.

Comfort for men as to do well, because the Lord sees, Paul, Phil. 3.13.14.

For them that feared the Lord.] Some think the Lord took special notice
therefore of it, because it was so rare and commendable a thing for any to hold
his fear, faith, and a good conscience, in the midst of that wicked and
froward people.

It is a thing most commendable,

For them that feared the Lord.] The Lord has a book of remembrance for them,
which is not barely to remember what they have done, but effectually to
remember it; that is, to reward it, and so much for them imports, that it is
for their benefit and profit, and to recompense and reward them.

It is not in vain to serve the Lord; Blessed in the deed

Because justice requires it,

VERSE. XVII.
And they shall be to me, says the Lord of hosts, in that day that I shall do
this, for a flock, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that
serves him.

AND they shall be to me says the Lord] Here is the Prophets second answer,
from a gracious and sweet promise of God, of his goodness and favor toward
them who fear him; even as an effect of his remembrance, and a proof he did
not forget them. And the sum of this promise is, that in the time of the
Gospel, he would make his choice and refusal of the good and bad, when it
should appear who was more excellent then others; so that those who did
believe, should be taken into his family, and should enjoy great commodities
and great dignity, both be his and so respected, and enjoy the benefits
belonging to his.

And they shall be to me.] And, Here, has the force of an illation, or
reference to the former sentence, ending that, and beginning this. i. To show
that I remember them, I will make them mine: so much the phrase in the
original signifies.

In that day when I shall make them my treasure, my peculiar.] The Lord to show
how dear they should be unto him, how he would defend them, how he would honor
and adorn them, used this word which is used, Ex. 19.5. translated chief
treasure: It signifies a portion of wealth got by a man's own labor and
industry, which men used to love more earnestly and keep more diligently, when
they have it: and so by this, he tells them how dear and precious they should be
unto him, who did receive the Gospel and truly profess him.

Some understand this of the last judgment only, and that day which is not
probable: Some both of the day the Gospel, and the judgment which has great
probability with it.

I will spare them, or I will use mercy and compassion toward them.] I will
receive them and specially love them, and will show my love in this, in sparing
them when they offend, or as some in winking at their infirmities and
corruptions, and not rejecting their service for them, which the similitude
does show.

As a man spares etc.] A similitude illustrating the promise of compassion and
mercy, showing how great and how tender his compassions should be toward them,
when it should be as of a father to his son, whom he loves both as his son,
and also because of that reverence, honor, and obedience he has done unto
him. Now this that is first promised is that they shall be his, for so is the
phrase, they shall be mine, like that which we have, Genesis 48.5. And now thy two
sons Manasseh and Ephraim which are borne unto thee in the land of Egypt,
before I came unto thee into Egypt, shall be mine, as Ruben and Simeon are
mine. i. They shall not be as my Grand children, but as my own sons, and in
the division of the Land, shall have their portions, as any one of my sons:
so here they shall be mine. i. I will adopt them, and make them mine, who are
not so by nature, nor of themselves.

No man is of himself and by nature, not of his parents the child of God, but
adopted so of God to it, Reve. 2.17.

In that day that I shall do this for a flock,] Or rather in that day when I
shall make them my chief treasure: as it is translated: Exodus 19.5. But all
comes to one end, to note how dear the Church and people of God are unto him.

They who fear God and think of his name,

And I will spare them, etc.] Another matter promised unto them, and in it two
things. First, That he would wink at, and pass by their infirmities, when they
served him and did the duties of his worship, and pass by many infirmities in
them, which he will not do in another. Secondly, That when he did visit them,
yet he would do it in love and compassion, and use them as a father his son,
that serves him.

This is a special thing, them: that in their obedience when they endeavor to
serve and perform duties commanded, he will accept it though it be mixed with
many infirmities, and will wink at them, and pass by them, as though he never
saw them. Mich. 7.18.

I will spare them or have compassion of them.] When he should come to afflict
and correct them, it should be in compassion and love.

The Lord when he afflicts and corrects his, he does it in compassion and love,

VERSE. XVIII.
Then shall you return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked:
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

THen shall you return and discern,] etc. The third part of the answer to
these, threatening a judgment to these who spoke thus blasphemously against the
Lord. The sum is, that such a judgment should come upon them, as should open
their eyes which they winked on now, and make them see and acknowledge a
difference as well in the things, as in Gods affection betwixt the good and bad.

Then shall you,] who now blaspheme God, and say you have found nor reaped any
profit by my service: Shall return,] that is, be smitten with a late and
unprofitable, yea, damned repentance; no true and serious returning.

And discerne] Out of woeful experience, when you shall feel your own misery,
and see the happy estate and condition of the godly; shall you know in how
far better estate the righteous;] that is he that is careful and
conscionable in all the duties of justice, honesty and equity. And the wicked]
him that has no conscience at all; but is unjust, unfaithful, unclean, or
any ways wicked: yea, you shall discern and know how excellent his estate is,
that serves God,] that is conscionable in all the duties of the first table,
and is studious and zealous of religion.

And him that serves him not] who has no care of any such thing, but is
profane and in all things irreligious.

You shall discern,] you shall be made to know that God sleeps not in
Heaven, when men do give themselves to all licentiousness and iniquity even
with greediness upon earth, and by experience will perceive, that men shall
not go free for all their sins, but shall come to an account and reckoning:
and so the meaning is, that by their own punishments which God shall lay upon
them, they shall discern the difference; for when as God shall spare them, he
shall rise in judgment against you, and come armed upon you, and then you
shall know that he took notice of all things done by men, and that he would
not suffer sin unpunished, though he have dissembled as it were for a time.

You return.] This may be taken for the sense of Gods judgment, wherewith the
wicked shall be affected, though they shall not repent, though their madness
against God, may by this be repressed, it break not forth no more.

The judgments of God, per totum, specially verse 11. the example of Pharaoh
shows it, and that Dan. 4.22.32. Isaiah 26.11.

Because though all his mercies and blessings should draw them to it, yet they
do it not,

Because they shall see and feel themselves smitten, Egypt and Goshen, or
smitten otherwise then they, Isaiah 27.7.8.

Discern between the righteous and the wicked.] etc. That is how excellent one
is above the other; that whereas they thought this far more happy and
honorable, they should see their error and be made to confess, that the other
is far more excellent, happy and honorable.

The righteous and he that serves God, Balaam Number. 23.10. Let me die the death
of the righteous, let my last end be like his. Wishing the worst part as is
commonly accounted, and so showing what he thought, whose testimony is without
suspicion, he being an enemy. That of Isa. 27.2. and has the Church, a
vineyard, they as vines, when the wicked are compared to thorns: verse 4. hence
that of Cant. 2.2. of the Church and members more excellent, as the Lilly then
the thorns. Reve. 2.1. As gold is more excellent then other metals, yea as in
the goldsmiths shop, it surpasses the iron tongs, and the hammer, the anvile
and the coals, so these all the rest.

Because they are in special favor and love with God, Haman successively, the
book of Ester shows?

Because they are Gods sons, they but his servants at best, at the worst,

Because they are the members of Christ, as the Church is his body,

The righteous and him that serves God.] These two the Prophet joineth
together, as the other two opposites, by these he teaches this.

There is no justice, He that fears God and works righteousness. Hence
Micha 6.8. To do justly and walk humbly with God, are joined together.
Therefore as Saint Paul makes faith the establishment of the law: Romans 3.21. So
St. James makes works and righteousness the perfection of faith: James 2.22.
A justifying faith contains this faith of profession in it.
That is, that which shows it to be sincere and lively or living. Both, that
there is no faith without righteousness, so no true righteousness without
faith.

Because Romans

Because it is not righteousness, econtra, having another end then Gods glory,
a man's gain, or praise, or such like: hence Christ reproves the works of
hypocrites, though they did the works of justice, it was not righteousness in
them, Matthew. 6.2.5. Now where religion is not, it must be that they shall want
their ground and have their end corrupt.

Then not without ground, have the Fathers before us, and we we now, or the
like; but rather splend da peccata, for they being void of religion cannot have
righteousness Jam, 2.22.

To teach us, what to judge of the works of ignorant and irreligious men, such
as have no knowledge of religion, make no conscience of the service and worship
of God, certainly we account them not, neither can we account them
righteousness. But we say, As Jam. 1.26. his religion is vain, no religion
though he do the works of religion, which has not justice and mercy and love
joined with it: so we say his righteousness is vain, which has not the
works of religion with it: we see a man hear the word, receive the sacrament,
be diligent in the works of Gods worship, but he is unjust, covetous, unchaste,
etc. we say his religion is in vain: and this will every one subscribe to; we
see men just, and chaste, and liberal in alms, etc. but he is irreligious, he
regards not Gods day, he neglects the word, the sacrament, prayer, and such
like: we say his righteousness is vain. But this will not all subscribe to;
but they shall know it at one time or other, that it is in vain; not only so
far as Chrysostom. speaks of works without faith, comparing them with the
relics of the dead Cadavera enim etsi etc. Chrysostom.
carcases, though they be covered with precious and rich clothes, yet have no
heat for them: so such as want faith, though they shine with glorious works,
yet they do them no good: now where there is not knowledge nor conscience of
religion, there cannot be faith. But further Orig. in Job goes. Omnia quae
faciant homines, etc. Orig.
All things which men do, whether in keeping their virginity, or in
abstinence, or in the chastnes of their bodies, or in the mortifying of the
flesh, or in the distributing of their goods, they are all to no purpose, and
to their loss, if they do them not of faith. And I infer they cannot be of
faith, where there is not care and conscience of religion: In vain then shall
it be unto them, for it shall bring them no fruit, no profit. For of whom
should they have their reward? Shall they receive from him whom they have not
sought? Whom they have not known? Whom they have not believed? Verily they
shall not receive from him any reward, but judgment, and anger, and
condemnation.

This may admonish every one, to add to their righteousness, himself. For if
the Apostles rule be good, Jam. 2.26. faith without works is dead: then why not
much more, says Chrysostom, are works without faith? which works must needs be
where there is not religion: and so he shall not have his reward that does
them, but they will be unprofitable to him; for as he that builds without a
foundation loses his work, and has only his labor, travail, and grief; so
is he that would build up works of righteousness, without faith and religion.
Orig. And as he says, all the whole year that Noah was preserved in the Arc,
and the Sun showed not her self, nor sent her beams upon the earth, the earth
gave no fruit, for without the Sun it can bring forth no fruit; So unless the
truth of God shine in the hearts of men, they can bring forth no fruit of good
works or righteousness. Then must every one endeavor that is just, upright,
chaste, etc. not to rest there, but labor to be religious, and have knowledge
and faith which must sanctify and make acceptable, and so profitable to the
other, as the Temple the gold, and the Altar the offering: lest they be to us
as Ciprian ser. dezelo and livore, or rather as the spirit of God says, Romans
14.23. Sin, because not of faith.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE PROPHET MALACHY.
FOR behold, the day comes, that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud,
yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble, and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave them neither
root nor branch.

2 But unto you that fear my Name, shall the sun of righteousness arise,
and health shall be under his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as fat
calves. 3 And ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be dust under the
soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this, says the Lord of hosts.
4 Remember the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb in
all Israel with the slatutes and judgments. 5 Behold I will send you Elijah
the Prophet before the coming of the great and fearful day of the Lord. 6
And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of
the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with cursing.
VERSE I.
For behold the day comes, that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud,
yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble, and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave them neither root
nor branch.

FOR behold the day comes, that shall burn as an even.] In this fourth
Chapter we may observe two principal parts.

First, some predictions, which are three. First, a prophecy of judgment to
the wicked, Verse 1. Secondly, of mercy and goodness to the godly, Verse 2.3.
Thirdly, of John Baptist his coming, and the fruit of it to the Church, Verse
5.6. Secondly, aprecept, or exhortation, to read and remember the Law, Verse
4.
Now in this first verse is a prediction or denunciation of judgment, even an
utter destruction to the wicked, by it opposing their former blasphemy who had
affirmed, that God did not respect the things that were done, and had
altogether cast off the duty and office of a Judge. And in this the first word,
[Behold] shows the certainty of it, poynting at it as if it were already come
and present.

The judgment God threatens against the wicked, he certainly performs. Vide,
Cap. 1.5. Doct. 1.

The day comes.] Many think this is to be understood of the day of the
second coming of Christ, when the wicked shall have their full doom; and true
it is, till then, this and the like are not fully accomplished, the wicked have
not their full portion; yet does God so execute his judgments here, as may be
to manifest his justice, and to confirm the faith of his, showing by some few
examples and small things that he does, that one day he will fully judge the
wicked: Therefore their opinion is the more probable and reasonable, who think
this was meant of the first coming of Christ, that upon their ungrateful
rejecting of mercy, whereas they boasted of a redeemer and looked for a great
day; The day indeed should come, but not such a day as they imagined, but such
as should consume them; like that day, Amos, 5.20. a day of darkness and not
light. And therefore he adds, it shall burn as an Oven, a common phrase in
Scripture when Gods wrath, and man's power to resist, are compared; Gods wrath
is as fire which consumes any dry matter it lights upon, for so it follows;

All the proud yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as slubble.] Which words
answer their blasphemy, Cap. 3.15. showing they were in a gross error, to call
the proud happy, and God will spare them; but the event should show the
contrary.

The day that comes shall burn them up.] i. The time that I have appointed,
in whose power all times and seasons are, not when men shall think fit or
prescribe me.

And shall leave them neither root nor branch.] An expression noting their
utter destruction.

The Lord will destroy and burn up all proud and wicked men.

As the Lord will destroy all wicked men, David's observation, Psalm. 37.35.36.
and Job's, Job, 24.23.24. and Solomon's Pro. 3.35.

Because this will more magnify both his justice and power, that he respects
not persons in judgment,

Because this will make him more generally and thoroughly feared, then if he
smote others,

Because it will more plainly prove his providence and government, Act. 28.4.6.

This may instruct us when we see wicked men to grow great in wealth and honor
by iniquity, yet not to envy them;

To admonish the rich and renowned among men,

The proud shall be Stuble.]

Wicked men whatsoever they be, great, honorable, rich, powerful, Esa. 27.4.
Who would set the briers and thorns against me in battle? I would go through
them, I would burn them together. See also, Psalm. 37.20. Es. 1.31. Nah. 1.10.
We have many examples of this, in Pharaoh Ahab, Sennacherab, Herod, and notably
in him that was both an example of the point, and one that taught it, namely
Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.30.32.

Because God is most powerful, the Lord of hosts,

Because all men are weak compared with him, they are but gras-hoppers, Es.
40.22. and reputed as nothing, Dan. 4.35.

To teach great men not to sin, and promise safety to themselves for their
greatness, Esa. 9.14.

Zach. 11.2. Then as the third Captain who was of equal strength with the
other two, when he saw them perish, entreated humbly for his life, 2. Kin.
1.13. How much more are such to entreat the Lord, who see him abasing more
mighty then themselves?

To instruct mean men, Absolon did his servants to kill Ammon, upon the
confidence of his greatness, 2. Sam. 13.28. Yet consider Absolon could not
save himself, but was hanged and stricken through with darts.

VERSE. II.
But unto you that fear my Name, shall the sun of righteousness arise, and
health shall be under his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as fat
calves.

But unto you that fear my Name, shall the sun of righteousness arise.] Here
is a second prediction or prophecy which is touching the godly, and of good
things of a spiritual nature. And to them does he turn his speech, that he
did not denounce this terrible day, to afflict the minds of the good, but to
terrify the wicked, who shall perish being contemners of God; but when that
shall come, you that fear God, lift up your heads in peace and hope, for to
you shall arise, The sun of righteousness. Thus the Prophet calls Christ after
the manner of the Prophets, who in diverse places have given him this name.
Esa. 60.1.2.19. Ioh. 8.12. Luc. 1.78. And he is said to arise unto them,
because he does enlighten them by his word and spirit: And he is called the Sun
of righteousness, being so himself, and making them so, regenerating, purging
them from their corruptions, renewing in them the image of God; which things
are more particularly expressed by that which follows.

With healing in his wings.] Keeping the same metaphor, he calls the sun
beams wings; that as by the beams of the sun, the air is purged and health
procured to men, so Christ should by his grace and spirit, purge them whom he
enlightens.

And you shall go forth.] That is, be set at liberty from bondage and slavery,
from sin, the devil, and death.

And grow up as the calves of the stall.] That is, you shall have an increase
and augmentation of grace and of the spirit, more and more, as fat calves: an
homely similitude to make it clearer: Some read you shall leap, but this
other the words will well bear, and is as fit.

All men are in themselves darkness and have no light, the estate of every man
by nature. The point is only implied.

Christ is risen a sun to as many as are truly called,

Christ is most holy and pure, without spot and blemish of sin,

They who are Gods elected and called, i. have their sins purged, their
spiritual sores cured, and they made holy and sanctified, 1. Cor. 6.11. Romans
8.10. Gal. 5.24. Ephesians. 5.26.27.

Because they are made one with Christ and joined with him, Cor. 5.17. New in
quality and condition, being made partakers of the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4.
as iron put into the fire remains so in the substance, but yet is pulled forth
wholly burning like fire: The same substance with the name remains, the heat,
shining, brightness, other accidents are not the irons, but the fires.

Because, as a cause of this, These. 5.23. The mind enlightened with the true
knowledge of God, Col. 1.9. The memory keeps and remembers that which is
agreeable to Gods will, whereas naturally it best remembers lewdness and
vanity, Psalm. 119.11. The word is hid in the heart: The will is sanctified so
far as it is freed from sin, that it can will and choose that which is good
and acceptable to God, and refuse that which is evil, Phil. 2.13. The
affections are sanctified and move to that which is good to embrace it, and
eschew evil, Romans 12.9. The body is sanctified when the members are
instruments of righteousness, Romans 6.13. And all is from Christ, in whom they
are, and to whom they are joined: In Christ they have a gracious health of mind
and spirit and body, who took whole man, In Christo habent etc. Aug. de civit.
Dei. lib. 10. c. 27.
that he might heal the whole man of all pestilentiall contagion, as Saint
Aug. speaks. But none has this holiness in perfection but in part, and to
dream of a perfection is a Pelagian fancy, contrary to experience, conscience,
our own confessions to God, and to the word of God that has taught us that we
have but here the first fruits, Romans 8.23. And the full measure not accomplished
till after death, Col. 3.4. In the mean time he is in hand with the cure and
healing of us: So that the state of the best is clean in part, and yet in part
to be made clean, and must hearken to the Apostle, 2. Cor. 7.1. To cleanse
themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, St. Bern. in Cant. sermon.
58.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God; knowing they have still an army of
vicious desires to fight against, which are the Jebusites who dwell in our
borders, and may be subdued, though they cannot be driven out.

This will answer the Papists slander, Bishop in his Epistle to the King, that
we say, that to think of inherent righteousness and to stand just by it
before God, is to raze the foundation of religion, and to make Christ a
Pseudo-Christ. If they understand it of being just imperfectly before God, we
none of us deny it, but if as perfect righteousness in Gods sight, we say it
does raze the foundation, and justleth Christ out of his place, and take away
from him that honor which the Scripture has given him to be called, the Lord
our Righteousness, Jer. 33.16. and to defeat the work of God, by whom, he is
made unto us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. But this is injurious to the
inestimable value of Christ's blood. God cloakes our sin now, and cures it too
by degrees, and afterward fully; he cloaketh and covers our iniquity with the
righteousness of Christ, which is not a short cloak that cannot cover two,
Bern. in Cant. 61.
as Saint Bernard speaks, but being a large and everlasting righteousness it
will largely cover both thee and me.

They who are elected and called are redeemed; that is, are set at liberty and
freed by Christ, from sin, satan, and death; and shall go forth (as the
words are here) from sin, Romans 7.5.6. Romans 6.6.14. 1 John 3.8. from Satan,
Joh. 12.31. Col. 1.13. from death, heb. 2.14.

Because they are one with Christ, and he having over come those enemies,

Because being one with him, Now where the spirit is, there is liberty, 2 Cor.
3.17.

Because they must,

Because God has showed mercy to pardon their sin,

We see many of them who are partakers of this redemption, yet are still
overcome of sin, and are led captive to transgress the commandment, as Saint
Paul was, Romans 7.

Falling into sinnne, Cypr. de circums. Epiph. in haeres. 64.
as Saint Cyprian speaks, as a raging beast, yet tied and chained up in the
utmost passages of the soul: Or as Epiphanius, as a root sprouting out weeds,
yet still nipped and checked that they cannot have their growth. Then sin
reigns not, so that though by reason of this remainder of sin a man be
greatly hindered, that he cannot do the thing he would, yet the thing that
prevails in him, is a will and desire of righteousness, hungring and
thirsting after it, the drifr and purpose of his life tending wholly to it, it
is grievous to him that he fails, and makes him cry out, Romans 7.27. O wretched
man! etc.

Those are still assaulted by Satan, and hotly pursued by him,

It is a sign they are the rather freed, not because they are tempted, Cyprian
speaks: The Devil is therefore more fierce, because overcome, and would feign
conquer his conqueror; So that though he go about like a roaring Lion, 1 Pet.
5.9. yet they are able to resist him steadfast in the faith, and so armed with
the coate-armour of Gods spirit, and his grace, that though he may by violence
now and then foil them, yet does he not overcome them and lead them captive;
but the more he assaults, the more are they enabled to repel him and resist
his forces; for they prove like a City that has been once besieged, but not
sacked; ever after it will be better able to resist the like forces: yea
greater, because they will fortify the walls and breaches, and increase their
munition and strength. It falls out with men that enjoy their lands in peace
and security, they look not into their evidences, only keep them in a box or
chest; but if any man lay claim to the least part, and would wrest it from
them, then will they with diligence seek them forth, and look them over, and
consult with Lawyers, whereby they are able to answer the plea of the
adversaries. So it is with the spiritual estate; Satan (as Chrysostom
speaks) when he sees he can do nothing, either presently desists, fearing
lest he become a cause of more glory to us: or if he do continue, it is but to
be revenged of them by troubling and vexing them, whom he cannot overcome; So
that his assaults prove that they are freed from him, as Pharoahs pursuing of
Israel showed they had escaped.

These still dye, how are they then freed from it?

They neither are nor can be free, because the sentence is unchangeable, Heb.
9.27. but they are freed from the dominion and tyranny of death, yea from the
hurt and evil that comes by it; nay, it is made to bring them many benefits.
It frees them from, First, the afflictions and miseries of this life, yea
though it seem to come unto them somewhat untimely. The righteous is taken
away from the evil to come, he shall enter into peace, they shall rest in
their beds, Isai. 57.1.2. 1 Kings 14.13. Secondly, from the fellowship of
wicked men, who vex their souls, as the Sodomites did righteous Lots. Thirdly,
they are freed by it from sin. Death is found to be profitable to the
faithful, because it frees a man from the danger of sinning, and puts him into
a security of not sinning, says S. August. So that in bringing death, is by
death destroyed, as the viper of her brood. Death had never entered but by sin,
and sin had never ended but by death, Fourthly they are freed from the assaults
of Satan and the world; for they by it do not only fly into the wilderness
to be free for many days, as the Church, Rev. 12.6. but as the words are in
the fifth verse, they are caught up unto God, and to his throne: and so as
favorites pursued, are safe when they are in the Court, specially in the
presence chamber: So much more here. Besides these freedoms, it brings great
benefits. First, it is their passage into the presence of God, where is
fullness of joy; an unpleasant gate, but to a Princely Palace. Secondly, it is
an herald that fetches them to their glory and crowning, from these earthly
cottages, 2 Cor. 5.1. Thirdly, it restores our bodies more holy and pure unto
us. At length then what is death? It Is no more then to put off ones coat; the
body is as a garment, and we lay it off but for a while by death, to put it on
again a fresh.

It is comfort to as many as find and feel the assaults of Satan and sin,
Free indeed because the son has made them free, John 8.36. They must not
measure their freedom, and so their comforts, by feeling no assaults: For as
Hierom to Heliodorus: Then thou art most dangerously assaulted, when thou
know not that thou art assaulted. We have to fight says Saint Cyprian (de
mortalit.) with covetousness, with unchastity, with wrathfulnesse, with
ambition, with carnal vices, and with the enticements of the world. Hereupon
says Saint August. ( lib. 2. contr. Julian.) God forbid that we should think
holy Cyprian to have been covetous, because he fought with covetousness, or
wrathful, or ambitious, or carnal, or a lover of this world, because he
fought with them; nay, therefore was he none of these, because he fought and
strongly resisted these evil motions.

Healing under his wings.] It implies sickness among men.

Every man naturally of himself, From the sole of the foot to the head, there
is no soundness, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores.

Because of natural parents who communicate their sin and nature; beget in
their own likeness, Genesis 5.3. and so, That that is borne of flesh is flesh,
John 3.6. It Is propagated more then any natural disease, and outgrowes nature,
for we find children sinning before they can either go or speak.

Because they are without Christ who is life; Chrysologus.

Because they are not regenerate, then that is true, Romans 7.18. In me, that is,
in my flesh dwells no good thing. And if no good, then much evil; for there
is no medium twixt these which are more opposite then health and sickness.

To let every man see what he is by nature,

This may teach us why men can so hardly endure the Ministry of the word,
specially that which reproves and threatens,

The reason why they account the Law and Commandments of God, such a burden,
and the obedience of them so tedious, is, Paul complains, though he was in
health, and had an inward man, Romans 7.22.23. much more such as have nothing but
the outward and the carnal man.

And ye shall go forth.] If Christ bring liberty, it intimates a bondage
before.

Every man naturally is a slave, in captivity and bondage to Satan, Carnal and
sold under sin, Romans 6.16. To whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey. John 12.31. The Devil is the Prince of this
world. 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this world. 2 Timothy 2.26. Who takes men captive at
his will.

Because they serve and obey sin, subjection to it, especially when the
service they do is willing, John 8.34. Whosoever commits sin is the
servant of sin. So Romans 6.16. and 2 Pet. 2.19. They are the servants of
corruption, for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

Because if they be slaves to sin, by sin, death entered into the world,
Romans 5.12. Sin the only cause (says one) which enlarges deaths dominions,
and made all the world to become his tributaries; Adam had not died, had he not
sinned.

This will teach us and warrant us what to judge of those men, whom we shall
hear, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage. And yet they live very
profanely and wickedly; no iniquity subdued, but sin reigning, and they
subjects to their corruption, yea captives to their lusts, uncleanenesse,
ambition, pride, anger, etc. When they are Masters of families, Magistrates of
Cities, Captains of bands, Coronels of fields, Generals of Armies, Commanders
of countries, yea, Princes; yet one base, ambitious, or covetous, or voluptuous
lust does rule over them; miserable slaves, and if they feel not this, their
bondage is the greater; sin and Satan have the surer possession, when things
all are at peace. The captivity is the more dangerous, the more willing; as the
malignity of poison, is near the less, though it be sweet, if yet it be
poison.

This will confute the Doctrine of Popery, Bellarmines words) that a man may
do things morally good, and keep or fulfill the law, according to the
substance of the things prescribed, without the help and assistance of special
grace. But how should this be, if he be the slave of sin? We deny not to any
man free will, for else we should make him no man: But we must understand that
free will is either good or evil, and so according to the distinction of
Bernard: All that have free will but to evil, are their own and Satan's; all
that have free will and to good, are Gods. Gregorius Ariminensis is express,
that to affirm, that man by his natural strength without the special help
of God, can do any virtuous action, or morally good, is one of the damnable
heresies of Pelagius: or if in any thing it differ from his heresy, it is
further from truth.

And grow up as young calves.] A further benefit promised of growing up and
increasing in grace and sanctification daily by degrees.

They who are Gods elect and called, shall grow up and increase in graces, They
are branches in Christ that bear fruit, and are purged that they may bear
more fruit. Joh. 15.2. Phil. 1.6. Jam. 2.5. 1 Cor. 1.4.5.

Because he will restore in them by Christ, Adam, and by him, his image of
righteousness and holiness; therefore shall they increase and grow up toward
it, which must be got again in long time and diverse progress, though it were
lost in a moment.

Because some doubt else may,

This may put many a man to a quaere with himself, Pharaoh dreamed of. These
may fear themselves, that if they approve themselves in this condition and
think all is well with them, they are not right; but if they dislike their
dullness, and backwardness in profiting and growing on in sanctification, if
they bewail their wants, and earnestly use the means, they may be persuaded
that what God has begun he will perform in them to the end; and that he will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him.

To persuade every one to endeavor to go forward, August. He had said, I am
not already perfect, and yet afterward he says: as many as be perfect;
perfect, and yet not perfect; perfect travailers, but yet not perfect
comprehenders: Let it always be displeasing unto thee to be as thou art; if
thou meanest to attain at length to that which yet thou art not; for when thou
think well of thy self, thou go no farther, but if thou say it is
well, thou art undone; forget what is past, look not back, lest thou staiest
where thou now art: Remember Lots wife.

VERSE. III.
And ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be dust under the soles of
your feet in the day that I shall do this, says the Lord of hosts.

AND ye shall tread down the wicked] The last thing promised to those that
belong to God, is victory over their enemies. A comfortable promise to them
that were oppressed and under the wind, that God would change the condition,
and make them now aloft, and the other under. It is usual with the Lord, when
he promises redemption and comforts to his, to join also a prophecy of the
destruction of their enemies, lest they should be grieved with too much
emulation at their present prosperity. Thus God works patience in them, seeing
he would give them after a while cause of triumph over their enemies, and that
they shall be the Lords Ministers to act this judgment, You shall tread down
the wicked, they shall be made your footstool: And it is added, they shall be
as dust.] or ashes; showing their utter and ignominious destruction.

In the day that I shall do this.] Which notes the time spoken to restrain
their desires, who happily hearing it, would be carried headlong with it in their
desires for it; therefore by this they are taught to wait with patience, till
the time come when God will effect it. And this day is partly in this life, but
fully and perfectly in the other, when they shall with Christ judge the wicked
and tread upon them.

The Lord he often descends to the infirmities of his,

The Lord oftimes destroys the wicked, Ye shall tread, etc.

VERSE. IIII.
Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb in
all Israel with the statutes and judgments.

REmember the law of Moses my servant.] Here is the second part of this
Chapter, the precept commanding their reading and remembering the law; because
from hence they were to have no more Prophets till Christ's coming, when John
should be his forerunner; and therefore when they were without Prophets, they
must give the more diligence to read and be exercised in the law, and to submit
themselves to the doctrine of piety therein contained. Now, by naming the law,
he does not exclude the Prophets and prophesies that were written, his own and
others, but rather including them as commentaries of the law, and interpreters
of Moses; So he leaves them not to their own imaginations, but restraines them
to that which was left written as being sufficient to direct and govern them.

My servant] Moses was not the author of the Law, but only the instrument of
bringing it. Therefore it is added;

Which I commanded unto him.] He was only Gods Minister to utter what he would
have him deliver.

In Horeb.] The place where the Law was given, which some think to signify
the mount Sinai, others think by both is meant one hill, which in respect of
that part, which lay toward the East was called Horeb: of that toward the
West, Sinai; and of this place the Prophet rather speaks, that he may make
them call to mind the great Majesty of God, which he showed in that place, at
the giving of the Law.

To all Israel.] He notes the persons to whom he gave it, even to themselves,
to make them the rather to regard it, and obey it above others, Psalm. 147.20.
And he says to all, that no man might exempt himself, whether learned or
unlearned, base or noble, male or female, all ought to attend to it and
remember it.

With the Statutes and Judgments.] This he speaks the rather, to commend this
care to them, seeing the law is for their profit and good, and contains in it
all directions for public affairs, to teach men to carry themselves in all
conditions.

The people of God must remember the whole Law; Vide Cap. 2.6.

The people of God must remember this wholly and only.

The people of God must read, know, David's prayer and practice, Psalm. 119. And
Christ requires it, Joh. 5.39. and Saint Paul, Col. 3.16.

Because some are such as must teach others, and ought to do it:

Because they cannot without it preserve themselves from sin; Ignorances, for
not knowing sin they can no more avoid it, then the bird that sees not the
snare: but the knowledge of the word will secure and preserve them, Prove.
7.1.2.2.4.5.

Because whatsoever is done in obedience of God,

Uses of this point, see, Cap. 1.8.

VERSE. V.
Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and
fearful day of the Lord.

BEhold I will send you Eliah.] The third prophecy in this Chapter, touching
the coming of John the Baptist, of his office, and the fruit the Church should
have by him, in this verse and the last.

In this verse we have, his sending, and in it we observe, by whom, and who is
sent, his name and office, and thirdly the time when.

I will send.] This is here spoken of God the Father, which Cap. 3.1. was
spoken of the Son: And to the Father it is also applied, Matthew. 11.10.

Eliah the Prophet.] Not that Eliah who was taken up in a fiery Chariot, but
John Baptist who is here called Eliah, for the similitude of his mind and
manners, his graces, gifts, and office: If we admit an heavenly interpreter to
tell us the meaning, Luc. 1.17. or Christ, Matthew. 17.10.11.12. who told his
disciples that Elias was come: and we read in the next verse, verse 13. That
the disciples understood that he spoke unto them of John the Baptist. Yet
Christ revealed it at another time more plainly, Matthew. 11.13.14. All the
Prophets prophesied till John, and this is Elias which was for to come.

The Papists understand this of the true Eliah, and that he shall come again
in person. Ribera has three reasons for it. First, The authority of
Chrysostom, Riber in Lo.
Aug. Ambr. Theod. Cyril. Aquin. etc. We answer, one Angel is more then all
these, especially Christ who is our sole Doctor, and has otherwise
interpreted. Secondly, The Septuagint. in stead of Prophet reads Thesbite. We
answer that the original is Prophet, so Ribera himself confesses, and so the
King of Spains Bible has it. Must we then reform the Fountain by the
Channel, or this by that? Thirdly, His third reason is from the last words of
the verse, Lest I come, etc. which are, he says, understood of the second
coming of Christ, because his first coming was to save, not to judge or
destroy. I answer, It is not Christ that speaks these words, but the Father,
who verse three, was called The Lord of Hosts, a title not given to Christ. And
the words are not meant, of the destruction of the wicked at the last
judgment, but of Gods plaguing them in this life, for contemning of Christ, as
their own Montanus does also interpret it: Bellarm ine also would prove it as
Ribera does, that the words refer to Christ's second coming, because that day
is called Great and fearful, whereas Christ's first coming is acceptable, and
a day of salvation. I answer, that Christ's second coming, in respect of no
other thing, nor to any other persons, is great and fearful, then his first
coming is, and? contra, for his second coming, to his own, is a day of
salvation, and they are bid to lift up their heads when it approaches: but to
the wicked, both the first and second coming are fearful, and full of horror.
Therefore Montanus interprets it thus: the day is great in respect of the good,
and dreadful in respect of the wicked; resembling this place to that of John,
Matthew. 3.12.

But the reason why the Papists contend it should be the true Eliah, is,
because they might prove that the Pope is not Antichrist. This is one of
Sanders his great demonstrations to prove it, because Eliah must resist
Antichrist, but Eliah is not yet come to do it. ergo, But what Prophet, what
Apostle, what Scripture, ever told them any such thing. Papal traditions will
leave nothing unknown, they tell us things wherein Gods spirit is silent; they
tell us the soldiers name who pierced Christ, the thieves name who were
crucified with Christ, the hosts name in whose house he celebrated the supper,
and the names of the two witnesses, Rev. 11.3. to the Enoch and Elias, if we
will believe them: but their folly is made manifest to all that will see.

Before the coming etc.] Here is the time when Elias shall come, immediately
before Christ's coming; that is, his first coming, which though it may seem to
be described contrary, when it is said to be acceptable and gracious, yet this
is spoken in respect of diverse parties: that whereas there were some that
contemned and made no account of the mercies of Christ, to them it should be a
dreadful day, but to the godly, acceptable and gracious.

The coming of Christ is very terrible, to all natural, He shall smite the
earth with the red of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay
the wicked: which is again repeated, Rev. 2.16. And by his Ministers he does
it, 2. These. 2.8. 2. Cor. 2.15.16.

Because he brings them by this to the sight of sin, Romans 3.20.

Because by this he brings them to the sense of that punishment which is due
for sin,

By this he also troubles his own,

He does so,

Other things which might be observed here, are already noted, Cap. 3.1.

VERSE. VI.
And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of
the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the Earth with cursing.

AND he shall turn the heart of the fathers.] In this verse is described the
end of John's coming before Christ, Vide brevem expos. hujus versus, apud D.
Abbot. Antich. Demonstr. ca. 6 p. 133.
his office, which is to convert the hearts of the Fathers to the children, and
to bring them to an holy union of faith, to work repentance in all, and to
turn them from iniquity to the living God.

He shall turn.] He shall be my instrument to turn or convert men; speaking
honorably of the Ministry of the word, to show how powerful it is, when he
works with it. The Ministers then convert, when they are Co-workers with God,
1. Cor. 4.15. 1. Cor. 15.10. but prevail not when he denies assistance, 1.
Cor. 3.7.

The heart of the father to etc.] Saint Aug. and Hierom, by the Fathers,
understand Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the Prophets, and by Children, the
Jews; when by the preaching of John the Jews should believe in Christ, in
whom the Fathers had believed; then should their fathers hearts be turned and
affected toward them, which otherwise were averse from them. Some understand
by Fathers, the Jews, and by Children, the Apostles and other Christians,
according to that Psalm, 45.16. And when the Jews were converted, by Elias, to
believe as the Christians did, then were the Fathers and Children of one mind,
consenting in one truth. But some understand by them all ages, orders, degrees
of men, meaning that John should execute his office with the like authority,
gravity, and power toward all, and shall have and see the fruit of his labors
in all sorts, and so it is interpreted, Luke 1.17. That John when he came,
should find many dissensions, many strange opinions and dotages, but he should
gather them to God, and bring them from those dissensions to true unity, that
they may grow together in one faith.

Lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.] These words menace as many as
resisted John's Ministry. There were among this people many obstinate and
wilful, who had need of this rowsing and awakening: a threatening also, not
only against particular men, but to destroy the whole Nation of the Jews, by
famine, pestilence, war, and exile.

Repentance is wrought by the preaching of the word. Vide, Cap. 3.7.

The Ministry of the word works upon all, old, young, rich, poor,

Because God has decreed to save of all sorts some; then must the word needs
work upon them, it being the means of salvation,

Because that when he converts by it, the wise, rich, and mighty,

Because when he calls of all sorts,

To encourage the Ministers in the diversity of their hearers, Peter toward
the circumcision, and was mighty in Paul toward the Gentiles, Gal. 2.8. So he
will this day be powerful to some of the rich, the next to some of the poor;
this Lords day to one of honor, the next happily, to one in disgrace and vile,
to all according to the pleasure of his own working.

A Table of the Contents.
The letter (a) shows the first Alphabet, the letter (b) the second, the
figure shows the Page.
A. ACcepting of persons, a great sin b 74 75 Adversity b 158 Adultery b 192
Adultery annuls not marriage b 119 Affection how far necessary in Gods
service a 159 160 Affliction, a burden a 3 It befalls Gods dearest children. a
8 Why it befalls them b, 236. 248 Alms of oppressors, a, 223. 224 226 Altar,
what it is. a, 126 Anger of God. a, 187. 188 Angels, the name to whom given. b,
166
B. Banishment a proof of Gods anger. a, 29 Blasphemy a great sin. b, 152 It
much displeases God, b, 153 some kinds of it. b, 156. 157 248. 249 Blessings
abused, aggravate sin. a, 208 Bread, what meant by it. a, 126 Bondage of
natural men. b, 281 282 Bounty in Gods service. a, 150. 151. 152. Bounty of
Idolaters. b, 213. 214 Burden, what it signifies. a, 2
C. Calling of Ministers b 26. 27. 49. 50 faithfulness in particular calling
b, 36. 37. How children to be ordered by their parents for their callings a,
66. Sins against ones calling are more heinous. a, 120 Catholic Church, and
the members of it. b, 102 Children, their duty. a, 57 59. 60. 64 67. 69. 71. 73
Children of God, their happy condition. b, 237. 238 Christ, to whom he comes.
b, 167 his coming desired. by Patriarchs. b, 168. his coming promised long.
b, 170. 171 he is our Prophet b, 172. 173. be purifieth his people b, 175. 176
Church, now Catholic. a, 194. it is the most excellent society. b, 178. it may
err, b, 59. 60. 61. it must be holy. b, 89. the honor and prosperity of it.
b, 240. 241. Church-robbers. b, 219. 220. 221 225. 228 229 Conference of godly.
b, 261. Creation binds us to Gods service. a, 91. 92. Creatures have all power
from God. b, 12. Credit, not got by sin. b, 17. 19. It is gotten by honoring
and maintaining of Ministers. b, 239 Customs, injurious concerning tithes. b,
225
D. Dearth and famine for sin b, 14 Death, how Gods children freed from it b,
278 279 Deceivers in Gods service a, 231 233 Desire of Christ b 179 180
Disgrace brought by sin, foretells ruin, without repentance b, 20 Divorces
for needless causes b 122 Divorce may only be by authority b. 118 119
unlawful, but only for adultery b, 141 142 143 144 Dominion of sin b, 278
Donatives, their original b 228
E. Elijah, who he is b, 286 287 Election binds us to Gods service a, 94 95
Increase in grace b, 281 282 Error not to be taught b, 41 Excellency of the
godly b, 267 Excommunication a, 129 130 131 132 Executors of wills their sin
b, 198 199 Exhort, we must exhort one another b, 258 259 Extraordinary
providence of God for his people b, 237
F. Famine for sin b, 14 Fatherless children not to be injuried 198 199
Favor of God how to be esteemed b, 205 206 Fear of God a 97 98 the want of it
causes sin b, 201 differences of filial and servile fear a, 98 99 the
effects of Gods fear a 101. servile fear, what it is, with the effect of it a
110 111 Forgetfulness of benefits a, 25 Free will b, 138 281
G. God, his power a, 37 his anger a, 187 188 the Lord of hosts a, 37
Godliness causes prosperity b, 250
H. Hearing required b, 51 52 53 Heart must be kept pure b, 137 Honor of God
a, 97 Honor lost by sin b, 19 Hopes of wicked men vain a, 38 39 Hosts, God
the Lord of hosts a, 37 Husband may not grieve his wife b, 105 106 Hypocrisy
a, 156 157 b. 187 188 It is a great sin a, 220 Hypocrites think all too much
for God a, 218 Hypocrites justify themselves when under judgments a, 251 252
I. Idolaters liberal in their worship b, 213 214 Imitation of predecessors
virtues b, 58 Impropriations of Churches b, 228 229 Inconveniences must not
hinder obedience to God b 4 5 Ingratitude a great sin a, 16 17 25 208
Injuriousnesse is against nature b 79 it is against religion b 80 81 Injustice
is joined with irreligion b, 150 151 268 Invocation of Saints b, 181 Ironies,
whether lawful a, 167 168 Irreligion b 187 268 Judgments, are for sin a 41
they should restrain sin a 5. Of profiting by them a 10, 11. They profit not
the wicked b 13. How wicked carry themselves in them b 98. How vain their
course is b 98 99 Hypocrites justify themselves under them b 251, 252
Judgments may be upon things belonging to men, as well as upon their own
persons b 235. No person freed from judgments b 10, 11. The causes of
judgments b 96. God brings them not but upon known causes b 185 They are
equal a 52. God will be justified in them, a 43 44 47 God has glory by them a
54. God can bring them with a word b 16. The difference of them on the godly
and the wicked a 45, 46 Iudgeing of others a 146, 147, 148 149
K Kingdoms, dispoed of by God a 40 Knowledge of God, how needful, a 152, 153
Knowledge excuses not hearing b 6. 7. God knows the wicked and their ways a
184, 260
L Lame service a 156 Law the false pretense of it increases sin b 147
Liberality of Idolaters b 213, 214 Long life a blessing b 29, 30 Love the
causes of it b 77 Love of God to his Church a 19
M Magistrates, when they neglect to punish, God will do it b 94. How they are
to give judgment b 185 186 how to be obeyed a 63, 82 Maintenance of Ministers
b 215 216 221 224 225 226. 227 232 233. What it is b 216 218. How necessary b
227 228. A blessing to such as maintain them b 231, 232 Marriage how children
to. submit to their parents in it a 69 God is the witness of marriage b 115.
The description of marriage b 121 122. The author of it b 132. The end of it b
133 Marriage with contrary religion b 90, 91, 92 Vnfaithfullnesse in marriage
is sin against God b 112 Married persons, their duty b 120 Mass whether one
may be present at it a 157 Meditation of the word b 7 Mercy of God only keeps
off judgments b 203 204 Mighty men cannot withstand God b 273 Mincha, what it
signifies a 199 Ministers, must put difference between godly and wicked a 126
130. They sin, if censure not the wicked a 132 Contempt of Gods Ministers and
his worship go together a 214. Best Ministers most contemned a 219, They must
apply doctrine b 2, 3 what their care must be concerning Gods worship b 8, 9. A
special Covenant is made with them b 24 25. They deliver whole truth b 39 they
must not corrupt the word b 41 they must be holy b 42. They must preach so as
to convert men b 45 they ought to be learned in the Scriptures b 48 It is a
great corruption, when they occasion men to sin b 67 when they are contemned
and hated justly b 70, 71 what they are then to do b 74 they are Gods
Messengers b 166 to defraud them of their maintenance, is sacrilege b 215,
216, 219, 220, 221, 225. Ministry of man ordinarily used by God a 12, 13. How
to be esteemed a 13, 14. None may take it upon him without a calling b 26. The
efficacy of the Ministry b 291.
N Nature teaches not to wrong any b 79.
O Obedience due to God in all things b 4, 5. How far due to parents a 62, 63,
64 66. How far due to Masters a 80, 81, 82. How far due to Magistrates a 63,
82. Old men, their duty b 30. Omission of duties b 208. 209. Oppression, God
not pleased with sacrifices of it a 222. 224, 225. Oppressors not heard of God
b 110 Original sin b 126, 280
P Papists plea of bounty b 214, Parents to take care of childrens souls b
127, 128. Passion a 25. Patience under affliction a 4, 5. Patience in injuries
b 108, 109. Peace only to the upright b 45. People of God, may be punished a 8,
9, 10. Their privileges a 27. Person must be accepted, before his prayers are
a 189. Perfection, whether in this life b 14. Perfididiousnesse, a great sin b
82, 83 Piety brings prosperity b 250. Plenty, promised to the obedient b 31.
promised to paiers of tithes b 231, 232, 233 Polygamie b 122, 129 130. Popes may
and have erred b 61, 62 their Church robbing b 228. Portion, how children to
submit in that a 67. Poverty of Ministers b 226, 227. Power of God a 37.
Praise, God to be praised for deliverances a 55. Prayer not heard, how great a
judgment a 169, 170. When the season of prayer a 170. How we must pray a 172.
What to pray for a 173. Prayer to Saints departed a 175. Prayers of wicked not
profitable a 178. Where to pray a 197, 198. All need the prayers of others a
174. Prayers of Gods people accepted b 181, 182. Preferring man before God how
heinous a 160, 163. Priest how the word used a 203. Professors, their sin most
heinous a 210. Profaneness of heart, how known a 145. Prophets 3. sorts a 12.
Christ our prophet b 172, 173 Prosperity b 158 159. Prosperity promised to piety
b 250. No note of true Church b 241, 242. Providence of God, not to be
questioned b 160. To deny it, is pride against God b 244, 245. Whence it is
that men doubt of it b 247, 248. Gods providence and protection a bond of
service a 105. Public worship to be attended b 52, 53. Punishment, Gods own
people punished a 8 wicked often do escape unpunished long b 256. Purgagatory b
178 179 235
R. Redemption of the elect b 277 Regenerate, their works holy a 205 Reigning
sin what b 278 Religion teaches to do no wrong b 80 81 Remembrance, God
remembers our ways b 262 Repentance only removes judgments b 6, 210, 211
Reproof a 133 134 Revenge, the desire of it a 49 Reward to obedience b 33
Riches, the way to attain them b 32 234 whether fit for Ministers b 226 227
Wicked often increase in riches b 254 255 Righteousness cannot be without
religion b 268, 269 Righteousness inherent b 276
S. Sacraments, their efficacy a 142 the Ministers of them b 28 Sacrifices of
N. Test. a 144 what Sacrifices required of Christians a 202 Sacrilege b 212
215 219 220 221 239 240 Sanctification of Gods elect b 275 276 Scoffing
speeches, whether lawful a 167 Sencelessenesse under judgments a 3, 4
Separation may not be from a Church for the abuses of it. a 177 180 Servants
their duty a 76 78 83 86 89 Service of God must be with best a 150 183 Sick
service a 159
T. Temple, people not bound to it in prayer. a, 197 Tempting of God, what. b.
230 231 Tithes, whether still in force. b, 216. 217. 218. Thoughts are known to
God. a, 138 Toleration of Papists. a, 179 Truth, all of it to be delivered b 39
V. Virginity how to be esteemed of. b 136 Vows to be observed a 234 235 Usury
b 85
W. Wages of hirelings, not to be detained b 195 Wards, the abuse b 198 199
Watchfulness required of us b 260 Widows not to be oppressed b 196 197 Wicked
though flourish shall be destroyed b 272 273 Wife is husbands companion b 117
choice a of wife b 144 145 Witches not to be sought unto b 189 190 Word of God,
how to be preached a 6 7. How to be heard a 7. must be applied b 2 3. must be
all delivered b 39. it must be heard publicly b 51 52. It must be sought after
b 54 55 All things are good or evil as they are with or against the word b 84.
Wicked not able to abide the preaching of it b 174 Works no cause of
justification a 189 Worship of God must be holy a 127 Where that is abused, God
is abused a 138 Worship of God removed for contempt a 229 Worship of God
furthered by maintenance of Ministry b 227 228 Wrath of God a 44 45
Z. Zeal. a 159

FINIS.
AN EXERCITATION UPON THE PROPHECY OF MALACHY

Wherein, The Context is illustrate by a clear Analyze, The original Text is
examined, Most translations extant are conferred, The expositions of the
ancients and others are weighed, Together with some occasional observations.


By SAMUEL TORSHELL,

Intended by way of Addition to a larger Commentary upon the same Prophecy, by
that reverend and godly Divine Mr. Richard Stock, and now since his death at
last published with the consent of his Executors by the same Author.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin, for Daniel Friar, Thomas Nichols and Samuel
Enderbey and are to be sold at their shops in little Britain and Pope-head
Alley. 1640.

NO BILISSIMO AC HONORATISSIMO DOMINO, D. EDOVARDO, COMITI DORSET, BARONI DE
BUCKHURST, Serenissimae Dominae Reginae Domino Camerario, praenobilis ordinis
Periscelidis Militi, and Serenissimo Domino regi CAROLO, a Conciliis
secretioribus: DEPVRATAE ELOQVENTIAE FACILE PRINCIPI: INGENUORVM OMNIVM
STVDIORUM fautori, Mecaenati Dignissimo: IN OMNIBUS NEGOTIIS A D HONOREM REGIUM
ac Salutem publicam spectantibus, Vigilantissimo ac prudentissimo Consiliario:
Has EXERCITATIONES in Prophetam MALACHIAM, Ut exile quidem, at Devotum tamen,
perpetuae observantiae and maximi obsequii Testimonium, D. D. D.

Sacellanus ejus indignus, Humillimus Servus, Samuel Torshel.

To the Reader.
IT was not choice, but occasion that cast me upon this Subject. Having the
original notes of the Sermons of that reverend, learned and godly Divine, M.
Richard Stock upon this prophet Malachy, entrusted into my hands, and upon
perusal of them finding many necessary points most wholesomely treated of; I
thought it too great an injury both to his Name, and to the publicque, to make
them only mine, and to keep them to mine own use; and therefore I resolved,
(not without the judgment and approbation of other men) to communicate them
unto the use of others. But withal observing, that his aim being only the
edification of a popular audience, he had only indeavored to apply the Text to
the condition of his present hearers; and had left somewhat to be done to make
it a Complete Commentary; I set my self to examine the original, to confer
translations, to inquire into the several glosses and expositions of the
Ancients and Modern's; and have thereupon made up what you see, by way of
Exercitation. Not out of any opinion of mine own ability, or an ambition to be
upon the stall, or out of any more peculiar delight that I take in this kind of
study, which yet is a study most worthy of a Divine, and which may exercise the
most able; especially these more difficile pieces, I mean, the prophecies,
which according to the Hieroglyphique of prophecy which (they say) does hang
among other pictures in the Vatica^ library at Rome, are like Matrones with
their eyes covered. In regard of which difficulty it was, that Paulinus Bishop
of Nola, (a man much commended by S. Aug. and S. Hier; and one that had not any
resolution against writing, for he wrote other tractes, as Verses and
Epistles,) would not be drawn to write commentaries, though he were entreated
by many of his friends, as deeming himself unworthy, though he were indeed
very able. I commend his spirit, though I follow not his example, and I have
given you the excuse above.

I have every where followed the Grammatical, which is the lawful and geunine
sense Iac. Armin Disp. priv. These. 9
of Scripture. Men have been too wanton with Allegories Origin, S. Ambrose, S.
Hierom himself, and others of the Ancients, have been blamed for it by learned
men. It were easy, to multiply instances, but it were needless. I have also
sought the most proper gra^maticall sense, not always the first but the most
agreeable to the nature of the context; which while it has not been observed,
many absurd interpretations have been made. Corn. a lapide Corn. a lap. proleg.
in proph. min.
says, he heard one preach, that Moses dyed kissing of God. Because of that
place Deuteronomy. 34.5, He dyed upon the mouth of the Lord. Not observing the use of
that phrase among the Hebrews, which also the Septuagint, the Chalde, the
Vulgar Latin, our English, and (for ought I know) all interpreters do
express, He dyed according to the word of the Lord. But I will not enlarge my
self here, because I speak unto the same point in the Epistle before M.
Stocks commentary. I will only request this of the learned reader, (if any such
shall vouchsafe to bestow his eye so meanly,) that he make a favorable
judgment of what defect or other blemish he may discern in a work of this
nature, which could not be smoothly wrought, nor wrought in all things to mine
own satisfaction, having the use of no books but mine own, and living almost
an 100 mile from any publicque library. Yet such as I have, J have not
neglected to consult: willing to cast off that untrue and slanderous aspersion
which Francis Ribera Riber. Com. in Hos. 13. Number. 12.
has thrown upon Protestant Jnterpreters; that they read not the
Commentaries of the holy fathers, but being furnished with some poor measure
of knowledge in the tongues, Sed vide Guil. Perkinsi propheticam. cap. 3.
they read the Scripture as if they were to read Livie or Cicero.

Whatsoever it is that I have done in this, I submit it to the censure of this
Church of England, of which I am a part and member, and in which I make my
daily prayers unto Almighty God, that truth and peace may still be maintained,
and that she may still flourish with prosperity and reputation, notwithstanding
the ill will and ill-opinion of al sorts round about her.

S. T.

A Table of the Digressions.
Malachy. Chapter Ver.
OF Malachy; who he was, His Country, and parentage. 1.1 A Discourse about the
names of Angels. 1.1. A discourse about the giving of names to children. 1.1. A
discourse concerning the name of Altar. 1.7.2, 13. Concerning the honor due to
Gods house and service. 1.7. Concerning the admitting of such only into sacred
orders, as are fit and worthy. 1.8. A discourse about Preaching and
Catechizing. 2.7. Concerning the question; whether disparitas cultus, be an
impediment of Matrimony. 2.11. Concerning Polygamy, and the distinction of
Bigamy. 2.15. Of the question, whether a judge be bound to give sentence
secundum allegata and probata. 3.5. A discourse of the ancient severity against
adulterers. 3.5. A discourse of the care of Widows and Orphans. 3.5. A
discourse of the discovery of Atheism. 3.5. Of the ill conse quence of keeping
the Clergy poor. 38. Of Tithes. Their kinds, use, and how due. 3.8. A
discourse of the Division of the Bible into Chapters and verses. 4.1. A
discourse of the Phaenix, and the aenigmatical use of it. 4.2. A discourse of
Samson, how in his name, a type of Christ. 4.2. A discourse of the necessity
and benefit of acquaintance with Gods Law. 4.4.


A Table of all such Texts of Scripture as are occasionally quoted, or
illustrated in the exposition of this Prophecy.
Genesis Malachy. Chapter Ver. CHAPTER 2.1. 1.4 Chapter 2.18 2.14 Chapter 4.3 1.11 Chapter 4.14 4.6
Chapter 5.24 2.6 Chapter 6.4 1.6 Chapter 7.11 3.10 Chapter 8.12 3.10 Chapter 14.18 2.11 Chapter 16.5
2.16 Chapter 17.1 2.6 Chapter 18.21 3. 5 Chapter 19.6 1,10 Chapter 22.14 2.11 Chapter 25.23 1.3 Chapter
25.30 1.4 Chapter 28.17 4.5 Chapter 29.31 1,2 Chapter 31.7 3.5 Chapter 31.38 3.11 Chapter 31.41 3.5
Chapter 31.50 3.5 Chapter 32.13 1.11 Chapter 33.11 3.10 Chapter 35.2 2.11 Chapter 37.10 2.3 Chapter
38.11. 3.5 Chapter 38.14 3.5 Chapter 39.35 2.11 Chapter 41.5.7 4.6 Chapter 24.33. 1.6 Chapter 24.36
3.11 Chapter 43.11 1.11 Chapter 47.12 2.9 Chapter 49.28 3.1 Exodus Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter
2.10 4.4 Chapter 3.1 4.4 Chapter 7.11, 12 3 5 Chapter 9.35 1 1 Chapter 10.2 4 4 Chapter 16.18 2 9
Chapter 19.5 3 17 Chapter 22.18.21, 22 3 5 Chapter 23.6.9 3 5 Chapter 23.17 1 14 Chapter 23.18 2 3
Chapter 29.38, 39, 40, 41 1. 11 Chapter 32.26 2 5 Leviticus Malachy. Chapter Ver. 1 7 Chapter 1
and, 2 and 3 1 11 Chapter 2.1 1 7 Chapter 3.11 2 3 Chapter 7.32 2. 13 Chapter 18.18 3 5 Chapter
19.33, 34 1 7 Chapter 22.20 1 14 Chapter 22.23 3 8 Chapter 27 32. Numbers Malachy. Chapter Ver.
Chapter 4.37.45 1 1 Chapter 6.21 2 9 Chapter 6.25 1 9 Chapter 14.22 3 5 Chapter 25.7, 8 2 5
Deuteronomy Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 2.8 1 2 Chapter 6.1 4 4 Chapter 6.1, 16 ^. 10 Chapter
10.18, 19 3 5 Chapter 15.21 1 7 Chapter 18.10 3 5 Chapter 21.15. 1 2 Chapter 24.14, 15.17 9. 5
Chapter 27.15 1. 14 Chapter 30.2 3. 7 Judges Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.15 3. 10 Chapter 7.4
3. 2 Chapter 11, 10 3. 5 Chapter 19.10 2. 11 I Samuel Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.6.10 2.
13 Chapter 2.30 2. 6 Chapter 3, 3 3. 1 Chapter 10.10.27 1. 11 Chapter 12.15 3. 5 Chapter 232.1 3.
17 Chapter 28.24 4. 3 Chapter 31.9 2. 12 II Samuel Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 8.6 1. 11 Chapter
13.12 2. 7 Chapter 13.26 2. 15 Chapter 17.11 1. 8 Chapter 20.3 3. 5 Chapter 20.3, 26 1. 6 Chapter
21.7 3. 17 I Kings Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 8.33.35 3. 7 Chapter 9.26 1. 3 Chapter 11.1 2.
11 Chapter 18.45 3. 14 Chapter 19.8 4. 4 Chapter 19.8, 10 1. 4 Chapter 21.1 3. 1 II Kings
Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 3.15 1. 1 Chapter 4.3.4.5.6 3. 10 Chapter 5.26 2. 15 Chapter 7.2 3.
10 Chapter 9.25 1. 1 Chapter 25, 18, 21 1. 1 I Chron. Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 9.23 3. 14
Chapter 16.38 1. 80 Chapter 62.1.20 3. 10 II Chron. Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 8.17 1. 3 Chapter
31.4 3. 8 Chapter 33.6 3. 5 Chapter 35, 15. 1 10 1 10 Ezra. Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 7.1 1
1 Nehemiah Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 5.14 1 8 Chapter 13.10 3 8 Chapter 13.11, 12, 13 3 10
Esther Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 2.5. 2 11 Chapter 6.1. 3 16 Job Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter
2.10 2 15 Chapter 16.19 3 5 Chapter 19.3 3 5 Chapter 22.23 3 15 Chapter 29.11 3 12 Chapter 29.18. 4
2 Chapter 30.8 1 6 Chapter 30.18 2 9 Chapter 33.6 2 9 Psalms Malachy. Chapter Ver. Psalm 1.1
2 6 Psalm 9.5 2 3 Psalm 10.8 1 13 Psalm 17.8 4 2 Psalm 24.5 4 2 Psalm
35.14. 3 14 Psalm 49.9 3 5 Psalm 51.19 3 3 Psalm 58.9 2 14 Psalm 64.7 3 1
Psalm 68.5 3 5 Psalm 76.2 2 11 Psalm 80.9 3 1 Psalm 82.3 3 5 Psalm 84.11 1
10 Psalm 95.9 3 15 Psalm 103.17 4 1 Psalm 126.2, 3 1 5 Psalm 139.9 4. 2
Psalm 141. 1 11 Proverbs Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 13.24 1 2 Chapter 18.14 3 2
Chapter 19.6, 7 1 2 Chapter 22.23 3 8 Chapter 29.8 1 13 Eccles. Malachy. Chapter
Ver. Chapter 2.8 3 16 Esaiah Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.26 3 2 Chapter 8.11 1
1 Chapter 9.3 1 11 Chapter 9.9.10, 11 1. 4 Chapter 13 5 4. 6 Chapter 13.22 3. 5
Chapter 13.19, 20, 21, 22 1. 3 Chapter 21.11 1. 4 Chapter 28.1 3. 14 Chapter
29.1 2. 3 Chapter 30.13 3. 1 Chapter 40.3 3. 1 Chapter 42.19 1. 1 Chapter 43.24
2. 17 Chapter 47.8 3. 5 Chapter 47.14 4. 1 Chapter 48.10 3. 2 Chapter 57 14 3.
1 Chapter 57.19 1, 12 Chapter 61.4 1. 4 Chapter 62.6 2. 9 Chapter 62.10 3 1
Chapter 64.1 3. 1 Chapter 65.2 3. 7 Chapter 65.11 1. 7 Chapter 66.5 4. 6
Chapter 66.20 1. 11 Chapter 66.21 3. 3 Jeremiah Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 2.22
3. 2 Chapter 6.20 3. 4 Chapter 9.7 3. 2 Chapter 22.3.13 3. 5 Chapter 29.23 3. 5
Chapter 30.9 4. 5 Chapter 46.21 4. 3 Chapter 49.9.18 1, 13 Chapter 49.11 3. 5
Chapter 50.11 4. 3 Chapter 51.5 3. 5 Chapter 51.52 2. 13 Lament. Malachy. Chapter
Ver. Chapter 1 1 3. 5 Chapter 3.40 3. 7 Chapter 4.21 1. 4 Chapter 5.3 3. 5
Chapter 5.18 1. 3 Ezekiel. 4. 5 Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.22 1. 11 Chapter
2.3 1. 3 Chapter 25.13 1. 2 Chapter 35.3.7.15 1. 2 Chapter 41.22 3 5 Chapter
46.18 Daniel 1. 8 Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.3, 4, 5 Chapter 1.8 1. 7 Chapter
8.12 2. 6 Chapter 9.21 1. 11 Hosea Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 7.16 3. 7 Joel
Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.4 3. 11 Chapter 1.17 3. 10 Chapter 2.2 4. 2 Chapter
2.21 1. 5 Chapter 2.23 4. 2 Amos Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 5.21 1. 3 Chapter
5.27 1. 4 Obadiah. Malachy. Chapter Ver. Verse 3.4, 5 3 3 Verse 10.11 2. 2 Micah
Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 3.5.11 3. 8 Haggy Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.13 1. 1
Chapter 2.8 3. 1 Zephany Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 3.15 2. 2 Zachary Malachy.
Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.3. 3. 7 Chapter 3.8 4. 2 Chapter 5.3 2. 2 Chapter 7.10 3. 5
Chapter 11.8 4. 6 II Esdras. Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.40 1, 1 Tobit Malachy.
Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.7.8 3, 8 Matthew Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 2.2 4, 2 Chapter
2.4 4. 5 Chapter 3.2 4. 6 Chapter 3.12 4. 1 Chapter 6.11 1. 7 Chapter 6.24 1. 2
Chapter 6.26 2. 15 Chapter 10.5 1. 11 Chapter 10.37 1. 2 Chapter 11.10 3. 1
Chapter 11, 14, 15 4. 1.5 Chapter 17.10, 11, 12. 4. 1.5 Chapter 17.24 2. 15
Chapter 19.11 2. 16 Chapter 20 4. 1 Chapter 20.28 4. 2 Chapter 21.44 4. 5
Chapter 23.37 4. 2. Chapter 24.27 4. 2 Chapter 26.58.74 4. 1 Mark Malachy. Chapter
Ver. Chapter 1.1 4. 5 Chapter 6.3 2. 15 Chapter 11.17 2. 15 Chapter 1.16, 17 4.
25 Chapter 1.76.77, 78 3. 1 Luke. 4. 2.6 Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 2.22 3. 1
Chapter 2.34 4. 1.5 Chapter 9.9.17 4. 5 Chapter 7.5 1. 11 Chapter 14.1 1. 7
Chapter 14.20 1. 2 Chapter 19.44 4. 5 John Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.1 4. 1
Chapter 1.6 3. 1 Chapter 1.29 4. 1 Chapter 2.19 3. 1 Chapter 5.35.37 4. 1
Chapter 6.23 2. 2 Chapter 7.24 2. 9 Chapter 8.16, 17, 18 3. 5 Chapter 8.56 3. 1
Chapter 9.22 4. 6 Chapter 9.39 4. 1 Chapter 20.28 3. 1 Acts Malachy. Chapter Ver.
Chapter 3.1 1. 11 Chapter 4.36 3. 2 Chapter 6.2 3. 5 Chapter 6.7 3. 2 Chapter
7.53 3. 1 Chapter 15.20 1. 7 Chapter 20.21 1. 11 Chapter 21.28 1. 11 Romans
Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 2.9 1. 11 Chapter 9.11, 12, 13 1. 2 Chapter 9.29 1. 4
Chapter 10.21 3. 7 Chapter 12.1 3. 3 Chapter 15.11.16 1. 11 I Corinth. Malachy.
Chapter Ver. Chapter 2.5 4. 6 Chapter 9.8, 9 2. 15 Chapter 10.21 1. 7 Chapter 16.22
4. 6 2 Cor. 9.6 2. 2 Galatians. Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 3.13 1 14 Chapter
3.19 3. 1 Ephesians. 5.2 1. 11 Philip. 4.18 1. 11 Coloss. 2.14 3. 8 II Thessal.
Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 2. 4. 5 Chapter 2.5 2. 15 I Timothy Malachy. Chapter Ver.
Chapter 1 20 4. 6 Chapter 2.8 1. 11 Chapter 3.16 3. 1 Chapter 5.3 3. 5 Hebrews
Malachy. Chapter Ver. Chapter 2.2 3. 1 Chapter 10.5 1. 11 Chapter 11.5 4. 5 Chapter
13.16 1. 11 James 5.4 3. 5 1 John 5.16 4. 6 Jude 14. 4. 6 Revelation Malachy.
Chapter Ver. Chapter 1.6 3. 3 Chapter 5.8 1. 11 Chapter 11.3 4. 5

FINIS.
I shall desire the Reader to mend with his pen these few Errata before he
read the Exercitation, which being short and the language of it rough, the
least error will make him miscarry in the sense. Some other smaller faults he
will find, which will not hinder him.

PAge 1. Line 22. read, Montan. p. 2. l. 4. and l. 7. read, (...). p. 8. l.
4. read, their p. 10. l. 14. read because p. 14. l. 14. read, First, Gods. p.
15. l. 25. read, Or as the p. 16. l. 28. read, what they brought p. 29. l. 26
read, Adon. p. 32. l. 2. blot out, is. p. 32. l. 42. blot out, to cleave p.
60. l. 12. read, that p. 65. l. 28. read, shall not. p. 74. l. 4. read, as
soon. p. 80. l. 36. blot out, I content to the. p. 82. l. 43. read, The Sun.

A Catalogue of the Authorities here cited.
Malachy. Chapter Ver. ABarbanel, apud Buxtorfium, 1. 1 Abben-Ezra, 1. 1 Rab.
Abraham, 1. 13 Rab. Abraham Davidis, seu, Abr. bar Dior. 1. 1 Acts and
Monuments of Engl. Martyrs, 3. 5 Christ. Adricomius, in Deser. Ter. S. 1. 3 H.
Ainsworth, in Pentateuch, 1. 9 Card. Allen. Apolog. 1. 8 Alex. ab Alex. Genial.
Dier. 3. 5 Jo. H. Alstedi. Thesaur. Chronol. 1. 1 Paratitla Theolog. 1. 7 3. 1
Theologia Naturalis, 4. 2 Theolog. Casuum, 3. 5 Supplem. ad Chamieri Panstr. 3.
8 Aluredi regis leges Ecclesiasticae, 3. 8 Sixtini Amamae, Gramm. Hebr. 1. 2
Anomal. Speciales, 1. 13 3. 9 Antibarbarus Biblicus, 1. 1. 4 2. 12 3. 5 4. 5
Dissertatio de Keri, 1. 4 De recta lect. L. S. 1. 4 Dissertatio de nom.
Tetragr. 1. 4 Guil. Amesii, Anti-Bellarm. 3. 8 S. Ambrosius, 3. 1 Andr.
Althamerus, in Tacit. Germ. 3. 5 Lanc. Andrews Bishop of Winchester his life,
3. 5 Ioh. Annius, de Antichristo. 4. 5 Aquila, 1. 4 2. 3 Articles of Visit. 2.
7 Arator. 4 4 Arabica versio, Alex. and Antiochena, 1. 11 2. 9 3. 2 Asterius,
in Biblioth. Patrum, 4. 2 Athanasius. 1. 1 4. 4 S. Augustinus, passim. and De
Catechis. rudibus 2. 7 De Symbolo ad Catechum. 2. 7 B BEllarmin. Gemitus
Columbae, 1. 7 Controvers. 3. 8 4. 5 Benjamin in Itinerario, 1. 3 Bertinus, 1.
8 Theod. Bezae, Annotat. majores, 1. 4 4 6 Bibliotheca, Vaticana, Medicea, 2. 9
Benedict. Colleg. Cantabr. 1. 7 Ioh. Billii, Nov. Test. Gr. 4. 5 Bizozeri,
Summa Casuum, 3. 5 Henr. Bocerus, de Jurisdiction, 3. 5 Ioh. Bodinus, de
Republica, 3. 5 Bonifacti Episc. Mogunt. Epist. 3. 5 Jac. Bonfrer. In Iudic.
Comment. 1. 1 4. 2 Onomasticon, 1 1. 3 4. 4 Annotat. in Chorogr. Tabul. 1. 3
Ordo Breviarii secund. Vsum Sarum, 4. 2 Mart. Bresserus, de Conscientia, 3. 5
Gasp. Brockmond. System. Theol. 3. 1 3. 5 4. 5 Hugh Broughton, Consent of
Script. 1. 4 Burgensis in Hoseam, 1. 1 4. 5 Ioh. Buxtorfi, Lexicon, 1. 4
Comment. Masoreticus, 1 1 3. 5 4 4 Biblioth. Rabbinica, 1. 1 De Abbreviat.
Hebr. 4. 6 C CAjetani, Peccatorum Summula, 3. 5 Comment. in S. Luc. 4. 6
Calvinus, passim. Catecheses Cyrilli, 2. 7 Catecheses Mystagogicae, 2. 7
Canones, Ioh. Pecham, Archiep. Cant. 1. 1 Incertae editionis, apud Spelman, 1.
7 Egberti Archiep. Eboracens. 2. 7 3. 8 Sub Edgaro rege, 2. 7 3. 8 Council.
Cloveshoviensis. 2. 7 Canuti Regis, 2. 7 Aelfrici, 2. 7 2. 15 3. 8 Eccles.
Anglicanae, 2. 7 Council. Neocaesar. 2. 15 Council. Calcuthens. 3. 8 Odonis
Archiep: Cantuar: 3. 8 Guil: Cantarelli Var. Quaest: 2. 15 3. 5 King Charles
Injunctions, 2. 7 3. 8 Chaldea Paraphrasis, passim. Christoph: a Castro, in
proph: 2. 3 Sanct. Chrysostonius. 1. 1 4. 1 Ludov: Capell: Histor: Apostolica,
1. 4 2. 11 Is. Casaubon, 2. 7 4. 1 Capitula Incertae editionis, apud Spelman.
1. 7 2. 7 Canuti Regis leges Eccles: 2. 7 Nic: Caussin: Holy Court, 2. 15 3. 5
Dan: Chamier: Panstrat: 3. 2 4. 5 Caesarius, in Biblioth: patrum, 4. 1
Concilium Cloveshoviense, 2. 7 Tridentinum, 2. 7 Neocaesariense, 2. 15 Quintum
Generale, 3. 1 Romanum, 3. 1 Calcuthense, 3. 8 Wintoniense, 3. 8 Parisiense, 3.
8 Dordrechtanum, 2. 7 Constitutions and Canons, An. 1603. 2. 7 Ioh. Cochlaei,
Speculum Antiq. Devot. 2. 15 3. 8 Rich. Cousin. Tabulae polit: Eccl: Angl: 4. 6
Chemnitii, examen Conc. Trid. 1. 11 W. Chillingw: Relig: of Protest. 2. 7
Cicero, 2. 3 Cyrillus, 1. 10 2. 2, 7, 12. 3. 1 4. 1 Cyrus prodromus, in
Biblioth: patr: 4. 1 Isid. Clarius, in Proph: 4. 5 D PDamian: apud Choclaeum,
2. 5, 15 Ioh. Davenanti Episc: Sarisb: Determine 2. 7 Rab. David. 1. 1 Delrio,
3. 5 Jah. Deodat. Ital. Biblia, passim. Diodorus Siculus, 4. 4 Acta Synodi
Dordrechti habitae, 2. 7 Ioh. Drusii Lect. in Hoseam, 1. 1 Quaest. Hebraic. 1.
4, 13 4. 4 Tract. de Tetragram. 1. 4 Steph: Duranti, de ritibus Ecclesiae. 3. 1
E EAdmeri Histor. Novorum, 3. 5 Edmundi regis leges, 3. 8 Edwardi Senioris
Leges, 3. 8 Aethelstani regis leges. 3. 8 Edgari regis leges, 3. 8 Egberti
Archiep. Eborac. Excerptiones 2. 7, 18 3. 8 Ekkchard, 2. 7 Elias Levita, 1. 1
Eniedeni Loc. V. and N. Test. explic. 3. 1 Epiphanius, 1. 1 S. Ephraem. sermon.
de 2d. Adven. 3. 2 Erasmi paraph, in Evang. 1. 11 Eusebius de locis Hebraicis,
1. 1 Euthymius, 4. 1 F ROb. F. Herrey, Table of proper names, 1. 1 Forsteri
Lexicon, 2. 15 Ioh. Foxi Martyrol. 3. 5 French Bible. passim. Fumi Armilla
aurea. 3. 5 G THo. Gataker, Treat: of Lots, 2. 15 3. 5 Ioh. Gagneius in Evang:
4. 6 Galatinus, de Arcanis, etc. 1. 4, 13 Genevenses Theologi apud Zanchium, 2.
11 Geneva Translation. passim. Gilb. Genebrardi Chronolog: 1. 1 4. 1 Solom:
Glassii, Philolog: Sacra, 1. 13 Tho: Goodwyn. Mos. and Ar: 1. 11 3. 8 Gratian.
Decret. 2. 11, 15 3. 5, 8 H IOs. Hall, Bishop of Ex. Old Religion, 2. 7 Columba
Noae. 2. 7 Sermon. at Dort. 2. 7 Rab. Hananus, 2. 16 Dan. Heinsii, Aristarch.
Sacer, 2. 9 Exercitat. Sacrae, 2. 2, 9 3. 1 4. 1, 2, 6 Christ. Hilvici
Chronolog. 2. 5 S. Hieronymus, Passim, and, in Joelem, 1. 1, 3 In Esaiam, 1. 4
Epist. 4. 4 S. Hilarious, 4. 5 Historicum opus, Basil. editum, 3. 5 Histor.
Gallic. 3. 11 Hist. of the Council of Trent, English by St. Nathaniel Brent,
2. 7 Homerus, 4. 2 Hottoman, 3. 16 Joh. Huart. Examen: de Ingen. 1. 8 Gordon.
Huntlaei, Epit. Controvers. 1. 13 Hugo Cardinalis. 1. 6, etc. I KIng James
monit. preface, 2. 7 4. 5 Th. Iackson, Triplicitie of Romans Blasphemy, 2. 7
Corn. Iansenius in Sirac. 4. 5 Doctor Jewel Bishop of Salisb. his Life, 2. 7
Ioh. Ionstoni Thaumatogr. Not. 4. 2 Fl. Joseph. Antiquit. Iud. 1. 4 Bell.
Iudaic. 1 4 H. Isaackson, Saturn: Ephem. or Chronol. 1. 1 Isidor. Etymolog. 1.
1 S. Irenaeus, 4. 4 Fr. Junii, notae margin. 1. 1 2. 5 4. 4 Parallel: 3. 1 4.
2, 5, 6 Iustiniani Imper. Institutiones, 3. 5 Justin. Histor. 2. 13 Iuvenalis.
4. 4 K THo. a Kempis, de Imit. Christi, 4. 4 Conradi Kercheri Concordantiae Gr:
1. 4 2. 15 Ioh. Knobbari viduae, Epist. ad Episc: Antuer: 3. 5 L LActantius, 4.
5 Arth: Lake. Bishop of B. and W. his Life. 2. 7 Sermons. 2. 15 Corn: a Lapide,
passim. and Prooem. in proph: 1. 8 Edw. Leigh, Treat. of Promises, 3. 10
Leonard: Lessius de Antichristo, 4. 5 Lucani Pharsalia, 1. 3 M. Luther, 1. 8 2.
16 Lyranus, passim. Guil: Lyndwood: provinc. Constit. 1. 1 3. 8 M Matthew.
Westmonast: 3. 5 Maimon: Tr. de Sacrif. 1. 9, 11 Margin of the old English
Bible, 1. 10 Of Geneva, 1. 2, 10 2. 13 Magdeburg: Centuriae, 3. 5 Maiola, Dier:
Canicul: 4. 2 H. Mason, of Hearing and Doing, 4. 4 Martial. Epigr: 1. 1 Pet.
Martyr: Virmill: Loc. Com: 1. 1 2. 11 4. 5 Pet. Martyr of Milan, Decads of Ind:
3. 10 Jos: Meade Comment: ad Clavem Apoc: 4. 5 Menasseh Ben Israel,
Conciliator, 1. 4, 6 3. 10 Mercerus, 4. 2 Steph: Menochius, passim. Joh.
Minshaei Ductor in Ling. 1. 1 2. 11 Missale sec: usum Sarum, 3. 1 H. Mollerus
in Psalm: 1. 10 Arias Montanus, passim. Tho. Mortoni, Episc. Dunelm: Antidot:
de mer: 2. 7 O ODon: Archiep: Cant: Constit. 3. 8 Oecumenii Enarrationes, 4. 1
Offae regis Donatio, apud Spelman: 3. 8 Ordinarium Div: Offic. sec: usum Sarum,
4. 2 Origin: 1. 1 Lucas Osiander, passim. 3. 1 4. 5 P PLauti Comoed: 1. 13
Pagnini Versio, passim. and Lexicon, 2. 15 David Pareus, in Romanos, 1. 2
Proleg: ad Hos. 1. 1 Phil. Pareus, in vita Patris, 1. 1 4. 4 G. Pasor: Etyma.
nom. propr. 2. 11 4. 2 Matthew. Paris Hist. 3. 8 Gabr. Pennotti, propugnac: hum:
libert. 1. 1 Bened: Pererius, in Exodus 3. 5 In Daniel. 4. 5 De Antichristo, 4.
5 W. Perkins of witchcraft, 3. 5 Joh. Piscator, passim. Prosa seu sequentiae
Eccl. 4. 2 Plin. Hist. Natural: 3. 2, 11 Plutarchi Parallel. 3. 5 Rich.
Preston, New cov. 3. 18 R DOctor Reinolds Confer. with Heart, 1. 8 Reginaldi,
praxis fori poenitent. 2. 11 3. 5 Remigius, 1. 1 Quirin: Reuteri Supplem. ad
Zanch. in Thessal. 4. 5 Sergii Risii Archiep. Damasc. Arab. Versio, 2. 9 Andr.
Rivet. praelect. in Exodus 3. 5 Doct. Tho. Ridley, View of Civil and Canon Law,
3. 8 Fr. Ribera, passim, and in Obadiam, 1. 4, 5 Praelud. in min. proph. 1. 1
Coel. Rhodigini, Lect. Antiq. 3. 5, 10 Herebert. Rosweyd. in vita Th. a Kempis,
4. 4 Sir Benjamin Ruddiard, Sp. in Parliam. 3. 8 Rupertus, passim. S SAnchez in
proph. 3. 2 Scaligeri exercitationes, 3. 11 Scaliger. notae apud Billianam N.T.
in press. 4. 5 Shelford of Antichrist, 4. 5 Simon. Schardi Hist. 3. 5 Ioh.
Scapulae Lexic. Gr. 1. 11 Scharpius de Antichristo, 4. 5 Valent. Schindleri
Pentaglot. 1. 1, 4 2. 6, 11 Seder Olam Zuta, 1. 1 Sepher Hakkabala, 1. 1 Ioh.
Seldom: de Dis Syris, 1. 4, 7 Septuag. Versio, passim. Rich. Sibs Sermons, 3.
16 Silvest: Prier: Summa, 3. 5 Dom. H. Spelman: Council: Pam. Brit. 1. 7
Archaeolog. 2. 7 Rob: Stephani Thesaur. Ling. Lat. 1. 8 Rich. Stock Comment: on
Malachy, passim. Syriaca Versio, 1. 11 T TAciti Descr. Germ. 3. 5 Thargum. 1.
4, 11, 12 Ioh: Tarnovii, excertation: Biblic. 2. 3 Paul: Tarnonii, Comment: in
Iohe 3. 1 Tertullian: 1. 1, 11 Tigurina Versio, Passim. Theodoret. 1. 1
Theodor: Mopsvestenus, 3. 1 Greg: Tholosani Syntag: Iuris, 2. 15 Tollet:
Instructio Sacerd: 3. 5 Eman: Tremel. passim. and in Marg. ad Zach. 4. 6 Ioh.
Tritenhem. de Orig. Franc. 3. 5 V LAur. Vallae Castigat. vulg. Lat. 4. 5 Fr.
Vatablus, passim. Vigilius Papa, 3. 1 Virgil. 1. 10 Gerard. Vossius in Sermon. S.
Ephr. 3. 2 Iac. Usher: Archiep. Armachan. Antiq. Eccl. 4. 2 Vulg. Lat. Versio,
passim. W WAlafridus Strabo de exord. Eccle. 3. 8 Mich. Waltheri Harmonia S.
Scr. 2. 16 Ioh. Weemse, Exposit. of Moses Law, 2. 11 4. 4 Christian Synagogue,
3. 8 Degenerate sons, 3. 5 Iodoc: Willichius in Taciti German: 3. 5 Ioh.
Winckleman: Passim. Wierus, de praestig. Demon: 3. 5 Ioh. Wolphius in addit.
ad P. Mart. in Reg. 3. 5 Z ZAnchius in Epistol. 2. 11 De Divortio. 2. 16

The end of the Catalogue.
AN EXERCITATION UPON THE PROPHECY OF MALACHY.
IN the whole Book of Malachy which seems to be but one Prophecy or Sermon,
we may (without any prejudice of others whose opinions the Reader may see, in
Ioh. Tarnovius, in Mal. proleg 6.) observe as the parts of it.

First, The inscription or the preface verse. 1.

Secondly, The prophecy it self. Verse. 2. etc. ad fin. proph.

I. The inscription or the preface. verse. 1. The burden of the Word of the Lord
to Israel by Malachy.] Which is the title or head of the whole prophecy,
wherein we have,

First, The subject. The burden of the Word.

Secondly, The circumstances of the persons.

1. From whom, The Lord. 2. To whom, To Israel. 3. By whom, By Malachy.
I. The subject, or the subject matter of the whole book. The burden of the
Word] So our last translation, the Geneva English, the Italian of Deodate
Ilcari^.
, Mintan, Winkleman. The Prophecy] so Pagnin: and Piscator. The burdensome
prophecy] so Tremell. The word is (...), the root in Hebr. Nasa, signifies To
lift or take up, to carry, to bear. According to which we have a phrase in
Scripture, To take up a proverb. And so whereas the Septuagint sometimes renders
the word, (...), Verbum, The word, sometimes (...), The Oracle or Divine
answer, sometimes (...), The vision, here they render it (...), The assumption
or lifting or taking up the word of the Lord. And they have expressed the
Original, The lifting up of the Word against Israel. Though the Greeks use the
word (...), and especially the Latins in another sense, among whom, Lemma is
that word or short sentence, which is lifted up upon the head of the discourse,
to be the title or summary argument of the rest.

So the titles of Epigrams are called Lemmata, as in Martial. Epigr. Lib. 14.

Lemmata si quaeras cur sint adscripta, Docebo;
Vt si malueris, Lemmatasola logas.
If why the titles are ore-writ, you ask; I say;
The titles only if you had rather read, you may.
And in another place,

Vivida componis epigrammata, Mortua ponis
Lemmata --
The Epigramm's thou do compose are quick, but dull
The titles are --
Much unto which purpose we usually call the Versus intercalaris or the foot
of the ditty which ordinarily contains and repeates the chief sum, The
burden in the Song. But we must find more in the use and application of the
word Burden, here; the burden of the whole prophecy is a burden against and
upon Israel: or, the inscription, title, head, or argument of this prophecy
carries its signification with it, It is a burden taken up at the command of
God by the Prophet, to be laid upon Israel, to crush them, to make them
sensible of their sin and Gods wrath. And therefore the Tigurine translation
(though it have, as the French La charge contre Israel.
also has, mistaken the particle (...) which usually signifies Ad, To, and so
both our english translations have it, according to most other translaturs, To
Israel, and never See Schindler pentagl. in verbo (...),
as I can find, Contra Against) has expressed unto us the meaning of the
Prophets phrase, in rendering it, The burden against Israel. And our old English
autorised, before this last, for the Church, has a marginall note (which short
notes were made before those of Geneva) which gives us the same meaning; The
Burden, that is, The grievous and threatening prophecy, laid upon them as a
Burden. So in 2 Kin. 9.25. where the words are, Nasa eth hammassa, which
Schindler renders, He lift up that prophecy against him. And so also Drusius
lect. in Nahum. 1.1. That we have in our last translation, The Lord laid this
Burden upon him.

Secondly, the circumstances of the persons.

I. The Author, from whom; the Lord. The burden of the Word of the Lord.] There
is no difficulty in the words; but for the emergent questions hence, One, that
this book is canonical, and from the Lord, I refer the Reader to the
commentary: Another, that prophesying or divining is not natural, I refer to
Cornel. a lapide, Canones in min. proph. Can. 21. And to a much larger
discourse of it, in Gabr. Pennot. Propug. hum. libert. lib. 10. cap. 78.11.

II. The Object. To whom. To Israel] the Jews returned from the captivity,
principally Judah and Benjamin with such of the ten Tribes as were dispersed
among them, to which ten Tribes the name of Israel did properly and solely
belong after the schism made by Jeroboam, and till the captivity; but after
that, the names of Israel and Judah were used alike, and chiefly if not solely,
for the two other Tribes of Judea and Benjamin. An observation that will give
light to many places. Of the name Israel, the diverse absurd derivations of it
among the fathers, and the true and genuine original of it, see Sixtiu. Amama
in his Antibarb. Bibl. p. 428.429. ad Genesis 32.28.

III. The Minister. By Malachy, or, by the hand, or, In the hand of Malachy.]
or, as the French, By the means Par le moyen de Malachie.
of Malachy. That is, by the ministry of Malachy; by his mouth, the Mouth being
called the Hand, by a Catachresis; see Exodus 9.35. As the Lord spoke by the
hand of Moses. (1) by his mouth. Number. 4.37.45. Accordingly the spirit of
prophecy in the mouth of the prophets, is called, The hand of the Lord. 2 King.
3.15. (...). The hand of the Lord (which the Targum renders, the spirit of
prophecy from the Lord.) Came upon him. Esa. 8.11. The Lord spoke to me with a
strong hand (or, in the strength of hand) and instructed me.

By Malachy] (...). Tremell: reads it Maleaci. Piscator well finds fault with
that, because Caph having not a point in the belly of it, sounds as Ch, and
reads Maleachi, and so Montan. The vulgar Malachias, both our Engl. Malachy.
For the signification of it, (...), and thence Maleach is the same that (...)
Angel is in the Greek, that is, A messenger, or, One that is sent. Minshieu
enterprets it, The Angel of the Lord, compounding it of Malach and Iah, upon a
mistake, and mistaking his author too, for he cites Isidore, the place he
means though he name it not, is, lib. 7. cap. 8. and the words there though
somewhat obscure, seem to me to carry another meaning, for following the
reading of the Lxx, he gives that sense of the word that they do, not The
messenger or Angel of the Lord, but (...), my Angel, which Etymon also Hierom
gives in his Preface to Joel, where he derives the names of all the Prophets:
and he is followed not only by the composer of the table of proper names to
the Geneva, and by Rob. F. Herrey the corrector and enlarger of that table
printed with our authorized translation, but our last translators also
themselves have so rendered the very same word into English, in the Text of Esa.
42.19. Who is deaf (...) as my messenger.

But to leave this, the greatest ado is, who this Malachy should be.

First, the Lxx (as was said) turn it, my Angel, which reading as the anoients
generally follow, so Origin took thence an occasion to conceive that it was an
heavenly Angel in humane conversation whom God employed, and Tertullian seems
to be of that opinion.

2. But it is more generally received, and upon better grounds, that he was a
man. 1. Some say, some man of another name, and called an Angel for his office
sake, and because of his eminency. The Jews, some of them think he was
Mordecai, some that he was Zachary, some (as Deodate notes because of that Hag.
1.13) that he was Hagge; but the most of them that he was Ezra, according to
Buxtorfius in comment: Masoretico cap. 3. who having set down Elias Levita his
preface in Hebr. rythine beginning, Aala Ezrahu Malachi, Ezra went up, The same
is Malachy.
upon occasion of that quotes R. David in Loc. affirming it to be the general
opinion. Yet see in his 10. Chap. Abarbanel and Maimony alleged, who seem to
be of another mind, reckoning Malachy and Ezra, as distinct men in the
catalogue of the heads of the great Synagogue. But the most are, that he was
the same with Ezra, a man indeed very eminent, who though he were not high
priest was next, in dignity, and of great authority both with his own and the
Persians, of notable sanctity, and of that age, that he saw both temples (see
the learned Bishop of Chichester, now of Norwich, his Apparatus ad Orig:
Eccles. App. VI. sect. 23.) being borne to Saraiah before the captivity, as
appears Ezr. 7.1. compared with, 2 Ki. 25.18.21. and returned into the land
about the 130. year of his age, about the time of this prophecy, where he
dealt also in the same subject and against the same corruptions, which was one
argument that led the Jews, and after them S. Hierom, Remigius, Rupertus, and
of late Ribera the Pontifician, and our Pet. Martyr. ( Loc. Commun. Claus. ^.
cap. 15. sect. 48.) to be of that conceit, that he was Ezra, or at least that
it is probable, as Luc Osiander and Dav. Par^us proleg (...) Hos. Who would see
the reasons, (such as they are) for this opinion, I refer him to the
following commentary, where they are also answered. Secondly, I follow those
that take this name of Malachy to be the Prophets own proper name. And so
besides that Aben-Ezra quoted by Buxtorfius in the place recited, Athanasius,
Chrysostom. Theo. Aug. Lyran. Vatabl: Montan. and Genebrard too (though he
speak obscurely, Chro. p. 180.4.) distinguish Ezra and this Prophet; It seems
also to be so taken by the Apocryphal Ezra, lib. 2. c. 1. v. 40. who reckons
his name among the other Prophets, and then adds the signification of it; for I
assent not unto Iunius his reading and his note upon the place, which the
reader may see. After the Captivity as they brought with them from Babylon the
names of Angels, not proper names (as Jacob Bonfrerius discourses it, comment.
in Iudic. c. 13. v. 17. Where he purposely handles the question, whether
Angels have any names:) but of their office, as Gabriel. Raphael, Vriel, so it
is likely they might more usually call their sons Angels, that manner of
language seeming to be very ordinary with them, and our Prophet often uses it,
so he calls the Priest, Cap. 2.7. and Christ, Cap. 3.1. and John Baptist, in
the same Verse. It Was his name, and I suppose given him, not by the people (as
Epiphanius tells us in his life,) who because of his comely form and holy
life, called him so, but by his father at his birth or circumcision. It was a
commendable practice of the Jews to give their children the names of such as
had formerly excelled in virtue, (a custom imitated by Christians who used to
call such children, as were borne to them upon or near the festivalls of any
of the Apostles or others, by their names, which custom Philip Pareus in the
life of his father David Pareus, tells us was observed in his country, and
that, for that reason his Father had that name given him) or for the
remembrance of some event, or for the foretelling of some thing to come to
pass; But however, usually they gave them names of a good signification. Which
though we are not bound to imitate, (as some do even unto superstition,) but
have a liberty to impose such names as are in use in our Country, though happily
we know not the signification of them; yet it has been also the piety of
Christian Churches, to provide that no unfitting names be given in Baptism;
among others we have a good constitution of John Pecham sometimes Archbishop
of Canterbury. Attendant Sacerdotes ne lasciva nomina quae scilicet mox prolata
sonent in lasciviam, imponi permittant parvulis baptizatis, sexus praecipue
foeminini, and si contrarium fiat, per confirmantes episcopos corrigatur. Let
the Priests see, that they suffer no wanton names which sound lasciviously to
be given unto infants in their Baptism, especially to the female sex, and if
there be, let the Bishops change them at their confirmation. Lyndw. provinc.
lib. 3. De Bapt. cap. Circ. Sacramentum. See also the gloss there. But this
only by the way.

Who the Father of Malachy was we find not, and yet that his Father was not a
prophet is not to be concluded, for that rule of latter Hebrews, That such
Prophets whose Fathers are named were the sons of Prophets, and otherwise
not; Is found to be uncertain by Burgensis in Hos. 1. and by Franc. Ribera
praelud. 4. in Expos. proph. and condemned also by Ioh. Drusius, Lect. in Hos.
1.1.

The place also of his birth is as uncertain, save that Epiphanius and out of
him Ribera, praelud. 5. tell us it was Sopha a Town of Zabulon, A place not at
all mentioned or observed by Eusebius or S. Hierom in Bonfrerius his
Onomasticon, nor by M. John More in his exact map of the Land.

For the time of his prophesying, see the following commentary with which I sit
down in this point, unwilling to endeavor to reconcile Chronologers about the
precise year. Ioh. Alsted. in Thesauro Chronol. Titulo. 13. places him. An. M.
3537. Our Isaackson in that diligent and industrious work of his places him an
hundred years sooner, not far from which time the Hebrews in their Seder
Olam Zuta or briefer Chronicle, translated by Genebrard, do pitch, setting his
death, An. M. 3404. But the Sepher hakkabala, (writ by R. Abraham Davidis, as
Genebrard calls him, who also translated some part of it, or R. Abraham bar
dior, as Buxtorfius names him in Bibliotheca Rabbinica, litera P.) yet nearer
to the year of Isaackson, and our commentary, about A. M. 3450. Let such as
have leisure, and think it worth the time, satisfy themselves farther; to me
it is plain by the matter that he handles, that he prophesied after the Temple
was built (for he reproves their profaning of the Altar) and a little before
the coming of Ezra, for he inveighed against their marrying with strangers,
which Ezra by his authority did remedy. Epiphanius tells us he was borne after
the captivity and dyed young. As if he had been an Angel, only came and told
his errand and presently returned. But thus much for the inscription, by way of
preface, we are next to consider the prophecy it self, from Verse. 2. to the
end of the Book.

II. The prophecy it self: which contains diverse contestations with them
all, both priests and people, for many things that were amiss among them. But
being concise and patheticall, as most of the Prophets are, and abounding in
affection, he intermingleth with his contestations and reproves, sometimes
persuasions, sometimes threatenings, sometimes promises: Yet (saving the
judgment of others who have handled this book) I resolve the whole prophecy
into eight contestations.

First, for their ingratitude and contempt of Gods worship from cap. 1. verse.
2. to Chap. 2. v. 10.

Secondly, for their unequal and unrighteous dealing with each other. Cap. 2.
ver. 10.

Thirdly, for their marrying with strangers and infidells. Cap. 2. ver. 11.12.

Fourthly, for their polygamy. Chap. 2. ver. 13.14, 15, 16.

Fifthly, for their blasphemy against God, and his providence from Chap. 2.
ver. 17. to Chap. 3. ver. 7.

Sixthly, for their impenitence. Chap. 3. ver. 7.

Seventhly, for their Sacrilege. Chap. 3. ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Eighthly, again for their Blasphemy and Atheism, from Chap. 3. ver, 13. to
the end of the Book.

I. The first Contestation.
He contests with the Priests and the people, for their ingratitude and
contempt of Gods worship; from Chap. 1. ver. 2. to Chap. 2. ver. 10. In this,
1. He expostulates with them, Chap. 1. ver. 2. to the 9. 2. He threatens them,
ver. 9. to the end of Chap. 1. 3. He amplifies the former expostulations and
threatenings, Chap. 2. ver. 1. to the 10.


I. He expostulates with them.

1. For their ingratitude. ver. 2. to the 6th. 2. For their contempt and
profaning of Gods worship ver. 6, 7, 8.
I. He expostulates with them for their ingratitude, ver. 2. unto ver. 6. They
did not account of, nor so much as acknowledge Gods love. The Prophet therefore
presents the Lord reasoning with them, and convincing them of it. We have, 1.
The proposition of Gods love. 2. The proof of it.


First, the proposition of Gods love. ver. 2. I have loved you, says the
Lord.] Tremell: reads it in the present, I love you. Not only as Hier: I have
loved you, that is, the Jews: while they loved me and kept my Covenant, they
had testimonies of my love: but according to the force of the Hebrew, who by
one tense signify all, I have loved you, and do love you: else they might
object, what is that to us that thou have loved our fathers, and hate us?

Secondly, the proof of it. Where, I. The occasion of it. There questioning
with God. II. Gods answer to it.


First, the occasion is, their questioning, and unthankful denial of his
love. Yet ye say] Genev. And yet ye say. Vul. And ye have said. Trem. and
Pisc. And ye say. Vatable. And ye will say. So he, because Vau turns the
preter into the future. Chald. And if ye shall say. This variety yet alters
not the sense. Yet ye say, wherein have thou loved us?] or do thou love us?
so Trem. What testimony is there of thy love? It is the objection of the
people, rising partly from their oscitancy and forgetfulness; partly from the
observation and sense of their former and present miseries.

Secondly, Gods answer to their objection, by way of proof of his love.

1. That he chose them before Esau and his posterity. He chose their family
and the father of it, and preferred him before Esau, though equal to him in
other respects, being his brother, his twin-brother, yea his elder brother.

Was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord, yet I loved Jacob, and I hated
Esau] The sense is, The Anomaly in the word (...) see in Amama, Gram. l. 1. c.
10. Nu. 21.
I have loved and chosen Jacob and you his posterity before Esau and the
Idumaeans Which was true. First, When both the fathers of these families were
in the womb, before any desert or actual fault. The History is, Genesis 25.23. I
have hated, (1) less loved Esau, Jacob being before and above him. So Leah was
said to be hated, Rachel being preferred before her. Genesis 29.31. And in that
sense Christ will have us hate Father and Mother; that is, he will be preferred
before them. Luke 14.20. with, Math. 10.37. See also, Deuteronomy. 21.15. Prove. 13.24.
and, 19.6, 7. Math. 6.24. And besides, Esau is to be taken, at least in this
place, not so much personally as Originally, for some think Esau himself did
not fall away to idolatry, though the Edomites afterward did. ( Vide Apparatus
ad orig. Eccl. 1. Appar. sect. 24.) yet he was a profane person, and if he
remained impenitent, was reprobated; (so Par: ad Romans 9. Dub. 4. But however it
were with him, here the context shows the Lord speaks of the posterities,
and their whole posterities, the whole border or nation; but election is of
certain persons, not, of any whole nation. Secondly, when the Jews were
preferred before the Idumeans. They had the Law of God, and his ordinances, the
Temple, and Gods worship, the ministry of the Prophets, yea and the rule and
dominion over Edom. 3. And cheifely at that present when Malachy prophesied,
when the Jews were returned into their Country, and the Edomites left in
captivity. Unto this temporal condition of theirs, the Geneva note applies
all, and so the meaning of the place seems to be unto me, though the Apostle
citing this place rises higher to treat of praedestination, To. 9 11, 12, 13.
And what use he makes of this place to that purpose, is more fit there to
enquire, to the commentators on which I do therefore refer the Reader.

Secondly, that he now showed a different dealing toward them. That whereas
they were now again in their own land (which is only intimated here) yet
Edom was left wast and un-inhabited. And they might the rather consider this as
a testimony of Gods love to them, that this was done to Edom for their sake;
for so we find it in Obadiah, ver. 10.11. That their unmercifulness in
Hierusalems destruction is paid home unto them. This desolation of Edom, is set
out to be, 1. Extreme. ver. 3. 2. Unrecoverable. ver. 4. 3. Notorious. ver.
4, 5.


I. Extreme. I hated Esau, and laid his mountains, and his heritage wast, for
the Dragons of the Wilderness.] It is a circumlocution to express that (...),
that total ruin of Edom.

His Mountaines] (1.) The Mountains of Seir, so named, not of Esau, but of
Seir the father of the Horites, as Bonfrerius argues against both Eusebius and
S. Hierom, in his Onomasticon. A stony and hilly Country, being part of Arabia
Petrea, like unto Tirolis or Helvetia among the Alps, or as our Country of
Wales. So it is described to be by all the Prophets that mention it, and
prophesied against it, as Jeremy, Ezekiel, Obadiah. A large tract it is, though
a barren, larger then Christianus Adrichomius has described it to be, as Jac.
Bonfrerius proves against him ( Annot. 5. in Chorogr. Tabulam,) because Elath
and Ezion-gaber which are seated upon the red Sea, were within it, as appears,
Deuteronomy. 2.8. 1. Kin. 9.26. 2 Cro. 8.17. To which also agrees M. Mores map. And
his heritage,] The land which the posterity of Esau possessed haereditario
jure; for as God gave the Canaanites to the Jews, so he gave the Hortons the
old inhabitants of that part, into the hand of the Edomites.

Wast] Ruinous and desolate. (...) the word here, and (...) and (...) all
signify the same thing, and when an utter desolation is to be expressed, Two of
them are sometimes put together, as Ezekiel. 35.3. O mount Seir, I will make thee
(Shemama Umeshamma) wastnes and desolation. Or as our English reads it, most
desolate. And ver. 7. of the same Chapter, two more are together; I will make
mount Seir, (Shimama Ushemama) desolation and desolation; Or Wastnes and
Wastnes: or as ours, most desolate. And how that is we see ver. 15. Thou shall
be desolate O mount Seir, and all Idumaea, even all of it. That is, no place
fit for men to dwell in, but as it is in the next words.

For the dragons in the Wilderness.] The French and Deodate, Exposed to
Dragons. Another phrase to express an utter desolation usual in the Prophets
Lam. 5.18. Esaias 13.19.20.21, 22. Which description of the ruining of Babylon,
will give light to this phrase; and of which place Benjamin, In Itinerario,
observed and relates, That that old Babylion is utterly overthrown, in which
Nebuchodonosors stately ruins are yet to be scene, but inaccessible for men,
became of the diverse and harmefull kinds of Serpents and Dragons lurking
there. And they are here called The Dragons of the Wilderness, either because
where they abound they will turn a place into a Wilderness, by driving men
from their habitations; Or, because they do usually breed and live in such
uncouth and forlorn places; or, (which we may observe) because it was the
Wilderness of this Country of Edom, where the Israelites were stung with fiery
Serpents, this Country a great part of it being Wilderness and abounding
naturally with Serpents, they should swarm and possess the rest of the land;
which how great a judgment it is, we have notably and excellently set forth
by Lucan: in his Pharsalia, lib. 9. describing Cato's dangerous passage through
the Lybian Desert. But for this utter wastnesse of Edom, see more in the
Prophets, Iere. 49.9.13. Ezekiel. 25.13. Obad. ver. 3, 4, 5.

II. Unrecoverable. Whereas Edom says, We are impoverished, but we will
return and build the desolate places, Thus says the Lord of hosts, they shall
build, but I will throw down.] Their endeavors shall be vain and to no
purpose to repair their ruins, for I will cross their designs; and though
they obtain liberty of those in whose land they are held, to return and
restore things, yet they shall not be able. A like passage we have, Esaias 9.9,
10, 11. see the place.

Whereas Edom saith] so ours and Montan. Though Edom say: so Genev. If Edom
shall say: so Ragnin. Pisc. and the Ital. the particle (...) will bear all
these; and the sense differs not.

Edom] a name of Esan which his father or some body else gave him upon his
greedy desire, or mocking his intemperance, which made him double the word
through earnestness; Genesis 25.30. Esau said to Jacob, feed me, I pray thee
(min-haadom haadom) with that red, that red pottage; therefore his name was
called Edom. But it is here taken for the Country, or rather the inhabitants of
the Country, Edomites.

(N.B. The Rabbis (cited by Galatinus de Arcan. lib. 4. c. 28.) usually by
Edom understand Rome; and so render diverse places; as Lam. 4.21. O daughter of
Edom (the Thargum reads it (...) Roma Impia, wicked Rome) the cup also shall
pass thorough unto thee. They say also that Julius Caesar and the succeeding
Emperors were originally of Edom. S. Hierome on Esaias 21.11. where Edom is
called Duma; gives us the reason of the Jewish error, their mistaking (...) for
(...), and (...) for (...), and so read Roma for Duma. But their error has
more malice in it then mere mistaking, as will appear by their applying of
all places mentioning Edom, against the Christians under the name of Romans.
See Ribera in Obad. ver. 1.)

We are impoverished] so ours, the Genesis Chald. Pagn. Mont. Vatabl. We are
destroyed: so Vulg. Russasnu, ad extremam inopiam reducti, brought to extreme
want. (...) is, possessione destitutus, exterminatus fuit; put out of all, or,
as we use to say, thrust out of house and home. Their Towns of trading, and
fields yielding increase being destroyed.

But] vau is sometimes adversative, though usually copulative, as Montan. and
Pisc. do render it here, And.

We will return and build] Piscat. puts it into one word Reaedificabimus, we
will rebuild, as if (...) here in construction with another verb were used
adverbially for Ru^su^, again. The Lxx, (...). We will turn again and build
again.

The desolate places] Vulg Those things which were destroyed. Hharabot,
Solitudes, Wastes, so the word is used, Esaias 61.4. A metonymie of the form.
Wastes, that is wast places. Solitudes, Solitary or desolate places.

Thus says the Lord of hosts] The Lord God of hosts. So Piscat. But Elohe,
God, is not in the Text. About the name Jehova there has been much ado,
about the writing, pronouncing, and use of it. It would too much enlarge these
notes, here to undertake the examination. I refer the reader, to,

Menasseh ben Israel, his Conciliator, Quaest. 3. in. Exodus Drusius, Hebr.
Quaest. lib. 1. qu. 56. lib. 2. qu. 68.69. lib. 3. qu. 6. a. b. but especially
lib. de Tetragr. Mr. Broughton, consent of Script. p. 1. and, ad An: mundi, 274
1.

Beza, Annotat. Majores, in Apoc. 1.4.

Sixtin. Amama, his Dissertatio de Keri, p. 26. and, De recta lectione L. 5. p.
57. but especially his Dissertatio de Nom. Tetragram. in his Antibarb:
Biblicus, at page 473. etc.

Mr. Seldom, De dis Syris 1. Syntagm. 2. Cap. 1. p. 110, 111.117.

The Lexicons of Buxtorfius, and Schindler in the word, (...).

The French bibles constantly render Iehova, L'Eternel.
Eternal, somewhat answering the signification of the word Iehova; but Mr.
Deodate in his Italian does still express it according to their usual
speaking, Signore, which is the same with the Spanish Senor, and Don, and the
English, Lord.

The Lord of hosts] many interpreters retain the Hebrew word in their
translation, Dominus Zebaoth: so does the Lxx most usually, (...), (and the new
Test. from them, as Romans 9.29.) But in this place, and so throughout this
Prophecy, (which may be noted here once for all, See Conrad. Kircheri Concord.
Gr.) they render it, (...), The Lord omnipotent. Only the fragment of Aquila,
(...), and so ours, Lord of hosts. Zaba is an Army or an host set in order; the
plural Zebaoth, Genesis 2.1. And the Lord is thus called, having the command,
First, of the Angels. Secondly, of the Stars. Thirdly, of all Creatures on
the earth. This is his name, as it is, Amos 5.27. Says the Lord, whose name is
the God of hosts.

They shall build, but I will destroy] you are repaired, but not they; Their
labor is vain. Here the Lxx again use (...), they shall rebuild.

I will destroy] the Lxx, (...), subvert. I will throw down what they build.
1. King. 19.10. They have thrown down thine Altars. The same word that is
here. We have an English word from the French Harasser, of the same sound with
the Hebrew, and much of the same sense, To harase. Thus their desolation is set
out to be extreme and unrecoverable, and in the last place, notorious.

III. Notorious. It is now and shall be taken notice of to after times, that
Edom your enemy is under my indignation. Notorious, 1. To the world, to all. 2.
to you the Jews.

First, To the world. And they shall call them, or, They shall be called] An
impersonall locution as we say. That is, all that pass shall hiss and point
at them and shall call them;

The Border of wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord has
indignation for ever] The calamity of Edom shall go for a proverb. It shall
lose its old name among men, and carry a name of infamy, and a mark of Divine
vengeance.

The Border of wickednesse] A poor cursed land laid wast for sin.

The Border] That is, the land of wickedness, or, the wicked land. French, the
Country of wickedness, and so the Ital. Contradad empieta, the street,
precinct, or Country of wickedness. The border, or term, or limit, being put
for the land it self. Or it is so expressed, because men shall only come to the
border or marches, and standing there and entering no farther on, shall as it
were point and say, Ahwicked, Ah wicked place.

And the people against whom the Lord has indignation for ever] Lxx. (...),
The people against whom the Lord fights. The people whom he abhors and
despises. For the Orig. signifies to abhor and contemn, as well as to have
indignation against.

For ever] (...) which usually is translated, Ever, signifies a long time, or,
a time whose duration is hid from us: for the root of it is Alam, to hide. Yet
according to our use and sense of the word, It is true, that Edom though it
were a people again after this time (as appear by Josephus, Antiq. lib. 13.
cap. 16, 17. and, Belli Judaici, lib. 6. cap. 7.) yet the Lord had indgnation
against it for, ever; for, First, Their captivity was never revoked by any
decree. Some relics only stayed in some few un-observeable places of Idumaea,
and those few and other colonies that came in (because the land was open)
increased somewhat, and were called Idumaeans, though they were Mistanatio.
Secondly, And these also such as they were were subdued shortly by Hircanus the
Jewish high Priest, and received (or as Ludov. Capell. Hist. Apost. p. 93. were
forced to receive) circumcision, and were made Jews. So their estate was
changed for ever. Thirdly, after the Jewish war, their very name by degrees
perished, no memory of them being left in posterity.

2. Notorious also in special to the Jews, the Church, And your eyes shall
see (the Italian supplies (Lo, It,) in a smaller character, shall see it,) and
ye shall say, The Lord, will be magnified from the border of Israel.] French,
above all that are upon the frontiers of Israel. This Tremell. reads
otherwise; which your eyes shall see from the border of Israel, and ye shall
say, etc. The Hebr. From the border, or upon, or, from upon. The border, that
is, the region of Israel, is opposed to the border, or region of wickedness.
God had indignation at that, but here they shall see that God will make his
name great. Through his goodness toward them; or as Ioh. Tarnovius, He will
manifest his goodness from above from heaven upon their border. See Psalm.
126.2, 3. Joel. 2.21. The Chald: thus, Let the glory of the Lord be
multiplied, for he has enlarged the borders of Israel. To wit, the Idumaeaus
being subdued, and made Jews by Hircanus. Or as some, the Lord will be
magnified by enlarging the Jews borders over other nations. Piscat. seems to
incline to this. (How much God enlarged their borders, see in Ribera comment.
in Obad. ver. 19. fully) Or as Osiander, let the Lord be praised who has
again restored and made our land to flourish. Or, as others, in a yet
different sense, the Lord will be magnified from beyond the borders of Israel,
through the World. Thus much of their Ingratitude. In the next place,

II. He expostulates with them for their Contempt and Profaning of Gods
worship; ver. 6, 7, 8. In which we have, First, Gods accusation of them. ver.
6. Secondly, the debating of the accusation. ver. 6, 7, 8. Thirdly, Gods
accusation of them. 1. more tacit and employed. 2 more open and expressed.


First, A Son honors his father, and aservant his Master.] A son honors,
(1) loves, reverences, obeyes, and if need be, sustaines and relieves his
Father. He will honor, so Montan. and Pisc. that is, Honorare solet. Not
only the divine law, but humane reason and nature teaches him it, and he does
it. And the servant his master;] Here is an Ellipsis of the verb, supplied by
Piscator, Reveretur, He fears or reverences, His Master] the Hebr. His
Masters or Lords. So Joseph is called, Genes. 42.33. The Lords. And the man
(Adone haarets, Domini terrae, The Lords) the Lord of the Country spoke unto
us. A verb singular is in construction with a noune plural. And it is observed
to be ordinary in this word, honoris gratia, to carry with it the dignity of
the person.

Secondly, his accusation of them is more open and express; I. In the
application of that natural law. If then I be a Father, where is my honor?]
that is, which is due to me, you confessing me to be, and calling me father.
And if I be a Master ( Adonim plural, as before; If (as Tarnovius) it have
not a farther mea^ing to set out the mystery of the Trinity.) Where is my
fear?] my reverence, so Tremel. (...) Morai, of (...) to fear and to
reverence, and to venerate and worship. But of Iare there are two nounes, Ijra
which is that Ti^^or by which we religiously worship Gods; and Mora, that
fear whereby we are in awe of one that is terrible, and that is the word here.
II. The accusation is expressed in the direct accusation, where, First, who
accuses. It Is God. Where is my fear, says the Lord of hosts. See ver. 4.
Secondly, who are accused. The Priests. Unto you oh Prists] the Italian
supplies, unto you O Priests I speak. S. Hier. Theodor. Remig. Hugo. etc.
think all the people are reproved for neglect of God and his service. And they
are so afterward; but here it is more specially directed to the Priests, Gods
primo-geniti, his sons, peculiar to him, which heigthens the accusation.
Chohen is a Minister in politicis, as well as, in Sacris. 2 Samuel 20.26. Ira the
Iairite was (chohen) a prince or chief ruler about David. See Menas. ben
Israel Conciliator, Qu. 29. in Exodus But here the whole context is clear for
interpreting it, Priests. Thirdly, the crime they are directly charged with,
you that despise my name] this is the general head under which the
particulars, after mentioned are comprehended. The Lxx, (...). Ye that esteem
my Name at a low rate. The French, ye misprised my Name, My Name] that is, Me,
My glory or fame and Dignity. Renowned men, are called, men of name, Genes.
6.4. In opposition to which, Base men are called, (Beli shem) men of no name.
Job. 30.8. Thus God accuses them, we have next,



2. The debating of that accusation.

First, they traverse it. They put him to the proof. And ye say, (or, a the
^ulg. And ye have said) wherein have we despised thy name?] Do we contemn
thy Name? so Tremel. The Tigurine here is rather a paraphrase then a
translation; In what thing have we counted thy Name vile, and is it irregarded
by us? Secondly, ver. 7. Ye offer polluted bread upon my Altar] The Ital.
Supplies it, In as much as ye offer, etc. Such as offer polluted bread upon my
Altar, despise my Name. But you do so. Therefore you despise my name.
Ye offer] So Pagnin: also turned it, and it is agreeable to the mind of the
place; though that of Montanus correction be more to the letter, ye cause to
come, or that of Tremel. ye bring; for so the word signifies. Maggishim of
Nagash to come near, or, To bring.

Bread] S. Hierom, Remig. Lyr. Hugo, understand The Shewbread, being not
wheaten and unleavened, but contrary to the law, of barley, branny, and
leavened, and therefore called Polluted, which was brought and set on the Table
of Shewbread, for that they also mean by the Altar. But Bread here seems to
be the same with the sacrifices mentioned ver. 8. so that here is a
Synechdoche, Bread, that is, the meat of the sacrifices, or polluted
sacrifices. For (...) signifies as well as Bread, all sorts of food. Therefore
afterward ver. 12. it is called, meat. So also in the other original does
(...) signify, Mat. 6.11. Luc. 14.1. This is also observed by Steph. Menochius
in his short notes. Deodate here renders it food, in his Italian, and his
Margin refers to Levit. 3.11. where he says, the sacrifices were called, the
food of the Lord.

Polluted Bread, or unclean,] the sacrifices are so called, either being not
according to the law. Levit. cap. 1. and, 2. and, 3. and cap 22 20, etc. Deuteronomy.
15.21. Or being polluted through the impiety of the offerers; Or that they
brought Idolothytes for sacrifices, which in the new Testament, Acts 15.2^. are
called (...), Pollutions of Idols, and that is the word of the Lxx here, (...)
And it seems Daniel was afraid lest if he had eaten of the Kings portion, he
might eat of the meat prepared in the feasts of the Idols whom the King
worshipped and sacrificed unto, and so be polluted Dan. 1.8.

Upon my Altar,] the Altar of burnt offerings.

Thirdly, the peoples answer again. Wherein have we polluted thee?]

The Lxx, (...); But whatsoever it is that we bring or offer, yet wherein have
we polluted thee?

Fourthly, Gods farther reply, for the proving of the assumption of the last
Syllogism which they denied, and to show them how near they touched himself
in their profanenes In that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible.] or
as the Geneva, Not to be regarded. As if it were no matter what brought and
laid upon it.

The table of the Lord] So he calls The Altar, because the sacrifice is as it
were a feast, to the Lord, and for the Priests. And so the Altar is expressly
called, Ezekiel. 41.22. The Altar was three Cubits, and he said unto me, This is
((...)) the Table that is before the Lord. And no doubt, The Lords Table may
also be called an Altar in that harmless sense in which the fathers used it,
before Transubstantiation was hatched or thought of Ioh Alsted Paratitla The ol
in verbo, Propositionimensa, observes that the Greeks use both names, but not
for the same table; They have two tables, one upon, which the Bread and Wine
stands before the consecration which they call (...), and the Table ^ and
another to, which the elements are carried from thence, where they are also
consecrated, and that they call (...), The holy Seat, and (...), The Altar.
But the fruitless Logemachy in this point which has been already, has been
but too much. The table is put for the Altar, (a metaphor) being like a Table,
the Lord being feasted at his Altar. The Metaphor is clear, Esaias 65.11, Ye
are they that prepare a table for that troop. (1) That make an Altar and
sacrifice to good fortune, as Mr. Seldom interprets it in his learned book, De
dis Syris. Syntag. 1. cap. 1. page 4. Such is that of the Apostle when he
calls the (...) the Ara (which we have not a fit english word for, but we
usually though unfitly call) the Altar of Devils, The Table of Devils. 1 Cor.
10.21.

Ye say, The Table is contemptible] The Lxx. here have the same word again,
(...). But it is in the Hebr: as ours have rendered it, Contemptible. Either, 1.
They saw the Sacrificing to be despised; slighted through such long dis-use;
by reason of the 70 years Captivity they had not recovered the fervor of
former time to be so frequently before the Lord: or, 2. They looked so
ornefully on the mean building and ornaments of the Temple, for it did not
answer the glory of the former house; So Tarnovius: or, 3. Because the Jews
were newly returned and were yet but poor, and could not bring such rich
oblations, therefore the Priests grew cold and careless in attending on the
altar: or, 4. Because they saw what was brought consumed with fire, they
thought any thing good enough for the fire, good enough to be burnt. The truth
is, The low and cheap opinion of Gods worship, has ever made a greater waste
upon religion, than an over-high; and there is less danger (though there be
danger) in superstition then in profaneness. Hence it was that the piety of
ancient Christian times was so much in their reverent demeanor in Gods house,
though otherwise their devotion had much faeculentie and dross admixt. Among
the many Canons to this purpose of other Churches, and our own, every where
obvious, I cannot but here insert that very devout one which fell into my
observation at the time of the collecting of these notes, which Sir Hen.
Spelman has imparted to the world out of Bennet College manuscript. Non
debere ad ecclesiam, etc. We ordain, That men come not to the Church for any
other cause, then to praise God, and to do him service. But Contendings,
Pleadings and matters of arbitrament.
Tumults, and Vain talkings, and all other like actions, let them by no means
be suffered in that holy place. For there where Gods Name is called upon, and
Sacrifice offered unto God, and where no doubt the Angels are frequent, it is
dangerous to do or say any such thing as agrees not to that holy place. For if
the Lord cast those out of the Temple which bought or sold such victimes as
were to be offered to himself; how much more offended will he cast out them
who pollute that place set apart, for divine worship, with vain leasings,
mirthes, and such like toys. The place is, Inter Capitula incertae editionis,
Cap, 10. In Council. Pam. brit. page 591. Where you shall find it both after
the Latin and the Saxon Copy. A devout Canon of that ancient, but well nigh
most corrupt age since Christ, if it were made as Sr. H. Spelm. seems to
guess by his placing it about An. Dom. 1050. And indeed all ages of the Church
have been tender in this point, but ours. But what a diseased mind is it to
find fault with the serving of God with comeliness and honor, and that it will
not be endured that we should be splendid at our own tables, and sordid at
Gods, as Bellarmin also complained even in that overdoting and superstitious
Church, Bellarm. in Gemitu Columbae.
of some prelates, that they would provide rich wines for their own tables, and
cared not what Tap-lash was served at Gods. An instance that we may easilyer
complain of, then have remedied, at least in our Country parish Churches.

This profaneness is argued to be, 1. against Gods Law. 2. against the rule of
common honesty and comeliness, verse. 8.

First, And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice (or, to sacrifice,) Is it not
evil? And if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil?] thus also the Lxx
and the Chald: and Tremell: read it by an interrogation. But Vatablus with the
Tigurine on which he noted (as Cornel. a lap. proem. in min. proph. page 6.
affirms, which I have not seen, but only those notes of his which being
taken from his mouth by Bertinus who succeeded him in his professor-ship at
Paris, were set out together with the Vulgar and Pagnin's version by Rob.
Stephens, An 1556. which I note here only by the way, and once for all) and
Pagn. and Montan: the French, the English of Geneva, and John Tarnov. (who here
and usually follows Luther) they read it affirmatively When ye offer the
blind, etc. It is not evil. The autorised Engl. before our last, and Piscat.
supply it, when ye offer the blind, (ye say) it is not evil. That is, It is
well enough, though it be blind or lame. It is not evil in your opinion, who
rather then you would lose any gain, say, Melius est Il quam nil (It is Lucas
Osianders rhyme, upon this place, not mine) better that which is ill and bad
then nothing at all. But the sense is much clearer in the interrogative, Is it
not evil? That is, It is evil. And so it is the first argument against their
profane nesse. See the particulars explicated in the commentary. The second is,
that it is.

Secondly, Against the rule of common honesty and comlines. Offer it now unto
thy governor, (or as the Geneva, to thy Prince,) will he be pleased with it,
(or as the Genev. will he be content with thee) or accept thy person, says the
Lord of hosts? that is, he will be displeased with thee, he will not accept it
at thy hand; much less will I, says the Lord.

Thy Governor] the Lxx. and the vul. Thy Captain. The Genev. thy Prince. Those
that ruled in the time of the second Temple, were not called (...) Kings. But
(...) Captains or Governors, because they were then under the power of other
nations, and were not Kings or supreme Princes, but had praefecture granted
unto them. Such an one Nehemiah was Nch. 5.14. and Zerobabel and others, who as
Deodate observes, had their provision of beasts and other food brought in for
their use, and the maintenance of their house by the people. To which this
present Text seems to allude. Yet such an one, (much less a King) will not
be well pleased with a sorry worthless present, or a neglective service.

Accept thy Person] Vulg. and Pagn. Accept thy Countenance or face. Hebr. Thy
faces, but it is to be translated in the singular, for Pane the singular is
out of use; and it is here taken for the person, and so it is other where, as,
28 am. 17.11. Go to battle in thine own person. Or, I counsel thee that thy
face or presence go.

Accept thy Face] or, will he lift up thy face? for (...) here, is of (...) as
was said upon the first verse; but when Nasa is used De facie alterius, it
signifies to honor one, or, to do somewhat for his sake. Will he honor thee,
as great ones use to do such as bring them presents that they like, will he
gratify thee with his favor? will he be benevolous toward thee? He will not.

Luc. O siander here takes occasion gravely to apply this passage against their
sin, who destinate unto Gods ministry, such as are of dull wit, and of
defective or blemished bodies, as if any were good enough and fit enough for
God. The Papacy which (as Card. Allen Apolog. cap. 6. says) is discreetly
menaged, is wise in this point, doing as the master of the Eunuchs under the
King of Babylon, who chose out of the Israelites such children as were without
blemish, well-favored, wise and skillful, and had ability in them, that they
might be taught in the art and tongue of the Chaldeans. Dan. 1.3, 4, 5. We
have this place notably applied and enlarged by D. Reynolds in his preface to
the Conference. It were to be wished that that order which the ingenious
Spaniard Huarte in his Examen de ingeniis, in the dedication to King Philip
speaks of, were taken, that some men of great wisdom were deputed to
discover each ones propension in his youth, and so accordingly to dispose of
them. That they be not set to the study of divinity that are fit only for
Carpenters or Tailors. For as he well observes, They are such as have not a
wit for Divinity that destroy Christian Religion. See his 10th. Chapter. But of
this by the way. And so much of Gods expostulating with them, in the next,

II. He threatnes judgments against them. ver. 9. to the end of the first
Chapter, Judgments, 1. privative ver. 9. to the 14th. 2 positive, ver. 14.

I. Privative Judgments. 1. The rejecting of their prayers. ver. 9.2. the
rejecting of their sacrifices. ver. 10.3. The removal of his worship. ver. 11,
12, 13.

First, ver. 9. And now I pray, beseech God, (or, the Face of God) that he
will be gracious unto us: this has been by your means; (or, from your Hand)
will he regard your person, says the Lord of Hosts? Many do take this as an
wholesome counsel to the Priests, or a serious advise, that they would repent,
and fly to Gods Grace to avert his wrath, and to pray unto him that he would
be reconciled. So S. Hierom. and they that usually follow him, Theodor.
Rupert. Lyr. Haymo, Menochius, as also Jo. Piscat. and the Geneva note. But I
incline to Montan. Junius, Deodate, and the author of this following
commentary, That it is an Ironie; try now I pray, beseech God, see if you can
prevail; you have reason to try what you can do, for you are they that have
provoked God, but you shall not be accepted.

Beseech] (...) Weary God with your prayers. It comes of (...) To be grieved,
To be sick, To be weak, and when it is joined with Panim, as it is here,
Hhallu na Pene-el, It is to weary one with prayer, to deprecate. The Geneva is,
Pray before God,] which our commentary follows, and gives this sense, Pray
before him in the place of his worship. But the Hebr. is as our Margin, beseech
the face of God: the Face of your God, so the Lxx.

That he will be gracious unto us.] That he may have mercy upon us; so the
Genesis and Italian. It is the same phrase, which is used in that form of prayer
or blessing which was ordered for the Priests, Number. 6.25. and happily this place
alludes to that. (See Maimon: alleged by Ainsw. ad loc.)

This has been by your meanes] or, From your hand, so Hebr. Chald. Lxx. The
Tigur. and Tremell. This evil has been done by your means. So our old
authorized English does express it, and it seems to answer to the
interpretation of S. Hierom and his followers, This has not been so much your
Fathers sin as yours; not so much the peoples as yours the Priests, Therefore
you that have angered the Lord, do you Pray.

Will he regard your persons] We had the same phrase in the former Verse; see
it there. Only, the Vulg. taking this whole Verse for a council, not an
Ironie, reads, If by any means he may receive you. Others, If by any means
he may take his face, (1) his anger from you. And the word will bear that
too, for Nasa, is Auserre as well as suscipere Theodoret yet otherwise, Do you
think God will receive you to favor without repentance and Prayer? Others;
will he regard you more then the rest, will he be partial? no, you shall smart
also.

Secondly, he threatens the rejecting of their sacrifices. ver. 10. Who is
there even among you that would shut the doors (for naught?) neither do you
kindle (fire) on my Altar for naught. I have no pleasure in you says the Lord
of Hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand.] Winkleman thinks
he passes here to a new reproof, to condemn their (...), seeking dishonest
gain even in Minutissimis And so it seems the composer of the short notes in
our old large Eng. bibles thought, whose margin has only this, Against all
those that follow Religion for lucres sake. Sr. Cyrill, and Sr. Hierom seem to
take it as a provocation of them to serve God better; you do nothing in my
service but you get by it, why then do you neglect it? If nothing else, the
reward might make you diligent. But most take it as a rejecting of their
sacrifices; though they go not the same way, because they differ in the
reading of the Text. Who is there among you that would shut the doors, that ye
might not kindle mine Altar in vain. So the Chald. Lxx. Theod. Vatabl. I would
some body would shut the doors, that they might not offer these polluted
sacrifices to no purpose, Who is there that would shut the doors? And kindle
not fire on my Altar in vain.] So the Geneva, and their note is, God desires
they would rather shut the doors then receive and burn such offerings. (...)
(...)
The author of the following commentary follows that; In which I must depart
from him, because we in our last (and the best English) translation, read the
words otherwise as above. We supply the word (...) (For naught) out of the
following sentence, as Piscator also does. Who is there that would shut the
doors for naught? Unto which I will offer a double sense. 1. There are none of
your that would or did serve me without recompense, and therefore being so
engaged to serve me, and yet withal so unthank full, I have no pleasure in
you or your sacrifices. Or, 2. Who is there even among you, any of you, (for I
will even make your selves the Judges:) that would so far gratify the
people, as to open the doors of the Temple, to pray for them; or to kindle the
Altar, to sacrifice to make atonement for them; and yet not be respected by
them, but do all this for naught, they bringing you the refuse tithes, poor
mean and corrupt offerings, as good as if they brought none at all? But so ye
deal with me, and despise my name, Therefore I have no pleasure in you, nor
will accept your offering.

Who would shut the dores] (1) of the Temple. The word is (...) The double
doors. The difference between (...) Ianua and (...) ostium, see in Genes.
19.6. Lot went out at the door ( ad ostium id est, aperturam. The door place)
and shut the door ( Ianuam, The opening door) after him. The Greek expresses
the difference more clearly, Lot went out (...), to the porch, (or outward
door,) And shut (...), the door, (the inner door) after him. But to return to
the Text in hand, these two-leaved doors of the Temple were daily to be opened
by the Priests of the family of Korah, where they waited as it were to watch
their watches there. See, Cron. 16.38.26.1.2 Cron. 35.15. and Henr: Mollerus in
Psalmu^ 84. ver. 11.

Neither do ye kindle fire on my Altar] illustrate my Altar; so Tremell or as
Montan. has it, Cause my altar to shine: which is also to the sense of our
translation, because things kindled or set on fire, do shine. According to
that of Virgil. Collucent ignes -- and Maenia respiciens, quae jam infelicis
Elisae (...) Collucent flammis -- The Lxx render it as we do, (...), ye
kindle. The Chald. paraphrase expresses the meaning too, ye offer upon my
Altar.

I have no pleasure in you] The Italian, I do not esteene you a jot.

I will not accept an offering, etc.] The word here is, Minhha of which see the
next verse, in which,

Thirdly, he threatens the remoovall of his worship. ver. 11, 12, 13. where we
consider, I. The translation, in the word of illation, For] Tremell. reads it,
But, and Piscator therefore would have it to be (...) for (...). But we need
not so supply the original, in which we have a clear context, in which God
passes from the former threatening to this, as alleging this as a reason of
the former; I will not accept their offering, for I have other people that more
reverence me. II. The threatening it self, let down by a comparison of
dissimilitude between the Jews and the Gentiles, where, 1. The proposition,
she wing the Gentiles care of his worship. ver. 11. 2. The reddition, showing
the Jews neglect and profaning of it. ver. 12.13.



First, the proposition showing the Gentiles care of Gods Worship, and respect
unto it. ver. 11. From the rising of the Sun to the gowing down of the same,
my name (shall be) great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense (shall
be) offered unto mine name, and a pure offering; for my name (shall be) great
among the heathen, says the Lord of Hosts] I will abolish your sacrifices,
impure, and bounded in one narrow land, my name and my worship shall not be
confined in Iudaea, but the whole World shall be my Temple, and all Nations
shall worship with pure offerings, for my name shall and will be magnified
among them every where.

From the rising of the Sun, to the going downe] that is, every where, from
East to West. And what if these Western parts of the World be particularly
prophesyed of, to enjoy the worship of God after the Jews which were in the
East: Or, what if these Islands of ours that lie in the Sea, into which the
Sun is said To go down, which is an expression of the old Greek Poets,
(see Ioh. Scapula in Them. (...), and the Prophet here uses such a word in the
other original, when the West is called according to the vulgar conceit The
Sunset, or, The suns going down, or, Going in, introitus solis. (...) of
(...), To lie down or, Go in.

My name great] the Genesis supplies, IS; we supply it, shall be great. Gods Name
what it is, we saw, ver. 6.

Shall be great] Lxx, (...). Glorified.

Among the Gentiles (in the end of the verse they are called, The heathen, but
the same word (...). The Jews theselves are also ordinarily called, Gojim. Esa.
9.3. Thou have multiplied the nation, Hagoi). The Thargum there, the people of
the house of Israel. Ezekiel. 2.3. I send thee to the children of Israel, to a
rebellious Nation. (Gojim, Nations) called so in the plural, because though
they were but one people, they were many tribes, or, divided into many
factions. But when the word is opposed to the Jews, (as here) it denotes other
people that are not of the seed of Abraham, who in the new testament are called
(...). as Math. 10.5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, (...). Romans 15.11.
Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles. (...). This word the Lxx use here, (...).
Though this word also be used for the Jews, even in the new Testament Luc.
7.5. (...). He loved our Nation. That is the Jews. But the Jews used the
word ordinarily to signify another people, and a people of another worship,
and to this day they use to call a Christian, Goi, A gentile. As we now also
do use the words, Heathen, Gentiles, Pagans, for such people as are without
Christ, or, are without the covenant. At in the Apostles time they ordinarily
called all such as were not of the Church (or which used to be called
Gentiles) (...), Greeks; because the greatest part of the East Country spoke
Greek, and that people were the principal among the Gentiles which were
known unto the Jews. But the Syriacke of the new Testament instead of
Grecians usually turns it, Aramaeans. (see Tremell. Marg. ad Act. 20.21.21.28.
Romans 29.) And the difference of the Grecian and Graecist in the language of
the new Testament see in Goodwyn, Mos. and Ar. lib. 1. cap. 3.

And in every place incense offered] So also the Lxx. Arab. Sir. Pagn. The
Tigur. Arias Mont. For Kitter and Ktora. and Ktoreth, and the word that is here
Muktar do all signify Incense or Perfume. It is spoken in the language of the
Leviticall Law (which is ordinary with the Prophets) to set out the spiritual
worship of God under the time of the Gospel. Yea under the Law it self,
Prayer was resembled by the Psalmist unto Incense, Psalm. 14.1.2. And the same
resemblance is used in the new Testament, Apoc. cap. 5.8.

Offered] and so the Lxx, Pagn. Tigur. Put] so the Sir. the Arab. of Antioch,
Made] but the other Arab. reads it, Brought.] All agreeable both to the
signification of the word Muggash of Nagash, To draw near, Or, To come near;
(that which is offered it Draws near unto God,) and to the use of Incensing.
Only the Vulg. Lat. translates it Sacrificed, but improperly: Yet the popish
interpreters make use of that translation for their purpose in the interpreting
of the next words, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, though without reason, as we
shall see.

And a pure Offering] This I say, the Pontificians interpret of the Mass, for
say they, the word here (...) Minhha, signifies specially that offering of fine
flower, Levit. 2.1. which was (say they) a type of the Eucharist. But, I Mincha
does not always signify a sacrifice, as we shall see afterward; And. 2. The
words of the Prophet cannot (...), literally be understood of the Mass, for
the popish Priests do not offer Fine flower, and oil, and frankincense, which
go all to the making of this Mincha; of which see the place. Levit. 2.1.2. and
Maimon. Tr. de Sacrif. cap. 13. s. 5. And for farther answer to this
interpretation, see the following commentary, fully: together with Chemnit.
Examen. part, 2a, lib. 6. de Missa, arg. 8.

There are diverse other interpretations. The root of this Hebr. word, is
Manahh an Arabique verb signifying, To give; and Minhha is any solemn gift or
present. To man; as Genes. 32.13. Jacob took (Mincha) a present for Esau. So,
Genes. 43.11.1. Sum. 10.27. and, 2 Samuel: 8.6. The Syrians became servants to
David, and brought gifts. He. Mincha. gr. (...). But especially it is a present
or gift to God, which when it is of cattle it is called Korban; and when of
things inanimate, as flower, cakes, wafers, etc. it is called Mincha. So, Genesis
4:3. Cain brought of the fruit of the ground (Mincha) an offering to the Lord.
But most strictly it signified those particular kinds of meat offerings,
mentioned, Lev. 2. There were five kinds of the^ in that Chapter; and among
them that of fine flower which was to be offered every morning and evening.
Exodus 29.38.39.40.41. This Mincha was primarily a figure of Christ's Oblation,
who gave himself for an offering to God for us. Ephesians. 5.2. So Heb. 10.5. etc.
The Apostle opens the 40th Psalm. A type of Christ, but not of the
Eucharist. Secondly, it figured the persons of Christians, who through Christ
are sanctified to be pure Oblations to God. Prophesied of, Esa. 66.20. The
Gentiles shall be brought for an offering, (Mincha) to the Lord. To which
place, or rather to this of the Prophet Malachy, the Apostle seems to allude,
Romans 15.16. where he calls the convrtsion of the Gentiles through the Gospel,
An oblation, or offering, or Sacrificing of the Gentiles unto God: in which
respect also he calls his preaching a Sacrifice: as Erasmus reads it also,
Sacrificans Evangelium. Though the phrase be obscure. Hugo's interpretation
here was of the Proselytes, who should be an offering to the Lord to the Temple
Ex omni loco, from every place. But it is not so in the Text, but, In every
place. And this sense agrees better with the conversion of us the Gentiles.
Thirdly, it figured the fruits of grace and good works, particularly, Prayer.
The Jewish interpeters say, this pure offering is meant of the prayers of the
holy Jews every were dispersed. So the Chalde paraphrase, I will receive your
prayers, and it shall be like a pure offering before me. But the place
speaks of the Gentiles. Therefore it is that Tertullian occasionally, and
Vatabl. and Calvin ad Loc. understand it of Christians their performing of
worship to God in the duties of holiness and love. Hence, duties of love are
called Sacrifices, Hebr. 13.16. Philip. 4.18. but chiefly the duties of
Holiness, praises of, and prayers unto God; when Every where there is a
lifting up of pure hands to the Lord. 1 Timothy 2.8. And it is observable that the
time of the Mincha which was daily, morning and evening, was the time of Set
prayer among the Jews. Dan. 9.21. While I was speaking in prayer, Gabriel
touched me, about the time of the evening oblation. (Mincha). This is that
which the Rabbis call, Tephilla Mincha, The prayer of the evening Sacrifice.
Which was about Three of the Clock in the afternoon; called in Scripture
according to the Jews reckoning of the time, The ninth hour, which is said to
be, Acts 3.1. (...). The hour of Prayer.

Secondly, the other part of the comparison, or reddition, shows on the
Contrary the Jews neglect, and profaning of that worship, which the Gentiles
would so reverently entertain. ver. 12.13. This is set down, I. Generally.
ver. 12. But ye have profaned it) But ye Priests and others, that have reason
to entertain and reverence my name and worship, ye have polluted it. Lxx,
(...). Ye have dishonored it. And so Pagn. The Geneva, and Deodates margin.
II. Particularly. 1. In their thoughts. 2. in their words, and 3. In their
deeds.


First, in their thoughts, or base conceit: for it is not so likely that they
uttered it in words. In that ye say, The Table of the Lord is polluted, and
the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible.] They had a base conceit
and profane, of Gods Altar, and the Sacrifices.

The Table] that is, the Altar. See before, ver. 7.

And the fruit thereof, even his meate] our old autorised Eng. has it, The
fruit, and in the margin, Or, the word, It is true that (...) fructus, fruit,
is by a metaphor transferred to speech which is the fruit of the tongue, as
Esaias. 57.19. I create ((...)) the fruit of the lip. Where the Targum is
Mamlal, and the Lxx (...), and the sense seems to be so, I create speech, or
the word of the lips. But here it is in its proper signification, the fruit.
The Septuagint. (...). Which the Vulg. follows, That which is put upon it,
with the fire that does consume it. So the Vulg. mistaking the original word,
as if it were (...) Comedens illum, but the word is (...) Cibus ejus, His
meat. The Chald. The Table of the Lord is despised, and the gifts thereof. The
Tigur. The provision thereof is vile, because as Vatabl. notes, the fat and
entrails that were offered were vile. S. Hier. otherwise, The fruit, that is,
the fire, and the meat of the fire, that is, the victime or sacrifice. I
rather take it as our translation has expressed it, for two nounes put
absolutely, or as we say, per appositionem, Both the Altar and the fruit,
even the meat upon it, were despised by them. The revenne, The Income of it,
so the Italian in the Text; Or, the fruit, so in the margin.

Secondly in their words. ver. 13. Ye said also, Behold what a weariness is
it] Besides what conceit ye have cherished, ye have also uttered enough to
discover your hypocrisy and profaneness.

Behold what a wearines is it] or, as the Geneva, It is a weariness. The Vnlg.
Behold, this out of our labor. Somewhat like to that of the Lxx, Behold, these
out of our affliction. We are returned poor, and this is as much as our labor
or poverty can allow. But it is not (...) De labor, of labor; but as Pagn.
and Vatabl. observe, and as it is in our best copies (...) Matlaa, either there
is a double Heemanticke (as they call it) or, it is two words, as Bab. Abr.
would have it read, (...), and so also Sixth. Amama ad loc. in his Anomal.
Special. Quis Labor. Oh, how I am weary! How I pant in bringing it, it is so
fat and heavy! or, how are we tired and spent in Gods service! This I take to
be the sense. There are other interpretations, as that of Winkleman, the beast
is not faulty, but only it is weary. The Priests so hypocritically excusing
themselves, in taking any offering that came to hand. Or, as some others, who
also make these the words of the Priest, some one of them taking up the
shoulder or the breast of some carrion sheep, saying, See what we have for our
labor, what a weariness is it to serve so fruitelesly. But I rest in the
sense before.

Thirdly, in their deeds, expressed, I. More darkely. II. More clearly.


First, more darkly. And ye have snnffed at it. Or, Whereas ye might have
blown it away] your very carriage has expressed your hypocrisy, and pride, and
contempt.

(...). Huntly the Scottish Jesuit contends from Galatinus that for (...) was
formerly read (...). For the vindication of the uncorrupted reading of which
place, See Solom: Glassius, Philol. sacr. lib. 1. Tr. 1 page 50.

Ye have snuffed at it] Behold what a labor, and ye throw it down. So,
Pagnin. As if they would take breath, pretending to be weary in the carrying of
it, being so fat and weighty. Ye say, Oh how weary! because the beast is fat
and heavy, whereas ye might have blown it away being so thin and light. So
Tremell. expresses it, and John Tarnovius. Or, It is worthy to be blown away;
so Hier. Remig. Lyr. you pant as if it were weighty, but I blow it away with
scorn. So also Hier: and Theodoret. The Septuag. in editione Romana read it,
(...), I have blown it away. But Cornel. A lap. tells us that in the edition
of the Lxx in Bibliis Regiis (which I had not,) ye have puffed or blown, Ioh.
Winkleman gives a singular sense, That the Priests by a kind of writhing of
their mouths, and drawing in their breath, would though in a scornful way,
extenuate and lessen their fault, in receiving corrupt offerings, Why? The
beast is not faulty, but only weary, Is this such a matter? As if forsooth,
etc. I rather will propound this sense; you blow and pant as if tired, and
think all too wearisome, and snuff and show dislike at it. Snuffing or
Puffing with the breath being a sign of dislike and contempt, and pride. So
the soldier in Plautus. -- Quojus tu legiones difflavisti. Quasi ventus folia
ant peniculum tectorium So God shows his contempt of his enemies, Psalm. 10.5.
As for all his enemies he puffs at them. So Prove. 29.8. Scornful men bring
a City into a snare. or, Set a City on fire. That is, with their breath. Or,
Difflant ciuitatem. As Drusius renders it, Hebraic Quaest. lib. 3. qu. 22.

Secondly, more expressly. And ye brought that which was torn, and the lame,
and the sick, Thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this at your hand,
says the Lord? ye cared not what you brought or offered. Thus ye brought (
Mincha, observe that that word is used here too, as well as verse, 11. where
the Papists so much contend for it) an offering indeed, such as it is, but such
as I cannot, nor will accept.

That which was torne] That which you got by rapine and oppression; so the
Vulg. Ye say, ye afford it out of your labor, but ye lie, It is what you
steal, and of that too, not of the best. So that here are three sins
discovered together, Rapine, Irreligion, and lying And thus S. Hier. Remigius,
and Lyran. understand it. That which was rent and torn: so Tremct. and
therefore Calvin understood it, that they brought sheep that were worried. But
they brought the beasts always alive, therefore the former exposition is
received by most, That which you snatched away by oppression. But how does this
agree with the description of the offering in the next words, lame and sick? I
therefore incline to Calvin, and it might be wcorried and torn, and yet alive.
Deodate in his Italian gives both senses, and leaves it to the readers choice.
Thus much of the threatening of judgments privative: we have in the next,

II. A positive judgment threatened. ver. 14. where,

First, But cursed be the deceiver] Cursed with curses temporal, spiritual,
and eternal. Lxx. (...), Fore spoken or execrated. The ordinary word of the
Lxx, Dent. 27.15, etc. And of the new Testament as Gal. 3.13.

Secondly, the sin. 1. generally 2. in particular.

First, Generally set down. The deceiver] deceitful against the faith of
Religion, and against ordinary justice. Tremel. calls him Machinator. He that
can devise ways of deceit covertly. The crafty deceiver. The Lxx, (...), Who
was able. Taking the word in the Text, Nochel to come of Iachal potuit, whereas
it is of Nachal, To deal perfidionsly.

Secondly, in particular. Which has in his flock a male and voweth and
sacrifieeth to the Lord a corrupt thing] That has better (for if he had not
ability, God would not require at his hands, but he should be more blameles)
and yet thinks the worst good enough for God. He must have a flock, and a
male in it, (that is, a sacrifice fit perfect and without blemish according to
the law;) or else God does not require or so strictly expect from him.

And voweth and sacrifices to the Lord, A corrupt thing] that is, that voweth
a perfect or sound thing (for they were by the law to vow, Levit. 22.23. Males
and perfect,) but comes short of his vow and sacrifices a corrupt, not
answerable either to the purpose of his vow, or to the law. There was no man
that would vow a corrupt thing, though through fraud he sacrificed or offered
such a one. Therefore the Greeks have expressed this sense, cursed be the
deceiver that has a male, and his vow being upon him, sacrifices a corrupt
thing. And accordingly the Vulg. Lat. That making a vow, sacrifices a weak
thing.

A corrupt thing] Vulg. a weak. Pagn. aspotted or blemished. The Tigur. a
faulty. The Hebr. word, Maschat is weakened, guelded, maimed, corrupt.

To the Lord] Hebr. Adonai. This is the first time in this Prophet, that God is
directly named by any other name then Jehovah. Adon is a Lord who as a
foundation or a column sustaines his people; and it is applied to God who is
the Lord of the whole earth, who is called Adam, Exodus, 23.17. All thy males
shall appear before (Haadon) the Lord God. But of this appellative there is
formed a proper name or epithete of God, Adonai with Cametz, having the same
points with Jehovah.

Thirdly, the reason, both why the deceiver is cursed, and to assure him he
shall be so. For I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my name is
dreadful among the heathen] The Italian, For as much as I am a great King. The
sense is, It will not stand with my glory, to suffer my people to profane and
despise that name which the Heathen magnify, and fear.

Dreadfull] Arias and the Genev. Terrible. The Vulg. horrible. Tremell.
Reverend. The Chald. Potent. Only the Lxx render it (...), Illustrious, as if
the word here (...) were of (...) To see. but it comes of (...) To be afraid.
And this verse seems to refer to the sixth, If I be a master, where is my
fear? The very Heathen acknowledge me to be so, by their dread and fear of
my Name. Thus having expostulated with them and threatened them for their
ingratitude and contempt, in the next place, in the former part of the next
Chapter;

III. Chap. 2. ver. 1. to the 10th. where,

First, to whom he chiefly applies his speech. verse. 1. And now O ye
Priests, this Commandment is for you] The French, Is addressed unto you. And
so Deodates Ital. also supplies it. He here returns his speech to the Priests
whose avarice and profaneness had been the fountain of much other evil and
profanenes among the people. Cursed be the deceaver who ever he be, But to you
O Priests it is principally to be applied. My name is dreadful even among the
heathen; If it be profaned by you that are near me in attendance and service,
the curse is chiefly against you.

And now] or as Tremell. Now therefore. Their objection is prevented; all that
has been said, touches the people, not us. Yes,

This Commandment is for you] or, as Montan. To you. This Commandment, this
increpation, this intimation of my mind is for you. Or, this Commandment is
for you; that is, of you I principally required and expected to be honored at
my Altar, in my sacrifices.

Secondly, the matter of the speech, mixed of contestations and threatenings, or,
a conditional threatening of many judgments unles they repented. We will
consider,

1. If you will not hear, and if you will not lay it to heart, To give glory
to my name, says the Lord of hosts.] Here are three conditions of exemption.
To hear God. To lay his Commandment or their duty to heart. To give glory to
Gods name. The Sum of them is repentance.

Lay to heart] The phrase is usual and frequent. The Geneva, Consider it in
your heart. Chald. paraphrase; unles ye put my fear upon your heart.

Lay it] what? my precepts; so Vatabl. your duty, so Tremell. my glory, so
others.

2. The things that are threatened, I. Set down more largely, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8. II. Repeated again with more brevity. ver. 9.


1. Set down more largely.

1. In general. verse 2. 2. In particular, verse. 3.4.5.6.7.8.
1. In general. I will even send a curse upon you,] The vulg. I will even send
want upon you. And they translate it so, because that curse was usual to the
Jews, and now being so lately returned and as yet not very warm in their
nests, would be the greater curse and because it would suit with their
covetousness. To say a little more for the Vulgar Lat. in the rendering of this
place, It is a saying of the ancient Hebrews, That, All benedictions, are
Amplifications, and all Curses are Diminutions. Which Dan. Heinsius, has
observed upon (...), in the text of Ioh. 6.22. in his Aristarchus Sacer part
secund. cap. 8. where the reader shall find more to this purpose, to whom I
refer him But (...) (of Arar or Ar, To speak against, or, Execrate) the Lxx.
Chald. Vatabl. Pagn. and both our English do render, a curse, leaving the
explicit meaning to the expositor. I will execrate you, or pronounce a curse
against you. This is amplifyed further three ways.

1. By an explication. And will curse your blessing [It is the same word
again, (...) Vearothi, I will Execrate, or Imprecate, as the Targum expresses
it by another word, Vealut, And I will lay an oath upon you, as if it were a
curse laid on with an oath. So it is Zach. 5.3. This is ( haala The oath, where
it is in our last English) the Curse which is gone forth. I will lay. an oath
upon your blessings. You shall not prosper. It may be expounded, either first:
I will deprive you of what you have and enjoy, or, are like to enjoy, so that
you shall reap sparingly, 2 Cor. 9.6. so Cyril. Remig. Vatabl. or secondly, I
will curse and blast what you bless, as your beasts, houses, fields, so the
Chald. I will curse your benediction and will execrate it. And this Saint
Hierome also follows. 2. By the certainety of it, being even begun already. Yea
I have cursed them already) Tremel. I have cursed them every one. The Chald.
and Vulg. make it but a repetition of the same thing, I will curse your
blessings, and I will curse or execrate them. But Vatablus and Pagnine read it
as we do. 3. By the cause briefly and anticipately inserted. Because ye do
not lay it to heart.] of which see before in the condition.
2. The things that are threatened, are set down in particular, verse. 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 9.

1. Famine, verse. 3. 2. Shame, verse. 3. 3. Gods breaking covenant with them,
verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
1. Famine, verse. 3. Behold I will corrupt (or reprove) your seed] Goer Lachem
eth hazzerah. The uncertain interpretation of (...) and (...) have caused
variety of exposition. (...) is To Reprove or Reprehend with sharp words and
much noise, especially when it is in construction with (...) as Genesis 37.10.
(...). His father rebuked him. But when it is in construction with an
accusative, it is To curse or Corrupt or Destroy, as Psalm. 9.5. gaarta gojim.
Thou have rebuked the heathen, or, as the meaning there is, Thou have destroyed
them, as the next words do plainly show. And so that word is taken here. The
other word (...) if it be written (...), It is Seed, if it be written (...)
it is, An arm of a man. So it is seems the Lxx read it. And hence the
ancient fragment of Aquila, I will reprove you with mine arm. As a Soldier,
or in resemblance to whom, an orator casts or stretches forth his arm when he
is vehement, (as Cicero speaks, Brachiunt procerius projectum est quasi
quoddam telum orationis.) S. Hier. and Lyran. and Menochius much otherwise, I
will throw a way the right arm or shoulder of the offering, which was the
Priests, due Levit. 7.32. That is, I will deprive you of your maintenance and
strength. Montanus and De Castro take it as a threatening of rejection both of
Priest and sacrifice; I will cast away both the arm by which ye offer, and
the seed (the Mincha) the offering also. Most of these and the Vulg. follow the
Lxx who mistaking Noer for Goer by reason of the likeness of (...), and, (...)
read it (...). And for such as read the other word (...), Seed, some
understand it of their Seed, that is, Their posterity. That God threatens to
destroy them and their issue. Some understand it of the seed cast into the
ground. And that sense I have given. That they should sow but not reap
plentifully, which is a threatening of Famine. The next is,

Secondly, shame and ignominy. And I will spread (or scatter) dung upon your
faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts and one shall take you away with
it. Or, It shall take you away to it.] So our last together with the marginall
reading. The French, and ye shall bear it. Ofiander; And it shall stick unto
you. The Vulg. Lat. and the Geneva English and the Commentary following which
used it, are here dark. The Chalde first offers us light to this place, I will
reveal the confusion or shame of your sins to your own faces. The Lxx,
(though mistaking (...) for (...), and reading it (...), The belly in which the
excrement or dung lies, which belly was part of the Priests due,) have given us
also another hint of interpreting. Because ye despise me, and offer ye care
not what, ye shall also be despised, The people shall throw you the belly
which is your due in the time of your solemn feasts, but with the dung or
excrement in it, so that in the throwing of it, the dung shall fly in your
faces, that being so sprinkled ye shall be laughed at by all, and you shall
be so like dung, your faces being fouled with it, that he that comes to cleave
to cleanse the place, shall offer as if he would throw you out with it, or take
you also upon his dung forke, or as Deodate, you shall be vile as dung, which
is removed away into a place remote from the temple. So this is the threatening
of shame and confusion to them, even in their sollemne, their rejoicing feasts.
Hbaggechen of Hhagag. Or else, Hhag is taken here Synechdochically for the
sacrifice it self offered in the feast, as it is sometimes taken, Exodus 23.18.
Amos. 5.21. Esaias. 29.1. The dung of the sacrifices. See Ioh. Tarnovius Exercit.
Biblic. page 127. parag. 4. edit. 2a. Howsoever the same sense stands good. The
next is,

Thirdly, Gods breaking covenant with them, And ye shall know that I have sent
this Commandment unto you, that my Covenant might be with Levi, says the
Lord of Hosts.] Wherein we have three points, 1. I intended it should have
stood. 2. But it does not or shall not stand. 3. And that because ye are
unanswerable to it. Upon this he takes occasion to remember them of the
Covenant with Aaron or Phinehas and the tribe of Levi, and now their falling
from it, and therefore Gods justice in forsaking them. So we have here, 1. The
parts of the Covenant. ver. 5. 2. The answering the conditions of the Covenant
by the former Priests. ver. 6, 7. 3. The degenerating of these Priests. ver. 8.


1. The parts of the Covenant, between God and Levi. verse 5.

First, On Gods part. A gracious promise and performance of life and peace. My
Covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him.] God promised
prosperity, and performed a long prosperous and happy life to some of them; as
to Aaron who lived 103 years, and to Phinehas (mentioned by Vatablus in his
notes) who lived 300 years as it is thought, and as some Chronologers do
observe, (yea it is the conceit of Pet. Damian. From some Jewish triflers, that
he lives still, taking him for Elias:) And to Iosue or Jesus the son of
Iosedech who (according to Helvicus) lived 110 years in the office of the
high-priest-hood. To these and others was expressly fulfilled a covenant
((...) Vitarum as it is in the original) of lives, that is, of long life, and
of peace, and would have been ready to have performed it to these to whom
Malachy prophecies, had they kept Covenant with him.

Secondly, on Levies part: for fear and humility. For the fear wherewith he
feared me, and was afraid before my Name.] Fear and humility, were the two
conditions for which God did this for them. Their fear of God, which was to
be soon in Aaron, Phinehas, Onias, and other good Priesh. And their being
troubled and affrighted and grieved when they saw Gods name to be contemned and
abused. See Exodus 32.26. and Number. 25.7, 8.

The Vulg.Lat. and the Geneva, read it in another sense, And I gave him fear,
and he feared me] But not so agreeable to the original. Tremell. renders the
last words, Because of my Name, It (that is, the Tribe of Levi) was broken.]
And Junius his note is, that Levi was deprived of life and peace, because he
sanctified not Gods Name. But the whole context is against that reading and
interpretation (...) (which is an Anomalie, and according to the rule should be
(...)) is the praeter tense in Niphal of (...), which is, To be dejected,
broken, cast down, etc. and so metaphorically it is used to signify, To be
amazed, afrighted, trembling, humbled. Wherefore we decline that of Iunius,
and rest in the sense offered by our last translation. See further in Ioh.
Tarnov. ad Locum. Thus of the parts or the Conditions of the Covenan: next see
we,

2. The answering of the conditions of the Covenant by the former Priests, ver.
6.7. which is, 1. Particularly set down. ver. 6. 2. Amplified by a Theoreme.
ver. 7.


I. Verse. 6. as it had been more generally in the former verse.

First, that they were studious in the law and skillful in it. The law of truth
was in his mouth;] Aaron and others taught truly.

The law of truth.] (...) ( vide plura de hoc nomine apud Valent. Schindlerum
in Pentagl. in verbo (...)) or, The law of righteousness, for this is opposed
to unrighteousness or iniquity in the next member, Iniquity not found in his
lips. The law, the mistress of righteousness is called, The truth, Dan. 8.12.

Secondly, that they seduced none to error. And iniquity was not found in his
lips.] Chald. No falsenesse. No lie, error, fraud, hypocrisy or flattery.

Thirdly, that they lived conscionably in peace and equity. He walked wish me
in peace and equity.] Aaron kept Gods precepts, lived honestly and peaceably
and justly; and so did others of them.

He walked with me] To walk, is a known phrase in Scripture, used to signify
a man's manner of living, as Psa. 1.1. and Psa. 119.1. But to walk with God, or
before God, signifies, to leaden life unblameable, as Genes. 5.24 and, 7.1.
only, 1. Sam. 2.30. it signifies barely to minister, and so the Thargum in that
place renders it, using (...), Should minister, for (...). Should walk. The
Lord said, that the house of thy father should walk before me for ever. That
is, minister unto me, or before me. But usually, and here, it notes the
holiness and integrity of the service, as well as the service it self.

Fourthly, that they brought others to God by their example and teaching. And
did turn away many from iniquity that is, they did cause many to return. To
which agrees the Septuagint, (...), He converted many. From iniquity] (...)
from their crookedness or crooked ways into which they had turned aside. It
comes of (...) to be crooked or contort, which by a metaphor is used to
signify sin. So we call evil manners Curvos Mores, crooked manners. We
translate it iniquity, the Lxx, unrighteousness. (...). Thus the former
Priests did, and this is,

II. Amplified by a theoreme, ver. 7. For the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; for he is the messenger
of the Lord of Hosts.] The Priests lips should presenve knowledge] the Vulgar
Latin, and our old autorised English Bible, read, Shall preserve. And the
Poutificians omit not the advantage of the translation, in the question of the
Churches (but in the final resolution of the point) of the Popes infallibility
in interpreting of the Scripture. To this question besides others that have
dealt in it, see Hist. of Council of Trent, Engl. lib: 2. page 158. Episcop.
Dunelm. Antidotum de merito, etc. Epist. dedic. page 9.10, 11. and fully to the
point and to this place, Relig. of Protest. in the Preface page: 7, 8. and pt.
1. Chap. 2. sect. 1.84, etc. 93, etc. 110, etc. See also D. Iackson, The
triplicity of Romish blasphemy, sect. 3. Chap. 1. paragr. 6, etc. And the
present most learned Bishop, of Salish. Determine. quaest. 5. which references I
make, that I may not enlarge these shorter notes with the controversy. Only
observe for the clearing of the present text, what Amama and Casaubon, and
before them Drusius and others acquainted with the Hebrew speaking, have
observed, that among the Hebrews, the future is often put to denote, not so
much what shall be, as what ought to be, as, 2 Samuel 3.12. No such thing (shall
be, that is) ought to be done in Israel. Like that; There shall be no poor
among you; that is, there ought to be none, but ye should provide for them. So
it is here, the Priests lips shall, that is, ought to preserve knowledge.
Which also is observed by Franc. Ribera the Jesuit.

Knowledge] that is, knowledge of the law; as appears by the next member. The
Priests duty is to be both furnished, and to bring out of his treasure things
new and old, To be much in preaching to the people. Accordingly it is thought
that some of the Christian Fathers, preached every day. However, it was
provided for by Canons, that they should preach frequently. Such a Canon we
have in the Excerptions of Egbert Archbishop of York, Anne 750. Vt emnibus
festis et diebus Dominicis, Vnusquisque Sacerdos Evangelium Christi praedicet
populo. That every Priest preach the Gospel of Christ unto the people upon all
holy days and the Lords days. And especially for the Lords day, in the Canons
under King Edgar, Anno. 967. Docemus etiam, ut Sacerdotes in qualibet die solis
populo praedicent. We require also, that the Priests preach unto the people
every sunday. Since the reformation, men have been frequent in this duty, many
Bishops being also exemplary to their Clergy. The publishers of the lives of D.
Jewel sometimes Lord Bishop of Sarum, and of the late reverend and godly
Bishop of Bath and Wells, have made it one of the heads of their Commendation,
their assiduity in preaching. But especially the care of the ancients was much
for Catechizing. Of Saint Marks Catechizing at Alexandria, and then Clements,
and after him Origens, the histories are known. We have Cyrill of Hierusalem's
Catechisms, and the Catecheses Mystagogicae, which are printed with them, which
if they were not his, are yet of some ancient author. We have a Tract of Saint
Augustin's de Catechizandis rudibus; and another De Symbolo ad Catechumenos.
And beside the practice of the fathers, many Counsels ordaining it. But the
care of no Church has been greater then that of ours, even in ancient times.
In a council held at Clyffe, Anno. 747. It was provided that every Priest
should instruct his people in the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Sacraments
in the English tongue. Can. 10. (see S. H. Spelmans margin ad locum) this Canon
is inserted afterward by Egbert into his. Excerp. 6. See also the
Ecclesiastical laws of Canutus, cap. 22. apud Spelman: page. 549. an
excellent and serious exhortation to this purpose, but too long here to
transcribe. And the Canon 23. of AElfric page 578. Yea it seems by the
Capitula incertae editionis (which by Sr. H. Spelmans placeing of them should
be about Anno. 1050) cap. 28. to have been the custom of our Bishops here
when they met in their Synods with their Clergy, to examine them in the manner
of their teaching, and how they profited their people. After these times
Catechizing was not much heard of till after Luthers preaching, when perceiving
that the Protestant Churches wanne much ground by this kind of diligence, the
practice was renewed by a decree of the Council of Trent in the Romish Church.
For our part, what ground we got by Catechizing, we are most likely to keep
and hold it by the same course; and to lose it all again by the neglect, which
was the observation of our judicious King James, That the cause why so many
fell to popery and other errors was their ungroundednesse in points of
Catechism. Upon such a reason as this it was that an elder Article of a former
Synod was renewed in the Synod at Dort, That all pastors should Catechize in
the afternoon on the Lords day. ( Act a Synodi, sess. 14 and 15.) The very
same with his Majesty's Injunctions to the Clergy of England, and which is
provided for by Canon, and enquired into by the Articles of Visitations, but on
all hands too too much neglected: which has given me occasion to transgress
my purpose in these shorter notes, and to enlarge this discourse, which yet I
cannot leave till I have noted that observeable passage of the present Reverend
Bishop of Exeter in his Preface to his Old Religion, That there is nothing
whereof he repents so much, as that he had not bestowed more hours in
public Catechizing. And, That in regard hereof he could quarrel his very
sermons, And his sermons are excellent ones, as all know that know them, to two
of them, namely his Columba Noae preached to the English Clergy in their
Convocation here in England; and to another upon Eccles. 7.16. preached to the
Divines at Dort at their 16th Session, I refer the Reader, where he shall
find an eloquent and zealous exhortation in this matter.) But of this point
enough, I return to the Text.

And they should seek the law at his mouth.] Here the Vulg. reads as before,
as if it were a promise or their infallibility. But it is only an intimation
of the peoples duty: and the reason follows.

For he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.] (...): the Lxx, and the Vulg.
read, The Angel. The Priest is called so, 1. Because he ministers to God, as
the Angels do before him, who stand before him, and praise him; but, 2.
specially and here, because he is Gods messenger to men from God, and from men
to God. Accordingly the Tigurine here, He is Gods Legate or Ambassador. And
that learned Knight in his Glossary or Archaeolog. has observed to us out of
Ekkehard, that the name has been given even to the Embassrdors of Kings,
Cedamus Angelo Imper i. We have seen how the former Priests carried themselves,
The next is,

III. The degenerating of these Priests from the practice of their fathers, in
regard of their covenant. verse 8.

First, that they were gone from their piety. But ye are departed out of the
way,] or, out of that way, as the Article is in the Hebr. that is, either out
of my way, or, out of that way in which your fathers walked. You have diverted
or turned out, or as the Lxx, (...), Declined Your course is opposite to that
of your fathers, They caused many to return to me, you are returned and gone
from me. But this opposition is more direct in the next member.

Secondly, that they caused many to fall, by their example partly, and partly
by their corrupt glosses. Ye have caused many to stumble at the law. Or, To
fall in the law] The Geneva reads it, By the law. The Vulg. Ye have
scandalized many. Montanus, Ye were a stumbling block, or an offense. Others,
ye have caused that men should stumble at the law; or go against the law, and
so fall into sin and consequently into calamities. So Piscator. Lxx. (...).
Ye have weakened many in the law, ye have offended, snared, caused to strike,
or dash, or stumble: for all these (...) will bear.

Thirdly, that they had in sum broken the covenant. Ye have corrupted the
covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts] Geneva, ye have broken. Vulg. ye
have made void. The Lxx, read as we do, (...), corrupted.

The covenant of Levi] that is, the covenant made with Levi. A metonymy of the
efficient. Thus we have seen the threatenings more largely.

II. verse. 9. where we have, 1. The judgments. Therefore have I also made you
contemptible, and base before all the people.] the Geneva, to be despised, and
vile. To be abject and humble, not in affection, but condition. 2. The causes.
According as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law.]


According] (...) for (...). For in this place (...) is not O S, the mouth, as
Pagnin: and Tremell: etc. render it, Secundum Os, etc. but an expletive
particle, which uses to be added to the servile letters (...) and (...), to
make them distinct words, as (...) is here, and elsewhere, as Number. 6.21. Job.
33.6.30.18. and (...), Exodus 16.18. Genes. 47.12. and then they signify, as
not only our translators in all those places and here, but the Lxx also have
expressed it by (...), Proptereaquod, Because that, or according as.

Ye have not kept my wayes] or watched my ways, or been (as it is in the
text, (...)) watchful or watching, to keep my way. For so the word is, Esa.
62.6.

But have been partial in the law. Or, lifted up the face against the law. Or,
Accepted faces in the law.) The first of these is the text reading of our
English Bibles; the two later are in the margin. To the last of these agree the
Lxx, Vulg: and Pagnin and Deodates Italian, ye have regard to the quality of
the person in the law. To the second, Montanus. Most agree in the sense, you
Priests that should judge according to the law, you accept persons, you respect
the rich, you deal partially in the law in expounding of it, making it pinch
the poor, and favor the rich. You flatter the rich, so Vatabl. You accept the
rich man's lame sacrifice, and have an evasion for it in some gloss; but ye
reject the poores, and are precise in the letter: To this purpose, Theodoret,
the Sir: and both the Arabiques, (which I find in Corn. a lap. ad loc. who
also in prooem. ad proph. min page 5. tells us, that the double Arab. version,
one of Alexandria, the other of Antioch, are at Rome, both in the Vatican, and
in the library of Cardinal Medices, translated into Latin, by Sergius Risius
Archbishop of Damascus) Ye accepted, or took the law in the face of it: ye
look but to the shell and skin of the law, and are hypocritical in it,
wresting the law to serve men. So the Pharise's dealt with Christ. The law
allowed circumcision on the Sabbath, that they approved; Christ did but heal a
poor diseased man on the Sabbath, and that in him they condemned, as if it
were against the law. Therefore Christ bids them, not to judge, (...), (our
translation is, According to appearance, I understand it thus) according to the
face, with respect of persons, but to judge righteous judgment. Ioh. 7.24. And
I am confirmed, by the learned Heinsius, whom I consulted after the collecting
of these notes, in his Aristarchus Sacer pt. 2. ca. 8. where he parallelleth
this very place of our Prophet, with that of John.

Thus we have seen the first contestation largely, for that supply which
Tremellius makes unto the Text, by adding the word, Saying] so to join this to
the following verse, is both needless, and obscures the sense. In the next
verse we proceed to a new head.

II. The second Contestation.
This second Contestation is only in the 10th Verse,

First, against nature. All being of one flesh. Have we not all one Father?]
God (faith Deodate) or, Abraham, according to others, and so he takes it. We
come all of Jacob, or ar least of Abraham, or at least of Adam.

Secondly, against Religion. Being all of one Church. Has not one God created
us?] or, made us? we serve the same God, the Creator.

Thirdly, another evidence against nature. We are brothers of the same stock.
Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother?]

Why do we] the Prophet includes himself, that his reproof may be the
milder; a rhetorical communicating; Why do we, that is, Why do ye.

Deal treacherously] the Geneva, why do we transgress every one against his
brother? our old English. Why is every one deceived of his brother? and so
Mont. But Pagn. otherwise, every one despises his brother.

Fourthly, another evidence that their dealing was against Religion. By
profaning the Covenant of our Fathers?] They broke or violated the Covenant
that their Fathers and Ancestors entered into, to which they should have had
regard, and been answerable unto it in all equal and righteous conversation.

S. Hierome and some others, take this verse as a particular reproof of their
injurious dealing with their wives and taking others; and that here two
arguments are brought to reconcile their love, the Communion of blood, and the
Communion of Religion. And that it is the violation of the particular covenant
of marriage, or the Covenant against marrying of strangers which is here
reproved, That they dealt treacherously against their Brethren, that is, either
the brethren of their wives, or their wives themselves, the females also among
the Hebrews being included under the term of Brethren. But I rest in the
sense above, which is that also which Deodate in his margin prefers, though he
give the other also, which is that of S. Hierome and comes in the next verse to
be considered. The reader may find another interpretation in the learned
Tarnovius the younger, which to me gives no satisfaction, let the reader judge.
And thus much of the second Contestation.

III. The third Contestation.
Thirdly, he contests with them for their marrying with strangers and
infidels. verse 11.12. we have, 1. The sin discovered. ver. 11. 2. The sin
threatened ver. 12.


I. 1. From the persons. 2. From the subject place. 3. From the quality of the
sin. 4. From the effect.


First, from the Bersons, Judah has dealt treacherously and an abomination is
committed in Israel and, Ierusalem] He exaggerates the same with more and
sharper words; for Israel was now no other then Judah. Judah, that is, The
Jewish people, the people of the return from the captivity of whatsoever
Tribe, as, Esth. 2.5. Mordecai though of the tribe of Benjamin, is called (...)
Iudaeus, A Jew. The word is here in the Faeminine Gender, it being usual to
compare a Nation to a woman, and hence that ordinary phrase, The daughter of
Tire, The daughter of Zion, etc. The aggravation from the persons here is this,
Judah the son of praise or confession (as we find the reason of the name in
the imposition, Genes. 29.35. of (...) Confessus est, laudavit) he even Judah
the son of praise, and he in whom I am well known, Psalm. 76.2. he has done
that which is unto my dishonor.

Secondly, from the subject place. In Israel and Ierusalem] of Israel see
verse. 1. Jerusalem was the Metropolis of Iudaea. It was first called Salem
where Melchisedec was King, Genes. 14.18. Afterward it was called Iebus, Judge.
19.10. being in the hands of the Iebusites; (which made our Minsheiu compound
it of Iebus and Salem, as if the name were Iebusalem, and for better sound the
B changed into R.) But when David got it out of the Iebusites hands, he called
it Jerusalem of (...) and (...) Videbunt pacem, They shall see peace. And I the
rather assent to this derivation (then to that of G. Pasor in his Etyma nom.
propr. at the end of his Lexic. in N.T. who would derive it of (...) and (...)
Timete Schalemum, Fear ye Salem, A name as he thinks given by the Iebusites
to the place out of the confidence of their strength; which cannot be made
evident, neither do his other reasons hold. See the place in verbo (...).) I
the rather I say assent to the former derivation, because David built to the
old City of Iebus or Salem, a new addition unto mount Sion, which was mount
Moriah lying in the midst betwixt Sion and Salem, the very place which Abraham
long before had named Iireh, will See, as it is Genes. 22.14. He called the
name of that place Iehovah-Iireh, The Lord will see. Which happily is the reason
why the name of this City has a duall form ((...) but ordinarily without Iod
as it is here, (...)) though it be singular, because it was made up of two
parts or two Cities, the upper and lower. Concerning the Situation see I.
Weemse, Expos. of Moses Laws. vol. 2. lib. 1. Exercit 6.7. and, Lud. Capell.
Hist. Apost. page 146, etc. The meaning of the place as it is an aggravation of
their sin, is clear enough of it self.

Thirdly, From the quality of the sin. Judah has dealt treacherously, An
abomination is committed -- And has married the daughter of a strange God.]
Their marrying of strange women, the worshippers of an heathen Idol, was a
treachery against the wives of their own tribes, and against God; and an
Abomination or an hateful thing in Gods sight; a thing that he loathes.
Concerning the question, De disparitate cultue, (whether it be to be reckoned
Inter Impedimenta Matrimonii; besides what we shall find in the following
commentary, I refer to Reginald praxis Fori. lib. 31. cap. 21. Number. 168. and
other Casuists, who answer negatively. So do the Geneva Divines in their
answer to the 8 questions proposed to them which are inserted among Zanchy's
epistles lib. 1 ad finem Epistolae 58. and Lucas Osiander ad hunc loc. This
question divided S. Augustine and S. Hierom as P. Mart. affirms, comment. in
1. Reg. 3.1. Where he has a very large discourse against marriage contracted
by those of diverse religions, yet allows it in conclusion; so that both
parties do meet in the belief of the maine Articles of the Creed; which he
says, he puts in for the mitigation of the severer sentence; which yet was
the sentence of the Ancients admitting no marriage with any of another faith:
as it collected by Gratian, cansa 28. qu. 1. cave, etc. and, non oportet, etc.
But of this obiter.

Has married.] (...). The Vnlg. Has had. Pagn. Has had to do with. Montan.
Has took to wife. Piscat. Has had an husbandly dominion over. The Lxx,
(...), Has loved. Schindler, Deamavit, has greatly beloved. The word will
bear all these and more, but ours have translated it according to the prime,
and most used signification of the word.

The daughter of a strange God] They are called, 1 King. 11.1. strange women.
As the heathen Idols are called, Genesis 35.2. (...) Strange Gods. No nation
formerly but the Jews did worship the true God; so that any woman of another
Nation might be called, The daughter of a strange God: which I suppose was the
reason of Deodates note, A woman of a strange Nation or religion. The Lxx here
take no notice of (...) Filia, or seem to have mistaken it for some other word,
and have rendered the place, (...), Has been diligent toward other Gods.

Fourthly, the last aggravation of their sin, is from the effect of it. For
Judah has profaned the holiness of the Lord which he loved Or, ought to
love.] Kodesch. The Holiness, that is, the holy and separate land of Iudaea, the
Country that God had chosen to be holy and peculiar to him, they had defiled,
and their own dignity, who were a people holy unto the Lord and beloved. This
interpretation is given by the commentary, which is that also of S. Hier.
Remigius, Hugo, etc. There are others, the Vulg. reads. The Sanctification.
Pagnin. and the Tigur: the holy place. The Chalde Paraphrase, They have defiled
their own soul; which was sanctified to the Lord, or before him, and beloved
of him. The Lxx, The holy things. Some understand the Temple; so Osiander;
some, the Law; some, Their Religion and the worship of God; some, as, Vatabl:
Piscat: and many others, The holy or sanctified ordinance of Marriage made by
the Lord. I assent to S. Hierom, as above.

II. The sin thus discovered, is threatened, Verse 12. The Lord will cut off
the man that does this: the master and the scholar out of the tabernacles of
Jacob, and him that offers an offering unto the Lord of hosts] He threatens
an utter dispersion even of the whole families of such.

The Lord will cut off] The Lord will scatter him, so the Lxx, (...), or cut
him down, or, loppe off his boughs. Piscator expresses it thus, The Lord
will cut off his children that does thus, the children that he begets, of the
daughter of a strange God. Happily he had respect to those Rabbis who interpret
this phrase To be cut off, To dye without children: which the Reader may see in
a peculiar discourse of Sixth. Amama Antib. Bibl. appendice ad Genes. 17.14.
page 954, etc. Where there is more of this phrase. Our commentary makes it a
Metaphor from the use of Physicians, who cut off rotten members, or of the
Sword or Axe which cuts off the head; and so we have the word, 1. Sam. 31.9.
(...). They cut off his head.

The man that does this] (...) The word is faeminine, but used Neutrally, and
so it is by all interpreted. The Lxx, in the purall, (...), He that does such,
or these things; but it is meant particularly of this sin of marrying
Idolaters.

The master and the scholar. Or, him that wakeneth, and him that answereth]
(...). The master and the servant, so the Geneva. The rayser up (or, the
question-mover) and the answerer; so our old English Bible. He that is the
author, and he that follows him; so the Tignrine. He that wakeneth, that is, he
that studiously observes strange women, that he may marry where he likes; and
he that defends, that is, that defends this kind of marriage; so Piscator.
The French, As well him that begins as him that answers. The Italian, Him that
wakes or watches and him that answers: which Deodate in his margin understands
of the keepers, porters, and singers of the Temple, (who answered in course in
singing according to the order of that sacred music) who had polluted
themselves with such marriages. Others express it otherwise; I incline to S.
Hierom, Montanus, Tarnovius, and our commentary, as I have given it above, That
it is meant of a dispersion even of the whole families of such, one and other,
Priest and people, master and scholar; which seems to be so out of the
following words, Out of the Tabernacles (or Tents) of Jacob. And what if it
were a proverbiall and ordinary phrase among the Jews, to which the Prophet
might happily allude and make use of it; But I submit the conjecture. Only here
the interpretation of the Septuag. seems to be singular, I will cut off him
that does these, until he be brought low out of the tents of Jacob. Taking
(...) Adusque, until; for (...), and missing the sense of the other word,
(...) signifying both, To answer, and To bring low.

And him that offers an offering.] That is, I will cut him off, yea though he
be a priest that is faulty in this kind: so the Chald: and Cyrill. Or, though
he offer an offering to reconcile me to him again being displeased with such
marriages; so others. And thus much for the third contestation.

IV The fourth Contestation.
He contests with them for their Polygamie. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16. where
consider, 1. The reproof of the sin. ver. 13, 14, 15. 2. A dehortation from
the sin. ver. 15, 16.


1. ver. 13, 14. and part of the 15. where, 1. The sin. That they took other
wives of the daughters of strangers to their lawful wives. This is not expressed
in so many terms, or in that term Polygamy by which Divines do now
ordinarily call it, but easy to be collected from the context of those 3 verses
named before. 2. The aggravations of this sin. 1. Injurious to their lawful
wives. 2. Hurtful to themselves. 3. Against the ordinance of God.



First, the first aggravation of this their sin is, that it is injurious to
their lawful wives, who were thereby grieved. This ye have done again,
covering the Altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out]
That is, this sin you have added, that by bringing in strange wives, you have
vexed and grieved your lawful ones, so that you have caused them to run unto
the Altar, to complain and to weep there.

This you have done againe] Furthermore this you have added: so the Tigurine.
This you have done secondly; so the Chald. and Pagn. This second crime (the
word is faeminine but put neutrall) Montan. Ye have not only taken strange
wives, but have taken them even to your other wives to vex them. The Lxx here,
ye have done ((...), Quae oderam) such things as I hate. It seems they had
respect to (...) To hate, and mistook it for (...) secondly or second.

Covering the Altar of the Lord with teares] The Geneva note is, ye cause the
people to lament, because God does not regard their sacrifices, so that they
seem to sacrifice in vain. So referring this to the former contestations with
the Priests, An exposition singular, and wide of the whole present context, and
the matter that the Prophet has in hand. That of Lyrant: also seems to miss
the sense, you continuing in your sin go to the Altar, and weep there to
beg pardon, but in vain. That of S Hierom, Cyril, Theodoret, and which out
comment. follows, is more agreeable; you so vilely use your other former
wives, that they fly, or you cause them to fly, to the temple, and weep before
the Altar. See Levit. 18.18. and 1. Sam. 1.6.10. which texts will give light to
this. But for the phrase, To cover the Altar with tears; It is, either to
weep plentifully, or to weep over the Altar: to throw themselves blubbered
and swollen with tears upon the Altar, even embracing it as it were; which was
also the use of other Nations, in Their calamities, solemn oaths, and
Suplications, to lay hold on the Altars. So Arsinoe in her extreme calamity
and suspicion of her brother Ptolomies fraud and cruelties, causes him to come
and lay hold on the Altars in the holiest Temple in Macedon, for her further
assurance and safety when she received his oath. As Justin describes the
ceremony, li. 24. Thus Virgil Aeneid. lib. 4. brings in Hiarbas the Lybian King
imploring Jupiter.

Talibus orantem dictis, Arasque tenentem
Audiit Omnipotens --
And of Aeneas, Aeneid lib. 6.

Talibus orabat dictis, arasque tenebat.
With such words prayed he, and the Altar held.

Upon this necessity of laying hold upon the altars when they addressed
themselves to the Deity, Robert Stephanus in his Thesaurus allege Varro, that
the old Latin word for Altars was Ansae (the ears or handles of a pot) and
afterward changed into Arae.

The Altar of the Lord] This is an amplifying of their griese. Their injury was
extreme, that they are driven to the last refuge; men repair unto the Altar
when all help fails. And further, at the Altar they should rejoice before the
Lord as the custom was when they came up with their wives to the Temple, 1 Samuel, 1. yet there, even there they are caused to weep. It Is called, the altar
of the Lord, It is his standing place, the ordinary residence of God where
these distressed women were confident to find him and to complain themselves
to him: that is, more solemnly, and for a public witness of their misery;
for else God who is every where does every where observe the tears of them
that are oppressed.

With tears, with weeping, and with crying out. Several words are used for
the farther amplification of their grief. They wept, yea they roared out, and
made great clamor and noise, or sent out deep groans, so the word is
translated Ierem. 51.52.

Secondly, the second aggravation of their sin is, that thereby they did also
hurt themselves in that they made their own offerings not to be accepted.
Insomuch that here gardeth not the offering any more, or receives it with good
will at your hand.] The tears and groans of your wives move God more then
your sacrifices do; so that he regards them not, he will not lookeat them, or
turn his face toward them. The adverb of denying is not here in the latter
member, but it is to be repeated (...) from the former member, and so to be
supplied, as serving in common to both; he regards not, nor receives.

Thirdly, the third aggravation of this sin, is in verse. 14, 15. That it is
against the Ordinance of God. Where observe, I. Yet ye say wherefore?] the
Vulg. And Mont. But. But ye say, why not regard it? An objection it is,
proceeding from their blindness or petulancy, not willing to be convinced.
But the answer is ready, because the Lord has seen that you have gone against
his ordinance, as it is in the next words. II. Because the Lord has been
witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt
treacherously; yet she is thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant. And did
not he make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit: And wherefore one? That
he might seek a godly seed.] This was their sin, that they dealt
treacherously against their wives in taking others, whereas the Lord had
appointed and they had made promise to one another in marriage, and only to
one another, as God had ordained in the very first in stitution of marriage,
when he could have made many women for one man, but he made only one for
one. This is the sum, but there are many particular arguments against
polygamie, which we shall observe in the examination of the words in the order
as they lie.


Because the Lord has been witness between thee, and thy wife] He alludes
to the use of contracting Deo test, God being called to witness, and his name
being called upon in the action. And he as it were protested then (the word is
(...) and that is as Mont. of (...) Protestatus or Ob^estatus est) that his
mind and will was, that marriage should b^e insoluble to you two; and you two
should remain solely to each other. This sense S. Hierom gives, and those that
usually follow him, Theod Remig. Lyr. Hugo, but most clearly Ribera.

The wife of thy youth [ Hebr. of thy youths. Thy young wife, so Piscator. Or
thy wife whom thou did marry when thou were young. In whom thy first love did
rejoice. (...) is that whole age of Adolescence or youth, from infancy till the
25th year.

The wife] The Lxx every where, (...) The woman. We render it here Wife, and
that rightly; for (...) A woman, when a Genitive follows is written (...), as
it is here, and presently after, and then it constantly signifies a Woman a
Wife. and it is so written once, Psalm 58.9. though not in construction.

Against whom thou have dealt treacherously] The Geneva, transgressed. The
Chald. Lied. Montan. Praevaricated, dealt cunningly and falsely. The Lxx,
(...), leavest or forsakest; that is, treacherously for another.

Yet is she thy companion] Vulg. Thy partner. Pagn. Thy fellow. The Tigur. thy
consort; the name (as Menochius observes) by which the Italians do call their
wives. So Eve was made for Adam, that he might not be alone, Gene 2.18. The
Lxx, (...), (here used by them in the Faeminine) she partakes with thee in
common.

And the Wife of thy Covenant,] The Wife with whom thou did Covenant. (...)
as before.

And did not he make one? (...). Here is (...) for (...). The note of
interrogation is wanting, which is usual in Scripture; 2 Samuel 13.26. 2 King.
5.26. lob. 2.10. As and (...), for (...); and (...) for (...), usually also in
the new Testament. Matthew. 6.26. and, 17.24. Mark 6.3, and 11.17. 1 Cor. 9.8,
9. 2 These. 2.5. So also the Latins speak, as Virgil, Eclog. 3.

Non ego te Vidi Damonis pessime Caprum

Excipere insidiis? -- Non for Nonne? But besides, the various interpretation
of this has made the place very obscure. The Vulg. Did not one thus? Pagnin:
boldly inserted Abraham here, Did not one Abraham thus as you do? Montan. in
his correction of Pagnin leaves out Abraham, yet seems to understand it in the
same manner; so does Vatablus. Hence many stumbling at this stone interpreted
it as a prevention of an objection that they might make for their own excuse,
that they did but as Abraham did, who had Sarah to his wife, yet he took
Hagar also. But Abraham did it having an excellent spirit, and knowing what he
did, expecting the promise of God concerning a blessed seed, and not knowing
that he should receive him of Sarah, therefore took Hagar that the promise
might not be void; and he took Hagar with Sarah's consent; He had no
children by Sarah, as you have; he despised not Sarah, as ye do; so that his
fact and yours are much unlike. The Chalde paraphrase seems to have laid this
stone, and led to this exposition, and most of them that use the Vulg. follow
it, and among the protestants, Winkleman and Osiander, Lutherans. But S. Hierom
found out a righter, and Theodoret, Lyra, Remigius, and of moderns, Junius,
Tarnovius, The Italian of Deodate both in the text and margin, the Geneva, our
old and our last English do entertain it; Did not he (that is, God) make one?
God made one Eve for Adam, and therefore the first sanction of unity in
marriage, is not to be infringed. This sense also Menochius gives, though the
translation that he is tied unto, will not yield it.

Yet had he the residue of the spirit] or, The excellence, so our margin. But I
am not satisfied why out most learned translators have put it in; for I find
not (...) in that signification. Yet I will not conceal that the Tigurine,
Vatabl. and Pagn. so translate it; and not only A lapide; but Conrad: Kircher
(in his greek Concordance, who in the Roots usually follows Forster, but in
this Sanct. Pagn. at the Root (...)) tells us that (...) signifies both
Remainder or Residue, and excellency. However, the text reading of our last
translation is here (as for ought I know every where else) to be preferred before
the marginall. And the meaning is, God made but one Woman for Adam, though he
had the Remainder of the spirit or breath, so that he could have made many.
He gave part to Adam and the rest to Eve, and made no more in that
extraordinary way, though it had bin easy unto him: as our old English and the
Geneva express it, He had abundance of spirit. That is, that spirit or
breath which he breathed into Man.

And wherefore one? ((...)) That he might seek a godly seed.] or, A seed of
God. That is, God requires you should cleave to your Wives, and not take the
daughters of a strange God, lest your seed be educated in Idolatry. So S.
Hierom? But I suppose there is more in it. The very issue of Polygamy is
spurious in some sense, It is not a godly seed, or the seed of God, that is,
which he appoints, but accursed. Thus every member of these two verses have
afforded several arguments against Polygamie. But all this is to be
understood to be against Simultaneous Polygamy, but not Successive; against
the having two wives at once, not against Second marriages, though troops of
the ancients (as Mr. Gataker speaks in his Treat: of Lots cap. 8. sect. 18.)
have condemned them; yet as he says, what Divine or other does now make doubt
of them. Not Protestants; See instead of all, that Sermon which upon this verse
the late Reverend and godly Bishop of Bath and Wells, D. Lake, preached and
applied at the penance of a man that had two Wives together; to which Sermon I
refer the Reader for more upon this 15th verse. Nor Papists, See Gregor.
Tholosanus, Syntag. Iuris, lib. 9. cap. 29. Guil. Cantarell. Var. Quaest. in
Decal. lib. 1. cap. 98. Number. 426.427. And if you will, that great pretender to
devotion, Nic. Caussin the French Jesuit, in his Holy Court, pt. 1. lib. 3.
sect. 37. Though he discourse a long while upon this argument like a
Montanist; as indeed all the Church of Rome have a little tang of Montanisme,
in that, 1. They deny a blessing in the Church to second marriages, (See
Canones Aelfrici, can. 9. apud Spelman: Conc. p. 574. but whether it be
agreeable to the Canon of Council. Neocaesar. quoted by Gratian. cause. 31. qu.
1. De his qui frequenter: let the Reader compare the places with the gloss at
the letters m and o, and judge) and, 2. That they put Bigamie (even successive
Bigamie) among Irregularities, as it to be seen in their Casuists and
Canonists. See excerptiones Egberti. ad An. Dom. 750. excerp. 32. and 89. apud.
D.H. Spelm. in Conc. ^ambrit. p. 261. The reason, such as it is, we have in
Pet. Damian. a devout Author in a most corrupt time, lib. cui titulus, Dominus
Nobiscum. cap. 12. apud. Ioh. Cochlaei, Speculum. p. 156. who yet speaks of it
with a Quis non miretur, that Bigamy, (successive Bigamie he speaks of) allowed
by the ancient Ecclesiastical Canons, should be a greater Irregularitie and
sin, then Fornication expressly condemned in holy writ. But of this also
enough, being only obiter. And thus much of the reproof of the sin: we have
next;

2. A dehortation from this sin, in the latter part of the 15. verse, and verse
16. which is, 1. Propounded. 2. Repeated.


First, the dehortation is propounded. verse 15. Therefore take heed unto your
spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the Wife of his youth. For the
Lord the God of Israel says, That he hates putting away; for one covers
violence with his garment, says the Lord of hosts.]

Take heed to your spirits.] The Geneva, keep your selves in your spirit.
Remigius and Lyra, keep your spirit; your Wife is the residue of your spirit,
keep and cherish her. The Tigurine, keep and preserve and tender your Wives,
as dearly as you do your own souls. Corn. a lap. Take heed to your breath,
you breath on one another, breath not on a stranger, keep thy self solely to
thy Wife. Conceited interpretations. Arias Montanus came nearer the sense, Be
wary and not rash. I like best that of our Commentary, Be sober and contain
your selves, keep a watch upon your spirits and affections, to content your
selves with your lawful Wives.

And let none deal treacher ously.] Or, unfaithfully. That is, In taking other
Wives, and when you are convinced of the sinfulness of keeping two Wives,
deal not treacherously to put away your old, pretending law for divorces, and
that you may safely do it; for the Lord hates this treachery in making
needless divorces, and thereby cloaking your sin. And this I take to be the
meaning of these and the next words.

For the Lord the God of Israel says, That he hates putting away, for one
covers violence with his garment, says the Lord,] Deal not treacherously
with your Wives, after your vexing them by taking other Wives unto them, then
to put them away, and pretend that the law allows you to give them Bills of
divorce; for this is but the covering of your violence and injury with that
garment or cloak; but the Lord is so far from allowing divorces in such
cases, that he hates them.

The Lord hates putting away. Or, To put away.] The younger Tarnovius gives
here the same sense with us. The Lord hates your (...) Dimitte (the imperative
in Piel) you have Dimitte, Dimitte, much in your mouths, Put her away, Put her
away: but the Lord hates your Dimitte. So it is an ironicall repetition of
their own usual word, which the Lord rejects with indignation. Or else, he
takes it for the Infinitive in Piel, put for a Noune, He hates to put away,
that is, putting away. And so is our text-reading. Our margin indeed is, If he
hate her put her away. Pagnin otherwise, If she (that is, thy Wife) hate thee
(that is be perverse) Put her away. The Geneva and our old English, If thou
hate her, put her away. And so does Zanchy read it in that discourse of
divorces which he wrote upon occasion of Andreas Pizzardus his divorce, as
indeed agreeing best with the matter he undertook to defend. And so read,
The Vulg. Vatabl: and among others Michael Walther a Lutheran in his Harmonia
Scripturae, lib. 2. sect. 185. Follows this reading of the Vulg. and therefore
takes a needless pains in reconciling this place to that of Christ, Mat.
19.11. for reading it aright according to our last and approved translation,
there is no (...) at all between them. And Montanus tells us that Rab. Hananus
a Jewish interpreter interprets it also as we do, God hates him who puts away
his wife.

For one covers violence with his garments] The Vulg. Latin, But iniquity
will cover his garment. Corn. a Lap. who is bound to follow it, labors much to
make good sense of it. First, he tells us, we must take, His, for, Thine. Put
her away, but iniquity will (or shall) cover thy garment. But how is that
meant. 1. Iniquity, that is, the punishment of thy iniquity shall cover thy
garment, that is, shall be upon thy body in regard of diseases, etc. 2. Upon
thy garment, that is, thou shall be punished in thy clothing, naked, ragged,
etc. 3. punishment shall be upon thee, the garment taken for the man, Thou
shall be openly punished. Thus he from others, for the Vulg. of which
translation Steph. Menochius a latter Jesuit, gives another sense. The Jews
excuse themselves, Why do you reprehend us, seeing the law permits us to put
away our Wives, If thou hate her put her away. But (which he makes the Prophets
answer) your iniquity shall thereby so abound and swell, that no garment will
be able to cover it. The Law permitting it only for the hardness of your
hearts, but not freeing you from sin, if rashly and without cause you put
them away. A better sense then that of A lapide, but for which he is feign to
take his farewell of the authorized Vulgar translation. If thou put her away,
give her some part of thy garments to cover her, something to live on; So
Luther occasionally expounds it: which sense Osiander follows, give her a good
dowry, that if she be put away she may marry another. Let him put her away,
for while he keeps her he covers his injury, and makes as if he loved her: so
the Geneva, and Winkleman. Much like to the Chalde paraphrase, Put her away,
and cover not thy hatred with a pretense that thou love her and keep her,
and make her a drudge. Vatablus is singular, as if their fault were, that
they put away their Wives and covered their iniquity under a garment, that is,
discovered not their fault, as the Law required they should, and so wanting a
formal bill of divorce they were made incapable of a second marriage, and so
they added to the injury. Some take it for an Ironic. Put her away, do so, but
thy sin shall overtake thee. All these mistake the sense. I rest in that
above. The Lord hates needless divorces, and the more when the Law is
pretended; for one, that is, the man that does this, does but daube, and color
and cloak his sin.

His iniquity] (...) oppression, or injury, or wrong. So Genes. 16.5. (...) My
wrong be upon thee.

2. The dehortation is again repeated. Therefore take heed to your spirit,
that ye deal not treacherously.] of which before. And thus much of the 4th
Contestation.

V. The fifth Contestation.
Fifthly, he contests with them for their contumely and blasphemy against God
and his providence, as if God were not just or took no notice of the affairs
of men. verse. 17. to ver. 7. of cap. 3. where observe, 1. Their blasphemy.
ver. 17. 2. The answer that is made unto it. chap. 3. verse, 12, 3, 4, 5, 6.


First, verse 17. Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, yet ye say,
wherein have we wearied him? When ye say, every one that does evil is good
in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in him, or, Where is the God of
Judgment?] you have added this sin to the rest, that by your Atheistical
conceits and blasphemous speeches ye have wearied and vexed me, says the Lord;
in that you call in question, my being, and my justice, and my providence.

Ye have wearied the Lord] Lxx, provoked. Chald. Molested or cumbred. The
Tigur: and Arias, wearied and toyled: Vatabl. Troubled. We have the same word,
Esaias 43.24. (...). Thou have wearied me with thine iniquities. Which is further
set out in the words next before. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins. So
here, ye have wearied and toyld me that I am weary, I cannot bear your words.

Ye say, he that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord] that is,
accepted and approved of him. An usual phrase among the Hebrews, which is
clear by the next;

And he delights in him,] An high accusation of God for injustice, that he
should justify the wicked; nay more, take pleasure in him.

Or where, etc. Or, is either a new accusation of God; ye say thus, he
delights in the wicked, or ye say thus, where is the God, etc. Or else it is
their proof that they bring of their former accusation of Gods Justice, he
delights in the wicked, or else where is the God of judgment: or as the
French, Otherwise where is the God of judgment. If he did not delight in him,
he would punish him.

Where is the God of judgment] (...), of that judgment. (...) Demonstrative,
has great Emphasis; where is the God of that, (1) of that great, exact, free,
just, precise, impartial judgment, which respects neither persons nor gifts,
but only justice, (as his Character is usually given by the Prophets) where is
he. Lxx, the God of righteousness. Chald. The God who does judgment. This was
their sin, their blasphemy against God. We have in the next Chapter,

Secondly the answer that is made unto their blasphemy. Chap. 3. ver. 1. to the
7th. Ye say, where is the God of judgeme^t, It shall appear says the Lord,
that I am the God of judgment, when the Messiah shall come into the World, (as
he shall come shortly) who shall dispense mercy and comfort to the godly, but
judgment and evil to evillmen. S. Hierom also and Theodoret allow of this
context and resolution. We have this laid down in a prophecy of Christ and
his Forerunner, the coming of them both.

1. The coming of the Forerunner, the Baptist. 2. The coming of the Messia.
I. The coming of the Forerunner. Part of the 1. ver: where, 1. His coming.
2. His work.


1. His coming. Behold I will send my Messenger] Behold; to the question which
(it appears by (...) the demonstrative) they would have to be taken notice
of; they receive an answer which carries with it a note of Pregnancy, used by
the Prophets concerning things eminent and certain, to make men attent.

I will send,] It may be taken to be the speech of Christ himself, according
to that of, Luc. 1.76. Where John Baptist is called his Prophet, or the speech
of God, as it is, Mat. 11, 10.

My messenger] or, Angel, for so it is in the He. of which see before, Chapter 1.1.
Chapter 2.7. See also Dan. Heinsius his Exercit. Sacrae, lib. 5. Cap. 4. in Act.
7.53. in which place, and Gal. 3.19. and, Heb. 2.2. by Angels he understands
the Prophets: as he does also, 1 Timothy 3.16. exercit. lib. 14. cap. 3. To me (I
confess) a new exposition of those places, having sometime heretofore, In a
brief comment on some part to the Galatians, given an other interpretation,
which the Reader if he please, may there see, though I have there also noted
that the exposition which is now offered by that most learned Heinsius, was
anciently St. Ambros his. If any shall vouchsafe to see my reasons for
interpreting the word Angels properly, in that place of Gal. 3.19. Let him
please also to correct an error in the same page 163. where whether it were
through the mistake of the Printer or the transcriber of my Copy, The same
Epistler, is put for, The same Apostle. A title most unworthy of that great and
chosen Vessel, being that which we use for sorry and worthles
Letter-scriblers. But this only by the way, because I would not leave any
title of Diminution upon that great Apostle. To return to the Text, This
Messenger or Angel, is John the Baptist, as the exposition is put out of all
controversy by Christ, Mat. 11, 10. This is he of whom it is spoken, behold,
etc. None doubt but it is meant of John, but who John should be has been some
doubt; He is called An Angel, and Origin thought he was one, and so thought
the latter Jews, because of his Heremiticall life: but S. Hierom concludes
sounder, he was an Angel in office, not in nature. In nature he was a man, and
we know whose son he was. A man sent from God. Ioh. 1.6. from God he had his
instruction; we find no other teaching he had. Some take Messenger
Sylleptice for all the Prophets, if any, between Malachy, and Christ; but that
it must be meant of one, see Iunius, his Parallel. li. 1. par. 50. Thus of the
coming of John.

2. His work. He shall prepare the way before mee] the French, accoutre or
dress the way. It is a metaphor from the use of Kings, who when they go in
progress, their Messengers and Harbingers go before them to fit and make all
ready, and in the way, The greatest Ministers of state go next before the
King. Many Prophets went before Christ, but John Baptist went next him, before
his face, hard by, near before him, as S. Chrysostom speaks on Math. 11. and
therefore Christ calls him in respect of other Prophets, The greatest borne of
Women: he came as the Deane of the Quire, Chorum prophetarum claudens. He was
borne a little before Christ was borne. It was the sixth month with Elizabet
when the blessed Virgin conceived, and so he came into the World but a little
before his master, to prepare the way, by preaching repentance, by baptising,
by giving testimony unto Christ, by taking up lodgings in the hearts of men for
Christ. He shall sweep the way; so Pagnin. (...) is to remove all obstacles
and impediments, and all filth out of the way and out of sight. Zephan. 3.15.
it is rendered, Cast out. He has cast out thine onemy. Psalm 80.9. To make
room. Tremell. reads it, To clear the way. That is, to take out all
stumbling blocks and obstacles. See, Esa. 57.14. and, Esaias 62.10. And what
John was to do, see Esaias. 40.3. Luc. 1.76, 77, 78. Let me also observe here,
that because of this office of his To go before Christ, and to serve for a
time or season till the appearing of Christ, who rose as the Sun does in the
morning, (and so he is called The sun, in the next Chapter) that for this
reason I say, John is called, A burning and shining light, in whose light the
Jews did rejoice for a season, as it is, Ioh. 5.35. Lights and Candles are of
good use, and do service till the morning appears or the Sun rises; and
therefore Lamps were kept burning in the Temple till the morning, as we find,
1 Samuel 3.3. where it is said, that the Lord called to Samuel, yer or before the
Lamp of God went out in the Temple; that is, before it was morning. So in the
dark night of things under the Law, The Prophets were lights, and especially
John was A burning light for that season, till that Christ manifest himself,
and then it was day. And thus much of the coming and office of the forerunner.

II. The coming of Christ the Messiah. We have, 1. His person. ver. 1. 2. His
coming. ver. 1. 3. His power. ver. 2. 4. The effects of his coming. ver. 3,
4, 5, 6.


First, his Person. The Lord whom ye seek, The Messenger of the Covenant,
whom ye delight in] Christ the Messiah is set out unto them by these two names.

The Lord] (...) Ille Dominus. The Lord by an excellence. (...). Dominator, as
the Vulg. (Of this appellative Adon, see before cap. 1. ver. 14.) Some Hebrews
whom Remigius also follows, understand by the Messenger, Elias; and by The
Lord, the Dominator; Antichrist; but the following words declare the
unsoundnesse of this interpretation, where he is called, the Angel of the
Covenant. Theodorus Mopsvestenus infected with the haeresie of the Ebionites
who denied the Divinity of Christ, (as Arrius after) understood by The Lord
here, Ezra, or some such person, who should restore the Jewish worship. Which
error was Damned by the Fathers of the Fifth general Council, and about the
same time at Rome under Vigilius. Of late Eniedenus the Socinian (in explic.
Loc. V. and. N. Test.) has quarrelled such Texts, in which the title of Lord
is given unto Christ, as Ioh. 20.28. for the vindication of which and the like
Texts, see that late industrious Divine, Gasp. Brockman. System. Tom. 1. art.
5. cap. 2. qu: 3. The Rabbis also pervert such places. See Ioh. Alstedi
paratitla Theo. in verbo Dominus.

Whom ye seeke] They had a certain notion of the Messiah, and were in
expectation of him. But the most part had hope and expectation of corporal
deliverance only by him, as John Deodate notes.

The Angel or Messenger of the Covenant,] Christ is here set out by his
sacerdotall office. He that was covenanted for, or promised: or, He that should
administer the Covenant.

Whom ye delight in] They delighted in his day though a far off; according
to that, Ioh. 8.56. See the Elder Tarnovius, In Dub. ad 4. partem, c. 8. Ioh.
qu. 18. The Geneva, Whom ye desire. We have that phrase, Hagge, 2.8. He was
4000 years desired, and earnestly. See Genesis 49.18. Esa. 64.1.

Secondly, his coming. He shall suddenly come to his Temple, Behold he shall
come, says the Lord of hosts]

Suddenly] It is the same word that is used, Psalm. 64.7. and Esa. 30.13. The
Geneva, speedily. Yet it was 500 years after Malachy before Christ was borne;
a short time in respect of the long expectation of the Patriarchs. But after
John, Christ came Suddenly, he was conceived speedily within a few months
after John, and borne speedily after John's birth, and taught publicly
speedily after John's preaching and baptising.

He shall come to his Temple.] Pagnin. had rendered it so, but Montanus in his
correction, To his palace. (...) signifies, a Palace or A Court, 1 King.
21.1. Naboths vineyard was hard by the Palace of Ahab. (Hecal Ahab.) And
though the word be used for the Temple, yet peculiarly for that part of the
Temple which is called the palace or the Court, which was the greater part,
the middle part between the Porch and the Oracle; answereable to which, (...)
A temple, in the restrained use of the word is now only taken, for the body of
the Church. But the whole Temple is here called by that name, as Christians
also have called the Churches or houses of God, Basilicae. See Steph. Duranti
De Ritibus Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 1. s. 8, 9. To the material Temple, and in the
literal sense, Christ was to come as to the solemn place of his appearance, as
when the Lord came to or among the people of old, He came into and filled his
house with his glory: so Christ came to his Temple, when he was presented
there a child, Luc. 2. So the Church of Rome seems to understand this, by
appointing in her Liturgy (which we had, Missale sec. usum Sarum; In offit:
propriis, page 12.) these words for the day of the Purification: but especially
he came thither when afterward he preached and wrought miracles there: for we
cannot understand by the Temple, either the Womb of the Virgin, as S. Cyril;
or the flesh and incarnation of Christ, according to that, Ioh. 2.19. as
Theodoret and S. Ang. and to which the learned Heinsius (though he also give
that other sense of the material Temple) seems to me to incline, exercit.
Sacrae. cap. 2. in Ioh. 2.19. Yet I shall easily agree with the reverend Author
of the following commentary, wherein also I think he follows S. Hierom, That
the end of Christ's coming is also at least intimated, that Christ comes to
make up a spiritual Temple or Church of Christians. To which agrees the Margin
of the Italian Bible, he shall come to the Temple at Jerusalem the figure of
the Church.

Thirdly, his power verse. 2. But who may abide the day of his coming? And who
shall stand when he appears? For he is like a refiners fire, and like
fullers soap.] The power and Majesty of Christ is here discovered by variety of
expression.

Who may abide the day of his coming?] Vulg. Who can think, that is, who can
think of all the glory, graces, benefits of that day. The Lxx and the Chald.
Who can sustain? That is, Who can endure the light of it. We being as Owls
unto the Sun. Who will not be astonished and melt. Vatablus his note is, who
will endure the tribulations of Christians that will follow upon his coming.
Winkleman, who will be able to stand in the reformations that Christ will
proceed upon. Our Comment. The wicked will not be able to abide Christ's
preaching, but will be destroyed by it. (...) in Piel, is, To comprehend,
contain, sustain, bear. I suppose the word is to be taken here in that
sense that it is, Pro. 18.14. The spirit of a man, (...), Will sustain his
infirmity.

And who shall stand when he appears?] The Geneva, Who shall endure. Who is
so hard and flinty or so made of iron, whom that sight will not break, who so
rebellious that will not be wrought upon? so Sanchez in loc. But others take
the place as comparing Christ's coming to the Sun in his rising, at whose
magnificence and brightness all are dazeled and amazed. So the Lxx. Chald.
Vulg. Vatabl. Pagnin. There are that understand this whole period of Christ's
coming to judgment, and among others Gerard Vossius upon Ephraems Sermon,
Desecundo adventu Domini. But most understand it of Christ's coming in the
flesh: The several interpretations of which place, Dan. Chamier, Panstr. Tom.
3. lib. 26. cap. 4. has plentifully collected, where he cleares this place,
especially the latter part of the verse, from the fingers of such as pervert it
to establish Purgatory.

For he is like a Refiners fire] Geneva, A purging fire. The Lxx, The fire of a
forge. Vulg. A forging fire. Deodates Italian, As the fire of him that founds
metalls. So we have the word where the same metaphor is followed, Esa. 48.10.
(...) I have refined thee, I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.
And, Judge. 7.4. I will try them. A boiling or melting fire; so Pagnin; as it is
Esaias 1, 26. I will purge away thy dross, and take away thy tin. So also,
Ierem. 9.7. See in Corn: a lap. five reasons why Christ is compared to fire.

And like fullers sope] Lxx. as washers herb. Vulg. As fullers herb. and so
the Tigurine from S. Hier. in Iere. 2.22. Though thou wash thee with nitre, and
take thee much ((...)) Soap: who says there, that Borith is an herb growing
in springing and moist places of Palaestine, and of the same use with Nitre.
That which we call Saponaria, in English Sopewe^d or Sopewoort. Deodates
Italian in the text, renders it, The Herb which scoureth cloth; In the margin,
Cudwoort or Cottonweed, which the fullers use. Vatabl. Pagn. Tremell. render
it, Soap. Arias leaves the Hebr. word untranslated, like fullers Borith. The
word comes of (...) to make pure, clean, or white. Thence (...) and (...), Any
thing that has force to cleanse garments from spots or stains. Therefore the
Chald. He is like that by which cloths are made white. But our last
translation renders it Soap, here, and Ier. 2.22. Which what it is, besides the
ordinary knowledge of it now adays, appears by that of Pliny, lib. 28. c.
12.7. Prodest and sapo; Gallorum inventum exsevo and cinere. Both the
Arabicques read Sulphur, not (as I suppose) according to Cornelius a lapide,
his conjecture, taking (...) for (...) which indeed signifies Sulphur in the
Chalde, but upon a much easier mistake in unpointed Hebrew, where the word is
(...), and in the Arabian (...) is Sulphur. But I submit this also as a
conjecture.

3. The effects of Christ's coming, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6.

1. In respect of the godly ver. 3, 4. 2. In respect of the wicked. ver. 5, 6.
I. In respect of the godly, the effect of his coming is very salutary and
comfortable. ver. 3, 4. where consider, 1. His work ver. 3. 2. The end of his
work ver. 4.


First his work. ver. 3. And he shall sit as a refiner and purifyer of
silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold and
Silver] Christ comes to cleanse and purify his people.

He shall sit] Geneva, He shall sit down to try. Some refer it, to express
Christ as a Judge, who sits to enquire and discern right from false. But the
phrase rather notes the accurate, serious and assiduous doing of a thing.
Deodate gives both.

As a refiner] Vulg: As a melter in a Forge.

And purifier] (...) is most ordinarily used for, To be clean or pure from
sin. And thence Taber is Pure, innocent, or holy. But it is used also as
here. God is compared to a refiner and purifier, as the Priests are in the next
words to Silver and Gold.

And he shall purify the sons of Levi and purge them,] Christ will make the
Priests brighter. The French, He shall make neat, or clean, the sons of
Levi. Vulg. Colabit, He shall streine them, as some liquor or liquid matter is
transmitted or streined thorough a narrow vessel, seive, or cloth, so that the
purer part may go through, and the dreggy may be left. The Lxx, He shall
power forth as metal which is melted Pagn. He shall melt them, Montan. He
shall boil them. The Chald; reads as we do, He shall purge them. Theodoret
understood this of the conversion of many Levites to the Faith of Christ, as
Ioses, Acts 4.36. and many Priests, Acts 6, 7. S. Hier. Remig. Rupert. Eyr.
etc. understand it of a new order of Levites to be instituted for the service
of the Gospel. And we know that the Ministers of the Gospel are prophesied of
under that name, and of Priests, Esaias 66.21. See the learned conference with
Heart, chap. 8. divis. 4. page 470. But Ioh. Deodate interprets it of all true
Christians and refers to Apo. 1.6 Romans 12.1. Him I assent to.

Secondly, the end of his work, in purging them. That they may offer unto the
Lord an offering,] The Geneva, that they may bring offerings. The word is
Mincha here too, of which see before. He still speaks in the prophetical
phrase. They shall be purged, that they may serve God, purely, and acceptably,
or offer an offering.

1. Pure. 2. Acceptable.
I. A pure offering, That they may offer an offering in righteousness,] that
is, holily and purely performed, according as is required. See the phrase, Ps.
51.19. II. An acceptable offering, ver. 4. Then shall the offerings of Judah
and Jerusalem be pleasant to the Lord.] And so the Vulg. Acceptable, so the
Geneva. Chald. shall be entertained freely. Vatabl. and Pagn. shall be
sweet. So we have rendered it, Ierem. 6.20. Nor your sacrifices, (...), Sweet
unto me. That the place is meant of the Service of the Church as it is Now, I
doubt not; but that Judah is the Latin Church, and Jerusalem Rome, as Ribera
would have it, I pass as a partial fancy of a Romish interpreter.
As in the days of old, and in the former (or ancient) times.] As acceptable
as were the Sacrifices, which Abel, Noah, Melchisedec, Abrabam, Moses, Aaron,
etc. Offered.

2. The effects of his coming in respect of the wicked, exitiall and terrible.
ver. 5.6. where we may consider, 1. The judgment. ver. 5. 2. The certainty of
the judgment. ver. 6.


I. ver. 5. where, 1. What it is. 2. Against whom.


First, what the judgment is, And I will come near to you in judgment, and I
will be a swift witness against, etc.] you said, where is the God of
judgment? I will make it appear unto you, that I am he. The Tigurine, I will
come and I will draw near. A phrase like that, Genes. 18.21. I will go down
and see, that I may punish. A metaphor from the custom of Itinerarie Justices,
or Judges that hold Assizes in their Circuits. I know this most interpreters,
ancient and others, who understand the former of Christ's first Coming, do
think this is meant of his Second; for which I cannot see reason, but rather
think this to be the sense, Though the coming of the Messiah bring so much
comfort along with it, and bring salvation to the World; yet against such as
continue in their sins, and thereby increase the guilt of them the more, by
how much, more grace is offered unto them; against such I will come to
judgment, and will be a swift witness against them. And thus I make it to be
the speech of God taken Substantialiter (who is in the end of the Verse again
called, The Lord of hosts, as all along the prophecy) and not Personaliter,
for Christ. Which interpretation notwithstanding I do submit, as I do all the
rest.

And I will be a swift witness against,] An hasty witness, so the Tigur.
Vatablus, Ready. Tremel. most speedy. The Lxx as we, (...), A swift witness.
The Trope here also is a Metaphor, and the affection of the Metaphor seems to
be a Catachresis, witness being put for Judge. I will soon upon the evidence
of your fact give judgment against you. Among men, the witness and the judge
must be distinct. That of Ioh. Bodin. De republ. lib. 6. page 1185, is
generally received; If the fact be only known to the judge, he may be a
witness of it, but a judge he cannot be. And to the question, whether a judge
be bound to give sentence Secundum allegata and probata? The Canons speak
affirmatively. Gratian. Cause. 2. qu. 1. et 7. plerunque, etc. and so also (to
omit others) it is determined by the learned Henr. Bocerus de Iurisdict. cap.
6. sect. 34. and by Ioh. Weems. Exercit. vol. 2. lib. 2. cap. 17. And there is
reason it should be so among men. But God, being infinitely present, an
eyewitness of every fact; and infinitely wise, free from all possibility of
error; and infinitely holy, out of all suspicion of being corrupted; may be,
and is, both witness and judge. See for further light, Gene. 31.50. Iud.
11.10.1. Sam. 12.5, Job 16.19, Ierem. 29.23. Ioh. 8.16, 17, 18. See also Ioh.
Buxtorf. in Comment. Masoret. cap. 14. in Litera ^. We have seen thus what the
judgment is;

2. Against whom it is; against.

1. Sorcerers. 2. Adulterers. 3. False swearers. 4. Oppressors of hirelings. 5.
Oppressors of Widows and fatherless. 6. Oppressors of strangers. 7. Such as
fear not God.
First, Against the Sorcerers.] The Lxx, (...). Sorcerers, or Poysoners. But of
Pharmaci, and (...), see Rhodigin. Antiqu. Lect. lib. 6. cap 12. lib. 9. c. 23.
the Hebr. is (...), and that is. He that exercises delusions and juggling
sleights, so that a thing is made to appear otherwise unto ones eyes, then
indeed it is. Exodus 7.11, 12. Upon which two verses, the Reader may satissie
himself in the second disputation, and the nine following, of Ben. Pererius in
cap. 7. Exodus to whom, and to Delrio and Wierus, I refer him for curiosities of
this argument. The word is here translated, A Sercerer, but usually a Witch,
as, Exodus 22.18.2. Chron. 33.6. Dent. 18.10. in which one text are reckoned up
the several sorts of Divination that are forbidden, all which are fully
explicated by M. Gataker. in his Tr. of Lots; and all which are to be
understood here under this one head. Concerning which, and the several cases
about them, besides the Popish Casnists, Cajetan. Peccat. Sum. in verbo,
Divinatio. Silvester in eod. Tit. Tollet, instructio Sacerd. lib. 4. cap. 14,
15. Guil. Cantarell. Var. Quaest. lib 2. Number 474. Bizozerus, Sum. Cas. pt. 2.
cap. 4. Memb. 5.6. Fumi, Armil. Aurea, Verbo Divinatio. Reginald. praxis fori
poenit. lib 17. cap. 16, 17. Martin. Bresser. de Consc. lib. 6. cap. 21. And
ours, M Perkins, of Witchcraft; Ioh. Alsted. Theol. Cas. cap. 13. sect. 11.
Andr. Rivet. Praelect. in Exodus 20. page 20. Gasper Brockmond. System. Theol.
Tom. 2. arti. 18 cap. 18. Cas. 11, 12, 13. ad 20. See also many things to the
purpose of this place, in Gabr. Pennot. Propugnac. hum. libert lib. 10. Ioh
Wolphius in Addit. ad Pet. Mart. 2. in Reg. 21. page 404. and in Weems. Degen.
sons, The Magitian.

Secondly, and against the Adulterer] The Lxx, translate it into the feminine,
(...), Adulteresses. It Is the Mascul. in the Hebr. Under this head also may be
referred all the sins usually treated of by Divines and Casuists under the
7th Commandment. A sin sentenced and severely punished by the Laws of
Nations, even the very heathen; for the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Romans, See
Plutarch, in Parall. passim. For other Nations, Alex. ab. Alex. Genial. Dier.
lib. 4. cap. 1. and Rhodigin, lect. Antiqu. lib. 21. c. 45.47. For the old
French, it is a notable story which is related by Ioh. Tritenhemius de Orig.
Francorum, page 304 (in the first Tome of the Opus Historicum at Basil,
collected by Simon Schardius as is thought and conjectured by the Printer) of
Basan the King and highpriest of the Sicambri, who were ancestors to the
French, that as his Laws were severe against adultery and other like crimes,
so he also was so strict in the execution of them, that he caused a sword and
an halter to be carried before him whithersoever he went, and finding an
accusation to be true against his own son Sedanus, that he had committed
adultery, he judged him to death, and when his Nobles entreated him to reverse
his sentence, he said; Strive not against justice, you may sooner restrain the
wind from blowing in the air, then turn Basanus mind aside from the law. And
turning to his son, he said; I kill thee not my son, but the law which
thou have broken. And therewithal in zeal to justice, he slew him with his
own hand. This was about 280 years before Christ. But especially for our own
ancestors, the old Saxons, it is an observable testimony which Corn. Tacitus,
Descr. Germ. gives of their severity against this sin, upon which place,
Andr. Althanner. and Jodocus Vuillichius in their commentaries upon Tacitus,
do take occasion (and justly too in my opinion) to condemn the Remissenes of
this age in punishing more sharply, what those times of ignorance did abhor.
But I would rather in this point commend unto the Reader, that zealous and
effectual Epistle of our country man, Boniface Arch Bishop of Mentz unto
Aethelbald King of the Mercians here in England. where he relates that severity
of the Saxons, and urges much against this sin. The Epistle is in the
Magdenburg. Centur. Cent. 8. cap. 9. and from them in Mt. Fox Martyrol. And it
seems there was much need of sharp writing at that time, when the people
generally by the Kings example were given unto this sin, and like fed Horses
neighing after their neighbors wives, as appears by another Epistle from the
said Boniface, to Heresfrid, a godly Priest, who as it seems was sometimes
called to preach in the Court of Aethelbald, and might work upon him.

Thirdly, And against false Swearers] Lxx, that swear by my Name upon a lie.
Pagnin. that swear lyingly. Vulg. perjurers. What the sin is, and how great;
see the Casuists, and others on the third Commandment. And how God has
punished it, if there were no other example, the lamentable issue of the
battle at Varus, where Vladistans the King of Hungary, and Julian the
Cardinal were miserably defeated by the Turk, will be a sufficient monument
to all succeeding times. We have also two pregnant instances in Eadmerus his
Historia Novorum (published by the learned Seldom,) lib. 1. page 5, 6, and lib.
5. page. 124, 125. But the sin here, is not only Perjury, when an oath taken
is not kept; but the very taking of a false oath. So Piscator according to the
Hebr. That swear unto a false thing. It may be rendered adverbially, That
swear falsely: and to that sense our translation. A sin it is of an high
nature, for first there is a lie, and then an oath made upon a lie.

Fourthly, And against those that oppress (or, defraud) the hireling in his
wages.] The Geneva. That wrongfully keep back the heirelings wages. The Vulg.
Who make cavills to detain wages. The Chald. and Lxx, Who take away wages by
violence: and so Pagn. The word, (...), will bear, all these, It is, to
defraud by calumny ((...)) or by guile, or by force. This was Labans sin.
Jacob complains of him, that he dealt hardly with him, and deceived him, and
changed his wages ten times. Genes. 31.7.41. He changed his wages ten times,
that is, often, as the phrase is taken Numb. 14.22. Job. 19.3. Or it may be he
did indeed ten times in Jacobs six years service change his wages which by
agreement was to arise from the Lambs that were yeaned, which in Mesopotamia
(which was the Country where Jacob kept Labans flock) yeaned twice a year; but
Laban partly thorough covetousness, and partly through envy at Jacobs
thriving, might happily every half year be altering the agreement; which was S.
Augustines conjecture, and is followed by Iunius and Pareus, though they
followed not his mistake occasioned by the Septuagint in reading the place,
Thou have deceived me of my wages in ten lambs. Of which see Sixth. Amama in his
Antibarb. Biblic. page 427, 428, who censures both the reading and the
interpretation. But to me what ever becomes of the Reading, yet it seems the
interpretation may stand good. This sin cries in the ears of God, Iam. 5.4.
and has a woe against it, Ierem. 22.13. and was specially provided against in
the law under Moses. Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. The wages of the labourer must be paid
as soon as he has done his work, because he sets his heart upon, or
lifts his soul unto it, that is, he has no other liveliehood, nothing else
whereby to maintain his life, or to trust unto.

Fifthly, And against those that oppress the widow and the fatherles] So I
read it with this supply, though the verb be not again repeated, but is to
be repeated from the former member to make the sense clear. The Lxx, Against
them who oppress widows by their power, and strike or beat the fatherless.

The Widow] (...). The solitary, or silent, or forsaken, as Ierem. 51.5. Israel
has not been (Hebr. widdowed) forsaken, and Esa. 13.22. Desolate houses, are
called in Heb. Widows. See the metaphor, Lament. 1.1. which is like unto that
of Virgil, Aeneid. 8.

-- tam multis viduasset civibus urbem.

See Genes. 38.11.14.2. Sam. 20.3. Esaias. 47.8. or, the Widow in the Hebr. is
called Silent, because her husband being dead, she cannot so well speak in
her own cause, or for her own defense. Therefore Gods care of Widows was
always great, Exodus 22.22. Deuteronomy. 10.18. and, 24, 17. Psalm. 49.9. and, 68.5.
Ierom. 49.11. And in the Christian Church the Apostles took care of them, and
specially for their sakes ordained Deacons who might see that they should not
be neglected, Acts. 6.1. A place pertinently observed and used by the Widow of
John Knobbarus the Printer, in her Epistle Dedicatory to the Bishop of Antwerp,
before the late Jesuit Bresserus his book De Concscientia. This care was
continued by S. Paul 1. Tim. 5.3. and after by many Bishops It Is a Testimony of
great honor, and a character fit for a Bishop, which Matthew of West minster,
gives to Gilbert Bishop of Chichester in K. Edward the firsts time, that he was
the Father of Orphans and the comforter of Widows.
. Yet at the last the Pontifician law grew straight and hard toward them,
wherein as Greg. Tholosan. has it, Syntag. Iuris. lib. 9. cap. 26. s. 14. It
was provided that the money bequeathed for pious uses to the endowing and
marrying of poor Women, might in no case be bestowed upon Widows marrying
again, though they were poor.

The fatherlesse] (...) is an Orphan, a Pupil, destitute of father or help.
See it clearly, Lament. 5.3. We are (Iethomim) Orphans and without father.
The Lxx, here, and constantly, translate it (...), but in one place, namely,
Psalm. 82.3. they render it, (...), poor. The fatherless and the widow's are
frequently joined together in the same Texts, and so they are in Gods care. The
ancient Church was tender of them, thence it was that Brephotrophi (as they
were called) were appointed for the charge of exposed infants, whose fathers
were not known; and Orphanotrophi to see to the bringing up of other infants.
A practice worthily followed and imitated by the rare zeal and charity of our
blessed King Edward the Sixth, who upon occasion of the Bishop of Londons
Sermon, besides Bridewell and S. Thomas Hospital disposed to other charitable
uses, was the glorious founder of Christ's Hospital for the relief of
fatherless children. It were easy to outvie the popish and to parallel the
ancient times, with examples of charity in this kind since the Reformation.
Among others that Honorable and reverend Prelate, D. Andrew's Lord Bishop of
Winchester, shines not more in his learned writings (which yet make him famous
in the gates) then in his Legacies to the poor, among which this was not the
least commendable that he gave 5C1 per Annum to the binding of poor Orphans to
be apprentices. A man deserving all the honor and right which those honorable
and learned personages have done him, who have gratified the English Church
with the History of his life. But I must take my self off from this argument,
remembering that these Excursions will happily be judged by some to be too
frequent and not proper for these short notes. I confess it, yet who would not
be large (upon the least occasion given) in the just commendations of those
rare examples, especially when so many on the contrary do build up their
estates and houses upon the ruins and distresses of Orphans and Pupills
committed to their trust; The sin that is here threatened in the text, and
questionles a great sin, and provided against fully in the ancient law; so
that in the Institutions of Justinian we have fourteen titles, (...), lib. 1.
Tit. 13, etc. And Greg. Tholosan. has found enough to collect to make two
books in his Syntagma, lib. 12. and, 13. with whom I leave the Reader.

Sixthly, And against those that turn aside the stranger] that is, from his
right, as our last translation supplies it even in the text. The Geneva and
Vulg. Against those that oppress the stranger. The Lxx. and the Chalde, That
pervert the judgment of the stranger. See how it is expressed, Exodus 23.6. Thou
shall wrest the judgment.

The stranger] (...) Is he that dwells where he was not borne; or one that has
dwelt but a while where he does, and so through want of friends and of
acquaintance with the Law, is more easy to be wronged; for whose defense
therefore God provided by many Laws. See Exodus 22.21. and, 23.9. Deuteronomy.
10.18.19. Levit. 19.33.34. Ierem 22.3. Ezekiel. 46.18. Zach. 7.10.

Seventhly, And against those that fear not me, says the Lord] The
particulars before mentioned are summed up in this, which is the fountain also
and head of other sins, and that against which the Lord will come near in
judgment. As, Primus in orb deos fecit Timor, and where the fear of God is,
it will command the heart and restrain from sin; so the little or no fear
of God, argues that men cherish little or no belief of God; when (according to
the ingenious conceit of Nic. Caussin the Jesuit, in his Table or picture of
worldly policy ( Holy Court, pt. 2. The Statesman. sect. 2.) In a Chamber
hideously black, the study of Lucifer, the brave spirits of the time, under
the regency of Herod and Tiberius, do study to find out the way, How to
believe in God no longer. The truth is, while most men, instead of contending
for the faith, have but wrangled about the differences of Religions, they are
grown Irreligious, and into a disposition unto Atheism; which how it may be
discovered and cured, will be worthy the labor of all such who are set over
men for the cure of their souls. Thus we have seen the judgment threatened,
and against whom.

II. verse 6. For I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob
are not consumed.] Or, as the Vulg. and Montan. and the Geneva read it, I
change not, And ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. It is the reason of what
was before said and threatened; you say I regard not to punish or reward: but
though I defer a while, yet I will come near to judgment, for I constantly
love good, and hate evil, I change not. So, Cyril, Theodor. Remig. Rupert.
Hugo, Lyr. Vatabl: etc. For the latter clause of this 6th verse, I shall with
submission take leave to depart from our learned translators, and read not as
they, Therefore], but as Montanus and as it is in the Hebrew, And,] I change
not, And ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. And, that is, And yet. Though I
threatened you, and change not, yet my patience is such, that ye are spared,
and not yet consumed. But I leave this place to such as can better search the
Prophets mind, for here I confess I do take off my own unskilful pen
without clear satisfaction in my self, about the coherence of this verse,
especially this latter clause, with the verses precedent. The Reader may find
it somewhat otherwise expressed in Tarnovius. And thus much of the 5th.
Contestation.

VI. The sixth Contestation.
Sixthly, verse. 7. That they had sinned, and continued in sin, and yet would
not be convinced.

1. That they had continued in sinning against Gods laws. Even from the days
of your fathers, ye have gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept
them,] He exprobrates their old and inveterate trade of sinning.

From mine Ordinances] Vulg. A legitimis meis, that is (as they tell us who
being bound to receive the vulgar Latin as Authentic, do study to make the
best sense of it) a legibus meis. You are gone from my laws. The Tigur. My
Statutes. Pagn. My institutes. The things which I have described, drawn out,
constituted, of (...).

2. That they would not yet be convinced; which is urged;

I. By a declaration of Gods Grace in exhorting them and encouraging them to
Repentance.

1. Exhorting them Return unto me says the Lord,] that is, by Repentance.
(...) among many other uses that it is put unto signifies to repent, as Deuteronomy.
30.2. 1 Kings 8.33.35. Lam. 3.40. Hos. 7.16. and in many Texts. God though he
might consume them, offers them mercy, and shows them a means to prevent his
wrath.

II. Encouraging them. And I will return unto you, says the Lord] that is, I
will show you favor. This is another use and signification of the word (...)
when it is applied unto God. So Zach. 1.3.

2. By their stiffenesse and difficulty to be convinced, But ye say, wherein
shall we return?] As if they were righteous, and needed no repentance. This is
the nature of man, to make contradiction to Gods grace, and resistance to the
motions of Gods Spirit, either convincing the world of sin, or persuading to
obedience. And this people did always so, as Saint Stephen testifies of them,
Act. 7.51. and the Apostle, Romans 10.21. To Israel he says, all day long I have
stretched forth my hands, (...), unto the disobedient (or unperswadeable) and
againsaying people. So the translation of the Septuagint, whom Saint Paul
followed, did with several words express that which in the Hebrew text, Esa.
65.2. is delivered in one, A rebellious people. But thus much of the sixth
Contestation.

VII. The seventh Contestation.
Seventhly, he contests with them for their Sacrilege, verse. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. both,

I. Arguing against their sin, verse. 8. and,

2. Expostulating with them, that it were better for them, yea, even in their
outward estates to deal righteously with God, verse. 9, 10, 11, 12.

I. He argues against their sin, verse.

1. From a ground of equity. 2. By an application of their fact unto the
ground.
1. He argues from a general ground of right and equity. Will a man rob God?
Yet ye have robbed mee] Will frail weak man ( Adam) do violence unto, or
defraud ( Elohim) the great and mighty God? Yet you have done so.

Robbe] The French, Pillage; Geneva, Spoil: will a man spoil God? So also
Pagn. and Vatab. Crucify, wound, or pierce, so the Vulgar, and the Tigurine,
and that is indeed the first signification of the original word. So the
Translator of the New Test, into the Syriack, uses the word, Coloss. 2.14.
(...) And nailed (or pierced) it unto his Cross. But by a Metaphor, it
signifies to Oppress, or To rob, or To spoil, as Prove. 22.53. The Lxx. here
taking (...) by a Metathesis for (...) which is, To supplant or Deceive, read,
Will a man supplant his God? But in the sense there is an agreement. Will a
man, or is it fit that a man should grieve, defraud, pierce, or spoil his God,
as you do who rob his Priests and Ministers of their maintenance, whereby you
undermine and overthrow even Religion it self, and Gods worship. When the
portions of the Levites were not given them, the Levites and Singers that did
the work, of Gods house, fled every one to his field: and so Gods work, that
is, his worship was left undone: as Nehemiah observed, Neh. 13.10. The truth
is, When the Ministers of God are kept under the burden of Poverty, The Lords
work is, either not done, or done deceitfully; when the Priests are forced to
comply with their humors, from whom they expect their maintenance, and so serve
not God, but them; flattering them that feed them, as it is, Micah. 3.5. They
bite with their teeth, and cry peace; which I interpret according to the Chalde
Paraphrase, He that makes them a feast of flesh, to him they preach peace: But
he that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him; And
so they make the people to err. And it cannot be otherwise, whiles, as it is
in the eleventh verse of that chapter, The Priests teach for hire, and the
Prophets divine for money, that is, are feign to maintain themselves with
sordid and unworthy flatteries. To prevent which, it was a most pious and
commendable care in King Hezekiah, which is recorded, 2. Chron. 31.4. He
commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion of the
Priests and Levites (that they might attend upon the Law of the Lord; so the
Vulg. That they might confirm themselves in executing the Law of the Lord. So
Tremel. but as we read,) that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.
Dependancie and expectation of arbitrary maintenance, is a great Alay to the
purer temper, and spirit, and zeal, that ought to be in them that serve at the
Lords Altar; in whom, (according to the usual Apothegme of a reverend Divine
of ours) Innocence and Independencie breeds the best courage. And by such is
God best served. The scandals that are given by Ministers, do much diminish
the reputation of Religion, and undermine it, but Scandalous livings are a
great cause of Scandalous Ministers: Which was the observation of a learned
Gentleman, and worthy member of the House of Commons, in the Parliament Anno
1628. who also promised, that he would never give over soliciting the cure and
remedy of this, while Parliaments and he should live together. And well may he
or some other effectually pursue it, especially having so much encouragement in
it, by the piety and tenderness of our present Religious, and most gracious
Sovereign, who (according to the example of his Royal Father, for planting a
settled competencie for the Churches throughout Scotland) has showed so much
readiness and gracious disposition this way, that (as he deserves it) I doubt
not but such as shall deliver his reign hereafter to posterity, will among his
other virtues, give him this Title, The Patron and Father of his poor and
injuried Clergy, and will mention that great Counselor of his in
Ecclesiastical matters, with his due honor, for promoving it in him, with so
much zeal to the welfare of this Church: But of this obiter and Currente
calame.

2. He argues against their sin, by an application of their fact, unto that
ground of general right. Yet ye have robbed me; But ye say, Wherein have we
robbed thee? In Tithes and in Offerings.] They deny the Assumption, and he
proves it; That they robbed him, because they dealt deceitfully about the
portion of his Priests. The Tithes he had of old assigned unto them. There were
three sorts of Tithes; The first were given to the Levites for their alimonie;
this was called, Maaser Rishon, The first Tithe. The second was that which
every man set a part against his going up to Jerusalem to feast with the
Levites and Priests, this was called, Maaser Sheni, The second Tithe. And lest
that should be omitted, the Tithe of the Third year was to be given to the
poor, to Levites, to widows, and orphans; and this was called Maaser Shlishi,
The Third Tithe, and Maaser aani, The poore-mans-tythe, (...). See these three
sorts mentioned, Tobit 1.7, 8. And besides, and before all these, The fiftieth
part was given to the Priests, which was called Reschit, The first fruit, and
Terumah gdola, The great offering. Tithes were intended much unto the same use
in the Christian Church, one part for the Bishop, another for the Clergy, a
third for the Poor, a fourth for the Repair of the Church: according to
Walafrid: Strabo, de exord. Eccles. cap. 27. published by Ioh. Cochlaeus in
Speculo Antiq. Devot. The distribution is somewhat otherwise, in the
Excerptions of Egbert, Archbishop of York, which the learned Sr. H. Spelman,
in his late diligent Collections of our British Councels and Decrees, has
communicated, Ad Annum Christi, 750. the fifth Excerption. Let the Priests
receive the Tithes, and set out the first part for the adorning of the Church;
the second for the use of poor and strangers; the third part let the Priests
reserve to themselves. The very same order we find in the Canons of Alfrick (
Bishop of York, as Sr. H. Spelm. guesseth at it, An. 1052.) Can. 24. He that
would see more concerning the care of our Ancient Kings about Tithes, may
satisfy himself in that industrious and learned Author, In Council. Calchuth.
ad An. 787. where in the seventeenth Canon, Vt Decimae just solventur: This
very place of our Prophet Malachy is alleged; as it is also in the
Constitutions of Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury, An. 943. cap. 10. He may see
also, K. Offa's gift, An. 793. page 308. K. Ethelwulphs gift, in the Council
at Winchester, An. 855. page 348. K. Alureds Eccles. laws, cap 9. page 377. K.
Edwards the elder, cap. 6. page 392. K. Aethelstans, cap. 1. page 402. K.
Edmunds, cap. 2. page 420. K. Edgars, cap. 3. page 444. and the Canons of his
time, Can. 54. page 454. Tithes they are Gods portion: hence when the Jews
tythed their flocks, as the young passed through the door of the fold, the
Levite stood with a rod in his hand, and marking the Tenth that came out, said,
This tenth is the Lords. According to that, Levit. 27.32. Whatsoever passes
under the rod, the tenth shall be the Lords. And so they have ever been
accounted, although the Church have sometimes taken liberty to assign them to
other uses; as those Decimae Saladinides, which the Council of Paris granted
to Philip of France for his war against Saladine the Mahumedan, An. 1189.
which (as Matthew. Paris, Monk of St. Albans writes,) Richard 1. the King of
England, obtained also for the same purpose the next year: and others since,
though the pretense were altered. But see the liberty of the antienter Church
concerning Tithes, in Gratian, Cause. 1. qu. 3. pervenit ad. cause. 13. qu. 1.
and 2. cause. 16. qu. 1. Si quis Laicus, and Ecclesiae antiquitus, and In
canonibus in Gangrensi, and quaest. 7. Decimas quas. And for ours, for the
times he writ of, and collected, see Wilhelm. Lyndewood, Constitut. lib. 1.
page 13.2. page 14. f. page 15. o. etc. and largely, De Decimis, lib. 3. page
101. etc. Concerning the Question, Quo Jure, besides the skirmishes of our men
about it, and which you shall find in the reverend and godly Author of the
following Commentary, pertinent and full; I do refer to Bellarm. Tom. 2. De
clericis, lib. 1. cap. 25. Against whom in that place Guil. Amesius says
nothing, and Joh. Alsted. in his Supplement of a Fifth Tome to Dan. Chamier.
Panstrat. lib. 4. cap. 10. Paragr. 2. Confesses in a manner, that to object
against him in this, is to seek a knot in a bulrush. See Dr. Thomas Ridley his
learned Discourse of Tithes, In his View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law,
page 124. etc. And in Offerings] Terumah, The Oblation, Elevation, Offering,
or, First fruit, did also belong to God; The Terumah gdolah, The Great
Oblation, and the Bikkurim. The several sorts, and other matters worth
knowing, concerning as well Tithes, as these Oblations. See in Ioh. Weemse,
Christian Synag. lib. 1. cap. 6. sect. 4. paragr. 2.3. And more fully in our
own Goodwyn, Mos. and Ar. lib. 6. cap. 2.3. And thus having argued against
their sin,

2. He expostulates with them their unreasonablnes in this thing, and that it
were better for them to deal righteously in the maintenance of Gods Priests,
both, 1. For the avoiding of evil, ver. 9. and, 2. For the procuring of good.
ver. 10, 11, 12.


I. In defrauding God of tithes, Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have
robbed me, even this whole Nation.] Not one, or few, but all dealt ill with
God, in the matter of tithes, and therefore God brought a curse upon the whole
Nation. The Vulg. and others, take it for a curse of penury and scarcity of
victuals; a great curse in that land. Meerah of Arar, signifies penury, want,
or, barrennes. Winkleman derives the word of Maar, To gnaw, or Pill: but not so
soundly. The Lxx here take the word to come of (...), and upon that mistake,
render the place, (...). (of the Anomalie in the word (...) in the Text, see
Sixth. Amam. in Anom. Spec. ad locum.) II. In bringing of tithes justly, they
should find, 1. Their estates blessed, verse 10.11. 2. Their reputation
cleared. ver. 12. So there are here two promises.

First, a blessing on their estates. ver. 10.11. Bring ye all the Tithes into
the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open unto you the windows of
Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes; and he shall not
destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruit,
before the time in the field, says the Lord of hosts. A place often and
pertinently applied and pressed, by such as have had occasion to declame on
this subject, and surely of great force to such as have faith in the promises
of God. A place which had well deserved more then a bare marginall note, from
the late author of the profitable Treatise of Divine promises. lib. 3. p. 231.

Bring ye all the tithes,] Our old authorized English, Bring ye every tithe.
Men have made distinctions of tithes, (and some of their own coining to save
something from God) but rank them under what heads you will, all must be
brought, and of every kind.

Into the storehouse,] Vulg. Into the barn. The tyth-barne. So the word is
Joel. 1.17. The Garners are laid desolate, the barnes are broken down. But it
is usually rendered Treasury. Beth haozar, The house of treasure or store. It
seems they had a standing place for tithes, as it is called Nehem. 13.11.12,
13. see the place, and 1. Chron. 26.20.

That there may be meat in my house] Vulg. That there may be spoil, and the
Hebr. Tereph. signifies so much. It is a Synechdoche, and the affection of the
Trope is a Catachresis. Spoil, that is, meat, there is the Catachresis, the
spoil which the beast makes to get food being put for meat: and then the
Synechdoche, meat, put for all necessary provision.

Meat in my house] that is, in the storehouse for the use and necessity of my
house; that is, of my Priests and Levites that serve in my house, my temple.

And prove me now herewith, says the Lord of hosts] Menasseh Ben-Israel,
Quaest. 3. in Deuteronomy. makes the doubt how these words may be reconciled to those,
in Deuteronomy. 6.16. Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God: and answers well, that
Malachies words are not to be understood Causaliter but Consecutive, namely,
that they should indeed find by experience, that if they offered their tithes,
they should find the Lord gracious and bountiful. See him more fully in the
place cited, in his Conciliator. So that here the promise of good things
follows. In which let us observe the artifice used in persuading.

Prove me, etc. If I will not open you the windows of Heaven,] whether I will
not. Piscat. and our Comment. make this form, (If I will not,) an oath. Which
cannot be clear, without some supply to the text, to make up the sense, which
needs not, but the sense does facilely offer it self thus, I will open them
unto you, and power you out so much rain (a great blessing in those hot and
dry Countries) as if the windows of Heaven were opened. A phrase noting great
plenty. 2. Kin. 7.2.

The windows of Heaven] Vulg. The Catarracts of Heaven. Catarracts are
gushings down of much water with volence, of (...) Defluere. such as are those
outrageous streams of fresh water (which Peter Martyr of Millan a Counselor
to the King of Spain, describes in his Decades of the new World, Dec. 1. lib.
6.) which so violently issue and fall headlong into the Sea, that they drive
back the salt water a good way, though rough and forced with contrary winds;
They rush down from the tops of the mountains of Paria, which Christopher
Columbus the first discoverer, was strongly conceited of, to be the seat of
Paradise. The French translate it here, The Shutts. Menochius, expresses the
Vulgar Catarracts, by the Port-Cullisses, The Sluses, or Dammes, of Heaven. And
so Cael. Rhodiginus, lect. Antiqu. lib. 23. cap. 24. does express it, taking
occasion to interpret that place in Genes. 7.11. Upon which place, and Genes.
8.2, See Ioh. Piscators Scholia. The Clouds are the windows or floud-gates of
Heaven, in the sense of this place.

And power you out (or, empty you out) a blessing] that is, a shower of rain,
bringing a blessing with it of plenty. Among the Hebrewis, A blessing as when
it is used concerning words, it signifies a salutation, or good wish: so when
it is used concerning things, it denotes some real good, or gift, as Genes.
33.11. Take I pray thee ((...)) my blessing which is brought unto thee, that
is, my gift. So, Judge. 1.15. Give me a blessing. The Chald reads, A
possession; and that appears to be her meaning by the next words, Give also
springs of water. She desired some low grounds. And we also in our use of
speaking have such a meaning, when we speak of A mothers blessing.

That (there shall) not (be room) enough (to receive it] the Hebr. being
concise, has only, That not enough. The rest our English translation has
supplied. The Geneva, I will power you out a blessing, without measure. The
Vulg. A blessing even to abundance. The Lxx, Till it suffices. The Chald. So
that ye shall say, It is enough. The French, As much as you can have no more.
The sense of all this variety of expression is the same and clear. Your
storehouses, rooms, and vessels, shall not be able to hold and contain the
plenty: like as the Prophet dealt with the widow, whose History we have, 2.
King. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.

And I will rebuke the devourer for your sake] that is, The Locusts, or other
harmefull Worms or Creatures. When there is much rain and plenty, many times
these Insects eat up all; as we see, Joel, 1.4. and in the History of the
plagues of Egypt. It is among the most wonderful stories and most lamentable,
which the Historians do relate of the plague of Locusts in France about the
year 852. Wheresoever they fell, they pitched their camp as it were, and
devoured all for 20. Miles space in a day. And still a small company went about
a days journey before the rest, as harbingers and guides of the rest to choose
where the whole multitude should a light, which accordingly would follow and
devour all before them.

Some Countries have been almost laid wast by them. Pliny says that in the
Isle Lemnes, the magistrates were feign to take it into their care, to appoint
unto every inhabitant what measure of them to destroy, so to keep them under.
Yea Scaliger, Exerc. 192. sect. 3. tells us of a kind of Insects that usually
in the Northern parts of Norway fall in showers of rain, which if they be
opened, as some as they fall have raw and indigested herbs found within them;
and when and where they alight, they bite and eat up all that is green.
Against these Devourers the Lord promises to provide and to secure them.

And he shall not destroy (or corrupt) the fruit of your ground; neither shall
your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field.] Vulg. Geneva, and the
French, your vine shall not be barren. Or, abortive, so others. The Buds and
Grapes shall not fall off unripe. They are called Orbi palmites among the
Latins, that bear not. The word is used, Genesis 31.38. Thy shee-goates have not
cast their young. And, Genesis 42.36. Me have ye bereaved of my children. (...).

Secondly, a blessing of reputation or good name. verse 12. And all Nations
shall call you blessed; for ye shall be a delightsome Land, says the Lord of
hosts.] All shall speak of your blessedness, shall magnify and praise you.
So the sense is, in Job. 29.11. When the ear heard me, it blessed me, that is,
It praised me. And thus the Lxx, (...). For ye shall be a delightsome Land]
Vulg. a desirable. Geneva. a pleasant land. Your land shall be green and
flourishing, so Cyril. You shall inhabit a fertile land; so Vatabl. I rather
take it as S. Jer. All Nations shall desire to live in your Land: a fruit of
that reputation they should have if they honored God with their substance. And
to this sense the Lxx, and our following comment. Ye shall be as a pleasant
land, praised and commended by all that pass by you. Thus much of the seventh
Contestation.

VIII. The eighth and last Contestation.
Lastly, he contests with them for their blaspheming of Gods providence, for
their Atheism, and stubborn perverse contempt of Gods worship, and of
repentance, verse 13. to the end of the Prophecy. We have, 1. Their blasphemous
Atheism proposed, verse 13.14, 15. 2. Answered, verse 16, etc. ad fin.


1. Their blasphemous Atheism is proposed and set down, 1. In general, verse
13. 2. In particular, verse 14, 15.


First, verse 13. Your words have been stout against me says the Lord: yet
ye say, what have we spoken so much against thee?] They thought and spoke
proudly of and against God.

Your words have been stout,] Lxx, troublesome. Vulg. they have prevailed over
me. (1) against me. Chazku. your words are strong, confirmed, or as the French
has it, enforced against me. You persist stoutly and clamorously in your
blasphemy; so Lyr^: your words are troublesome and press me as a load stone;
so S. Hier. Remig. etc. Your words overcome me and mine, you pervert more then
my Prophets can prevail with to the contrary, by your saying; It is in vain
to serve the Lord, etc. so the Tigurine.

Yet ye say, what have we spoken so much against thee?] They deny the
accusation. The Geneva, what have we spoken against thee. But there is more in
the word. (...) in Niphal signifies a continual speech, as our translators
have well expressed, what have we spoken so much against thee. And so the Targum
or Child paraphrase, in what have we multiplied speech against thee?

Secondly, in particular, verse 14, 15. Ye have said, It is vain to serve
God: and what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have
walked mournefully before the Lord of hosts? And now we call the proud happy:
yea they that work wickedness are set up, yea they that tempt God are even
delivered. This is the proof of the accusation against them. These were their
stout words against God.

Ye have said, It is vain to serve God.] Vulg. He is vain who serves God.
There is nothing got by it. A profane atheistical conceit now adays also
entertained of many.

And what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinance] or, his observation,
says our margin. The Geneva, his Commandment. The Hebr. is, Shamarnu
mishmarto, That we kept his custody, or, his ward, that is, the office imposed
by him upon us. So, Esaias 21.8. I am set (Mishmarti) in my ward whole nights. 1 Chronicles. 9.23. They had oversight by wards (Mishmaroth.) The priests were divided
in 24 Mishmaroth, Custodies or Wards, which they entered upon by their turns
every Sabbath. To which here seems to be an allusion.

And that we have walked mournfully (or in black) before the Lord? Pagn and
the Geneva, that we have walked humbly. The Lxx, suppliant. The Chald. With a
spirit cast down. Piscat. Mournfully before, that is, for fear of Iehova,
that we might reconcile him unto us. The French, that we have walked in poor
estate. The word is (...) obscurely, in mourning, or in black. We have the
word, 1 Kings 18.45. The Heavens (Hithkadderu) were black with Clouds. And, Ps.
35.14. (Koder.) I bowed down heavily as one that mourns for his mother.
Black is the color of mourning. Our comment: gives this sense; What profit
have we, that we have walked humbly, that is, that we have not resisted, nor
revenged our selves, but referred all to God, what have we got by it?

Now then, (or Therefore) we call the proud happy] They who tread upon modest
men, and raise themselves high, and work their own ends confidently, and
daringly, they thrive, and therefore them we call, that is, count happy.
Hierom here calls them, arrogant men. Boiling, raging men, swelling and
presumptuous. Zedim, comes of a root that has all these significations.

Yea they that work wickedness, are set up] or, built up, that is, They have
children, houses, lands, and honors, etc. Chald. They are established. The Lxx,
(...), are reedified. They prosper, and have all things well about them. As the
word is, Job, 22, 23. If thou return to the Almighty ((...)) thou shall be
built up, that is, Thou shall prosper.

Yea they that Tempt God are even delivered] The grudging and blasphemous
speeches of these wicked men are still continued: those that continue in
sinning, and ad sin to sin, and as it were dare God, to try what he will
do, or how he will deal, yet they are delivered; we see them to be safe,
secure, bold, and prosperous. See Ps. 95.9.

2. This blasphemy of theirs thus discovered is answered, First, by opposing
the contrary discourse of the godly, verse 16. Secondly, by showing Gods taking
notice of both. ver. 16. latter part. Thirdly, by declaring gods gracious
promise to deal well with the godly, ver. 17. Fourthly, by warning the
blasphemers, that Gods dealings shall be manifest even in their eyes. ver. 18.
Fifthly, by a further amplification of that point of Gods manifest dealing.
chap. 4. ver. 1. ad fin.


First, ver. 16. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another.] In
the greatest apparent Ataxy and disorder, and in the time of the stoutest
language and behavior of ungodly men, They that feared the Lord, being
acquainted with his ways and manner of working, spoke often for their mutual
encouragement and otherwise to one another, that there would come a day, or
that God is righteous, or, that he only deferres, or such like things they
spoke, whereby they defended the cause of God against wicked Atheists. This I
conceive to be the sense of these words; but for the manner of the Prophets
bringing them into his discourse, interpreters have not satisfied me. I
conceive him in the midst of his discourse, wherein in the person of God he
bends and directs his speech all this while to them that were before him, the
wicked whom he labored to convince; Now he breaks off, and turns his
speech to God, or to his own scule, or to the godly, yet with an intention in
a fine and insinuating way to instruct the wicked blasphemers that heard him,
In this manner; your words have bin stout, ye have said, it is in vain to serve
God, That men thrive most by wicked courses, but oh my God thou know, or, oh
thou my soul thou know, or, oh ye that fear God ye know, whatever these
blind and profane men use to think and say, yet then in the greatest seeming
disorders, yet then they that feared God, have other conceits, and encourage
one another, and speak otherwise; and thou oh God take notice of them; or,
oh my soul thou know, or, oh ye that fear God, ye know that the Lord
hearkens and hears, and sets down all in his book, etc. But this conceit
upon the place, I do with all submission leave to the judgment of those that
can more clearly and with more facility give satisfaction to themselves about
the coherence of these words. Secondly, he answers their blasphemy, by showing
Gods taking notice of the different speeches and cariages of men. ver. 16. The
latter part of it. Then the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought on his Name.] I take not these to be the words of the godly, as
Tremell: ( Tarnovius, and generally all) understands them, by supplying the
text, with the word, Saying; They that feared the Lord spoke to each other,
Saying, The Lord hearkened, etc. But I conceave, as I said in the former member
of the verse, that they are the words of the Prophet, who answers their
blasphemy by telling them (in that way of rhetorique that I have expressed above)
that God is not so regardlesse, as they imagine and speak, but he hears both
their Atheism, and likewise what defense the godly do make; and puts it down
as it were for a remembrance, to reward it in them. I herein follow S. Hierom,
and desire leave to depart from the reverend author of our commentary, who
interprets them as the speeches of the people, according to the supply in the
Tremellian Bible.
And a book of remembrance was written before him for them, etc.] It is a
Metaphor from the use of Kings to set down the good services done unto them.
As we have an instance of that custom, Esth. 6.1. Wherein Mordecai's service
was remembered. And Corn. a lapide tells us, that the Pope has a book of the
merits of his Prelates, whom he promotes accordingly. The prophet speaks
Anthropologice, not that God needs any memorial, but because men do keep
such books; and the Lord will as surely remember to reward his, as if they
were written in a register. Sepher Ziccaron. The Lxx, (...), A book of
memorialls. A chronicle. An history. As God has a bottell for his peoples
tears, so he has a Chronicle for their sufferings.

Thirdly, ver. 17. And they shall be mine, says the Lord, In that day when I
make up my Jewels: and I will spare him as a man spares his son that
serves him. A text of most sweet and comfortable contents. But for the choice
and practical Notions which it does afford for the encouraging and supporting
of the soul, I do refer to a discourse upon this verse by that excellent
preacher my Reverend and worthy friend D. Richard Sibbs, now with God.

They shall be mine,] Vulg. and Genev. They shall be to me. In that day when I
make up my Iewells] Vulg. They shall be to me in the day in which I do (that
is, Do judgment, as they that follow the vulgar make good the sense as well as
they can,) for peculiar. The Geneva, they shall be to me in that day that I
shall do this, for a flock. The old autorised English Bible, They shall be to
me in the day that I shall do judgment, a flock. And Peculium, the word of
the Vulg. Latin, sometimes signifies a flock. As in Plautus Asinar. --
Quanquam ego sumsor didatus,

Frugi tamen sum, nec potest peculium numerari. But properly it is that part of
the flock, which the fathers granted their children, or the masters to their
servants, as a stock whereon to exercise their industry: according to Hottoman.
A stock of Cattle peculiar. And so it somewhat agrees with the Hebrew, Segulla
a select portion. So, Deuteronomy. 6.6. The Lord has chosen thee to be (Segulla) a
special people unto himself. But it is properly some rare or dear treasure,
a brooch or rich tablet, or pendant, a Jewel, a rich and peculiar treasure.
As, Eccle. 2.8. I gathered me (Segullath melachim) the peculiar treasure of
Kings. Exodus 19.5. ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people.
Lxx, (...). A peculiar people. The Lord promises to take such care of the
godly, and to lay them up so safely as one would a special jewel.

And I will spare him as a man spares his son (The Geneva, his own son)
that serves him.] I will be indulgent toward and have pity upon the godly,
I will deal tenderly, pardon, and remit their punishment. See, 2 Samuel 21.7.
David spared Mephibosheth. Or, I will have compassion. So the word is
ordinarily translated, as, 1 Samuel 23.21. (...). Tee have compassion on me.

Fourthly, he answers their blasphemy, by warning them, ver. 18. Then shall
ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him
that serves God, and him that serves him not.] You oh wicked blasphemers
shall change your opinion, and whereas you said, the wicked prosper, and it is
in vain to serve the Lord; ye shall see a great difference between them, and
how much they gain by it that serve the Lord. So S. Hierom, etc. See the point
wholesomly and profitably handled, in a Treatise of D. Prestons on Eccles. 9.1,
2, 3, 4, annexed to his treatise of The new Covenant.

Fifthly, and lastly, Chap. 4.
he answers by a further amplification of that which was proposed before,
Hysterosis, the righteous were first named in the proposition, verse 18. but
the wicked are first treated of in this amplification, Chapter 4th, as the
Hebrew Bibles that we now use, and the Latin, and our English and most others
do distinguish it; which yet Tremellius and Piscator and some others do
continue to the former Chapter, making but 3, Chapters of this prophecy, and so
the first verse of this Chapter to be the 19th verse of the third, and so on.

Where let me take occasion by the way to note it, that all antiquity was
ignorant of the division of the Bible that we now use, which was made about
the year 1250, The work (as Genebrard thinks (of those Schoolmen who
assisted Hugh the Cardinal in gathering The Concordances, and an invention, so
useful and so much approved, that the Jews themselves after followed it in
the Hebrew Bibles. The Ancients indeed had their Titles and Chapters or
versicles too, but not so as we divide them, but usually in shorter periods:
as appears by that of Caesarius, We have (says he) four Gospells, which
consist of one thousand, one hundred sixty two Chapters. And Euthymius quoting
Math. 26.58, calls it the 65th. Title, and quoting Mat. 26.74. calls it The
66th, Title. Their Titles were as our Chapters, and their Chapters much what as
our verses. For instance, S. Matthew which we divide into 28 Chapters, they
divided into 68 Titles, and 355. Chapters. But all distinguished not alike. As
the Jews had their Parschiot, as namely, Bereschit, Noah, etc. according to
which they cited the Scripture of the old Testament; So the fathers, some of
them divide books according to the Histories, as Cyrus Prodromus makes his
First title, [In the beginning was the word]; his second Title [There was a
marriage in Cana,] His third Title,] Christ's night disciple Nicodemus, etc.
Some divided them according to the miracles, as Gregory, one Title; Of the
marriage in Cana; another, Of the five Loves, etc. Cyril, as he wrote 12 books
upon John, so he divides the Evangle, the first begins at Ioh. 1.1. The
second, at Ioh. 1.29. The third, at Ioh. 5.35, etc. S. August. makes a Period
in every Tract; and S. Chrysostom. in every Homily. S. Hierome on these small
prophets, often begins a book in the middle of a Chapter, as we have them now
divided. In Oecumenius his Enarrations he has 40, where we make 28 Chapters
on the Acts: he has 20, where we make but 16 in the Epistle to the Romans,
etc. many of them indeed often end their paraphrases and discourses where our
Chapter end, But that is, because the matter in hand breaks off there. The
truth is, Distinguishing of the Bible into Chapters and verses, much helps the
reader; but it is so divided as sometimes obscures the sense, as we often find
in reading the Bible; and of which the learned Isaac Casaubon complained. In
many places those things are now divided, which were better to be read
together; for example, Mat. Chap. 20. is ill divided; for the first 16 verses
do manifestly agree with the former Chapter. So this fourth Chapter of Malachy
were happily better to be continued to the former. Yet I will not presume to
alter in these notes, what our own Bibles direct me unto, though I consent to
the I content to the judgment of those great men, I mean Casaubon and
Heinsius, that we are not superstitiously to adhere to our late division.
Casaubon wished that some great Divine would take the pains to restore the
Ancient division, and Heinsius, prolegom. ad Exercit. page 20. though he take
no notice there of Casaubons desire, wishes too that it were done exactly, and
promises to do it. Which surely will be of great use; for much depends upon a
right division, else the sense may be much darkened. But of this enough, and
too much by way of Digression, unless the nature of Essay or Exercitation
(which this poor labor of mine is) will bear it out, and allow it. But I
return to the Text, wherein, The different dealing of God with the wicked and
the godly, is set out by evident comparisons. For,

I. To the wicked, The day of the Lord shall be terrible, Verse. 1. For behold,
the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all
that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them
up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.]
The word, For] shows the inference of this upon the proposition in the former
verse; ye shall discern between the righteous and the wicked, for the day
comes that will be terrible to the wicked, as to the godly it shall be
comfortable. This coherence St. Hierome, and the ancient Expositors allow. The
coming of Christ, which is prophesied of, even his first coming in regard of
the issue of it, and upon men's unthank fullness, and unbelief, and refusing of
mercy, shall be terrible. So it is also described to be, Matthew. 3.12. Ioh.
9.39. Christ who is (...), for the rising again of many in Israel, is also
(...), for the fall of many, that is, of ungodly and unbeleevers, Luc. 2.34.

The day comes that shall burn as an oven] That is, The day shall be when
wicked men shall be burned: as we use to say, The grand Assizes will hang many,
and make a gaole-delivery; that is, The Judges at their Assizes. Now whether
this Burning signify only Christ the Judges wrath, as Hier. and Remigius; or
properly, and ultimately, that fire which shall burn the world, and afterward
in hell, as Lyra, Vatabl. etc. to me is not material: For though I understand
with Montanus, the whole course of the prophecy contained in this period, and
that of it which is of most difficulty, verse 5. to be meant of Christ's first
coming, yet the execution also of Christ's wrath upon unbeleevers in the very
day of Judgment, may be looked at, without any prejudice to the safe and
warrantable interpretation of these things, as Christ himself applies them,
Matthew. 11.14. and 17.10, 11, 12. to his first coming, as we shall see when we
come to the fifth verse. And therefore I interpret it without any Respect, only
in this general sense, as a prophecy of Gods judgments against the wicked,
who will not receive Christ, when God shall send him for the restoration of
the Church.

And all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble] Though in
this life they be iron and brass, stout and proud against God, yet they shall
be weak and unable to make resistance against him. See Esa. 47.14. They shall
be as stubble ( Chalde, hhallashim chekash, weak as stubble,) they shall not
deliver themselves from the flame. As little straws, and small sticks; stubble,
that by reason of its lightness, may be driven with the wind, Ierem. 13.24.

And the day, etc. shall burn them up, etc. It shall leave them neither root
nor branch.] It is an amplification to show the full and utter destruction of
the wicked, as when the root is stockt up, the tree can grow no more. Which, I
say, may, not unsafely be understood of the day of Judgment upon Christ's
coming the second time; though Winckleman, Osiander, and some others do think
the place fulfilled in the destruction of Jerusalem, and the calamities that
came upon the unbeleeving Jews, upon their refusal of Christ in his first
coming; which is also a probable exposition.

2. verse. 2.3. But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of
righteousness arise, with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth and
grow up as calves of the stall. And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they
shall be ashes under the soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this,
says the Lord of hoasts.]

But, unto you] That adversative form, shows the opposition of these, to them
that were mentioned before, and the manifest difference of Gods dealing.

Shall the Sun (our old English Bible, That Sun) of righteousness arise.] In
his first coming (according to Theodoret and Montanus) Christ arose a Sun of
Righteousness. He came forth as the Sun does, as a Bridegroom out of his
chamber. In his Nativitie, and as a Giant to run his course, In the course of
all his conflicts and sufferings; He went under a cloud in his Passion, and
brake forth in his Resurrection, and darts forth beams of righteousness; for
he came to justify the world, to enlighten, to enliven all believers. And in
his second coming also, (according to Hierome and others) he will be full of
Majesty and brightness; He will declare hid things, The secrets of all
hearts, and after a long time of gloomie weather, will break out to the
chearing and refreshing of his Saints, to the driving away of all darkness,
sin, and error, to make ever after a continual daylight, and to astonish
and dazzle the eyes of his enemies. As I said, I see not but Malachy might
respect all this, and prophecy of Christ's whole administration from his
Nativity, till his rendering of the Kingdom to his Father.

The Sonne] Christ is called (...) Schemesch, The Minister of God, The Sun
which ministers and imparts light and heat; for the word is of schamasch, to
serve or minister to God or men; according as the Syriack version of the New
Testament uses this word, Matthew. 20.28. The Son of man came not, ( Sir.
deneschtammasch, (...)) that he might be ministered unto, but (
daneschemmesch, (...)) that he might minister. So Christ is the Sun of
Righteousness, because he does benignly impart righteousness or goodness;
for I explicate one word by another, as it is Psalm. 24.5. He shall receive the
blessing and righteousness (that is, Goodness) from the God of his salvation:
And Psalm. 103.17. where for, Righteousness, The Lxx. have (...). See our last
Translation in the margin, at Joel 2.23. In the Prophet, Zach. 3.8. where
Christ is called, The Branch; The Lxx. read (...). And Iunius ( Paral. lib. 1.
par. 50.) parallels this place of Malachy with Luc. 1.78. where Christ is
called (...), The dayspring from on high; so ours: The Orient, or East, Matthew.
2.2. and Matthew. 24.27. But (...), The East, or Rising, is by a Metonymie of the
adjunct, put for the Sun in that place; The East from on high, that is, says
George Pasor ( Lex. in Nov. Test. ad Thema, (...)) (...), The noone-tide Sun;
or (...), The Sun it self rising; as Dan. Heinsius, Exercit. lib. 3. cap. 1.
ad Luc. 1.68. Of this glorious Sun, Samson was the Type, as in other things, so
in his name; whether it signify, Their Sun, as Saint Hierom interprets it, and
as it is interpreted in the rythme, or Church-prose: Concerning the
signification of this name, see my Lord Primate of Ireland, in his most learned
History of the Antiquities of the British Churches, chap. 5. page 84. by
occasion of the mentioning of Samson, Bishop of S. David's in Wales.
Samson dictus, Sol eorum;
Christus lux est electorum,
Quos illustrat gratia.
Samson [Their Sun] did hight,
Christ to the elect is light,
On whom he shines with grace.
Or whether it signify, A little Sun, as seemed rather to Mercerus and to
Bonfrerius. And truly Samson, though he warmed and cheared the hearts of men
in that dark time of idolatry and hard time of affliction and oppression,
especially in his Noone of full strength; yet he was but a little Sun, in
respect of him whom he did Type, who is The Sun of righteousness, full of
glorious beams, able to dazzle the beholders with his brightness, so exceeding
great, that God thought fit to inure the peoples eyes, by looking first on a
lesser light, John the Baptist, that shining light, which came before Christ
arose. This point the Reader may find not inelegantly expressed (if he think
it worth his pains to look into such forgotten books) in the Order of the
Breviary, or the Ordinarium Divin. Offic. Secundum usum Sarum: In the fifth
Lection appointed for the Feast of John Baptist, which is folio XLIX. And I the
rather note it, because the Response and Versicle appointed together with this
Lection, are the words of the Angel to Zachary concerning John, Luc. 1.17.
whereby we may guess that the Church of Rome also interpreted the two Last
verses of this Chapter (to which that in Saint Luke refers) concerning John.
And so I have prepared a little light for those verses before I come unto them.

The Sun etc. with healing in his wings] The Geneva, And health shall be
under his wings. As Health or Healing is said to be in the Suns beams, because
by them it warmes and cherishes all things, dries up cold moistures offensive
to the creatures, excites and quickens Plants, Beasts, and men, in the
Springtime, and revives all that which seemed well nigh dead in the Winter: So
does Christ bring life into the world, and came and preached life; therefore
the Sir. and Arab. translate it, Health upon his tongue. But in the Text, it
is, In his wings; As Christ is compared to the Sun, and the beams of the Sun
are called Wings: partly because of its swift disparkling of them and motion,
and partly because it spreads its light in its Rising, as wings; whence Homer
calls the Sun, (...), The yellow haird, or golden-haird sun; and the
Scripture so speaks, Joel 2.2. The morning spread upon the mountains: And,
Psalm. 139.9. If I take the wings of the morning. Thus in regard of spreading,
Virgil, Aeneid. 8. speaks of the night also, Nox ruit and fuscis tellurem
complectitur alis. So Christ in regard of his Imparting of himself, and of
health and virtue from him, is said to have wings; Corn. a lapide, would have
it to point at a farther mystery. That as Christ is a Sun, so he is the True
bird of the sun, as it is called, The true Phoenix, for thus he says, the
Metaphor of having wings does best befit him. Let me note thus much to further
his conceit, that Canaph a wing, is of Canaph to gather, and cherish, as a
brood-hen does her young; so Christ uses it Matthew. 23.37. And David alludeth
to it, Psalm. 17.8. Hide me, under the shadow of thy wings. But of the Phoenix,
see Plin. Hist. Nature. lib. 10. cap. 2. who speaks doubtfully: Others (as
Ionston. Thaumatogr. Not. cl. 6. cap. 27.) confidently of it, that it is a
fable: yet Maiola, Dier. Canic. Tom. 1. Titul. Aves, disputes largely that all
is true which is reported of it. And Ioh. Alsted. Theolog. Notur. part. 1. page
217. and part. 2. page 474. seems to me to believe it; and so it seems
Tertul. and Vatabl. did, who think they have Scripture for it, for so that
place in Job 29.18. which in the Vulg. is, I shall dye in my nest, and multiply
my days as a Palm; and in our Translation, I shall multiply my days as the
Sand; they turn thus, I shall die in my nest, and multiply my days as a
Phoenix. But Corn. a Lapide does not believe so, but takes the story for a
fable; and I think he had good reason to do so, yet of the aenigmaticall use
of it, see him, ad hunc locum, and in his Proeme to the minor Prophets, page
23, and 44. How Asterius applies this place, see Dan. Heinsius, Exercit. lib.
1. cap. 5. and his censure.

And ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall] Such as
understand this prophecy of Christ's second coming only, give this sense; Ye
shall go out of the prison of this life into the other; so S. Hierom, Remig.
Vatabl. or, out of the grave, as calves loosed from the stall where they are
tied; so Tertul. lib. de resurr. cap. 31. where he quotes this place. And they
make this growing up, or skipping of fat calves, to signify the Sanity and
vigor of the godly, at and after the Resurrection, their Agility and great joy
together with the heavenly Quires, and their strange and sudden leap (as it
were) from mortality. I incline rather to that of our Commentary, that it
signifies the increase of grace and the Spirit from Christ upon the godly, or,
Their liberty and increasing in the joy of the Spirit, or, Their spiritual
joy here, and perfected in heaven.

Grow up as calves of the stall] Vulg. Shall leap. The Lxx. (...), skip and be
wanton, Chald. Ye shall thrive, or grow fat; and so the Tigurine. Pagn. Ye
shall be multiplied (...) (an Anomaly, hiric being put for pathach) is of (...)
and has all those significations, To grow, To multiply, To grow fat, To
expaliate, To be wanton, To leap and friske.

As calves of the stall] Chald. Tigur. Pagn. The French, the Geneva, As fat
calves. The Lxx, Like calves at liberty. Vulg. As calves out of the herd, that
feed and pasture together among the rest, and grow fat at grass; as it is,
Ier. 50.11. But Marbek is Saginarium, The place, stable, or as our English has
it, The Stall where calves are fatted, Jer. 46.21. Her hired men are like
bullocks of the stall. So the Hebr. and the margin there agreeable to it, 1 Samuel 28.24. The woman had a calfe of the stall. Our Transl. render it according
to the Ghalde, A fat calfe.

And ye shall tread down the wicked] (...) of (...) a word used nowhere else
in the Bible. The Chald. You shall thresh. The Lxx, and Tertul. (quoting this,
lib. de Resurr.) Vulg. Pagn. Ours, etc. You shall tread upon, or tread down
the wicked, that is, You shall be over them: A plain difference then shall be
found between you and them, notwithstanding men's profane conceits to the
contrary.

For they shall be ashes under your feet] Montan. and Geneva, Dust under the
soles of your feet.

In the day that I shall do this.] What day that is, see before, upon verse 1.

From this prophecy of the approaching of Christ's coming, he takes occasion,
in the name of the Lord;

1. To exhort them to study the Law, Verse 4. 2. To prepare their expectation
of Christ, by prophesying again of his forerunner, Verse 5, 6.
I. Christ, to whom the Law in all the parts of it does lead, verse. 4. Remember
ye the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded him in Horeb for all Israel,
with the Statutes and Judgments.] The Law here may be taken comprehensively
for all the doctrine of Moses, which is divided, Deuteronomy. 6.1. into (...)
Commandments (the moral Law) (...) Statutes, (the ceremonial Law,) and (...)
Judgments, (the Judicial Law;) or it may be taken principally for the Moral,
the other two being afterward repeated.

The Law of Moses] It is usual for writings to carry the names of them that
pen them, as David's Psalter. And Moses was the Lawgiver to Israel from God.
He has his name from that accident in his infancy, Exodus 2.10. She called
his name Moses, ((...) Mosche, that is, Drawn out) and she said, because
((...)) I drew him out of the water. In ancient time they wrote his name
Moses, either thinking it to be compounded of the Egyptian words, Mo, Water,
and Hyses, Saved: or being acquainted with the Syrians pronunciation, Muses (as
the Syrians at this day, and the Turks do pronounce it, as Cutlu Muses, an
usual name among them, that is, Happy Moses,) and joining ours with it, of
Moses and Muses, made Moses, but corruptly. Thus Drus. in quaest. Hebr. Among
the Egyptians he was called Mneves, as Fr. Junius quotes it out of Diodorus
Siculus; See his note ad Exodus 2.10. Ioh. Weems. ( Christ. Synag. lib. 1. cap.
1. page 21.) following Aben-ezra, says, they called him Monios. But see
Junius, Loco citato. Moses is mentioned, by some Heathen Poets as a Lawgiver.
Invenal. Sat. 14.

Tradidit arcano quodcunque volumine Moses.

And Arator; -- Non haec jejunia Moses condidit.

The law which I gave unto him in Horeb] A mountain in the Country of Amalek
and in the wilderness of Sinai, so called because of the dryness and
barrenness; of (...) To be dried, and To wither. It is called, 1 King. 19.8.
Horeb the mount of God, not in regard of the height of it, as tall Cedars are
called The Cedars of God; but because the Lord appeared there, and gave the
Law, for Horeb is mount Sinai, one mountain with two tops, the Eastern called
Sinai, and the Western Horeb. Iac. Bonfrer. in his Onomasticon tells us he
has disputed this question upon Exodus 3.1. which book I have not, and
therefore refer the Reader to consult him there. It is at this day called
Saint Catharius mountain.

Which I gave him] God gave Moses the Moral Law writ with his own hand, as
Deuteronomy. 10.2. seems to prove. See Weemse Expos. vol. 1. lib. 1. exerc. 3.

For all Israel] Pagn. To Mont. upon (1) for the use of all Israel.

With the Statutes and Iudgements] Of them before. Only let me not pass this
verse without notice of that which to me seems very observable, That the truth
is, Commentators upon this place can scarcely make a clear and fair coherence
of this verse with the foregoing; but as if the Prophet were full of this
necessary point; He inserts it (though to our seeming somewhat abruptly)
rather than not mention it. An observation that offers unto our thoughts. The
very great necessity of acquainting our selves with Gods Law, the benefit of
which I refer the Reader to find commended unto him, in a learned, and very
fruitful Treatise of Mr. H. Mason, Hearing and Doing, chap. 5. This point has
been much beat upon by the Fathers, in their Sermons or Homilies to the
people, in their Exhortations and Epistles to their private and dear friends.
Many of our men in handling the controversy about permitting the reading of
the Scripture to the people, have collected many and plentiful instances: I
spare them. Only I would note the piety of some persons in their assiduous
study of Gods Law. It is a known History which they relate of Alphonsus King of
Arragon. Let me add what Herebert Rosweyd the Jesuit reports of Thomas a
Kempis, the devout Author of those books (which are, and deserve to be in every
ones hand) De Imitatione Christi: That as he spent his hours in reading the
holy Scripture, so he wrote out the whole Bible, divided into four Tomes,
fairly and legibly with his own hand. And yet a great scholar too he was, a
man wedded to his book, so much that this was his usual saying, and that which
he was wont to write in the beginning of his books. In omnibus requiem
quaesivi and nusquam inveni nisi in angelo cum libello. In even hoexken met even
boexken.
I have sought content in all things, but never found it, unless with a book
in a nooke. But his most delight was in the book of God. How much was his
zeal beyond the temper of these times, when many think it would hinder their
schollership to read much or often in the Bible, which perhaps also is not to be
found in some well furnished studies. The neglect of which, and preferring the
handmaids (which yet are beautiful, and they blind, that do not confess so)
before the Mistress, has been much complained of by many pious and learned
men. Who can be large or full enough in the praise of the Book of God? (...),
The souls food, as Saint Athanasius calls it, (...), The Invariable rule of
truth, as Saint Iraeneus. The Aphorisms of Christ. The library of the Holy
Ghost. The circle of all divine arts. The Divine Pandects. The wisdom of the
Cross. The cubit of the Sanctuary. The touchstone of error. But I will take
my self off, lest it be said to me, Who ever dispraised Hercules? Only let me
insert another instance, for other kind of people, for lay people, for women.
Not the example of any of those glorious women found and mentioned in S.
Hieroms Epistles, famous and renowned for their piety this way: but a modern
example of Maudlin the wife of D. Pareus, of whom writing to John Newerus,
Pastor of Saint Peter's Church in Heidleburg to preach her funeral Sermon: he
reports, that after she was married, and more than forty years of age, out of
love to the holy Scriptures, she learnt to read, and took such delight in
it, and specially in the Psalms, that she got them almost all by heart. So
much for this point, the necessity of which, some think the Spirit of God would
teach us, by the great Zain in the word Zicru, Recordamini, in the Text, in
many Bibles. See John Buxtorf. in Comment. Masor. cap. 14.

2. He takes occasion to prepare their expectation, by prophesying again of
his forerunner, the Baptist, verse. 5.6. we have, 1. His coming, verse. 5. 2.
His work or office, verse. 6.


I. His coming, verse. 5. Behold, I will send you Eliah the Prophet, before the
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.] The interpretation of this
place has very much divided the Expositors. Saint Hierom took it once, for all
the Prophets that should come; but he goes almost alone. A far greater party
understand it of Eliah the Thisbite. For so the Lxx. read the very Text; (The
Vatican and ordinary copies of the Lxx, but not that which is in the King of
Spaines Bible;) and so also the Arab. which usually follows the Lxx; and some
of the Fathers, (but not all whom Bellarmine alleges, for Origin, Lactunt.
Hilary, Hierom, who are produced by him, are examined by Dan. Chamier,
Panstrat. Tom. 2. lib. 17. cap. 5. sect. 17.18. and found to bring him no
proofs,) Saint Chrysostom. Theod. Saint Aug. and happily others of the Ancients,
being misled by the corrupt reading of the Lxx, (...), I send unto you Eliah
the Thisbit. But this is not in the Hebr. Text, which the learned Popish
Expositors know, and yet they follow that of the Lxx, for another purpose than
the Ancients were aware of, as it is sufficiently known to Divines in the
Question of Antichrist. Benedict Pererius, De Antichristo, Disput. 10. against
Ioh. Annius, makes it one of his demonstrations that Mahomet is not Antichrist,
and so does Bellarmine, that the Bishop of Rome is not, because Enoch and Eliah
are not yet come, and are to come in his time. Doctor Sharp, a learned man of
ours ( De Antichrist. part. 1. cap. 31.) does hereupon take occasion to compare
Bellarmine to a frantic woman (whom, he says, he knew) that pretended great
acquaintance with the Angel Gabriel, and tells us, That surely Elias was the
carrier. Me thinks too lightly. I read nothing with pleasure that puts off a
learned adversary with a scoff: but not without offense, him who through his
weakness does magnify all Bellarmines Arguments, as surely the Suffolk Author
of the Five Discourses, Ann. 1635. did, who in his Treatise of Antichrist,
uses no other. I will not take this Text, as a sufficient occasion to enter
into the Question, who That Antichrist should be. Let the characters used by
Saint John and Saint Paul be impartially applied, and without ends, and I
suppose there will be less controversy; especially that of Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. For light unto which I refer the Reader, unto Quirinus Reuterus his
Supply to Zanchy, who here through age and dimnesse of sight broke off, which
Reuterus undertook at the request of Zanchy's Executors, and said much to this
point, and with much approbation. But to pass by the question it self,
whether the Pope be Antichrist, which the interpretation of this place, however
it be, does not conclude; The Cardinals arguments, that the Thisbite is
prophesied of, are not unanswerable.

Object. 1. This day before which this Eliah is to come, is the great and
dreadful day of the Lord. Therefore the day of the second coming of Christ:
for his first coming was an acceptable time and a day of salvation.

Answ. 1. The Hebr: may be rendered, Before the day of the great and dreadful
Lord come. And so the Chald. reads it. 2. But granting it as we read it, yet
(...), is not properly Terribile, but Timendum, to be feared or dreaded. Now,
fear is either from Terror, or from Reverence; so it is, Genesis 28.17. How
dreadful is this place? says Jacob, that is, Reverend, because of the signs
of the Divine presence. See also, Ezekiel 1.22. Thus even the day of Christ's first
coming, is to be entertained with an awful dread and reverence. 3. That day,
though a day of salvation to believers, yet was to others terrible; as it was
described to be in the former Chapter, verse 2. and is often described so, in the
New Testament Luc. 2.34. Luc. 3.9.17. Luc. 19.44. Math. 21.44. See Casp.
Blockmond. System. Theol. vol. 2. artic. 28. page 831.

Object. 2. It is added, lest I come and smite the Earth with a curse. But
Christ's first coming was not to judge, but to be judged.

Answ. 1. It may be understood with Montan. and Winkleman: of the destruction
of Jerusalem, and the calamity that came upon the Jews upon Christ's first
coming. 2. But I have all the way interpreted this Chapter comprehensive, even
of the day of judgment also, and the sentence then to be given by Christ. Yet
it follows not but the place may be meant of John Baptists coming before
Christ, to prepare men to belive, least hereafter for their infidelity they be
condemned. It follows not that he must come presently before that day.

Object. 3. Christ speaking of Elias, Math, 11.14. Says, This is Elias (qui
venturus est) which is for to come; but John was come already.

Answ. The Greek (...), Quiventurus erat, Which was for to come, speaking of
him whom (from Malachy's prophecy) they expected; and so might well be said of
one that was already come: as we have the same phrase, Math. 2.4. He demanded
where Christ should be borne. Yet was Christ borne already.

Object. 4. John was indeed allegorically Elias, but not literally; therefore
Christ speaking in the same place, Math. 11.14. of John, says, If ye will
receive it, This is Elias, that is, Elias is indeed for to come, yet if you
will have one now also in this my first coming, this John is he. But to show
that this is a mystery, he adds, He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Answ. John was Elias literally, that is, in the Prophet Malachies literal
sense: but because the Scribes had another conceit (not of another time, as the
Papists, but of another person) that it must be the Thisbite; he tells them
they mistake it in that; for the Prophet in his very literal sense meant John;
(as the Prophet Jeremiah, Ier. 30.9. meant the Mesiah literally, as it is
confessed, not David the son of Iesse, when he says, They shall serve David
their King.) And therefore he says; If ye will receive him, and adds, He
that has ears, let him hear.

Object. 5. Elias is prophesied of again. Rev. 11.3. One of the two witnesses.

Answ. Besides the fuller meaning of that place, for which let the Reader
consult expositors, and especially Mr. Ios. Meades learned Commentaries upon
his Clavis Apoc. There is there no mention at all of Elias. It is but a begging
to urge that text.

Object. 6. Why else were Enoch and Elias rapt up before death, and do still
live in their mortal flesh, to dye again; but that they are for that service
before the last coming of Christ?

Answ. That they live in their bodies in Heaven is not doubted, (see Sixth.
Amama, Antibarb. Bibl. l. 3. Syrach c. 44. page 947, etc. but that they live in
their mortal bodies, and that they shall dye, there is no Scripture for it,
neither is it likely, seeing the Scripture says of Enoch, Hebr. 11.5. He was
translated that he should not see death. (see Ios. Scaliger's note upon Math.
17.11. among those few short notes of his which John Bill the Kings Printer
has carefully collected at the end of his Impression of the New Testament
Greek, at London, 1622.) But why they were wrapped up, we must be content to
be ignorant, and it beseemes us most to be so. More of this point you have
well treated of in the following Commentary.

Being thus rid of this interpretation, we have another, which interprets the
place of Christ's first coming; and we have S. Marks authority for it, who
makes the last words of Malachy, to be the first words of his Gospel; and
therefore leads us to understand by Elias in the Prophet, John Baptist in his
Gospel. And that we may be further out of doubt, we have the text clearly so
expounded, Luc. 1.16, 17. (See Laurent. Valla his Castigation of the Vulg. Lat.
according to the corrected edition of Iacobus Rivius:) Math. 11.14, 15. Math.
17.10, 11.12.13. Which places let the Reader peruse. The name of Elias is given
to John, not propter identitatem personae, as if Elias were Redivivus, or by a
Metempsychosis were entered into John's body, but propter identitatem spiritus
and virtutis, because of the like gifts, calling, and Ministry. See Iunius,
parall. lib. 1. par. 31. Pet. Martyr. Loc. Clas. 3. cap. 16. sect. 21.22. But
especially our late blessed King of famous memory, in his Monitory preface
before his learned Apology for the Oath of allegiance; pa. 77.78. whose
arguments are examined by Leonard Lessius, Disp. de Antichr. Demonstr. 15. but
stand good. And besides ours, some learned and ingenuous Papists, as Paul.
Burgensis, Isid. Clarius, Bened. Arias Montan. in Locum, who do all admit our
interpretation: and Bishop Iansenius too, in cap. 48. Ecclus. as Bened.
Pererius affirms of him, lib. 15. in Daniel. page 223. D.

Let me here note by the way the conceit of Lucas Osiander, who as he yields
the place to be meant of John Baptist, the second Elias before Christ's first
coming; so he also interprets it of a third Elias before Christ's second
coming, and that is, Martin Luther; and accordingly interprets the following
words, and exhorts to the receiving of Luthers doctrine, lest God come and
punish our ingratitude. Luther indeed was a man of notable zeal like Elias,
fit for the business he was employed in by God, and we have great reason to
think honorably of him; but none to think that Malachy thought of him, or
that the Holy Ghost meant him here. Thus much of the coming of John.

2. And he shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the
heart of the children to the Fathers. Least I come and smite the Earth with a
curse.] For their interpretation of this who respect only the second coming of
Christ, let the Reader see Corn. a lapid. I content my self with that of our
following author, That whereas all was at that time out of order, full of
corruptions, and errors, and different sects, (see Tremell. ad marg. Zach.
11.8.) John was sent to preach repentance, Math. 3.2. and to convert of all
sorts from the error of their way, and to reduce them to the faith of the old
Patriarks. But for the manner of the phrase, Iunius ( parall. lib. 1. par. 55.)
makes it parallel to Luc. 1.76.77.79. and so it will bring in further light.
Add also, Luke 1.17. where, observe that the word of the Lxx is not used,
theirs is (...) but S. Lukes is (...). The Evangelists and Apostles though
usually they follow, yet sometimes take liberty to depart from the Lxx; and
concerning the vulgar Latin translation, Ioh. Gagneius a Sorbonist professes
he cannot tell the meaning of it; but falls very foul upon Cardinal Cajetan.
Yet his own conjecture of the misplacing of (...) there in the original text,
is bold. See him, ad loc. together with Beza his larger Annotations on the same
place.

Lest I come and smite the Earth with a curse.] The coherence of this, and the
meaning, see before Objection 2. and the Answer.

Lest I come.] The coming of Christ is not uncertain, but the smiting; I
read it, lest I smite when I come.

And smite the Earth,] S. Hier. earthly men: not Iudaea only, though sometimes
(...) be taken for a particular region; as Genes. 41.57. Esaias 13.5. yet
probably the calamity of the Jews may be principally respected.

With a curse.] Geneva, cursing. Chald. extermination. Pagnin. slaughter. The
Lxx, (...), wholly, suddenly. (...). Lest I smite the earth with utter
destruction. (...) is An utter curse, or Devoting to ruin; which Cherem, the
Rabbis say, does enter into the members of the body, the number of which they
observe to be according to the numerall letters of this word. The Jews had
three sorts of Anathema's. 1. Niddui. Rejection or Removing. He that was
Menuddeth was removed out of the Synagogue. (...). Ioh. 9.22. Thus they hold
Caine was excommunicate. Genes. 4.14. Esaias 66.5. This was of the nature of
profligation or proscription among the Romans. 2. Cherem, which is more
properly that which is Anathema among the Greeks, which is the curse that they
laid upon him, whom they put out of the Synagogue if he mended not. A giving
over to Satan. 1 Cor. 5.5.1. Tim. 1.20. At this they lighted Candles and put
them out again, to note that such an one was deprived of the light of Heaven.
This is the word used here. And this among us is the highest Ecclesiastical
censure, according to the Tables of D. Richard Cousin, who (Polit. Eccl. Anglic.
Tab. V. A.) makes these degrees. 1. Interdictio divinorum. 2. monitio. 3.
Suspensio. vel ab ingressu Ecclesiae; vel a perceptione sacramentorum. 4.
excommunicatio. 5. Anathematismus: Contra haereticum pertinacem. 3. There is a
third degree among the Jews, called Sham-atha. The extreme and highest degree
of excommunication. The Etymology of which word is either, 1 of Sam, Desolate,
and attha, Thou. Thou art desolate, or, Be thou desolate. 2. of Sham, There;
and Mitha, death. There is death. Or an Excommunication to death. As, 1 Ioh.
5.16. There is a sin unto death. Or, 3. of Shem or Sama in the Chalde, The
Lord, or The Name, that is, the Tetragrammaton, Jehovah; and Atha, he comes.
The Lord comes. A form of speech used by them in sudden accidents (as the most
learned Heinsius observes, exercit. lib. 7. c. 15.) and especially by such as
suffered any oppressions, whereby they still comforted the selves. This is the
same with that which S. Paul uses afterthe Syriack, where Maran is The Lord.
Maran-atha, The Lord comes. 1. Cor. 16.22. He that loves not the Lord Jesus,
let him be Anathema Maran-atha. Which curse they fetch from the first words of
Henochs prophecy, Jude, verse 14. And thus much for the last contestation, and
for the whole Text.

For the close we may take notice of a double observation.

1. That in many copies (though not here, in Montanus his Interlin. nor in two
others that I have) the last verse but one, in Esaiah, Ecclesiastes,
Lamentations, and this prophecy of Malachy, is repeated again after the Text,
but without points: because all these books have sad closes, and therefore the
Scribes thought fit, to leave the verse before, to be last, for the recreating
the spirits of the Reader, as containing more comfortable matter. See Ioh. Buxt
of de Abbrev. Hebraic. more in (...). 2. That all the Prophets (execept Jonah
and Nahum^) expressly and in some prophecy concerning Christ. He being the
mark at which all of them chiefly aimed. And let him be our Aim likewise.
Blessed is he who carefully expects his second appearance. Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly.
FINIS.

