Dialling diagram

HOROMETRIA: Or the Complete DIALLIST: Wherein the whole mystery of the Art of
DIALLING is plainly taught three several ways; two of which are performed
Geometrically by Rule and Compass only: And the third Instrumentally, by a
QUADRANT fitted for that purpose.

With the working of such Propositions of the Sphere, as are most useful in
ASTRONOMY and NAVIGATION, both Geometrically and Instrumentally.

By Thomas Stirrup, Philomath.

Whereunto is added an APPENDIX, showing how the parallels of Declination; the
Jewish, Babylonish, and Italian hours; the Azimuths, Almicanters, etc. may be
easily inscribed on any Dial whatsoever, by Rule and Compass only.

Also how to draw a Dial on the seeling of a room, By W. L.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for Thomas Pierrepont, at the Sun in
Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

TO THE READER:
Courteous Reader,
HEre is presented unto thee a short Treatise of the Art of Dialling.
Concerning the antiquity, excellency, and necessity thereof, I shall in this
place say little, the Antiquity thereof being well known to all who have
diligently read the Sacred Scriptures, wherein mention is made of that of K.
Ahaz, upon which the Almighty was pleased to express a Miracle for the
recovery of King Hezekiah, by causing the Sun to go back ten degrees upon the
said Dial, and this is the first that was ever recorded, being above 2400
years ago, since which time, Learning spreading it self over the whole
Universe, has made this Art more common.

For the excellency of it, the skill which is required in the Mathematics,
especially in Geometry, Astronomy, and Optiques, for the making a man complete
and excellent, is an evident proof, for without good knowledge in the Elements
of Geometry, with a competencie of knowledge in the circles of the Sphere, and
some insight in the Optiques, in vain does a man bestow his time in the study
of this Art of Dialling.

Now for the necessity of it, what is more necessary in a well ordered
Commonwealth? What action can be performed in due season without it? Or what
man can appoint any business with another, and not prefix a time, without the
loss of that which cannot be re-gained, and ought therefore to be most prized.

Now because that all the light which we receive is from the great and glorious
light of the World, [the SUN] we have fetched the beams thereof from heaven, to
enlighten the understandings of men upon earth, and from whose light we receive
and retain the benefit of all our knowledge.

Therefore this Art of Dialling being in it self so excellent and necessary,
may induce any industrious person to the practice thereof, the perfect
knowledge whereof in this ensuing Treatise is sufficiently taught, and that by
such brief, easy, and familiar ways, that not any Treatise hitherto
published, can for convenience, ease, and quick dispatch, be compared thereto.

The whole Treatise consists of five Books, in which the whole mystery of the
Art of Dialling is plainly taught three several ways, namely, two
Geometrically, and the third Instrumentally.

I.
The first Book contains certain Elements of Geometry and Astronomy, as also
how to perform diverse Propositions in Geometry.

II.
The second shows how to perform most propositions in Astronomy and
Navigation, Geometrically, with Scale and Compass only.

III.
The third shows how to find the Inclination and declination of any plane
without Instrument, as also how to draw the houre-lines upon any plane
howsoever, and in what Latitude soever situate, by Rule and Compass only, two
several ways, in both which, the two grand inconveniences of the common
ways ( viz. of outrunning the limits of the plane; and drawing of many
unnecessary lines) are totally avoided, you having no lines to draw, but such
as will be comprised within the bounds of your plane, and those so few, that
you need not fear confusion.

IV. and V.
The fourth, and fifth, shows the construction and use of a Quadrant, by
which all the most usual Propositions in Astronomy may be wrought with great
facility, and by which the Inclination and Declination of a plane may be
speedily attained, and also the houre-lines drawn upon all kind of planes in
any Latitude.

Unto these five Books is added an Appendix, showing how to furnish any kind
of Dial with Astronomicall Variety, as to draw thereon the parallels of
Declination, by which the place of the Sun may be known: the parallels of the
length of the day, by which the day of the Month, the Suns Rising and Setting,
the length of the day and night may be known: the Babylonish and Italian
hours, by which you may know how many hours are past since Sun rising, and
how many remain to Sun setting: The old unequal hours, by which the day is
divided into twelve equal paats according to the Jewish account: The Azimuths,
by which you may know in what quarter of the heavens the Sun is at any time of
the day: The Almicanters or Circles of Altitude, by which the height of the
Sun, the proportion of shadows to their bodies may be easily discovered. And
lastly; How to draw a Dial on the Seeling of a Room by reflection: All which
are performed Geometrically by Rule and Compass only, affording great delight
and pleasure in the practice of this most excellent Art. All which is here
presented to thee as freely as it was given from God, who is the author and
giver of all good things.

Vale.
THE CONTENTS.
TErms of Geometry. page 1 How to draw parallel lines page 9 How to raise and
let fall perpendiculars page 10 Astronomicall definitions page 13 Of the
Circles of the Sphere both great and small. page 15 The description of the
Scale for Dialling. page 23 How to make a line of Chords. page 24 How to make
an angle of any quantity of degrees and min. page 25 How to find the suns
altitude page 26 To find the length of Right and Contrary shadow page 28 To
find the suns declination page 30 How to find the suns place page 32 To find
the suns Amplitude page 33 How to find the height of the Pole page 34 How to
find the suns Amplitude page 35 How to find the suns Declination page 37 To
know at what time the sun shall be East or West page 39 How to find the height
of the sun at the hour of six page 40 To find the Azimuth at the hour of six
page 41 To find the Azimuth page 42 How to find the hour of the day page 44
How to find the Ascensionall difference page 49 How to find the Right or
Oblique Ascension page 50 How to find the suns altitude without Instrument
page 52 How to find the Latitude of a place page 54 How to find the
declination, and inclination of any plane page 59 How to draw a Meridian line
upon an Horizontal plane. page 64 To make an Equinoctial Dial page 65 How to
draw a Dial upon a Polar plane page 66 How to make an East or West Dial page
68 How to draw a Dial upon an Horizontal plane page 71 How to draw a Dial
upon a full North or South plane page 74 To draw a Dial upon a Vertical
inclining plane page 79 To draw a Dial upon a North or South declining plane
page 81 Another way to draw an horizontall Dial page 87 Another way to draw a
full North or South Dial page 89 In an upright declining plane, to find the
deflexion, the height of the style, and the inclination of Meridians page 92 To
draw a Dial upon an upright declining plane page 94 To draw a Dial up a
Meridian inclining plane page 101 In declining inclining planes, to find the
height of the style, the deflexion, etc. and to draw the Dial page 104 The
description of a Quadrant page 111 The working of diverse propositions in
Geometry by the Quadrant page 117 To work propositions in Astronomy by the
Quadrant page 124 To find the inclination and declination of a plane page 139
How to draw Dials on all kind of planes by the Quadrant. page 144 If the Cock
of a Dial be lost, to find the height thereof page 156 How to describe the
Equinoctial, Tropicks, and other parallels of the suns course and declination
in all kind of planes page 159 To draw the parallels of the length of the day
on all planes page 175 How the Babylonish and Italian hours may be drawn on all
kind of planes page 181 How the unequal hours may be drawn upon any plane
page 185 How to draw the Azimuths and Almicanters on all kind of planes page
188 How to draw a dial on the seeling of a Room. page 197
Courteous Reader, These Books are to be sold by Thomas Pierrepont at the Sun
in Paul's Church yard.
Dr. Twisse learned Treatise in defense of the Sabath day. Dr. Stoughton 17
choice Sermons. Mr. Fenners Works in five Treatises. Puerilis Confabula, in
English. The whole Treatise of the cases of conscience by Mr. William Perkins.
Miscellanea Philo Theologica, or God and Man, wherein many secrets of Scripture
and Nature are un-bowelled, by Henry Church. Dr. Ames Exposition of both the
Epistles of Peter. The Works of Mr. Nicholas Lokyer in three Treatises. The
spiritual man's directory by Mr. Fennor. Useful instructions for evil times,
by Mr. Nicholas Lokyer. Natural Philosophy reformed, by I. A Comenius.
Artificers plain Scale, by Mr. Thomas Stirrup. Dr. Sibbs Christian Charter.
Certain select cases resolved by Mr. Hen. Shepard. A vindication of Ordination
and laying on of hands, by Mr. Lazarus Seaman.
ALL the work of this Book is performed either Geometrically or
Instrumentally: For the Geometrical performance there is required only a line
of Chords (or rather a Sector,) and the Isntrumental part is performed by a
Quadrant fitted for that purpose: Therefore, if any be desirous to have either
Scale, Sector, Quadrant, or any other Mathematical Instrument whatsoever, they
may be furnished by Master Anthony Thompson in Hosier lane near Smithfield.

NOte, that the line of Chords which is drawn on the edge of the Quadrant A C
should issue from the center, but in the figure it is drawn short thereof,
which defect the Instrument maker will easily supply.

THE FIRST BOOK. Showing the meaning of some of the usefullest terms of
GEOMETRY, which be most attendant unto this Art of DIALLING: With a description
of some of the chief Points, Lines and Circles imagined in the Sphere: Being
very fit to be understood of all those that intend to practice either in the
Art of NAVIGATION, ASTRONOMY, OR DIALLING.
CHAP. I. Of certain terms of Geometry, necessary to be known of the unlearned,
before the proceeding in this Art of Dialling.
BEing intended in this Treatise of Dialling, to proceed by Geometrical
proportion: I have thought fit, first, to declare unto you the meaning of some
terms of Geometry which are necessary for the unlearned to know before they
enter into this Art of Dialling.

Definition 1.
Point A

First, therefore a point or prick is that which is the least of all materials,
having neither part nor quantity, and therefore void of length, breadth, and
depth: as is set forth unto you by the point or prick noted with the letter A.

Definition 2.
A Line is a supposed length, or a thing extending it self in length, without
breadth or thickness, whether it be right lined or crooked, and may be divided
into parts in respect of his length, but admits no other division, as is set
forth unto you by the line B.

Line B

Definition 3.
An Angle is the meeting of two lines in any sort, so as they both make not one
line.

Angle CDEAs for example, suppose the lines C D and E D to be drawn in such
sort, so as they may both meet in the point D, so shall the point D be the
angle included between the two lines, as C D E: And here note, that an Angle is
usually described by three letters, of which, the second, or middle letter,
represents always the angle intended.

Definition 4.
If a right line fall on a right line, making the angles on either side equal,
each of those angles are called right angles, and the line Perpendicular lines
AB and CBD illustrating right angles erected is called a Perpendicular line
unto the other. As for example, the line A B here in this figure, falling upon
the line C B D, in such sort, that the angles on both sides are thereby made
equal, as here you see, and therefore are called Right angles.

Definition 5.
A Perpendicular is a line raised from, or let fall upon another line, making
equal angles on both sides, as you may see declared in the former figure,
where the line A B is perpendicular unto the line C B D, making equal angles
in the point B.

Definition 6.
A Circle is a plain figure, and contained under one line which is called the
Circumference thereof, as in the figure following, the very Ring C B D E is
called the Circumference of that Circle.

Definition 7.
The Center of a Circle is that point which is in the midst thereof, from which
point, all right lines drawn to the Circumference are equal, as you may see in
the following figure, where the point by the letter A represents the Center,
and is the very middle point upon which the circumference was drawn.

Definition 8.
The Diameter of a Circle is a right line drawn through the center of any
Circle, in such sort that it may divide the whole Circle into two equal parts,
as you may see the line C A D, or B A E, either of which is the Diameter of the
circle B C E D, because either of them passes through the center A, and
divides the whole circle into two equal parts.

Definition 9.
The Semidiameter of a Circle, is half of the Diameter, and is contained
betwixt the center, and the one side of the Circle, as the line A D, or A B, or
A C, or A E, are either of them the Semidiameters of the Circle B C E D.

Definition 10.
A Semicircle is the one half of a Circle drawn upon his Diameter, and is
contained upon the superficies or surface of the Diameter, as the Semicircle C
B D, which is half of the Circle C B D E, and is contained above the Diameter
C A D.

Definition 11.
A Quadrant is the fourth part of a Circle, and is contained betwixt the
Semidiameter of the Circle, and a line drawn perpendicular unto the Diameter of
the same Circle, from the center thereof, dividing the Semicircle into two
equal parts, of the which parts, the one is the Quadrant or fourth part of the
same Circle. As for example, the Diameter of the Circle B D E C, is the line C
A D, dividing the Circle into two equal parts: then from the center A, raise
the perpendicular A B, dividing the Semicircle likewise into two equal parts,
so is A B D, or A B C, the Quadrant of the Circle C B D E.

Definition 12.
A Segment or portion of a Circle, is a figure contained under a right Circle
CBDE with segment FBGH line, and a part of a circumference, either greater or
lesser then the semicircle, as in the figure you may see that F B G H is a
segme^t or part of the Circle C B D E, and is contained under the right line
FHG (which is less then the Diameter C A D) and a part of the whole circumference
as F B G.

And here note, that these parts, and such like of the Circumference so
divided, are commonly called arches, or arch lines, and all lines (less then
the Diameter) drawn through, and applied to any part of the circumference, are
called Chords, or Chord lines, of those arches which they subtend.

Definition 13.
A Parallel line is a line drawn by the side of another line, in such sort that
they may be equidistant in all places, and of such parallels, two only belong
unto this work of Dialling, that is to say, the right lined Parallel, and the
circular Parallel.

Right lined Parallels, are two right lines equidistant in all places one from
the other, which being drawn forth infinitely, would never meet or concur; as
may be seen by these two lines A and B.

Parallel lines A and B

Definition 14.
Circular parallel: circle FGHI within circle BCDE having the same center AA
Circular parallel is a Circle drawn either within or without another Circle
upon the same center, as you may plainly see by the two Circles B C D E, and F
G H I, these Circles are both drawn upon the same center A, and therefore are
parallel the one to the other.

Definition 16.
A Degree is the 360th part of the circumference of any Circle, so that divide
the circumference of any circle into 360 parts, and each of those parts is
called a degree; so shall the Semi-circumference contain 180 of those Degrees;
and 90 of those degrees make a Quadrant, or a quarter of the circumference of
any Circle.

Definition 16.
A Minute is the 60th part of a degree, being understood of measure: but in
time a Minute is the 60th part of an hour, or the fourth part of a degree, 15
degrees answering to an hour, and 4 minutes to a degree.

Definition 17.
The quantity or 60-degree angle ABC and 60-degree arc (arch) AC measure of an
angle, is the number of degrees contained in the arch of a Circle, described
from the point of the same angle, and intercepted between the two sides of
that angle. As for example, the measure of the angle A B C is the number of
degrees contained in the arch A C which subtendeth the angle B, being found to
be 60.

Definition 18.
The Complement of an arch less then a Quadrant, is so much as that arch
wants of 90 degrees.

As for example, the arch A B being 60 degrees, which being taken from 90
degrees, leaves B C for the complement thereof, which is 30 degrees.

depiction of complementary arcs (arches): semicircle with E as center and A,
B, C, and D as points on the circumference, showing 60-degree angle AEB (arc
AB), 30-degree angle BEC (arc BC), and 90-degree angle CED (arc CD)

Definition 19.
The complement of an arch less then a Semicircle, is so much as that arch
wants of a Semicircle, or of 180 degrees. As for example, the arch D C B
being 120 degrees, this being taken from 180 degrees, the whole Semicircle,
leaves A B for the complement thereof, which will be found to be 60 degrees.

And here note, that what is said of the complements of arches, the same is
meant by the complements of angles.

CHAP. II. To a line given, to draw a parallel line, at any distance required.
SUppose the line given to be A B, unto which line it is required to draw a
parallel line. First, open your Compasses to the distance required, then set
one foot in the end A, and with the other strike an arch line, on that side the
given line Dialling diagram: how to draw a parallel line by first drawing arch
(arc) lines with a compass whereunto the parallel line is to be drawn, as the
arch line C, this being done, draw the like arch line upon the end B, as the
arch line D, and by the convexity of those two arch lines C and D, draw the
line C D, which shall be parallel to the given line, as was required.

CHAP. III. To perform the former proposition at a distance required, and by a
point limited.
SUppose the line given to be D E, unto which line it is required to draw a
parallel line, at the distance, and by the point F. Dialling diagram: how to
draw a parallel line at a specific distance and opposite a specific point First
therefore, place one foot of the compasses in the point F, from whence take the
shortest extention to the line D E, as F E, at which distance, place one foot
of the compasses in the end D, and with the other, strike the arch line G, by
the convexity of which arch line, and the limited point F, draw the line F G,
which is parallel to the given line D E, as was required.

CHAP. IIII. The manner how to raise a perpendicular line, from the middle of a
line given.
LEt the line given be A B; and let C be a point therein, whereon it is
required to raise a perpendicular. First therefore, open the compasses to any
convenient distance, Dialling diagram: how to draw a perpendicular line CD from
the middle of a given line ACB and setting one foot in the point C, and with
the other foot mark on either side thereof, the equal distances C A, and C B:
then opening your compasses to any convenient wider distance, with one foot in
the point A, with the other, strike the arch line E over the point C, then with
the same distance of your compasses, set one foot in B, and with the other draw
the arch line F, crossing the arch E in the point D, from which point D, draw
the line D C, which line is perpendicular unto the given line A B, from the
point C, as was required.

CHAP. V. To let a Perpendicular fall from a point assigned, unto the middle of
a line given.
LEt the line given whereupon you would have a perpendicular let fall, be the
line D E F, and the point assigned to be the point C, from whence you would
have a perpendicular let Dialling diagram: how to draw a perpendicular line
down from a given point C to the middle of an existing line DEF fall upon the
given line D E F. First, set one foot of your compasses in the point C, and
opening your compasses to any convenient distance, so that it be more then the
distance C E, make an arch of a circle with the other foot, so that it may cut
the line D E F twice, that is, at I and G: then find the middle between those
two intetsections, which will be in the point E, from which point E, draw the
line C E, which is the perpendicular which was desired to be let fall from the
given point C, unto the middle of the given line D E F.

CHAP. VI. To raise a Perpendicular upon the end of a line given.
SUppose the line whereupon you would have a perpendicular to be raised, be the
line B C, and from the point B a perpendicular is to be raised. First, open
your Compasses unto any convenient distance, which here we suppose to be the
distance B E, and set one foot of your compasses in Dialling diagram: how to
draw a perpendicular line from the end of a given line using compass and ruler
B, with the other draw the arch ED, then this distance being kept, set one foot
of your compasses in the point E, and with the other make a mark in the former
arch E D, as at D, still keeping the same distance, set one foot in the point D,
and with the other draw the arch line F over the given point B: now laying a
ruler upon the two points E and D, see where it crosses the arch line F, which
will be at F, from which point F, draw the line F B, which shall be a
perpendicular line unto the given line B C, raised from the end B, as was
required.

CHAP. VII. To let a perpendicular fall from a point assigned, unto the end of
a line given.
LEt the line D E be given, unto which it is required to let a perpendicular
fall from the assigned point A, unto the end D. First, from the assigned point
A, draw a line unto any part of the given line D E, which may be the line A B
C, then find the middle of the line A C, which will be at B, place therefore
one foot of your compasses in the point B, and extend the other unto A or C,
with which distance draw the Dialling diagram: how to draw a perpendicular line
down from a given point to the end of a line Semicircle A D C, so shall it cut
the given line D E in the point D, from which point D, draw the line A D, which
shall be the perpendicular let fall from the assigned point A unto the end D of
the given line D E, as was required.

CHAP. VIII. Certain Definitions Astronomicall, meet to be understood of the
unlearned, before the proceeding in this Art of Dialling.
IN the former Chapter I have showed the meaning of some terms of Geometry,
which be most helpful unto this art of Dialling, with the drawing of a
parallel line at any distance, or by a point assigned; so likewise have I
showed the manner either how to raise or let fall a perpendicular either from
or unto any part of a line given. So likewise now I think it will not be
unnecessary for to show unto the unlearned, the meaning of some of the most
usefullest terms in Astronomy, and most fitting this art of Dialling.

Definition 1.
A Sphere is a certain solid superficies, in whose middle is a point, from
which all lines drawn unto the circumference are equal, which point is the
center of the Sphere.

Definition 2.
The Pole is a prick or point imagined in the heavens, whereof are two, the
North pole being the center to a circle described by the motion of the North
star, or the tale of the little Bear, from which point aforesaid is a line
imagined to pass through the center of the Sphere, and passing directly to the
opposite part of the heavens, shows there to be the South Pole, and this line
so imagined to pass from one Pole to the other, through the center of the
Sphere, is called the Axletree of the World, because it has been formerly
supposed, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, together with the whole heavens has
been turned about from East to West, once round in 24 hours, by a true equal
course, like much in like time; which diurnall revolution is performed about
this Axletree of the World, and this Axletree is set out unto you in the
following figure by the line P A D, the Poles whereof are P and D.

Definition 3.
A Sphere accidentally is divided into two parts, that is to say, into a right
Sphere, and an oblique Sphere, a right Sphere is only unto those that dwell
under the Equinoctial, to whom neither of the Poles of the World are seen, but
lie hid in the Horizon. An oblique Sphere is unto those that inhabit on either
side of the Equinoctial, unto whom one of the Poles is ever seen, and the
orher hid under the Horizon.

Definition 4.
The Circles whereof the Sphere is composed are divided into two sorts; that is
to say, into greater Circles, and lesser: The greater Circles are those that
divide the Sphere into two equal parts, and they are in number six, viz. the
Equinoctial, the Ecliptique line, the two Colures, the Meridian, and the
Horizon. The lesser Circles are such as divide the Sphere into two parts
unequally; and they are four in number, as, the Tropic of Cancer, the Tropic
of Capricorn, the Circle Artique, and the Circle Antartique.

CHAP. IX. Of the six greater Circles.
Definition 5.
THe Equinoctial is a Circle that crosses the Poles of the world at right
angles, and divides the Sphere into two equal parts, and is called the
Equinoctial, because when the Sun comes unto it (which is twice in the year,
viz. at the Suns entrance into Aries and Libra) it makes the days and nights
of equal length throughout the whole world, and in the figure following, is
described by the line S A N.

Definition 6.
The Meridian is a great Circle, passing through the Poles of the world, and
the poles of the Horizon, or Zenith point right over our heads, and is so
called, because that in any time of the year, or in any place of the world,
when the Sun (by the motion of the heavens) comes unto that Circle, it is
then noon, or 12 of the clock: and it is to be understood, that all Towns and
Places that lie East and West one of another, have every one a several
Meridian; but all places that lie North and South one of another, have one and
the same Meridian: this circle is declared in the figure following by the
Circle E B W C.

Definition 7.
The Horizon is a Circle dividing the superior Hemisphere from the inferior,
whereupon it is called Horizon, that is to say, the bounds of sight, or the
farthest distance that the eye can see, and is set forth unto you by the line C
A B in the following figure.

Definition 8.
Colures are two great Circles, passing through both the Poles of the World,
crossing one the other in the said Poles at right angles, and dividing the
Equinoctial and the Zodiaque into four equal parts, making thereby the four
Seasons of the year, the one Colure passing through the two Tropicall points of
Cancer and Capricorn, showing the beginning of Summer, and also of Winter, at
which times the days and nights are longest and shortest. The other Colure
passing through the Equinoctial points Aries and Libra, showing the beginning
of the Spring time and Autumn, at which two times the days and nights are of
equal length throughout the whole World.

Definition 9.
The Ecliptique is a great Circle also, dividing the Equinoctial into two
equal parts by the head of Aries and Libra, the one half thereof does decline
unto the Northward, and the other toward the South, the greatest declination
thereof (according to the observation of that late famous Mathematician Master
Edward Wright) is 23 degrees, 31 minutes, 30 seconds. Note also that this
Circle is divided into 12 equal parts, which parts are attributed unto the 12
Signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius,
Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. Out of this line does the Sun never move,
but the Moon and other Planets are sometimes on the one side, and sometimes on
the other side thereof: this line may be represented in the following figure,
by that line whereon the characters of the 12 Signs stands.

CHAP. X. Of the four lesser Circles.
Definition 10.
THe Sun having ascended unto his highest Solsticiall point, does describe a
Circle, which is the nearest that he can approach unto the North Pole,
whereupon it is called the Circle of the Summer Solstice, or the Tropic of
Cancer, and is noted in the figure following by the line FG.

Definition 11.
The Sun also approaching unto the first scruple of Capricorn, or the Winter
Solstice, describes another Circle, which is the utmost bounds that the Sun
can depart from the Equinoctial line toward the Antartique Pole, whereupon it
is called the Circle of the Winter Solstice, or the Tropic of Capricorn, and
is described in the figure following by the line H I.

Definition 12.
So much as the Ecliptique declineth from the Equinoctial, so much does the
Poles of the Ecliptique decline from the Poles of the World, whereupon the pole
of the Ecliptique, which is by the North Pole of the World describes a Circle
as it passes about the Pole of the World, being just so far from the Pole, as
the Tropic of Cancer is from the Equator, and it is called the Circle Artick,
or the Circle of the North Pole, it is described in the following Diagram by
the line T O, where the letter O does stand for the Pole of the Ecliptique, and
the line T O for the Circle which the point O does describe about P the Pole of
the World.

Definition 13.
The fourth and last of the lesser Circles is described in like manner, by the
other pole of the Ecliptique about the South Pole of the World, and therefore
called the Antartique Circle, or the Circle of the South Pole, and is
demonstrated in the following figure by the line L R.

Definition 14.
The Zenith is an imaginary point in the heavens over our heads, making right
angles with the Horizon, as the Equinoctial makes with the Pole.

Definition 15.
The Nadir is a point in the heavens under our feet, making right angles with
the Horizon under the earth, as the Zenith does above, and therefore is
opposite unto the Zenith: both these may be represented in the figure by the
line E W, where the letter E stands for the Zenith, and W for the Nadir.

Definition 16.
The Declination of the Sun is the arch of a Circle contained betwixt the
Ecliptique and the Equinoctial, making right angles with the Equinoctial, and
may be set forth unto you by the arch S. But the Declination of a Star, is the
arch of a Circle let fall from the center of a Star, perpendicular unto the
Equinoctial. This Declination may Dialling diagram: Circle EBWC (where E
stands for Zenith and W for Nadir) illustrating astronomical definitions in
chapters 9 and 10 be counted either Northward or Southward, according to the
situation of the Sun or Star, whether it be nearer unto the North or South
Pole of the World.

Definition 17.
The Latitude of a Star is the arch of a Circle contained betwixt the center of
any star and the Ecliptique line, making right angles with the Ecliptique, and
counted either Northward or Southward according to the situation of the Star,
whether it be nearer unto the North or South Poles of the Ecliptique. And here
note, that the Sun has no Latitude, but always keeps in the Ecliptique line.

Definition 18.
The Latitude of a Town or Country, is the height of the Pole above the
Horizon, or the distance betwixt the Zenith and the Equinoctial, and may be
represented in this figure by the arch of the Meridian B P, where the North
Pole P is elevated above the horizontall line C A B according to the angle B A
P, which here is 52 degrees 25 minutes, the Latitude of Thurning.

Definition 19.
The Longitude of a Star is that part of the Ecliptique which is contained
betwixt the Stars place in the Ecliptique and the beginning of Aries, counting
them from Aries according to the order or succession of the Signs.

Definition 20.
The Longitude of a Town or Country, are the number of degrees which are
contained in the Equinoctial, betwixt the meridian that passes over the Isles
of Azores, (from whence the beginning of Longitude is accounted) Eastwards, and
the Meridian that passes over the Town or Country desired.

Definition 21.
The Altitude of the Sun or Star, is the arch of a circle contained betwixt the
center of the Sun or any Star, and the Horizon. As for example, in the former
figure, suppose the Sun to be in the Meridian at S, then the angle of altitude
will be the angle S A C, the measure whereof will be the arch C S, contained
betwixt the Sun at S, and the Horizon C, which here will be found to be 37
degr. and 35 min. the height of the Sun at noon when it is in the Equinoctial
Circle S A N.

Definition 22.
Azimuths are Circles which meet together in the Zenith, and cross the horizon
at right angles, and serve to find the point of the Compass which the Sun is
upon at any hour of the day: or the Azimuth of the Sun or Star is a part of
the Horizon, contained betwixt the true East or West point, and that Azimuth
which passes by the center of the same Star to the Horizon, and may be
represented in the former figure by the arch line E V W.

Definition 23.
Ascension, is the rising of any Star, or of any part or portion of the
Ecliptique above the Horizon.

Definition 24.
Right Ascension, is the number of degrees and minutes of the Equinoctial
(counted from the beginning of Aries) which comes to the Meridian with the
Sun, Moon, Star, or any portion of the Ecliptique.

Definition 25.
Oblique Ascension, is a part of the Equinoctial contained betwixt the
beginning of Aries, and that part of the Equinoctial that rises with the
center of a Star, or any portion of the Ecliptique in an Oblique Sphere.

Definition 26.
The Ascensionall Difference, is the difference betwixt the right and oblique
ascension, or it is the number of degrees contained betwixt that place of the
Equinoctial that rises with the center of a Star, and that place of the
Equinoctial that comes to the Meridian with the center of the same Star.

Definition 27.
Almicanters are circles drawn parallel unto the Horizon one over another,
until they come unto the Zenith, these are Circles that do measure the
elevation of the Pole, or height of the Sun, Moon, or Stars above the Horizon,
which is called the Almicanter of the Sun, Moon, or Star: the arch of the Sun
or Stars Almicanter, is a portion of an Azimuth contained betwixt that
Almicanter which passes through the center of the Star and the Horizon.

Thus having set forth unto the view of the unlearned (for whose sake this
Treatise was intended) the meaning of some of the usefullest terms of Geometry,
which be most attendent unto this Art of Dialling, and also a description of
some peculiar things concerning the Points, Lines, and Circles imagined in the
Sphere, being very fit to be understood of all such as intend to practice
either in the Art of Navigation, Astronomy, or Dialling. Therefore now I
intend to proceed with Scale and Compass to perform some questions
Astronomicall, before we enter upon the Art of Dialling, seeing they are both
delightful, and also helpful unto all such as shall be practitioners in this
Art of Dialling.

The end of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK. Showing Geometrically how to resolve all such Astronomical
Propositions as are of ordinary use, as well in the Art of Navigation, as in
this Art of Dialling.
CHAP. I. The description of the Scale, whereby this work may be performed
THis Scale for this work, needs to be divided but into two parts, the first
whereof may be a Scale of equal divisions of 16 in an inch, and may serve for
ordinary measure. The second part of the Scale may be a single Chord of a
Circle, or a Chord of 90, and is divided into 90 unequal divisions,
representing the 90 degrees of the Quadrant, and are numbered with 10, 20, 30,
40, etc. unto 90. This Chord is in use to measure any part or arch of a Circle,
not surmounting 90 degrees, the number of these degrees from 1 unto 60, is
called the Radius of the Scale, upon which distance all Dialling diagram: ruler
or scale Circles are to be drawn, whereupon 60 of these degrees are the
semidiameter of any Circle that is drawn upon that Radius.

The manner how to divide the line of Chords.
Although the making or dividing of this line of Chords be well known unto all
those that do make Mathematical Instruments, yet I would not have them that
shall make use of this Book, be ignorant of the dividing of this line:
Therefore, first, draw the Diameter A D C, which being done, upon the center D
describe the semicircle A B C, which semicircle divide into two equal parts or
Quadrants by the point B, then dividing one of these Quadrants into 90 equal
parts, or degrees, you are prepared, as here you see in the Quadrant A B.

Now this being done, set one foot of your Compasses in the point A, and let
the other be extended unto each degree or the Quadrant A B, and these extents
transfer into the line A D C, as here you see is done. This line so divided
into 90 unequal divisions from the point A, (and numbered by 10, 20, 30, 40,
etc. unto 90,) is called a line of Chords, and may be set on your Rule, as here
you see is done. And this may be as well performed within the Quadrant D A B,
by transferring the degree of the Quadrant A B into the line A E B, or into any
other line: and here you may see that when you open your compasses unto 60
degrees in the Quadrant, and transfer it into the line A D, that it will light
upon the center D, whereby it does plainly appear that 60 of those degrees are
equal to the semidiameter of the same Circle, and therefore is the Radius upon
which all circles are drawn, as was showed before in this Chapter.

Dialling diagram: illustration of how to divide a line of chords into degrees
of a circle

CHAP. II. How speedily with Rule and Compass, to make an angle containing any
degrees assigned, or to get the degrees of any angle made.
FIrst, therefore to make an angle of any quantity, open your Compasses to the
Radius of our Scale, and setting one foot thereof in the point A, with the
other foot describe the arch B C, then draw the line A B, then opening your
Compasses to so many degrees upon your line of Chords, as you would lay down,
which here we will suppose to be 40 degrees, and setting one foot in B, with
the other make a mark in the arch B C, as at C, from which point C, draw the
line C A, which shall make the angle B A C, containing 40 degrees, as was
required.

arch (arc) BC and 40-degree angle BACAnd if you desire to find the quantity
of an angle, open the Compasses to the Radius of your Scale, and set one foot
thereof in the point A, and with the other describe the arch B C, then taking
the distance betwixt B and C (that is, where the two legs and the arch line
crosses) and apply it unto the line of Chords, and there it will show you the
number of degrees contained in that angle, which here will be found to be 40
degrees.

CHAP. III. To find the altitude of the Sun by the shadow of a Gnomen set
perpendicular to the Horizon.
FFirst, draw the line A B, then opening your Compasses to the Radius of your
Scale, set one foot in the end A, and with the other describe the arch B C D,
then opening your Compasses unto the whole 90 degrees, with one foot in B, with
the other mark the arch B C D in the point D, from which point D, draw the
line D A, which shall be perpendicular unto the line A B, and make the Quadrant
A B Dialling diagram: Quadrant ABCD (where A is the center of a circle and B,
C, and D points along the circumference) C D, then suppose the height of your
Gnomon or substance yiedling shadow, to be the line A E, which here we will
suppose to be 12 foot, therefore take 12 of your equal divisions from your
Scale, as here I have taken 12 quarters for this our purpose, and set them down
from A to E, and draw the line E F parallel to A B, then suppose the length of
the shadow to be 9 foot, for this 9 foot must I take 9 of the same divisions as
I did before, and place them from E to G, by which point G, draw the line A G
C, from the center A through the point G, until it cutteth the arch B F C D in
the point C, so shall the arch B C be the height of the Sun desired, which in
this example will be found to be 53 degrees 8 minutes, the thing desired.

CHAP. IIII. To find the altitude of the Sun by the shadow of a Gnomon
standing at right angles with any perpendicular wall, in such manner that it
may lie parallel unto the Horizon.
FIrst, draw your Quadrant A B C D, as is taught in the last Chapter, and place
the length of your Gnomon from A to E, which here we will suppose to be 12 foot
as before in the last Chapter; then draw the line E F parallel to A B, then
suppose the length of the shadow to be 9 foot as before, this I place from E to
G, by which point G, draw the line A G C, as was formerly done in the last
Chapter, by which we have proceeded thus far, but as in the last Chapter the
arch B C was the height of the Sun desired; so by this Chapter the arch C D
shall be the height of the Sun, which being applied unto your Scale, will give
you 36 degrees. 52 min. for the height of the Sun desired.

CHAP. V. The Almicanter, or height of the Sun being given, to find the length
of the right shadow.
BY right shadow is meant the shadow of any staff, post, steeple, or any
Gnomon whatsoever, that stands at right angles with the Horizon, the one end
thereof respecting the Zenith of the place, and the other the Nadir. First,
therefore according unto the third Chapter, describe the Quadrant A B D, then
suppose the height of your Gnomon, or substance yiedling shadow, to be 12 foot,
as in the former Chapter: this do I set down from A to E, and Dialling diagram
from the point E draw the line E F parallel to A B, then set the Almicanter
(which here we will suppose to be 53 de. and 8 min. as it was found by the
third Chapter) from B unto C, from which point C, draw the line C A, cutting
the line E F in the point G; so shall E G be the length of the right shadow
desired, which being taken betwixt your Compasses, and applied unto your Scale,
will give you 9 of those divisions, whereof A E was 12, which here does
signify 9 foot.

CHAP. VI. The Almicanter, or height of the Sun being given, to find the
length of the contrary shadow.
BY the contrary shadow is understood the length of any shadow that is made by
a staff or Gnomon standing at right angles against any perpendicular wall, in
such a manner that it may lie parallel unto the Horizon; the length of the
contrary shadow does increase as the Sun rises in height: whereas,
contrariwise, the right shadow does decrease in length as the Sun does increase
in height. Therefore the way to find out the length of the Versed shadow is as
follows. First draw your Quadrant, as is taught in the third Chapter, now
supposing the length of your Gnomon to be 12 foot, place it from A to E,
likewise from E draw the line E F parallel to A B, as before: now supposing the
height of the Sun to be 36 degrees. 52 min. take it from your Scale, and place it
from D to C, from which point C, draw the line C A, cutting the line E F in the
point G, so shall G E be the length of the contrary shadow, which here will be
found to be 9 foot, the thing desired.

CHAP. VII. Having the distance of the Sun from the next Equinoctial point, to
find his Declination.
FIrst, draw the line A B, then upon the end A, raise the perpendicular A D;
then opening your Compasses to the Radius of the Scale, place one foot in the
center A, and with the other draw the Quadrant B C D: then supposing the Sun to
be either in the 29 degree of Taurus, or in the first degree of Leo, both which
points are 59 degrees distant from the next Equinoctial point Aries. Or if the
Sun shall be in the 29 degree of Scorpio, or in the first degree of Aquarius,
both which are also 59 degrees distant from the Equinoctial point Libra,
therefore take 59 degrees from your Scale, and place it from B to C, and draw
the line C A, then place the greatest declination of the Sun from B unto F,
which is 23 degrees 30 minutes, then Dialling diagram fixing one foot of your
Compasses in the point F, with the other take the nearest distance unto the
line A B, which you may do by opening or shuting of your Compasses, still
turning them to and fro, till the moving point thereof do only touch the line
A B: this distance being kept, set one foot of your Compasses in the point A,
and with the other make a mark in the line A C, as at E, from which point E,
take the nearest extent unto the line A B, this distance betwixt your Compasses
being kept, fix one foot in the arch B C D, moving it either upwards or
downwards, still keeping it directly in the arch line, until by moving the
other foot to and fro, you find it to touch the line A B and no more, so shall
the fixed foot rest in the point G, which shall be the Declination of the Sun
accounted from B, which in this example will be found to be about 20. degrees,
the thing desired.

CHAP. VIII. The Declination of the Sun, and the quarter of the Ecliptique
which he possesses being given, to find his true place.
LEt the declination given be 20 degrees, and the quarter that he possesses,
be betwixt the head of Aries and Cancer, first draw the Quadrant A D E F, then
set the greatest declination of the Sun upon the Chord from D unto B, which is
23 degrees and 30 minutes, then from the point B take the shortest extent unto
the line A D, this distance being kept, set one foot in the point A, and with
the other describe the small Quadrant G H I, then set the Dialling diagram
declination of the Sun (which in this example is 20 degrees) from D unto C,
from which point C, take the shortest extent unto the line A D, this distance
being kept, place one foot in the arch line G H I, after such a manner, that
the other foot being turned about, may but only touch the line A D, so shall
the fixed foot stay upon the point H, through which point H, draw the line A H
E, cutting the arch D F in the point E: so shall the arch D E be the distance
of the Sun from the head of Aries, which here will be found to be 59 degrees,
so that the Sun does hereby appear to be in 29 degrees of Taurus, at such time
as he does possess that quarter of the Ecliptique, betwixt the head of Aries
and Cancer.

CHAP. IX. Having the Latitude of the place, and the distance of the Sun from
the next Equinoctial point, to find his Amplitude.
FIrst, make the Quadrant A B C D, then take from your Scale 37 degrees. 30 min.
which here we will suppose to be the complement of the Latitude, and place it
from B unto E, then taking the nearest distance betwixt the point E, and the
line A B, with one foot set in A, with the other draw the arch F G H, then
place the Suns greatest declination from B unto I, from which point I, take the
nearest extent unto the Dialling diagram line A B, which distance being kept,
place one foot of your compasses in the arch line F G H, so that the moving
foot may but only touch the line A B at the shortest extent, so shall the fixed
foot rest in the arch line F G H at G, through which point G, draw the line A G
C, then supposing the Sun to be in the 29 degree of Taurus, that is 59 degrees
distant from the next Equinoctial point, take 59 degrees Dialling diagram from
your Scale and place them from B to L, from which point L, take the nearest
distance unto the line A B, with this distance, seting one foot in the point A,
with the other make a mark in the line A C, as at O, from which point O, take
the shortest extent unto the line A B, this distance being kept, fix one foot
of your Compasses in the arch B C D, in such a manner, that the moving foot
thereof may but only touch the line A B, so shall the fixed foot rest in the
point R, which is the Amplitude counted from B, and will be found in this
example to be 34 degrees. 9 min.

CHAP. X. Having the Declination and Amplitude of the Sun, to find the height
of the Pole.
FIrst, make the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Amplitude to be 34 degrees. 9
min. (as it was found by the last Chapter) take it from your Scale, and place
it from B to E, then taking the nearest extent from the point E unto the line A
B, set one foot of your Compasses in the center A, and with the other draw the
arch G H I, then supposing the Sun to have 20 degrees of Declination, take them
from your scale, and place them from B unto F, from which point F, take the
shortest extent unto the line A B: this distance being kept, fix one foot of
your Compasses in the arch line G H I, so that the other foot may but touch the
line A B at the nearest extent, so shall the fixed foot rest at the point H,
through which point H, draw the line A H C, cuting Dialling diagram the arch B
C D in the point C, so shall the arch B C be the height of the Equinoctial,
and the complement thereof which is the arch C D, shall be the elevation of the
Pole above the Horizon, or the distance of the Equinoctial from the Zenith,
which in this example will be found to be 52 degrees 30 minutes, the thing
desired.

CHAP. XI. Having the Latitude of the place, and the Declination of the Sun,
to find his Amplitude.
FIrst, make the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Latitude to be 52 degrees
30 minutes, take it from your Scale, and place it from D to E, or (which is all
one) if you place the complement thereof from B to E, from which point E take
the nearest extent unto the line A B, with this distance, setting one foot of
your Compasses in the center A, with the other describe the arch F G H, then
supposing the declination of the Sun to be 20 degrees, place them from B to O,
from which point O, take the shortest extent unto the line A B, which distance
being kept, fix one foot in the arch F G H, so that the other Dialling diagram
may but only touch the line A B at the nearest distance, so shall the fixed
foot rest at the point G, through which point G draw the line A G C, cutting the
arch B C D in the point C, so shall the arch B C be the Amplitude desired,
which in this example will be found to be 34 degrees 9 minutes, as before in
the 9 Chapter.

CHAP. XII. The elevation of the Pole, and the Amplitude of the Sun being
given, to find his Declination.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Amplitude to be 34 degrees. 9
min. place it from B to E, and from the point E take the nearest extent unto
the line A B, with which distance, setting one foot of your Compasses in the
center A, describe the arch G H I: then supposing the Latitude Dialling diagram
to be 52 degrees. 30 min. place it from D to C, from which point C, draw the line C
H A, cutting the arch G H I in the point H, from which point H, take the
nearest extent unto the line A B, with this distance, fixing one foot of your
Compasses in the arch B C D, as the other may but only touch the line A B at
the nearest extent, so shall the fixed foot rest at the point F, which shall be
20 degrees distance from the point B, the declination of the Sun desired.

CHAP. XIII. Having the Latitude of the place, and the Declination of the Sun,
to find his height in the Vertical Circle, or when he shall come to be due
East or West.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Latitude to be 52 degrees. 30
min, take it from your Scale and place it from B to C, then taking the nearest
extent from the point C unto the line A B, with one foot set in the center A,
with the other describe the arch G H I: Dialling diagram then supposing the Sun
to have 20 degrees. of declination, place it from B to O, from which point O take
the shortest extent unto the line A B, with this distance, fixing one foot in
the arch G H I, so that the other may but only touch the line A B at the
nearest extent, so shall the fixed foot rest in the point H, through which
point H draw the line A H E, cutting the arch B C D in the point E, so shall
the arch B E be the height of the Sun when he comes to be due East or West,
which being taken between your Compasses, and applied unto your Scale, will
give you 25 degrees. 32 min. the thing desired in this example.

CHAP. XIV. Having the Latitude of the place, and the Declination of the Sun,
to find the time when the Sun comes to be due East or West.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then placing the Latitude of the place
(which here we will suppose to be 52 degrees. 30 min.) from B to C, and draw the
line C E, then with the nearest distance from the point C unto the line A B,
which is the line C E, setting one foot of your Compasses in the Dialling
diagram center A, with the other draw the arch G H I: then supposing the
declination of the Sun to be 20 degrees, place it from B to F, from which point
F, lay a rule unto the center A, and where it crosses the line C E, there make
a mark as at O, then with the distance O E, fix one foot of your Compasses in
the arch G H I, after such manner, that the other foot may but only touch the
line A B at the nearest extent: So shall the fixed foot stay in the point H,
through which point H draw the line A H N, so shall D N be the quantity of time
from the Meridian, when the Sun comes to be due East or West, which in
degrees will here be found to be 73 degrees. 30 min. and these converted into time
(by allowing 15 degrees to an hour, and four minutes for a degree) will make
four hours and 54 minutes of an hour, that is, either at 4 a clock and 55
minutes in the afternoon, or at 7 a clock and 5 min. in the morning.

CHAP. XV. Having the Latitude of the place, and the Declination of the Sun, to
find what altitude the Sun shall have at the hour of six.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Latitude of the place to
be 52 degrees. 30 min. place it from Dialling diagram B to C, and from the point C,
take the shortest extent unto the line A B, with this distance setting one foot
in the center A, with the other draw the arch G H I, then supposing the
declination of the Sun to be 20 degrees. place it from B to E, and draw the line A
H E, cutting the arch G H E in the point H, from which point H take the
shortest extent unto the line A B, this distance being kept, fix one foot of
your Compasses in the arch B C D, in such sort that the other may but only
touch the line A B, so shall the fixed foot rest in the point O, whose distance
from the point B shall be the altitude of the Sun at the hour of six, which in
this example will be found to be 15 degrees 44 minutes the thing desired.

CHAP. XVI. Having the Latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun,
to find what Azimuth the Sun shall have at the hour of six.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Latitude to be 52 degrees, 30
min. place it from D to C, and draw the line A C, then supposing the
Declination to be 20 degrees, place Dialling diagram it from B to E, from which
point E draw the line E G, parallel to A B, until it cutteth the line A D in
the point G, and with the distance A G, describe the arch G H I, cutting the
line A C in the point H, through which point H draw the line O H P, parallel to
A B, then taking the length of the line G E betwixt your Compasses, place it
upon the line P O from P unto R, through which point R draw the line A R M,
cutting the arch B C D in M, so shall the arch B M be the Azimuth from the East
or West, which is here found to be 12 degrees 30 minutes.

CHAP. XVII. The Latitude of the place, the Almicanter, and Declination of the
Sun being given, to find the Azimuth.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Latitude to be 52 degrees. 30
min. setting it from B to C, draw the line A C, then supposing the declination
of the Dialling diagram Sun to be 11 degrees. 30 min. Northward, set it from B to
E, from which point E, take the nearest extent unto the line A B, and with this
distance, fixing one foot in the line A C, so as the other may but only touch
the line A B, make the mark F in the line A C: then supposing the height of the
Sun to be 30 degrees. 45 min. place it from B to G, from which point G, take the
nearest extent unto the line A D, and lay it down from A to N, then from the
aforesaid point G, take the shortest extent unto the line A B, and place it
from A to H, in the line A C, then take the distance F H betwixt your
Compasses, Here note, that if the Sun had been so low that the point H bad
fallen betwixt the center A and the point F, then should the arch D L have
showed the Azimuth from the North part of the Meridian.
and fix one foot in the line A C, so as the other may but touch the line A D,
so shall the Compasses stay in the point O, from whence take the shortest
extent unto the line A B, with which distance, setting one foot of your
Compasses in the point N, with the other foot describe the arch I, by the
convexity of which arch and the point A, draw the line A L, cutting the arch B
C D in the point L, so shall the arch B L be the Azimuth from the East or West,
and the arch L D the Azimuth from the South, which in this example will be
found to be 66 degrees. 43 min. the true Azimuth from the South: this is to be
understood when the Sun has North Declination.

But if the Sun has South Declination, then draw the following Quadrant A B C
D, and set 52 degrees. 30 min. from B to C, for the elevation of the Pole, and draw
the line C A, then supposing the Sun to have 11 degrees. 30 min. of South
declination, place it from B to E, and from the point E, take the nearest
extent unto the line A B, with which distance, fix one foot in the line A C, so
as the other foot may but only touch the line A D, and where the fixed foot so
rests, there make a mark, as at F: then place the height of the Sun, which
here we will suppose to be 13 degrees. 20 min. from B to G, from which point G,
take the nearest extent unto the line A D, and place it from A unto N in the
line A B, then take the nearest extent from the former point G unto the line A
B, with this distance fix one foot in the line A C, so as the other may but
only Dialling diagram touch the line A D, and where the fixed foot so rests,
there make a mark, as at O, from which point O take the shortest extent unto
the line A B, and place it from F to H, then with the distance HA, setting one
foot in the point N, with the other describe the arch line I, by the convexity
of which arch line, and the center point A, draw the line A L, cutting the arch
B C D in the point L, so shall the arch D L be the Azimuth of the Sun from the
South, which here will be found to be 49 degrees. 49 min. the thing desired.

CHAP. XVIII. The Latitude of the place, the Declination of the Sun, and the
Altitude of the Sun being given, to find the hour of the day.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Latitude to be 52 degrees. 20
min. place it from B unto C, and draw the line A C, then place the declination
of the Sun (which here let be 11 degrees. 30 min. South) from B unto E, from which
point E, take the nearest extent unto the line A B, this distance place from A
to F in the line A C, through which point F draw the line P F O parallel to A
B, then from the aforesaid point E, take the shortest extent unto the line A D,
which lay down from A to R in the line A B: then supposing the altitude of the
Sun to be 15 degrees. 24 min. Dialling diagram place it from B unto H, from which
point H take the shortest extent unto the line A B, and place it in the line A
D from D unto I, and take the distance A I, with which distance fix one foot in
the line A C so as the other may but just touch the line A D, and where the
fixed foot shall rest, make a mark as at N, then with the distance A N, place
one foot in R, with the other draw the arch L, by the convexity of which arch
line and the center A, draw the line A G, so shall the arch B G give the time
from the hour of six, and D G the time from noon, which in this example will
be found to be 45 degrees. which in time makes 3 hours; so that in the Latitude of
52 degrees. 20 min. the Sun having 11 degrees. 30 min. of South declination, and the
altitude in the morning to be 15 degrees. 24 min. it will appear to be 9 a clock;
but in the afternoon it would have been 3 a clock.

But if the declination had been North, then the distance from the point H to
the line A B, should have been placed from the center A toward the point I,
and the distance I P taken instead of A I, as by the next figure I will make
more plain.

First, draw the Quadrant A B C D as before, then place the Latitude 52 degrees. 20
min. from B to C, and draw the line A C, then let the declination be 11 degrees. 30
min. as before, place it from B to E, from which point E take the nearest
distance unto the line A B, and place it from A to F in the line A C, and
through the point F, draw the line O P parallel to A B, then from the aforesaid
point E, take the shortest extent unto the line A D, and place it in the line A
B from A unto R: then the altitude of the Sun being observed in the morning to
be 42 degrees 33 min. Dialling diagram I place it from B to H, from which point
H take the nearest extent unto the line A B. Now seeing the declination of the
Sun is supposed to be Northward, therefore place this last distance from the
center A unto I, and take the distance P I, with which distance fix one foot in
the line A C, so as the other may but only touch the line A D, and where the
fixed foot shall so rest, there make a mark as at N, then with the distance A
N, place one foot in the point R, and with the other draw the arch line L, by
the convexity of which arch line and the center A, draw the line A G, cutting
the arch B C D in the point G, so shall the arch B C give the quantity of time
from the hour of six, and the arch D G the quantity of time from the Meridian,
which in this example will be found to be about 30 degrees, that is in time two
hours; so that the observation being before noon as here, it will be 10 a
clock, if it had been in the afternoon it would have been two a clock.

And here note, that if the altitude of the Sun had been so small that the
point I had fallen betwixt the center A and the point P (which is the altitude
of the Sun at the hour of six) then should that part of the arch B C D toward
B give the quantity of time, either before six in the morning, or after six in
the evening.

CHAP. XIX. Having the Azimuth, the Suns Altitude, and the Declination, to
find the hour of the day.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the Sun to have 11 degrees. 30
min. declination, place it from B to E, and from the point E take the shortest
extent unto the line A D, with which distance, place one foot in the center A,
and with the other describe the arch G H I, then let the Azimuth be 66 degrees. 43
min. as it was found by the former part of the 17 Chapter, which place from B
to F, and from the point F take the nearest extent unto the line A B, which
distance place from G to H, in the arch G H I, through which point H draw the
line A H C, then the altitude of the Sun being 30 degrees. 45 min. place it from B
to L, and from the point K take the nearest Dialling diagram extent unto the
line A D, with which distance, setting one foot in the center A, with the other
describe the arch NR, then with the distance NR, fix one foot in the arch line
B C D, so as the other may but only touch the line A B, so shall the fixed foot
rest in the point M, and the arch B M shall show the hour from the Meridian,
which will be found in this example to be 53 degrees. 40 min. that is three hours,
and something better then 34 min. from the Meridian.

CHAP. XX. Having the hour of the day, the Suns altitude, and the declination,
to find the Azimuth.
FIrst, make the Quadrant A B C D, then supposing the declination of the Sun to
be 11 degrees. 30 min. North as before, place it from B to E, then suppose the
altitude of the Sun to be 30 degrees. 45 min. place it from B to L, from which
point L, take the shortest extent unto the line A D, with this distance,
setting one foot in the center A, describe the arch N R, now let the arch for
the hour be 53 degrees. 40 min. as it was found by the last Chapter, this set from
B unto M, and from the point M take the shortest extent unto the line Dialling
diagram A B, and place it from N to R, in the arch N R, and by the point R,
draw the line A R C, then from the point E take the nearest extent unto the
line A D, with which distance upon the center A, draw the arch G H, then with
the distance G H, fix one foot in the arch B C D, so that the other may but
touch the line A B, then will the fixed foot rest in the point F, and the arch
BF will show the Azimuth from the South, which in this example will be found to
be 66 degrees. 43 min. the thing desired.

CHAP. XXI. Having the Latitude of the place, and the Declination of the Sun,
to find the Ascensionall difference.
FIrst, draw the Quadrant A B C D, then place the Latitude (which here let be
52 degrees. 30 min.) from D to C, and draw the line COP parallel to AD, then with
the distance C P, upon the center A, describe the arch G H I, then place the
declination, being 20 degrees, from B to F, then lay your rule from the center
A upon the point F, Dialling diagram and draw F O, cutting C P in the point O,
through which point O draw the line O H R, cutting the arch G H I in the point
H, through which point H draw the line A H E, cutting the arch B C D in E, so
shall the arch B E be the difference ascensionall, and will be found in this
example to be 28 degrees. 19 min. which resolved into time does give one hour, and
something better then 53 min. for the difference betwixt the Suns rising or
setting, and the hour of six, according to the time of the year.

CHAP. XXII. Having the Declination of the Sun to find the Right Ascension.
FIrst, describe the Quadrant A B C D, then place the greatest declination of
the Sun from B to E, and draw the line E P parallel to A D, and with the
distance E P, with one foot in A, describe the arch G H I, then set the
Declination of the Sun given 20 degrees, from B unto F, and laying your Rule
upon the center A and the point F, draw the line F O Dialling diagram cutting E
P in O, through which point O draw the line O H R parallel to A B, cutting the
arch G H I in H, and through the point H draw the line A H C, cutting the arch
B C D in the point C, so shall B C be 56 degrees. 50 min. the right Ascension
desired.

CHAP. XXIII. Having the Right Ascension of the Sun or Star, together with the
difference of their Ascensions, to find the Oblique Ascension.
THe right Ascension of any point of the heavens being known, the difference of
the Ascension is either to be added thereunto, or else to be subtracted from
it, according as the Sun or Star is situated in the Northern or Southern
Signs. As for example: If the Sun be in any of these six Northern Signs
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, or Virgo, then the difference of the
Ascensions is to be subtracted from the right Ascension, and the remainder is
the Oblique Ascension; therefore let the fourth degree of Gemini be given, the
Right Ascension whereof is found to be 62 degrees, or 4 hours, and 8 min. and
the difference of Ascension (where the Pole is elevated 52 degrees. 30 min.) is 30
degrees. 3 min. or in time, 2 hours and something better, which being taken from
the Right Ascension, leaves 2 hours and 8 min. or 32 degrees. 5 min. which is the
Oblique Ascension of the Sun in the fourth degree of Gemini. But if the Sun be
upon the South side of the Equinoctial, either in Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius,
Capricornus, Aquarius, or Pisces, then the difference of the Ascensions is to
be added unto the right Ascension, and the sum of them both will be the Oblique
Ascension. As suppose the fourth degree of Sagitarius to be given, the Right
Ascension whereof is found to be 242 degrees, or 16 hours 8 min. and the
difference of Ascensions is 30 degrees. 3 min. or 2 hours, which being added unto
the Right Ascension, does make 18 hours 8 min. or in degrees, 272 degrees. 3 min.
which is the Oblique Ascension of the Sun in the fourth degree of Sagitarius.
But if you would find the Oblique Descension, you must work directly contrary
to these Rules given.

CHAP. XXIV. How to find the Altitude of the Sun without Instrument.
IN the third Chapter of this Book it is showed how to find the Altitude of
the Sun by a Gnomon set perpendicular to the Horizon, but seeing the ground is
so unlevel it is not so ready for this our purpose, and perhaps some may have
occasion to find the altitude of the Sun, and thereby the Azimuth or hour of
the day, according to the 17 or 18 Chapters, and yet may be unprovided of
Instruments to perform the same, or at least may be absent from them, therefore
it will not be un-needfull to show the finding of the same without the Gnomon
or other Instrument.

Take therefore a Trencher, or any simple boards end, of what fashion soever,
such as you can get, make thereon two pricks, as A and B, then prick in a pin,
nail, or short wire in one of Dialling diagram the points, as at A, whereupon
hang a thread with a plu^met, then lift up this board toward the Sun, till the
shadow of the pin at A, come directly on the point B, and directly where the
thread then falls, there make a mark as at E, under the thread, then with
your Rule and Compass draw the lines A B and A E, and find the angle B A E
(by the second Chapter) for that is the complement of the altitude of the Sun:
or, when you have drawn A B and A E, you may make the Quadrant B A F by the
third Chapter, and then the angle E A F shall be your altitude desired.

CHAP. XXV. How to find out the Latitude of a place, or the Poles elevation
above the Horizon, by the Sun.
SEeing that throughout this Book, the Latitude of the place is supposed to be
known, when as every one perhaps cannot tell which way to find it out,
therefore it will not be un-needfull to show how it may be readily attained,
sufficiently for our purpose.

First, therefore you must get the Meridian Altitude, which you may do by
observing diligently about noon a little before, and a little after, still
observing until you perceive the Sun to begin to fall again, then marking what
was his greatest altitude, will serve for this our present purpose.

Having gotten the Meridian altitude by this, and the Declination by the
seventh Chapter, you may find the Latitude of the place, or the elevation of
the Pole above the Horizon after this manner. If the Sun has North
Declination, then substract the Declination out of the Meridian altitude, and
the remainder shall be the height of the Equinoctial. But if the Sun has
South Declination, then add the Declination to the Meridian altitude, so shall
the sum of them give the altitude of the Equinoctial, which being taken out of
the Quadrant or 90 degrees, leaves the Latitude of your place, or the
elevation of the Pole above your Horizon.

As for example, upon the first day of May 1650, the Meridian altitude of the
Sun being observed to be 55 degrees. 35 min. upon which day I find the Suns place
to be in 20 degrees. 48 min. of Taurus, and the declination 18 degrees. 00 min. and
because the Declination is North, I substract 18 degrees. 00 min. out of the
Meridian altitude 55 degrees. 35 min. and there remains 37 degrees. 35 min. the height
of the Equinoctial, and this taken out of 90 degrees, leaves 52 degrees. 25 min.
for the Latitude of Thuring.

But it may be required sometimes for you to make a Dial for a Town or Country
whose Latitude you know not, neither can come thither conveniently to observe
it. Here is therefore added a Table showing the Latitude of the most principal
Cities and Towns in England, so that being required to make a Dial for any of
those places, you need but look in your Table, and there you have the Latitude
thereof. But if the Town you seek be not in the Table, look what Town in the
Table lies near unto it, and make your Dial to that Latitude, which will
occasion little difference.

A TABLE showing the Latitude of the most principal Cities and Towns in
ENGLAND.
Names of the places. Latitude Names of the places. Latitude d m d m St. Albons
51 55 Hull 53 50 Barwick 55 49 London 51 32 Bedford 52 18 Lancaster 54 8
Bristol 51 32 Leicester 52 40 Boston 53 2 Lincoln 53 15 Cambridge 52 17
Newcastle 54 58 Chester 53 20 Northampton 52 18 Coventry 52 30 Oxford 51 54
Chichester 50 56 Shrewsbury 52 48 Colchester 52 4 Warwick 52 25 Darby 53 6
Winchester 51 10 Grantham 52 58 Worcester 52 20 Halifax 53 49 Yarmouth 52 45
Hereford 52 14 York. 54 0

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK. Showing Geometrically how to describe the Houre-lines upon all
sorts of Planes, howsoever, (or in what Latitude soever) situated, two manner
of ways, without exceeding the limits of the Plane.
CHAP. I How to examine a Plane for a Horizontall Dial.
FOrasmuch as it is necessary before the drawing of any Dial, to know how your
plane is already placed, or how it ought afterward to be placed; it is
therefore expedient to show how it may be attained unto without the help of a
Quadrant, (or any such like Instrument) which for this purpose is very useful.

First, take any board that has one straight side, and an inch or more from
the straight side, draw a line parallel thereto, about the middle of which line
erect a perpendicular line, and at the center, where these two lines meet, cut
out a hollow piece from the edge of the parallel line for a plummet to hang in:
then if your plane seem to be level with the horizon, you may try it by
applying the straight side of your board thereunto, and holding the
perpendicular line upright, and holding a thread and Dialling diagram plummet
in your hand, so as the plummet may have free play in the hole; for then if the
thread shall fall on the perpendicular line, which way soever you turn the
board, it is an horizontall plane.

As for example, let the figure A B C D be a plane supposed to stand level
with the Horizon, and for to try the same, I take the simple boarde GOH, having
one straight side, as G H, then drawing a parallel thereto, I cross it at
right angles with the perpendicular O E, and at the point of intersection I cut
out a little bit as at E, for the plummet to play in, then applying the side G
H to the plane, with holding the perpendicular O E upright, and holding a
thread with a plummet to play in the hole E, and finding the thread to fall
directly on the perpendicular E O, which way soever I turn the board, I
therefore conclude it to be a horizontall plane.

CHAP. II. Of the trying of Planes, whether they be Erect or Inclining, and to
find the quantity of Inclination.
FOr the distinguishing of planes, because their inclination and declination
may be diverse, we will consider three lines belonging to every plane: the
first is the Horizontall line; the second the perpendicular line, crossing the
horizontall at right angles; the third is the Axis of the plane, crossing both
the horizontall line, and his perpendicular, and the plane it self, at right
angles; the extremity of which Axis may be called, the pole of the planes
horizontall line.

The perpendicular line does help to find the inclination, the horizontall
line with his Axis to find the Declination, and the pole of the planes
horizontall line, to give denomination unto the plane.

When the plane stands upright, pointing directly into the Zenith, it makes
right angles with the Horizon, and is therefore called an erect plane, and a
plumb line drawn thereon is called a Vertical line; as in this figure, the
plane G H L I is erect, and the line H I is the Vertical line.

Now for the trying of this plane, if you apply the straight side of your board
vertically thereto, as here you see done in the figure C, and either hanging a
thread and plummet in the point M, or holding up a thread and plummet with your
hand, you find the thread to fall directly on the parallel line M N it is an
erect plane, but if the thread will cross the line M N, it is no erect plane,
but inclines to the Horizon.

And if you find your plane to be erect, you may by applying your board
thereto, with the thread and plummet falling on the parallel line M N, draw the
vertical line H I by the edge of your board, the vertical line being drawn,
you may cross it at right angles with the line G L, which shall be level with
your Horizon, and therefore called the horizontall line of the plane.

If the plane shall be found to incline to the horizon, you may find out the
inclination after this manner.

Apply your board to the plane, as you see here by the figure B, in the plane F
K E H, then holding up a thread and plummet that it may fall upon the
perpendicular line O E, and turning about your board, till the straight side
thereof lie close with the plane, and the thread fall on the perpendicular line
O E, so the line drawn by the straight side of the board, shall be an
horizontall line, which here in this figure will be the line F E.

This being done, cross the horizontall line at right angles with the
perpendicular H K, then set the straight side of your board upon the line H K,
which is perpendicular to the horizontall line, with holding the board up
right, and holding up a thread and plummet, so that it may have free course to
play by the side of the board, which it may have by letting the plummer fall
within the hole, a little below X in the figure A: the thread thus hanging,
mark two points directly under it, the one at X where the thread crosses the
parallel line on the board, the other at T, at the upper side thereof, and so
by drawing the line T X, you have the angle T X V, which is called the angle of
Reclination, and it is the angle contained betwixt the plane and the vertical
line passing from the Zenith to the Nadir, the complement of which angle is the
inclination of the plane, and it is the angle that the plane makes with the
Horizon, the thing here desired.

Dialling diagram

By what is said here of finding the inclination of the upper face, the
inclination of the under face may soon be had, seeing they are both of one
quantity in themselves, therefore, if you apply the straight side of your board
to the perpendicular line of the under face, and hang the thread and plummet in
any part of the parallel line, the angle that is made by that parallel line and
the thread, shall be the complement of the angle of the inclination of the
plane to the Horizon.

CHAP. III. To find out the Declination of a Plane.
THe Declination of a plane is always reckoned in the Horizon, and it is the
angle contained between the line of East and West, and the horizontall line
upon the plane.

For the finding out of this Declination, first, take any board that has but
one straight side, and draw a line parallel thereto, as was done in the first
Chapter, and having drawn an horizontall line upon your plane, apply the
straight side of your board thereunto, holding it parallel to the Horizon, as
in the figure of the last Chapter, where the board D is applied to the
horizontall line G L, then the Sun shining upon the board, hold out a thread
and plummet, so as the thread being vertical, the shadow of the thread may
cross the parallel line S P upon the board, in which shadow make two points,
the one where the shadow crosses the parallel, as at P, the other about R, so
have you the angle S P R, which is made between the horizontall line of the
plane, and the Azimuth wherein the Sun is at the time of observation: at this
same instant, or as near as may be, must you take the Altitude of the Sun;
these two being done diligently, will help you to the planes Declination as
follows.

First, describe the Circle B C D E, which shall represent the Horizontall
Circle, and draw the diameter B A C, representing the horizontall line of the
plane, in the last chapter set out by the line G L, then having found S P R in
the last Chapter (which is the angle made by the horizontall line of the plane,
and the Azimuth wherein the Sun was at that time of observation) to be about 24
degrees. 10 min. I place it here from B the West end of the horizontall line to G
Dialling diagram Southwards, because the angle was taken at that end of the
line, at which instant the altitude of the Sun (by the 24 Chapter of the second
Book) being found to be 13 degrees. 20 m, having 11 degrees. 30 min. South Declination,
it will, by the 17 Chapter of the said second Book, be made to appear, that the
Azimuth of the Sun is 40 degrees. 11 min. from the West toward the South, and
therefore the West point is 40 degrees. 11 min. from the Sun toward the North; Now
taking this 40 degrees. 11 min. and placing them from G the place of the Sun at the
time of observation, to H Northwards, you shall have the true West point, and
if you draw the line H R, it shall represent both East and West, and crossing
the line H R at right angles, in the center A, you shall have the line D E for
the North and South; and if you cross the horizontall line B A C in the point
A, at right angles with the line S N, it shall be the Axis of the plane, the
two poles whereof S and N, shall be the poles of the planes horizontall line.

Now the angle of declination here required, is the angle B A H, or E A S, for
look how much the horizontall line of the plane declineth from the line of East
and West, so much does the poles of the planes horizontall line decline from
the North and South toward either East or West, either of which angles in this
example will be found to be about 16 degrees. the declination of the plane from the
South point E, Eastward.

CHAP. IV. How to draw the Meridian line upon an Horizontall plane, the Sun
shining thereon.
IF your plane be level with the Horizon, describe thereon a Circle as B C D
E, then holding up a thread and plummet, so as the thread being vertical, the
shadow thereof may fall upon the center A, and draw the line of shadow Dialling
diagram C E, then take the altitude of the Sun at the same instant (or as near
as may be) and by the 17 Chapter of the former Book get the Azimuth of the sun,
which let be (as in that example it was found) 66 degrees. 43 min. from the South
toward the East, this 66 degrees. 43 min. I place from E the point of the shadow
Southwards to B, and draw the line B A D, which is the meridian line desired.

CHAP. V. Of making the Equinoctial Dial.
AN Equinoctial plane is that which is parallel to the Equinoctial Circle of
the Sphere, and therefore having drawn the horizontall line B C, and crossed it
with the perpendicular D E, at right angles in the point A, if by Dialling
diagram the second Chapter you shall find the inclination of the plane toward
the South to be equal to the complement of your Latitude, and by the third
Chapter you find the horizontall line directly in the line of East and West,
and so to have no declination, you may be sure this plane is parallel to the
Equinoctial Circle, and is therefore called an Equinoctial plane.

This Dial is no other then a Circle divided into 24 equal parts, by which
divisions and the center A, you may draw so many hour lines as shall be
necessary. As you may see here done in the Circle B D C E, which is divided
equally into 24 equal parts, and hour lines drawn from the center A to so
many of them as is needful, the line D E, which is the line of inclination, is
the Meridian or 12 of clock line: his Style is no more but a straight pin or
wire plumb erected in the center.

This Dial, though, of all other, he be the simplest, yet is he mother to all
the rest, for out of him, as from a root, is derived the projectment of those
24 hour lines on any other great Circle or plane whatsoever.

CAAP. VI. The drawing of a Dial upon the direct Polar Plane.
A Direct Polar plane, is that which is parallel to the Circle of the hour of
six, therefore, having drawn the horizontall line A B, rnd crossed it at right
angles about the middle of the line at C, with the perpendicular C E, if you
shall find the planes inclination toward the North to be equal to the
Latitude of the place, and the horizontall line directly in the line of East
and West, and so to have no declination, you may be sure this plane lies
parallel to the hour of six, and is therefore called a Polar plane. The
horizontall line being drawn at the length of the plane, divide it into seven
equal parts, and set down one of them in the line of inclination from C unto
D, and upon the center D describe the Equinoctial Circle, which you may divide
into 24 equal parts if you will, but one quarter thereof into six will serve
as well: then at the Dialling diagram distance C E draw the line F G parallel
to A B: Then having divided the Equator either into 24 equal parts, or one
quarter thereof into six, you may by a rule laid upon the center D, and each of
those six parts, make marks in the horizontall line A B (which here is instead
of the contingent line) as you may see by the pricked lines, these distances
from the Meridian, being applied upon the same line on the other side of the
Meridian, and also on both sides the Meridian in the upper line, the lines
drawn from point to point, parallel to the Meridian C E, shall be the hour
lines, the line C E shall be the Meridian line, the hour of 12, and must also
be the substilar line, whereon the style must stand, which may be a plate of
iron or some other metal, being so broad as the semidiameter of the Circle is,
as is showed in the figure. This style must be placed along upon the line of
12, making right angles therewith, the upper edge whereof must be parallel to
the plane; so shall it cast a true shadow upon the hour lines. The under face
of this Polar plane, and also of the former Equinoctial plane, is made
altogether like unto the upper faces here described, without any difference at
all.

CHAP. VII. The making of an erect Meridian Dial.
A Meridian plane is that which is parallel to the Meridian Circle of the
Sphere; therefore having drawn the horizontall line A B, and finding it to
decline 90 degrees. from the South, the plane being erect, I conclude it to lie
parallel to the Meridian Circle of the Sphere, and is therefore called a
Meridian plane.

The horizontall line being drawn, at the North end thereof as at A, make an
angle equal to the elevation of the Equinoctial, which is in this example 37
degrees. 30 min. and draw the line A C D so long as your plane will give you leave,
making an angle in the point A equal to the Equinoctials height, so shall the
South end of this line behold precisely the Equinoctial Circle, this line
divide into five equal parts, and with the same wideness of the Compasses,
with one foot in E (which is the fourth division from A, or the first from D)
describe the Circle D H, through the center whereof draw a Diameter, cutting
the former Diameter D H at right angles in the center E, this Diameter shall
lie parallel to the Axl^tree of the world, and be the line for the hour of
six, then at the outsides of the Circle draw two touch lines, one beneath, the
other above the Circle, so that they may be both parallel to the middle line,
then divide one quarter of the Circle into six equal parts, and place the Rule
upon the center E, and each of those parts, mark where it touches the line of
contingence; as here you may see it does in the points 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11,
from which points, if you draw lines parallel to the line of six, they shall be
the hour lines here desired, and shall be parallel one to the other: the
distance betwixt 6 and 7 is the same with 6 and 5, and the distance Dialling
diagram between 6 and 8 is the same with the distance betwixt 6 and 4, and so
you have all the hour points in the upper touch line, and if you transfer
these distances from the hour of six into the other touch line likewise from
the line of six, you may the better by the opposite points draw the lines
parallel to the line of six.

For the style of this Dial it may be either a plate of some metal, being so
broad as the semidiameter of the circle is, and so placed perpendicularly along
over the line of the hour of six, the upper edge thereof being parallel to the
plane, or it may be a straight pin fixed in the center of the circle, making
right angles with the plane, being just so long as the Semidiameter of the
Circle is, only showing the hour with the very top or end thereof.

Dialling diagram

This plane has two faces, one to the East, the other to the West, the making
whereof are both alike, only in naming the hours, for the one contains the
hours for the forenoon, and the other for the afternoon, as you may perceive
by the figures.

CHAP. VIII. To draw a Dial upon an Horizontall plane.
AN Horizontall plane is that which is parallel to the Horizontall Circle of
the Sphere, which being found by the first Chapter to be level with the
Horizon, you may by the fourth Chapter draw the Meridian line A B serving for
the Meridian, the hour of 12, and the substilar: in this Meridian make choice
of a center as at C, through which point C draw the line D E, crossing the
Meridian at right angles, this line shall be the line of East and West, and is
the six a clock line both for morning and evening.

Then by the second Chapter of the second Book draw the line S C; making the
angle S C A equal to the Latitude of the place, which here we will suppose to
be 52 degrees. 30 min. this line shall represent the cock of the Dial, and the
Axletree of the World, then at the North end of the Meridian line, draw another
line as F G, crossing the Meridian in the point A at right angles, this line is
called the Touch-line, or line of contingence. Then set one foot of your
Compasses in the point A, and with the other take the nearest extent unto the
line S C or the Style, with this distance turning your Compasses about, with
one foot still in the point A, with the other make a mark in the Meridian as at
I, which shall be the center of the Equinoctial, upon which describe the
Equinoctial Circle A D B E, with this same distance, setting one foot in the
point A, make a mark^^ F on the one side of the Meridian, and another at G on
the other side thereof, both which must be in the line of Contingence, by which
two points, and the center C, you may draw the hour lines of 3 and 9.

Dialling diagram

This same distance of your Compasses being kept, with one foot still in the
center A, with the other make the marks T and V in the Equinoctial Circle,
each of which distances is an arch of 60 degrees, or four hours of time, the
half of which arch is 30 degrees, or two hours from the Meridian, this
divided in the half will be 15 degrees. or one hour from the Meridian; then
laying your rule upon the center I of the Equinoctial, and upon these two last
divisions in the circle thereof, where the rule shall touch the line of
contingence, there mark it as at H and O, by which points and the center C, you
may draw the hourlines of 10 and 11; the like may you do on the other side of
the meridian, so have you six of your hour lines drawn: and now because the
contingent will outrun our plane, we may from the intersection of the hours
of 9 and 3 with the touch line draw the lines F D and G E parallel to the
meridian A B, until they cut the line of East and West in the points D and E,
then draw the lines A D and A E, this being done, set one foot of your
compasses in the point H, and with the other take the nearest extent unto the
line A E; this distance being kept, fix one foot in the line G E, so as the
other may but touch the line A E; so shall the fixed foot rest in the point N,
by which and the center C, you may draw the 7 a clock hour-line: in like manner
may you place one foot in the point O, and with the other take the shortest
extent unto the line A E, with this distance fixing one foot in the line G E,
so as the other may but only touch the line A E; so shall the fixed foot rest
in the point R, by which and the center C you may draw the 8 a clock hour-line,
the like may be done on the other side of the meridian, or you may by these
distances thus found prick out the like on the other side of the meridian.

Thus by dividing but half a quarter of the Equinoctial Circle into three
equal parts, you may describe your whole Dial.

And whereas in Summer, the 4 and 5 in the morning, and also 7 and 8 at
evening, shall be necessary in this kind of Dial: prolong or draw the lines of
4 and 5 at evening beyond the center C, and they shall show the hour of 4 and 5
in the morning, and likewise the 7 and 8 in the morning for 7 and 8 at evening.

What is here spoken concerning the hours, the like is to be done in drawing
the half hours, as well in this kind as in all them which follow.

The style must be fixed in the center C, hanging directly over the meridian
line A C, with so great an angle as the lines S C A makes, which is the true
pattern of the cock.

This and all other kinds of Dials may be drawn upon a clean paper, and then
with the help of your compasses placed on your plane.

CAAP. IX. To draw a Dial upon an erect direct vertical Plane, commonly
called a South or North Dial.
A Vertical plane is that which is parallel to the prime vertical Circle, it
has two faces, one to the South the other to the North; therefore having drawn
the Horizontall line A B, and from the middle thereof let fall the
perpendicular C D, which if you find by the second Chapter to be erect, and
the Horizontall line A B to lie in the line of East and West, and so to have no
declination, you may be sure this plane is parallel to the prime vertical
Circle of the Sphere, and therefore is called a vertical plane.

This perpendicular C D shall serve for the meridian, the hour of 12, and the
substilar line, which is the line over which the Style or Gnomon in your Dial
directly hangs.

The Horizontall line A B shall serve for the hour lines of six, both for
morning and evening.

Then (by the second Chapter of the second Book) draw the line S C, making the
angle S C D equal to the Latitudes complement, which in this example is 37
degr. 30 minutes, this line S D shall represent the axletree of the world, and
if you draw the line S D square to the meridian, you shall have the Triangle S
C D for the true pattern of your Dials cock: then cross the meridian (in some
point thereof as at E) at right angles, with the line F G, serving for the
touch-line, then taking the shortest extent from the point E unto the line S C,
place it in the meridian from E to I, which point shall be the center of the
Equinoctial Circle, therefore upon the center I, describe the circle A E B for
the Equator: this distance of your compasses being kept, set one foot in the
point E, and with the other set out the equal distances E G and E F in the
contingent line, which shall be the points through which you must draw the
hour lines of 9 and 3 from the point C, the center of the Dial; the same
distance of your compasses being still kept, with one foot in the point E, with
the other make a mark in the Equinoctial Circle as at H. So shall the arch E H
contain 60 degr. or four hours of time, which arch you may divide into four
equal parts, and by laying your rule upon the center I, and those two
divisions next the meridian C D you may make two marks in the line of
contingence, as at N and O; through which two points, and from the center C may
you draw the hour lines of 10 and 11, and now because the touch-line will
outrun the plane, you may from the intersections of the hour-points of 9 and 3
in the line of contingence, draw the lines A F and B G parallel to the meridian
C D, until they cut the Horizontall line A B, then draw the lines A E and B E,
this being done, set one foot in the point O, and with the other take the
shortest extent unto the Dialling diagram line A E: with this distance set one
foot in the line A F, so as the other may but touch the line A E at the nearest
extent, and the fixed foot shall rest in the point T, by which and the center
C, you may draw the 7 a clock hour-line: in like manner may you place one foot
in the point N, and with the other take the shortest extent unto the line A E,
with which distance fix one foot in the line A F, as that the other being
turned about, may but only touch the line A B, so shall the fixed foot rest in
the point V, by which and the center C, you may draw the 8 a clock hour-line,
or you may extend the line A B a little beyond the points A and B, and take the
distance E O, and set it from A to R, or from B to R, then lay a Rule upon the
points R and O, and where you shall see it cross either the line A F or B G,
there make a mark as at T, which shall be the point, through which the hour of 7
or 5 must be drawn from the center as before, so likewise may you take the
distance E N, and set it from A to P and from B to P, and laying your Rule upon
the two points P and N, where you shall see it cross the lines A F or B G,
there make a mark as at V, which shall be the point for the hour of 8 or 4;
this is in effect no more but to draw a line parallel to the line A E or B E by
the point O, and this line shall cut the line A F or B G in the point T, which
shall be the points for the hour of 7 or 5 as before: and so you may by the
point N draw a line parallel to the line A E or B E, and where it shall cross
the line A F or B G, there make a mark as at V, which shall be the points for
the hour of 8 or 4.

Thus you may see, that by dividing the Radius of the Equinoctial Circle into
four equal parts, you may describe your whole Dial, if it has no
declination; for having with this Radius pricked out the lines of 3 and 9, and
placed the lines for 10 and 11, these two distances from the hour of 12 shall
give the like for the hour of 1 and 2 on the other side of the meridian, and
having drawn the lines for 7 and 8 by the former rules, you may take their
distances from the hour of 6, and place them on the other side of the Dial
from 6 to 5 and 4: so have you all your hour lines drawn, and yet we have not
outrun the limits of our plane, which is an inconvenience, unto which the most
are subject. Now seeing the Triangle S C D is the true pattern of this Dials
cock, and that this is the South face of this plane, therefore the center will
be upward, and the stile-point downward, hanging directly over the meridian
line.

But if it had been the North face of this plane, you must have proceeded in
all things as before, but only in placing the Dial, and naming the hours;
for if it be the North face, the center must be in the lower part of the
meridian line, and the style and hour lines point upwards, as you may see in
this figure following.

Dialling diagram

CHAP. X. To draw a Dial upon a direct vertical plane, inclining to the
Horizon.
ALL those planes that have their Horizontall line lying East and West, are in
that respect said to be direct vertical planes; if they be also upright
passing through the Zenith, they are erect direct vertical planes; if they
incline to the pole, they are direct polar planes; if to the Equinoctial, they
are called Equinoctial planes, and are described before: if to none of these
three points, they are then called direct verticals inclining.

In all Dials that decline not, two things must be had before you can make the
Dial, the first is the meridian or 12 a clock line, wherein the cock must
stand, and the second is the elevation of the pole above the same line.

For the Horizontall plane, the meridian line is drawn by the 4 Chapter, and
the elevation of the pole above the plane is always equal to the latitude of
the place; and in erect direct verticals, the perpendicular or vertical line
is the meridian or 12 a clock line, and the elevation of the pole above the
plane is always equal to the complement of the latitude, the North pole being
elevated above the North face, and the South pole above the South face thereof.

And in these verticals inclining being direct, the line of inclination is
their meridian, and line wherein the cock must stand, but for the elevation of
the cock, we must first consider, whether the plane inclines toward the South
or toward the North; if it inclines toward the South, add the inclination
to your latitude, the sum of both shall be the elevation of the pole above
the plane, and if the sum shall be just 90 degrees, it is an Equinoctial
plane, and is described before in the 5 Chapter, but if the sum shall exceed
90 degrees, take it out of 180, and that which remains shall be the elevation
of the pole above the plane.

As for example in the latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. let a plane be found to
incline Southwards 20 degrees, this 20 degrees. added to 52 degrees. 30 min. the
latitude of the place, the sum will be 72 degr. 30 min. the elevation of the
pole above the plane, with which you may proceed to draw a Dial by the eighth
or ninth Chapters as if it were a horizontall plane, for their difference is
nothing, but in the height of the style, which is the elevation of the pole
above the plane. For this plane shall be parallel to that Horizon, whose
latitude is 72 degrees. 30 min. lying both under one and the same meridian.

But if the inclination be Northward, compare the inclination with your
latitude, and take the lesser out of the greater; so shall the difference be
the elevation of the pole above the plane, but if there be no difference, it is
a direct polar plane, and is described before in the sixth Chapter.

As in the latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. a plane being proposed to incline
toward the North 25 degrees. this 25 degr. being taken out of 52 degrees 30
minutes leaves 27 degrees. and 30 minutes for the elevation of the pole above the
plane. Now this plane being parallel to that Horizon, whose latitude is 27 degrees.
30 min. lying both under one and the same meridian, therefore you may proceed
to make this Dial, as if you were to make an Horizontall Dial in that
country.

Each of these planes have two faces; one toward the Zenith, the other toward
the Nadir; but what is said of the one is common to the other; they only
differ in this, the one has the South, the other has the North pole elevated
above their faces.

For upon the upper faces of all North incliners, whose inclination is less
then the latitude of the place, on the under faces of all North incliners,
whose inclination is greater then the latitude of the place; and on the upper
faces of all South incliners, the North pole is elevated; and therefore
contrarily, on the under faces of all North incliners, whose inclination is
less then the latitude of the place, on the upper faces of all North
incliners, whose inclination is greater then the latitude of the place; and on
the under faces of all South incliners, the South pole is elevated: unto one of
which poles, the styles of all Dialls must point directly.

CAAP. XI. To draw a Dial upon an erect, or vertical plane declining,
commonly called a South or North erect declining Dial.
ALL upright planes whereon a man may draw a vertical line; are in that
respect said to be erect or vertical; if their horizontall line shall lie
directly East and West, they are direct vertical planes; if directly North and
South, they are properly called Meridian planes, and are described before.

If they behold none of these four principal parts of the world, but shall
stand between the prime vertical circle, and the Meridian, they are then
called by the general name of declining verticals, or by the name of South or
North erect declining planes.

In all such declining planes, because the Meridian of the place (which in all
upright planes is the vertical line, and serves for the hour of 12) and the
Meridian of the plane deflecteth one from the other; therefore we must find
out and place the Meridian of the plane, (which is the line over which the
style directly hangs, and is here called the Substile) and likewise the
elevation of the pole above the plane: both which may be easily performed in
this manner.

First, draw a blind line parallel to the Horizon, which may be the line A B,
and from a point therein as at C, let fall the perpendicular C D, serving for
the Meridian of the place, and the hour of 12, and through some place of this
Meridian as at E, draw the line F G at right angles.

Then having by the third chapter examined this plane, and finding it to
decline 30 degrees. from the South toward the East, I draw an arch of a circle
upon the center C, with my compasses opened to the Radius of the Scale; in
which arch I place the declination of the plane from E to H, on the same side
of the meridian with the declination of the plane, as here you see; then set
the complement of the latitude, which is 37 degr. 30 min. in the same arch from
E to M, and draw the line C H for the declination of the plane, and the line C
M G cutting the line F G in the point G for the complement of your latitude.

This being done, take the distance E G; and set it in the line of declination
from C to S, from which point S draw the line S L square to the meridian C D,
then take S L and set it from E to O in the line E F, and draw the line C O,
which is the Meridian of this plane, or the line of the Substile, Here note,
that in all decliners, the Substile goes from the Meridian, toward that coast
which is contrary to the coast of the planes declination.
wherein the style must stand directly up from the plane, then through the
point O draw the line P K, square to the Substile C O, which shall be the
touch-line or line of contingence.

Then take the distance C L, and set it in the line of contingence from O to P,
and draw the line C P for the style.

This done, set one foot in the point O, Dialling diagram and with the other
take the shortest extent unto the style C P with this distance, one foot
remaining still in the point O, the other turned toward C, make a mark at y in
the line of the Substile, which shall be the center whereon you must describe
the Equinoctial circle.

Now having drawn the line NT through the center C, and parallel to the
touch-line I K, which will be square to the Substile C O, I take the distance O
y, which is the Radius upon which the Equinoctial circle was drawn, and place
it on both sides the substile, in the line of contingence from O to I, and from
O to K, and in his parallel line from C to G, and from C to R, and draw G I and
R K, then laying your rule upon the point y, the center of the Equinoctial,
and a the point of intersection of the touch-line with the meridian, and where
it cutteth the circles circumference, there must you begin to divide it into 24
equal parts, but those six shall be only in use which are next the line of
contingence, that is, three of each side of the substile next thereunto.

Then place your Ruler upon the center y, and upon each of these six points of
the Equator, and where it touches the line of contingence, there make marks,
by which and the center C, draw those six hour lines next the Substilar; which
shall all fall between the points I and K in the touch-line, three whereof
shall fall betwixt O and K, and three betwixt O and I, thus have you 6 of your
12 hours, viz. 12. 11. 10. 9. 8. and 7. then take the distance from the point O
to the intersection of the hour of 12 with the touch-line, and place it from O
to b, and from G to N, then laying your Rule upon these two points N and b,
where it shall cross the line G I, shall be the point through which you may
draw the six a clock hour-line; in like manner, take the distance from O to the
line for 11 a clock, and set it from O to c, and from G to Z, then lay the Rule
upon C and Z, and where it shall cut the line, G I shall be the point through
which you shall draw the 5 a clock hour-line; and so placing the distance O 10
from O to g, and from G to V, and laying the Rule upon V and g, you shall find
the point in the line G I, through which you may draw the 4 a clock hour-line:
in like manner may you proceed with the other side.

For taking the distance from the point O to the line of 9, and setting it from
O to h, and from R to x, and laying the Rule upon the points h and x, where you
shall see it cut the line R K, there shall be the point, through which you
shall draw the 3 a clock hour-line.

And so you may take the distances from O, to the line of 8, and 7, and place
them from O to d and m, and from R to W and T, and so by laying your Rule upon
the points W d and T m, where it shall cross the line R K, there shall be the
points through which the houre-lines of 2, and 1, shall be drawn.

The Dial being thus drawn upon the South-east face of this plane, let the
style be fixed in the center C, so that it may hang directly over the Substile
C O, making an angle therewith equal to the angle P C O.

The style with the substile must here point downwards, because in all upright
planes declining from the South, the South pole is elevated; and in all upright
planes declining from the North, the North pole is elevated.

Therefore if you were to make a Dial to the North face of this plane, you
must make choice of your center C in the lower part of the Meridian C D, that
the style with the substile may have room to point upwards.

This Dial being made on paper for the South-east face of this plane, will
also serve for the North-west face thereof, if you turn it upside down; so that
the style with the substile may point upwards; and the paper being oyled or
pricked through, so that you may take the backside thereof for the fore-side,
without altering the numbers, set to the hours.

And the foreside of this pattern, turned upside down, so that the cock may
point upwards, shall serve for the North-east face of a plane having the same
declination; only altering the numbers set to the hours.

This paper being oyled, if you do but change the backside for the foreside;
and the numbers set to the hours, still keeping the center upwards, and the
style pointing downwards, this pattern will serve for the South-west face of a
plane, whose declination is the same as before.

And thus you see by diligent observation, this pattern may be made to serve
for four Dials, which being well understood, will be a great help to the Artist.

CHAP. XII. How to draw a Dial upon an horizontall plane, otherwise then in
the eighth Chapter was showed.
ALthough I have plainly and perfectly showed the making of the horizontall,
the direct South or North, as well erect as inclining; and the South or North
erect declining Dials, in the four former Chapters: yet to satisfy them that
delight in variety, I have here declared another way, whereby you may make them
most artificially and geometrically; not being tied to the use of the Canons;
(which indeed of all others is most exact, but not so easy to be understood)
nor to any one Instrument (which may be absent from me, when I should need it)
although in this Treatise I do perform the whole by a plain Quadrant.

Therefore by the first Chapter, having found the plane to be horizontall; by
the fourth Chapter draw the meridian line A B, and cross it at right angles in
the middle with the line D E, which is the line of East and West, and serves
for the hour of six at morning, and six at evening.

Then upon the center C (which is the point of intersection) describe a circle
for your Dial as large as your plane will give leave; which let be the circle
A D B E, then take the latitude of the place which is here 52 degr. 30 min. and
set it from A to N, in the quadrant A D, and draw the line C N S, then from A
raise the perpendicular A S, to cut the line C S at S, so shall the Triangle A
C S be the true pattern for your cock; this being done, divide the two quarters
of your circle A E and A D, each into six equal parts, so shall you have in
each Quadrant five points by which you may draw the five Chord lines I F
Dialling diagram G H and A, as here you see; then take one half of the Chord
line A, and set it in the line of the style from C to O, from which point O
take the nearest extent unto the meridian; with this distance setting one foot
in the point A, with the other make a mark on each side of the meridian, in the
same Chord line A, through which points you shall draw the hour lines of 1 and
11.

So likewise you may take one half the Chord H, and place it in the line of the
style from C to K, from which point K, take the shortest extent unto the
meridian, with this distance set one foot in H, and with the other make on each
side the meridian a mark in the same Chord line, through which you shall draw
the hour lines of 2 and 10.

And thus you may proceed with the rest of the lines, as the Figure will show
better then many words; for this is sooner wrought then spoken.

And if you would have the hours before and after six, you may extend them
through the center, as was showed in the 8 Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. To draw a Dial upon a direct vertical plane, as well erect as
inclining, otherwise then in the ninth Chapter was showed.
THe work of this, is almost like unto the other before; the difference is
only in the elevation of the pole above the plane: for in the horizontall
plane, the elevation is equal to the latitude of the place; and in all direct
verticals being erect, the elevation of the pole above the plane is equal to
the complement of the latitude, but if they shall incline toward the horizon,
then shall you find the elevation of the pole above the plane by the 10
Chapter.

The elevation of the pole above the plane being known, the making of these
Dials are all alike; therefore by the second Chapter draw the line EW parallel
to the horizon, and from the middle thereof set fall the perpendicular ZN which
shall be the meridian of the plane, and also the meridian of the place, serving
for the line of 12, and also for the Substile, over which the style must hang,
both in erect and inclining planes being direct.

Then upon the center Z describe your Dials circle, or rather the Semicircle E
N W, and seeing this plane is erect, and also direct, therefore the elevation
of the pole Dialling diagram above the plane is 37 degr. 30 min. equal to the
complement of our latitude, which take from your scale, and place it from N to
H in your Dialls semicircle, and draw the line Z H S for the line of the style;
then from the end of the meridian as at N, draw the crooked line N S, cutting
the line of the style in the point S, so shall the Triangle S Z N be the true
pattern for your cock.

This being done, divide each Quadrant of your Semicircle into six equal
parts, so shall you have 5 points, by which you may draw 5 Chord lines, cutting
the meridian at right angles in the points I K L M N.

This being done, take the half of each Chord, and place it from the center Z
along upon the line of the style, as here you see; the half of the Chord N from
Z to A, and one half the Chord M from Z to B, and half the Chord L from Z to C,
and one half the Chord-lines I and K, set from Z unto D and G; now from each of
these points, take the nearest extent unto the meridian Z N, and place them
upon their proper Chord lines from the meridian on both sides thereof; so shall
you have two points on each Chord, through which you shall draw the hour lines
from the center of your Dial, as the shortest extent from the point A unto the
meridian, set in the Chord N from the meridian both ways, shall give you the
points for 1 and 11; so shall the shortest extent from the point B (being
placed from the meridian both ways in the Chord M) give you the two points for
10 and 2, and so you may proceed with the rest; thus doing, you shall have in
each Chord two points, on each side the meridian one; through which, and from
the center Z, you may draw your houre-lines at pleasure, without exceeding the
limits of your plane. And seeing this is the South face of this plane,
therefore the style must point downwards being fixed in the center Z in the
upper part of the meridian line Z N, over which the style must directly hang,
making therewith an angle equal to the angle N Z S.

But if it had been the North face, then must the center be placed in the lower
part of the Meridian, and the style, with the substyle, and also the
houre-lines, must point upwards.

CHAP. XIV. The declination of an upright plane being given, how thereby to
find the elevation of the pole above the same, with the angle of Deflexion, or
the distance of the substile from the Meridian: and also the angle of
inclination betwixt both Meridians.
IN all erect declining planes, when the declination is found, there is three
things more to be considered before we can come to the drawing of the Dial.

I. The elevation of the pole above the plane.

II. The distance of the substile from the Meridian.

III. The angle contained betwixt the Meridian of the plane, and the Meridian
of the place; which here we call the inclination of Meridians: This angle is
made at the Pole, and serves to show us where we shall begin to divide our
Diall-circle into 24 equal parts.

These three may be both artificially, easily, and speedily, performed after
this manner following.

First, describe a Quadrant, as A B C, then supposing your Latitude to be 52
degrees. 30 min. take it from your Scale, and set it from B to E in the arch of the
Quadrant, and draw the line E D parallel to A B, cutting the line A C in the
point D, then take the distance D E, and setting one foot in the center A, with
the other describe the arch G H O R.

Then suppose your declination to be 32 degrees. this set from B to F in the arch B
E C, and draw the line F A, cutting the arch G R in the point H, through which
point draw the line S H N cutting the arch B E C in N, so shall the arch C N be
the elevation of the pole above the plane, which in this example is found to be
31 degrees. 5 min.

Then take the Dialling diagram distance H S, and set it in the line D E, from
D to K, through which point K draw the line A K L, cutting the arch B C in the
point L, so shall the arch C L be the distance of the substile from the
Meridian, and in this example is 22 degrees. 8 min.

Now from the point L, draw the line L T parallel to the line A C, cutting the
arch G R in the point O, through which point O draw the line A O I, cutting the
arch B C in the point I, so shall the arch C I be the inclination of both
Meridians, and is found by this example to be 38 degrees. 13 min. so that by this
example the Meridian of the plane will fall betwixt the hours of 2 and 3 if
the plane shall decline Westward; but if it shall decline Eastward, then shall
it fall betwixt the hours of 9 and 10 before noon.

CHAP. XV. To draw a Dial upon an erect or Vertical plane declining;
otherwise then in the 11 Chapter was showed.
HAving by the third Chapter found the declination of this plane to be 32
degrees, and so by the last Chapter found the elevation of the pole above the
plane to be 31 degrees. 5 min. and the distance of the substile from the Meridian
to be 22 degrees. 8 min. and likewise the angle of inclination between both
Meridians to be 38 degrees. 13 min. we may proceed to make the Dial after this
manner.

First, draw the horizontall W E, and the perpendicular line Z N, crossing the
horizontall line at right angles, which is the Meridian of the place and the
line of 12.

Then in the meridian make choice of some point with most convenience, as the
center C, whereupon describe your Dial circle E N W.

Then take a Chord of 22 degrees. 8 min. from your Scale, for the distance of the
substile from the Meridian, and inscribe it into this Circle from the Meridian,
upon these conditions, that if the plane declineth West, then must the substile
be placed East of the plumb line; but if the declination shall be East, then
must the substile be placed West from the Meridian, as here it is.

This 22 degrees. 8 min. being set in the Dial circle from the Meridian at N unto
M, I draw the line C M for the substile: then through the center C draw the
diameter A B, making right angles with the substile C M, above this Diameter
there needs no houre-lines to be drawn if the plane be erect.

Then take 31 degrees. 5 min. and set them from M to D, and draw the line C D S for
the Style, then from M the end of the Style draw the crooked line M S, cutting
the line of the Style in the point S, so shall the triangle S C M be the true
pattern for the Cock of the Dial.

Dialling diagram

This being done, take 38 degrees. 13 min. and set them always on that side the
substile whereon the line of 12 lies, as here from M to H, so shall the point
H be the point where you shall begin to divide your dial circle into 24 equal
parts, but those points shall be only in use which do fall below the Diameter
A C B.

And if the line of the substile falls not directly upon one of the hour
lines, then shall you have six points on each side thereof, from which you may
let perpendiculars fall unto the line of the substile as here you see done.

Now take each perpendicular betwixt your compasses, and with one foot in the
center C, with the other make marks in the line of the Style, from which take
the nearest extents unto the line of the substile, and lay them upon their own
proper perpendiculars from the substile, so may you make points through which
you may draw houre-lines, and by thus doing with each perpendicular on both
Dialling diagram sides the substile, you may describe your whole Dial as here
you see, which may serve for four faces, by observing what was spoken in the 11
Chapter.

When you have drawn and described your Dial upon paper, for any plane
whatsoever, you may cut off the hour lines Cock and all, with a lesser Circle
then the Dial Circle, either with a concentrique or an excentrique Circle, and
so make a Dial less then the Circle by which you framed it.

Or if you extend the hour lines beyond the Dial Circle, you may cut them off
either with a greater concentrique Circle, and so make a bigger Dial, or else
you may cut them off with a Square, as here you see in the following figure; or
any other form what you shall think most convenient.

Of a Plane falling near the Meridian.
When as the declination of a plane shall cause it to lie near the Meridian,
as that the Declination and inclination shall cause it to lie near the Pole,
then does the elevation of the Pole above the plane grow so small, and the
hour lines so exceeding near together, that except the plane be very large they
will hardly serve to good purpose; as here in this figure, being a plane which
is erect, and declining from the South 80 degrees. toward the East.

Therefore first, draw your Dial very true (as before has been taught) upon a
large paper, making your circle as big as you can: then extend the houre-lines,
with the substile, and the line of the style, a great way beyond the Dials
circle, until they do spread, so that they will fill the plane indifferent
well, and then cut them off with a long square as O N in the following figure,
so will it show almost Dialling diagram An erect Dial declining from the South
80 degrees. toward the East: the distance of the substile from the Meridian 37
degrees. 4 min. the elevation of the Pole above the plane 6 degrees. 4 min. and the
inclination of both Meridians 82 degrees. 5 min.
like the Meridian Dial of the 7 Chapter, for the hours will be almost parallel
the one to the other, and the style almost parallel to the substile, as you may
see by the figure.

CHAP. XVI. The inclination of a Meridian plane being given, how thereby to
find the elevation of the pole above the plane, the distance of the substile
from the Meridian; and the angle of the inclination of the Meridian of the
plane to the Meridian of the place.
ALL those planes wherein the horizontall line is the same with the Meridian
line, are therefore called Meridian planes, if they make right angles with the
Horizon, they are called erect Meridian planes, and are described before.

But if they lean to the Horizon, they are then called Incliners.

These may incline either to the East part of the Horizon, or to the West, and
each of them has two faces, the upper toward the Zenith, the lower toward
the Nadir, wherein knowing the Latitude of the place, and the inclination of
the plane to the Horizon, we are to consider three things more before we can
come to the drawing of the Dial.

I. The elevation of the pole above the plane.

II. The distance of the substile from the Meridian.

III. The angle of Inclination betwixt both Meridians.

These three may be found after this manner, little differing from the 14 Chap.

First, describe a Quadrant, as A B C, then set 52 degrees. 30 min. (your Latitude)
from C to E, in the arch of your Quadrant C B, and draw the line E R parallel
to A B, cutting the line A C in the point R, and with the distance E R, with
one foot in the center A, with the other draw the arch G H O D, then let your
inclination be 30 degrees. which set in the arch of the Quadrant from B to F, and
draw the line A F, cutting the arch G O D in the point H, through which point
H, draw the line S H N, cutting the arch of the Quadrant in the point N, so
shall the arch C N be the elevation of the pole above the plane, which in this
example is 43 degrees. 23 min.

Dialling diagramThen take the distance S H, and set it in the line E R from R
to K, through which point K, draw the line A K L, cutting the arch of the
quadrant in the point L, so shall the arch C L be the distance of the substile
from the Meridian, and is in this example 33 degrees. 5 min.

This being done, from the point L, draw the line L T parallel to the line A C,
cutting the arch G D in the point O, through which point O draw the line A O I,
cutting the arch of the Quadrant B C in the point I, so shall the arch C I be
the inclination of the Meridian of the plane to the Meridian of the place, and
in this example is found to be 43 degrees. 28 min. which being resolved into time,
does give about two hours and 54 min. from the Meridian, for the place of the
substile amongst the houre-lines.

CHAP. XVII. To draw a Dial upon the Meridian inclining plane.
HAving by the second Chapter found the inclination of this plane to be 30 degrees.
and so by the last chapter found the elevation of the pole above the plane to
be 43 degrees. 23 min. and the distance of the substile from the meridian to be 33
degrees. 5 min. and likewise, the angle of inclination to be 43 degrees. 38 min. we may
proceed to make the Dial after this manner.

First, draw the horizontall line A B, serving for the Meridian and the hour
of 12, about the middle of this line make choice of a center at C, upon which
describe a Circle for your Dial, as A D B E.

Then seeing this is the upper face of the plane, set 33 degrees. 5 min. the
distance of the substile from the Meridian, in the Dials Circle from the North
end of the Horizontall line upwards, as from B to H, and draw the line C H for
the substile: But if this had been the under face, the substile must have
fallen below the horizontall line: now through the center C draw the Diameter E
F, making right angles with the substile C H.

Then set 43 degrees. 23 min. from H unto D for the style, and draw the line C D
unto S, and from the end of the substile draw the crooked line H S, cutting the
line of the style in the point S, so shall the Triangle S C H be the true
pattern of your Cock for this Dial.

Then set 43 degrees. 28 min. from H unto M, for the difference betwixt the
Meridian of the plane and the Meridian of the place. Now here at M must you
begin to divide your Circle into 24 equal parts, from which points let down so
many perpendiculars to the substile, as there shall be points on that side the
diameter E F next the substile.

Now take each perpendicular betwixt your Compasses, and with one foot in the
center C, with the other make marks in the line of the style, from which take
the nearest extents unto the substile, and lay them down upon their own proper
perpendiculars from the substile, so may you make marks, through which and from
the center, you may draw the houre-lines.

This dial being thus drawn, for the upper face of a Meridian plane inclining
toward the West, you must fix the Cock in the center C, hanging over the
substile C H, with an angle equal to the angle S C H, so that it may point to
the North Pole, because upon the upper faces of all Meridian incliners the
North Pole is elevated; and therefore contrarily, the South Pole must needs be
elevated above their under faces.

This Dial being drawn in paper, for the upper face of this plane, will also
serve for the under face thereof, if you turn the pattern about so that the
horizontall line A B may lie still parallel to the Horizon, and the style with
the substile (lying under the Horizontall line) may point downwards to the
South Pole, the paper being oyled or pricked through, so that you may take the
back side thereof for the fore side, without altering the numbers set to the
hours.

Dialling diagram

CHAP. XVIII. The inclination and declination of any plane being given in a
known Latitude, to find the angle of intersection between the plane and the
Meridian, the ascension and elevation of the Meridian, with the arch thereof
between the Pole and the plane, and also the elevation of the Pole above the
plane, the distance of the substile from the Meridian, with the inclination
between both Meridians.
IF a plane shall decline from the South, and also incline to the Horizon, it
is then called by the name of a declining inclining plane.

Of these there are several sorts, for the inclination being Northward, the
plane may fall betwixt the Horizon and the Pole, or betwixt the Zenith and the
Pole, or else they may lie in the Poles of the World: or the inclination may be
southward, and so fall below the intersection of the Meridian and the Equator
or above it, or the plane may fall directly in the intersection of the Meridian
with the Equator, each of these planes have two faces, the upper toward the
Zenith, and the lower toward the Nadir: Now having the Latitude of the place,
with the declination and inclination of the plane, we have seven things more to
consider before we can come to the drawing of the Dial.

I. The angle of intersection betwixt the plane and the Meridian.

II. The arch of the plane betwixt the Horizon and the Meridian.

III. The arch of the Meridian betwixt the Horizon and the plane.

IV. The arch of the Meridian between the Pole and the plane.

V. The elevation of the Pole above the Plane.

VI. The distance of the substile from the Meridian.

VII. The angle of inclination betwixt the Meridian of the plane, and the
Meridian of the place. All these seven may be found out after this manner.

First, Describe the Quadrant A B C, then suppose the plane to decline from the
South toward the East 35 degrees. and to incline toward the Horizon 25 degrees. set
35 degrees. the declination of the plane from C to E in the Quadrants arch C B, and
draw the line A E, then set 25 degrees. the inclination of the plane in the same
arch from B to F, and draw the line F Z parallel to A C, cutting the line A B
in the point Z, and with the distance F Z, and one foot placed in the center A,
with the other describe the arch G H I, cutting the line A E in the point H,
through which point H draw the line K L parallel to A C cutting the arch C B in
the point K, then take the distance H L, and set it in the line F Z from Z unto
O, through which point O draw the line A O M, cutting the arch B C in the point
M, from which point M draw the line M P N parallel to A B, cutting the arch G I
in the point P, through which point P draw the line A P Q cutting the arch B C
in the point G, so shall the arch B K be 75 degrees. 58 min. the inclination of the
plane to the Meridian, and the arch B Q will be 57 degrees. 36 min. for the
Meridians ascension, or the arch of the plane, betwixt the Horizon and the
Meridian, and the arch B M shall be 20 degrees. 54 min. for the elevation of the
Meridian, or the arch of the Meridian betwixt the Horizon and the plane. Now if
the plane shall incline toward the South, add this elevation of the Meridian
to your Latitude, and the sum of both shall be the position Latitude, or the
arch of the Meridian betwixt the Pole and the plane, and if the sum shall
exceed 90 degrees. take it out of 180 degrees. and that which remains shall be the
position Latitude, or the arch of the Meridian between the Pole and the plane.

Dialling diagramBut if the inclination shall be northward, then compare the
elevation of the Meridian with your Latitude, and take the lesser out of the
greater, and so shall the difference be the position Latitude: As here in this
example, supposing the inclination to be Northward, we take 20 degrees. 54 min. the
elevation of the Meridian, out of 52 degrees. 30 min. the Latitude proposed, and
there will remain 31 degrees. 36 min. for the position Latitude, or the arch of the
meridian between the Pole and the plane.

This being done, set 31 degrees. 36 min. the position Latitude, from B to T in the
arch B C, and draw the line A T, then with the distance K L, upon the center A,
describe the arch Y M W, cutting the line A T in the point M, through which
point M draw the line R S parallel to A B, cutting the arch B C in the point S,
so shall the arch B S be 30 degrees 33 minutes, the height of the Pole above
the plane.

Then lay your rule upon the point S and the center A, and where it shall cut
the line K L, there make a mark as at V, through which point V, draw the line D
V N W parallel to A B, cutting the arch Y W in the point N, and the arch B C in
W, so shall the arch B W be 8 degrees. 35 min. the distance of the substile from
the Meridian.

Lastly, through the point N, draw the line Y X parallel to A C, cutting the
arch B C in the point X, so shall the arch B X be 16 degrees. 20 min. the
inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place.

CHAP. XIX. To draw a Dial upon a declining inclining Plane.
HAving by the second Chapter found the inclination to be 25 degrees. toward the
North, and by the third Chapter the declination from the South toward the East
to be 35 degrees. and so by the last Chapter the Meridians ascension to be 57 degrees.
36 min. The elevation of the Pole above the plane 30 degrees. 33 min. The distance
of the substile from the Meridian 8 degrees 35 min. And the inclination of both
Meridians 17 degrees. 30 min. we may proceed to make the Dial after this manner.

First, Draw the line A B parallel to the Horizon, in which line make choice of
a center as at C, whereon describe your Dial circle A D B E A, then take 57
degrees. 36 min. the Meridians ascension, and set it from B that end of the
horizontall line with the declination of the plane, as from B to N, and draw
the line C N for the hour of 12.

Then set 8 degrees. 35 min. the distance of the substile from the Meridian from N
to M (on that side the Meridian which is contrary to the declination of the
plane) and draw the line C M for the substile. And set 30 degrees. 33 min. from M
to D, and draw the line C D unto S, and from the end of the substile draw the
crooked line M S, cutting the line of the Style in S, so shall the Triangle M C
S be the true pattern of this Dials Cock.

Then set 17 degrees. 30 min. the inclination of Meridians from M unto O, which is
the point where you must begin to divide your Dial circle into 24 equal
parts; from which points let down so many perpendiculars to the substile, as
there shall be points on that side the Diameter F E next the substile, and so
by working as before has been showed, you may draw the houre-lines, and set up
the style as in the former planes.

Now here I would have you well to consider what has been here spoken
concerning these kind of Dials, and also what follows the same, for if you
mark the diversity which does arise by reason of the elevation of the Meridian,
you may perceive thereby three sundry kinds of Dials to arise out of a North
inclining plane declining, and also in a South inclining declining plane, yet
in effect they are but one if you consider what follows here concerning them,
in all which, the style with the substile, and such like materials, are found
out according to the last Chapter.

Therefore having drawn your horizontall line, you must consider which pole is
elevated above your plane, and how to place the Meridian from the Horizontall
line. For Dialling diagram upon the upper faces of all North incliners, whose
Meridians elevation is less then the Latitude of the place: on the under faces
of all North incliners whose meridians elevation is greater then the Latitude
of the place: and on the upper faces of all South incliners, the North Pole is
elevated.

And upon the under faces of all North incliners whose meridians elevation is
less then the Latitude of the place: On the upper faces of all North
incliners, whose meridians elevation is greater then the Latitude of the place:
and on the under faces of all South incliners the South Pole is elevated.

Now for placing the Meridian from the horizontall line; upon the upper faces
of all South incliners, whose meridians elevation is greater then the Latitudes
complement: on the under faces of all South incliners whose meridians elevation
is less then the Latitudes complement: on the under faces of all North
incliners, whose meridians elevation is greater then the Latitude of the place:
and on the upper faces of all North incliners whose Meridians elevation is
less then the Latitude of the place; the Meridian must be placed above the
Horizontall line, as here in this example.

And therefore by the contrary; Upon the upper faces of all South incliners,
whose meridians elevation is less then the Latitudes complement: On the under
faces of all South incliners, whose meridians elevation is greater then the
Latitudes complement: On the under faces of all North incliners, whose
meridians elevation is less then the Latitude of the place: And on the upper
faces of all North incliners, whose meridians elevation is greater then the
Latitude of the place; the Meridian must be placed below the Horizontall line.

But here you must observe, that if it be either the upper or under faces of a
South inclining plane, whose meridians elevation is greater then the Latitudes
complement: or either the upper or under faces of a North inclining plane,
whose meridians elevation is less then the Latitude of the place; that then
the Meridian must be placed from that end of the horizontall line with the
declination of the plane: But on all the other faces of these kind of planes,
the Meridian must be placed from that end of the horizontall line which is
contrary to the declination of the plane.

And here note, that if the inclination shall be Southward, and the elevation
of the Meridirn equal to the complement of your Latitude; then shall the
substile lie square to the Meridian.

And if the inclination shall be Northward, and the elevation of the meridian
equal to the Latitude of the place, then shall neither Pole be elevated above
this plane, and therefore shall be a Polar declining plane. Wherein the
Meridian being placed according to his ascension from the horizontall line,
shall be in place of the substile, unto which if you draw a line square, it
shall serve for the Equator. Then set one foot of your Compasses in the
intersection of the substile with the Equator, and open the other to any
convenient distance upon the substile, and describe the Equinoctial Circle (as
in the sixth Chapter of this Book was showed:) upon the center whereof, make an
angle with the line of the substile, equal to the inclination of both
meridians, namely the meridian of the plane and the meridian of the place,
which shall show you where to begin to divide your Equinoctial Circle into
twenty four equal parts.

These things being known, you may proceed to make your Dial and set up the
Cock according to the sixth Chapter.

As for example, in our Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. a plane is proposed to
decline from the South toward the East 35 degrees. as before, but inclining
Northward 57 degrees. 50 min. the Meridians ascension by the 18 Chapter will be
found to be 69 degrees. 33 min. and his elevation 52 degrees. 30 min. equal to the
Latitude of the place, and therefore neither pole is elevated above this plane,
and so no distance between the Substile and the Meridian: for the Meridian and
the style with the substile, will be as it were all one line, which is the
Axletree of the World: so that here the style must be parallel to the plane,
and the hour lines parallel one to the other, as in the Meridian and direct
Polar planes. Therefore, first draw the Horizontall line A B, wherein make
choice of a center as at C, whereon describe an occult arch of a Circle as B E:
then into this arch inscribe the Meridians ascension 69 degrees. 33 min. from B to
E, and draw the line CE for the meridian of the plane, and for the substilar,
and if you draw a line square to this substilar, it shall be the Equator.

Then set one foot of your Compasses in the point of intersection D, and with
the other opened to a convenient wideness, draw a Circle for the Equator, unto
which you may draw two touch lines square to the substile as in the direct
polar plane.

This being done, and the inclination of both Meridians being found by the last
Chapter to be 29 degrees. 3 min. set it in this Circle from H unto O, and draw the
line D O F, cutting the contingent in F, from which point F you shall draw the
12 a clock hour-line parallel to the substile.

Dialling diagram

Now from the point O, divide your Equinoctial circle into 24 equal parts,
with which you may proceed to make your Dial, and set up the cock according to
the 6 Chapter.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOURTH BOOK. Showing how to resolve all such Astronomicall Propositions
(as are of ordinary use in this Art of Dialling) by help of a Quadrant fitted
for the same purpose.
CHAP. I. The description of the Quadrant.
HAving in the second and third Books showed Geometrically the working of most
of the ordinary Propositions Astronomicall, with the delineation of all kind
of plain wall Dials howsoever, or in what latiitude soever situated, still
keepng within the limits of our plane, and yet not tied to the use of any
Instrument.

I will now show how you may perform the former work exactly, easily and
speedily, by a plain Quadrant fitted for that purpose; the description whereof
is after this manner.

Having prepared a piece of Box or Brass in manner of a Quadrant, draw thereon
the two Semidiameters A B and A C, equally distant or parallel to the edges,
cutting one the other at right angles in the center A, upon which center A,
with the Semidiameter A B or A C, describe the arch B C, this arch is called
the limb, and is divided into 90 equal parts or degrees; and subdivided into
as many parts as quantity will give leave, being numbered from the left hand
toward the right after the usual manner.

Then let the Semidiameter A B be divided into 90 unequal parts, (called right
Sines) either from the Table of natural Sines by help of a decimall Scale,
equal to the Semidiameter A B, or else by taking the nearest extents from each
degree of your Quadrant, unto the side A B, and placing them upon the side A B
each after other, from the center A toward B, you shall exactly divide the
Semidiameter A B into 90 unequal divisions called right Sines.

This being done, draw the line D E from the Sine of 45 degrees counted in the
line of Sines unto 45 degrees counted in the Quadrant, then from the point E
draw the line E F parallel to A B, making the square A D E F, the side D E
whereof (for distinction) may be called a Tangent line, and the side E F a
Co-tangent line, then draw the Diagonall line A E, which you may call the line
of Latitudes.

Then upon the center A, with the distance A D or A F describe the arch D F,
which you may divide into six equal parts, by laying your Rule upon each 15th.
degree in the Quadrant, and the center A as at g h I k l F, from which points
draw slope lines to each 15th. degree in the Quadrant, numbered backward, as F
P, l O, k E, I n, h m, g B; these lines so drawn are to be accounted as hours,
then dividing each space into two equal parts, draw other slope lines standing
for half hours, which may be distinguished from the other, as they are in the
figure.

Dialling diagram

Now because in the latter part of this Book there is often required to use a
line of Chords to several Radiuses, therefore upon the edge of the Quadrant A
C, you may have a line of Chords, divided as in the figure, and so the Quadrant
being at hand will supply the uses of the Scale mentioned in the preceding
Book, and also a Chord of any Circle, whose Radius is less then the line A C
may be taken off and in that case supply the use of a Sector.

To this Quadrant, as to all others of this kind in their use is added Sights,
with a thread, bead, and plummet according to the usual manner.

CAAP. II. Of the use of the line of Sines. Any Radius not exceeding the line
of Sines being known, to find the right Sine of any arch or angle thereunto
belonging.
IF the Radius of the Circle given be equal to the line of Sines, there needs
no farther work, but to take the other Sines also out of the line of Sines.

But if it be lesser, then take it betwixt your compasses, and set one foot in
the Sine of 90 degrees, and with the other lay the thread to the nearest
distance, which you may do by turning the compasses about, till the moving
point thereof do only touch the thread and no more: the threrd lying still in
this position, take the nearest extent thereunto, from any Sine you think good,
and it shall be the like Sine agreeable to the Radius given.

As for example, let the circle B C D E in the following chapter represent the
meridian circle, let B D be the Horizon, and C E the vertical circle; and let
F G be the diameter of an almicanter, and so F H the Semidiameter thereof;
which being given it is required to find the Sines both of 30 and 50 degrees,
agreeable to that Radius, first therefore, take the given Radius betwixt your
compasses, and with one foot set in the Sine of 90 degrees, with the other lay
the thread to the nearest distance, the thread lying still in this position,
take the nearest extents thereunto, from the Sine of 30 and likewise of 50,
these distances place upon the Radius F H from H to N, and from H to R, so
shall H N be the Sine of 30 degrees, and H R the Sine of 50 degrees, agreeable
to the Radius F H the thing desired.

CHAP. III. The Right Sine of any arch being given to find the Radius.
TAke the Sine given betwixt your compasses, and setting one foot in the like
Sine in the line of Sines, with the other lay the thread to the nearest
distance, the thread lying still in this position, take the shortest extent
thereunto from the Sine of 90 degrees, which distance shall be the Radius
required.

As for example, let H R be the given Sine of 50 degrees, and it is required to
find the Radius answering thereunto, take H R with your compasses and set one
foot in the Sine of 50 degrees. and with the other lay the thread to the nearest
distance, which being kept in this position, if you take the shortest extent
thereunto, from the Sine of 90 you shall have the line H F for the Radius
required.

Dialling diagram

CHAP. IV. The right Sine, or the Radius of any Circle being given, and a
straight line resembling a Sine, to find the quantity of that unknown Sine.
FIrst, take the Radius, or the right sine given, and setting one foot of your
Compasses either in the like sine or in the Radius of the line of Sines, and
with the other, lay the thread to the nearest distance, then take the right
line given, and six one foot in the line of sines, moving it till the moveable
foot touch the thread at the nearest extent, so shall the fixed foot stay at
the degree of the sine required.

As for example, let F H be the Radius given, and H N the straight line given
resembling a Sine, first with the distance F H from the Sine of 90 lay the
thread to the nearest distance; the thread lying still in this position, take
the line H N and fixing one foot of your compasses in the line of Sines, still
moving it to and fro till the moveable foot thereof, does only touch the
thread, so shall the fixed foot rest at the Sine of 30 degrees in the line of
Sines; this 30 degrees is the arch, of which H N is the Sine, F H in the last
chapter being the Radius.

CHAP. V. The Radius of a circle not exceeding the line of Sines being given,
to find the chords of every arch.
IF the Radius given, shall be equal to the line of Sines, then double the
Sine of half the arch, and you shall have the chord of the whole arch, that
is, a Sine of 10 degrees. doubled gives a chord of 20 degrees. and a Sine of 15 degrees.
doubled gives a chord of 30 degrees. and so of the rest, as in the third chapter,
the line I O the Sine of I C an arch of 30 degrees. being doubled gives I L the
chord of ICL which is an arch of 60 degrees.

And if the Radius of the circle given, be equal to the Semi-radius (the sine
of 30 degrees.) of the line of sines; then you need not to double the lines of
sines as before, but only double the numbers: so shall a sine of 10 degrees. be a
chord of 20 degrees. and a sine of 15 degrees. be a chord of 30 degrees. and so of the
rest, but if the Radius of the circle given, be less then the semi-radius of
your line of sines, then take it betwixt your compasses and setting one foot in
the sine of 30 degrees. with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance, the
thread lying still in this position, take it over at the nearest extent in what
Sine you think good, only doubling the number, and you shall have the Chord
desired.

As for example, let A C be the diameter of the circle in the third Chapter,
and it is required to find a Chorde of 30 degrees, therefore first, I take A C
betwixt my compasses and setting one foot in the Sine of 30 degrees. with the other
I lay the thread to the nearest distance: which being kept at this angle, I
take it over from the sine of 15 degrees. which does give me I C the Chord of 30
degrees. which was desired.

And if the Radius given, be greater then the Sine of 30. and yet less then
the Radius of the line of Sines; then with the Radius given, and from the Sine
of the complement of half the arch required, lay the thread to the nearest
distance; then taking it over at the nearest extent from the sine of the whole
arch, you shall have your desire.

As for example, let the Radius A C of the circle in the third Chapter be
given; and a Chord of 30 degrees. required: the half of 30 degrees. is 15 degrees. the
complement whereof is 75 degrees. therefore I take the Radius with my compasses,
and setting one foot in the Sine of 75 degrees. with the other I lay the thread to
the nearest distance: the thread lying still in this position, I take the
shortest extent thereunto from the Sine of 30 degrees. which gives I C the Chord
of 30 degrees. which was desired.

Now by the converse of this Chapter, if you have the Chord of any arch given,
you may thereby find out the Radius.

CHAP. VI. To divide a line by extreme and mean proportion.
A Right line is said to be divided by extreme and mean proportion, when the
lesser Segment thereof, is to the greater, as the greater is to the whole line.

Let A B be the line to be so divided, this line I take with my compasses, and
setting one foot in the sine of 54 degrees. and with the other I lay the thread to
the nearest distance: which lying still in this position, I take it over from
the sine of 30 degrees. which distance shall be the greater segment A C dividing
the whole line in the point C; or the thread lying in the former position, if
you shall take the shortest extent thereunto from 18 degrees. you shall have B C
for the lesser segment, which will divide the whole line by extreme and mean
proportion in the point C from the end B, so that as B C the lesser segment, is
to A C the greater segment; so is A C the greater segment, to A B the whole
line, as was required Dialling diagram

CHAP. VII. To find a mean proportional line between two right lines given.
A Mean proportional line is that, whose square is equal to the long square,
contained under his two extremes.

First, ioyn the two given lines together, so as they may make both one right
line; the which divide into two equal parts; and with the one half thereof,
setting one foot in the Sine of 90 degrees. with the other lay the thread to the
nearest extent, which lying still in this position, take the distance betwixt
the middle point, and the point of meeting of the two given lines, and fixing
one foot in the line of sines, so as the other may but only touch the thread;
now from the complement of the sine where the fixed foot so rests, take the
shortest extent unto the thread, which shall be the mean proprtional line
required.

Dialling diagram

As for example, let A and B be two lines given, between which it is required
to find a mean proportional line, first join the two lines together in F, so
as they both make the right line C D, which divide into two equal parts in the
point E, then with either half of which, setting one foot in the sine of 90
degrees. with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance: then keeping the
thread in this positio^, take the distance between the middle point E and F,
the place of meeting of the two given lines, and fixing one foot in the line of
sines, so as the other may but only touch the thread, and the fixed foot will
stay about 22 degrees. 30 min. the complement whereof is 67 degrees. 30 min. from which
take the shottest extent unto the thread lying as before, which shall be the
line H, the mean proportional line betwixt the two extremes A and B, which
was required.

CHAP. VIII. Having the distance of the Sun from the next equinoctial point,
to find his declination.
FIrst, lay the thread upon 23 degrees. 30 min. the suns greatest declination,
counted on the limb of the quadrant, the thread lying still open at this
angle, take the shortest extent thereunto from the sine of the distance of the
Sun from the next equinoctial point, this distance being applied to the line
of sines from the center A, shall give you the sine of the suns declination.

So in the figure of the 13 chapter, the sun being in the 29 degrees. of Taurus at
K, which is 59 degrees. from C the equinoctial point Aries; the declination of the
sun will be found about 20 degrees. the line C M which was required.

CHAP. IX. The declination of the sun, and the quarter of the ecliptic which
he posseseth being given, to find his place.
TAke the sine of the suns declination from the line of sines, and setting one
foot in the sine of the suns greatest declination, with the other lay the
thread to the nearest distance so shall it show upon the limb, the distance of
the sun from the next equinoctial point.

So in the figure of the 13 chapter C M the declination of the sun being 20
degrees. and K the angle of the suns greatest declination, the line C K will be
found to be 59 degrees. for the distance of the sun from the next equinoctial
point which was required.

CHAP. X. Having the latitude of the place, and the distance of the sun from
the next equinoctial point, to find his amplitude.
TAke the sine of the suns greatest declination betwixt your compasses, and
setting one foot in the cosine of the latitude, with the other lay the thread
to the nearest distance; which lying still in this position, set one foot in
the sine of the suns distance from the next equinoctial point, and with the
other take the nearest extent unto the thread, so shall you have betwixt your
compasses the Sine of the Amplitude.

As in the figure of the 13 chapter, the angle at N being 37 degrees. 30 min. the
complement of the latitude, and K the angle of the Suns greatest declination,
and C K 59 degrees. the distance of the Sun from the equinoctial point Aries, the
line C N will be found to be the Sine of 34 degrees. 9 min. the amplitude required

CHAP. XI. Having the declination and amplitude to find the height of the pole.
FIrst, take the sine of the Suns declination, and set one foot in the sine of
the Amplitude, and with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance, so
shall the thread upon the limb, show the complement of the latitude.

So in the figure of the 13 Chapter, the declination C M being 20 degrees. and the
amplitude C N being 34 degrees. 9 min. and the angle at M being Right, we shall
find the angle at N to be 37 degrees. 30 min. the complement whereof is 52 degrees. 30
min. which was required for the latitude of the place.

CHAP. XII. Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun,
to find his amplitude.
WIth the Sine of the declination set one foot in the cosine of the latitude,
and with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance: so shall it show
upon the limb the amplitude required: so in the figure of the next Chapter, the
angle CNM being 37 degrees. 30 min. the cosine of the latitude, and C M the
declination here 20 degrees. and the angle at M being right, we shall find the
base C N to be the Sine of 34. which was required for the Suns amplitude.

CHAP. XIII. Having the elevation of the pole, and amplitude of the Sun, to
find his declination.
FIrst, lay the thread to the amplitude counted in the limb, then take it over
at the shortest extent, from the cosine of the latitude, so shall you have the
Sine of the suns declination betwixt your compasses.

So in this figure, the amplitude C N being. 34 degrees. 9 min. and the angle at N
being cosine to the latitude, the angle at M being a right angle, we shall find
CM to be 20 degrees. for the declination of the sun which was required.

Dialling diagram

CHAP. XIIII. Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun,
to find his height in the Vertical circle.
FIrst, take the sine of the declination of the Sun, and setting one foot in
the Sine of the latitude, with the other lay the thread to the nearest
distance; so shall it show upon the limb the height of the Sun in the Vertical
circle.

So in the figure of the last Chapter, the angle C I O being 52 degrees. 30 min.
the latitude of the place, and C O the Suns declination 20 degrees, and the
angle C O I being a right angle we may find C I to be a sine of 25 degrees. 32 min.
the height of the sun in the Vertical circle which was required.

CHAP. XV. Having the latitude of the place, and the distance of the Sun from
the next Equinoctial Point, to find his height in the vertical circle.
FIrst, take the sine of the suns greatest declination, and setting one foot in
the sine of the latitude, with the other lay the thread to the nearest
distance: the thread lying still in this position; from the sine of the suns
place take the nearest extent thereunto, which shall be the sine of the suns
height in the Vertical circle.

So in the figure of the 13 chapter, the angle at I being 52 degrees. 30 min. which
is the latitude of the place, and the angle at K the suns greatest declination,
and K C being 59 degrees. the suns distance from the next equinoctial point, we
shall find C I to be 25 degrees. 32 min. for the height of the sun in the Vertical
circle.

CHAP. XVI. Having the latitude of the place and the declination of the Sun, to
find the time when the Sun comes to be due east or west.
WIth the sine of the declination, set one foot in the sine of the latitude,
and with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance: then take it over at
the nearest extent from the cosine of the latitude; which distance keep; and
setting one foot in the cosine of the declination, with the other lay the
thread to the nearest distance: so shall it show upon the limb, the quantity
of degrees betwixt the hour of six and the East or West points.

So in the figure in the 13 Chapter, the declination C O being 20 degrees. and the
angle O I C being 52 degrees 30 min. the complement whereof is the angle O C I, we
may find the sine O I which distance keep; now seeing O I is a sine of the
Radius O F and not of AEC, therefore by the 4 Chapter, you may find the
quantity of that unknown sine; for seeing the Radius O F is the cosine of the
declination, therefore set one foot therein, and with the other distance kept,
lay the thread to the nearest distance: so shall it show upon the limb 16 degrees.
30 min. which converted into time makes 1 hour, and 6 min. for the quantity
of time between the hour of six and the suns being in the East or West points.

CHAP. XVII. Having the latitude of the Place, and the declination of the sun,
to find his altitude at the hour of six.
FIrst, take the thread, and lay it upon the declination counted in the limb;
then from the sine of the latitude, take it over at the shortest extent; which
distance shall be the sine of the height of the sun at the hour of six.

So in the figure of the 13 Chapter, the angle at L being a right angle, and L
O C being 52 degrees. 30 min. the latitude of the place, and C O the declination of
the sun being 20 degrees. we shall find C L to be the sine of 15 degrees. 44 min for
the height of the sun at the hour of six, which was equired.

CHAP. XVIII. Having the latitude of the place, and the height of the sun at
the hour of six, to find what azimuth he shall have at the hour of six.
FIrst, with the sine of the suns height at the hour of six, set one foot in
the sine of the latitude, and with the other lay the thread to the nearest
distance: then take the least distance thereunto from the cosine of the
latitude, now with this distance setting one foot in the cosine of the
altitude, with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance as before: so
shall it show upon the limb, the azimuth of the sun from the East or West
points.

So in the figure of the 13 chapter, the angle CLO being a right angle, and the
angle L C O being 37 degrees. 30 min. the cosine of the latitude, the angle L O C
must be 52 degrees. 30 min. the latitude of the place being the complement of the
angle L C O, and C L being 15 degrees 44 min. (as by the last chapter it did
appear) we shall find L O to be the sine of 12 degrees. 30 min. for the azimuth of
the sun from the East or West, at the hour of six as was required.

CHAP. XIX. Having the declination of the sun, to find his Right Ascension.
FIrst, with your compasses take the sine of the suns declination given, and
setting one foot in the sine of the suns greatest declination, with the other
lay the thread to the nearest distance: then at the least distance from the
cosine of the suns greatest declination take it over: now again, with this
distance lay the thread to the nearest distance from the cosine of the
declination given, so shall it show upon the limb the right ascension of the
sun.

So in the figure of the 13 chapter, C O the suns declination being 20 degrees. and
the angle O K C being 23 degrees. 30 min. the suns greatest declination, and the
angle K C O being the complement of the angle O K C we shall find K O to be the
sine of 56 degrees. 50 min. for the right ascension of the sun required.

CHAP. XX. Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to
find the Ascensionall difference.
FIrst, take the sine of the Suns declination, and setting one foot in the
cosine of the Latitude, with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance:
then at the least distance take it over from the sine of the Latitude: with
which, setting one foot in the cosine of the declination, with the other lay
the thread again to the nearest distance, so shall it show upon the limb the
Suns Ascensionall difference.

So in the figure of the 13 Chapter, the angle M C N being 52 degrees. 30 min. and
the angle C N M being the complement thereof, the one being the latitude, and
the other the co-latitude, and C M being 20 degrees. the sine of the Suns
declination, we shall find M N 28 degrees. 19 min. for the difference of
Ascensions, which being converted into time, makes 1 hour, and something
better then 53 min.

Now when the Sun has North declination, if you take this difference of
Ascension (which is 1 hour 53 min.) out of 6 hours, there will be left 4
hours 7 min. for the time of Sun rising, and if you add it unto 6 hours, the
same will be 7 hours 53 min. for the time of Sun setting.

And so contrarily, when the Sun has South declination, if you add this
ascensionall difference to 6 hours, you shall have the time of his rising, and
if you take it away from 6 hours, that which is left shall be the time of Sun
setting.

CHAP. XXI. The Latitude of the place, the Almicanter, and declination of the
Sun being given, to find the Azimuth.
IF the Suns declination be Northward, then by the 14 or 15 Chapters get his
height in the Vertical Circle for the day proposed: from the sine of which
take the distance unto the sine of the Suns altitude observed: with this
distance, setting one foot in the cosine of the Latitude, with the other lay
the thread to the nearest distance; unto which (being kept still in this
position) take the least distance from the sine of the Latitude, with this
distance, setting one foot in the cosine of the Suns altitude, with the other
lay the thread again to the nearest distance, so shall it show upon the limb
the Suns Azimuth from the East or West, either Northward or Southward.

So in this figure, having N M the distance betwixt the sine of 14 degrees. 33 min.
(the height of the Sun in the Vertical circle) and the sine of 30 degrees. 45 min.
the height of the Sun at the time of observation, and 52 degrees. 30 min. Dialling
diagram the angle N O M the Latitude of the place, the complement whereof is 37
degrees. 30 min. the angle M N O, we shall find M O to be the sine of 23 degrees. 17
min. the Azimuth from the East or West points Southward.

And here note, when the declination is Northward, that as when the latitude of
the Sun given, and his height in the Vertical circle is equal, he is directly
in the East or West, so when his altitude given is greatest, then is the
Azimuth toward the South, and when his altitude given is least, then is the
Azimuth toward the North.

But if the declination of the Sun be Southward, then by the 10 or 12 Chapters,
find the Amplitude for the day proposed.

Now first, take the sine of the Suns altitude, and setting one foot in the
cosine of the Latitude, with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance,
which thread lying still in this position, take it over at the shortest extent
from the sine of the Latitude, this distance add to the sine of the Amplitude,
by setting one foot in the sine of the Amplitude, and extending the other upon
the line of sines, these two being thus joined, take them betwixt your
Compasses, setting one foot in the cosine of the Suns altitude, and with the
other lay the thread to the nearest distance: so shall it show upon the limb
the Suns Azimuth from the East or West, toward the South.

So in this figure, having V C or T N, 19 degrees. 7 min. the Amplitude for the day
proposed, and T V the sine of the Suns altitude being 13 degrees. 20 min. and 52
degrees. 30 min. the angle V X T, the latitude of the place; and the angle T V X,
the complement thereof; we shall find X N to be the sine of 40 degrees. 11 min.
the Azimuth of the Sun from the East or West points Southward, which was
required.

CHAP. XXII. The latitude of the place, the declination and altitude of the Sun
being given, to find the hour of the day.
IF the declination of the Sun be Northward, find the height of the Sun at the
hour of six by the 17 Chapter, betwixt which sine, and the sine of the Suns
altitude given, take the distance upon the line of sines, with which distance,
setting one foot in the cosine of the latitude, with the other lay the thread
to the nearest distance, the thread lying still in this position, take it over
at the shortest extent from the sine of 90 degrees. with this distance, setting one
foot in the cosine of the declination, with the other lay the thread again to
the nearest distance: so shall it show upon the limb the quantity of time from
the hour of six.

So in this figure, having M N the distance betwixt the sine of 9 degrees. 5 min
(the height of the Sun at the hour of six) and the sine of 42 degrees. 33 min. the
height of the Sun given, and the angle M O N 52 degrees. 30 min. the Latitude of
the place, and his complement M N O, we shall find N O to be the sine of 60
degrees. the quantity of time from the hour of six, which 60 degrees. is four hours of
time. And here also note, that if the altitude given be greater then the
altitude of the Sun at the hour of six, then is the time found to the
Southward of the hour of six; but if it be lesser then is it to the Northward.

But if the declination of the Sun be Southward, find his depression at the
hour of six, by the 17 Chapter, for the day proposed, which will be equal to
his height at six, if the quantity of declination be alike.

Dialling diagram

Now take the sine of this depression, and add it to the sine of his altitude
observed, by setting one foot in the sine of his altitude, and extending the
other upon the line of sines: These two being thus joined together in one, take
them betwixt your compasses, and setting one foot in the cosine of the
latitude as before, and with the other, lay the thread to the nearest distance:
which lying still in this position, take it over at the shortest extent from
the sine of 90 degrees. with this distance, setting one foot in the cosine of the
declination as before, with the other lay the thread again to the nearest
distance: so shall it show upon the limb the quantity of time from the hour of
six.

So in this figure, having the sine of 15 degrees. 24 min. the altitude of the Sun
given, and the sine of 9 degrees. 5 min. his depression at the hour of six, joined
both together in one straight line, as T V, and having the angle T X V 52 degrees.
20 min. the Latitude given, and the angle T V X the co-latitude, we shall find
T X to be the sine of 45 degrees. the quantity of time from the hour of six, which
converted into time will make three hours.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK. Showing how to describe the houre-lines upon all sorts of
planes howsoever, or in what Latitude soever situated, by a Quadrant fitted
for the purpose.
CHAP. I. How to examine a plane for an Horizontall Dial.
IF your plane seem to be level with the Horizon, you may try it by laying a
Ruler thereupon, and applying the side A B of your Quadrant to the under side
thereof, and if the thread with the plummet does fall directly upon his level
line A C; which way soever you turn it, it is a horizontall plane. Or if you
set the side A B of your Quadrant upon the upper side of your Ruler, so that
the center may hang a little over the end of your ruler, and holding up a
thread and plummet, so that it may play upon the center, if it shall fall
directly upon his level line A C, making no angle therewith, it is an
horizontall plane, as here you may see by this figure.

Dialling diagram

CHAP. II. Of the trying of planes, whether they be erect or inclining, and to
find the quantity of their inclination.
IF the plane seem to be erect, you may try it by holding the Quadrant, so
that the thread may fall on the plumb line A C, for then if that side of the
Quadrant shall lie close to the plane, it is erect, and a line drawn by that
side of the Quadrant shall be a Vertical line; and the line which crosses
this vertical line at right angles, will be the Horizontall line, as here you
may see in this figure, the plane D E F G being erect, and the line D E being
vertical, the line F G must be horizontall. But if the plane shall incline,
the quantity of inclination may be found out after this manner.

First, you must draw thereon the horizontall line, which you may do upon the
under face, by applying the side A B of your Quadrant thereunto, so as the
thread and plummet may fall upon the plumb line A C, the side A B lying close
with the plane, by which if you draw a line, it shall be parallel to the
Horizon.

Or you may draw a horizontall line upon the upper face, by laying a Ruler
thereupon, and applying the side A B of your Quadrant to the under side
thereof, still moving your Rule, until the thread and plummet does fall
directly upon the plumb line A C, the Rule lying thus close to the plane, you
may thereby draw a line parallel to the Horizon.

Having drawn this horizontall line M N, cross it at right angles with the
perpendicular K D; unto which, if it be the under face, apply the side A B of
your Quadrant, so shall the thread upon the limb give you the angle of
inclination required.

But if it be the upper face of the plane, then lay a Ruler to the
perpendicular K D; unto the under side whereof, apply the side A B of your
Quadrant, as is here showed in this figure, so shall the degree of the Quadrant
give you C A H, the angle of inclination required.

But if it be so, that you cannot apply the side of your Quadrant to the under
side of your Ruler, then set it upon Dialling diagram the upper side thereof,
so that the center thereof may hang a little over the end of the Ruler, and
holding up a thread and plummet, so that it may fall upon the center A, and it
shall show upon the limb, the inclination of the plane, which is the angle C A
H, equal to the former angle.

Here you must be needful that both edges of your Ruler be straight, and one
parallel to the other.

CHAP. III. To find the Declination of a plane.
TO find out this declination you must make two observations by the Sun: the
first is of the angle made between the horizontall line of the plane, and the
Azimuth wherein the Sun is at the time of observation: the second is of the
Suns altitude: both these observations should be made at one instant.

First, for the horizontall distance, having drawn upon your plane a line
parallel to the Horizon, apply the side of your Quadrant thereunto; holding it
parallel to the Horizon, then holding up a thread and plummet at full liberty,
so as the shadow thereof may pass through the center of the Quadrant, observe
the angle made upon the Quadrant by the shadow of the thread, and that side
with the horizontall line, for that is the distance here required.

Then at the same instant, as near as may be, take the Suns altitude, that so
you may find the Suns Azimuth from the East or West points; by the 21 Chapter
of the fourth Book.

Having thus gotten the horizontall distance, with the Azimuth of the Sun for
the same time, describe a Circle as A B C D, representing the horizontall
circle, and draw the diameter A C, which shall represent the horizontall line F
G of the last Chapter. Now supposing the horizontall distance to be 38 degrees. 30
min. the angle O A B of the last Chapter, place it from C Southward to E (that
is from the same end of the horizontall line with which the angle was made upon
the plane) and draw the line E Z: Then supposing the altitude of the Sun at the
same time to be 30 degrees. 45 min. with 11 degrees. 30 min. North declination, and so
by the 21 Chapter of the fourth Book, the Azimuth will be found to be 23 degrees.
17 min. from the East Southward, being the observation was made in the
forenoon: this 23 degrees. 17 min. I place from E (the place of the Sun at the time
of observation;) unto R, (which is the true point of the East,) and draw the
line H R representing the Vertical Circle, so shall the angle made between the
horizontall line of the plane, and the line of East and West, be the
declination of the plane, which in this example is found to be 15 degrees. 13 min.
the angle C Z R.

Dialling diagram

Or you may observe the angle made between the shadow of the thread, and that
side of the Quadrant which lies perpendicular unto the horizontall line of the
plane, which in this example is 51 degrees. 30 min. the complement of the former
angle, and it is the angle O A C in the former Chapter upon the Quadrant.

Now having drawn your Horizontall Circle as before, and the diameter A C for
the horizontall line of the plane, you may cross it at right angles with the
diameter B D, for the Axis of the planes horizontall line, from which as from
D, you may set your horizontall distance on the same side thereof, as before
you found it by your observation, as here from D to E, and draw the line E Z
for the line of the shadow, and having found the Azimuth of the Sun 23 degrees. 17
min. from the East Southward, you may set it from E (the place of the Sun)
Northward to R, and draw the line R Z H for the line of East and West, as
before.

Or if you take the Suns Azimuth from the South, which in this example will be
66 degrees. 43 min. the complement of the former 23 degrees. 17 min. you may set it
from E (the place of the Sun) unto S Southward, and draw the line S Z N for the
Meridian, so shall the arch S D or R C be 15 degrees. 13 min. for the declination
as before.

CHAP. IV. To draw the houre-lines upon the Horizontall, the full North or
South planes, whether erect or inclining.
SEeing the making of these Dials are all after one manner, we will here
proceed to make an Horizontall Dial, by help of the lines upon the Quadrant,
fitted for that purpose.

Therefore having by the 10 Chapter of the third book found the elevation of
the pole above the plane, we may proceed after this manner.

First, draw the line D A F of sufficient length, out of the middle whereof let
fall the perpendicular A B for the Meridian and Substile, then take the line D
E or E F out of your Quadrant, and set it from A to B in the Meridian; through
which point B draw the line E B C parallel to D A F, now supposing the
elevation of the pole above the plane, to be 52 degrees. 30 min. the latitude of
the place; from the Sine thereof take the nearest extent unto A E the line of
latitudes, and set it from A to D, and from A to F both ways, and from B to C,
and from B to E, and draw the lines D C and E F making the long square C D F E:
the two angles whereof C and E shall be the points for the hours of 3 and 9 in
all these kind of planes that declines not from the North or South.

Then applying the thread to the first houre-point in the limb B C or D F, as
to m or g, it will cut the tangent line D E in 5, then take the distance D 5,
and set it down here from D to 5, and from F to 7; with this distance setting
one foot in the Sine of 90 degrees. with the other lay the thread to the nearest
distance; unto which take the shortest extent from the Sine of the elevation of
the pole above the plane: this distance set from B to 1, and from B to 11, then
again apply your thread to the next hour in the limb as at n or h, and it will
cut the tangent line D E at 4 therefore take D 4 from your Quadrant, and set it
from D to 4, and from F to 8, with this distance from the Sine of 90 degrees. open
the thread as before, and take it over from the Sine of the height of the
Style, this distance prick down from B to 2, and from B to 10, so have you all
the houre-points pricked down; by which and the center A you may Dialling
diagram draw all the hour lines, as here you see done, the line A B for 12, and
the line D A F for the two sixes.

For the hour lines before six and after, you may extend their opposite hour
lines beyond the center as was showed in the 8 chapter of the third book.

What is here showed concerning the hours, the like may be understood for the
half hours, by applying the thread thereunto in the limb.

CHAP. V. To draw a Dial upon a South or North erect declining plane.
IN the drawing of all these kind of Dials by help of this Quadrant, when the
Latitude of the place, and the declination of the plane is known, two things
more is to be considered: First, the elevation of the Pole above the plane,:
Secondly, the inclination of the Meridian of the plane, to the Meridian of the
place; both which will speedily be found when you are ready for them.

First therefore, draw the line D A F as before, from the middle whereof let
fall the perpendicular A B for the substilar, and at the distance of the
tangent line D E, draw the line C B E parallel to the line D A F.

Now to find the elevation of the pole above the plane, lay the thread upon
the cosine of the Latitude counted on the limb, and take it over at the
nearest extent from the cosine of the declination, which distance shall be the
sine of the elevation of the pole above the plane.

So the declination of the plane being 32 degrees. in the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30
min. the elevation of the Pole above the plane will be 31 degrees. 5 min. from the
sine of which take the nearest extent unto the line of Latitudes, this distance
set from A to D and F both ways, and from B to C and E, and draw the lines D C
and E F, making the long square C D F E, as in the former Chapter.

For the inclination of Meridians, take the sine of the declination of the
plane, and setting one foot in the cosine of the styles elevation, with the
other lay the thread to the nearest distance, so shall it show upon the limb
the inclination of Meridians to be 38 degrees. 13 min.

Dialling diagram

The thread lying still in this position, observe which of the hours and where
it cutteth; which will be the slope line n I in the point y; to this point y
set the bead, which by this means is fitted to the description of this Dial:
the thread lying still in the former position, you shall see it cut the tangent
D E in the point S upon the Quadrant, therefore take D S with your Compasses,
and prick it down here from D to 6, with this same distance from the sine of 90
degrees. open the thread to the least distance, and taking it over from the sine of
the height of the style; you shall have the distance from B to 12. And here
note, that as in the 13 Chapter of the third Book, the substile is placed on
that side the Meridian which is contrary to the planes declination; so here the
Meridian is placed on that side the substile whereon the declination of the
plane is.

The bead being thus fitted, apply it to every houre-line by removing the
thread, as first, I remove it to the lines m h and B g, and it will cut the
line D E upon the Quadrant in r and q, therefore I take D r and D q, and prick
them down from D to 5 and 4, with these same distances open the thread as
before from the sine of 90; and by taking it over from the sine of the height
of the style, you shall have the distances B 11 and B 10: again, the bead being
applied to the line k E; the thread will cut the co-tangent line in T,
therefore take F T from your Quadrant, and prick it down here from F to 1, with
this fame distance, open the thread from the sine of 90 degrees. as before, and by
taking it over from the sine of the height of the pole above the plane, you
shall have the distance B 7: then again, the bead being applied to the lines l
O and F P, the thread will cut the co-tangent line F E in V and W, therefore
take F V and F W, and prick them down here from F to 2 and 3, with these
distances open the thread from the sine of 90 degrees. and take them over from the
sine of the height of the style, so shall you have the distances B 8 and B 9,
thus have you the twelve hours pricked down, by which points and the center A,
you may draw the houre-lines, as here you see.

In the like manner may the half hours be supplied.

The Dial being thus drawn on paper, you must place it so upon the plane, that
the twelve a clock houre-line may be perpendicular unto the Horizon, according
to the 11 or 15 Chapters of the third Book.

Note, that if the inclination of Meridians shall be more then 45 degrees. so that
the thread does cut the co-tangent line F E, then you must take the distance
from F to the thread, and prick it down either from D or from F upon the line D
C or F E for the twelve a clock point, according as the plane shall decline
either Eastward or Westward, and his parallel taken from the sine of the height
of the style, shall give the distance from B to 6, and so of the rest.

CHAP. VI. To draw a Dial upon an East or West Inclining plane.
IN these planes, as in the former, when we have the latitude of the place and
the inclination of the plane, we have two things more to consider before we can
draw the houre-lines upon the plane.

First, the elevation of the Pole above the plane: Secondly, the inclination of
both Meridians.

For the elevation of the Pole above the plane, lay the thread upon the
Latitude counted in the limb, and take it over at the nearest extent from the
cosine of the inclination, which distance shall be the sine of the elevation
of the Pole above the plane.

So in the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. if a plane shall incline 40 degrees. to the
Horizon, the height of the style will be 37 degrees. 26 min. with which you may
proceed to make your parallelogram or long square, as in the former Chapters.

Then for the inclination of Meridians, take the sine of the inclination of the
plane with your Compasses, and setting one foot in the cosine of the the Poles
elevation above the plane, with the other lay the thread to the nearest
distance, and it will show upon the limb the inclination required.

Thus in the latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. if a plane shall incline 40 degrees. to
the Horizon, the inclination of both meridians, Dialling diagram will be 54
degrees. 2 min. The thread lying still upon this inclination of Meridians, you may
see both which and where it cutteth the houre-lines, and so accordingly
rectify the bead as before was showed.

And you may also see where the thread cutteth the cotangent line E F, that so
you may take the distance from the point F upon the Quadrant, unto the point of
intersection of the thread with the co-tangent line; this distance you must set
here from D to 12, and with the same, open the thread from the sine of 90 degrees.
as before, and take it over from the sine of the height of the style, which
shall be the distance from B to 6, and so you may proceed to prick down the
rest of the hours as in the last Chap was showed.

In all these planes you must place the line of twelve parallel to the Horizon,
according to the 17 Chapter of the third Book, in which Chapter is fully showed
the true situation of this Dial upon the plane.

CHAP. VII. To draw a Dial upon a declining inclining plane.
IN the making of these kind of Dials by this Quadrant, when the latitude of
the place, and the declination, and inclination of the plane is known, there is
six things more to be considered before we can come to the drawing of this
Dial upon the plane.

1 The inclination of the plane to the Meridian. 2 The Meridians ascension. 3
The elevation of the Meridian. 4 The position latitude. 5 The elevation of the
pole above the plane. 6 The inclination of Meridians.
All these six may speedily be found out upon the Quadrant after this manner.

1 To find the inclination of the plane to the Meridian.
Lay the thread upon the inclination of the plane counted in the limb, and
taking it over at the shortest extent from the sine of the planes declination;
you shall have the sine of the complement of the inclination of the plane to
the Meridian.

2 To find the Meridians ascension and elevation.
Take with your Compasses the cosine of the declination, and setting one foot
of your Compasses in the sine of the inclination of the plane to the Meridian,
with the other lay the thread to the nearest distance; so shall it show upon
the limb, the Meridians ascension required.

The thread lying still in this position, take it over from the sine of the
inclination given, and you shall have the elevation of the Meridian his sine,
which was required.

Now if the planes inclination shall be Southward, add the elevation of the
Meridian to your Latitude; so shall the sum (if less then 90 degrees.) be the
position Latitude: but if the sum shall exceed 90 degrees. take the complement
thereof to 180 degrees. for the position Latitude here required.

And if the plane shall incline toward the North, compare the Meridians
elevation with your Latitude, and subduct the lesser out of the greater, so
shall the difference give you the position Latitude; if there be no difference,
it is a declining polar plane, and may be described as in the latter part of
the last Chapter of the third Book.

3 To find the elevation of the Pole above the plane.
Lay the thread to the position Latitude counted in the limb, and take it over
at the nearest extent from the sine of the inclination of the plane to the
Meridian; and you shall have the sine of the elevation of the Pole above the
plane.

4 To find the inclination of Meridians.
Take the cosine of the inclination of the plane to the Meridian, and setting
one foot in the cosine of the height of the style, with the other lay the
thread to the nearest extent, so shall it show upon the limb, the inclination
of the Meridian of the plane, to the Meridian of the place, as was required.

According to these Rules, Suppose a plane to incline toward the North 30 degrees.
and to decline from the South toward the East 60 degrees. in the Latitude of 52
degrees. 30 min. First, I find the inclination of the plane to the Meridian to be
64 degrees. 20 min. Then I find the Meridians ascension to be 33 degrees. 41 min. In
like manner I find the elevation of the Meridian to be 16 degrees. 6 min. and
because the plane inclines toward the North, I compare this arch with the
Latitude of the place, and finding it least I take it therefrom, and there
remains 36 degrees. 24 min. for the position Latitude: and so the elevation of
the pole above the plane is 32 degrees. 20 min. and the inclination of Meridians 30
degrees. 52 min.

The elevation of the Pole above the plane, with the inclination of Meridians
being thus found out, you may proceed to draw the Dial as in the former planes.

The Dial being thus drawn on paper, you may place it in a right situation
upon the plane, by help of the Meridians ascension here found out, with the
directions given in the last Chapter of the third Book.

Dialling diagram

In all kind of plane Dials, the style must be placed over the substile,
making an angle therewith equal to the elevation of the Pole above the plane,
as has been fully showed in the third Book.

CHAP. VIII. In any erect declining Dial, having the distance of the substile
from the Meridian, in a known Latitude; how thereby to get the Cocks elevation,
and the declination.
IN any of these Dials, if the Cock be lost, you may hereby get the height
thereof again, and make it anew, for though it be gone, the substile where it
stood will remain.

First, therefore get the quantity of the angle of deflexio^ by the second
Chapter of the second Book, which is the angle included between the line of 12
and the substilar, which admit to be 22 degrees. 8 min. as in the Dial of the 15
Chap. of the third Book.

This being found, take the sine of the Latitude betwixt your Compasses, and
setting one foot in the cosine of the angle of deflexion found, with the other
lay the thread to the nearest distance: so shall it show upon the limb the
elevation of the Pole above the plane.

So in the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. the distance of the substile from the
Meridian, being 22 degrees. 8 min. as in the said 15 Chap. the elevation of the
Pole above the plane will be 31 degrees. 3 min. by which you may fashion a new Cock
to the Dial at your pleasure.

To find the Declination.

Take the sine of the height of the style, and setting one foot of your
Compasses in the sine of the complement of the Latitude, with the other lay the
thread to the nearest distance: so shall it show upon the limb the complement
of the declination of the plane. So shall you find the declination of the
former plane to be 32 degrees.

The end of the fifth Book.
AN APPENDIX. SHOWING How the Parallels of Declination, the Parallels of the
length of the day, the Jewish, Babylonish and Italian Hours; the Azimuths,
Almicanters, and the like, may be easily inscribed in any Dial whatsoever, by
Rule and Compass only.

Whereby the Suns place, the day of the Month, the Rising and setting of the
Sun, the length of the Day and Night, the point of the Compass, and other
necessaries, may be discovered at first sight, only by looking upon the Dial.

Also how to draw a Dial on the seeling of a Room.

By W. L.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for Thomas Pierrepont, at the Sun in
Paul's Churchyard: 1652.

THE APPENDIX.
CHAP. I. How to describe the Equinoctial, Tropicks; and other parallels of
the Suns course or Declination, in all kind of planes.
ALL Circles of the Sphere whether great or small, that may be projected upon
any Diall-plane, become various according as the planes on which they are to be
drawn are situate; but notwithstanding this, all great Circles, viz* such as
divide the Sphere into two equal parts, as all Hours, Azimuths, and Horizons,
are straight lines, though variously projected, according as the planes on
which they are drawn do lie in respect of them. And all small Circles, viz.
such as divide the Sphere unequally, are Conick Sections, namely, either
Elypses, Hyperbola's, or Parabola's, except they be drawn upon such planes as
lie parallel to those smaller Circles, and therefore the parallels of
declination in the Equinoctial plane, and the Circles of Altitude in an
Horizontall plane, are perfect Circles. For the Equinoctial Dial lying in the
very plain of the Equinoctial Circle is parallel to all the parallels of
declination; as the Horizontall Dial lying in the very plain of the Horizon,
is parallel to all the Almicanters or Circles of Altitude.

Now because the Sun in his course moves continually between the two Tropicks;
and never exceeds those bounds; so likewise, all Astronomicall conclusions
that are to be drawn upon any Dial plane, are limited either by the
Equinoctial, or by one or both of the Tropicks: therefore it is requisite;
first, to show you how to describe the Equinoctial and the Tropicks upon all
kind of planes, because it is them that limit and confine all other
intermediate parallels, whether they be of the Suns entrance into the Signs,
or the Diurnall arches for the length of the day. And therefore I shall first
show you how to perform this work upon such planes as lie parallel to the Axis
of the World, as do the East and West Dials, and the Polar, whether direct or
declining.

. 1. In the East, West, and Polar Dials.
HOw to make an East or West Dial you are taught before, therefore let the
Square A B C D be a plane, on which there is an East Dial drawn, the height of
the style being equal to the distance between the hours of 9 and 6, noted
there with the letters E G, and let it be required to draw upon the same plane
the Equinoctial and the two Tropicks. Now the Equinoctial being a great
circle of the Sphere, it is therefore a straight line, and is represented in
the Dial following by the line H F. The houre-lines and the Equinoctial being
thus drawn, we may proceed to the rest of the work in this manner.

Upon a piece of fine Dialling diagram pastboard, or other convenient matter,
draw a line as O R, and upon O as a center describe the arch of a circle R S,
and because the declination of the Tropic of Cancer or Capricorn is 23 degrees. 31
min. distant from the Equinoctial, on either side thereof, therefore on the
arch R S set 23 degrees. 31 min. from R to S, and draw the line O S, then shall the
line O R represent the Equinoctial, and the other line O S either of the
Tropicks, and this triangular figure O R S, we shall hereafter call the Trigon.

Having fitted your Trigon, you must have recours to your Dial, and from
thence with your Compasses you must first take out the distance E G (equal to
the height of the style of the same Dial) and prick it down in the Trigon from
O to P, and draw the line P 6 perpendicular to O R.

Secondly, going to your plane again, take the distance from G the top of the
style, to 7 in the Equinoctial of your plane; and place that distance in the
Trigon from O to q, and draw the line q 7 perpendicular to O R. Thirdly, take
out of your plane the distance G 8, and prick it down in your Trigon from O to
r, and draw the line r 8 perpendicular to O R. Fourthly, take out of your plane
the distance G 9, and prick it down in your Trigon from O to s; and draw s 9
perpendicular to O R. Fifthly, take out of your plane the distance G 10; and
prick it down in your Trigon from O to t, and draw t 10 perpendicular to O R.
Lastly, take the distance G 11, and prick it down in your Trigon from O to v,
and draw v 11 perpendicular to O R, as before.

These distances being, all of them, taken out of your plane, and placed on
your Trigon, it rests now to show you how they must be again transferred from
the Trigon to the plane. Therefore, to find upon the houre-lines of your
plane, the points through which the Tropic of Cancer must pass you have no
more to do but thus. First, out of your Trigon, take the distance P 6, and set
that same distance upon your plane from 6 to c upon the hour-line of six.
Secondly, take out of your Trigon the distance q 7, and place that distance
upon the plane from 5 to b and from 7 to d, upon the hour lines of 5 and 7.
Thirdly, take out of your Trigon the distance r 8, and set that distance on
your plane from 4 to a, and from 8 to e. Fourthly, take out of your Trigon the
distane s 9, and set it on your plane from 9 to f. Fifthly, take from your
Trigon the distance t 10, and set it on your plane from 10 to g. Lastly, take
out of your Trigon the distance v 11, and set it on your plane from 11 to h.

Dialling diagram

These points a b c d e f g h, being found upon the several and respective
hour lines, shall be the points through which the Tropic of Cancer, shall
pass, therefore draw the line a b c d e f g h, and that shall be the Tropic
of Cancer, so that when the Sun is in Cancer, (which is about the 11 of June)
the top of the shadow of the style of your Dial will run directly along that
line a b c d e f g h, and when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, that is, in the
beginning of Aries or Libra, (which is on the 10 of March, or the 12 of
September) the top of the shadow of the style will run along the Equinoctial
line E F.

The Tropic of Cancer being drawn, I will now show you how to draw the Tropic
of Capricorn, which differs nothing from that of Cancer, because they have
both of them like declination from the Equinoctial: therefore the distance 8 k
being made equal to the distance 8 e, and the distance 9 l equal to 9 f; and
the distance 10 m equal to 10 g, you shall have the points k l m upon the
hours of 8, 9 and 10, through which points k l m draw the line k l m, etc.
which line shall represent the Tropic of Capricorn, along which line the top
of the shadow of the style shall run about the 11 of December, when the Sun is
in Capricorn.

Having thus plainly shown you how to insert the Equinoctial and Tropicks into
your plane, I will now give you one rule by which you may put on any other
intermediate parallels of the Suns course, they differing nothing at all from
the directions formerly given you to insert the Tropicks.

Consider therefore what parallels you would put on your plane, and find what
declination the sun has when he is in such a parallel, and accordingly insert
those degrees of declination into your Trigon, as before you did for the
Tropicks.

Example, Let it be required to put upon your plane, the parallels of the Suns
entrance into the 12 signs of the Zodiaque: You must, first, find what
declination the Sun has when he enters any of those Signs, which this little
Table does plainly show, by which you may see, that when the Sun enters into
Taurus, Virgo, Scorpio, or Pisces, his declination is 11 degrees 30 minutes,
and when he is in the beginning of Gemini, Leo, Sagitarius or Aquarius, his
declination is 20 degrees 12 minutes.

A TABLE showing what Declination the Sun has at his entrance into the twelve
SIGNS.
North Decli. D M South Decli. Aries 00 00 Libra Taurus Virgo 11 30 Scorpio
Pisces Gemini Leo 20 12 Sagitarius Aquarius Cancer 23 31 Capricorn

Therefore take 11 degrees. 30 min. in your Compasses, and place it in your Trigon
from R unto V, and draw the line O V, which shall represent the parallel of
Taurus, Virgo, Scorpio and Pisces. Also take 20 degrees. 12 min. in your compasses
and place it in your Trigon from R unto X, and draw O X, which shall represent
the parallel of Gemini, Leo, Sagitarius and Aquarius.

These parallels being placed in your Trigon according to their true
declination from the Equinoctial, they are to be transferred into your plane
in all respects as the Tropicks were, by taking out of your Trigon the
distances from the line O R, to the several points where the hours cross the
parallel, and place the same distances upon your plane from the Aequinoctiall
upon the respective hour lines, from which they were taken out of the Trigon,
and through these points draw the lines in your plane, which shall be the true
parallels of the Suns course at his entrance into all the 12 Signs of the
Zodiaque, to which you may set the Characters of the Signs, as you see done in
the figure.

And here note, that if you draw upon your plane the halves and quarters of
hours, and put them into your Trigon, and transfer them to your plane again,
you shall then have more points, through which your parallels must pass, which
will much help you in the drawing thereof, (especially in large planes) for
there is no better way to draw these kind of lines, but by finding a great
number of points, and so draw them by hand.

Note also, that whatsoever is here spoken of the East and West Dials, the same
in all respects is to be observed in putting on the parallels of the Suns
course in all planes that lie parallel to the Axis of the world as the Polar,
whether direct or declining.

In all these kinds of planes, as the East, West, and Polar, the style were
best to be made of a straight piece of wire, equal in length to the line E G,
fixed in the point E, standing perpendicular unto the plane, the end thereof at
G being filed very fine and sharp, proportionable to the greatness of the
plane, for all these Astronomicall conclusions are showed (not by the shadow of
the whole length of the style, but) by the very Apex or top thereof, and
therefore the more care ought to be had in the forming and making of it.

The line MEN in the former East Dial is called the Horizontall line, because
it lies parallel to the Horizon, and by the meeting of the parallels of the
Suns course with this line, the rising of the Sun may be nearly estimated, for
there you see that the Tropic of Cancer cutteth this line near the point M,
which is a little before the four a clock hour-line, which shows, that when
the Sun is in the Tropic of Cancer, he rises somewhat before four in the
morning, in like manner the Tropic of Capricorn cutteth the Horizontall line
something after 8, at which time the Sun rises being in Capricorn, but this by
the way the farther use of this line shall be showed hereafter.

I have been the larger in the work of this plane, because I intend to be more
brief in those which follow, and this being well and truly understood, the
others will need very few precepts or examples; yet I shall not omit any thing,
but make it apparent to the meanest capacity. Having thus finished the East or
West planes, I will now show you how to do the like in the Horizontal, full
South or Norrh planes, which are the next in order.

. 2. In the North, South, and Horizontall Dials.
IN all these planes the substiler and the Meridian are all one, and the height
of the style, in the Horizontall Dial is always equal to the latitude of the
place, and you are to take notice, that whatsoever is here said of the full
North and South upright planes, the same is to be understood of the full North
and South reclining or inclining, all which in those latitudes whose complement
is equal to the height of the style they are erect direct planes, and in those
latitudes which are equal to the height of the style above such reclining
planes, they are horizontal planes. One example therefore in one plane will be
sufficient for all the rest. Therefore, in the latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. Let
it be required to describe the Equinoctial, and the two Tropicks in a full
South erect plane.

Having drawn your Dial, with the hours, halves and quarters, as also the
line C Q for the style, you must make choice of some convenient point in the
style as at S for the Gnodus or knot which must give the shadow to the Tropicks
and other parallels of declination, for all these Astronomicall conclusions are
not showed by the shadow of the whole length of the style or Axis, as the hour
is, but by some point therein which represents the center of the earth, which
in the Dial following is the point S, and the triangular style in that Dial
is represented by the triangle C S L, whereof C L is called the substilar, C S
the Axis of the style, and S L the perpendicular style, the top of which, viz.
S, is the point we are in this place to respect.

The Dial being drawn, and the Triangle C S L made equal to the Cock of the
Dial, you must upon a piece of pastboard draw the Triangle O P R equal to the
style in your Dial C S L, making R O equal to C L the substilar, P O equal
to C S the axis of the style, and P R equal to S L the length of the
perpendicular style.

Then from the point P, raise a perpendicular as P B, representing the
Equinoctial, and on P as a center, describe the arch A B C, now because the
Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn do decline 23 degrees. 31 min. from the
Equinoctial, therefore take 23 degrees. 31 min. from your Scale of Chords, and set
it off upon the arch A B C from B to A, and from B to C, and draw the lines P A
and P C representing the two Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn. This done,
extend the line of the substilar R O (which in North or South erect direct
planes, I told you was always the same with the twelve aclock line) from O to
12, cutting the Equinoctial line P B in the point a, then with your compasses
take the distance O a out of your Trigon, and place it in your plane from the
center C unto a, and draw the line a perpendicular to the substile or line of
12. The Equinoctial being drawn: First, take out of your plane the distance C
b, and place that distance in your Trigon from O unto b, and draw the line O b
1, representing the hour of 1 or 11 in your Dial. Secondly, take out of your
plane the distance C c, and place that in your Trigon from O unto c, and draw
the line O c 2, representing the houre-lines of 2 or 10. Thirdly, take out of
your plane the distance C d, and place it in your Trigon from O unto d, and
draw the line O d 3, for the hours of 9 and 3. Fourthly, from our plane take
the distance C e, and set in your Trigon from O unto e, and draw the line O e 4
representing the hours of 4 and 8. And thus must you do with the rest of the
hours in your plane if occasion require.

These lines O a; O b, O c, O d, and O e, in your Trigon, being extended, do
cut the Tropic of Cancer P A in the points 12, 1, 2, and 3: therefore out of
your Trigon take the distances O 12, O 1, O 2, O 3, O 4, and set them upon
their correspondent hour lines of your plane, from the center C unto g h i k
and l, so shall the points g h i k and l be the points upon the houre-lines,
through which the Tropic of Cancer must pass, and is therefore noted with the
character of Cancer at both ends.

Dialling diagram

Now before you draw the Tropic of Capricorn, it is necessary to draw the
horizontall line of your plane A B, which line in all upright planes must be
drawn through the point L, the foot of the perpendicular style, and
perpendicular to the Meridian or line of 12: And in all planes whatsoever, this
line must be drawn through the intersection of the Equinoctial with the hour
of six. This line ought first to be drawn, because it is very improper to
extend the Tropicks or other parallels of declination, above the Horizontall
line, because at what hour any parallel of declination cutteth this line, on
either side of the Meridian, at that time does the Sun rise or set, as was
instanced in the last.

Dialling diagram

Now the Tropic of Capricorn must be put upon your plane in the same manner as
that of Cancer, by taking out of your Trigon the distances from O, where the
several houre-lines a b c d e do cut the Tropic of Capricorn P C, and place
them on your plane from the center C upon the respective houre-lines, and
through those points so found, draw the line, representing the Tropic of
Capricorn.

And in the same manner may the parallels of the other Signs be drawn upon
your plane, by placing them into your Trigon according to their declinations,
and afterward transfer them into your plane, as you see in the former figure.

The rules that have been here given for the describing of the parallels of the
Signs in this erect direct plane, is universal in all planes, observing this
one exception; that whereas in all erect direct planes the Equinoctial is
drawn perpendicular to the Meridian or line of 12, so in all other planes
whatsoever, the Equinoctioll must be drawn perpendicular to the substile, and
then the work will be the same in all respects, as may appear more largely in
the next Section.

. 3. In Declining, or Declining Reclining Dials.
THe last caution preceding is sufficient for the performing of this work, and
therefore needs no example: However, suppose an upright plane to decline 32
degrees. from the South Eastwards, in the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. and let it be
required to describe the two Tropicks and the Equinoctial upon such a plane.

The Dial being drawn, with the style and substile, make choice of some
convenient point in the style or Axis, as at C; for the Knot that must give the
shadow, and from that point C, let fall a perpendicular to the substile, as C
B, and through the point B, draw the horizontall line D E perpendicular to the
line of 12 a clock, then shall the Triangle A B C represent the style of the
Dial. Then provide a Trigon, as this figure shows, making the Triangle F G H
equal to the cock of your Dial, viz. F H equal Dialling diagram to the Axis
of the style, G H equal to the substilar, and F G equal to the perpendicular
of the style, extending the line G H to O; then from the point F, raise the
perpendicular F K, and on F as a center describe the arch of a circle L K M,
setting 23 degrees. 31 min. (the declination of the Tropicks) from K to L and M.
Then with your Compasses take out of your Trigon the distance H c, and set that
distance on the substile of your plane from the center A unto P, and draw the
line P perpendicular to the substilar. This done, the manner of inserting the
Tropicks will be directly the same as before, for if you take with your
compasses the distance from A the center of your Dial, to the several points
where the houre-lines cross the Equinoctial, and put them into your Trigon
from H upon the line F K, and draw lines from H through those points and both
the Tropicks F L and F M, setting the number of the hour from whence the
distances were taken in the plane at the end of each line as is done in the
Trigon, then you have no more to do, but to take the distance from H to the
intersections of these houre-lines with the Tropicks, and transfer those
distances to your plane again upon the correspondent houre-lines, in all
respects as in the work of the former Sections: So shall you have described the
two Tropicks and the Equinoctial. And by the same rules and reason any other
intermediate parallels of declination.

And here note, that whatsoever is said of upright decliners, the same is also
to be understood of those planes which both decline and recline, and for the
horizontal line in all reclining or inclining planes, it must pass through the
foot of the perpendicular style, and the intersection of the Equinoctial with
the hour of fix.

Dialling diagram

CHAP. II. Showing how to inscribe the parallels of the length of the day on
any plane,
THe parallels of the length of the day, and those of the Signs are inscribed
upon all kind of planes by one and the same rules, they being in the Sphere
the same Circles; so that as when you put on the parallels of the Suns entrance
into the 12 Signs, you seek what declination he has, and accordingly proceed
as before; so now for the parallels of the length of the day you must seek
what declination the Sun has at such a length of the day as you would put into
your plane, which that you may do, I have here added the rule following.

Consider how much longer or shorter your day proposed is then 12 hours, and
take the difference, then the proportion will be; As the Sine of 90 degrees,
Is to the Sine of half the difference;
So is the Tangent complement of the Latitude of the place,
To the Tangent of the declination that the Sun shall have
when the day is at such a length as you require.


As for example, Let it be required to know what declination the Sun shall have
when the day is 16 hours long in the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. The
difference betwixt 16 hours and 12 hours is 4 hours, (or 60 degrees.) the half
of which is 30 degrees. Therefore say, As the Sine of 90 degrees. 10,000000 Is to the
Sine of 30 degrees. which is half the difference 9,698970 So the Tangent
complement of the Latitude 37 degrees. 30 min. 9,884980 To the Tangent of the
Declination of the sun. 20 degrees. 59 m. 9,583950


And such declination shall the Sun have when the day is either 16 hours or 8
hours long in the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min.

Now if the day be above 12 hours long, the Sun has North declination, but if
less then 12 hours long he has South declination. For those who are ignorant
of these kind of prportions, they had best to read Mr. Norwoods Doctrine of
Triangles. But that nothing might be wanting, and not much to trouble the
learner, I have here added a Table showing what declination the Sun has at
such time that the day is either 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, or 16 hours
long, in the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. which Table was made by the preceding
rules.

By which table you may see Length of the day. The Suns Declinatio^ D M 8 20 59
9 16 22 10 11 14 11 5 43 12 0 0 13 5 43 14 11 14 15 16 22 16 20 59 that when
the day is 12 hours long the Sun has then no declination, but is in the
Equinoctial; but when the day is either 11 or 13 hours long, the declination
is then 5 degrees. 43 min. and when the day is either 9 or 15 hours long, the Sun
has 16 degrees. 22 min. of declination, and so for the rest, as in the Table.

For the placing of these parallels of the length of the day upon any of the
forementioned planes; you must insert these angles of declination into your
Trigon between the Tropicks, and proceed in all respects as before. I will
therefore give you but one example, which shall be in a full South plane, upon
which and the Horizontall these arches do appear most uniform.

Now let it be required to draw the parallels of the Suns course, when the day
is 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 hours long; upon a full South plane in
the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min.

Having drawn your Dial with Hours halves and quarters, and also made choice
of some convenient point in the style to give the shadow, and draw the
horizontall line C D, then make the triangle S A R in this Trigon equal to the
triangle S A R in the following South Dial; as S A equal to the Axis of the
style, A R equal to the substilar, and R S equal to the perpendicular style:
then draw the perpendiculars S G for the Equinoctial, and describe the arch O
G P, making G O and G P each of them 23 degrees. 31 min. for the two Tropicks,
which you must transfer into your plane as before.

Now for the drawing of the parallels of the length of the day, you must have
recourse to the little Table before going, and therein see what declination the
Sun has at such a day as you would put into your plane, as when the day is
either 8 or 16 hours long, the declination is 20 degrees. 59 min. therefore place
in your Trigon 20 degrees. 59 min. from G unto a both ways, and draw the lines S a
and S a, marking them at the ends with 8 and 16 the length of the day for which
they serve. Likewise; when the day is either 9 or 15 hours long, then the Suns
declination is 16 degrees. 22 min. therefore set 16 degrees. 22 min. from G unto b both
ways; and draw S b and S b. Also when the day is either 10 or 14 hours long,
then the declination is 11 degrees. 14 min. which set from G to c both ways, and
draw S c and S c. Lastly, when the day is 11 or 13 hours long the declination
is 5 degrees. 43 min. which set from G unto d both ways, and draw S d and S d,
noting them with numbers answering to the length of the day, as you see in the
Trigon, when the day is just 12 hours long it is Equinoctial and has no
declination, and is signified in the Trigon by the line S G.

Dialling diagram

For the manner how to transfer these parallels of the length of the day into
the plane, it is to be performed in all respects as in the former Chapter for
the inserting of the Signs, not at all differing therefrom, and therefore I
shall forbear to give you any farther instructions for the performance thereof
but give you the figure of a South plane with these parallels drawn thereon,
which will instruct more then a whole Chapter of information.

Dialling diagram

And thus much for the drawing of the parallels of the Signs and Diurnall
arches in all kind of planes. I will now proceed to show you how some other
Astronomicall conclusions (which are very pleasing and delightful) may be
inscribed upon all sorts of Dials.

CHAP. III. Showing how the Italian and Babylonish hours may be drawn upon all
kind of planes.
THe Italians account their hours from the Suns setting, and the Babylonians
from his rising, so that these kind of houre-lines being drawn upon any plane,
you may know (by inspection only) how many hours are past since the last
setting or rising of the Sun. The inscription of these houre-lines into any of
the former planes is very easy, the work of the last Chapter being well
understood.

Because that upon a full South or an Horizontall plane, these houre-lines show
themselves most uniform, I have therefore for example sake, made choice of a
full South Dial, upon which it shall be shown how to draw both the Italian and
Babylonish hours.

Your Dial being drawn, and the two Tropicks and the Equinoctial thereon
inscribed, and also the Horizontall line, you must draw in your Dial two
obscure parallels of the length of the day, one when the day is 8 hours, and
the other when the day is 16 hours long, expressed in the following Dial by
the two pricked arches near the two Tropicks, the uppermost of which is the
parallel of the Suns course when the day is 8 hours long, and the undermost is
the parallel of his course when the day is 16 hours long, and the
Aequinoctiall is the parallel of the Suns course when the day is 12 hours long.

Your Dial being thus prepared, and these parallels thus inserted, the
inscription of these houre-lines is very easy and plain to be understood. To
begin then with the inscription of the Babylonish hours (which are the hours
from the Suns rising.) First, It is apparent that when the day is 8 hours
long, that the Sun rises at 8 in the morning, so that at that time, the first
hour after the suns rising is 9 in the morning. Secondly, when the day is 12
hours long, the Sun rises at 6 in the morning, so that at that time the first
hour after the suns rising is 7 in the morning. Thirdly, when the day is 16
hours long, the Sun rises at 4 in the morning, so that the first hour after
his rising is 5 in the morning, as plainly appears by this Table: Length of
the Day. 8 12 16 Hours from Sun rising. 1 9 7 5 2 10 8 6 3 11 9 7 4 12 10 8 5 1
11 9 6 2 12 10 7 3 1 11 8 4 2 12 9 5 3 1 10 6 4 2 11 7 5 3 By which you may
perceive that when the day is 8 hours long, the seventh hour from sun rising
is 3 in the afternoon. When the day is 12 hours long, the seventh hour from
sun rising is 1 in the afternoon. And when the day is 16 hours long, the
seventh hour from the suns rising is 11 before noon, as by this Table does
evidently appear. And therefore a straight line drawn in your Dial through
those points where the common houre-lines of your Dial cross the respective
parallels of the days length, shall show the true quantity of hours since the
suns rising at all times of the year, which is the Babylonish hour.

Dialling diagram

For example, let it be required to draw the seventh hour from the suns rising
in your Dial. First, by the Table you see, that in the parallel of 8 hours
for the length of the day, the seventh hour from the suns rising is 3 in the
afternoon, therefore observe where the houre-line of three crosses the
parallel of 8 hours, which is at a. Secondly, by the Table you see that in the
parallel of 12 hours for the length of the day, the seventh hour from sun
rising is then 1 in the afternoon, wherefore observe where the houre-line of 1
crosses the Equinoctial, which is at b. Thirdly, by the Table you see that in
the parallel of 16 hours for the length of the day, the seveth hour from the
suns rising is 11 before noon, therefore observe where the houre-line of 11
crosses the parallel of 16 hours, which is at c: then draw the straight line a
b c, which shall be the seventh Babylonish hour, or the seventh hour from the
suns rising all the year long.

And by this rule, and the help of the Table, you may draw all the other hours
from sun rising, as you see them drawn in the figure, and put numbers to them
as you see there done.

1 Note, That if any of the points you are to make use of for the drawing of
any of these hours fall without your plane, you must in this case extend your
houre-line; parallel and Equinoctial, beyond the limits of your Diall-plane,
and there make use of the points, but you need extend the line you draw no
farther then the bounds of the plane, as here in the figure you see the first
hour from Sun rising crosses not the Equinoctial and the houre-line of 7
within the plane, but if the Equinoctial and the houre-line of 7 were
extended, it would cross.

2 Note, That if any of the three points you are to make use of do so far
exceed the limits of your plane, that it will be either impossible (or at least
very troublesome) to extend the houre-lines so far that then in that case any
two of the three points will sufficiently serve the turn.

3 Note, That as the hours from sun rising were put into the plane, by the
same rule may the hours from sun setting (or Italian hours) be inserted, the
difference being only in the numbering of them; the hours from the sun rising
being numbered from the West side of the Horizontall line by 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, and 11; and the hours from the suns setting are denominated from
the East side of the Horizon, and numbered backwards by 23, 22, 21, 20, 19, 18,
17, 16, 15, 14, and 13, as in the figure does evidently appear.

4 Note, That these Italian and Babylonish hours are inscribed on all planes by
help of this little Table, and the rules and cautions delivered in this
Chapter, and therefore more examples were superfluous.

CHAP. IV. Showing how the Jewish hours may be drawn upon any plane.
IT was the custom of the Ancients to divide their day and also their night
(whether long or short) into 12 equal parts, beginning their day at the suns
rising, and their night at the suns setting; so that 12 of the clock at noon
was always the sixth hour of their day, and 12 at night was always the sixth
hour of their night, and according to this division were their Dials drawn; so
that all the Somer the hours of their day were longer then the hours of their
night; and all the Winter, the hours of their night were longer then those of
their day; and when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, then the hours of their
day and night were equal, and the same with those of our account, but at all
other times of the year different.

The inscribing of these hours into all kind of planes is very easy, being
much like the drawing of the Babylonish and Italian hours before taught.

Having therefore drawn your Dial (which in this example (for the avoiding of
many figures) we will have to be the full South plane used before in Chap. 2.
of this Appendix) with the hours, halves, and quarters, and also drawn the two
Tropicks and the parallels of the length of the day thereupon, as you see here
done in this figure. Then make choice of two parallels of the length of the
day, which must be both of them equidistant from the Equinoctial, which let be
the parallels of 9 hours and 15 hours, both which are three hours different
from the Equinoctial on either side thereof, and these two parallels are the
most convenient for this our purpose, because the Jewish hours will fall (in
these two parallels) justly upon the hours, halves and quarters of the common
houre-lines, and so be the easier drawn. Now the points through which every one
of the Jewish hours must pass is exactly showed by this little Table, wherein
you may see that the first Jewish hour must be drawn through 5 hours 45 min.
(or 5 hours three quarters) in the parallel of 15: through 7 hours in the
Equinoctial: Jewish hours. The parallel of 15 hours. Equinoctial. The parallel
of 9 hours. H. M. H. H. M. 1 5 45 7 8 15 2 7 0 8 9 0 3 8 15 9 9 45 4 9 30 10 10
30 5 10 45 11 11 15 6 12 0 12 12 0 7 1 15 1 0 45 8 2 30 2 1 30 9 3 45 3 2 15 10
5 0 4 3 0 11 6 15 5 3 45 12 7 30 6 4 30 and through 8 hours and a quarter in
the parallel of 9 hours.

In like manner, the second Jewish hour must be drawn in your plane through 7
of the clock in the parallel of 15: through 8 a clock in the Equinoctial: and
through 9 of the clock in the parallel of 9 hours, and so of all the rest,
according as you see in this Table, and as you may perceive them drawn in the
South plane, the numbers belonging to these hours being set at both ends of
each houre-line.

Dialling diagram

CHAP. V. Showing how to draw the Azimuths, or Vertical Circles in all kind
of planes.
THe Azimuths are great Circles of the Sphere meeting together in the Zenith of
the place, and are variously inscribed on all planes according to their
situation. In the Horizontall plane they meet in a center with equal angles.
In all upright planes, whether direct or declining, they are parallel to the
Meridian or line of 12. And in all reclining planes they meet together in a
point which is the Zenith of the place. These Azimuths being great Circles in
the Sphere, are therefore straight lines in all planes, and may be drawn as
follows.

. 1. In the Horizontall plane.
IN the Horizontall plane these Azimuths are most easily inserted, for your
Dial being drawn, with the Tropicks thereon, you have no more to do, but upon
the foot of the perpendicular style to describe a Circle, which you may divide
into 32 equal parts (beginning at the Meridian) answering to the 32 points of
the Mariners Compass: Or else you may divide the same Circle into 90 equal
parts, according to the Astronomicall division, and through each of those
points draw straight lines from the foot of the style, and set numbers or
letters to them, either by 10, 20, 30, 40, etc. if you divide it into 90, or
else by South, S by W, S S W, S W by S, etc. if you divide the Circle according
to the Mariners Compass. This is so plain that it needs no example.

. 2. In the East or West erect planes.
YOur Dial being finished, you may draw upon a piece of Pastboard the line M E
N, representing the Horizontall line M E N in your Dial then on the point E,
raise the perpendicular E Q equal to the line EG in your Dial, and on Q as a
center describe the semicircle K E L, and divide one half thereof, namely, the
Quadrant E L into eight equal parts, representing one quarter of the Mariners
Compass, and from the center Q draw lines through each of those divisions
extending them till they cut the line M E N in the points, then with your
compasses take the distances from E to every one of these points, etc. and
prick them down in the Horizontall line of your plane from E to, from which
points draw lines perpendicular to the horizontall line M E N, which shall be
the Azimuths or points of the Compass between the East and the South. Divide
likewise the other Dialling diagram Quadrant of the Circle E K into eight
equal parts, and draw lines from the center Q through three of them, till they
cut the horizontall line as you see in the figure, and there also draw lines
perpendicular to the Horizon, and these lines shall be the Azimuths between the
East and the North, viz. so many of them as your plane is capable to receive,
which the following figure does most plainly show.

Here note, that as the East Dial shows all the morning hours from sun
rising to the Meridian; and the West Dial shows all the afternoon hours from
the Meridian to his setting; so does the East Dial show all the Azimuths from
the Suns rising till Noon, and the West Dial all the Azimuths from noon till
his setting.

Dialling diagram

. 3. In the full North and South erect planes.
THe drawing of the Azimuths upon the full North or South erect planes is very
little different from the drawing of the same Circles upon the East or West
planes. But for example, let it be required to draw the Azimuths upon the full
South Dial: the Tropicks and the Equinoctial being drawn, together with the
Horizontall line, you must upon a piece of Pastboard draw the line A L B,
representing the Horizontall line A L B in the South Dial next following; then
on the point L raise the perpendicular L S, making L S equal to L S the
perpendicular style of the Dial, and on S as a center describe the semicircle
E L F, and divide each Quadrant thereof, namely E L and L F into 8 equal parts
(each Quadrant representing one quarter of the Mariners Compass) and through
each of those divisions draw lines from the center S, till they cut the line A
L B in the points m n o p and q, then Dialling diagram with your Compasses take
the distance L q, and set that distance upon the horizontall line of your plane
from L unto q both ways. Likewise, take the distance L p, and set that
distance in your plane upon the horizontall line thereof from L unto p both
ways. Also take the distances L o, L n, and L m, and set them upon the
horizontall line in your Dial from L to o, and n, and m, on each side of the
Meridian. Lastly, if from the points m, n, o, p, and q, you draw lines parallel
to the Meridian or line of 12, they shall be the true Azimuths upon your plane,
and these Azimuths may be put on either according to the Astronomicall account
by 10, 20, 30, 40, etc. or else by the points Dialling diagram of the Compass,
as in this figure, according as you shall divide the Semicircle E L F: And thus
much concerning erect direct planes.

. 4. In erect declining planes.
IN upright declining planes the Azimuths are easily inscribed, little
differing from the former. Draw therefore your Dial, which we will suppose to
be the South declining plane before used in the third Section of the first
Chapter of this Appendix, which declineth from the South Eastward 32 degrees.

Your Dial being drawn and the Equinoctial, and Tropicks, and also the
Horizontall line, thereon inscribed, upon a piece of pastboard draw the line D
B E, representing the horizontall line D B E in your Dial, then on the point B
raise the perpendicular B C, making B C equal to B C the perpendicular style
in your Dial; then on the point C as a center describe the Semicircle R B S,
then out Dialling diagram of your plane take the distance between B the foot of
the style, and the point O, where the Meridian crosses the horizontall line,
and set that distance on your pastboard from B unto O, and draw the line C O.
cutting the Semicircle in the point K. at which point K you must begin to
divide your Semicircle into 16 equal parts, then from the center C draw lines
through each of those divisions till they cut the line D E in the points a b c
d e f g h i k l and m.

Lastly, with your Compasses take the distances O a, O b, O c, O d, etc. out of
your pastboard, and prick the same distances down on your plane from O to a b c
d e f g h i k l and m, and from those points draw lines parallel to the
Meridian, which lines shall be the Azimuths required, which you must number
according to the situation of the Dialling diagram plane, viz. the Western
Azimuths on the East side of the Meridian, and the Eastern Azimuths on the West
side of your Dial, as you see them here numbered in this figure.

. 5. In East and West Incliners, and also in North and South Incliners
declining.
IN all these planes, because the Zenith of the place cutteth the plane
oblikely, making oblike angles therewith, there is in all these planes two
points to be found in each plane before the Azimuths can be drawn, the one is
the Zenith of the plane, the other the Zenith of the place, in which all the
Azimuths must meet with unequal angles.

I. Therefore suppose a direct South plane to recline 25 degrees. from the Zenith,
the complement thereof is 65 degrees. the inclination of the under face of the same
plane to the Horizon, therefore make the perpendicular side of the style
Radius, then the Meridian will be a tangent line thereunto, upon which
Meridian, from the foot of the perpendicular style, prick down 65 degrees. for the
Zenith point where all the Azimuths must meet. and 25 degrees. for the horizontall
point, through which the horizontall line must pass, Then describing a
Semicircle, divide it into 16 parts, and lay a ruler from the center and each
of those divisions till it cut the horizontall line, and thereon make marks,
then lay a ruler upon the Zenith point and each of these marks in the
horizontall line, and they shall be the true Azimuths belonging to your plane,
which you must number according to the situation thereof.

II. In the East and West Incliners, and in the North and South decliners
inclining, because the 12 of clock line and the substilar are several lines,
you must therefore draw a line perpendicular to the base of the plane, which
must pass directly through the foot of the perpendicular style, then make the
perpendicular style the Radius, and the other line last drawn shall be a
Tangent line thereto, upon which line set off the inclination of the plane to
the Horizon, and that shall give you the Zenith point, and the horizontall
point shall be found by setting off the reclination of the plane from the
Zenith, and here note that the Zenith point will always fall upon the Meridian.

CHAP. VI. Of the Almicanters or circles of Altitude.
THe circles of altitude have the same relation to the Azimuths, as the
Tropicks and parallels of declination have to the houre-lines, and therefore,
as the parallels of declination in the Equinoctial plane are perfect circles,
so are the circles of Altitude in an Horizontall plane.

The inscription of these into all kind of planes is (in a manner) the same
with the parallels of declination, but whereas in the drawing the parallels of
declination, you take the houre-lines out of your plane and put them in a
Trigon; so in this you must take the Azimuths out of your plane, and put them
into a Trigon for that purpose, and so transfer them to the plane again as you
did the other; and because these are small circles, therefore they become
Conick sections, except on such planes as lie parallel to the Zenith, which is
only the Horizontall.

CHAP. VII. How to draw a Dial on the Seeling of a Room.
BEcause the direct beams of the Sun can never shine upon the seeling of a
Room, they must therefore be reflected thither by help of a small piece of
Looking glass conveniently fixed in some Transam of the window, so that it may
lie exactly parallel to the Horizon. The place being chosen, and the glass
therein fixed, you must draw upon the seeling of the Room a Meridian line, as
you are taught in the former Books, which Meridian line must be so drawn that
it may pass directly over the glass before placed, which you may perceive how
to do by holding a thread and plummet from the top of the seeling till it fall
directly upon the superficies of the glass.

The foundation being thus laid, we will now proceed to the work, which amongst
so many ways as there are to perform it, I shall make choice of that which I
suppose to Dialling diagram be most familiar and easy. Draw therefore upon
paper or otherwise an horizontall Dial for the Latitude in which you are, as
is the Horizontall Dial foregoing for the Latitude of 52 degrees. 30 min. Then
upon the center thereof at A, with the Radius of your line of Chords describe
the Semicircle B C D, cutting the houre-lines in the points a b c d and e, then
with your Compasses you may measure the quantity of each hours distance from
the Meridian, by taking the distance from C to a b c d and e, so shall you
find the distance between the Meridian and 11 or 1 to be 12 degrees. Likewise the
distance between the Meridian and 10 or 2 to be 24 degrees. 37 min. and the
distance between the Meridian and 9 or 3, to be 38 degrees. 25 min. and so of the
rest as by the figure and the second column of the Table does appear. This
done, take the complement of every of these angles, so shall the complement of
12 degrees. be 78 degrees. and the complement of 24 degrees. 37 min. be 65 degrees. 23 min. and
so of all the rest, as by the third column of the Table may appear.

The Hours. The angle that each houre-line makes with the Merid. The complement
of each houre-lines angle with the Meridia^ 12 00d. 00m. 90d. 00m. 1 11 12 00
78 00 2 10 24 37 65 23 3 9 38 25 51 35 4 8 53 58 36 2 5 7 71 20 18 40 6 90 00
00 00

Having these things prepared, Let the line L R in the following figure
represent a Meridian line drawn upon the seeling of a room, and let K be the
glass fixed directly under the said Meridian upon some transam of the window,
then laying one end of a string upon the glass at K, extend the other up to
the Meridian at L, which point L you may find by moving the string to and fro
upon the Meridian line, till another holding the side of a Quadrant to the
moveable string, he shall find the thread and plummet to fall directly upon
the complement of the Latitude, which in this example is 37 degrees. 30 min.

The point L being thus found upon the Meridian, draw the line L AE
perpendicular to the Meridian L R, which line shall be the Equinoctial.

Having thus done, upon a table or such like draw a line which shall be of
equal length with LK, the distance from the glass to the point L on the
seeling, which line divide into 10 equal parts, and each of those (or at least
one of them) into 10 other parts, so shall you have in all 100 parts, each of
which you must suppose to be divided into 10 other smaller parts, so shall the
whole line contain 1000 parts, as in the figure is expressed by the line S.

Your line thus supposed to be divided into 1000 parts, you must take with your
compasses out of the said line 268 of them, (which is the natural tangent of
15 degrees.) and place them upon the Equinoctial line from L to M. Then take 577
the natural tangent of 30 degrees. and place it from L to N. Then take the whole
line, and set it from L to P. Lastly, take 732 parts and set them from P to Q:
so shall the points M N P and Q be the points through which the hours of 1 2 3
and 4 must pass, and the same work being done on the other side of the
Meridian, you Dialling diagram shall find points through which the houes of 11
10 9 and 8 shall pass: the hours of 5 in the morning and 7 at night will
seldom fall upon the plane except they be supplied from East and West windows.

Now because the center of the Dial is without the Room, so that you cannot
make use of that to draw the hours by, you must therefore place one foot of
your compasses in the points L M N P and Q, with the other draw obscure arches
of Circles as * * * * *, and out of the last column of the former Table take
the complement of every hours arch from the Meridian, and place them upon the
respective hour arches from the Equinoctial to the points * * * * * as you
see in the figure. Lastly, if you draw the lines *M, *N, *P, *Q, they shall be
the true hours upon the seeling.

In the inscription of the Azimuths in declining reclining planes, and in
drawing the circles of Altitude in all kind of planes, I confess I should
have been somewhat larger in giving you an example in each plane, as I did with
the other varieties before, but pre-supposing the ingenious practitioner
sufficiently to understand that which goes before, he cannot but with small
pains overcome the rest; But I should not have been so brief, could I possibly
have procured more time, which by no means would be granted.

Also my intent in this place was to have shown you the inscription of the
Circles of position and other varieties: Also the framing of diverse
Geometrical Bodies, and to furnish them with variety of Dials, and the making
of diverse Isntrumental Dials: But these, with many other HOROLOGICAL conceits
and inventions, I reserve till a more convenient opportunity, and therefore in
the mean time, Farewell.

FINIS.

