Imprimatur

IO. FELL Vicecan.
Aug. 9. An. 1669.
AD CLERUM. A SERMON Preached at a VISITATION holden at GRANTHAM In the COUNTY
and DIOCESE of Lincoln, 8. October. 1641.

By a late Learned PRELATE.

Now Published by his own Copy.

Sirac. 3. 24. For many are deceived by their own vain opinion: and an evil
suspicion has overthrown their Judgment.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY for Ric. Davis, 1670.

MATTHEW. 15. 9. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.
1. OUr Savior sometimes forewarneth his Disciples to beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees. Which leaven, as he expounds himself, (and he best knew his
own meaning,) was of two sorts: the leaven of hypocrisy, Luke 12. and the
leaven of corrupt and superstitious doctrine, Matthew. 16: We read 1 Cor. 5.
Luke 12. 1. Matthew. 16. 12. 1 Cor. 5. 8.
of a third sort, and that is the leaven of maliciousness: which also usually
accompanies the other two. Where any of the three are in abundance, but
especially where they all meet and abound, (as in these Pharisees) it is
impossible by any care or cunning so to keep them hidden, as not to bewray
themselves upon occasion to an observing eye. As you know it is the nature of
leaven, though it be hidden never so deep in a heap of meal, to work up to the
top, so that a man may certainly know by the effects, and be able to say, that
there it is. In the story of this present Chapter, the Pharisees discover all
the three; Malice, Hypocrisy, and Superstition. Their Malice against Christ,
although it appeared sufficiently in this, that their quarrelling his Disciples
for eating with unwashen hands was with the intent to bring an odium upon him
for not instructing them better: yet he passes it by, without taking any
special notice thereof. It may be, for that his own person was chiefly
concerned in it. But then the other two, their Hypocrisy and Superstition, in
rejecting the Commandments of God for the setting up of their own Traditions;
because they trencht so near and deep upon the honor of God his heavenly
Father, he neither would nor could dissemble. But themselves having given him
the occasion by asking him the first question. [Why do thy Disciples
transgress the tradition of the Elders?] he turns the point of their own
weapon full upon them again as it were by way of recrimination not Percutit
illos atrociore recriminatione. Eras. in Paraphr. (...), Chrysostom. Hom. 51.
without some sharpness, do you blame them for that? But why then do you your
selves also transgress the Commandment of God by your Tradition? which is a
far greater matter.

That is their Charge, verse. 3. Which having made good by one instance taken
from the fifth Commandment, 2.
(more he might have brought; but it needed not; this one being so notorious
and so convincing:) he thenceforth doubts not to call (...). Chrysoft. ibid.
Isai. 29. 13.
them Hypocrites to their faces, and to apply to them a passage out of the
Prophet Esaias very pat to his purpose. Wherein the Prophet charged the people
of those times with the very same crimes, both of them, whereof these Pharisees
are presently appealed: to wit, Hypocrisy, and Superstition; Hypocrisy in
their Worship, and superstition in the Doctrine. The Leaven whereof, by how
much more it swelled them in their own and the common opinion, making them to
be highly esteemed among men for their outward preciseness and semblances of
holiness: (...).
by so much the more it sowred them toward Almighty God, rendering the whole
lump of their so strict Religion abominable in his sight. So true Acts 26. 5.
Luke 16. 15.
is that of our Savior, Luke 16. That which is highly esteemed among men, is
abomination in the sight of God. Their Hypocrisy he puts home to them in
the Verses before the Text; Ye Hypocrites, well did Esatas prophecy of you,
saying, This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me
with their lips; but their heart is far from me. That done, he forgets not
to remember them of their Superstition too: continuing his allegation out of
the Prophet still, in the words of my Text, But in vain do they wohship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. 3.


This later verse I have chosen to entreat of alone (...). 1 Timothy 4. 2.
at this time. For although Hypocrisy and corrupt teaching do often go
together, as in those Jews whom the Prophet long before reproved, and in these
Pharisees whom our Savior here reproves: yet have I purposely severed this
verse from the former in the handling, moved thereunto out of a double
consideration. First, because Hypocrisy lurking more within, we are not able
to pronounce of it with such certainty; neither (if we were) have we indeed any
good warrant so to do: as we may of unsound Doctrines which lie more open to
the view, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. 1 John 4. 1.
and are allowed to our examination. Secondly, and especially, because hundreds
of those my brethren whom I cannot in reason excuse from symbolizing with the
Pharisees in teaching for doctrines the commandments of men, (which is the
fault reproved in this verse;) I cannot yet in charity and in my own thoughts,
but acquit from partaking with them in (the measure at least of) that their
foul hypocrisy, wherewith they stand charged in the former Verses.

The Words themselves being one entire proposition; to stand upon the curious
dividing of them would be a matter of more ostentation than use: And the truth
thereof also, when the meaning is once laid open, will be so evident, that I
shall presume of your assent, without spending much time in the proof. The main
of our business then upon the Text at this time must be Explication,
Application, and Use: First the Explication of the Words; then the Application
of the Matter; and lastly some Corollaries inferred there from for our Use.
Which for your better understanding and remembrance I shall endeavor to do as
plainly and orderly as I can.

As for the Words first. There are three things in them that desire
Explication: First, what is meant 4.
by the commandments of men; secondly, what it is to teach such Commandments
for doctrines; thirdly, how and in what respect they that teach such doctrines
may be said to worship God in vain. For the first: (...), or (...), a
Commandment, properly and strictly taken, is an affirmative precept, requiring
something to be done: the contrary whereof is a Prohibition or negative
precept, forbidding the doing of something. But in the Holy Scriptures, (as in
our common speech also,) the word is usually so extended as to comprehend both,
(Prohibitions also, as well as Commandments properly so called.) The reason
whereof is, because Affirmatives, and Negatives do for the most part mutually
include and infer the one the other: As in the present case it is all one,
whether the Pharisees should command men to wash before meat, or forbid them to
eat before they had washed. We call the whole Decalogue the ten Commandments,
though there be Negative Precepts (...) etc. Mark 10. 19. Luke 18. 20.
there as well as Affirmative, yea more Negative than Affirmative. And those
Negatives [Touch not, Taste not, Handle not,] are called the Commandments of
men, Col. 2. 22. Which place I note the rather, because the appellation here
used, and cited out of Esai. 29. according to the Septuagint [(...)] are not
found any where else in the whole Testament besides in the relation of this
story, save in that one place only. By the analogy of which places, in as
much as there is mention made in them all as well of Doctrines, as of
Commandments, and that in some of them with the Conjunction Copulative between
them; we are warranted to bring within the extent of this word, according to
the general intention and scope of our Savior in this place, Doctrinals as
well as Morals: that is to say, as well those that prescribe unto our
Judgments, what we are bound to believe or not to believe in matter of Opinion;
as those that prescribe unto our Consciences, what we are bound to do or not to
do, in matter of Practice. Although the special occasion whereupon our Savior
fell into this discourse against the Pharisees, and the special instance
whereby he convinces them, do withal show, that the Morals do more
principally, properly, and directly fall under his particular intention and
scope therein. In the full extent of the word then, all those prescriptions are
to be taken for the Commandments of men, wherein any thing is by humane
Authority either enjoined or forbidden to be believed or done, (especially to
be done,) which God in his Holy Word has not so enjoined or forbidden.
Jonadab's command to the Rechabites, that Jer. 35. 6.
they should not drink Wine, they nor their sons for ever; and the Pharisees
tradition here, that none should eat with unwashen hands; were both the
commandments of men.

This is clear enough, yea and good enough hitherto, if there were no more in
it but so. For you 5.
must observe, (or else you quite mistake the Text, and the whole drift of it,)
that it is no part of our Saviors meaning, absolutely and wholly to condemn
all the Commandments of men. For that were to cut the sinews of all Government
and Order, and to overturn Churches, Kingdoms, Corporations, Families, and all
other both greater and lesser Societies of men: none of all which can be upheld
without some posttive Laws and Sanctions of man's devising. We do not therefore
find, that either Jonadab was blamed for commanding the Rechabites not to drink
wine; or that they were blamed for observing his commandment therein. But
rather on the contrary that God well approved both of him and them, yea and
rewarded them for their obedience unto that Jer. 35. 18, 19.
command; though it were a command but of man's devising, and had no more than a
bare humane Authority to warrant it. And therefore those men are very wide,
that vouch this Text against the Ecclesiastical Abridgm. Linc. p. 44.
Constitutions or Ceremonies with such confidence, as if they were able with
this one Engine to take them all off at a blow: not considering, that it is not
barely the Commandments of men, either materially or formally taken, (that is
to say, neither the things commanded by men, nor yet men's commanding of them;)
but it is the teaching of such Commandments for Doctoines, that our Savior
here condemns the Pharisees for. What that is therefore, we are next to
enquire, (...), teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

In the 29. of Esaie, the substantives have a 6.
Conjunction copulative between them in the Septuagint; and they are read in
the very same manner and order [(...)] by St. Paul, alluding thereunto in Col.
2. But in the Greek Text in all Copies extant both here and in Mark 7. where
the same History is related, they are put without the Per appositionem. Erasm.
Beza.
Conjunction, by Apposition, as the Grammarians call it. The meaning is the
same in both readings; only this latter way it appears better, and it is in
effect this: Whosoever shall endeavor to impose upon the judgments of men, in
credendis, or in point of faith, any thing to be believed as a part of Gods
holy truth; or shall endeavor to impose upon the Consciences of men, in
agendis, or in point of manners, any thing to be observed as a part of Gods
holy will, which cannot be sufficiently evidenced so or so to be, either by
express testimony of the written Word of God, rightly understood and applied,
or by clear natural and necessary deduction therefrom according to the Laws of
true Logical discourse; is guilty more or less of that Superstition our
Savior here condemns in the Pharisees, of teaching for Doctrines the
commandments of men.

And a fault it is of a large comprehension. It takes in all additions
whatsoever, that are made 7.
to that absolute and all sufficient Rule of Faith and Manners, which God has
left unto his Church in his written Word. In what kind soever they are; whether
in Opinion, Worship, Ordinance, Injunction, Prohibition, Promise, or otherwise.
From what cause soever they proceed; whether from credulity, ignorance,
education, partiality, hypocrisy, misgoverned zeal, time-serving, or any
other. For what end soever they may be done; whether those ends be in truth
intended, or but in show pretended: say it be the glory of God, the reformation
of abuses, the preventing of mischiefs or inconveniences, the avoiding of
scandals, the maintenance of Christian liberty, the furtherance of piety, or
whatever else can be imagined. If they have not a sufficient foundation in the
sacred Text, and yet shall be offered to be pressed upon our judgments or
consciences in the name of God, and as his Word: they are to be held as chafe,
fitter to be scattered before the wind, or cast out to the dunghill, than to be
hoarded up in the Garners among the wheat; (alas, what is the Jer. 23. 28.
chaff to the wheat?) or as wood, hay, or stubble, meeter to become fuel for
the Oven or Hearth, than 1 Cor. 3. 12, 15.
to be coffered up in the treasury among gold, and silver, and precious
stones. And he that brings any such doctrine with him, let his piety or parts
be otherwise what they can be; should he in either of both, or even in both,
match not only the holy Apostles of Christ, but the very blessed Angels in
Gal. 1. 8.
heaven; yet should we rather defy him as a Traitor, for setting Gods stamp
upon his own Bullion, than receive him as his faithful Ambassador; and salute
him with an Anathema sooner, than bid him God speed. Especially if the doctrine
be apparently either 2 John ver. 10.
false or ungrounded, and yet positively and peremptorily delivered, as if it
were the undoubted word and will of God.

I may not now descend to particulars. But thus 8.
much it will concern us all to know in the general, That whosoever teaches
any thing either to be absolutely unlawful, which God has not forbidden in his
word; or to be absolutely necessary, which God has not required in his word:
he teaches for doctrines the commandments of men,, and so far forth plaieth
the Pharisees part in burthening the consciences of Gods people with the
superstitious fancies of his own brain. But otherwise, the enjoining of
something for a time which God has not forbidden, or the forbidding of
something for a time which God has not required, by those that are endued with
lawful Authority in any Ecclesiastical, Political, or Domestical Society; so as
the same be not done for conscience sake toward God, or with any opinion of
worship, merit, or operative holiness, but merely out of prudential
considerations, and for the reasons of order, decency, expedience, or other
like respects of convenience and accommodation; is a thing no ways justly
chargeable with Pharisaisme, superstition, or to be cried down and condemned
under the name of will worship; nor does it come within the compass of our
Saviors reproof in this place. If Jonadab had laid an obligation upon the
consciences of the Rechabites, not to drink wine, by telling them that for
conscience sake toward God they ought to abstain therefrom; or if the Jewish
Elders and Governors, leaving the consciences of the people free, had only
made a Law under some penalty for decency and cleanliness sake, that no man
should sit down to meat in public with unwashen hands: to my seeming had he
then been guilty of this Pharisaical superstition, and they free. In brief then
to conclude this Enquiry, To lay an obligation either upon the judgments or
consciences of men in point of opinion or practice, which God has not laid;
that, and nothing but that, is to teach for doctrines the commandments of men.

We have yet a third thing to be enquired of, for 9.
the Explication of the words: namely, how and in what respect they that teach
such doctrines may be said to worship God in vain. The ambiguity of our English
word Worship, has occasioned many Errors among Divines, and mis-understandings
of one another words and writings, whereby the disputes and controversies
about Worship are become of all other the most intricate and perplexed. The
Hebrews, and the Greeks too, have sundry words, and those of distinct notions,
and significations: which we in English, for want of fitter expressions, are
feign to translate promiscuously by this one word Worship. The Greek words
(...), (...), (...), and (...), (which is the word here used) are all
indifferently rendered, worshipping. Here, according to the notion of the Greek
word, it properly signifies the performance of some religious or devout act,
with an intention to honor God thereby. Whereby it appears, that these
Pharisees placed a great part of their Religion in the observation of these
Traditions of men's devising; and flattered themselves with this conceit, that
they did God a great deal of honor in so doing, and that therefore he could
not choose but be marveilous well pleased with them for so doing. By long
accustoming themselves to which-like outward observances, they had almost lost
the vigor and soul of true Religion,' (which consists in the inward reverence
and devotion of the heart:) and had little other left than the bare carcass, or
empty outside thereof; and that also patcht and pieced up for the most part
with the devises and inventions of men.

And this our Savior now tells them is Worship 10.
in vain. He says so indeed: but has he any Text for it. The place he cites
is in Esaie 29. 13. where the words according to the Original run but thus,
[Their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:] but that it is vain,
the Prophet does not there say. He does not say it (...), in those very words,
according to the Hebrew: but the scope of the place imports all that and
more. For God there threatens to punish the people for such worship: which he
would not have done, if he had been either pleased with it, or honored by it.
But the very word and all is so found, even as our Savior cites it [(...)] in
the Septuagint there: which being the most common and received Translation in
those days, was therefore for the most part followed by Christ and his
Apostles in their quotations, especially where it swerved not very much in
sense from the Original. Now a thing is said to be done in vain, when it has
not that wished effect, which the doer intended and expected. Those Pharisees
then, intending by those superstitious will worships to honor God, and hoping
to please him therewithal; when their expectations should be so far
frustrated, that God should all on the contrary profess himself dishonored and
displeased thereby; it must needs be acknowledged that this their Will Worship
was all in vain. Certainly God will reject, what himself has forbidden: and he
has forbidden, and that both frequently, and with the severest interminations,
all manner of VVillworship (of this kind, and properly so called) and all
additions of men unto his holy Word.

In the several parts of the Text thus opened, we may see the full meaning of
the whole. God will 11.
not approve of, nor accept any VVit-worship, or VVill-worship, forged or
devised by man, with an opinion as if it were a necessary part of Gods service;
nor allow of any doctrine, that tends to bind the Judgments or Consciences of
his people further than he has thought fit himself to bind them by the
expresses of his Word. He will, when time serves, root out every plant which
is not of his own planting. And when the day is come, which shall declare (by a
Matthew. 15. 12.
fiery trial) every man's work of what sort it is: the 1 Cor. 3. 12* 15
gold and silver and precious stones shall abide the fire, and the workman that
built with such good stuff shall receive a blessed reward. But he that builds
wood, or hay, or stubble; though by the great mercy of God he himself may pass
through the fire, and be saved (with some difficulty,) so long as he holds
fast the foundation, which is Christ and his merits: yet he shall suffer loss
in his work however. That shall be sure to burn and perish; whatsoever becomes
of him. All that fear of God is but superstitious and vain, that is taught by
the Precepts and Commandments of men.

From the Explication of the Text hitherto, I came now to the Application of
it. Wherein I 12.
doubt not by Gods help, but to make clear to the judgment of any man, that is
not either incapable through ignorance, or fore-possessed with prejudice, these
three things. First, that the Papists are guilty of the Pharisaical
superstition and Will Worship here condemned. Secondly, that the Church of
England, and her regular and obedient children are not guilty of the same.
Thirdly, that those Divines and others in the Church of England, that so
undutifully charge her therewithal, are in truth themselves inexcusably guilty
of that very crime, whereof they unjustly accuse her.

First, for the Papists. That they are the right children and successors of the
Pharisees, no man that 13.
rightly understands the Tenets of the Romish Church but will easily grant;
if he shall duly consider what a mass of humane Traditions both in point of
belief and worship are imposed upon the judgments and consciences of all that
may be suffered to live in the visible Communion of that Church, and that with
opinion of necessity and under pain of damnation. The Popes Supremacy,
Worshipping of Images, Invocation of Saints and Angels, the propitiatory
Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, the seven Sacraments, Transubstantiation,
Adoration of the host, Communion under one kind, Private Masses, forbidaing
Priests Marriage, Monastical Vows, Prayer in an unknown tongue, Auricular
Confession. All these, and I know not how many more, are such, as even by the
confession of their own learned Writers, depend upon unwritten Traditions more
than upon the Scriptures. True it is, that for most of these they pretend to
Scripture also: but with so little color at the best, and with so little
confidence at the last; that when they are hard put to it, they are forced to
fly from that hold, and to shelter themselves under their great Diana
Tradition. Take away that, it is confessed that many of the chief Arcicles of
their Faith nutare and vacillare videbuntur, will seem Andradius. Multo maxima
pars Evangelii pervenit ad nos traditione; perexigua literis est mandata. Hos.
Confess. c. 92. Egenum elementum. Hosius. Plumbea regula. Pighius, etc.
even to totter and reel, and have much ado to keep up. For what else could we
imagine should make them strive so much to debase the Scripture all they can,
denying it to be a Rule of Faith, and charging it with imperfection, obscurity,
uncertainty, and many other defects; and on the otherside to magnify
Traditions as every way more absolute: but merely their consciousness, that
sundry of their doctrines, if they should be examined to the bottom, would
apeare to have no sound foundation in the Written Word. And then must needs we
conclude from what has been already delivered, that they ought to be
received, (or rather not to be received but rejected) as the Doctrines and
Commandments of men.

Nor will their flying to Tradition help them in this case, or free them from
Pharisaisme; but rather make the more against them. For to omit that it has
been the usual course of false teachers, when their Doctrines were found not to
be Scriptureproofe, to V. Chamier. Tom. 1. Panstrat. Lib. 9. cap. 16. Jewels
Defense 2. chapt. 9.
fly to Tradition: do but enquire a little into the Original and growth of
Pharisaical Traditions, and you shall find that Non male comparari Pharisaeos
Cetholicis. Serarius. apud Hall. Sermon. on Matt. 5. 30.
one egg is not more like another, than the Papists and the Pharisees are
alike in this matter. When Saduc (or whosoever else was the first Author of the
Sect of the Sadduces) and his followers began to vent their pestilent Sadoc
discipulus Antiqui Sochaei, author sectae Sadducaeorum secundum Rabbinos. V. E
l. Tisb in (...); Schindler. in Lexic. Pentagl. Sed hoc ut commentum Rabbinicum
exigit Montacutius* qui Sadducaeorum o iginem ad Dositheum quendam refert, ex
authoritate Epiphanii and aliorum; eosque Sadducaeos dictos confirmat a (...)
Justitia, ob mores austeros, and in judiciis severitatem. V. Montacut. Appar.
7.. 49.
and Atheistical Doctrines, against the immortality of the Soul, the
resurrection of the Body, and other like: the best Learned among the Jews,
(the Pharisees especially,) opposed against them by arguments and collections
drawn from the Scriptures. The Saduces finding themselves unable to hold
argument with them, (as having two shrewd disadvantages; but a little Learning,
and a bad cause;) had no other means to avoid the force of all their arguments,
than to hold them precisely to the letter of the Text, without admitting any
exposition thereof, or collection therefrom. Unless they could bring clear
Text, that should affirm totidem verbis what they denied; they would not
yield. The Pharisees on the contrary refused (as they had good cause) to be
tied to such unreasonable conditions: but stood upon the meaning of the
Scriptures, as the Sadduces did upon the letter; confirming the truth of their
interpretations partly from Reason, and partly from Tradition. Not meaning by
Tradition (as yet,) any doctrine other than what was already sufficiently
contained in the Scriptures; but merely the Doctrine which had been in all ages
constantly taught and received with an Universal consent among the People of
God, as consonant to the holy Scriptures and grounded thereon. By this means,
though they could not satisfy the Sadduces, (as Heretics and Sectaries
commonly are obstinate) yet so far they satisfied the generality of the
people, that they (...) -- etc. Joseph. 13. Antiqu. 18.
grew into very great esteem with them, and within a while carried all before
them: the detestation of the Sadduces and of their loose errors also conducing
not a little thereunto. And who now but the Pharisees? and what now but
Tradition? in every man's eye and mouth. Things being at this pass, any wise
man may judge, how easy a matter it was for men so reverenced as the Pharisees
were, to abuse the credulity of the people and the interess they had in their
good opinion, to their own advantage: to make themselves Lords of the peoples
faith, and by little and little to bring into the Worship whatsoever doctrines
and observances they pleased; and all under the acceptable name of the
Traditions of the Elders. And so they did, winning continually upon the (...).
Epiphan. in Ptolom. Justinian. Novel. 146. and alii.
people by their cunning and shows of Religion, and proceeding still more and
more, till the Jewish Worship by their means was grown to that height of
superstition and formality, as we see it was in (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 51. in Matt.
our Saviors days. Such was the beginning, and such the rise, of these
Pharisaical Traditions.

Popish Traditions also both came in and grew up 15.
just after the same manner. The Orthodox Bishops and Doctors in the ancient
Church, being to maintain the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, the
Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, the Hypostatical Union of the
two Natures in the person of Christ, the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and other
like Articles of the Catholic Religion, against the Arians, Eunomians,
Macedonians, and other Heretics: for that the words Trinity, Homousion,
Hypostasis, Procession, etc. (which for the better expressing of the Catholic
sense they were forced to use) were not expressly to be found in the holy
Scriptures; had recourse therefore very often, in their writings against the
Heretics of their times, to the Tradition of the Church. Whereby they meant
not (as the Papists would now wrest their words,) any unwritten doctrine not
contained in the Scriptures, but the very doctrine of the Scriptures
themselves, as they had been constantly understood and believed by all
faithful Christians in the Catholic Church down from the Apostles times till
the several present ages wherein they lived. This course of theirs, of so
serviceable and necessary use in those times, gave the first occasion, and
after-rise, to that heap of Errors and Superstitions, which in process of time
(by the power and policy of the Bishop of Rome Mox subsecuta est corruptela
Calvin. in loc.
especially) were introduced into the Christian Church under the specious name
and color of Catholic Traditions. Thus have they trodden in the steps of their
forefathers the Pharisees: and stand guilty even as they of the Superstition
here condemned by our Savior, in teaching for doctrines men's Precepts.

But if the Church of Rome be cast, how shall the 16
Church of England be quit? That symbolizeth so much with her in many of her
Ceremonies, and otherwise? What are all our crossings, and kneelings, and
duckings? What Surplice, and Ring, and all those other Rites and Accoutrements
that are used in or about the public Worship; but so many Commandments of men?
For it cannot be made appear (nor truly do I think was it ever endeavored,)
that God has any where commanded them. Indeed these things have been objected
heretofore, with clamor enough; and the cry is of late revived again with more
noise and malice than ever, in a world of base and unworthy Pamphlets, that
like the frogs of Egypt croake in every corner of the Land: And I pray God the
suffering of them to multiply Exodus 8. 14.
into such heaps do not cause the whole Land so to stink in his nos-thrills,
that he grow weary of it and forsake us. But I undertook to justify the Church
of England and her regular and obedient children in this behalf: and it will be
expected I should do it. If any of the Children of this Church in their too
much have have over-runne their Mother; that is, have busied themselves and
troubled others with putting forward new Rites and Ceremonies, with scandal,
and without Law: or by using her name without her leave for the serving of
their own purposes have causelessely brought an evil suspicion upon her (as
some are blamed) let them answer it as well as they can: it is not my business
now to plead for them, but to vindicate the Church of England against another
sort of men, who have accused her of Superstition unjustly.

Set both these aside; and her defense is made in a word, if we do but remember
what has been already 17
delivered in the Explication of the Text: to wit, that it is not the
commandments of men, either Materially or Formally taken; but the Opinion that
we have of them, and the teaching of them for Doctrines, wherein Superstition
properly consists. Materially first. There is no Superstition either in
wearing or in not wearing a Surplice, in kneeling or in not kneeling at the
Communion, in crossing or in not crossing an infant newly baptized: even as
there is no superstition in washing or in not washing the hands before meat. So
long as neither the one is done with an opinion of necessity, nor the other
forborne out of the opinion of unlawfulness. For so long the conscience stands
free. The Apostle has so resolved in the very like case: That neither that
eats is the worse for it, nor he that eatethnot the 1 Cor. 8. 8.
better for it. A man may eat, and do it with a good conscience: and he may not
eat, and do that with a good Conscience too. As in the present case, at this
time it is certain Christ's disciples did eat and washed not: it cannot be
doubted, but at some time or other they washed before they ate. Not for
conscience sake toward God either; but even as they saw it fit, and as the
present occasion required: and they might do both without superstition. But if
any man shall wear, or kneel, or cross, with an opinion of necessity and for
conscience sake toward God, as if those parts of Gods service wherein those
Ceremonies are used in our Church could not be rightly performed without them,
yea although the Church had not appointed them; doubtless the use of those
Ceremonies by reason of such his opinion should be Superstition to him. Because
a man cannot be of that Opinion, but he must believe it to be true doctrine,
that such and such Ceremonies are of themselves necessary parts of Gods
worship. As on the contrary, if any body should refuse to wear, or kneel, or
cross, out of an opinion of their unlawfulnes; as if those Ceremonies did
vitiate the whole act of that worship whereunto they are applied: I cannot see,
but upon the same ground, and by reason of such his opinion, the refusal of
those Ceremonies should be to him also Superstition. Because a man cannot be of
that opinion, but he must believe this to be true doctrine, that such and such
Ceremonies are of themselves unlawful to be used in the Worship of God. But the
obedient children of the Church of England, having no such opinion either of
the necessity or unlawfulnes of the said Ceremonies; but holding them to be (as
indeed they are) things in their own nature indifferent: are even therefore
free from Superstition in both the kinds aforesaid: So then in the things
commanded taken materially, that is to say, considered in themselves without
respect to the Churches command, there is no Superstition: because there is
nothing concerning them doctrinally taught either the one way, or the other.

Now if we can as well clear these things taken also formally, that is to say,
considered not in themselves, 18.
but as they stand commanded by public authority of the Church: the whole
business is done, as to this point. Nor is there in truth any great difficulty
in it, if we will but apprehend things aright. For although the very commanding
them do seem to bring with it a kind of necessity, and to lay a tie upon the
Conscience, (as that of St. Paul implies both, you must needs be subject, and
that for conscience sake:) yet is not that any tie brought upon the Romans 13. 5.
Conscience de novo by such command of the Church: only that tie that lay upon
the Conscience before, by virtue of that general Commandment of God of obeying
the higher powers in all their lawful Commands, is by that Commandment of the
Church applied to that particular matter. Even as it is in all Civil
Constitutions, and humane positive Laws whatsoever. And the Necessity also is
but an Obediential, not a Doctrinal necessity. But the Text requires a
Doctrinal necessity, to make the thing done a vain and superstitious worship
[Teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.] Which the Church of England
in prescribing the aforesaid Ceremonies has not done; nor by her own grounds
could do. For look as the case stands with private men for doing, or
refusing: even so stands the case with public Governors for commanding or
forbidding. As therefore with private men, it is not the bare doing or refusing
of a thing, as in discretion they shall see cause; but the doing of it with an
opinion of Necessity, or the refusing of it with the opinion of Unlawfulness,
that makes the Action superstitious, as has been already showed: So with
public Governors, it is not the commanding or forbidding of a mutable
Ceremony, as for the present they shall deem it fit, for order, decency, or
uniformities sake, or such other like respect: but the commanding of it with an
opinion as if it were of perpetual necessity, or the forbidding it with the
like opinion as if it were simply unlawful, that makes the Constitution
superstitious.

Now I appeal to any man, that has not run on 19.
madly with the cry for company, but endeavored with the spirit of Charity and
Sobriety to satisfy his own understanding herein; if the Church of England
both in the The Ceremonies that remain are retained for discipline and order,
which, upon just causes, may be altered and changed, and therefore are not to
be esteemed equal with God's law. Preface, of Cerem.
Preface before the Book of Common Prayer, and in the The Church has power to
decree rites and Ceremonies, -- but it ought not besides the Scripture to
enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of salvation. Artic. 20. Every
particular or National Church has authority to ordain, change, and abolish
Ceremonies etc. Art. 34.
Articles of her Confession, and in sundry passages in the Homilies
occasionally (and these Books are acknowledged her most Authentic writings,
the two former especially, and the just standard whereby to measure her whole
Doctrine:) if, I say, she have not in them all, and that in as plain and
express terms as can be desired, disclaimed all humane Traditions, that are
imposed upon the consciences of Gods people either in point of Faith or
Manners; and declared to the world, that she challenged no power to her self to
order any thing by her own authority but only in things indiffenent, and such
as are not repugnant to the word of God; and that her Constitutions are but for
order, comeliness, and uniformity sake, and not for conscience sake toward
God; and that therefore any of those her Orders and Constitutions may be
retained, abolished, or altered from time to time, and at all times, as the
Governors for the time being shall judge to serve best unto Edification. What
should I say more? If men list to be contentious, and will not be satisfied,
who can help it? yet thus much I dare say more. Let any Papist or Precisiian in
the world give instance but in any one single thing, doctrinally maintained by
the Church of England, which he can with any color of truth except against as
a Commandment of men: if we do not either show good warrant for it from the
written word of God, (which we doubt not but to be able to do, and is most
adrem;) or else (which is enough ad hominem) for every single instance they
shall bring, return them ten of their own teaching, every whit as liable to the
same exception as that: we will yield the Bucklers, and confess her guilty.

But now what will you say, if after all this clamouring against English-Popish
Ceremonies, (as of late 20.
they have blasoned them,) they that keep all this ado prove in the end the
guilty persons themselves? I am much deceived if it do not clearly prove so: if
we either compare her doctrine and theirs together, or take a view of some of
theirs by themselves. First, compare them a little, which will also add (...).
Chrysostom. Orat. 2. contr. Judaeos.
some confirmation to the former point for the farther justifying of the Church
of England in this behalf. And for example and perspicuity sake, let the
instance be kneeling at the Communion; there being the like reason of all the
rest. I pray you consider well the evidence: weigh the grounds, and observe the
course held on both sides, and then give sentence accordingly. If, as God has
given those our Church Governors power to determine of indifferent mutable
circumstances, and they using the liberty of the Power given them, have
appointed kneeling rather than sitting or standing, as judging it a gesture of
greater reverence and well becoming our unworthiness, but without any opinion
either of the necessity of that gesture, or of the unlawfulness of the other
two; so God had given the like Power to these our Brethren, and they using the
liberty of that Power had appointed sitting or standing rather than kneeling,
as judging either of them a more proper Table gesture than it, yet without any
opinion of their necessity, or of the unlawfulness of kneeling; the case had
then been alike of both. These had been as free as they; neither of them had
been guilty of Superstition, in teaching for doctrines the commandments of men:
because there was no doctrinal necessity, whereby to bind the conscience of
Gods people on either side. Again, if as these say to their Proselytes
peremptorily in effect thus [you are bound in conscience not to kneel; it is an
unlawful gesture, a superstitious relic of Popery, and carries with it a
shrewd appearance of their idolatrous Bread-worship; and therefore we charge
you upon your consciences not to kneel:] so our Church-governors should say to
the people peremptorily in effect thus, [you are bound in conscience to kneel,
or else you profane the holy Sacrament, not discerning the Lords Body; and
therefore we charge you upon your consciences to kneel:] the case of both had
here also been alike. Both alike guilty of Superstition, in teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men: because by that doctrinal necessity as well
the one sort as the other had laid a perpetual obligation upon the Consciences
of men, in a matter which God having not any where either commanded or
forbidden has therefore left free and indifferent. But now taking the case as
de facto it is, without Ifs and Ands, set the one against the other, and make
the comparison right: and here it is. Our Brethren having no public authority
given them to order what shall be done or not done in matters of external
government, do yet bind the consciences of Gods people, by teaching that which
they thus forbid to be simply and in it self unlawful. Our Governors on the
contrary, though having public authority to prescribe in such matters, do yet
leave the consciences of men at liberty, without teaching that which they
appoint, to be of absolute necessity in it self. This being species facti, as
the Civilians speak, the even true state of the case: say now I beseeeh you in
good sooth, and be not partial, Quid Juris? At whose door lies the
Superstition? The one side teaching no such doctrine, but having authority, do
by virtue of that authority appoint the people to kneel; The other side having
no such authority, but teaching a doctrine, do by virtue of that doctrine
charge the people not to kneel: Whether of both sides may rightlier be said to
teach for doctrines the Commandments of men?

Tu quum sis quod ego, and fortassis nequior --

Their guilt herein will yet farther appear, if leaving comparisons, we take a
view of some of their doctrines by themselves. I say, but some of them: for how
many hours would serve to reckon them all? or who indeed (even of themselves)
knows them all? There are so many Covies of new doctrines sprung up ever and
anon, especially in these late times of connivence and licentiousness; which by
that they are well hatched, presently fly abroad the Country, and are
entertained by some or other for as good Divinity, as if they were the
undoubted Oracles of the Holy Ghost. I dare not affirm it, because I will not
put my self to the trouble to prove it, and because I heartily desire and wish
I be deceived in it: yet I cannot dissemble my fear that it is but too true,
(by the proportion of what we almost daily hear or see,) that within little
more than this one twelvemonth last past there have been more false and
superstitious doctrines vented in the Pulpits and Presses in England, than have
been (in so open and daring a manner) in the whole space of almost fourscore
years before, I mean since the first of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory. And
to make good the former charge, omitting sundry other their unwarrantable
positions, partly concerning Church Government, Orders, and Ceremonies
established by Law, partly concerning sundry received customs in matters wholly
or in part Ecclesiastical, partly concerning the use of sundry pastimes and
recreations, partly concerning sundry usages and customs in vita communi in
things merely Civil, and not sacred or Ecclesiastical, the particulars whereof
would amount to many scores, if not hundreds: I shall present unto your view a
dozen only, which I have selected from the rest of those that I have observed
to have been most urged of late in Sermons and Pamphlets; by which you may in
part judge of the rest. And they are these

1. First, that the appointing of a set form of Prayer 22.
or Liturgy, to be used in the service of God, is unlawful or Antichristian: or
that it is a straitning or limiting of the Holy Spirit of God.

2. That it is not in the power of the Church to ordain any Rites or Ceremonies
in the service of God, which the people are bound to observe, other than such
as God has commanded in his Word.

3. That Rites and usages, devised or abused either by Heathens or Idolaters,
may not be lawfully used by Christians in the service of God.

4. That it is unlawful or superstitious to kneel at the holy Communion, in the
act of receiving the Sacrament.

5. That Instrumental Music may not be used in the service of God, as well as
Vocal.

6. That Episcopacy is Antichristian, or repugnant to the Word of God.

7. That the Presbyterian discipline is the very Scepter of Christ's Kingdom; or
the order appointed by Christ himself for the perpetual Government of his
Church, which ought of all particular Congregations to be inviolably That the
observation of Annual Festivals in memory of Christ or his Apostles, as
Christmas, Easter, etc. is Antichristian, superstitious, and unlawful.
observed unto the Worlds end.

8. That it is simply unlawful for a Minister to be possessed of two Benefices.

9. That Ecclesiastical persons may not meddle in secular affairs; nor can with
a good conscience exercise any Civil office or Jurisdiction, although by humane
authority, Law, or custom allowed them.

10. That it is not lawful in preaching Gods word, to recite sentences out of
the Fathers; much less from the writings of Heathen Writers.

11. That the Election or consent of the people is of necessity required,
either to the ordeining of Ministers, or to the appointing of them to their
particular charges.

12. Lastly, (which though I find not positively delivered in terminis, nor is
the danger thereof so generally observed, as of sundry of the former; yet for
that I find it often touched upon in these late Treatises, and conceive it to
be an Error of no less dangerous consequence than many of the former, I
thought meet not to omit it:) That the Examples of Christ and of his Apostles
ought to be observed of all Christians, as a perpetual Rule binding them to
Conformity, even as their Precepts do unto Obedience.

23. Concerning which Positions, I do here in the face of this Congregation
take God to witness, who shall judge us all at the last day, that I do verily
believe, and in my conscience am persuaded, that all and every of them are the
vain and superstitious inventions of men, wholly destitute of all sound warrant
from the Written Word of God rightly understood and applied: and (till they
shall be better proved) ought to be so esteemed of every man that desires to
make Gods Holy Word the rule of his opinions and actions. Many and great are
the mischiefs otherwise, that come to the Church and people of God, by the
teaching of these and other like groundless Positions: As amongst others these
three following. First, great scandal is hereby given to Atheists, Papists,
Separatists, and other the enemies of our Religion; especially to the Papists:
who will not only take occasion thence to speak evil of us and of the way of
truth and holiness which we profess, but will be themselves also the more
confirmed in their own wicked errors, by objecting to us, that since we left
them, we cannot tell where to stay. Secondly, many sober and godly men, both
Ministers and others, who cheerfully submit to the established Laws and
Government, (as they take themselves by the Law of God bound to do, in things
which they believe not to be repugnant to his Word) are by this means
unworthily exposed to contempt and miscensure, as if they were time-servers, or
inclined to Popery or Superstition at the least. But if they shall farther
endeavor in their Sermons or otherwise, to show their just dislike, and to
hinder the growth, of these unlawful impositions, and to hold the people in
their good belief by instructing them better; they shall be sure to be
forthwith branded as opposers of the Gospel. As if there were such a spirit of
Infallibility annexed to some men's Pulpits, as some have said there is to the
Popes Chair, that whatsoever they shall deliver thence must needs be Gospel.
Thirdly, hereby many an honest-hearted and well-meaning Christian is
wonderfully abused: by being misled into Error, Superstition, and
Disobedience; by having his conscience brought into bondage in those things,
whereunto it was the good pleasure of God to leave him free; and by being
disposed to much uncharitableness in judging evil of his brother, that has
given him no just cause so to do.

Besides these and sundry other mischiefs of dangerous consequence, too long
now to repeat: the 24.
thing that I am presently to affirm, concerning all and every of the
positions aforesaid and other like them, pertinently to the Text and business
in hand, is this, That whosoever shall doctrinally and positively teath any of
the same, does ipso facto become guilty of the Superstition here condemned by
our Savior, and so far forth symbolizeth with the Pharisees in teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men. And I doubt not, but there are in the Church
of England sundry learned judicious and Orthodox Divines, no way suspected of
favoring Popery or Popish Innovations, that by Gods help and the advantage of
Truth will be ready to maintain what I now affirm, in a fair Christian and
Scholar-like trial, against whosoever are otherwise minded, whenever by
authority they shall be thereunto required.

I have now finished what I had to say from this Scripture by way of
Application. From the whole 25.
premises would arise sundry Inferences, as Corollaries and by way of Use. In
the prosecution whereof, had we time for it, I should have occasion to fall
upon some things that might be of right good use for the settling of men's
judgments and consciences in a way of Truth and Peace. And truly my aim lay
chiefly here, when my thoughts fixed upon this Text. But having enlarged my self
so far beyond my first purpose already, I shall only give you a short touch
of each of them: and it may be hereafter (as I shall see cause, and as God
shall dispose,) I may take some other occasion, here or elsewhere, to enlarge
them further.

The first should be an earnest request to such of my Brethren, as through
inconsideration, zeal against 26.
Popery or profaneness, or any other cause, have been a little too forward and
faulty this way. That they would in the fear of God review their own dictates,
and (all partiality and self-seeking laid aside) bestow a little pains to
examine thoroughly the soundness of those principles from which they draw their
conclusions: whether they be the very true word of God indeed, or but the
fancies and devices of the wit of man. I know how loathly men are induced to
suspect themselves to be in an Error: and that it is with our brethren herein
as with other men, may sufficiently appear in this, that few of them will so
much as bestow the reading of those books, that might give them satisfaction.
But (beloved) better try your own work your selves, and if it prove but hay or
stubble burn it your selves, by acknowledging your error and retracting it;
that you may build better: than let it lie on still, till a sorer fire catch
it. Better for any of us all, whether in respect of our errors or sins, to
prevent the Lords judging of us, by timely judging our selves, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
than to slack the time till his judgment overtake us.

The second use should be an Admonition to all my Brethren of the Ministry for
the time to come, 27
and that in the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 3. 10. Let 1 Cor. 11. 23. and 15. 3.
Quod accepisti, non quod excogitasti. Vinc-Lirin. cap. 27.
every man take heed what he builds. St Paul himself was very careful this
way, not to deliver any thing to the people, but what he had received from the
Lord. The Prophets of the Lord still delivered their Messages with this Preface
Haec dicit Dominus. Yea that wretch Balaam, though a false Prophet, and
covetous enough, professed yet that Number. 22. 18.
if Balak would give him his house full of silver and gold, he neither durst
nor would go beyond the word of the Lord to do less or more. There is a great
proneness in us all to idolize our own inventions: Besides much Ignorance,
Hypocrisy, and Partiality; any of which may byas us awry. Our Educations may
lay such early anticipations upon our judgments; or our teachers, or the books
we read, or the society we converse withal, may leave such impressions
therein, as may fill them with prejudice, not easily to be removed. The golden
mean is a hard thing to hit upon almost in any thing, without some warping
toward one of the extremes, either on the right hand, or on the left: and
without a great deal of wisdom and care seldom shall we seek to shun one
extreme, and not run a little too far toward the other, if not quite into
it. In all which and sundry other respects, we may soon fall into gross
mistakes and errors, if we do not take the more heed; whilst we suspect no
such thing by our selves, but verily believe that all we do is out of pure
zeal for Gods Glory, and the love of his truth. We had need of all the piety,
and learning, and discretion, and pains, and prayers we have: and all little
enough without Gods blessing too, (ey and our own greater care too,) to keep us
from running into Errors, and from teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men.

The Third use should be for Admonition also, to 28.
all the people of God, that they be not hasty to believe every spirit; but to
try the Spirits (especially 1 John 4.1.
when they see the spirits to disagree and clash one with another, or find
otherwise just cause of suspicion;) and that, as the Beraeans did, by the
Scriptures. Using withal all good subsidiary helps for the better Act. 17.11.
understanding thereof: especially those two as the principal; the Rule of
Right Reason, and the known constant judgment and practice of the Universal
Church. That so they may fan away the chafe from the wheat: and letting go
the refuse, hold falt that which is good. To this end, every man 1 Thessalonians. 5 21.
should especially beware, that he do not suffer himself to be carried away
with names; nor to have any man's person either in hatred or admiration: but
embrace what is consonant to truth and reason, though Judas himself should
preach it; and reject what even Jude 16. Gal. 1. 8. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 13 in 2. Corinthians.
an Angel from heaven should teach, if he have no other reason to induce him to
believe it, than that he teaches it.

29. The Fourth Use should be for Exhortation to the learneder sort of my
Brethren, to show their faithfulness, duty, and true hearty affection to God
and his Truth and Church, by mainteining the simplicity of the Christian Faith,
and asserting the doctrine of Christian Liberty, against all corrupt mixtures
of men's inventions, and against all unlawful impositions of men's commandments,
in any kind whatsoever. If other men be zealous to set up their own errors,
shall we be remiss to hold up Gods Truth? God having deposited it with us, and
committed it to our special trust: how shall we be able to answer it to God and
the World, if we suffer it to be stolen out of the hearts of our people by our
silence or neglect! Like enough you shall incur blame and censure enough for
so doing; as if you sought but yourselves in it, by seeking to please those
that are in authority in hope to get preferment thereby. But let none of these
things discourage you: if you shall not be able by the grace of God in some
measure to despice the censures of rash and uncharitable men, so long as you
can approve your hearts and actions in the sight of God, and to break through
(if need be) far greater trials and discouragements than these; you are not
worthy to be called the servants of Christ.

The last use should be an humble Supplication to 30.
those that have in their hands the ordering of the great affairs of Church and
State; That they would in their goodness and wisdoms make some speedy and
effectual provision, to repress the exorbitant licentiousness of these times,
in printing and preaching every man what he list: to the great dishonor of
God, scandal of the Reformed Religion, fomenting of Superstition and Error,
and disturbance of the peace both of Church and Commonwealth. Lest if way be
still given thereunto, those evil spirits that this late connivence has
raised, grow so fiecre within a while, that it will trouble all the power and
wisdom of the Kingdom to conjure them handsomely down again. But certainly,
since we find by late experience, what wildness in some of the Laypeople, what
petulancy in some of the inferior Clergy, what insolency in some both of the
Laity and Clergy, our Land is grown into, since the reins of the
Ecclesiastical Government have layn a little slack: we cannot but see, what need
we have to desire and pray, that the Ecclesiastical Government and power may be
timely settled in some such moderate and effectual way; as that it may not be
either too much abused by them that are to exercise it, nor too much despised
by those that must live under it. In the mean time, so long as things hang thus
loose and unsettled, I know not better how to represent unto you the present
face of the times in some respects, than in the words of the Prophet Jeremy,
[The Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests get power into Jerem. 5. 31.
their hands by their means, and my people love to have it so: And what will
you do in the end thereof?

What the end of these insolences will be, God alone knows. The increase of
Profaneness, Riot, 32.
Oppression, and all manner of wickedness on the one side; and the growth of
Error, Novelty, and Superstition on the other side: are no good signs onward.
The Lord of his great mercy grant a better end thereunto, than either these
beginnings or proceedings hitherto portend, or our sins deserve. And the same
Lord of his infinite goodness vouchsafe, To dispell from us by the light of
his Holy spirit all blindesse and hardness of heart; To purge out of us by the
fire of his Holy spirit all dross of pride and bypocrisie; To increase in us
by the grace of his Holy spirit the love of Truth and Godliness; To support us
by the comforts of his Holy spirit amidst all our distresses and fears; And to
lead us by the guidance of his Holy spirit along the paths of holiness unto
the ports of happiness. And all this for the alone merits sake of his blessed
Son and our alone Savior Jesus Christ. To which blessed Father, Son, and holy
Spirit, be ascribed by us and the whole Christian Church, all the kingdom, the
power, and the glory, from this time forth for evermore. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

