A second Champion, OR Companion to Truth:

Wherein is showed these Particulars, or Tenets.
1 Of Miracles. 2 The reasons wherefore so few embrace the Gospel. 3 Of the
first Covenant, and the second Covenant. 4 Of the Father and the Son. 5 Of
Heaven. 6 Of Hell. 7 Of Glory. 8 Of Faith. 9 Of the Resurrection, and the
eternal judgment. 10 Of Visible Worship. 11 A Postscript.
By Richard Stookes Preacher of the Gospel.

(...)

(...)

(...)

London, Printed for George Whittington at the Blew Anchor in Cornhill, 1650.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
TIme is the most precious berbe in the Garden of the World; there is nothing
more precious, and there is nothing more slighted of vain man; the use of
time will save, and the abuse of time will judge thee; for upon this moment of
Time depends thy eternal welfare, for we must be called to an account how we
have spent this Time which is allotted to us, and then one hours time that is
spent for heaven, will more comfort us at the day of our death, then all the
rest of our time which has been spent for vanity; (...) wil^^nde at the day of
thy death how precious Time ^^ for (...) no sooner come into this world, but
(...) going but again; and so soon as thou live, (...) dying; and so soon as
thou breathest, thy breath is a departing thou passest away as a shadow, and
thy days are bi^ as a span long, they are but as the rising of a bubble; thou
no sooner have a beginning, but thou art going to thy end; and thy strength is
but as the grass, and thy beauty is but as the flower of the field, The grass
fades, and the flower withers, and then thy glory is gone; for thy living is
uncertain, but thy death is certain, for thou art more sure to dye, then to
live; for what is so certain as death, and what is so uncertain as life? for
death will bring thee to the grave, and thy deeds will bring thee to judgment;
and as death does leave thee, so shall judgment find thee: and all creatures
observe their time but man, and yet man is the most noble of creatures, for
thou have time, and all things attend thee to bring thee to glory, if thou do
not bring thy self to misery; but if thou do, thou art a mispender of time;
for there are three enemies that are destructive to thy souls good, thy flesh,
the world, and the devil; thou carriest thy greatest enemy with thee, for thou
art a friend to thy flesh, and it is an enemy to God; For if thou live after
the flesh thou shall dye, for the flesh is an enemy to the Spirit; thy flesh
only leads thee to the earth, for the earth is its center, for it is for
earthly things, as for earthly honor and respect of the world, and loves to
have the prai(...) men, and to have the riches of the flesh, or (...) world,
with all the delights of the flesh, for we are apt to be more careful for our
fleshly man, then for our spiritual man; for thy flesh war^^th against the
Spirit: Alas poor creature! why ^^st thou make so much of so great an enemy?
how much time do thou take in clothing thy flesh? what cost do thou
bestow, and what care do thou take to beautify thy enemy? for what care do
thou take to cloathe him, and to make him fine, and delightest in his beauty?
and how often do thou change his habit? and how bravely do thou adorn him?
how careful art thou for his diet, and how softly do thou lay him? what
delight do thou take in his company? how desirable is he? how do thou dote
upon his beauty? thou art inamoured with his presence, and yet he is thine
enemy: thou seek to save him, and he seeks to destroy thee: thou art willing
to please him, and spendest much time upon him, but be deceives thee of thy
spiritualls: he is but a rotten friend, for he must come to corruption; thou
can not save him, nor he cannot save thee; for he will leave thee in a sad
condition; and this is the enemy thou carriest with thee, which will at last
destroy thee: if thou look not about thee, he will bring thee to ruin,
before thou art aware, to spend thy time for earth, and to lose thy time for
heaven. And yet thou have two enemies more, which are destructive to thy
spiritual condition; for how does the devil plot to work (...) in laying a
snare in every corner, that thou can hardly escape him, and how does he
spread his suares in the world, in blinding their eyes with the Honors,
Riches, and pleasures of this life, to check them of their Spiritual
comforts, and to take them off their precious time from looking after Heaven;
and therefore consider, courteous Reader, thy best condition is to study
heavenly things; let thy time be spent for Heaven, for that will profit thee at
the last, and thou shall find a heavenly treasure which will stand thee in
stead at the last day; so the glory of this life is but for a time, but the
glory of Heaven endures for ever: For the sufferings of this life are not
worthy of the glory that shall be revealed; for if we suffer with him we shall
also reign with him, but if we deny him, he will also deny us. And this has
encouraged me to write at this time, desiring to improve that time that he has
given me, to my Masters advantage, from whom I look for any reward. I have set
forth a Book, that is called, or entitled, Truths Champion, or, Truths
Companion, which is liked of some, and despised of others; and I was desired
also to set forth my judgment in some other things which were necessary to
Salvation; for the knowledge of some, and the strengthening of others, and also
that the truth may be known to all men; but I know it will pass under many
censures, for I do not think it will please all men, for the world is not so
apt t^ receive truth, I look to be Judged for it; I am not ^^tter then my
Master, for his Doctrine was despised of the Learned, and well may mine; but I
^^^e thou will try me before thou judge me, and then if thou judge me, thou will also judge the Word; for what I have done is not to please man, for I am
ready to pass under all censures for the name of Christ, and I count all
things but dung in respect of him, and of his truth, for whom I desire to
suffer the loss of all things, and count all but as dross and dung that I may
win Christ, and be found in him: for one smile from God is better then all the
smiles of the World, and therefore I care not for the judgment of man, for I
seek not to please man, but God; for all the smiles of the world will but
bring me to the Grave, but the smiles of God will bring me to Heaven; and
therefore it is better to dye in the favor of the Lord, then in the favor of
men; for were I a lover of the World I were an enemy to God; I desire to leave
the honors, riches, and pleasures of this world for a better, I am willing to
leave the glory of this life, for I look for a better; for I desire to
undergo all the fury of Hell, to have a Heaven.

My time is but short, I desire to bid adieu to the world; for what is the
world but vanit^, all the honors are but dishonours, and all the riches i^ but
poverty; all the joy is but sorrow, and all the pleasure is but displeasure;
and had I no better comfort then what is in this life, I were in a sad
condition, for I live in hope of a better resurrection, and so I hope do
thou; which if thou do, thou will like my works the better, and so farewell.

Richard Stookes.

A Second CHAMPION to the TRVTH.
CHAPTER 1. Of working of Miracles.
ANd first I shall begin to speak of Miracles, which so many dote upon in these
days, waiting for visible signs, and some great Revelation: and to them I
shall say as Christ said unto the Scribes and Pharisees that the Kingdom of God
comes not with observation; for they looked that Christ should come with
abundance of earthly pomp and glory: but Christ tells them they were deceived,
for the Kingdom of God consisted not of outward glory and excellency; for says
he, the Kingdom of God is within you: it is more of substance then of show,
more glorious within then without, and the Miracles more inward then outward.
Miracles of a more spiritual nature to appear in the inward man, to the beating
down of every strong hold: and therefore those outward miracles are swallowed
up of inward miracles, of a more glorious nature: the one being a type of the
other, as the outward man was a type of the inward man; and therefore my work
shall be in this Chapter, to show you my reasons why I conceive that Miracles
in a visible way, a^e to cease in that age: So that this is my meaning, that
the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles in a visible way: were to cease in that
age.

1. Because Miracles were to testify of Christ's coming in the flesh, and
therefore when Christ came, he came with signs and wonders, as his casting out
of Devils. Mat. 12. 22. and Luke 11. 17. Of his healing the sick, and curing
them of their Diseases; as you may see, Mat. 15. 30. In giving sight to the
blind, and hearing to the death, and speech to the d^^^, making the lame to go,
as raising up the d^^^: and all this he was to do, to manifest himself to the
World, that he was the Christ Is^i^^ 35. 5. 6. chap. 61. 1. Mat. 11. 5. And
thus (...) came to be known of John Baptist, as you (...) see Mat. 11. 4. 5.
Together, with the (...) of the Holy Ghost descending upon him in the likeness
of a Dove, Luke 3. 22. John 1. 33. And thus he was manifest to John, as to all
the World, doing such works as never man did, whereby he might appear to be the
Christ, to leave all men without excuse, as John 15. 24. in doing such works as
were never done from the beginning, in opening the eyes of the blind, John 9.
32. and in showing such signs and wonders which were not before recorded,
least the world should take up to much time in the searching thereof, and in
doteing more upon his acts, then upon the end of his coming, John 20, 30. and
21. 25. As also further, the Apostles were gifted for the same end to manifest
Christ to be come in the flesh, working miracles, both before and after his
ascensio^ that thereby they might manifest to the World, that he was the
Christ; and for that and they were promised by Christ, to receive the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, Luke 24. 49. which was performed in Acts 2. 1. 2. The gifts of
the spirit being powered upon them, insomuch, that they were able to speak
infallibly, to work Miracles, and to speak with new Tongues, and to understand
all Languages under Heaven, (...) 2. 6. Even for this very end, that they (...)
that he was the Christ, both at (...), and to the (...) pa^ts of the Earth,
Act. 1. 8. And thus the Lord granted signs and wonders to be done by the hands
of the Apostles, to give Testimony to the word of his grace, Act 14. ^. who did
manifest to the world, that all the wonders that they wrought, were in the name
and power of Jesus, Acts 4. 10. showing in their preaching that this was the
end for which Miracles were on foot, even to testify of Christ, Acts 2. 22.
And this was one end, for which Miracles were given to hold forth the coming of
Christ.

2. Miracles were to confirm the Covenant of grace, which was to be established
as firm as the first; for when the first Covenant was given out, it was
ratified with signs and wonders; for all the Mountain was on fire, and there
were thunderings and lightnings, and voices, and so terrible was the sight,
that it made Moses the man of God tremble: So terrible were the signs. Heb.
12. 18. 19. 22. And thus you see the first Covenant was ratified with Miracles,
and so also was the second, which is a better Covenant estableished upon better
promises, Heb. 8. 6. And also more glorious Miracles of a more spiritual
nature* for the Miracles of the first Covenant were more outward and terrible:
But the Miracles of the 2. Covenant are more inwardly (...) comfortable, which
did accompany the Appostles in their Ministry, confirming the truth by signs
and wonders, Mark* 16. the last, Act. 19. 10. 11. And thus did the Lord Jesus
Christ himself also confirm the Doctrine of the Gospel with more Miracles, then
ever any word was before from the beginning of the World; so that you may see
that the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles wanted not Miracles to confirm it:
God the Father also bearing witness with signs and wonders, and diverse gifts
of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2. 4. That it might appear the Covenant was the more
glorious, and more excellent, firm and sure: being so wonderfully ratified and
confirmed with Miracles. And thus you see a second Reason wherefore Miracles
were on foot, even to confirm the truth of the Gospel.

Now a third reason wherefore Miracles were on foot, was this: even to confirm
the calling and Ministry of the Apostles, who were to lay the Foundation both
for Doctrine and practice, which the World was to follow in after Ages, to the
end of the World, For we are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. Ephesians. 2 20. In
being the Author both of their Doctrine and Practice; and therefore you see it
was requisite, that Miracles should attend the Apostles in their Ministry; who
were to set forth such a way to the world, that was never before heard of:
neither can there be a more glorious way set forth, or more glorious Ministers
then Christ and his Apostles were; to set forth a way to the World, to walk in
in future ages; and therefore the Father, even the God of Heaven and Earth, did
so honor the way of the Gospel with his Son, and such glorious Miracles,
that were never acted before since the World stood; whereby he did manifest his
probation of their way.

And thus I have showed you some reasons wherefore Miracles were on foot, even
to confirm the truth, that Christ and his Apostles did set forth. Now, I shall
also show you reasons and grounds, wherefore I conceive that Miracles are
ceased, which are these.

First, We have received a sure word of prophecy, to the which we do well if we
take heed 2 Pet. 1. 19. For a standing Word as the Gospel is, is a more surer
ground of Faith, then all the Miracles in the world; that our faith should not
be built upon men, but upon the Word of God, which endures for ever. 1 Pet. 1.
25. For to ground our Faith upon miracles, is but a rotteu foundation; because
when miracles cease, our Faith must cease: and so we stand at a great loss,
being built on so uncertain a ground; but it is not so with the people of God,
who are built upon the Rock and foundation of Christ, and his Apostles, their
way being undeniable, and by the which way we must be judged at the last day.

Secondly, Another Reason is this, Miracles were to accompany Apostolical men
in those Apostolical times, to set forth an Apostolical way to the World;
which they were to stand to, being so gloriously confirmed with miracles by
Christ and his Apostles, as any way could be confirmed: so that now to look for
miracles is vain, except you look for a better way, and better workmen then
the former were; which to do, is to race the foundation of Christ and his
Apostles.

Thirdly, Because it cannot appear that after those Apostolical times that
miracles were on foot, or that any after those times did work miracles: neither
Timothy nor Titus in their ordinary ministry, nor any of the Ministers in the
seven Churches of Asia; but were to look unto the form of sound Doctrine,
which they had received from the Apostles, as you may see, 2 Timothy 1. 13. which
was the foundation of Christian Doctrine and practice, whereon the people of
God are to build in every age; For other foundation can no man lay then Christ
has laid, 1 Cor. 3. 11. And so it does appear, that after the Apostles times,
there was no looking for miracles; for they knew, the Gospel was as gloriously
confirmed with Miracles as was possible to be.

Fourthly, If we look for miracles now: what do we else but question the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and fly in the face of Christ and his Apostles, to
condemn them of insufficiency, as not being able to set forth such a way for
all men to walk in; which is sufficient to save them if they believe in it; and
also of force to condemn, if they do reject it? But this is clear, where the
Apostle says, that Christ shall come in flaming fire, to render vengeance
against them that obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 1 8.

Fifthly, If we must have Miracles now to believe; then why not Miracles also,
to confirm our belief, and miracles also to keep us in the Faith; which if so,
then we may cast off the Scriptures, and build our Faith upon Miracles, and
then if miracles cease, we cease to believe: and so if there be no Miracle
there is no Faith; if no belief, then no salvation.

Sixthly, If we must build our Faith upon Miracles, and nothing be true to us
in the Scripture, till it be confirmed by a Miracle; then, how will you discern
between a false ^^racle, and a true, seeing that a pretender may do the like:
and so ^ou may take a false miracle for a true, o^ a true miracle for a false:
and so by the subtilty of the Devil you may be ^^^ in strong delusions to deny
all S^^pture to your utter damnation?

Seventhly, Whether does not this Tenent question the State of all our
forefathers, from the Apostles to this present time, that their faith was in
vain, and their salvation uncertain, seeing they wanted miracles to confirm
it to them, and so were in a sad condition? and the like I may say of you that
stand so much for miracles: what if you die before you enjoy a miracle to
confirm the truth unto you and so build upon the sand? is not your condition
sad that your salvation should depend upon a miracle, and so be damned?

8. Whether does not this Tenent set up the Pope and his Adherents, who may say
by this reasoning, that he is in the right way, and others in the wrong:
because they have miracles to confirm their way, and thereby prove their Church
to be true: the Pope working a miracle every year, whereby he does persuade
them that his way is right, and all the ways of others false, because they
have not miracles to confirm their way? and therefore the Pope by this may
plead that he is right, and others wrong, and so we shall justify the
generation of the wicked to confirm them in their wickedness, and condemn the
people of God, because they have no miracle.

9. I may say to such as Christ says to the Scribes and Pharisees under the
Law, They have Moses and the Prophets, if they would not believe them, neither
would they believe if one should rise from the dead to work miracles: and so I
say, we have Christ and his Apostles, and he that will not believe the truth
set forth by them confirmed before by miracles, neither will he believe if one
should rise from the dead, and do all the miracles in the world.

10. It does appear that miracles are ceased, because the Scriptures do declare
that such as should work miracles in the last days, should be false Prophets,
showing signs and wonders, and that Satan should come with all lying signs
and wonders to draw men from the truth, that they might believe a lie, that all
those might be damned who obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, 2
These. 2. 9. 10. And this I believe is the Devils grand design in these days,
to make men believe, that the Scripture is not true without miracles to
confirm it, that thereby he may deceive the world, and set up his own false
miracles in stead of the true: and this may be the reason why he puts it into
the hearts of men in these days that miracles and dreams are above the word,
that thereby he might have them where he would, and so deceive them with a
false miracle, as he does the greatest part of the world at this day, as the
Turks who are deceived with the false miracles of Mah^^^^, wherein he has
deluded them to this present day, through the devil and his instruments;
together with their false miracles, wherein they are kept in blindness; as
also the Pope with the Latin Church, deceiving the world, and themselves, with
their false miracles, which they much boast of, whereby they judge their way to
be right, because the Devil and the Pope work miracles to confirm their way,
which indeed the Scriptures did foretell, that the Latin Beast would deceive the
world with his false miracles. Revel. 13. 13, 14. But these spirits are the
spirits of devils, deceiving the Kings of the earth, and the whole world,
Revel. 16. 14. But the Lord will take that beastly worship of the Beast,
together with the Beast, and the false Prophet, with his lying spirit, that
wrought miracles to deceive the people, and will cast them into the lake of his
wra^h forever and ever, Revel. 19. ^.

Now there is some objections to be answered, as Joel 2. where the Lord does
foretell, that young men shall see visions, and old men shall dream dreams: and
that that prophecy is in part to be fulfilled.

To the which I do reply, with the words of Peter, who had a more spiritual
discerning then any in these days to discern the truth of prophesies, that
that prophecy was fulfilled upon them when the visions of the Lord did appear
unto them in Acts 2 1, 2, 3. who were the Lords young men, who were to declare
the mind of God to the whole earth: and that being such a public prophecy,
it was publicly fulfilled to perfect a public work to the admiration of the
beholders who were very desirous to know what was the meaning of those strange
works, and the Apostle flies to the prophecy of Joel for their refuge, and
tells them it was no more then what was prophesied of them: and that they might
now see that prophecy fulfilled, Acts 2. 16. 17, 18. and that those were the
days that were spoken of before, being glorious Gospel Times, in which the
Lord was to accomplish his promise, that there might be nothing wanting to
ratify and confirm the truth of the Gospel: so that this prophecy being
extraordinary, (...) does appear by the Apostl^^ words: if any do pretend in
these days the like revelations, they must also show the like effects which I
think they cannot.

10. I shall speak a word or two of Gospell-visions, whereby it will appear
that that there are no such visions in these days: and first those visions did
appear in a^visible manner to the sight of the beholders, Luke 3. and Acts 2.
and then secondly, they were able to confirm what was revealed in the vision
to them by a visible sign or wonder: and thirdly, they were able to speak in
an extraordinary manner to convince the gainsayers; and fourthly, those
visions were for the truth, and not against it: so that from hence I conclude,
that the cause is taken away because the effect cease; for if they prove the
like visions, they must also prove the like visible manifestations; or else
they are false visions. And as for the dreamers there spoken of, you may see
that was fully fulfilled in those days in the Scribes and Pharisees, those old
and ancient Doctors of those times, who stood dreaming as men amazed, when
they beheld the Lord Christ, and his Apostles, the mirror of the world, to
preach such glorious doctrine, accompanied with such glorious miracles; and
their doctrine being so strange and rare, and so unanswerable preaching, with
such authority, and so mightily, convincing the gainsayers: the Doctors also
themselves being so wonderfully confuted, that we may truly say, That they were
in a dream, or trance: whereby the prophecy was truly fulfilled.

2. Object. is in Mark 16. These signs shall follow those that do believe. So
that hence they do infer, That there is no true Gospel-Preachers but such as
work miracles: which if this be true, then there is no faith in England,
because no true Ministry; for faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. even by
hearing the word preached, and how shall he preach except he be sent: so that
if there be no Preachers, there is no faith, and then there is no salvation:
for if the Ministry of faith cease, then faith must cease: which if so, then to
what purpose do your Ministers teach, seeing they work no miracles, so that by
this Tenent both you and your Ministers are in a false way.

And further if our salvation depend upon miracles, would God have been wanting
think you ever since the Apostles time to have sent them into the world to have
perfected their salvation to the full? for certainly, if we could not have been
saved without them, God would never have been wanting to have sent them: But
God had so fully before confirmed the Gospel with such Ministers and Miracles,
which is sufficient to confirm the truth in all Ages.

3. Objection. But we have been in a great confusion for many hundred of years
together, ard in a great confusion amongst us, to know the truth, and how shall
we know without a miracle to confirm it to us?

To the which I reply, and how shall we know the truth by a Miracle; seeing a
pretender may do the like, and so you may take a false Miracle for a true? or
how will you prove that your Miracle to be true? if not by the word, or else it
may be false for ought you know: must not the word try your miracle, whether it
be true or false? and therefore to the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to that, they are in a false way, Isaiah 8. for the word of the
Lord is powerful, and sharper then a two-edged Sword, Heb. 4. 12. to pierce
through all the false ways of men, and to cut in pieces all false worships
whatsoever; and it is a searcher of the heart, and a tryer of the raines, to
search into all the hearts of men and their actions, to judge them according to
their works.

2. Who must end all contentions, must not the word which is able to satisfy
all doubts, and to direct us in all our ways? and what need we fear, having so
glorious a Guide as the Gospel is? can you find a better Rule to walk by, or a
better Guide to lead you, which is the Resolver of all doubts; for if the word
cannot satisfy you, who can? And now I shall speak a word or two for the word
of my God; for where will you find a Christ but in the word? and where will you
find the promises of Christ but in the Word? does not the Word hold forth
Christ to you, and holds forth the promise to you? does not the word show you
the way of life? if you would know what Doctrine is right, does not the word
show you what Doctrine and what worship you ought to observe? does not the word
hold forth unto you holiness and unholiness, life and death? and shall not the
word judge you at the last day for every idle word? and is not this the word of
Christ, John 12. 48. Consider therefore all you that forget God, will not his
word find you one day, and accuse you at the bar of justice for all your
contempt, and then what answer will you make: will you say his word was false
or true, will you condemn your judge that shall judge you? the Lord give to
consider, that you may prevent the judgments of this Judge.

CHAP. 2. The Reasons wherefore so few believe, and embrace the Gospel.
IN the next place I shall endeavor to show you the Reason wherefore so few
believe the ^ospel, for Christ says, many are called, and few are chosen, Mat.
22. 14. And so there is no fault in Christ, if he call them, and they come not:
the fault is theirs, and not his; Christ tells us also. That (...) is the gate,
and narrow is the way that leads to (...) few there are that find it, Mat. 7.
^4. And (...) sure Christ does not hinder them from finding the way; for if he
did, he would not condemn them for not finding it; but sure he (...) intend to
give them life, because he pro^^^^ it to them, or else he did dissemble with
(...), which I believe he did not. Also the (...) of (...) as like (...) a
King, that made ^^^^riage for his (...), Mat. 22. 2, 3, 4. Now this King is God
who did intend to marry his Son to all that embrace his grace: and first he
invited the Jews, as Christ himself says, I was not sent but to the lost
sheep of the House of Israel, Mat. 10. 6. But the proud Scribes and Pharisees
rejected the grace and mercy offered them, and respected the pleasures of this
world above the riches of Christ, and he came unto his own, but his own
received him not, John 1. 11. And therefore the Children of the Kingdom were
cast out, Mat. 8. 12. And therefore Paul says, it was necessary that the
Gospel should be first preached to the Jews; but seeing you reject the Gospel,
lo we turn to the Gentiles, Acts 13. 46. And thus you see they were called,
but they refused to come, and therefore the fault was theirs and not his; for
Christ says, A sower went forth to sow, and some seed fell upon good ground,
and some fell upon bad ground, and some ground brought forth fruit, and some
brought forth none: Now the sower is Christ, and the seed is the word of grace,
and the ground is the World: Now it does appear, that the fault was not in the
sower, for he sowed good seed, as you may see, Mat. 13. 34. And the same seed
was sown upon the bad ground, as upon the good; but you may say, how came the
ground to be bad? I reply, by the Devil and themselves; for God made the ground
good, as you may see, Genesis 2. and so says the wise Solomon, Eccles. 7. 29. God
made man good, but they found out many inventions: so that you may see the
fault was in the ground, and not in the sower nor the seed; so that the fault
is not in Christ, because so few receive the Gospel, but in the Creature who is
condemned for rejecting the Gospel.

And now I shall come to Reasons, to show you wherefore so few embrace the
Gospel, 1. Because the promises of the Gospel are spiritual, and promises of
another life, and therefore so few receive it; for if the Gospel promised to
make men rich men, and great men in the World: then all would be
Gospel-Professors, because they would be rich and great men in the World, and
to be honored of men, and to enjoy all the glory of the flesh for to have the
praise of men, and to have the World on their side; but because the Gospel
holds forth no such thing, but contrariwise those that embrace the Gospel,
loose the savor and esteem of the World, and are hated of all men, as
contemptible men of another World, as not worthy (...) upon the face of the
Earth: and therefore there are so few that embrace the Gospel, the ways of the
Gospel being despised and contemptible in the eyes of the World, Mat. 10. 22.
And this is the Reason wherefore so few embrace the Gospel of Christ, as you
may see John 15. 19.

2. Reason. Is because the Gospel holds forth a self-denying Creature, that a
man must deny himself in the honors, riches, and pleasures of this life, and
love Christ above all; for he that loves Father or Mother, Wife and Children,
or Brother and Sister, or any thing in the world more then Christ. is not
worthy of him; and he that does not deny himself and take up his Cross, and
follow Christ cannot be his Disciple, Mat. 10. 34. Luke 14. 26. For he that
seeks to save his life in the riches, and honors of this life, he shall loose
the riches and honors in Christ; and he that is ashamed to profess the truth
of Christ before men, Christ will deny him the comforts of the Gospel before
his Father which is in Heaven: and therefore it is that so few do believe and
obey the Gospel, even because they love the honors, riches, and pleasures of
this life, more then they do Christ: Nay, rather then they will lose the honor
of this world, they will (...) Christ like Judas, for a piece of money, (...)
deny their Master with Peter, and forsake Christ with Demas, to embrace this
present world: so hard a thing is self-denial to be brought off our own
bottoms to embrace the Gospel, that I may say with the Prophet Esaias 53. Lord
who has believed our report: so many seek themselves, and so few the things of
Christ, that rather then they will deny themselves, they deny the Lord that
bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1,

3 Reason. Wherefore so few embrace the Gospel, is because men love the praise
of men more then the praise of God: for thus it was in the days of Christ,
there were many of the Rulers believed on him, but they did not confess his
name and Gospel openly, because of the Priests of those times, who were
enemies to Christ and his truth: and for fear of the Priests of those times
they ^urst not embrace the Gospel, lest they should lose their favor, and be
shut out of the synagogue, John 12. 42 they will deny Christ, for the Text
says, That those chief Rulers loved the praise of men more then the praise of
God, ver. 43. And thus it is now in our days, there are many of the chief
Rulers believe, and are persuaded of the truth of Christ, but they will not
confess him, and (...) truth openly, because they will not displease the
Priests: and least they should out themselves out of the fleshly Church of
England, and that covetous fleshly Ministry: and because they love the praise
of men more then the praise of God, the god of this world having blinded the
eyes of the great ones, and the eyes of the priests, and people, lest they
should obey the glorious Gospel of Christ 2 Cor. 4. 4. and for this cause there
is so few that embrace the Gospel, because men love the praise of men more
then the praise of God.

4 Reason. Is because there is so few of the great ones believe the Gospel,
and this was the plea of the Scribes and Pharisees against Christ, Have any of
the rulers believed on him? John 7. 48. The Pharisees knowing this, that the
multitude would follow the great ones, whether right or wrong, whether their
way were true or false: and this is as true in our days* for if the great ones
would believe, and follow the Gospel, then would the inferior ones: and if
the Priests would embrace the Gospel, then would the people: and so as Christ
says, The blind lead the blind, and so they both fall into the ditch: for as
the Apostle says, ye see your calling brethren, how that not many mighty, not
many noble, not many learned, but the poor receive the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. the
contemptible ones of the wor^^, the great ones ^allowing in their fleshly
felicity and worldly glory, and therefore it ^^ that so few embrace the Gospel
of Christ.

5 Reason. Is the high esteem of the persons of some, and the dis-esteem of the
persons of others, and thus did the Scribes and Pharisees vilify the Person of
Christ in their saying; Is not this the Carpenters son? Mark 6. 3. 4. being
offended at him, and declaring against him, saying, Art thou greater then our
father Abraham, and the Prophets? John 8. 53. and thus they undervalued the
Person of Christ to make his doctrine contemptible in abasing his Person, that
thereby they might set up themselves, saying, We are Abraham's children, John 8.
39. but for this fellow, we know not whence he is, John 9. 29. and thus did the
proud Scribes and Pharisees of those times contemn Christ, and his Apostles,
as if they were the basest men in the world, and thus they do in these days
highly esteem of the persons of so me, if he be an University man, and have
learned the spirit, as they conceive, at the University, with the knowledge of
the humane tongues, and have received his humane degrees, then they admire his
Person, and esteem him some great man, or divine person, having bought the
spirit at the University, as the people conceive: and that which he has bought
at the Schools, he sels it for spirit, though indeed it be nothing but a Tract
of Fathers and Authors which he has got by art, compacting a Sermon out of
Fathers and Authors, and the like, and preaches but the judgments of other
men, and those men's persons are esteemed as the only men in the world, and all
other men rejected, though never so able and godly, because they come not in by
the door of humane inventions, their persons are despised as contemptible, and
so their doctrine is despised, being never so holy and true, because their
persons are contemptible, which is a main cause and reason wherefore so few
embrace the Gospel of Christ.

6 Reason, Wherefore so few embrace the Gospel, is this, because the Lord has
been pleased in all Ages to reveal his truth to a company of contemptible ones
in the worlds eye, as you may see both under the Law and Gospel: as under the
Law the Lord called Moses a shepherd to feed his flock, who was feeding the
sheep of his father, Exodus 3. And the Lord called him to feed his people
Israel, and also David a shepherd, who was tending of his fathers flock: And
the Lord called him (...) the ewes, and made him a shepherd in Is(...) and
then there was Elisha a plowman, and Amos a heards-man, Amos 1. And thus you
see under the Law how the Lord did reveal his truth: and under the Gospel you
have Christ and his Disciples, who were poor contemptible men in the world, and
as Matthew a Publican, and Peter, James and John fishermen, with Paul a
Tent-maker. And thus you see, that the Lord did reveal his truth by a company
of tradesmen, which the Apostle Paul does so gloriously confirm, 1 Cor. 1.
against the proud Rabbis of those times, and justifies his poor brethren in
the Ministry, saying, you see your calling brethren, how that not many wise,
mighty or noble are called to the Ministry, but God has called the foolish to
confound the wise, and the weak to confound the mighty, and things that are
not in the worlds ^ye as any thing, has God chosen to bring to ^aught things
that are esteemed in the world. And this the Lord does, that no flesh should
boast or glory in his presence: and therefore the Apostle says, Where is the
wise, where is the Scribe and disputer of this world? for the Lord has made
foolish the wisdom of this world, 1 Cor. 1. 20. And therefore behold says the
Lord, I will do a work in your days, says the Lord, that you will not
believe, though (...) declared unto you; for the wisdom of your wise men shall
perish, and I will make the deviners mad, Esa. 29. 14. Act. 23. Oh behold and
wonder ye Ministers of England, and ye Rabbis and Doctors, ye have been
exalted up to Heaven, but you shall be brought down; for you have sought your
selves more then Jesus Christ, and your own honor more then his; you have
sought to set up your selves and to abace Christ, and have been ashamed to
tonfess his Gospel before men, for fear of losing your earthly honors and
preferments, and have denied the holy one of Israel, in perverting his ways,
and changing his Ordinances, and have been time-servers, and served your selves
and not Christ, and therefore the Lord has a quarrel against you, and will
confound your wisdom, and make you to be despised before the people, and will
shake off your fleshly glorying, that you may glory in the Lord; and this the
Lord will do by raising up men to preach the Gospel, and you shall be cast out
as a contemptible thing, because you have been a hinderance, and not a
furtherance to the Gospel of Christ; for the Idolizing of your persons, is a
reason wherefore so few believe and obey the Gospel of Christ.

7. Reason. Wherefore so few embrace and obey the Gospel, is because the ways
of the Gospel are persecuted ways; for no sooner Christ the great Minister of
God came to preach the Gospel to the People, but the high Priest and Doctors
sought to destroy him, Mat 2. and how was he persecuted of the Learned Rabbis,
and was forced to flee from one place to another, and was persecuted wheresoever
he came, and had not where to hide his head while the great Doctors were
slourishing in their earthly glory and pomp. rejoicing at the troubles of the
Son of God, and like Foxes lay lurking in their holes to watch for his ruin,
and nothing would serve them but his death; crying, his blood be upon us and
our Children, and thus the learned Doctors slew the Lord of life, rejoicing at
his death with mocks and scorns, like hellish Doctors; and thus you see the
Lord himself was dealt with for preaching the Gospel: and therefore Christ does
tell his Apostles, that they should be hated of all men for his names sake,
Mat. 10. 22. and now you shall see how his Apostles were persecuted for
preaching the Gospel: not to speak of their troubles before Christ was put to
death, but also after; as before his death, how many times were they in trouble
with their Master, both by Sea and by Land? what straits were they put unto at
his death, when they were all forced to fly and leave their Master in the
mouth of hell? who can express their grief in that condition? as also after his
ascension, how were they persecuted? when Peter and John were put in prison,
Acts 4. 3. for preaching the Gospel, being scourged and beaten, Acts 5. 40. and
commanded to preach no more in the name of Jesus, and also the killing of
Steven, stoneing him with stones, Acts 7. Together, with the killing of James
with the Sword, as Acts 12. and putting Peter in prison, and what shall I say
of Paul, who was persecuted on every side, being stoned, whipped, and
imprisoned, with the report of the Apostle himself, saying, they were led as
sheep to the slaughter, Romans 8. 36. and were troubled, perplexed, persecuted,
and cast down, and bearing in their bodies the sufferings of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.
8. 9. 10. The Apostle himself being in the depth of troubles, as you may see, 2
Cor. 11. where he does relate that he was in labor more abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often, five times of the Jews
receiving 40. stripes save one, thrice beaten with rods, once stoned, thrice
suffering Shipwreck, and a night and a day in the deep, and many suffering
more, which are related, as you may see, 2 Cor. ^^. 16. 17. and all this he
suffered for Christ and his Gospel, to show to all the World, that the
Ministers of the Gospel have been a persecuted Company in all ages; and who
were the greatest persecutors in the days of Christ and his Apostles; was it
not you hellish Doctors and Rabbis with the rabble of Priests and high Priest?
were not you the chief to condemn Christ and his Apostles of false Doctrine,
and chiefest in Council to act against them, that you might fill up the measure
of your sins; and so fall into the anger of the Almighty, by doing what you
could to hinder the passage of the Gospel, and shall not the Gospel condemn you
for this at the last day? and does not this resemble our times, for who are the
greatest persecutors of Christ and his Gospel in these days? are not you
Priests and learned Rabbis? and do not you follow the steps of your
Forefathers, to fill up the nature of your sins, i^ persecuting the Gospel
and the true ways thereof by your council, and acting what you can against the
truth? so that you have been a cause wherefore so few have believed and obeyed
the Gospel by seeking all means you can to persecute all such a^ would embrace
the truth of Jesus Christ, so that most men are afraid to profess the Gospel,
because it is a persecuted way.

8. Reason, Wherefore so few embraced and obeyed the Gospel is this, even
because the ways of the Gospel are counted heresy, and such as profess the
Gospel are counted Heretics: and thus it was in former times, even against
Christ and his Apostles: Oh how did the High Priest, Scribes, and Pharisees
bestir them? will the learned Doctors bestir them? John came neither eating nor
drinking, and ye said, he had a Devil; the Lord Christ came eating and
drinking, and ye said, behold a gluttonous man, a friend of publicans and
sinners, and thus you railed against the Person and Doctrine of Christ,
accusing him of heresy, and saying, he was a blasphemer, and had a Devil, and
cast out Devils by the name of Beelzebub: and were not these your words
against the Lord; Oh you learned Rabbis? accusing the Apostles also, that they
were ignorant fellows, Acts 4. and forbidding them to preach any more in the
name of Christ, and seeking all means to destroy them by your hellish Council,
in saying their Doctrine and Teaching was false, and that they did but delude
the People? how did you Scribes and Pharisees rail against the famous Apostle
Paul, that glorious Preacher of the Gospel? did you not say he was a deluder,
and turned the World upside-down? that his Doctrine was false? that he was a
Heretic, and preached Heresy, though his Doctrine were a glorious truth, even
the Gospel of Christ, as you may see in his answer to that hellish crew,
saying, that way that you call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
Acts 24. 14. Oh you High Priest and you Elde^s, were you not ashamed to accuse
Christ and his Apostles, of false Doctrine, how will you answer it in the day
of Gods anger? and thou Orator named Tertullus, how bravely did thou act the
Devils part in accusing of Paul and his Doctrine, calling him pestilent fellow,
and a mover of sedition throughout the World, and a Ringleader of Sects and
Heresy? shall not that Gospel that Paul taught, judge you at the last day? how
willy on plead then at the Bar of justice, when the Gospel shall be your judge?
And thus; you see the reason wherefore so few embraced the Gospel in those
times, because the way of the Gospel was counted Heresy; and does not this
resemble our times? are not Gospel-wayes called Heresy? and such as profess
the Gospel Here^^^^? and all the nick names the Devil can invent to make the
way of the Gospel (...) in the eyes of the People? and who are the chief actors
in this thing, but the learned of our times, who persuade the people as the
Scribes and Pharices did, that the way of the Gospel is Heresy? railing in
their Pulpits like furies, to put the people in fear, least they should obey
the truth, and stirring up the great ones also to fright the people with their
Bulls; and therefore it is that so few believe and obey the Gospel.

9. Reason is, Because the Gospel holds forth separation, that Gods people
ought to be a separated people, in respect of worship from all the people in
the Earth, which is a way that most men abhor; and therefore it is that so
few obey the Truth; beca^se separation is a heinous thing in the Worlds Eye:
though it be a Gospel Truth, as does appear, 2 Cor. 6. 14. where we are
commanded by the Lord to separate, and the Reasons given. First, that we be not
unequally yoaked together with unbelievers; for what fellowship has the
righteous way of the Gospel with an unrighteous way? and what concord has the
Gospel of light with the way of darkness: or the way of Christ with the way of
Beliall: or he that believes with an Infidel; and therefore come out from
amongst them, and be you sep^^^^ says the Lord, from all the ways and
worships of men, and I will be your God, and you shall be my People, says the
Lord of Hosts. And come out of her my People, and be not partakers of her
sins, lest you receive of her punishment. Rev. 18. 4. And therefore Christ
says, If you were of the World, the World would love her own; but I have
called (or chosen) you out of the World, in respect of Worship; John 15. 18.
19. and therefore does the World hate you. And thus you see, there is a Gospel
command for separation; as also there is example; for what did Christ and his
Apostles preach, but away of separation from the World, both in their doctrine
and practice? and such as did embrace their doctrine, were separated from the
World in respect of worship, as you may see, Acts 2. 40. For as the People of
Israel were separated from all the people of the Earth in respect of Worship:
for Circumcision was a distinguishing badge whereby they were known from the
World; for by being Circumcised, they had right unto the Land of Can^an, and
unto the Inheritances of the Land, and had right unto all the Ordinances of
that Covenant, and the promises and blessings thereof; but he that did slight
and cast of circumcision, was to be cut off from the Israel of God, Genesis 17.
14. and so Baptism under the Gospel is a distinguishing badge, to distinguish
between Believers and unbelievers; and therefore such as manifested repentance
and faith, and were baptized, had a right unto the Gospel Covenant, and to all
the Ordinances thereof, being accounted the Church and House of Christ, and
Members of that body whereof Christ is the head, Baptism being a door to let
in Gospel-Priviledges; for such as were baptized they were separated from the
World, in respect of worship, enjoying Gospel Worship amongst themselves, as
you may see in all the Churches: none being baptized but such as were made
Disciples by manifestation of Repentance and Faith, and none receiving the
Supper but such as were baptized: and all these Churches being gathered out of
the World, had the worship of Christ amongst themselves, having nothing to do
with those that were without, as you may see 2 Cor. 5. 13 whereby you may see
that the people of Christ under the Gospel are to be a separated people from
the World, in respect of Worship: because the worship of Christ and the worship
of the World being as contrary as light and darkness, as you may see 2 Cor. 6.
14. and this is a great reason wherefore so few embrace the Gospel, because it
is a way of separation.

10. Reason, Wherefore so few believe and obey the Gospel, is for want of
trial, because men do not search and try the ways of men, and therefore we are
commanded to try all things, 1 These. 5. 21. and to try the spirits whether they
be of God, 1 John 4. 1. Oh you people of England, how ignorant are you of the
ways of the Gospel, for want of searching the Scriptures, whereby you might
discern the truth, and so the blindness of your former ways? you have built
your faith upon men and not upon God, trusting upon Synods and Councels of men,
and not upon the word of God: how ready have you been to embrace every
invention of men, which they have set up? how often have you changed your
Worship, embracing every tradition that men have set up? when you should with
the noble Bereans have searched the scriptures, Act 17. 11. to have seen
whether their Doctrines had been true or not? how have you swallowed down every
Antichristian bait, whereby you have been choked of your spiritual comfort, in
taking a false Profession for a true, and this is the cause of your blindness
in spiritual things? shall not your worldly minds convince? would you have
trusted your (...) and Goods so with men, to have been at their disposing, and
not have searched how they have dealt with you?

I think you would not, and yet you have trusted men with your spiritual goods,
and have not minded what you have received: and is not this the reason
wherefore you are so poor and beggarly in spiritual things? you have sought
more after Earth then Heaven; and more after the shadow then the substance; you
have a name that you live, but you are dead, Revel. 3. 1. know you not that you
are returned blind and naked? I council you to buy eye salve, that you may see
your blindness in the things of God, and search and try your ways for your
spiritual good; and you Ministers of England, how long will you keep the people
in Egypt, that are seeking after the Land of Canaan, and you retain them? do
you not make them groan under their spiritual burdens? are not they crying
unto the Lord by reason of their bondage whiles you are seeking to keep them in
Egypt? will you not let them come to Canaan? will you hinder them still to
bring the anger of God upon you? how long will you keep them in Egypt to build
your earthly glory? and shall not their labor be your ruin? will you pursue
them to the Sea of blood, that the wrath of the Almighty might swallow you up?
and then shall the people have liberty to enter into the spiritual Land.

CHAP. 8. Of the first Covenant, and the second Covenant.
ANd now I shall speak a word or two of the two Covenants; wherein I shall use
this method. First, I shall speak of the first Covenant, and then of the
second: now the first Covenant was but typical, and therefore it was the good
pleasure of the Father to send the Son to take away the first, that he might
establish the second as you may see, Heb. 10. 9. that is, he takes away the
force of the first, that the second might come in place: which is a better
Covenant, established upon better Promises, Heb. 8. 6. now that the first was a
typical Covenant, will appear for these Reasons.

1. The first Covenant was an administration of the letter, and therefore it
was a typical Covenant, 2 Cor. 3. 6.

2. It was written and engraven in Tables of stone, which was a Type of the
Covenant of grace, which was to be written and engraven in the fleshly Tables
of the heart; and therefore it was a typical Covenant, verse 7.

3. It was an administration of condemnation, and therefore it was a typical
Covenant, verse 9.

4. It was a Law of sin and death, and therefore it was a typical Covenant,
verse 7. Romans 8. 11.

5. It was to be done away, and to be abolished, and therefore it was a
typical Covenant, verse 1. 11. 13.

6. It was a wounding Covenant, it was able to wound, and to show the weakness
of the Creatures, for by the Law came the knowledge of sin, but it was not
able to heal; and therefore it was a typical Covenant.

7. It was a Covenant of bondage, and therefore it was typical; for they were
bound to observe a multitude of Laws and Ordinances under that Covenant,
besides the offering Sacrifices, which was a great bondage, and therefore it
was a typical Covenant, as you may see, Gal. 4. 24. 30.

8. It made nothing perfect, and therefore it was typical; for the Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did; in the which hope we
draw nigh unto God, and so it is disanulled, as you may see, Heb. 7. 18. 19.
and therefore it was a typical Covenant.

9. The first Covenant consisted of Types and shadows, for the Law had a
shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of things, Heb. 10. 2.
and therefore it was a Typical Covenant.

10. The first waketh old, and is ready to vanish away. Heb. 8. 1. 3 and
therefore it was a typical Covenant.

11. There Is a better Covenant comes in place, established upon better
promises; Hebrews 8. 6. 7. 8. and therefore it was a typical Covenant.

12. The worship was typical, and therefore it was a typical Covenant; for
there being a change of the Priesthood, there must also be a change of the Law,
as you may see, Hebr. 7. 12. for the first worship was but on foot till a
better worship came, and then it was to be done away: as the ten words were
but a typical Worship; for, Thou shall have none other Gods but me. And, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; and that is
this, thou shall worship me according to my Covenant and according to the Laws
of that Covenant; for if thou do not worship me according to my Covenant and
according to the Laws thereof; thou worshipest another God, and do not
worship the Lord thy God; for if thou chusest another way of worship then I
have prescribed, and change thy worship, thou also changest thy God; and this
is the full intent and meaning of the first Covenant, an outward
acknowledgement of God to all the world, in obeying those Laws and Ordinances
prescribed and set forth by him, whereby they did acknowledge him to be their
God: which worship God did accept of till a better came, until the time of
Reformation, as you may see, Heb. 9. 10. and then the Father would send the
Son, the great Minister of God, who did administer a better Covenant and better
ordinances to the world; and when that way was come they were to live no longer
to Moses and his teaching; but were to live under the teaching of Christ; which
the Father did confirm when he said, This is my beloved Son, hear him; Mat.
17. 5. but they rejected the teaching of the Son, and did not look to the end
of that worship which was abolished by Christ, as you may see 2 Cor. 3. 13. and
so their minds are blinded unto this day, living in the shadow when they might
have embraced the substance; and therefore they missed salvation, because they
sought it by the first Covenant and not by the second: though they were very
zealous to worship God according to the first Covenant, as you may see Romans 9.
31. 32. and so they stumbled and fell, as you may see, ver. 33.

And thus you see, that the worship of the first Covenant, was but to coutinue
till a better came in place; for when Christ came there was a change, as you
may see in all his teachings, and in his declaring, that neither at Jerusalem.
nor in the Mountain should they worship God; that being but an administration
of the letter, as you may see, 2 Cor. 3. 6. but they should worship in the way
of the Gospel, which is an administration of the Spirit, as you may see, 2
Corinthians 3. 8. which is a better worship then the former was, being a better
Covenant, established upon better promises. And thus I have given you some
Reasons wherefore the first Covenant was a typical Covenant; and now I shall
show you how Christ is said to take away a typical Covenant; and that is in
these three respects. 1. He pacifies the Fathers wrath for the transgressions
of the first Covenant. And secondly, He does the work of the first Coenant.
And thirdly, He takes away the first by establishing the second; and so I shall
begin with the first.

And first, He pacifies the Fathers wrath; for the first Covenant was a
Covenant of terror, as you may see, Exodus 19. For the Law was added because of
transgression, till the seed should come; Gal. 3. 19. and so terrible was the
sight thereof, that it made Moses quake and tremble, to show that wrath was
gone out against sin; Heb. 12. 20. 21. being a Law of sin and death. Romans
8. 2. Now Christ comes and takes away the enmity, and was made a curse for us,
being the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, John 1. 29. and
so we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were held, Romans 7.
6. and has redeemed us from the curse; Gal. 3. 13. and has broken down the
middle-wall of partition, and has abolished and taken away the Law of enmity,
Ephesians. 2. 15. 16. by blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances, and all the
Jewish worship which was against us; and has spoiled or killed that enmity
that was between God and as by reason of sin; and has made a free passage
between God and our souls, having conquered all oppositions, Col. 2. 15. 16.
that thereby we might come with all boldness to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.
16. and therefore it is that Christ has taken away the first Covenant, because
it was a Covenant of bondage, and the Ordinances thereof; and so he gives us
right and freedom to embrace a Covenant of love and mercy, that is more easy
and comfortable to us.

Secondly, He has taken away the first Covenant, in doing the work of the
first Covenant; for the first Covenant did require a perfect work of a perfect
man, but there was ^one that was able to do a perfect work; for the Apostle
says, they were all gone astray, and were all gone out of the way, so that
there was none that did good no not one, as Romans 3. 12. So that none were able
to do the work of the first Covenant; and therefore Christ was to come to do
the work of the first Covenant, being a perfect man, without spot or blemish,
and so he was able to do a perfect work, to fulfill the righteousness of the
first Covenant; For the first Covenant exacted a work of righteousness and
holiness, which none were able to perform till Christ came; who when he came,
did all that the first Covenant did exact, in doing such works as never man
did: and so fulfilled the whole Law, and all the righteousness and holiness
thereof: and so he is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes. Romans 10. 4. And therefore he is declared to be righteous and just,
and the justifier of all that believe in him: Romans 8. 25 26. so that, as by the
offense of one many were made sinners: even so by the righteousness of Christ
shall many be made righteous. Romans 5. 19. And for this work of his, God has
highly exalted him, and has made him Heir of all things. Heb. 1. 2. And thus
you see, that Christ has done the work of the first Covenant, and so is the
end thereof.

Thirdly, Christ takes away the first, by establishing the second; for finding
fault with the first, he says, Behold the days come says the Lord, that I
will make or establish a new Covenant, and so he takes away the first, that he
may establish the second: Heb. 10. 9. and so Christ is become a Minister of a
better Covenant, established upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6. For if the first
had been found faultlesse, there had been no place found for the second; but
finding fault with the first, he says, Behold, the days come says the Lord,
that I will make a new Covenant, and in that he says, a new Covenant, he has
made the first old, and that which is old is ready to vanish away. Heb. 8. 7.
8. 13. And thus you see the first was but a typical Covenant, and was but to
continue until a better came, which is a better Covenant and a better way then
the former was; And thus I have spoken a word or two of the first Covenant, and
now I shall speak a word or two of the second.

And first, I shall show you how the Covenant of grace is established, and that
is these three ways.

First, by promise, for no sooner there was a wound by the first Covenant; but
there was a promise of healing in the second, saying, the seed of the Woman
shall break the Serpents head, as you may see, Genesis 3. 15. and this was also
promised to Noah, Gen 6. 18. and more fully manifested to Abraham, in many
promises made unto him at diverse and sundry times Genesis 12. 3. and the 17. 7.
and a more plainer promise was made to Moses, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
where the Lord shows, that he would send the great Prophet, or Angel of his
Covenant, and would put his words into his mouth that he might speak all that
the Father should command him, ver. 18. 19. And thus yon see all along how the
Covenant was established by the promise of the Father.

Secondly, The Covenant was established by prophecy as you may see, Isa. 42. 6.
chapter 49, 6. as also in Jer. 31. 31. And it shall come to pass in the last
days, that I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the
house of Judah, not according to the Covenant I made with their Fathers, in the
day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of Egypt; which Covenant
they brake though I was a husband unto them says the Lord; but this shall be
the Covenant that I will make with them says the Lord And thus you see, that
it was established by Prophecy.

Thirdly, It was established by the blood of the Testatour, for a covenant is
ratified by blood, as also the first covenant was; for when Moses had spoken
every precept to all the people according to the Law, he took the blood of
calves and of goats, and sprinkled both the book and the people, saying, This
is the blood of the covenant, which God has enjoined unto you, for without
blood there is no remission, Heb, 9. 19. 20. 22. and therefore the second
covenant was established and ratified with blood. even by the blood of the Son
of God, Heb. 9. 14. For where a covenant is, there must also be of necessity
the death of the Testator, ver. 16. and therefore the blood of Christ is called
the blood of the covenant. Heb. 10. 29. chap. 12. 24. chap. 13. 20. And thus
the Covenant is ratified and confirmed by the blood of Christ, which is the
blood of the everlasting covenant.

And thus I have showed you in a word or two, how the Covenant was established,
and now I shall speak a word or two of the Covenant it self: now the essence
or being of the Covenant, is God, who out of his (...) love, and unexpressible
mercy, and tender compassion, was pleased to give a being to the Covenant, to
manifest to all men that he was not in anger but in love, that though his anger
lay in the Covenant of the flesh, yet his love lay in the Covenant of the
spirit: for he seemed to show anger in the type and shadow, but his great love
does appear in the substance and truth, in the Covenant of grace to manifest
his great love to all men: and thus much for the being of the Covenant, and now
for the matter of it.

Now the matter of the Covenant is the mind of God, consisting of promises of
love and mercy unto all men, as you may see Luke 2. 10. 14. upon condition of
obedience unto the Laws and Ordinances of that Covenant proceeding from the
mind of God, from whence all the teaching of the Gospel and ordinances
thereof do proceed as you see Deuteronomy. 18. 17, 18. For the Son does nothing of
himself, but what he has received of the Father, in being taught of the
Father what to teach. John 8. 20. 29. And so being to toach the mind of the
Father, both for promises and commands to the world, from the mind of God: and
thus much for the matter of the Covenant, consisting of Promises and
Ordinances, proceeding from the mind of the Father, and now of the matter it
self.

Now the Covenant of grace is called a testament or will, being indeed the will
of the Father revealed to the Son, and by the Son revealed to the world, to
manifest the Fathers love unto the sons and daughters of men: and testified
to the world, that what he declared was the mind of God, and sealed it with
his blood, and so his blood is called the blood of God, or the blood of the
testament, or will, Heb. 10. 19. chap. 13. 20.

Secondly, It is called a new Covenant, because it makes the first old, and
takes away the old bondage of the first, that there might be Gospel-freedome in
the second; that so we may see how far the one does exceed the other.

Thirdly, It is called a new Covenant, because it does not wax old as the other
did, but is to continue for ever, and is an everlasting Covenant, which is to
continue until the consummation of all things, Mat. 28.

Fourthly, It is called a new Covenant, because it is new in every age, and to
every generation it is a new covenant, bringing new covenants in every age,
which are green and ^^urishing afresh in all generations, to manifest the glory
of the Gospel beyond the glory of the first: the glory of the one decreasing,
and the glory of the other growng and increasing: and thus much of the covenant.

Now the parties covenanting, are the Father and Son; for the Father strikes a
covenant with the Son, that he should teach all men: and to do his will in
declaring glad tidings to all the sons and daughters of men, and to manifest
his love to the world, as you may see, John 3. 16. so that if they do embrace
the grace and mercy offered them they may live, and this does appear by the
words of the Father himself; that this is truth, for he says, As I live, I
will not the death of a sinner, but that he live, Ezekiel. 18. 32. and does
manifest the same in Isai. 49. 6. where he says, That it was a small or light
thing that Christ should be his servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the desolations of Israel, but I will also give thee a light to the
Gentiles, and thou shall be my salvation to the end of the earth, to establish
the earth, and to cause to inherit the desolate heritages, that thou may say
to the prisoners, come forth, and to them that are in darkness, show your
selves, Isai. 19. 6. 8. 9. And thus you see the Engagement of the Father, For
it is good and acceptable in his sight, that he will have all (...) to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 3. 4. and consulteth
not that any man should perish, but that all men should come to repentance, 2
Pet. 3. 9. And for this end, the Father has enabled the Son with all
sufficiency, being full of grace and truth, and giving all power into his
hands, whereby he might be the better enabled to do the same: and thus the
Father frees himself in giving all sufficient power unto the Son, whereby he
might teach all men, and to perform the Covenant on his part: and thus you see
the incomprehensible love of the Father, that he should engage himself thus
unto the world, that he would send his Son to be a Teacher to all the world, so
that this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light. And so it does appear, that the Father is not
wanting on his part to give light unto the Son, that the Son might not be
wanting on his part to give light to the world.

And then in the next place, the Son strikes a covenant with the Father, for
these are the parties covenanting, as you may see, 1 Timothy 2. ^, For there is
one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who is called the ^^gel
of the Covenant. And the Mediator between God and man, who strikes a covenant
with the Father, saying, Lo I come to do thy will O God, for thus it is written
of me in the volume of thy book to do thy will O God, Heb. 10. 1. And so the
Son covenants with the Father to do his will, For I came to do the will of him
that sent me, and to declare his mind to the world; and so he teaches all men
as he himself does declare, when he says, When I am ascended, I will draw all
men unto me, John 12. 32. And these are the words of Christ, who was never
wanting to fulfill his word, for he draws all men as you shall see.

First, By the Works of creation, As the heavens declare the glory of God, and
the earth shows forth his handy-worke, day unto day utters speech, and
night unto night teaches knowledge, and there is no place where their voice is
not heard; for their line is gone through the whole earth, and their words unto
the end of the world, Psam. 19. 1. 2. 3. and thus you see Christ draws all men
by the works of creation, every creature indeed being a Gospel-Teacher, Col. 1.
23. For that which may be known of God is manifest in them, even the eternal
power of God, and the Godhead, so that they are left without excuse, Romans 1.
19. 20. so that Christ draws all men by the works of creation which are as a
natural eye to see the Sun.

Secondly, Christ draws all men by Gospel-manifestation, and therefore the
Gospel is to ^e preached to all Nations, Mat. 28. and the ^ery creature, Mark
16. And they have not obeyed the Gospel, is not for want of hearing, for the
sound of the Gospel is gone through the earth, and their words unto the end of
the world, Romans 10. 18. The Gospel being preached to every or in every
creature, as you may see Col. 1. 29. and therefore Christ himself does declare
that the Gospel must be preached to all the world, as you may see Mat. 24. 14.
for a witness to all the world before the end shall come. And thus Christ is
not wanting to preach the Gospel. For as by the sin of one man death came
upon all men to judgment, even so by the righteousness of one the free-gift
came upon all men to justification of life, Romans 5. 19. For this is the command
of God, that all men should believe in the Son, and he that does not, makes
God a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son, 1 John
5. 10. And thus you may see, that Christ is not wanting on his part to teach
all men: For this was the end of his coming that all men through him might
believe.

Thirdly, He draws all men by the spirits revelation, which was prophesied of
before that he would pour out of his spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2. 28. and
that all flesh should see the salvation of God, Mat. 3. 8. (...) that grace of
God that brings salvation, has appeared unto all men, teaching them, Tit. 2
11. so that all men through him might believe, John 1. 7. For he is the light
of the world, and the true light that lightens every man that comes into the
world, John 1. 9. And thus he has promised to do unto the worst of men, as to
the simple ones, and such as delight in their scorning, yea unto fools that
hate knowledge, and would have poured his spirit upon them, had not they
rejected it, as you may see Prove. 1. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. saying Unto you Oh men
do I call, and my voice is to the sons of men, but seeing I have called and
you have refused, I will also refuse you, says the Lord. And thus you see the
truth of this thing: now will you say, that Christ is wanting to teach any man
the way to salvation, whereby he might be saved? and if he be, you will lay the
fault in him, which he does deny, saying, This is the condemnation, that light
is come into the world, and they love darkness rather then light, because
their deeds are evil, and will not come to the light, John 3. 19. 20. And thus
I have showed you how Christ does perform his part of the covenant in a word
or two, which is to teach all men, whereby they might believe, and embrace the
Gospel, and lay hold of eternal life: and if that they did not embrace life,
they have no cause to complain: For as much as Christ taught them, they shall
not say at the last day. that Christ did not teach them the way to heaven: when
he shall say unto them, I have called, and you have refused, Prove. 1. 24. And
thus I have spoken a word or two of the parties covenanting, to wit, the Father
and the Son: and now I shall speak a word or two of the extent of the Covenant.

Now it does appear, the covenant does extend unto all men, as in the
prophecy of Esaias 2. 6. chap. 49. 6. where the covenant was promised to all
both to Jews and Gentiles, and in the words of the covenant it self, it seems
to be clear, as in Jer. 31. 34. where the words are these, And they shall all
know me from the least of them to the greatest of them, and they shall be all
taught of God, John 6. 45. and I will power out of my spirit upon all flesh, as
Joel 2. which are new Covenant words, and all flesh shall see the salvation of
God, Luke 3. 6. wherewith it does appear that it does extend to all men; for as
the wound came upon all men under the first Covenant, so the healing must
extend to all under the second Covenant, or else the plaster is not so great
as the sore, Romans 5. 18. and now I shall show you some Reasons, wherefore the
Covenant does extend to all.

1. Because Christ does mediate for whole man, as it does appear in the 1 Timothy
2. 5. for there is one Mediator between God and Man the Man Christ Jesus; and
therefore the Covenant must extend to all men, because he mediates for whole
man, even for all that were lost in the first Adam.

2. The Covenant does extend to all men, because Christ is a propitiation or
Sacrifice for our sins, and not for our sins only, but for and of the
whole World, 1 John 2. 2. whereby it does appear that the Covenant does extend
to all men.

3. Because the promises of the Covenant do extend to all men, and therefore
all men are commanded to repent and believe, because mercy is promised to all
men, as Christ says, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners ^^
repentance, Mat. 9. 13. and wills not that any man should perish, but that
all men should come to the knowledge of the truth; so that no man is denied the
promises of mercy, but such as will fully reject the Gospel, as you may see,
Prove. 1. 20. to the end, Romans 8. 11. 2 Act. 13. 46. 47.

4. Because the Covenant extends as far as the blood, for the blood is the
blood of the Covenant, Heb. 9. 14. chapter 10. 29. Now the blood of Christ does
extend to all men, as does appear in that he died for the chief of sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15. and came to justify the ungodly, Romans 4. 5. in dying for them, as
you may see, Romans 5. 6. and so God commends his grace toward us, that while
we were sinners Christ died for us, verse 8. who died for his enemies, verse
10. and tasted death for all men, Heb. 2. 9. and therefore it does appear, that
the Covenant does extend to all men, because the Covenant extends as far as the
blood.

5. It does appear that the Covenant does extend to all men, because such as
shall be condemned, shall be condemned for rejecting the Gospel as the Apostle
does declare, when he says that God shall judge the secrets of men according
to the Gospel, Romans 2. 16. And God shall come in flaming fire rendering
vengeance to those that know not God, and obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 1. 8. 9.
and this is the condemnation of the World, that light is come, and they love
darkness rather then light, John 3. 19. Now if the Covenant extend so far as to
judge all men: then it does appear that it does extend to all men.

6. The Covenant of grace is a Covenant of love, and the love of God does
extend as far as his anger; for he is the God of love, and therefore his
mercies are over all his works, and the enmity is swallowed up of love, his
love being a free love, and his Covenant a free Covenant; and therefore it does
appear that his Gospel does extend to all, because his love does much more
appear when it is extended to all, then when it is extended to some, and those
that deny the truth of this, deny the free love of God: and thus I have showed
you the extent of the Covenant, and now I shall show you wherein the two
Covenants do agree.

Now the Covenants agree in these respects.

1. The Doctrine and practice of the first Covenant was one, for they taught
one Doctrine, and practiced one way, both they and their Generations, and so
were to do, and not to turn to the right hand or to the left, but just
according to the Command, Deuteronomy. 4. 1. 2. and so under the Gospel there is one
Doctrine and one practice, as you may see in all the Gospel; for the Apostles
of Christ all taught one Doctrine, and practiced one thing, as you may see in
all their Doctrine and practice; and this the Apostle Paul exhorts Tymothy,
saying, hold fast that form of sound words which you have been taught, 2 Timothy
1. 13. so that therein the first and second Covenant agree.

2. Those that kept the first Covenant had right unto the promises and
blessings, and had right unto all the Ordinances thereof, but those that broke
that Law were cursed, and had no right unto any promise therein, and so those
that keep and obey the Gospel are blessed, but those that reject and contemn
the Gospel are cursed, 1 Pet. 2. 7. 8.

3. All the Laws and Ordinances of the first Covenant were in force while the
Covenant was on foot; for he that did but neglect circumcision, was to be cut
off from the Israel of God, Genesis 17. 14. and so also all the Laws and
Ordinances of the second Covenant are on foot while the Covenant stands; for
take away the Ordinances, and take away the covenant also: and therefore he
that denies any Ordinances under the Gospel, rejects the council of God to his
own destruction Luke 7. 3. and therein the first and second covenant agree.

4. The first covenant was a conditional covenant, as you may see by the words
of Moses, Levit. 26. 46. and so also is the second a conditional covenant; for
Repentance and Faith are the conditions of the covenant, without the which none
shall be saved; for except you repent, you shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.
5. and he that does not believe shall be condemned, John 3. now I am not
ignorant that most men conceive the Covenant to be without any condition at
all, but absolute, and the, strength of their Argument lies in the words
(shall) and (will) as I will be their God, and they shall be my people; and so
they take these words to be without any condition, to the which I reply, that
the words shall and will, are both in the future tence, and are both
conditional words: as the Lord said to Israel, thou shall have no other Gods
but me, and thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve: now if this word had bin without any condition, then they should never
have chosen other Gods, nor have fallen from the worship of God; but you see
they worshipped other Gods: and therefore it does appear, that the word shall
is a conditional word. Again the Lord said to Israel, ye shall keep my
Sabboths: now if this word shall were without any condition, then they should
never have broken the Sabbath; but they broke the Sabbath, and therefore it
does appear, that the word shall, is not without any condition; and then the
Lord said unto Israel, you shall walk in all the ways that I have commanded,
as you may see, Deuteronomy. 15. 33. Now if this word ( shall) had been without any
condition, then they should never have disobeyed the Commands; but we see they
did, and therefore the word ( shall) is a conditional word, and so they shall be
my people is but a conditional word, that is this: if they embrace my grace and
mercy, they shall be my people, and if not, they shall not be my people: and
for the other word, ( I will be their God) and also the word ( will) is a
conditional word as does appear, for as I live says the Lord, I will not the
death of a sinner: now if there were no condition in this word ( will) then all
men should be saved, and Christ says, when I am ascended I will draw all men:
now if there be no condition in the word ( will) then all men shall be drawn,
and he will that all men should be saved: and he will not that any man should
perish, 1 Timothy 2. 2 Pet. 3. now if the word ( will) be without any condition,
then all men shall be saved, and no man should perish; but all that disobey the
Gospel shall perish, 2 These. 1. and therefore you see that the words shall and
will are conditional, and therefore the covenant of grace, is a conditional
Covenant; for as I have showed, Repentance and Faith are the conditions of the
Covenant, without the which none shall be saved, and therein the first and
second Covenant agree: and now I shall show in a word or two wherein they
differ.

The first Covenant is old, and the second Covenant is new, and therein they
differ: the first, the Law of the letter, the second, the Law of the spirit;
the first was written and engraven in Tables of stone, the second is written
and ingraved in the fleshly Tables of the heart; the first a Law of death, the
second a Law of life; the first a Law of bondage, the second a Law of liberty;
the first a wounding Law, the second a healing Law; the first a natural Law,
the second a spiritual Law; the first a Law of types, the second a Law of
substance; the first was to be done away, the second is to continue; the first
a Law of earthly blessings, the second a Law of spiritual blessings; the first
is to a natural death, and the second to a spiritual death; the first was to
stand for a time, and the second is to stand for ever.

And thus I have spoken a word or two of both the Covenants so far as time
would give me leave; and the Lord give the Reader understanding and moderation.

CHAP. IIII. of the Father and the Son.
ANd in the next place, I shall speak of the Father and the Son; and I shall
begin with the words of the Son, wherein he does exalt the Father, and desires
him to glorify his Son, that the Son also glorfie thee; John 17. 1. and so
the Son exalts the Father, and tells, that this is life eternal, to know the
Father to be the only true God, and the Son whom he has sent verse 2. and
from these words, I shall endeavor to speak a word or two of the Father and
the Son, and first I shall speak of the Father, and that from these words.

To know thee the only true God: from these words, you have the oneness of
God, set forth to be the only God of all Being, from whom proceeds all
things, as the Son does acknowledge in this verse; for the Father is the God of
all Gods; and therefore he is the true God, and is the first God, and shall be
the last God; and therefore I shall endeavor to speak of the Father, who is
the escence or being of all things, and so to know him is eternal life; and
therefore I shall speak a word or two, how to know the Father, and that in
these three ways.

First, To know him in his Titles, as there are many Titles whereby he is
known, he is called [ Elohim] the Almighties or Almighty power, and he is
called [ Elohim] sometimes [ Eloah] the Almighty, and in short [ Ell] mighty,
and [ Eloah] has affinity with [ Alah] he adjured; but we are to know, that [
Jehovah Elohim] was the Creator only, Genesis 2. 4. Isa. 44. 24, and he is also
called [ Jehovah] this is his proper name, He that is, that was, and that will
be; it comes of [ Havah] he was, He is also called [ Ad^^^] which is Gods name
of sustentation and Domin^^^^ and [ El, Elion] the mighty, the high: and he is
also called [ Shaddai] Almighty or Alsufficient: he is called [ Ehejich a^her
Ehejeh] I am that I am, or I will be that I will be. And thus to know him in
his Titles, is life eternal; and many Titles more he has, which I have (...)
time to name.

Secondly, To know the Father as he is one God, is life eternal; and that he
is the alone God, the Scriptures do abundantly declare, that he is the God of
the spirits of all flesh, as Numb. 27. 16. for he is the Father of spirits,
Heb. 12. 9. for he is the first God and there is none besides him, Deuteronomy. 4. 35.
for the Father is the God of Gods, and the Lord of Lords, and a great God, that
is no respecter of persons, Deuteronomy. 16. 17. and there is no God with him. Deuteronomy.
32. 39. for among the Gods there is no God like the Father; for he is God
alone, Psa. 86. 8. 10, and therefore he is above all Gods. Psa. 95. 3. for he
is called. the God of Gods Psa. 136. 2. and he is the first God and the last
God. Isa. 44. 6. For thus says the Lord, Is there any God besides me? No I
know not any, verse. 8. And therefore the Father says, I am the Lord, and
there is none else, and there is no God besides not; Isaiah 45. 5. And
therefore he says, (...) member the days of old, for I am God, and there is
none else: I am God, and there is none like me. Isa. 46. 9.

And thus you see the Father is before all Gods, and God alone in respect of
his Being; and for the further probation of this truth, I shall come to the
Confession of the Son. who does acknowledge the Father to be above all, when
he says, I thank thee O Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent. And all things are given unto me of my
Father, Mat. 11. 25. 27. in doing nothing but by his Fathers appointment, Luke
22. 29. and when he said, Father into thy hands I commit my spirit: Luke 23.
46. as also confessing, that the Father sent him. John 5. 36, 37. doing nothing
of himself; but as he was taught of the Father; John 8. 28. And thus you see
the confession of Christ, that he did nothing of himself; but the Father that
sent him, gave him a Commandment what he should say and teach, as you may see
John 12. 49. 50. and when he said, Lo I come to do thy will O God. And thus
you see, the Son does acknowled^^ the Father to be the only true God.

And now I shall come to the testimony of the Apostles to confirm this truth,
in the^^ saying, That Jesus when you have Crucified, (...) God raised up. Acts
2. 23, 24. and God the Father has raised up Jesus whereof we are ^^^nesses,
Acts 2. 32. and in doing their (...) works in the name of Jesus whom God has
raised up, Acts 4. 10. and the God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye
flew and hanged upon a tree. Acts 5. 30. And the Apo^^e does declare, that to
confess the truth of this Doctrine is the way to salvation. Romans 10. 9. And
thus the Apostles do acknowledge the Father to be the only true God; saying,
There are Gods many and Lords many; but (...) there is but one God, even the
Father of whom (...) all things. 2 Cor. 8. 5, 6.

And then you have the confession of the Prophets and Christ and his Apostles,
that the Father is the only true God, which to know is life eternal. And now
I shall come to the third thing.

Thirdly. It is life eternal, to know the Father as he is the God of all
being, from whom all things do proceed; and therefore there is (...) like the
Father amongst the Gods, so wonderful in power and in glory: Exodus 15. 1^.
For the Father is greater then all Gods, (...) in the thing wherein they (...),
he is above (...) Exodus 18. 11. and therefore there is no God in Heaven nor in
earth that can do according to his works nor according to his might, as you may
see, Deuteronomy. 4. 24. being Lord of Heaven above and earth beneath, and there is
none else: Deuteronomy. 4. 39. All Nations whom thou have made shall worship thee, for
thou art God alone. Psa. 86. 9. 10. In his hands are the deep places of the
earth, and his hands formed the dry land; the Sea is his and he made it, and
the height and the strength of the Hills is his also. Psa. 95. 3, 4, 5. To him
alone that does great wonders, who by his wisdom made the Heavens, and
stretched out the Earth above the waters, and that made the great lights of
Heaven; which is the God of Gods, and his mercy endures for ever: as you may
see, 136. Psa. Who is the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, that dwells
between the Cherubi^^, thou art God, even thou alone of all the Kingdoms of the
earth, thou have made Heaven and earth, Isa. 37. 16. and before him there was
no God formed: neither shall there be after him, Isa. 43. 10. For thus says
the Lord, I am the Lord and there is none else, for there is no God besides ^^,
I girded thee, thou have not known me; thou they may know from the rising and
from the West, that there is none besides ^^* I was the Lord, and there is none
else, 45. Is^ 5, 6, 7.

And thus he is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King,
Jer. 10. 10. that makes the earth to tremble and the Nations shall not be able
to abide his indignation; and the Gods that have not made the Heavens and the
Earth shall even perish from the Earth and from under these Heavens; and so we
have all one father, for one God has created us, Mal. 1. 10. and thus you see,
that the Prophets do acknowledge the Father to be the God of all Being.

And now I shall show you the testimony of Christ, and his Apostles, when
Christ says, I thank thee O Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, Mat. 11. 25. and
all things are delivered unto me of my Father, ver. 27. and my Father is
greater then I, John 14. 28. and my Father is greater then all, and I have kept
my Fathers commands and abide in his love, John 15. 10. and so you see the
acknowledgement of the Son.

And now I shall come to his Apostles, who do declare, that God the Father
(...) Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and much power; for the Father was
with him whereof they were Witnesses, Acts 10. 48, 49. that God the Father made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all things therein, Acts 14. 15. chapter 17. 14.
being Lord of Heaven and Earth and al things therein, and the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 31. For though there be that are called Gods, as
there be Gods many, and Lords many; yet to us there is but one God, the Father
of whom are all things; 1 Cor. 8. 5. 6.

And thus you see, that the Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles do
acknowledge, that God the Father is the only true God: even the God of all
Being; and thus to know the Father is eternal life.

And now I shall come to speak of the Son, for it is life eternal to know the
Son, as to know the Father; the Son being the great Prophet of God, and the
greatest of all the Prophets, and the greatest of the sons of men, and above
all men and Angels, next unto God himself; and thus to know the Son is eternal
life.

1. To know him in the promise, being promised of long before he came, by the
Father himself, that as he made a Covenant of works with the first Adam, he
would make a Covenant of grace with the second Adam, which should be perfected
at the coming of the Some, that the love of the Father might be known to all
the world: the which love and grace was to be declared by the Son, the chief
Prophet of God, who was to reveal the mind of God to all men, in opening the
Fountain of Gods love and mercy, and for that cause he was much desired of
before he came, being the Son of the Fathers love, in declaring the salvation
of God, of which salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently,
who Prophesied of the grace to come; searching what, or what manner of time the
Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified before of
the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow, 2 Pet. 10. 11. and
thus Christ was promised of long before he came, unto Adam and Noah: as also to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and to Moses, unto who^ the Father revealed the Son,
saying, I will raise them a Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee*
and I will put my word into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I
command him: Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Acts 3. and as he was promised to Moses: so also to
the Prophets; and thus to know him in the promise is life eternal.

2. To know him as he was begotten by the promise, is life eternal; for thus
says the Lord, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; for the Son was
not born after the flesh, but after the promise and mind of God; and so the
seed of grace was springing from the time of Adam till it came forth, being
begotten by the word of promise.

3. To know him in his conception is life eternal, being begotten by the
immortal word; all the promises compassing the Virgin about, and the power of
the most high overshadowing her, Luke 1. 32. and so begat a holy seed, Mal. 2.
15. So that, that which was begot was a holy man, Luke 1. 15. conceived in the
matrix or womb of God; being begot by the word of promise, and born of the
pure Virgin: being conceived of the pure nature of God, not borne after the
flesh, but after the Spirit or promise of God; for the first man was of the
earth earthly and his Kingdom and power earthly, and therefore his thoughts and
mind earthly; but the second is a heavenly man, whose thoughts are heavenly,
being without spot or blemish* or any worldly care, but all for Heaven, both in
his thoughts, words and deeds; and therefore he was called the Lord from
Heaven, being able to conquer all the fleshly lusts and temptations of the
world, and therefore might rightly be called a Heavenly man, and therein did
exceed the first Adam.

And then again, the first Adam was called the Image of God; but the second
Adam is called the express Image of the Fathers person* whereby it does
appear, that the second Adam is of a more glorious nature; the first Adam being
of a earthly nature, and the second Adam being of a spiritual nature; the
first Adam being set about earthly things, and the second Adam being set about
spiritual things.

And thus you see, that Christ was begotten a pure man, fit for all heavenly
employment; being of so glorious and pure a nature, that he was able to aspire
or ascend into Heaven; for what should hinder him being every way heavenly, and
no way earthly in his nature; and therefore he was able to walk upon the Sea
and not be drowned, as you may see, Mat. 14. 15. and was able to pass through
doors and stone Walls, being so pure a man that there was nothing could hinder
him from going into any place. And thus it is life eternal, to know the man
Christ in his pure conception as he was a pure nature.

4. To know him as he ascended into Heaven is life eternal; for being a pure
heavenly man he was able to ascend into Heaven, for what should hinder him
being a pure nature: being a heavenly nature, it was more natural to be in
Heaven then to be in earth; for it is nothing but this sinful nature that
hinders us from Heaven; but Christ having no sin in his nature, there was
nothing could hinder him from ascending into Heaven. Now that Christ did ascend
into Heaven. Now that Christ did ascend into Heaven does appear, for says he,
No man has ascended up to Heaven at any time, but he that came down from
Heaven, which is the Son of man that was in Heaven; and so Christ shows you,
that never any man did ascend to Heaven but himself, but the man Christ went up
into Heaven; for he says it, and I dare not but believe it, for his words are
Spirit and Truth: no man at any time but the man Christ, John 3. 13. And I I
came down from Heaven not to do mine own will; but the will of him that sent
me. John 6. 38. For the Father takes him up into Heaven, and revealed his mind
and his will to him, what he would have him to declare to the world; and to
manifest the Fathers love to all men, if they did embrace his doctrine; and so
the Father sent him into the world, that he that believed in him should not
perish; And th^^ much does the Son confess when he says, L^^ I came to do
thy will O God. And, I came down from Heaven, not to do my own will; but the
will of him that sent me. And thus to know Christ, is life eternal.

5. To know him in his life, is life eternal, what he came to do, and what he
did. First, what he came to do, and that was to do the will of the Father; For
thus it is written in the volume of thy book of me, to do thy will O God, Heb.
10. For the words that I speak are not mine, but the words of him that sent me.

And thus you see, the end of Christ's comeing to declare the mind of the Father
to the world, which was a pure heavenly Doctrine; all tending to grace and
glory, his Doctrine being all spiritual; and to know him in his life as he was
a pure spiritual man, for all his thoughts were heavenly, and his words and
Doctrine heavenly and all his actions heavenly: So that it might truly be said,
he came from Heaven, being a man for Heaven and not for earth, all his actions
tending Heavenward; being indeed a man for another world, Heaven being ready to
receive him, and the world being weary of him; and thus to know Christ i^
eternal life.

6. To know him in his death is eternal life, all his life being a life of
heavenly trouble (...) of heavenly afflictions; being in his life a pattern of
all heavenly living. So that the World had nothing against his person, but
against his doctrine; for their envy against him, was not in respect of his
person, but of his Doctrine; for his person might have been free but for his
Doctrine; for his accuse^^ said, he is a blasphemer and is worthy to die, for
he has said, he came from God, and that he came from Heaven, and that he was
the Son of God; and has spoke against our Laws and against Moses; and has
said, he is greater then Abraham and the Prophets, and has preached blasphemy;
and therefore he ought and is worthy to die, and is not worthy to live; and by
our Law he ought to be put to death. And for these Reasons they sought to
destroy him, and were never satisfied till they had got him into their hands;
and so to be revenged on him, by smiting of him with their hands, and scourging
him with whips and rods, with their mockings of him, and spitting in his face,
and Crowning him with Thorns, and doing him all the disgrace that they could;
who was led as a sheep to the slaughter and did stand up to maintain the
Doctrine that he delivered (...) the mouth of the Father to his death, that it
might appear to all the word, that that he had delivered was truth; and for to
indicate his doctrine, he was ready to lay down his life, and was ready to
seal the truth with his blood: and as the first Covenant was sealed and
confirmed with the blood (...) ^uls and of goats, even so he (...) willing ^^d
ready to seal and confirm the Covenant of grace, and glory with his own blood:
and so the blood of Christ is called the blood of the Testament, Covenant, or
Will of God: ^^d thus to know the Lord Jesus Christ, i^ ^^^rnall life.

Seventhly, it is life eternal to know Christ in his resurrection from death
to life: and so he became the more glorious in that he conque^^d all his
enemies, and destroyed those that thought to have destroyed him; for he said
unto death I will be thy death, and he conquered the grave, and he said unto
the grave give up; he overcame sin, the world, and the devil, for he loosed
the powers of darkness* and he conquered principalities and powers, and made a
show of it openly, Colos. 2. Yea he conquered proud flesh,, and to the terror
of all ^is enemies; and thus Jesus Christ rose from death to life, and was more
famous in his suffering, then before in loosing the pains of death, Acts 2. 24.
for it was impossible that it should be holden of it: the Father having before
promised, That he would not leave his soul in grave, nor suffer his holy one
to see curruption, Psalm. 16. 10. being the first fruits of them that sleep, and
a sure evidence of the resurrection of the dead, being raised up by the mighty
power of God, that as Christ was raised up, so also shall we by the same spirit
who raised up Jesus who is gloriously ascended up into heaven, as a forerunner
for us: for he that was made a ^little lower then the Angels, is crowned with
glory and honor, so that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, and every
tongue shall confess him, yea those that pierced him, and being made the Judge
both of the quick and the dead, to the joy and salvation of his friends, and to
the destruction of his enemies: and thus to know him is eternal life.

Eighthly, To know him as he is God is eternal life: for when he had done the
will of the Father, and had so gloriously confirmed the Gospel by his
suffering, and confirmed the truth with his blood, when that heavenly nature
was made subject to anger, when (...) sweat water and blood, making strong
cries, and supplications with tears unto him, that was able to deliver him, and
was heard in the thing that he desired, and when he said My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? and when he said Father into thy hands I commit my
spirit; and so he suffered as a lamb without spot and blemish, in fulfilling
all the prophesies that the Prophets prophesied of him, to fulfill the
Scriptures, and the mind of the Father, when he said, O Father not my will, but
thine be done, that he might accomplish all that was written of him to do, that
thereby he might finish the glorious work of the Gospel and establish an
everlasting Covenant sealing and confirming it with his own blood, being the
blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 10. 29. chap. 13. 20. and for all those
heavenly acts of the Son, the Father raises him from the dead: For he was
raised up by the mighty power of God, as the God of our fathers raised up
Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, Acts 2. 24. 32. chap. 3, 13. 15.
chap. 5. 33. 31. And thus you see the Father raises him from the dead in a
glorious manner, and makes him a God* and gives all power into his hands as you
may see Mat. 28. 18. and so the Son is God by office, being the great and
chief officer of God, in being made heir of all things, Heb. 1. 1. 2. and this
was prophesied as in the Psalm. 110. 1. where the Prophet says, The Lord said
unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy
footstool, Now David's Lord was Christ, and Christ's Lord was God, as does
appear, in Heb. 1. where the Father says, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee, and again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a
Son, and again, When he brings his first begotten into the world, he says,
and let all the Angels worship him: And of the Angels, he says, who makes his
Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire: but of the Son, he says,
Thy-throne O God is for ever and ever, a Scepter of righteousness is the
Scepter of thy Kingdom: for thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity,
therefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows: and thus the Father has exalted him above the Gods, saying. Sit
thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110. 1.
For God the Father has made him the God of all things, and so the Father calls
him the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, and has put the Government
upon him, and of his Government there shall be no end, for God the Father will
perform this, Esaias 9. 6. 7. The Spirit of God the Father being upon him, that
he might judge the righteous in mercy, and the wicked in judgment, Esaias 11. 4.
And thus the Father has crowned him with glory and honor; for it has pleased
the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell: for he is the fullness of
the Godhead, the Father having made him God of all things, both in heaven and
earth; and now the Son is to rule till he have put all things under his feet:
Now the last enemy is death* for he has put all things under his feet, but the
Son shall subdue and conquer death, and shall reign till he has put down all
rule, and all authority and power, and then comes the end, when he shall
deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, and be subject to him, that so
God the Father may be all in all things, 1 Cor. 15. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. And
thus you see that God the Father has given all things to the Son, and has
made him a God till the end of all things, till all enemies are conquered by
the Son; and then shall he give up the Kingdom to the Father again, and be
subject to him, that God the Father may be all in all; and thus to know Christ
is eternal life.

Now the use that I make of all this, is this, It shows the great and
exceeding love of the Father to us in revealing his mind and will to a man as
we are; and that this man Christ should be so gloriously exalted by God the
Father, to be the chief in his Council to declare his mind to the world, and
that thereby the world might be reconciled to God by the man Christ, in
preaching mercy to us, by a man as we are, and in making a man to be a
Mediator between him and us, to raise him gloriously from the dead, and to
give all power into his hands, and to make him Lord of heaven and earth, to set
him at his right hand in glory, and to center all mercy and judgment in the
Son: what greater favor could the Father of mercies show us, which is a sure
testimony of our rising from the dead, and of our glorification with him at the
last day?

And in the next place, I shall endeavor to reconcile some Scriptures that
seem to contradict the truth of this Doctrine, and the first is in Ge^. 1. 26.
Let us make man: to the which I reply, That there the Father speaks of his Word
or Spirit, by which he made all things: For the Spirit of God moved upon the
waters, and the witness of two is true, as Deuteronomy. 17. 6. John 8. 17. And so the
Spirit of God in the Scripture is distinct from God, as in many places, he
might speak of the Angels, as being familiar with him, whereby they might show
their acceptance of that work, being the great Counsel of heaven, for he could
not speak of the Son, as in being at that time, neither could he really be
before he had a being, or else the Father might speak in a twofold relation,
when he spoke of man, to wit, of the work of creation, and redemption; and so
he might speak of the Son, but any otherwise he could not. Another Scripture is
in John 1. 1. 2. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and
God was that word: To the which I reply, That in the beginning implies a term
of time, but God was before all time, and that word was with God, and so it was
before it came from him: for the word is the mind of God, and came from the
heart of God, and was the power of God; for by his word he made all things,
(...) that sense it might be called God, for (...) a common name in Scripture,
as Idols are called Gods, and men are called Gods, as being of note and fame;
and the word being of that power might be called God, though it come from the
Father, who is the God of all Gods. And another Scripture is, before Abraham
was I am: And to that I reply, that Christ was before Abraham. First, he was
before him in the promise. And secondly, he was before him in Gods account; for
God did account of his Son before Abraham, and therefore Christ might well say
before Abraham was I am, being the Son of God himself. And another Scripture
is, I and my Father are one, which is true indeed, that the Father and the Son
are one, both in mind and Doctrine, the Son delivering the mind of the Father,
as I have showed before; but else the Son says, the Father is greater then I,
and I came to do the work of him that sent me.

Now another Scripture is this, that he being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, and the express Image of the Fathers person: and
this is true indeed, that the Son is said to be the form or likeness, Picture
or Image of the Fathers Person, but you will not say that the Image or Picture
of a man, is the man; for the express Image or Picture of a man, is but his
form, and so Christ is the Image of his Fathers Person, that is God by Office,
but not the Father himself, and so the Son is the Image, and the Father is the
substance, from whom all things do proceed, being the essence of all things,
and the original of all being. And thus in a word, as time would permit me, I
have endeavored to give unto the Father that which is his, and also to the
Son, that which is his: the Son being the chief in the Court of the Fathers
Majesty: I shall desire to honor the Son, who is so highly honored of the
Father; for it became the Father, of whom are all things, and by whom are al
things to make the Captain of our salvation perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.
8. 10. Thou have put all things under his feet, in subjection; for in that he
put all things under him, he has left nothing that is not put under him, but
now we see not as yet all things put under him, Heb. 2. 8. 10.

CHAP. V. Of Heaven.
NOw I shall endeavor to speak of Heaven, for that will be the glorious Heaven
to arive at at the last day. Now the Kingdom of Heaven is called another world,
when Christ says, neither in this World, nor in the World to come, and so it
is another World, for that is a heavenly World, and this a earthly; that World
injoyes the presence of God, and this the back parts; that World injoyes the
substance, and this injoyes the shadow; that is a World of spirit, and this a
World of flesh; that a World of goodness, this a World of wickedness; that is a
continuing World, and this a fading World; that is a World and Kingdom not made
with hands, but eternal in the Heavens. And now I shall speak as plainly as I
can, a word or two of Heaven, and first what Heaven is.

1. Heaven is a place of glory, where the face and presence of God is, and
where those glorious Angels are, and all the heavenly Host, above all created
Heavens, where God the Father was from all eternity: and for the probation of
this, you shall have Dan. 7. 9. 10. Where the Father is called the ancient of
days, being indeed before all time: and his Throne prescribed with that
glorious heavenly Host that does attend him: for he is the high and lofty one
that Inhabits eternity, and dwells in the highest Heavens: for thus says the
wise Solomon, If Israel pray, hear thou in Heaven thy dewlling place, 1 Kings
8. 39. 43. and Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Foot-stooll: and Christ
says, that in Heaven the Angels do always behold the face and presence of
his Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 18. 10. and also the Son is entered into
the very Heaven of glory it self, Heb. 9. 24. there to remain till he come at
the last day. And now I shall show you reasons that there is a Heaven.

1. Reason. Is from Gods eternal Being before all time, he must be somewhere*
and his glory must be somewhere, even in Heaven, a place not made with hands, 2
Cor. 5, 2. a place of glory: before all time, and before these visible Heavens
and Earth were created, he was in glory, whereby it does appear there is a
Heaven.

2. Reason. When he came to create the visible Heavens and Earth that appear
to us; from whence came he but from Heaven? and where was he but in a place of
glory, before these visible Heavens and Earth were made? which shows he was
somewhere before in a place of glory that cannot be beheld with mortal eyes,
and which cannot be comprehended by a final Creature, and therefore it does
appear that there is a Heaven.

3. Reason. Is because we enjoy but the back parts of God; for we can hardly
behold his back-parts, and how then should we behold his fore-parts? how then
should we behold him in his glory? Again, when Israel beheld the back-parts of
God in the Mount, his glory made them and Moses tremble; and if his back-parts
made them tremble, how then should they behold his fore-parts? and where do you
think the face and presence of God is with that innumerable Company of Angels,
and heavenly Host? would not the presence of one Angel make you tremble; what
then would his Host, and what would God himself do? for no man shall see his
face and live. Where is his presence, his face and fore-parts, and that Company
of Angels that are always in his presence, but in Heaven a place of glory?
which shows there is a Heaven.

4 Reason. When God has appeared at any time to his People, his appearance
has been more glorious then all the glory in the earth: and they have bin
ashamed, and confounded in themselves, as not being able to behold the glory of
their maker, either in himself or in his Angels, whose appearance would darken
all the glory of the Earth; whereby it does appear that the presence of God and
his Angels must be somewhere, the Earth not being able to bear their glory;
and where should they be but in Heaven, a place of glory?

5. Reason. When the Lord has spoken at any time to the People, his word has
come down from Heaven: as when he spoke with Noah, and with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, he spoke from Heaven; and when he spoke with Moses in the 3. of Exodus he
spoke from Heaven; and when the Law was given in the Mount, he came from
Heaven: as also when he spoke unto the Prophets, he spoke from Heaven; and also
at the Birth of Christ, from whence came that glorious Company of Angels, but
from Heaven; and when there came a voice from Heaven, saying, this is my
beloved Son: and when the Heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost came upon
the Apostles: as also in the vision of Paul, a light and a voice came from
Heaven, and much more might be spoken on at large, if time would permit to show
that there is a Heaven, where God is more glorious then he is in Earth.

6. Reason. That there is a Heaven, does appear from the desire of the people
of God, who looked upon all things below as nothing with their desires to seek
after Heaven; and desiring to leave this World; and confessed that here they
were strangers and had no abiding place, but sought for a place in another
World; with desires to be desolved, and to be absent from the body, desiring to
be clothed upon with their House, which is from Heaven; with their weariness of
this World, and desiring to leave it for a better, does make it appear that
there is a Heaven.

7. Reas. The prayers of the Saints does make it appear that there is a Heaven,
as in their prayers lifting up their thoughts, their eyes and hands, and all to
Heaven, from whence they look for comfort; and might I not be very large in
this, in the practice of all the Saints? but a word to the wise is enough.

8. Reason. The holy walkings of the Saints does declare there is a Heaven, by
framing all their thoughts, words and deeds in such a heavenly way, that so
they might be fitting themselves for such a Kingdom.

9. Reason. The Prophets do declare there is a Heaven in all their writings, of
which I shall speak a word or two of some, as Deuteronomy. 3. 24. where Moses says,
that there is no God in Heaven or Earth can do such glorious works as the God
of Heaven; and Solomon says, Lord hear in Heaven thy dewlling place, 2 Kings
8. 31. 34. and thy People pray, and supplicate unto thee, Lord hear in Heaven
thy dewlling place, 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. and David says, The Lord, looked down from
Heaven upon the Children of men, Psalm. 13. 2. and the Lord looks down from
Heaven, and beholds all the Sons of men, Psalm. 33. 13. and thy mercy O Lord
is in the Heavens, Psalm. 36. 5. and God looked down from Heaven, Psalm. 53. 2.
but our God is in the Heavens, Psalm. 115. 3. and his glory is above the
Heavens, Psalm. 113. 4. Thus says the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, Isaiah 65.
2. and thus says the Lord, can Heaven above be measured? Jer. 31. 34. and
there is a God in Heaven that reveals secrets, Dan. 2. 28. and he it is that
builds his ascensions in the Heavens, Amos 9. 6. for behold, the Lord comes
down out of his place, Mich. 1. 3. and thus you see the testimony of the
Prophets, that there is a Heaven.

10. Reason. Christ and his Apostles do declare that there is a Heaven; when
Christ taught them to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, Mat. 6. 9. and that
you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 45. and how
much more shall your Father which is in Heaven, give them that ask him, Mat.
7. 11. and flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father which
is in Heaven, Mat. 16. 17. for the Angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in heaven, Mat. 18. 10. And thus you see the Son does affirm
that there is a Heaven in these and many places more that might be brought. And
now I shall go to the Apostles, in saying, your Master also is in heaven,
Ephesians. 6. 1. and the Throne of Majesty in the heavens, Heb. 1. i. and the Holy
Ghost sent down from heaven. ^ Pet. 11. 12. and the voices that came from
heaven, we heard when we were with him in the holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1. 18. And
thus you see the truth of this, that there is a Heaven.

^^. Reason. Christ's Ascension does make it appear, that there is a Heaven; for
where is Christ gone but into Heaven, to rest in glory with the Father, when he
says, I go to my Father, and I go to prepare a place for you, John 14. 2. 12?
and he ascended up into heaven, Acts 1. 10. in the appearance of the Beholders,
whom the heavens must contain, Acts 3. 21. being ascended far above all
heavens, Ephesians. 4. 10. and so we look for the Son of God from heaven, 1 These.
1. 10. which at last shall show himself from heaven, 2 These. 1. 7. even that
Jesus that is passed into heaven, Heb. 4. 14. and is such a high Priest who is
set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the heavens, Heb. 8. 1.
and is entered into the very heaven* Heb. 9. 24. And thus you see it is very
clear that there is a Heaven.

12. Reason. The coming of Christ at the day of judgment does make it appear
there is a Heaven; for where is he but in Heaven, and from whence comes he with
that glorious Company of Angels, but from Heaven? Mat. 25. 31. when the Trump
shall sound, and the dead shall rise, the heavens shall melt, and the Earth
shall tremble, and the Mountains shall fl^e from his presence; when he shall
come terribly to shake the Earth: so glorious will his coming be from heaven.

Lastly, Does not the day of Judgment declare there is a Heaven, when Christ
shall come to separate the sheep from the Goa^es, and shall say unto those on
his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father receive a Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. Mat. 25. 34. And what Kingdom is this think
you but Heaven, and what place is this but a place of glory? and Christ says,
I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am there may you be also, John
14. 3. And when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear
with him in glory; and when this house shall be dissolved, we shall have a
Kingdom eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. and our treasure is laid up in
Heaven, Col. 1. 5. when w^ shall receive that incorruptible inheritance which
is undefiled, and that fades not away, which is reserved in heaven for us. 1
Pet. 1. 4. And thus you see it plain that there is a Heaven.

And now I shall show you further in a word or two, what Heaven is; and first
it is a place as I shall prove by scripture: it is the Throne of God; 1 Kings
8. 27. 2 Chro. 6. 18. Isa. 66. 1. And therefore he reigns and sits upon the
Throne of his holiness, Psa. 147. 8. And Behold the Lord comes forth of his
place, and will come down and tread upon the high places of the earth. Mic. 1.
3. And Christ says, it is a place prepared; Go receive the Kingdom prepared,
for in my Fathers house are many Mansions; John 14. 1. and the Apostle says,
it cannot be moved or shaken. Heb. 12. 27, 28. And thus you see that Heaven is
a place.

Secondly, It is a place of glory, where we shall enjoy the fore-parts of God;
that is, we shall see him as he is, and shall enjoy his face and presence, as
he is in his glory unspeakable, which cannot be expressed with the tongue of men
and Angels; to show you that glorious Majesty, with the glorious presence of
the Son, being ascended with that heavenly host in glory unexpressable.

Thirdly, It is a place of honor, where we shall be Crowned, and made Kings to
reign with him for ever, and be Crowned with everlasting Crowns upon our
heads, and enjoy the glory of the highest Majesty, being honored of Angels,
and all that Heavenly guard, and shall be Priests of the most high God, to
offer up praises to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and
ever; for all the honor in the footstool, is but a type of the hnour that we
shall enjoy in the Throne.

Fourthly, It is a place of heavenly riches; For eye has not seen, nor the
ear heard: neither can the heart of man conceive the glory of that place; all
the riches upon the earth being but a Type and shadow of the heavenly riches,
where the creature shall enjoy all the fulness of God, and shall have more
then heart can wish or desire; for if God be so rich in his footstool, what is
he in the Throne?

Fifthly, It is a place of joy, where is fulness of joy; for where should we
rejoice but in the presence of God, where we shall come to enjoy all the
fulness of God with joy unspeakable, and full of glory? to joy in the Father
and in the Son, in Saints and Angels; who can express that joy but those
that enjoy it? to enjoy such a company, to be in such a glorious condition, all
the joy in the world being but a Type thereof.

Sixthly, It is a place of peace, for there will be no opposition in the
Throne; What enemy dare appear there? Do not all his enemies tremble before
him, and are afraid to approach into his presence? and shall not all his
enemies be destroyed before that time when the Saints shall enjoy their rest?
What glorious peace shall be their peace with God and Christ, with Saints and
Angels? even the peace of God that passes all understanding.

Seventhly, It is a place of pleasure and delight, the desired Haven of the
Saints; which they have so much longed and sought after, to be in the substance
of pleasure and delight, where is fulness of pleasure, and joy for evermore;
being a place of all heavenly glory and enjoyment beyond the apprehension of a
weak creature to conceive or apprehend.

Eighthly, In respect of that glorious com^^^y, to enjoy the presence of God
the Father, and of Christ the Son, with that glorious train of Angels, with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with Moses, David and Solomon, and in a word, with
all the glorious Prophets and Apostles; and with all the people of God that
ever have been or shall be in all ages; What a glorious Communion will there be
at that time, to have fellowship with so glorious a company, with sweet
knowledge and acquaintance with them, and enjoying their company for ever in
all spiritual pleasures and delight?

Ninthly, It is a Heaven of glory, for ever and ever; for the glory shall never
end, nor their joy shall never be diminished; but they shall reign with God for
ever and ever in the fullness of his glory, there to behold his presence, to joy
and to rejoice in his greatness, and in the glory of his Majesty for ever and
ever.

CHAP. VI. Of Hell.
THere is some that say there is no Hell; but they might as well say there is
no God, nor no resurrection nor Judgment; but how will such persons answer
this one day before the Judgment Seat of this great God; and I may say of
such, except they trun from this their wicked tenent: as Christ said, Oh ye
Serpents and generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the condemnation of Hell?
for if there be no Hell, then we may live as we list; but such do in their
hearts believe there is no God, or else they must acknowledge a Hell; and
therefore I shall endeavor by the assistance of my God, to prove that there is
a Hell, and I shall use this method; first show what I mean by Hell, and then
I shall prove that there is a Hell.

Now Hell is a place of condemnation, or a deprivation from the presence of
God, of Christ, and of grace and glory; for Christ says, He that believes not
is condemned already, and Tophet is prepared of old, and all the wicked and
ungodly shall go down to Hell; and Christ shall say, Go you cursed into a place
prepared.

That there is a condemnation does appear for these Reasons.

1. From the essence or being of God himself, who is so pure and glorious in
his nature, that he abhorrs the very thoughts of sin; being as opposite as
light and darkness; that as he loves nothing more then goodness: so nothing
is so odious in his sight as sin and wickedness; So that, being so opposite
to the essence and being of God, as not to enjoy his presence; therefore there
must be a deprivation, or separation between God and sin, and so there is a
condemnation.

2. Because God has opposed sin at all times, as the greatest enemy to all
goodness, and has been an enemy to sin ever since he was in being; and has
proclaimed it to be his greatest enemy under all his Dominions; and has showed
his displeasure against it from the beginning, in setting all his heavenly host
against it, and proclaiming open war against it for ever, as never to enjoy his
presence, but to abide his displeasure for ever; and therefore there is a
condemnation.

3. All that is opposite to God shall at last be condemned; and what is more
opposite to God then sin, and sinners, in opposing his power and goodness,
rejecting and despising his holiness, and seeks to make God and his ways
contemptible; and therefore God will condemn sin, and the punishment of sin
shall extend as far as the wickedness of it, and that a condemnation for ever
and ever.

4. Sin is an open en^^^^ against God, in destroying his works, and reviling
and blaspheming his great name, and seeks to rob him of his honor, to
overthrow his truth and people, and does abhor all the ways of God, being a
continual enemy against him and his goodness, teaching people to deny him to
be God, and to deny his name and greatness, and has sought to destroy and rob
God of his being; and therefore God does declare, that he will punish sin for
ever, and condemn it from his presence for evermore.

5. God has declared that he will condemn sinners as well as sin; and
therefore there is a condemnation: even the Angels that fell, are reserved in
chains of darkness till the great day, and shall never be delivered from the
wrath to come; which makes them fear and tremble, and how dare thou then
proud man say, there is no Hell? does not the Devil delude thee, that thou
may at last lie under the same condemnation?

6. If there be no condemnation, then the condition of the wicked, is better
then the condition of the people of God, then in vain do they serve God, if
the wicked who walk in all the ways of wickedness, and commit sin with
greediness, and accomplish all their wicked desires; if they shall not be
condemned, then all our holy walkings are in vain; but what can be more
contrary to GOD then this? Does not GOD abhor such thoughts as these, and
declared, that he will put a difference between those that serve him, and
those that serve him not? Malachi 3. 18. and therefore there is a condemnation.

7. If there be no condemnation, to what purpose are the Scriptures set forth?
if they shall be saved that disobey them, as well as those that obey them, then
the Scripture is of little use; but the Scripture will tell you at the last
day, that it is in force to condemn you.

8. If there be no condemnation, then the Devils shall be saved, and then
wickedness shall be as much honored as goodness; and then it would be best to
walk after our own ways, and take all the pleasure we could in this life, if
there be no condemnation; but neither sin nor sinners shall escape the
judgment of GOD, and therefore there is a condemnation.

10. The Prophets do declare, that there is a condemnation, that all the
wicked, and all Nations that forget God, shall go down to hell. Psalm. 9. 17. and
the wicked shall perish, Psalm. 37. 20. and the hope of the wicked shall perish,
Prove. and Tophet is prepared of old, for the King, as for the beggar, Esaias 30.
33. for there is no peace to the wicked says our God, Esaias 48. 22. and there
is no peace says my God, to the wicked, Esaias 54. 21. and those that will not
obey, I will utterly destroy, Jer. 12. 17. For I will punish you according to
the fruit of your doings, says the Lord, Jerem. 21. 14. and I will bring an
everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall never be
forgotten, Jerem. 23. 40. And behold the whirlewind of the Lord goes forth
with fury, a continuing whirlewinde, it shall fall with pain upon the head of
the wicked; the fierce anger of the Lord shall not return until he have done
it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart, in the latter days
ye shall consider it, Jerem. 30. 23. 24. And the day comes that shall burn as
an oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be burnt up, says
the Lord of hosts, Mal. 4. 4. And what need I bring more Scriptures seeing all
the Prophets are full in this, to show that there is a condemnation?

11. Christ and his Apostles will tell you, that there is a condemnation: does
not Christ say, this is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and
they love darkness rather then light, John 3. 17? And he that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed on the Son of God, ver. 18. And
the word that I have spoken shall judge you at the last day, John 12. And when
he shall say to those on his left hand, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. 25. 41. And that they shall go
into everlasting punishment, verse. 46. And that many are called, and few are
chosen. And the Apostle says, Tribulation and anguish upon every soul that
does wickedly, Romans 2. 3. And that God shall judge all men by the Gospel; and
that Christ shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance to all that obey not
the Gospel, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1. 8. 9. And many places more might be brought to
prove that there is a condemnation.

12 Does not your conscience tell you there is a Hell? does it not accuse you
for all your actions? will it not be as a thousand witnesses against you? how
will you satisfy conscience? for if our conscience condemn us, God is greater
then our conscience. Does not conscience register up all your actions? will it
not tell you one day you must be brought to an account, and judged according to
your deeds? for Solomon says* A wounded conscience who can bear? When it comes
to accuse you at your death, and sets your sins in order before you, it will tell
you there is a condemnation, and you shall then find there is a condemnation;
and I shall show you the judgments of this condemnation.

First, One judgment of this condemnation is hell, which is a hidden place of
Gods anger and wrath; for as the joys of heaven are hidden joys, so also the
torments of hell are hid: for no man is able to apprehend how terrible the
torments of hell are, which makes the devils to tremble: for says the Lord, An
anger is kindled in my wrath, which shall burn to the lowest hell, Deuteronomy. 32.
22. And all the wicked and all nations that forget God shall go own to bell,
Psalm. 9. 17. and Tophet is prepared of old for the King as well as the beggar,
you may see Esaias 30. 33. And when Christ shall say to the wicked, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. 25. 41. And
the wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, ver. 46. When Christ shall
come in flaming fire with his migty Angels, to render vengeance to those that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, 2 These. 1. 7. 8. 9. and this is one judgment of this condemnation.

The second judgeme^^ (...) the fire of hell* which is the fire of Gods (...):
and is the wrath and anger of God which shall burn and consume for ever; for if
our material fire which was made to warm, to comfort and refresh the creature,
be so terrible, what do you think the fire of hell is, that is made for
tormen^? when God himself does invent torment, how terrible will it be? for
the wrath of the Lord like a river of brimstone does kindle the fire of hell,
Esaias 30. 33. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness of men, that withhold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18*
And the fire of the wrath is everlasting, and never goes out. Mat. 25. 41.

Thirdly The worm never dies, and this worm I conceive to be an accusing
conscience, judging and accusing a sinful and wicked creature for all his
abominations that he has committed in rejecting the love of God and the grace
and mercy offered in Jesus Christ, whereby he might have been freed from that
wrath to come, had he embraced the grace and mercy offered, but now he is lost
for ever through his own default, and has lost the glory that he might have
had, and must abide the wrath of God for ever: and thus the worm never dies.
Mark 9. 25.

Fourthly, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, for now there will be
a wonderful change, for those that formerly have lived in all pleasure and
delight, and have been haters of God, and contemners of all good, and rejoicing
in their pleasures and delights, and have glutted themselves with the pleasures
of this world, with their scorns and jears, and rejoycings against the troubles
of the people of God, and mocking at their troubles, and rejoicing at their
calamity, with their enjoying all the pleasures of this life, taking their fill
in the eyes of this world; but now comes their woe, their rejoicing will be
turned to mourning; for woe be to you that laugh now in your wickedness, for
you shall weep: Oh what a change will there be when all their joy will be
turned into weeping, for there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: they
that have glutted themselves with their made joy, shall now have enought of
weeping, they shall now weep and houle, and bewail their condition with
weeping for ever; and this is another judgment of this condemnation, Mat. 13.
42. 50. chap. 24. 51. chap. 25. 30.

5. They shall be cast into utter darkness, for they have done the works of
darkness, and their reward shall be, that they shall be cast into utter
darkness: it would be a hell for a man to live all his lifetime in some dark
place where he should never see the light all his lifetime. How terrible was
the darkness in Egypt that might be felt. Exodus 10. 23. that no man rose from
his place for three days, it was so dark, and they were so amazed with
darkness; but what will the darkness of Hell be think you? it is utter
darkness, where they shall be deprived of the light for ever, from the light of
God, of Christ, and from the light of grace and glory, and never more to see
the light, Mat. 8. 12. chap. 12. 13. chapter 25. 30.

6. The consideration of the loss of their time, what they are, and what they
might have been, had they improved that precious time, that was afforded them,
whereby they might have been precious Saints in Heaven, and to have enjoyed the
presence of God, and of Christ, of Saints and Angels, to have been in glory
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and with all the Saints in glory, had they
improved that precious time which the Lord did afford them, who was waiting
upon them to do them good, by tendering grace to them day by day, and they
rejecting all the motions of his spirit, and despised his grace and mercy
offered them, and so may blame themselves, and not him: O how will this strike
to their hearts think you, when they consider their loss, and themselves the
cause there of, and now are lost Creatures for ever: how will this aggravate
their woe? O consider this all you that forget God, before it is too late,
while you have time, and while it is called to day, harden not your hearts,
least you fall into the anger of God, ^^id so (...) you up in his wrath, into
that terrible condemnation; for our God is a consuming fire.

Seventhly, They shall receive every one according to their deeds and their
wickedness; then those that have been most vile, shall receive according to
their vileness, the proud shall receive according to their pride; for terrible
is that God that judges them: so much covetousness, so much wrath; so much
drunkenness, so much of the anger of God shall be powered upon them; so much
swearing, so much payment for oaths; so much whoring, so much torment; so much
pleasure in the world, so much displeasure and sorrow; so much honor in the
world, so much dishonor with God; and look how much they have been persecutors
of the Saints, and people of God, so much they shall be persecuted; for thus
says the Lord, I will measure unto them according to their works. Now will the
Lord call all their wickedness into remembrance, which have been forgotten so
many hundred of years, but now are called to remembrance; for though he
suffered them long* yet now he will pay them home at last: and this will be an
aggravation of their condemnation.

Eighthly, Their worm shall never die* nor the fire of Gods wrath shall never
be put out; for he suffered them for a moment, to delight themselves in sin,
but he will punish them for ever, and this is the aggravation of all, that
there will be no end of their sorrow, no time of releasment, no more hope of
mercy, no more offers of grace, never to look for any releasment, no ease of
their punishment, no comfort in their sorrow, no hope of ever having liberty,
or to come out of those torments, but shall abide the wrath of God for ever, so
long as God is God, so long shall his wrath be out against sin, and sinners,
even for ever and ever. Then will the Lord show how great an enemy he is to
sin, and all those that join with sin, when he shall set the decree for ever
against sin and sinners, to be tormented in the flames of his wrath, and in the
fire of his anger from everlasting to everlasting: and thus you see that there
is a condemnation, and those that will not believe the truth of this I shall
leave them to their own conscience, and the great Judge.

CHAP. VII. Of Glory.
THere is some conceive, there is fullness of glory in this life; but to such I
shall say with Paul, That if we had our portion only in this life, we were of
all men most miserable: And therefore I shall endeavor to speak a word or two
of glory, and show you some reason wherefore we are not in fullness of glory,
and show you what it is to be in fullness of glory.

To be in the fullness of glory is to enjoy the fore-parts, or face, and
presence of God and Christ, with all the Saints, and those glorious Angels to
be in their presence, and to reign with them for ever in glory; and so says
the Apostle, When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear
with him in glory, Col. 3. 4. And therefore we hope for the glory of God, Romans
5. 2. that we may be glorified together with him, Romans 8. 17. For when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, then shall we receive a Crown of glory that
fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. And now I shall come to Reasons.

1 We are not in the fullness of glory in this life, because we enjoy but his
back-parts, not his fore-parts; we do not enjoy his presence where he is in
glory with his Angels, for we are not able to apprehend his glory here, much
less to be in it, or enjoy it in this life, for we are not in the presence of
God, and those glorious Angels in heaven; we enjoy but his back-parts here in
his footstool, his fore-parts and glory is in the Throne, and cannot be seen
with mortal eyes.

Secondly, there is a veil over our eyes, we see but darkly, as through a
glass; we are not able to behold his face and presence, nor to behold his
glory; we see him yet but through the promises, we do not enjoy him as he his;
his glory would rather affright, then comfort us in this mortal estate, should
these mortal eyes of ours behold the glory of the Angels, much less the God
of glory; for now we see but darkly, as through a glass, but then shall we see
him face to face, 1 Cor. 13.

Thirdly, We knew but in part, and understand his glory but in part; but when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away,
and we shall know him as he is, and know all men as we are known of God, which
cannot be in this life, to know God and his Saints in glory, and therefore
there is not fullness of glory in this life, knowing so little of God, and so
few of his Saints.

Fourthly, we seek for glory by patient continuance in well-doing, that we
might inherit the promises; now if we were in fullness of glory, we need not
seek for it if we had it: But we are seeking for glory, and honor, and
immortality, with eternal life; and therefore it does appear we have it not,
Romans 2. 3.

Fifthly, we hope for this fullness of glory, and therefore we do not enjoy it,
for if we did, what need we hope for it, Romans 5. 2. And Christ in us the hope
of glory; now if we had it, what need we hope, our hope were at an end, if we
had the thing we hope for; to wit, fullness of glory, but you see we have it
not, and therefore we hope for it, as not having yet received it.

6 The eye has not seen, nor the ear has not heard, nor since the beginning
of the world has it not been heard; nor none besides God does know what he
has prepared for them that wait for him, Esa. 644. And if we have not yet
seen, nor heard it, how then do we ^njoy it; and if we are not able to
conceive of the glory, how then can we be in it; and if none but God know it,
then how can we know it?

Seventhly, The Apostle Paul had as much of the Spirit of God as any man,
except the Son himself, and as glorious enjoyments of God, being taken up into
the third heavens and saw glory unspeakable, which he was not able to utter nor
express; and yet he says, If we had our glory only in this life, we were of
all men most miserable, for he looked for a more glorious enjoyment then he
could enjoy in this life, as you may see 1 Cor. 15. 19.

Eighthly, The Apostle says, he was ready to be offered up, and the time of his
departure was at hand, he had fought a good fight, and had finished his course,
had kept the faith, and henceforth was laid up for him a Crown of
righteousness, or glory, and for all them that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.
6, 7, 8. And the Prophet David says, Oh how great is thy goodness which thou
have laid up for them that fear thee, Ps. 31. 19. whereby you may see it is not
in this life, it is laid up for a better life, in a better Kingdom, where we
shall be capable to receive it.

Ninthly, The good Apostle tells you, he did so run that he might obtain; for
he tell you that he had not yet attained, neithe^ was he perfect; but this he
did, he forg^^ those things that were past, for he did not dote upon his
former goodness, but was pressing forward toward the mark, or prize of
glory, that was set before him, 2 Cor. 9. Phil. 3. for he that is constant to
death, shall receive a Crown of life or glory, Rev 2. 10. And thus you see the
Apostle was so far from being puffed up with fullness of glory in this life,
that he tells us, he is not the man that does enjoy fullness of glory, for he
was striving for it to make it sure to him in this life, and so to wait for it
in a better life, and in a better Kingdom, that he was in hope to enjoy.

Tenthly, The Apostle says, I desire to depart hence, and to go to Christ,
which is best of all, Phil. 1. 23. whereby it does appear, that there is not
fullness of glory in this life; for the Apostle says, In this we groan
earnestly, and had rather be absent from the body to be present with the Lord:
for while we are present in the body, we are absent from the Lord: And thus
you see that the Apostle makes it clear, that while we are present in this
body, there is not fullness of glory; and therefore he desired to leave this
earthly, to enjoy a heavenly Kingdom, which was more to be desired, and
abundantly more glorious.

11. That which we see and enjoy here, is but temporal, but that which we do
not see, and shall afterward enjoy, is spiritual and eternal glory, and
therefore there is not fullness of glory in this life, 2 Cor. 4. 18.

12. When this earthly house of ours shall be dissolved, we shall have a
building of God, a house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, 2
Cor. 5. 2. whereby it does appear that we are not in fullness of glory.

13. We are not clothed with our house which is from heaven, whereby we might
be made fit to enjoy such a heavenly glory, For while we are present in the
body, we are absent from the Lord, and so shall be until we are clothed with
our heavenly house, which will not be in this life, 2 Cor. 5. 2. 6. 8.

14. When Christ who is our life, shall appear, then shall we appear with
him in glory, and then shall we enjoy the fullness of glory, and not before;
and he gives you the reason, saying, We are dead, and our life, or glory, is
hid with Christ in God; but when Christ who is our life shall appear, then
shall we appear with him in glory.

15. Christ is in heaven, and we are in earth, and therefore we are not in the
fullness of glory; for Christ says, And if I go to prepare a place for you, I
will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am there you may be
also, and while we are absent from Christ, who is in heaven in glory it self,
how then have we fullness of glory?

16. These vile bodies of ours are not yet changed like unto his glorious body,
we are not yet made partakers of that divine nature, till this mortal, shall
put on immortality; and till this corruptible, shall put on an incorruptible;
and this natural become a spiritual; and then shall we be like him as he is,
but this will not be in this life, and therefore we look for it in anotherlife,
Phil. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 44. 53, 54.

17. We are not in the Throne, we are but in the footstool, we are not in
heaven, the fullness of glory; for Christ is entered into his glory, Luke 24.
28. that is into heaven where his glory is, Act. 1. 22. Heb. 4. 14. and we also
shall be in heaven, for there our glory is, Colos. 1. 5. having in heaven a
better and enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. and therefore we desire a heavenly
Kingdom, rather then an earthly, Heb. 11, 28. which is reserved for us in
heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 4. So that you see there is not a fullness of glory in this
life.

18. We are not yet risen from the dead until the resurrection of the dead,
and therefore we are not in fullness of glory; for as we have borne the image
of the earthly, so also shall we bear the image of the heavenly, when these
vile bodies of ours shall be raised up, and made like unto his glorious body,
which will not be in this life.

19. We do not yet reign with Christ, and therefore we are not in the fullness
of glory; we are not yet entered into our inheritance, to be Kings, and Priests,
and to have that immortal Crown, where is that glory that we enjoy? are we
not persecuted on all sides? are we not accounted as the vilest of creatures?
but the Saints shall reign in glory, and then shall all oppositions be
trampled under their feet; they shall be Kings, and Priests, and be crowned,
and shall live and reign for ever with God the Father, and with Jesus Christ
his Son, with those glorious Angels, and with all the Saints in glory; but this
glory is yet to come, we are yet waiting for it.

20. If we were in fullness of glory, there could nothing be added to our
condition, for we should be perfect, we should not need any thing to make our
condition glorious; but the best of us find abundance of Spiritual wants, we
want Spiritual joy, and Spiritual peace; we want that Spiritual union and
communion with our God, we have not that assurance in the Promises, but we
might have more, for we cannot have the fullness of glory in this life, it is
laid up for us in a better life.

Lastly, mortality will tell thee, oh vain man, that thou art not in the
fullness of glory; shall thou not dye, and where will thy fullness of glory be
then? that will tell thee, thou art not perfect; if thou art in fullness of
glory, why do thou dye? why do thou hunger and thirst? why do thou eat,
and cloth thee? why art thou subject to cold, and nakedness? and why do
thou complain of wanting, if thou wast perfect thou could not want any
thing? for did thou possess all things, how could thou want any thing?
O thou vain man, thy condition tells thee thou want, but thy proud heart
tells thee thou art full; thy condition tells thee that thou want all
things, but thy proud heart tells thee, that thou want nothing; thou say
that thou art in the fullness of glory in this life, but death will tell thee
that thou want glory; and do not thou slight the glory to come, when thou
say, here is fullness; for none but God alone knows the fullness of glory,
and yet thou do: Oh vain man, I counsel thee to buy eye salve, that thou
may see thy want of a fullness of glory, for if thou do not now, thou will
when it is too late. And now in the next place I shall speak a word or two of
glory, because I know that many have deceived themselves with the word (
glory;) Now there is diverse kinds of glory, for there is a glory of the two
Covenants, for if the administration of Condemnation was glory here, how much
more shall the administration of Righteousness exceed in glory? And God revealed
himself from the glory of the first, to the glory of the second, from glory to
glory, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. There was a glory of Moses, for the Children of
Israel could not behold his face for his glory, 2 Cor. 3. 17. There was a glory
of Solomon, and yet the grass of the field passed the glory of Solomon, Mat.
6. 29. and a glory of man, but all the glory of man is as the flower of the
field, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

There is a glory of the Sun, and of the Moon, and Stars, for they differ
in glory, 2 Cor. 15. 41. and glory to him that works good, and to every man
that works good, glory, Romans 2. 10. There is a glory in the Law, Romans 12. 23.
and the Gospel is called glory, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And there is a vain glory, Gal.
5. 26. There is a glory of the Saints, Ephesians. 3. 13. and a glory in affliction,
and then there is a glory of the Church, Ephesians. 5. 21. and there is a glory in
their shame, Phil. 3. 19. the Saints were the glory of the Apostles, 2 These. 1.
20. There is a glory of the Whore, Revel. 18. 7. and there is a glory of the
Gentiles, Revel. 22. 24. for the Gentiles shall bring their glory to the
Saints, Revel. 1. 26. also there is an earthly glory, and there is a heavenly
glory; a glory in Grace, and a glory in Glory; and that is the glory of all
glories.

CHAP. VIII. Of Faith.
NOw the Text says, The just shall live by his faith, and therefore I shall
endeavor to speak a word or two of Faith; it is that whereby we live in
Grace, and it is that whereby we are carried on to Glory; now there is a faith
of the History, and there is a faith of the Mystery; there is a faith of
Miracles, and there is a legal faith; there is a temporary faith, and an
Evangelicall faith, and the last is most excellent, being the faith of the
Gospel, that carries us on to Salvation; and in the next place I shall show
you what faith is.

Now faith, or belief, is an obedience to, or a living in all the commands of
the Gospel to Salvation; now it does appear that faith, or belief, is
obedience, because unbeleefe is counted rebellion, or disobedience, for such as
believe and obey are justified, John 3. 36. for he gives the Holy Ghost to
those that obey him, Act. 5. 32. And know you not that to whom you yield your
selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom you obey; whether of
sin unto death, or of obedience to life, Romans 6. 16. and ye have purified
your souls in obeying the truth, 2 Pet. 1. 22. and thus you see faith, or
obedience, justifies the creature, for thereby he is justified, and such as
are unbeleevers, and disobedient, are condemned, when Christ shall come in
flaming fire, to render vengeance to those that obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 8. for to those that are disobedient Christ is a stone to stumble at, and a
rock to be offended at, to such as stumble at the Word, being disobedient, and
obey not that whereon they were set, 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. that all those might be
damned which obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 12.
and thus you see that faith, or belief, is obedience, and rebellion or
unbeleefe is disobedience; now the great controversy will be, whether it is
Christ's work, or the Creatures work to act faith; now the greatest part hold,
that it is Christ's work to act faith, and some few hold that it is the
Creatures work to act faith; now the greatest part can never be in the best
way, and therefore I shall side with the lesser part, for they say, the fault
is in the Creature that he does not believe, and the greatest Party say, it is
not the Creatures work to believe, it is Christ's work to act faith, and so
they lay all the unbeleefe upon Christ, and therefore I shall prove that it is
the Creatures work, and not Christ's, to act faith.

And first, it is the Creatures work to believe, because Christ has done his
work, for Christ's work was to obey the Commands of his Father, and to set
forth such a way to the world as they were to stand to, and to establish that
way for life, and death; and this was his work enjoined him from the Father,
which he did in setting down the mind of the Father, in all things that were
necessary to salvation, which he did, and sealed the Doctrine of the Father
with his blood, and did his work, and therefore he says, If you keep my
Commandments ye shall abide in my love, as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments, and abide in his love, John 15. 10. Christ's work was to obey
the Commands of the Father; and our work is to obey the Commands of the Son,
and therefore it is our work to believe, and not Christ's.

2. That Christ has done his work will appear, because Christ is entered into
his rest, and sure he did not enter before he had done his work, for he said;
He had finished his course, and done all things that the Father commanded him,
by perfecting the way of Salvation to all the world, and giving Commandment
unto his Apostles, to establish that Gospel to the whole earth, and all things
as he had commanded them, as you may see, Mat. 28. Act. 1. 2. and when he had
finished his whole work he ascended to the Father, and is entered into his
rest, Heb. 4. saying, To him that over comes will I grant to sit with me in my
throne, as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne,
Revel. 3. 21. and therefore it does appear, that it is not Christ's work to
act faith in the Creature, except you will call him in question from his rest,
which I think you dare not.

3. If it be Christ's work to act faith in the Creature, then the fault will
lie in Christ, that the Creature does not believe; and then the Father may
question the Son for all the unbeleefe in the world, seeing you say, it was
Christ's work to act faith in the Creature, then all the fault will lie upon
him, for if he had acted faith, the Creature should have believed, and so the
Father might call the Son to an account for all the unbeleefe of the Creature;
and what is this think you, but to pluck Christ out of his throne, and to take
him from his rest.

4. If it be Christ's work to act faith in the Creature, then the Creature has
a good excuse, and may say, there is no cause wherefore he should be condemned
for not believing, seeing it was not his work to believe: but the fault was in
Christ, who did not act faith in him, and therefore he was not to blame,
because it was not his work to believe, but Christ's work; and therefore no
reason he should be condemned for another fault, and so you would excuse the
Creature, and condemn Christ.

5. Christ does not act faith in the Creature, because he shall judge the
Creature for not believing, for it were improper that he should be the Judge
that were in the fault, and condemn the creature for not believing, when it
was never his work to believe; and so the creature might reply unto the Judge,
that he did condemn him falsely, to condemn the creature for not believing,
when it was Christ's work to act faith, and not the creatures; and thus you see
what sad effects would follow this Tenent, that it is Christ's work to act
faith in the creature.

6. If it be Christ's work to act faith in the creature, then he should be by
that a respecter of persons, because he acts faith in some, and not in others,
and yet condemns them for not doing that he should do himself, being his work
to act faith, and not the creatures; what a respecter of persons would he
appear to be, then to leave the greatest part of the world under condemnation
for his own default, because he did not act faith in them, whereby they might
be saved: Oh what a partial Judge would you make him by this tenent! does not
the Scripture tell you, that he is no respecter of persons, and that he shall
judge every man according to his works, Act. 10. 34. Romans 2. 11.

7. If it be the work of Christ to act faith in the creature, then what shall
the creature be condemned for at the last day? shall the creature be condemned
for not doing good, when it was never the creatures work to do good; if it
were Christ's work to act all the good in the creature, and so few do well,
then he did intend the rest should do ill, because you say it was his work to
act the good, and not theirs; and then how can he judge them for doing that he
did intend they should do? for either he did intend they should do well or
ill: But if he had intended they should have done well, he would have acted
good in them; but he did not act faith in them, and therefore he did intend
they should do ill, and so by this you would make Christ the author of all the
wickedness that is committed, seeing, as you say, it was not in the creatures
power to act good; and if so, then what shall the creature be condemned for,
for doing the will of God? And thus you see, how ill those repay God, that hold
that God or Christ acts faith in the creature.

8. If it be Christ's work to act faith in the creature, then why does he
exhort them to believe, seeing it is his work, and not theirs? they might have
replied to him, saying, Why do thou press us so to believe, and act faith,
seeing it is thy work, and not ours?

9. Why does he upbraid them for not believing, saying, Woe be to Coraisim and
Bethsada, if it were his work to believe, and obey, and not theirs? Why does
he threaten them, if the work were his, and not theirs, and lay such woes upon
them?

10. It is said, He marvelled at their unbeleefe, Mark. 6. 6. And why does he
marvel at their unbeleef, if it were his work to act faith, and not theirs?

11. It is said, he could not do many great works in his own Country, because
of their unbeleefe: And what should hinder him, if it were his work to believe
and act faith in them, and not theirs, could their unbeleef hinder him? Mat.
13. 58.

12. It is said, That the Israelites were broken off through unbeleefe, Romans
11. 20. Now how could they be broken off through unbeleef, if it were not their
work to believe; if it be Christ's work to believe, and act faith in them, then
how could they be broken off, seeing it was Christ's work, and not theirs?

13. It is said, If they abide not still in unbeleefe, they shall be grafted
in; And how can their unbelief hinder them, if it were Christ's work to act
faith, and not theirs, then how could their unbeleef hinder them?

14. They entered not in, because of unbeleef; and how could that be? if it
were not their work to believe, then how could their unbeleef hinder them, Heb.
3. 19.

15. The Apostle says, Brethren take heed lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbeleefe to depart from the living God, verse. 12. And how could their
unbeleef hinder them, if it were Christ's work to act faith, and not theirs?

16. It is said, The fearful, and unbeleeving, shall have their portion in the
lake, Revel. 21 8. And why should they be punished, if it were not their work
to believe? if it were Christ's work to act faith and not theirs, should they be
punished for Christ's not acting faith? And thus you see how weak this Tenet of
theirs is, that hold it is Christ's work to act faith, and not the creatures;
and so lay all the unbeleef in the world upon the back of Christ, and so would
make him stand at the Bar of Justice as the cause of all the unbeleef in the
world.

And now in the next place, I shall prove that it is the creatures work to
believe, for these reasons:

First, because he gives the creature ability to believe, for he makes him a
reasonable creature, and gives him knowledge and understanding to do such a
work as he requires of him; for if he should require the creature to do such a
work, as he knew the creature were not able to do, it were unreasonable to
require it, because he knew the creature was not able to perform it; but he
every where condemns the creature for not doing good; and therefore it does
appear, he gives the creature ability to do good; and that I shall prove for
these reasons:

First, because he gives the creature free choice, as in all the Scripture,
as, I have set before you life and death, choose you which you will, as you may
see, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. And choose you whom you will serve, for I and my house will
serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. And when they chose strange gods, then was war in
the gate, Judge. 5. 8. And the Lord said unto Solomon, because thou have chosen
wisdom befare riches and honor, I will give thee wisdom above all that were
before thee, or that shall follow after thee, 1 King. 3. 11. And David had
chosen the way of Gods commandments, Psalm. 109. And says the Lord, they shall
call, but I will not answer, because they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord, as Prove. 1. 28. 29. And thus you see the Lord puts
the creature to his choice; now the Lords putting the creature to choose, and
the creatures choosing either good or evil, does make it appear that the
creature has ability; or else, if the creature had not ability, why does the
Lord condemn the creature for not choosing good; and Christ says, Mary has
chosen the better part: and his servants you are to whom you obey; whereby it
does appear, they had ability to obey either good or evil; for if they had not
ability, when they do evil, to do good; then how could they be condemned for
not doing good, seeing they had not ability to do otherwise?

2. He gives the creature ability to believe, because he charges the creature
with rebellion for not believing, saying to the people of Israel, How often
would I, and you would not: And ye will not come to me, that ye might have
life: And he that believes not, is condemned ^already: And the unbeleeving
shall have their portion in the lake of fire; and many Scriptures more, whereby
it does appear, that the creature has ability to believe; or else how could
the creature be charged with rebellion for not believing, if it had not ability
to believe?

3. Those that do not believe, are said to reject the mind of God, as Act. 7.
51. Ye have always resisted the holy Ghost, and seeing you reject so great
salvation, lo we turn to the Gentiles, and to those that also say, Christ is
a stone to stumble at, and a rock to be offended at, 1 Pet. 2. 7. And by this
it does appear, that the creature has ability to believe, and obey; or else
how could it be said, that they rejected the mind of God, if they had not the
ability to obey his mind, how could they be said to reject it?

4. Christ does not detain and hinder men from believing, and therefore he
gives them ability to believe; for if he does not, then he hinders them from
believing; but he does not hinder men from believing, and therefore he gives
them ability to believe. Now, you will not say, that Christ hinders any man
from believing, will you? and if you say, he does not give them ability, then
you will lay the fault upon Christ, and not upon the creature; for, if he does
not give them ability to do well, then he does intend the creature should do
ill, which were wicked to say; and therefore it does appear, that he gives the
creature ability to believe.

5. Christ commands men to believe, and therefore it does appear that he gives
them ability to believe; for this is the Commandment of God, that we should
believe in his Son, and he that does not, makes God a Liar, even because he
believes not in the Son of God, 1 John 3. 23. ver. 5. 10. and this was the
teaching of Christ and his Apostles, to teach men to believe in all their
preaching; now does God command men to believe in his Son, and not give them
ability to believe? then how can he condemn them for not believing, if they
were never able to believe? But God never gives a command, but he gives ability
to believe, and obey his command, or else how could the creature be judged for
breaking his commands, if he never was able to keep them.

6. It does appear that Christ gives the creature ability to believe; because
he lays the fault upon the creature for not believing; for the text says, He
marvelled at their unbeleefe, and he could not do many great things in his
own Country, because of their unbeleefe; and he came to his own, and his own
received him not; and he upbraided them for their unbeleefe, and many places
more might be named, whereby it does appear they had ability to believe, or
else how could they be in fault, if they were not able to believe; but Christ
lays the fault upon the creature for not obeying, and therefore it is clear
that the creature has ability to obey.

7. Christ gives the creature ability to believe, because he does condemn the
creature for not believing, saying, He that believes not, is condemned
already, because he believes not in the Son of God, Joh. 3. 18. and he that
believes not in the Son, the wrath of God abides on him; and by this it does
plainly appear, that it is not Christ's work to act faith in the creature, but
the creatures work to believe, and act faith; because the creature is
condemned for not believing; and if the creature be condemned for not
believing, then it must needs follow, that the creature has ability to
believe: for either the creature is condemned for something, or nothing; now if
the creature had not ability to believe, then it is condemned for nothing, for
not doing that it was impossible to do, and that it never had ability to do;
but you see the creature is condemned for not believing, and therefore it does
appear that the creature has ability to believe, because it is condemned for
not doing something that it might have done, and that is, for not believing.

8. It does appear that the creature has ability to believe and obey, because
the creature is condemned as an unbeleever; for the creature could not be
condemned as an unbeleever if it never had ability to obey.

9. Those creatures that believe and obey, are justified, by believing, from
all that ever they have done, Act. 13, 39. and those that do not believe, are
condemned; and by this it does appear, that it is the creatures work to
believe, and that the creature has ability to believe, or else how could he be
condemned as an unbeleever.

10. Our believing, or not believing, is never imputed unto Christ, but unto
our selves; for Abraham's faith was imputed to him for righteousness, and the
just shall live by his own faith; so that our believing is never imputed to
Christ: but to us, for if our believing were imputed to him, then it would
follow, that our unbeleefe would be imputed to Christ also, and so by that, we
should make Christ a believer, and an unbeleever also, which is most absurd;
for the faith and obedience of the creature is imputed to the creature, and not
to Christ; and also the unbeleefe and disobedience of the creature is imputed
to the creature, and not to Christ; so that it is plain, it is the creatures
work to believe, because both obedience and disobedience is imputed to the
creature.

11. Such as shall be Judged at the last day, shall be judged for their
disobedience; now if it were Christ's work to act obedience in the creature,
then what shall the creature be judged for, for Christ's not acting obedience?
for then the creature would be freed, if it were not his work to obey, but
Christ's work; but the creature shall be judged, and not Christ, and therefore
it is plain, that it is the creatures work to obey.

12. The Apostle says, the just shall live by his faith, or obedience; and
that creature that is lifted up above faith and obedience, my Soul shall have
no pleasure in him, says the Lord: and therefore it does appear, that it is
the creatures work to act faith and obedience, for that is his Spiritual
living in Grace, whereby he shall come to glory, and receive the end of his
faith, the salvation of his Soul. And thus I have endeavored to clear my
Master Christ, that the disobedience of the creature shall not be laid upon him,
it being the creatures work to obey, and not his; and that thereby, all men
may know that duty, that it is their work to obey the Gospel, and not his; and
that their not obeying the Gospel shall not be laid to the charge of Christ, but
that all men shall know it was their work to obey, and not his, and shall be
condemned at the last day for their not obeying.

CHAP. IX. Of the Resurrection.
IN the days of Christ and his Apostles, there were some Sadduces that denied
the Resurrection of the dead, Act. 23. 8 and so there are in these days, such,
as hold there is no Resurrection, but in this life; and such are in but a sad
condition, whose hope are perished from the Land of the living, and go out of
this world, worse then they came in; for when they came into this world, there
was some hope in them to receive a better world, but now the death of these
men; is worse then their birth, and beginning* but the Resurrection is that
which is desired of all the Saints, hoping, and longing for the day, for their
Redemption, to wit, the Resurrection of the dead; for then the Saints shall
enter into their inheritance which was prepared for them from everlasting time;
and therefore for my own comfort, and for the comfort of the Saints, I shall
endeavor to speak a word or two of the Resurrection; and first I shall prove,
that there is a Resurrection, and then I shall show how we shall be raised.

Now the reasons to prove, that there shall be Resurrection are these:

First, God does declare to all the world, that he did not intend the creature
should dye for ever; because he sent his Son to declare to the contrary, that
all men shall rise, and that he is the resurrection of the dead, John 11. 25.
and the first fruits of them that sleep; and that as he was raised from the
dead, so shall all men be raised by the same power, and shall conquer and
trample death under their feet.

2. There will be a Resurrection, that God may manifest his great power to all
men in raising them from the dead, that thereby it may be seen how glorious he
is in all his undertakings, in so wonderful an act, as to raise them from the
dead, by his glorious power, which will be manifest at that day.

3. That he might fulfill his promises, who has promised that we shall see him
as he is, and shall enjoy his face and presence in the Throne of his glory,
with that glorious company of Angels, that attend his presence to behold his
beauty, and to joy in his presence, where is fullness of joy, and pleasure for
evermore.

4. There shall be a Resurrection that he may give unto every one according to
his works, and reward the Saints with blessing, and the wicked with cursing,
and to give to every man according to his desert.

5. There is a Resurrection, because that God has promised to restore the
Creation to its first purity, in making a new heaven, and a new earth, where in
shall dwell righteousness, and to make his power and glory appear, as at the
first.

6. It has been the belief of the Saints, that there shall be a
Resurrection; Job says, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though this flesh be destroyed with
worms, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and
mine eyes shall behold him, though my reins be consumed within me, Job 19. 25,
26, 27. and then shall the gates of death be opened, Job 38. 17. And David
says, Thou set me before thy face for ever, Psalm. 41. 12. And Esaias says,
Thy dead men shall live together, with my dead bodies shall they arise; Awake
and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for the dens is as the dens of herbs, and
the earth shall cast out her dead, Esaias 26. 19. And the Apostle to the Heb. 11.
does recite a Catalogue of the Saints, who all dyed in the faith, and confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, that they might obtain a
better resurrection, as verse. 23. 35.

7. If there be no Resurrection, then the faith of the Saints is void, and all
their hopes are perished, and their glory is at an end, and they all as lost
creatures, and their condition very sad.

8 If there be no Resurrection, then the Saints have lost their reward, and all
their labor is in vain, in seeking for a better Kingdom, and a better
inheritance; for if there be no Resurrection, then there is no heaven, nor no
glory after this life; then we shall never enjoy the presence of God, and
Christ, nor those glorious Angels, nor the heaven of glory.

9. If there be no Resurrection, then the wicked will be in a better estate
then the godly, for they have had their portion in this life, and have glutted
themselves with the pleasures of this world, and have had all the delights of
the sons of men, and have satisfied their hearts to the full; and the people
of God have weaned themselves from all the pleasures and delights of this
world, and have lost all the glory thereof, and have been despised of all men
in hopes of a better life; and all in vain, if there be no Resurrection.

10 If there be no Resurrection, the wicked shall never be punished, for all
the wickedness that they have acted against the Lord; then they will never be
called to account for all their blaspheming his glorious Name, their swearing,
and cursing, their drunkenness, and whoredom, with their shedding of innocent
blood, their wicked pride, and baseness, with all their abominations; if there
be no Resurrection, this is the day they look for; then they might commit all
wickedness with greediness*; for what should they fear, if there be no
Resurrection?

11. If there be no Resurrection, then the Devils shall not be punished, for
they are reserved in chains of darkness till the great day; but if there be
no Resurrection, then there will be no judgment, and so they will never be
punished; and they would not cease to reign, nor enjoy ^^eir wicked power for
ever: then what need the Devils fear and tremble* if there be^ no
Resurrection, they need not fear any judgment to come.

12. If there be no Resurrection, then we may live as we list, and enjoy all
the pleasures we can in this life, to enjoy the sight of our eyes, and the
desires of our hearts, and eat and drink; and be merry, for to morrow we dye,
and so all our glory is at an end; for then we have only our portion in this
life; if there be no Resurrection, then all our glory is at an end.

13. Those that hold this Tenet; to wit, that there is no Resurrection; whether
do not they question whether there be a God? for if there be no Resurrection,
then they may question whether there be a God, or if there be a God yet he is
not able to perform his promises; for he has made many large promises that
there shall be a Resurrection, but he is not able to perform it, for there
shall be none: and what do these men else, but question God, and the power of
God? and whether is not this blasphemy think you, in the highest nature? and
whether shall not this great God one day, judge such Sadduces as these are?

14 Whether do not those that deny the Resurrection, question all the Prophets
and Apostles, and that which they spoke by the mouth of God in all their
Doctrine, speaking of the Resurrection, and the day of judgment, and preaching
the judgments of God against wicked men, which was a great part of their
Doctrine in all their preaching? and whether do not those that deny the
Resurrection, question all the rest of their Doctrine to be false, by this
their Tenet of denying the Resurrection; for if their Doctrine of the
Resurrection be false; then why may not you also question all the rest of their
Doctrine to be false; for deny the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and you may as
well deny all the rest: but how vile and wicked this Tenet is, let all wise men
try and judge.

15. Whether is not this a most Atheistical Tenet, to deny the Resurrection?
and whether is not this the same that the Atheists hold, in 2 Pet. 3. 4.
saying, Where is the promise of his coming, for since the Fathers fell asleep
all things continue as they were, from the beginning of the Creation; and being
ignorantly willing of this their wicked Tenet, not knowing, that One day with
the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day; for the
Lord is not slack of his coming, as some count slacknesse; but is long
suffering to us ward, not willing, or consulting that any should perish, but
that all men should come to a change, Ver. 8. 9. And thus you see there were
such Atheists in the Apostles times, who were wilfully ignorant of the
Resurrection, and the coming of Christ; but this shall be the perdition of
ungodly men, to their utter destruction, and now I shall further prove that
there is a Resurrection.

1. Christ will tell thee that there is a Resurrection* when he says, I am the
resurrection and the life, Joh. 11. 25. that is, he is an infallible testimony
of the Resurrection, in being risen from the dead, and has trampled death
under his feet, and has showed us, that as he rose from the dead, so also shall
we be raised up, by the same power; and when he was asked a question concerning
Marriage, he told them, they erred, not knowing the Scripture, and the power of
God; for in the Resurrection they neither married, nor were given in marriage,
but were like unto the Angels of God in heaven, Mat. 22. 29, 30. And as
touching the Resurrection, have you not heard in the Prophets what God spoke,
saying? I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;
now, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living; and that the Saints
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just, Luke 14. 14. and that they
that shall be accounted w^^thy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from
the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage, neither can they do any
more; for they are equal with the Angels, and are the children of God, being
the children of the Resurrection, Luke 20. 34, 35, 36. and Moses showed you at
the Bush of the Resurrection, ver. 37. And Christ says further, Marvel not at
this, for the hour is coming, when all that are in the Graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good to the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection of condemnation, Joh.
5. 28, 29. and thus you see the words of Christ, which are sufficient to
satisfy any reasonable man that there is a Resurrection.

2. Christ's Apostles will tell thee, that there is a Resurrection, of which
they are witnesses, Act. 1. 22. Preaching, through Jesus, the resurrection of
the dead, Acts 4. 2. and for which Doctrine Paul was called in question for
preaching the resurrection, Act. 24. 22. For since by man came death, by man
also came the resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 22. and therefore the
Apostle pressed forward, that he might be made partaker of the glory of this
resurrection, Phil. 3. 10. 11. and this was a principle of the Gospel that
they taught, as you may see, Heb. 6. 2. And in the 11 Heb. the Apostle shows
you an epitome of the glorious Acts of the Saints of former times, what they
under-went, that they might obtain the glory of a better Resurrection, Heb.
11. 35. And so we are bego^ten to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 3. For God has has raised up the Lord Christ, and will also
raise up us by his own power, 1 Cor. 6. 14. And knowing that God the Father,
which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall
present us with you, 2 Cor. 4. 14. and thus the Apostles clear the truth of
this Doctrine, that there is a resurrection.

3. The day of Judgment will tell thee, that there is a Resurrection; and thus
says the wise Solomon, For God shall bring every work into judgment, with
every secret thing whether it be good or evil, Eccles. 12. 14. And therefore
Christ says, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
judgment, then for those that reject the Gospel, Mat. 10. 15. And I say unto
you that for every idle word that men shall speak they shall give account
thereof in the day of judgment; for by thy words, thou shall be justified, and
by thy words, thou shall be condemned, Mat. 12. 36, 37. And says Christ, The
words that I have spoken shall judge you at the last day, Joh. 12. 48. And
therefore Christ is ordained of God to be a judge of the quick and the dead,
Act. 20. 42. For God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by the man Christ whom he has appointed, Act. 17. 31 And the
disobedient, or wicked, treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. And when God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel, Romans 2. 16.
And we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14. 10. For to
this end Christ has dyed and rose again, that he might be the Lord both of
the dead and living, verse. 9. For we must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, that every man may receive according to that he has done in the
body, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. And it is appointed for all men
once to dye, and after that comes judgment, Heb. 9. 27. And Enoch the
seventh from Adam, prophesied of this, saying, Behold! the Lord comes with
ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all, Jude 14, 15. For the
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the
unjust to the day of judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 29. And the Angels are
reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day, Jude 6.
And thus I have showed that there is a Judgment, For it is appointed for all
men once to dye, and after that, comes judgment; and therefore it is clear
that there is a Resurrection.

4. Thy conscience will tell thee, O vain man, that there is a Resurrection;
for does not thy conscience tell thee, that thou must one day give account for
all thy vain thoughts, words, and actions, and that thou must appear before
the great Judge: examine thy conscience and it will tell thee, and be as a
thousand witnesses against thee; thou have the testimony within thee, that will
testify against thee that there is a Resurrection, and judge thee one day, if
thou continuest in that wicked opinion, thy conscience will tell thee at thy
death, there is a Resurrection; thou can not one day stop the mouth of
conscience, when it shall come and witness against thee for all thy wicked
acts: And thus you see it is clear that there is a Resurrection; and now I
shall speak a word or two when it shall be.

1. But now for the set day or hour of this Resurrection, or Judgment, it is
too high for a finite creature to know; For it is not for us to know the times
or seasons that the Father has put in his own power, Act. 1. 7. For of that
day nor hour knows no man, no not the Angels, nor the Son himself till it
be revealed to him, Mat. 24. 36. And therefore I shall not dare, as some have
foolishly done, to prescribe or set forth the day of this Resurrection or
Judgment.

2. The Fathers and learned Doctors of the times in former ages, have conceived
this day of the Resurrection or Judgment to be at the end of six thousand
years; but this is but their judgment; and I shall also, under the favor of
the Learned, give my judgment, as desiring to see further, because God has
promised to manifest more light in the latter days, and also because I stand
upon the shoulders of my forefathers, and therefore may see further. Now I
conceive, that as God was six days finishing the works of Creation, and the
seventh day was a Sabbath of rest, that there is a glorious, spiritual meaning
in all this, or else God could as well have finished his works in one day as
in six, and therefore there must be some other meaning in all this, which I
conceive to be this; That as God the Father was six days laboring in the
works of Creation, and finished his works in six days, and rested the
seventh day; it holds forth thus much, That the sons and daughters of men,
with the creatures also, should be in commotion and hard labor for six
thousand years, and that in these six thousand years, he will end all war and
strife, and that within these years he will shake all Nations, Hag. 2. 7, 8.
and will overthrow the pride and vainglory, and false confidence of all
Nations, and will shake them off their fleshly glorying, and beat down all
their strong holds, and every fenced wall, Esa. 2. and all Nations shall lie
open and naked, and shall have their fill of fighting, and shall see their
vanity, and shall desire to be at rest, and shall beat all their weapons of war
in pieces, and there shall be a spirit of love and union established in all
Nations, neither shall they learn war any more, but every man shall sit under
his own vine, and under his own fig tree, and none shall make them afraid; for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Esa. 2. Mic. 4. and then shall the
fullness of the Gentiles come in, and the Jews shall be called, and the glory
of the people of Israel shall be set up, and they shall enjoy their former
inheritances; to wit, the Land of Canaan, and all the glory thereof, and the
Lord will end the hard labor and travel of all Nations, and all Nations shall
sit down at rest: And this I believe the Lord will do in the six thousand
years; for he has seen the sore labor and travel of all Nations, and of
every creature, and he does intend to give them a Jubilee, or Sabbath of rest;
and the seventh day, or seventh thousand years, will be a rest to all
Nations, and to every creature, from that sore labor and travel; and all
pride and covetousness shall be done away in those days, and the desire of
all Nations shall come to seek the Lord, and to seek the ways of Sion; and the
Lord will extend peace to all Nations like a mighty River, Esa. last, Revel.
21. v. 22. And the Lord shall speak to the heaven above, and to the earth
below; and all fruits of the earth shall come in abundance, and there shall be
a fullness of all the fruits of the earth, for the Winter shall be like the
Summer, and fullness shall be upon all the earth, for it is the Lords Jubilee or
Sabbath of rest to all Nations.

3. This Resurrection shall be at the last day, in the last age, or
generation, when the number of Gods account is up, and the last generation
shall be brought up, for that is the number of Gods account when the last
generation is on foot, For the Gospel must be preached to all the world for a
witness to all Nations, and then shall the end come, Mat. 24. 14. For it does
not appear, that Christ shall not come until the restoration of all things
that are written in the Law and the Prophets, and that there shall be a new
heaven, and a new earth, and a refining of all things before his glorious
appearing, with that glorious company, and heavenly host, whom the heavens must
contain until that time, till all things be refined, as you may see, Act. 3.
20, 21. For it does appear, that the Resurrection shall not be until the new
heavens, and new earth, and that they shall be refined, and come forth of the
new earth; and that we shall not rise before, does appear by Scripture, which
says, That man lies down, and rises not till the heavens be no more, or
dissolved, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep, Job 14. 22.
And of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
work of thy hands, and they shall perish, but thou shall stand, and they shall
all of them wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed; as you may see, Psalm. 102. 25, 26. For the stars of
heaven, and constellations thereof, shall not give their light, the Sun shall
be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine,
Esa. 13. 10. For the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the
earth do shake, the earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean
dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly, the earth shall reel too and fro
like a drunken man, and shall be removed like a cottage, and the transgression
thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again, Esa. 24.
18, 19, 20. And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens
shall be rolled together as a scrole, and all their host shall fall down, as a
leaf falls off from the Vine; and as a falling Fig from the Fig. tree, Esa.
34. 4. Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath, for
the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a
garment, and they that dwell therein shall dye in like manner, Esa. 51. 6. For
behold I create new heavens, and a new earth, and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come in mind, Esa. 65. 17. And by all this it does appear,
that there shall be new heavens, and a new earth, for this Prophecy must be
fulfilled before the coming of Christ, whom the heavens must contain until
the restoring of all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, Act.
3. which the words of Christ seem to clear in Mat. 24. where he says, The
Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken: And all this
before the coming of Christ, whereby it does appear, that the Resurrection
will not be until there is a new heaven, and a new earth. For the Apostle
says, The heavens, and the earth, which now are, by the word of the Lord are
kept in store, and are reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, in
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat, and the earth also, and the works thereof shall be
burnt up: And seeing all these things must be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be, looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God,
wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat; as you may see, 2 Pet. 3. 7. 10. 12. And by all this it
does appear, that there shall be a wonderful change, before the coming of
Christ, an alteration in the heaven, and in the earth, and a purging of all
things by fire, and the old heaven and earth dissolved, as not being fit to
entertain such a glorious judge, and such a heavenly host, because the heaven
and earth are both polluted with sin, and therefore they must be burnt up,
and all the noisome scents and stinkes, and evil vapors of corruption, and
all noisome scents, and all things that are corrupted with sin, shall be
dissolved and burnt up, as not fit to entertain such a glorious Judge, and
therefore there must be a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, the first heaven and earth being not able to stand before his
presence; and therefore there will be a new heaven, and a new earth; as you may
see, Revel. 21. 1. And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth, for the first
heaven, and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea: And
all this is a preparation for the great Judge.

4. When all these things are come to pass then this shall be the sign of the
coming of the Son of man, which will be apparent to all the world, for then
will the Lord Jesus Christ appear from heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. For as the lightning comes out of the East,
and shines even to the West, even so shall the coming of the Son of man be,
Mat. 24. 27. And all the wicked families that are upon the earth, at that time,
shall mourn, when they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory: and then shall the Lord Christ send his
Angels with the sound of a great Trumpet to awaken all the Saints, who shall be
raised from their sleep by the sound of the great Trumpet, and the Angels shall
gather together all the Saints from the four winds, from one end of the earth
to the other, Mat. 24. 31. For those that have dyed in the faith of Christ,
shall rise first, being awakened out of sleep with the voice of the Archangell,
and with the Trump of God, and shall all be gathered together in a moment, to
meet the great Judge, and to rejoice in his glory, and in their glorious
deliverance, being now to enjoy his presence forever, with all his glorious
Angels, and shall now come to be Judges of their enemies, and sit down with the
great Judge to judge all their enemies; and therefore it is that the Saints
shall rise first, that they may lay open their grievances before the great
Judge, of all their great wrongs, and bring in their evidences against the
wicked for all their hard usage, and cruel persecution of their enemies, and
the Saints shall be gloriously honored at that day, having the Judge on their
side to their great joy and comfort; and to the terror of their enemies.

5. The Resurrection of the Saints shall be glorious, in being raised out of
the new earth, and all the corruption burnt up, and so are raised out of pure
matter; For it was sown a corruptible body, but it shall be raised an
incorruptible body; for as we have borne the image of the earthly, so we shall
also bear the image of the heavenly; for it is sown a natural body, and it
is raised a spiritual body, and this in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
at the last Trump, for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed, 1 Cor. 15. 44. 48. 52. For this
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality; and when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall put on immortality; then shall be brought to pass that saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory, and thanks be to God that
gives us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord; as you may see, 1 Cor. 15.
53, 54. And then shall we be clothed with our house which is from heaven, 2
Cor. 5. 1. And then shall our vile bodies be changed, and fashioned, like unto
his glorious body, and we shall be like him as be is: And thus we shall be
raised in a glorious estate, whereby we may be fitted for so glorious a
Kingdom, and such a glorious company as we shall enjoy.

6. We shall be raised in our likeness; for though our nature shall be more
pure and glorious, yet the pureness of our nature will not take away the being
of it, as the pureness of the Man Christ, does not take away his being to be a
man, nor the glory of his substance make his substance cease to be; for the
glory of the substance, does not take from but adds to the substance, and so
the glory of the man adds to the man, but does not take away his being to be a
man: And so though we shall be raised more glorious men, yet we shall be men:
and to this I shall add Scripture, Job says, I know that my ^edeemer lives,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though the worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall behold for my
self, and mine eyes shall ^ebol(...) and not ^^ther eyes, though my reins be
cons(...)in me, Job 19. 25, 26, 27. And David does declare, That his flesh did
rest in hope for that great and glorious day, to wit, the redemption of his
body, Psalm. 16. And the Apostle says, We shall be judged according to those
things that we have done in this body, whether good or bad: For another body
shall not be judged, but the same body; nor another body shall not be punished,
but the same body, for the same body shall be punished that has acted
wickedness; and this the Apostle does clear, in the 1 Cor. 15. showing us,
that there is diverse kinds of flesh, but he will give to every body his own
flesh, and to every seed his own body, to show us, that the same flesh shall be
raised up again, and not another; and so I shall conclude with the words of the
Prophet, saying, Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise; Awake, and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead, Esa. 26. 19.

7. They shall appear in the same form, and likeness, and fashion as they were
in upon earth, and shall have the same body, and the same stature and
proportion, with the same likeness and complexion; for their rising shall not
change their proportion no way, but rather add to it to make them more like
themselves then ever they were before, and every man shall be known in the same
body and proportion as he was upon the earth, Adam in his own likeness, and
Abraham, Moses, Solomon, and David in their own likeness, and every man and
woman in their own likeness as they were upon earth, and so they shall be
known, every man and woman as they were upon the earth, only they shall appear
more glorious; but their glorious appearance will not take away the being of
their likeness and proportion, but rather add to it; as the glory and
excellency of a man does not take away his leaving to be a man, but rather adds
to it, and even so the glory of our appearing does not take away the likeness
of our being, but rather adds to it, and so makes our likeness the more
glorious.

8 The wicked shall also be raised up, for Christ shall judge both the quick and
the dead, and we shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to give
an account for those things that we have done in the flesh, whether good or
evil; for Christ shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and all Nations shall be
gathered together before him, Mat. 25. 31, 32. For the time is coming, that
all that are in the graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall
com^forth, they that have done good to the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil to the resurrection of condemnation, Joh. 5. 28, 29. For it is
appointed for all men once to dye, and after that comes judgment. Now the
wicked I conceive shall not rise like the Saints, but every one according to his
nature, for the Saints shall rise with the nature of Christ upon them, for their
vile bodies shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body, and be clothed with
their house which is from heaven; but the wicked shall rise in their corrupt
nature, and shall be clothed with their sin; and as the Saints shall be
clothed with their obedience, even so shall the wicked be clothed with their
disobedience; and this I conceive shall be the distinguishing badge whereby the
righteous shall be known from the wicked, for the Saints shall rise with the
clothing or livery of Christ upon them; and the other shall rise with the
clothing or livery of the Devil upon them, whereby they shall be known whose
servants they are, and yet I conceive the Lord will do his part, for he will
raise them up a pure nature, for they shall be most pure and glorious in their
nature, until they shall be clothed with their sin, which shall darken their
nature, for they will come forth of the new earth, and so their natures shall ^e
Spiritual, incorruptible, and immortal, whereby they will be more capable of
Sin and Judgment, and the more capable of all their sorrow and misery; and now
I shall speak a word or two where this Judgment shall be.

9. Where this Judgment shall be, is a great question, for some think it shall
be in the Air, but me thinks that is but an airie argument, for there is no
good reason can be given wherefore it should be in the Air; and others think
it shall be in heaven, but that is not likely, wherefore it should be in heaven,
because Christ comes down to judge, and therefore it does appear it shall be
on the earth, for what should the wicked do in heaven? and therefore Christ
comes down upon earth to Judge them; for it is most fit that where they have
done their wickedness, that there they should be judged, and that is, upon the
earth; now the place of Judgment I conceive will be at Jerusalem, about the
valley of Iehoshaphat, which is the middle part of the earth, for there Christ
was put to death, and had all the dishonor; and there he will vindicate
himself in that place, and have all the honor; for in the place where he
ascended up into heaven, it is likely in the same place he will descend with his
mighty Angels, and that is, upon the Mount Olive^, or the Mount of Olives; for
thus it is Prophesied of him, when the Lord shall come forth of his holy place;
for behold, the Lord comes forth out of his place, and will come down, and
will tread upon the high places of the earth, and the Mountains shall be molten
under him, and the Valleys shall be cleft: as Wax before the fire, and as the
waters that are poured down a steep place, Mich. 1. 3, 4. and at that day his
feet shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, that is, before Jerusalem, on the
East, and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst toward the East, and
toward the West, and there shall be a very great Valley, and half of the
Mountain shall remove toward the North, and half of it toward the South, and
ye shall fly to the Valley of my Mountains, for the Valley of the Mountains
shall reach unto Azal, and those that are there at that day fhal fly as they
fled before the Earthquake, in the days of Vzzah King of Judah, and the Lord
my God shall come, and all the Saints with him, Zach. 14. 3, 4, 5. and thus you
may see how gloriously the Lord will come to prepare a place for Judgment, and
how mighty and spacious it will be, even a mighty Valley, which is not able to
be expressed; so spacious, and so large, that it might be fit to entertain
such a number, that no man knows but himself, and thither shall all Nations be
gathered to be judged, as the Scripture seems to hold forth, saying, Proclaim
ye among the Gentiles, prepare watre, wake up the mighty men, and let all the
men of war come near, let them come up; and here the Prophet shows you what
the Lord Christ will say at that day, saying, Beat your Flow-shares into
Swords, and your Pruning-bookes into Spears; let the weak say, I am strong;
wherein Christ shows all Nations their weaknesses when they shall come before
him to Judgment; assemble your selves and come, all ye Heathen, and gather
your selves together round about* thither will thou cause thy mighty ones to
come down, O Lord; and thus the Prophet in this Verse holds forth the glorious
appearing of Christ, with all his Host: and then shall all the Heathen be
wakened, and come to the valley of Iehoshaphat, or the valley of threshing, for
there will the Lord sit to judge all the Heathen round about, for all their
wickedness is at the full, Joel 3. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. for there will the Lord
^^ster ^p hi^ great Army, for his camp is very great, and multitudes,
multitudes shall be in the valley of threshing, for then the day of the Lord is
near in the valley of division, or threshing, and then shall the Sun and the
Moon be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining, for the glory
of Christ and his Angels shall darken the Host of Heaven, and then shall the
Lord the great Judge of Heaven and Earth roar out of Zion, and shall utter his
voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the Earth shall shake, for the Lord
will number all his forces, and then there will be the noise of a multitude in
the Mountains, a tumultuous noise of the Nations gathered together, and the
Lord of Hosts himself mustereth the Host, to see if there be any wanting, for
he will not miss a man, being able to call them all by their names; and then
shall the Lord at that day sit down in Judgment, and all the Prisoners be
shut up together as in a Prison, and a wall of fire being round about them,
with that mighty guard of Angels to attend the Prisoners, and after many days
they shall be visited, or found wanting, being judged in order, after their
Ages and Generations; and then shall the Moon be confounded, and the Sun
ashamed at the glory of the Lord, his glory darkning all the Host of Heaven,
when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and before his ancients
gloriously.

12. And lastly, the question will be, how long this Judgment shall last, and
how long this great Judge will be in judging all the world? Now some conceive,
that it shall be in the twinkling of an eye, but that is very unlikely to be,
for then how can Christ be said to sit upon the Throne, and to sit in
Judgment? there can be but a little sitting in the twinkling of an eye.
Secondly, some think it to be a natural day that Christ shall sit in
Judgment, but that is but a small sitting, to sit a natural day, for such a
great work as to judge all the world; will his glory no longer appear in
Judgment then for a day? Shall not the great Judge of heaven and earth
surmount all the Judges in the world, in the time of his Judgment? who can
counter-pane him in Judgment? for the time of his sitting, he is no hired
Judge, he sits at his own cost and charges, and all his mighty company, he
cannot want any thing in the time of his sitting, for all is his, and therefore
I conceive he will sit a longer time; for, one day with the Lord is as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day; and therefore I conceive the
Judgment shall be longer then some suppose, even for a thousand years; and for
the proof of the same, I shall give you my Reasons:

1. Because one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand
years as one day, 2 Pet. 3. and therefore the Judgment may be for a thousand
years.

2 Because it is called, a great, and notable day, more gloriously noted then
other days, as well in respect of time, as in the great works of it; and
therefore by this day must be meant a longer time then a natural day, being
called, the judgment of the great day; and, the great day of his wrath; for,
if the day was lengthened in the time of Joshua, much more shall it be
lengthened in the day of Christ, Act. 2. 20. Iud. 6. Revel. 6. 7.

3. Because the glorious coming of Christ shall darken the Sun and Moon, and
all the Host of Heaven, for what is the light of the Sun to the light of
Christ, from whence all light does proceed? and by this it does appear, that
Christ shall sit a longer time then some suppose, and shall enlighten the earth
with his glory, and that all his enemies may see the glory, and excellency of
his person to the admiration of all the earth.

4. Because he is said to sit in the Judgment, and on the throne of his
Majesty, for the ancient of days shall sit and execute judgment, as does
appear, for says Daniel, I beheld till the thrones were cast down, even all
the glory of the wicked, when the ancient of days did sit, whose garment was
white as snow, and the baire of his head like pure wool; his throne was like
the fiery flame, and his wheels were like the burning flame; a fiery stream
issued and came forth before him, thousand thousands ministered unto him, and
ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; and the Books were opened,
and I saw in the night Visions, and behold, one like the Son of Man came with
the clouds of heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and they brought him
near before him, and there was given him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom,
that all Nations and Languages should serve him; an everlasting dominion which
shall not pass away, Dan. 7. 13, 14. for thus says the Lord, Let the Heathen
be awakened, and come to the valley of Jehoshaphat, for there will I sit to
judge all the heathen round about, Joel 3. 12. and many Scriptures more I might
bring to show you, that the great Judge must sit in Judgment, to show unto us,
that it is a larger time then some conceive, by his sitting.

5. The coming of Christ being so glorious that it shall darken all the Host of
Heaven, for the Sun and the Moon shall not give forth light, being so glorious
a light in place, but shall be at a stand, as amazed and confounded in
themselves, and all their light being but as darkness in respect of the great
Judge, for the Judge himself shall be their everlasting Light, being indeed
the great Court of Heaven more clear then the Sun, for the light thereof
does darken the light of the Sun and Moon, which makes it appear that this
glorious Judge, and this glorious Court of Heaven will not be so soon removed.

6. The Books are to be opened, and every man is to be judged according to
those things that are written in those Books; and there must be a time to open
the Books, and a time to judge and examine every matter, and every person
particularly, according to his deeds; whereby it does appear, that the great
Court of Heaven will not be so soon removed.

7. The pleading of the Prisoners at the Bar does make it appear, that the
Court shall not be removed, for the Prisoners at the Bar of Justice will plead,
and say, Lord, in thy name we have Prophesied, and cast out Devils, and done
many wonderful works; And when saw we thee in Prison, or in sickness, or
hungry, or naked, or the like; whereby it does appear, that the pleading of
Prisoners, and the answerings of the Judge does hold forth a longer time to us,
then we suppose, to sit in judgment.

8. If every Person should not be called to account in particular, there might
be some excuse in the Creature, for then they might say, I, nor I was not
judged; but the Judge will not pass over things so lightly, for they are
matters upon Life and Death, (...) upon eternal life and death; and therefore
^ ^oth appear, that the great Judge will examine every man to the full, with
every particular thing, and with so many Millions of thousands to be judged, in
particular, does make it appear, that the great Judge cannot be so soon
removed.

9. Christ says, that the Apostles shall sit upon twelve Thrones, and shall
judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, even such as are revolted from Jesus Christ,
and have rejected grace, and mercy, offered them in the Son, and have shed
the blood of the Prophets, and Apostles through their wickedness; and
therefore it does appear, that Christ will make his twelve Apostles to sit
down upon twelve Thrones, and they shall be the great Iurymen of Christ, to
give in their verdict for life or death, and what they do shall be approved of
by Christ, for the Jews being a most wise and subtle people, shall have the
more able Judges to deal with them; and who are more fit for that work then
the Apostles? who shall be the grand Judges, or the grand Jury to give in their
evidences to the chief Judge against them, and the Judge also consenting to
their judgment; For whose sins they remit, they shall be remitted; and whose
sins they retain, they shall be retained: And this being so, it does appear,
that the Court shall not be so soon removed, Mat. 19. 28. Luke 22. 30.

10. The Apostles shall judge the Angels, and give judgment against them, and
when will that be, but at the great day? for they are reserved in chains of
darkness until the great day, and then shall they appear before the Grand
Jury, who shall give their Judgment against them, and deliver them to the
chief Judge, who shall pass sentence upon them, for ever to be cast into the
anger and wrath of the Almighty: for this is the great day of judgment which
has been spoken of so long before, which will not be ended in a small time.

11. It is said, that the Saints shall judge the world, and that cannot be in a
small time, seeing there is so many millions of thousands to be judged, with
the examination of every particular action, and yet they will not be idle all
the time, nor rejourne the Court like idle Judges: for it shall be no night,
all the time of the judgment, neither will they stir until they have
accomplished that great work^; for I conceive there will be as much hastening
of the work as may be, even round about the Throne, and the twelve Patriarchs
judging those before the Flood, with the twelve Apostles, judging those under
the Law, and the Ministers of the Gospel, judging those under the Gospel; for
it is said, The Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2. And al these great
things cannot be done in a small time; for all the Prisoners pleading at the
Bar on the one side, and the Judges giving sentence on the other side, with
their examining of all causes, does make it appear, that this great Court will
not be so soon removed, as some think.

12. The Scripture does declare, that after the new heavens and earth are made,
that the Saints shall reign with Christ in abundance of glory, which I conceive
must be all the time of the judgment, for it will not be before the new
heavens and earth, as the Scripture seems to hold forth, but after the new
heavens and earth, and then will the Lord Jesus come, and all the Saints with
him, and then shall the Saints reign in glory, even all the time of the
sitting of the great Judge, which I believe will be the account of a thousand
years, and about Jerusalem shall be the Throne of their glory: and they shall
be filled with the fullness of delight in all that time, and then will the
dwelling of God be with men, and they shall be the new Jerusalem, being
clothed with their house from heaven, and God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes; For there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor
any pain, for all their former troubles being passed away; for Jerusalem will
be more glorious then ever it was in the world before, with her gates and walls
most glorious, and such a glorious City it will be as never yet was seen, the
glory of which place, will enlighten both heaven and earth, and shall darken
all the host of heaven, being a place for the Saints of the most High, where
they shall rest all the time of the sitting of the great Judge, for this will
be a new Jerusalem, indeed, a place of glory until the great. Judge has
finished his work upon the earth; and in this new Jerusalem of the Saints,
there shall be no Temple, nor any worship enjoined, for this will be all their
work, to offer up praises unto him that shall sit upon the Throne; for the
Father and the Son are the Temple of this glorious City; and this City will have
no need of Sun or Moon, for the Father and the Son will be the light thereof,
and all the Nations which shall be saved, shall walk in the light of this City,
and there shall their glory be, for the Gates of this City shall not be shut at
all by day, for there shall be no night; and this will be a glorious rest for the
Saints, all the fitting of the great Judge. Re. 22. And then shall the Lord
roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and the
earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the harbor of his people, and there
shall we know that he is the Lord, dwelling in Zion his holy mountain, then
shall Jerusalem be holy: nor there shall no strangers pass through her any
more: and it shall come to pass at that day, that the mountains shall drop
downs new wine, and the bills shall flow with milk, and all the Rivers of Judah
shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth from the house of the
Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim, Joel 3. 17, 18. For in the midst
of this City, new Jerusalem, shall proceed from the Throne of God, and of the
Lamb, a (...) River of water of life in the midst of the street of it, and on
the other side of the River, there shall be a tree of life, which shall have
twelve manner of fruits, and yielding her fruit every month, and the leaves of
the tree shall be for healing the Nations of all their spiritual grief, for
there shall be no more cries amongst the Saints, but the Throne of God, and of
the Lamb^ shall be in this glorious City, and they shall serve him, and there
they shall see his face and presence, and his name shall be in their foreheads,
the honor of their glorious profession, and in that City there shall be no
night, and there the Saints shall reign in a glorious manner, for it is the
great day of the great Judge, in which there shall be no darkness: And thus will
the Lord Christ prepare a glorious place for the Saints, such a glorious City
as cannot be expressed, where they shall gloriously reign in all spiritual
pleasure and delight, which is not able to be expressed, for there will the
great Court of heaven be, while the great Judge is upon the earth, to show
forth his wonderful glory while he sits in judgment, until the great Court
shall be broken up; for Jesus Christ shall sit upon his glorious Throne, and al
Nations shall be gathered together before him, and he shall separate the good
from the bad, and will set the sheep on his right hand, and goats on his left
hand; and when the great Trial and Judgment is passed upon all the wicked,
then shall he send them to their place; saying, Go ye wicked and cursed ones,
depart from me into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels; and
then shall they go into everlasting punishment for ever and ever, where the
worm never dies, nor the fire never goes out, Mat. 25. 41* 46. And when Christ
has done his work upon the earth, then shall that glorious Court be broken up
with glorious triumph and glory, which is not able to be expressed, and then shall
they al return unto the place prepared for them far above all heavens; for then
shall the great Judge of heaven and earth return from whence he came, with all
his glorious heavenly host, far above all heavens, into the heaven of heavens,
there to remain for ever and ever, and so the whole Creation shall enjoy the
footstool, Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22* and the Saints shall enjoy the Throne for
ever, and ever.

And thus I have spoken a word or two, as my time would permit me, of the
Resurrection.

CHAP. X. Of Visible Worship.
THe wise Solomon says, That the full stomach loatheth the honey comb; and his
saying is made good in this Age; for never was the word of God more plentiful,
nor never more contemptible then it is in these days; but what brings a
loathing, but a fullness? and what brings contempt, but plenty? are not many
fatted up in these days to the day of slaughter, they are full, but not of
goodness; for that would make them see their wants, who is more proud of grace
then he that has least; and who is more humble then he that has most: how
many in these days are rapt up in spiritual pride, and boast of more then
they have, and yet improve not that they have* many say they are full, that are
empty; and yet they boast as if they were full: who is worse, then he that
thinks he is best; he says he knows, when he is ignorant, he says he
sees, when he is blind; he says he is full, when he is an hungry; and he
says he wants nothing, when he wants all things; he says he is rich, when
he is poor: And this is the condition of a spiritual proud man.

It was spiritual pride that brought the Devils from heaven, to hell; and
there is many in these days that are sick of this disease; when all the
Devils snares fail, yet here he takes the Bird; the Devil is more subtle
then man, and yet he makes man more wicked then himself; for the Devils durst
not deny the Scripture; but he begets a worse child then himself, and when he
has done so, he laughs at his folly: he talks of high seize if they
break the Command, they shall be as Gods; but he knows when they do
transgress, they shall be as Devils: he tells men when they disobey, they
shall be highest; but he knows when they disobey, they shall be lowest: he
tells them if they will obey him, they shall see, but he knows if they do obey
him, they shall be blind: he tells them that obedience is nothing, but he
knows disobedience is something: he says obedience will not save thee, but he
knows that disobedience will damn thee: he says the Scripture is not true,
but he knows he is a liar: he says thou need not serve God, but he knows
thou shall be damned if thou do not: he says thou need not show any
visible obedience, but he knows if thou do not, thou will show a visible
disobedience: he tells thee that Christ has done all for thee, thou need
not do any thing, but he knows thou shall not be saved, except thou do
something: he tells thee thou needs not keep all the Commands, but he knows if
thou break one, thou art guilty of all: he tells thee that some Ordinances are
carnal, but he knows that thou art carnal: he tells thee it is nothing to
break some Commands, but he knows it is something to break any Command: he
tells thee thou art higher then obedience, but he knows thou art in the highest
disobedience: he tells thee that all shall be saved, but he knows that the
greatest part shall be damned: he tells thee there is no glory but in this life,
but he knows thou shall find punishment in another: he tells thee there is no
heaven, but he knows thou shall find a hell: he tells thee there is no
Resurrection, but he knows thou shall find a Judgment: he tells thee there is
no Judgment, but he knows thou shall find a punishment: he tells thee that God
acts all thy actions, but he knows thou art a liar: he tells thee that God acts
all thy good acts, and yet he knows thou shall be condemned for not acting
good: he tells thee there is no sin, and yet he knows he is the father of lies:
he tells thee that the Scripture is but a low and carnal way, but he knows thou
art a liar: he tells thee that the Scriptures cannot save thee, but he knows the
Scriptures can damn thee* he tells thee that the Scriptures cannot bring life,
but he knows the Scriptures can bring death: he tells thee that the Scriptures
are carnal, but he knows that thou art carnal: he tells thee that the
Scriptures are not the mind of God, but he knows thou art a liar.

And thus the Devil deludeth, and man acts his delusions: how apt is the
Devil to deceive, and how apt is man to be deceived: how cunning is the Devil
to delude, and how foolish is the creature to be deluded: how wise is the
Devil to keep thee from heaven; and how foolish art thou to lose it: his
intent is to damn thee, and thy intent is to damn thy self.

And this is the grand design of the Devil too, he makes thee believe thou art
high, when he knows thou art but low; he makes thee believe thou art in light,
when he knows thou art in darkness: how often has the Devil deceived thee, and
how often have thou been deceived? the Devil bids thee to deny the word, and
thou art ready to forswear it: the Devil bids thee to mock the Scripture, and
thou art ready to trample it under thy feet: and what is this, but a Bird worse
then himself, he hatches the Egg, and the man begets the Serpent; he sows the
seed, and man reaps it: But some may think I speak a mystery; if so, then know
I speak to a people in the mystery of darkness, whose thoughts are high, but
their words are low; whose words are high, but their actions are but low; who
talk of love, but their deeds are hatred; they will not believe a visible
worship in Scripture, and therefore we must prove it to our comfort, and their
shame. But we must not prove it by Scripture; for if we do, they will not
believe it. Now you may see the Serpent stir in the Egg, and therefore we must
prove it by reason; the Lord said to Saul, Thy sin is as the sin of
witchcraft to reject the word: which if so, then there are many such like
witches, And because thou have rejected my word, I have also rejected thee:
which if so, how many such like witches will God reject. There was such under
the Law, that said, It was in vain to serve God; and thou art following thy
forefathers steps; thou will not be behind them, thou will rather run
before them, so ready art thou to obey thy disobedient master the Devil; he
fell from his first place, and so will thou, for thou art a servant to that god
that thou obeyest: but thou show that thou art not for God, but for Belial;
thou will not manifest a visible obedience, but thou will manifest a visible
disobedience; thou will not worship God, but thou will worship Belial; thou will not worship God visibly, but thou will worship Beliall visibly; and now I
shall give thee some Reasons for a visible worship, but it may be thou will
say, it is not reason, then I shall say, thou art no man.

1. The principles of Nature will tell thee, that there is a visible worship,
for before there was any prescript worship set forth, yet there was an inward
principle that told them, there was a visible worship, and thereby they did
worship God visibly, and did manifest to all the world that they stood for a
visible worship, and did offer Sacrifices, and the like, to manifest a visible
worship to their God, and did worship God in the principles of Nature, as
faithfully, as if they had had a visible prescript, whereby they were justified
before God, and will thou derogate from Nature, then it seems thou have a
principle worse then Nature, for Nature is for a visible worship, when they had
no visible worship set forth, yet Nature taught them there was one; but thou
have a worse principle then Nature, that teaches thee, there is none.

2. Thy Conscience will tell thee there is a visible worship, and will testify
against thee one day for thy visible disobedience; and will accuse thee at the
Bar of Justice; what will thou say then? will thou say, there was no visible
worship? will not conscience tell thee of thy wickedness, and lay before thee
what an agent of Hell thou have bin, often thou have belied thy conscience, and
stifled the motions thereof? and how often thou have pleaded against thy
conscience, and that thou have made the Word of the Lord contemptible, and have
villyfied it before all the people, how thou have slighted the Commands of the
Lord, and have set thy self to work wickedness, and have sold thy self to
plead for disobedience; that thou have stood for Baal, and not for God, in that
thou have acted the Devils part, to make the ways of God contemptible. now how
will thy traitorous heart excuse thee for all these things? will thou plead
against Conscience then at the bar of Justice? no Traitor, thy Conscience will
then be thy Judge, and set thy sins in order before thee, and then thou shall
be paid according to thy deserts, and thy punishment shall be as great as thy
sin; when thou shall fall into the wrath of the Almighty.

3. If thou art not for a visible obedience, then thou art for a visible
disobedience, and then his servant thou art to whom thou obeyest; but thou art
not for visible obedience, but for disobedience, and by that I shall know who is
thy Father, even the Devil, who is the father of Lies, and of disobedience, for
he kept not his first place, nor abode in the truth; and thou followest the
steps of thy father the Devil, for thou art his own child, we may know thee
by following thy fathers steps, that thou come out of his bosom, for he
has begat thee to be a son of his Lies; for how do thou set up a visible
disobedience to all the world, thou art busy about thy Fathers work; God tells
men they should obey, and teaches the Creature visible obedience; and thou
say, he should not obey, and teach the Creature visible disobedience; and
is not this a setting up thy self against God? the Lord strives to make men
good, and thou strivest to make men wicked; would thou make all the world
disobedient, that thou might rejoice at their disobedience, as the Devil
rejoices at thee? thou art for disobedience, thou show whose son thou
art, and there I leave thee.

4. Thy striving so against a visible worship, does make it appear that there
is one, by thy striving against it, for if there were not a visible worship,
what do thou strive against? if there were none, thou had no need to strive
for nothing, for thy strife were at an end; but sure thou art aware there is a
visible worship, because thou strivest so against it, and therein thou
discoverest thy Hypocrisy, that thou art a dissembling Hipocrite, in striving
against a visible way; because thou know there is one, and yet thou say,
there is not; what do thou strive for then? if there be no visible worship,
thou need not strive for that which is not; whereby thou bewrayest thy
Hypocrisy.

5. If there be no visible worship, then to what purpose are the Scriptures set
forth? then they will be of no use; if there be no visible worship, then we may
cast them away as of no use; then we might walk as we list, and say, there was
no prescript for us to walk by, but every one might walk according to the
desires of their own hearts, and might say, they were led by the Spirit,
though they acted all manner of wickedness, and none could reprove those
visible walkings, if there were not a visible way set forth, and this is the
day thou would have, thou Son of Belial, that thou might set up the ways
of wickedness, thou would have the Scriptures of no use, and yet thou can
make some use of them thy self; like the Devil, for his own ends, thou can
use it as a cloak to hide the Serpent; thou would make the Scripture to
hold out disobedience, and not obedience, whereby thy visible disobedience does
appear, that thou art in the gall of bitterness.

6. Whether is not this to fly in the face of Christ, and his Apostles? to make
them contemptible to all the world, and to condemn them of insufficiency, as
not being able to set forth a way to all the world, which they were to follow
in after Ages, and to challenge them of weakness, that what they have set
forth is not sufficient, neither to save those that walk in that way, no^ to
condemn those that disobey that way, and that those persons were not able to
set forth so holy a way, but there might be a holier, and a better way; and
that it is but low and carnal, and not fit to be walked in; but for those that
are low and carnal, and fit for babes, and not for men, but such as are in a
low dispensation; and what do thou now thou Serpent, but cast dirt in the
face of Christ and his Apostles? thou think not their way good enough for
thee, thou countest Christ and his Apostles to have walked in a carnal way,
they were not Spiritual enough for thee; their way thou think was but low,
and therefore thou think thou cast find a better; but where will thou find
it? thou show thy self now to be a fine proud Angel, thou passest a proud
Pharisee, for thou art nearer thy Father the Devil, for thou art a holy Angel
of disobedience, thy holiness lies in denying a visible worship, thy holiness
lies in disobedience, and this is the holiness of a Serpent.

7. Thou say there was a worship, but there is none now; there was a visible
worship once in the days of the Apostles, but that was to continue but till
that Age; and what is thy reason for that? Is there not as much need in this
Age of a visible worship as then? are we more holy then they? if there was a
visible worship then, why not now? did God intend that former Ages should serve
him, and these latter Ages should disobey him? Have we not as much need in this
Age to worship him, as in any other Age? if there was a visible worship then,
why not now? is this Age any better then former Ages? or have we any
privileges more then other Ages? except God intend to exempt us from
worshipping of him, there is the same way for us to walk by, as the Apostles
of Christ walked in, which they have set forth to us, and to all the world to
walk by, that thereby they might be happy that walk therein, as they were
happy that walked therein, but thou need it not; for thou think thou art
holy enough, thou art fed up with high conceits of thy self, thou will not
worship God now, but thou will worship the Devil; now thou would eat the
forbidden fruit to be a god, but when thou eatest thou art a Devil; thou will
rather obey the Serpent then God, but thou will have a Serpents reward.

8. If there be not a visible way now, how shall I know thee from the Serpent?
thou may say thou art a Saint, but thou may be a Devil; for the Devil
can transform himself into an Angel of Light, he can say, he is holy, when
he is wicked; he can say, he is in light, when he is in darkness; he can say,
he is in the height of godliness, when he is in the height of ungodliness; he
can say, he is an Angel, when he is a Devil ^ and so may thou: if there be
no way to try thee, if we may not try thy way thou walk in by the Word, thou
may then frame any worship to thy self, and say, it is right; thou would
break the yoke of worship, that thou might run at random; thou art aweary
of order, thou would be in confusion; thou art striving to leave the
straight way, that thou might run thy own crooked ways; and therefore thou
would have no visible worship, that thou might make a way of thine own
inventing; and thus thou art changing thy shape; thou can change thy self
every year like the Serpent, and then thou art a new creature of thine own
making, for thou have more knowledge then grace, thou art a Serpent, to deceive
with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, and lying signs and wonders,
with thy false visions, and dreams, to take men in thy snares, and to make
them more like the Serpent then thy self, thou go about like a roaring Lion
to take thy Prey, and to tear in pieces; thou art a Woolfe to scatter the
Flock, and a Fox to devour the Lambs; but thou art a Hog in the Garden, for
thou delightest to root up the sweet flowers to satisfy thy swinish nature;
thou art not a dumb, but a barking Curre, but thou art one of the worser sort,
for thou will fawn, and bite, and yet thou say, thou art a Saint; but thy
black conditions does bewray thee, and makes thee appear like a Devil; thou
put'st on a Lions skin upon an Ass, but the braying of the Ass will bewray
thee; but some perhaps may think I jeere; to the which I reply; it is no
jeere, but a mystery to the Lovers of Mysteries, that are able to bear strong
meat; for there is no potion, but they can let down; they are of a strong
digestion; thou art for no worship, and yet can swallow down any worship;
there is no way to try, say thou, how then shall we know thee what thou art?
we shall not trust thee far if we may not try thee, thou art the more to be
suspected if thou will not be tried; thou say there is no rule to try thee
by, but the Devil is a Liar; thou would have no Scripture, nor Word to try
thee by, and then thou would say, thou wast pure Gold; but the Scripture
will find to be stinking Brass, only flourished over with the refuse of Gold
for to cover thy Hypocrisy.

9. Those that have been accounted most precious in Gods account, have
worshipped God in a visible way: what say thou to Moses, he was faithful to
God in all his house, and yet he was a visible worshipper of God, and obeyed
him in every Command; and whatsoever God commanded him to do, he did, and is
every where almost commended for his obedience, and is exalted in all the word:
And what say thou to David, a man after Gods own heart, and who was more
obedient to all the Commands of God then he; how zealous was he in visible
worship; and how does God commend him for it: how highly is he commended in all
the History of God, and his obedient service is every where almost spoken off:
And what say thou to Christ the chiefest of the Fathers love, who came out
of the bowels of the Father; he was a worshipper of God, and held forth a
visible worship; he was circumcised to fulfill the worship of the Law, and was
baptized, to hold forth a Gospel worship; and though he were a Son, yet
learned he obedience by the things he suffered; and was obedient in all things,
and was most dear and precious in the sight of the Father, and yet was a
visible worshipper, was a baptized person, and did administer the Supper, and
did partake of it with a great deal of desire, and commanded the same worship
to be performed in future ages: and what will thou say to Christ now? thou will
say he walked very low, will thou? the Son himself was not exempted from
visible worship, and yet thou art: have thou more privilege then Christ? how
came thou by it? art thou higher then the Son? the Son was not exempted
from visible worship, and yet thou art: now it does appear that thou art a
proud Peacock, thou can turn up thy tail, and pride thy self in thy fine
feathers, and never look to thy feet, thou art doting upon thy tail, and
forgettest thy footsteps; but thou will lose thy tail shortly, and then where
will thy pride be? will thou say thou art higher then Christ, that thou art
exempted from worship; for if thou art exempted from visible worship, and
Christ himself was not, then it seems thou art greater, and have more
privileges then he; but thy blindness will deceive thee: And what say thou
to Paul, he was but a low fellow in thine eyes; but I am sure he was higher
then thou, for he was able to speak an infallible truth, and was able to
confirm it with a visible sign, he was able to work miracles, and to speak
with new tongues, and so art not thou, and yet thy words are higher then Paul's,
but thy deeds are lower; and yet Paul was a visible worshipper of God, for he
was a baptized person, and did administer the Supper, and did partake of it
himself, and taught the gathering of Churches, and those were his ways that
were in Christ Jesus; if thou will stoop so low as to look in, 2 Cor. 4. which
thou can hardly do, thou art brideled up so high with that golden chain
about thy neck, called Mystery; but thou say, that the Apostle said
himself, That he was not sent to baptize, but to preach: and thou think
that this is a great argument from the word not.

To the which I reply, that the Apostle says also, That we wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers; and yet thou will say,
that he wrestled against flesh and blood; so that thou see the word ( not)
does imply something: for the Apostle says, I have writ unto you ( not) to
keep company with such, and such, and yet ( not) altogether refrain, for then
thou must go out of the world; and so thou see the word ( not) does imply
something: for the word ( not) and the word ( nothing) are all one, and
signify one thing; and so Paul was not sent to preach; that is, not only sent
to baptize, but to preach: Christ tells his Apostles, that nothing should hurt
them, and yet something might hurt them, Luke 10. 19. the Apostle says, The
Athenians gave themselves to nothing, but to hear news, Act. 14. 21. And yet
they gave themselves to something else: the Apostle says, Owe nothing to any
man, Romans 13. 8. and yet we owe something to all men; and he says,
Circumcision is nothing, 1 Cor. 7. 19. and yet we know that Circumcision is
something. Again he says, that we know that an Idol is nothing in the world,
1 Cor. 8. 4. and we know that an Idol is something, though it be nothing in
respect of God; yet it is something in respect of an Idol: and so the Apostle
says, He was nothing, 2 Cor. 12. 11 and yet we know he was something. Again,
the Apostle says, Be careful for nothing, Phil. 4. 6. and yet we know we must
be careful for something: And we brought nothing into this World, and yet we
know we brought something. The Laodiseans said, They had need of nothing, and
yet we know they had need of something.

And thus I have showed th^^ that ( not) or ( nothing) implies the lesser, and
not the greater; and though Baptism is nothing in respect of teaching, yet
that does not follow but that Baptism is something: And thus the Serpent is
taken in his craft.

10. Those that have contemned a Visible Worship, have been most contemptible
to God; what say thou to the Scribes and Pharisees? John came in the way of
Righteousness, Matthew. 21. 32. And they did not repent, nor were changed from
their wickedness, that they might believe; for they rejected the counsel of
God against themselves, and were not baptized; and how were they liked think
thou for their pains? does not Christ say, Woe be to you Scribes and
Pharisees: does he not count them Hypocrites for rejecting the Doctrine of
John, which was the counsel of God: And who were they in the times of Christ,
and his Apostles, that did reject the Gospel, and the way and Ordinances of the
Gospel; were they not the proud Scribes and Pharisees, who rejected the visible
way of the Gospel, and were they not rejected of the Lord for their
wickedness, for contemning the Ordinances of the Gospel: they despised the way
of the Gospel, but the Lord despised them for it, and cast them out as
contemptible: and do not thou follow the steps of thy forefathers, to
contemn the way and Ordinances of the Gospel, as they did, that thou might
fall into the same condemnation.

12. Those that had received the highest seize, walked in a visible way
and profession, even such as had received the Holy Ghost, and were able to
speak infallibly, to work miracles, and to speak with new tongues; yet these
walked in a visible worship, and were baptized, did partake of the Supper, and
walked in a Church way; for the fullness of the Spirit, does not take away thy
obedience, but rather makes thee more obedient, art thou as full of the Spirit
as Christ? and yet he walked in a visible way and commanded his Apostles to set
forth a visible way of worship to the world to be practiced in every Age.

Again, have thou as much of the Spirit of God as the Apostles of Christ, and
yet they worshipped God in a visible way; art thou too good to walk in that way
that the Apostles of Christ walked in? or can thou produce a better way then
they walked in? can thou find out a more holy way then they did? or can
thou find out a more soule-saving way? can thou set forth a better Christ,
and a better Gospel, and a more spiritual way? produce it if thou can, and
we will believe thee; but if thou can not find out a better way then Christ
and his Apostles have set forth; then what do thou contend for, for a worse
way? if thou can not find a better way, then why do thou forsake this? It
is a sign thou art weary of serving God: who will thou serve next, but the
Serpent and thy self; thou contemnest the Scripture and the way of the
Scripture, that thou might serve the Devil, and thy self: how do thou
villifie Christ and his Apostles? surely thou art not of God, but of thy father
the Devil, for his works thou do: Can thou find a better way then Christ
and his Apostles walked in? can thou find more spiritual men then they
were, or more precious examples to follow, who were patterns of all goodness?
was their way so carnal as thou makes it? what carnal honors and riches had
they by walking in that way? what ptaise had they of the world? If their way
were so carnal, as thou would make it, then why did not all the world
receive it? they are apt enough to embrace a carnal way for their fleshly
advantage, thou need not much persuade them what way is more contrary to all
the world then the way of Christ, and his Apostles; whereby it does appear to
be a truth, because it is hated of all the world.

Lastly, The letter of the Scripture will tell thee there is a visible worship;
for how could thou know what visible or invisible meant, but by the letter
of the word? or how could thou tell what worship meant, but by the word?
does not the letter of the word tell thee all things? did God ever speak to
thee without a letter? then what word did he speak? God never spoke nonsense?
but if he spoke without a letter, then he spoke nonsense: And thou would be
a blasphemer to say so, for no word can be made without letters, and thou can
compact no word without a letter: when God gave Adam a Law, he taught him to
read it; and thou must read thy A, B, C, before thou can read plain, and
must learn thy letters plain, before thou can speak plain; and I think thou
have hardly learned thy A, B, C, for thou can hardly read plain, and yet
thou do despise the letter of thy Learning, for how would thou know that
God Created all things in six days, but by the Letter? and how would thou
know what God did every day, but by the Letter? and how could thou know that
the Heaven was called Heaven, and the Earth was called Earth, but by the
Letter? and how could thou know the name of the Sun, or the name of the
Moon, and Stars, but by the Letter that calls them so? and how did thou know
the names of Day, and Night without the Letter? and how come thou to know
the names of the Creatures both in the Air, as the Fowls of the Air, and the
names of the Beasts of the Field, with the Fishes in the Sea? how come thou
to know the names of all these? does not the Letter of the the Word tell thee?
or else, how could thou know their names?

Again, how do thou know there was an Adam and Eve, but by the Letter? and
how do thou know the world was destroyed by Water at Noah's flood, but by the
Letter of the Word? and how do thou know that Noah, and his Family were saved
in the Arc, but by the Letter? and how do thou know there was an Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, but by the Letter? that there was a Moses, and the Law of
Moses? a people of Israel, that were in Egypt, and came into tht Land of
Canaan, does not the Letter tell thee this, or else how could thou know it?
and here I might be large, to teach thee to learn thy Letters, and to know the
Letter of the Scripture; but thy pride will stop thy learning, and yet I shall
leave thee without excuse. How come thou to know there is a Christ, but by
the letter of the Word? and how came thou to know that Christ dyed, and rose
again, and ascended into Heaven, but by the Letter of the Word? and how
know thou what Christ dyed for, that he came to save Sinners, and to open a
door of Salvation to the world, and that there is Salvation in him for
sinners? How came thou to know all this, but by the Letter of the Word? and
how come thou to know there is a Gospel, and Grace, Mercy, and Salvation
held forth in this Gospel, but by the Letter? And then again, how come
thou to know that there is a Heaven, and a Hell, and that there shall be a
Resurrection, and a Judgment, and that thou shall rise at the last Day? How
come thou to know all these things, but by the Letter of the Word? sure
had thou learned the Letter better, thou would not have despised thy
Master; it is the Letter of the Word of God, that has taught thee what thou
have, and thou art a good Scholar to despise thy Master; How do thou know
that there is sin, but by the Letter? and that there is a Devil, and that
the Devil and wicked men shall be punished for ever, and that the godly shall
be blessed for ever? How come thou to know all these things, but by the
Letter of the Word? thou may thank the Letter of the Word for all thy
knowledge, or else thou might have been like unto the East Indians, that
know not their right hand from their left, for it is the Letter of the Word
that has taught thee thy wisdom, and the Devil has taught thee thy pride,
and yet I wish thee better then thou do thy self, for the Letter of the
Scripture would feign keep thee, and yet I think the Devil will take thee.

And yet I shall speak a word or two more for visible worship, for ought we
not to serve God as well with our bodies as with our hearts? Can we ^erve God
within; and the Devil without? sure no man can serve two Masters, for out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; for thou show by thy words
what is within; for as thy heart is, so are thy words, but it is a sign there
is no worship in thy heart, because there is none in thy words; or else thou
do dissemble with thy self. Why ought we not as well to serve God in our
Bodies as in our Souls? Will the worship of God hinder us? and why cannot we
know as much in a visible way as thou do out? Do thou think that the
Worship of the Gospel, and the Laws and Ordinances thereof, does hinder us
from knowing the mind of God? sure this is but the doctrine of the Serpent;
for our obedience to the Commands of Jesus Christ does not hinder us, but
further us to know his mind: For, the humble he will teach, and he rejects
the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

Our living in the Commands of Christ will not hinder us, but help us to know
the mind of God; for the Promise is to such as walk in his way, and that he
that does his Will shall know his mind; and therefore it does appear, that
the Commands of Christ does not hinder us from knowing the Mysteries of God:
thou would take us off of our obedience from serving of God, to serve the
Devil; for the Devil has deceived thee, and thou would deceive; as thou
would bring us out of order into confusion, to walk in confusion like thy
self; thou art of no Religion, and yet thou can be of any; and thy Religion
changes as often as thy thoughts; thou art restless in thy thoughts, and
restless in thy life, and also as restless in thy comforts; for thou art in
Babylon, and the height of confusion, for thou live a confused life, thou
lie in confusion, and there thou live; how long will thou walk in
confusion? will thou not return into order lest thou dye in confusion, and
fall into the wrath and anger of Jehovah.

FINIS.
A Postscript to a Party called Seekers, or those that call themselves Madmen,
which deny the Bible to be Scripture, or the Word of GOD.
THE Devil has always in all Ages sought to blind the eyes of the people,
for he can fit himself for all Ages; and he is more subtle in this Age, then
in other Ages; and the reason I conceive is this, because people are come to
see further then they have done in former times into the word of God, and his
worship* and therefore it is the subtilty of Satan in these days to seek to
take us off all worship and to deny the Bible to be the word of God, and so
teaches men to deny that there is any rule to walk by, but that every man may
walk according to the dictates of his own heart, and as it seems good in
his own eyes; and this is a pleasing bait to take the world with: and here the
old Serpent does prevail, and snares the sons of men; for this is the day he
looks for, if he can take men off the word, that thereby they may deny all
Scriptures, and all Visible Worship, then they will be his own children of the
tribe of disobedience, begotten by the seed of the Serpent, and traveling
toward the land of confusion, that they may arrive at the anger of God; and
because the word is made so contemptible in these days, I shall endeavor for
the strengthening of some, and the confirming of others, to give you some
reasons, wherefore the things contained in the Bible, are the word of God.

And first, by the works of Creation, it does appear that this is a truth; for
if the Lord has taken so much care of the works of Creation to preserve them,
do you think that his care will be less to preserve his Word? Does not he
magnify his Name, and his word above all things? Psalm. 138. 2. And has he not
more care of his word with the letters and sillables thereof, then of the
Stars of heaven? for if his care be so great to preserve the works of
Creation; how much more shall his care be to preserve his Word? whereby his
Name and Power might be known to all Nations.

2 If the Letter and Word of the Old Testament were not true, then what
privilege had the Jews which the Apostle speaks of in Romans 3. 1. 2. That unto
them were committed the Oracles of God: now what praise is to the Jews, if
their Oracles were not true? then they had little privilege above the
Gentiles, which is so much spoken of; for if the Letter and Word be corrupted,
then what was their privilege above other Nations?

3 These sixteen hundred years, and more, since the Jews have been cast off
from being the Church of God, and have been scattered for their sins upon the
face of the whole earth, and have been the greatest enemies to the Gospel of
any people; and yet for all this, it cannot be proved that they have corrupted
the Scripture, but that the Hebrew Text remains as it was in the Apostles
days; and shall we think that they were less careful in former times when
they were the Church of God? for they have been these many years so careful,
that if any fault escaped the Scribe, that Book was not allowed to be read in
their Synagogue, until it were corrected: for they have these rules, that if
the Book of the Law want but a letter; or if the form of any letter be not
perfect, it was for children, and not for Church. Maim in Sepher Torah C. 10.

4 What is 70 years to corrupt all Copies; when as a Copy written on Parchment
as their manner was, will endure many 70 years entire? Jeremiah, with some
Jews, remained a while in the Land; and Ezekiel, Daniel, with many godly men
that were in Babylon, with Ezra that learned Priest, and Scribe, came with the
people out of Babylon, and they had also other Prophets amongst them, as
Haggai, Zachariah, and Malachi; and how do you think that the Word should be
corrupted, having such a glorious company, both of Prophets, Scribes, and wise
men? whereby it does appear, that the Scripture is not corrupted, but does
remain the Word of God.

5 Does not Christ reprove the Priests, and Scribes, with the Pharisees, for
corrupting the Law by wrong interpretation, as you may see, Matthew. 5. 15. and
23? Now it does appear, if they had violated and falsified the Scriptures,
that Christ would have reproved them for it; would not Christ have told them
saying, you have falsified the Scripture? but he does not, and therefore it
does appear that the Scriptures are true.

6 If the Scriptures of the Old Testament had been false, would Christ have
exhorted them to have read the Scriptures, Luke 16 John 5. 2 Pet. 1? If they
had been wrong, would not Christ and his Apostles have left a perfect Canon of
the word to the Church, and to all the world? but we see that Christ does
confirm the Law in every point, Mat. 5. 18. And therefore it does appear that
the Bible is true.

7 It cannot appear that the Bible should be corrupted since, for besides the
Apostles, there were many thousand of learned Jews, and the Churches of the
Jews that came to profess the Gospel, Act. 21. 20. James 1. 1. and the truth
being so gloriously planted, that it does appear that the word could not be
corrupted since.

8 It does appear that the Bible is the word of God, because it holds out
holiness more then any Book in the world; for there is no Book in the world
parallel with it, in respect of holiness, whereby it does appear that it is
the word of God.

9 It does appear that the Scriptures in the Original Text are the word of
God, because they hold forth a self-denying creature, more then any Book
besides in the world; and therefore it does appear that it is the word of God.

10 There is nothing in the world that does discover the wicked ways of men
more then the Scripture does, and therefore it does appear that it is the Word
of God, because there is no Book more excellent to discover the wickedness of
the Creature.

11 In respect of the matter of the Scripture, whereby it does appear to be
the Word of God, for there cannot be more glorious matter for the Creature to
be centered upon, whereby it does appear to be the Word of God.

12 The right justice and judgment in the Word does make it appear to be the
Word of God, in holding forth such pure justice and judgment as all the Books
in the world cannot, nor do not hold forth the same, whereby it does appear
to be the Word of God.

13 Gods preservation of the Scriptures in all Ages does make it appear that
it is the Word of God, so as all the enemies thereof were not able to destroy
it, nor yet are, although the Scriptures have had many thousands of enemies;
and being so wonderfully preserved in all Ages, against all opposers, does make
it appear that it is the Word of God.

14 The Scriptures, or Bible does appear to be the Word of God, because those
things that have been prophesied of therein, have come to pass in all Ages,
and things have fallen out in every Age according to their several Prophesies;
and all this being so, does make it plainly appear, that the Scriptures are
the Word of God.

15 By the powerful effects that the Word has wrought, and does yet work
upon the hearts and Consciences of men, as to avoid the evil, and to choose the
good, does make it appear to be the Scripture of God, in respect of the
wonderful effects that have been wrought thereby in all ages.

16 It does appear it is not the word of the Devil, because it does discover
his wicked names and titles, as also his wicked nature, with the terrible
Judgments that are prescribed against him, all which does make it appear that
it is the Word of God; for most certain it is, that the Devil would never
speak against himself, to judge himself, were there not a greater to
discover and to judge him, which is the Word of God.

17 It does appear that it is not the Word of man, because it holds forth the
wickedness of the Creature; as also his eternal Judgment; and most apparent
it is, that the Creature would never condemn himself eternally, were there
not a greater to condemn him, which is the Word of God*

And now because those that deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, are
grounded upon nothing but their own Dictates, which is the ground of their
principles, whereby they say, they know all things; because they say, God is in
them, and that they know that which God knows; therefore to the chiefest of
these I shall prescribe some work, because they say, they know all things, to
answer to these questions or quaeries: And,

1 Whether is that precept, enjoined by Christ, to go preach, and baptize? and
if you say it is, then where, and when ceased?

2 Whether does not the visible Creation hold forth a visible Worship? and
whether shall a visible Worship cease until the visible Creation cease? etc.

Richard Stookes.

FINIS.

