Die Mercurii 6. November. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled; That this House
does hereby return thanks to Mr. Strickland, for his great pains taken in the
Sermon preached by him yesterday, being the fifth of November, in the Abbey
Church, Westminster, before their Lordships; who is desired to print and
publish the same. And it is farther Ordered, that none shall Print, or reprint,
the said Sermon, unless he be authorized under the hand of the said Mr.
Strickland.

Jo: Brown Cler: Parliament.

I do Authorize Mr Henry Overton to print this Sermon.

JOHN STRICKLAND.

IMMANVEL, OR THE CHURCH TRIUMPHING IN GOD WITH US.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable House of LORDS, in the Abbey of
Westminster; at their public Thanksgiving, November 5th 1644.

By JOHN STRICKLAND, B. D. Pastor of the Church at St EDMUNDS in NEW SARUM. A
Member of the Assembly of Divines.

PSALM. 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton, at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley, 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS, NOW ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT AT WESTMINSTER.
MY LORDS;
BEsides your Appointment (which carries the sacred authority of a command
with me) there are three things somewhat incline me to yield this Sermon to the
Press, notwithstanding, the just sense I have of mine own weakness, and its
unworthiness.

First, The birthday of it, allowed not sufficient time for a full delivery,
your Lordships great occasions after the Morning Sermon, so straightened the time
of your Evening-Sacrifice, that by your late coming together, I was compelled
wholly to lay aside some parts, and to deliver the rest by pieces Raptim, as I
could in such haste: Now the Press has given me leave a little better to
gather the materials, which then I scattered, and to couple all into some
better proportion by the sinews of coherence, that I may present you with the
entire (though yet unpolished) body of my Meditations intended for you

Secondly, The matter which was suited to a day of Praises before your
Loraships, may be very useful (if not necessary) at all times; Even now A Fast
observed by both Houses of Parliament.
when You are putting on Your mourning-garments, and when the whole Kingdom
seems to be in a more sad posture then it was November. 5th. Our praising God for
his being with us in a thanksgiving-day, may effectually admonish and prepare
us to mourn after Gods presence, in a day of humiliation with more
affectionatenesse. For as it is true, Monendo laudat, it is likewise true
inverted, Laudando monet. Yea, the paying of God his due tribute of praise for
the great things he has done, is the way to engage him to do greater things
for us in a future time of need, if we do it heartily: it ministers courage
and resolution in the cause, and gives an unconquerable strength to our faith
in expectation of a happy end. Iehosaphat therefore made the praising of God a
part of his preparation to battle, when a dreadful Army of enemies came
against him, 2 Chronicles. 20.21.
2 Chronicles. 20.21. He appointed Singers unto the Lord, that should praise the
beauty of holiness, as they went out before the Army, and to say, Praise the
Lord, for his mercy indureth for ever. And it was not in vain, their praising
God prevailed, as if it had been praying to him; Ver. 22.
for ver. 22. When they began to Sing, the Lord set Ambushments against the
Children of Ammon, and Moab, and Mount-Seir, and they were smitten. We are
behind with God in this, above other duties: Nature and self-love can prevail
with us, to a kind of prayer in time of distress, because that is the ordinary
known way to obtain relief; but praising God is a more refined and
spiritual duty above Nature, and requires both purity and strength of grace
to be well performed. It Is not impossible, but this plain and homespun
Discourse, may stir up the endeavors of some in this neglected duty; one of
ten to return, and give God praise; and so contribute somewhat unto public
benefit. Be not You guilty of unthankfulness to God, (most Noble Peers) lest
the Lord lose his end in bringing in public mercies, lest we fare the worse,
and prevail the less in a good cause; yea, lest you bring evil upon the
Land; as Hezekiah did, by not rendering again according to the benefit done
unto him; for, therefore was wrath come upon him, ^ Chron. 32.25.
and upon Judah, and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32.25.

Thirdly, You are the Men (my Lords) with whom God will plead the Kingdoms
cause, and through whom, in this great Controversy now on foot, we look for
Gods presence with England, by Gods being in your Counsels, and by his
blessing of your martial affairs, we all say, The Lord of Hosts is with us.
It much concerns you, it much concerns us all, that You earnestly seek after,
and carefully keep God with you in your great employments, and that we all
strive by prayer for Gods presence with You, that God may stand and judge in
the Assembly of our gods; and therefore do I thus humbly present this poor
piece to Your Noble acceptance and patronage, that it might happily put You in
remembrance of your duty, if You cast your eye upon it, or the people of
theirs, in praying for You, that God may be with You in the great work of
Church and State; which is, and shall be daily the prayer of

The meanest of those that serve You in the Lord, JOHN STRICKLAND.

IMMANUEL, OR, THE CHURCH TRIUMPHING IN GOD WITH US.
PSALM. 46.7. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge.


THE mention of the sons of Korah in the Title, and of the earths removing,
and the mountains shaking, ver. 2. and 3. seems somewhat to countenance the
opinion that the sons of Korah penned the Psalm, upon their deliverance,
when the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up their father, Numb. 16.32.
Muscu^^s.
Others conceive it penned by David, or some other, upon a notable deliverance
of the Church from the Ammonites, Moabites, and Syrians, in the days of David,
recorded 2 Samuel 10. But most probably the miraculous (...).
deliverance of the Church from the Assyrians, in the time of Hezekiah, when
the Lord by the hand of an Angel from heaven slew in one night 185000. of the
enemy, as the History makes it appear, 2 King. 19.35. This (I say) was
probably the occasion, but whether David, or some other was the Penman of this
Psalm, as it is not determined, so is it not material to our purpose. However
it is (...), a Psalm of praise, or triumphall Song, wherein the Church
rejoices in the Lord, giving him not only the praise of her experience for a
deliverance received, but also the praise of her hope and confidence for the
future, setting him up as a perpetual and standing refuge to the Church in all
succeeding generations, wherein she shall be kept secure and unmoved: God is
in the midst of her, she shall not be moved. Ver. 5.
Ver. 5. Though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into the
midst of the Sea. For he is not only a rock, against which the gates of hell
cannot prevail; but he is watchful and always ready at the Churches right
hand in the time of danger, Psalm. 110.5. Ju^ius.
Auxilium praesentissimum, a very present help, that never comes too late. This
the Church had late experience of, how easily he could defeat her enemies when
they rose up in greatest rage and fury, ver. 6. The heathen raged; the
kingdoms were moved; he uttered his voice; the earth melted; and therefore
she makes this the maine of her dittie, while she triumphs over fears, and
dangers, and enemies in the Text, The Lord of Hosts is with us, etc.

The words are a kind of Chorus or burden in this Song of praise, once and
again repeated, as being that strain wherein the Church (now big with praises
could best deliver her self: in them note 2 generals, viz. 1. What it is
wherein the Church so triumphantly rejoices in, Gods presence and protection;
He is with us, He is our refuge. 2. Why Gods presence is matter of such joy and
triumph to the Church: and there be two grounds thereof, viz. 1. He is the
general Sovereign, having all creatures at command: Lord of Hosts; therefore
he can help her. 2. He is God in Covenant with the Church, The God of Jacob;
therefore he will never fail her.



Words opened. Lord of hosts
Lord of Hosts] or Lord of the Armies of creatures, whether visible or
invisible, whether creatures in heaven or earth; for so largely the word is
taken, Genesis 2. 1. The heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of
them: They are called Hosts in respect of their multitude, order, and obedience
to their Maker; Creaturae scu^ Deo conserantur, sunt tanqua^ milites nutum
ducis expectantes. Arist. alicu^^ in Metaph
as an Army in martial order or battalia, ready to fall on when or where the
word of command from their General shall require: And though some conceive,
that name may be given unto God upon a more special ground, as having a more
especial hand in disposing Armies, and ordering the events of war, yet the
former and more general interpretation of this style in relation to all the
creatures, as it is particularly set forth Psalm. 148.2. etc. whereby is holden
our Gods universal dominion and sovereignty over them all, suites better with
the Churches purpose in this place.

Is with us.
Is with us] These words hold out Gods presence with the Church; But what
privilege may that be? since God is every where, in heaven above, in hell
beneath, and in the utmost parts of the earth and Sea, Psalm. 139.8, Psalm.
139.8, 9.
9. Am I a God near at hand, and not a God far off? Jer. 23.23, 24.
Do not I ^^ll heaven and earth? says the Lord, Jer. 23.23, 24. Yea, it is
his nature, and it cannot be otherwise, An^^^^^
Deus in se no^ recipit locorum, vel temporum distinclionem, says one: what
advantage then that God is with his Church, seeing he is also with her enemies?

Two-sold presence of God.
For clearing this phrase, we must observe there is a two-sold presence of God;
first, his general and common presence, whereby he is re^^ t^^^ in all places
and things without distinction or difference, which is Gods omnipresence, in
which kind of presence to have God with her is no peculiar privilege of the
Church. Secondly, there is a special presence of God, or his presence
testified by some remarkable works or special demonstrations, Effective,
whereby God may be so present in some places and things, as he is not in
others, in which kind to enjoy the presence of God (so it be in away of mercy)
is a special privilege.

Three fold special presence.
Again, There be three sorts of Gods special presence, all which may be justly
accounted the Churches privilege. First, His glorious presence, or his
presence testified by eminent glory, and the residence thereof. Thus God is
said to be in heaven differentially, so as he is not any where else; and heaven
is therefore called his throne or dwelling place, 1 King 8.39.
1 King. 8.39. As a King is no where so majestically, as upon his throne, or in
his Chair of state; and this is so great a privilege of the Church, as that
she comes not to enjoy joy it, until she be triumphant in heaven, and
therefore is not the presence here intended.

Secondly, His gracious presence, Sam. 6.2. 2 Samuel 6.2.
or spiritual tokens of his grace, as assistance and acceptance in the duties
of his worship, together with enjoyment and benefit of his Ordinances. Thus he
is present with his Church and people in times of the Gospel, Mat. 18.20
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them, Mat. 18.20. This kind of presence is a privilege of the Church
militant, that he will be with her in holy and spiritual administrations and
Ordinances; yet this is not the presence principally intended here.

Thirdly, His providentiall presence, Israel in the Wilderness by the pillar
of fire and of a cloud, Exodus 13.21. Exodus 13.21.
And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the
way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light. And as this presence
was intended for a guide, so was it also for a defense to his people against
their enemies, and at which their enemies, the Egyptians, were troubled, Exodus
14.20. Exodus 14.20.
By this kind of presence the Lord is with his Church militant, in reference to
her external regiment, and more especially in her warfare, standing up for her
and with her, against her enemies: and this is the Churches privilege in these
words, The Lord of Hosts is with us.

The God of Jacob.
The God of Jacob] Jacob is in Scripture sometime the name of a person,
sometime the name of a people. It is the proper name of Abraham's grandchild
(the fathe of the Patriarchs) and one of the feoffees in trust for the
covenant of grace, together with Abraham and Isaac. And if any shall ask me,
why then the God of Jacob, more then the God of Isaac? shough it might suffice
that the Spirit of God is pleased so to speak, yet Mr Calvin gives this
reason, (...) ^r (...) is ^^r^^^p^ ^u^^^ ^ed mag^^ ^o^^^, (...) of ^der is um
A^^^^^^ (...) Calvin in Isaiam.
the covenant of grace was more solemnly made and publicly ratified with
Abraham and Jacob, then it was with Isaac, and therefore when he will be looked
upon as a God in covenant with his people, he holds forth himself more
frequently by the name of the God of Abraham, and the God of Jacob, then of the
God of Isaac; albeit, sometime he is pleased to take upon him that style also:
As a common name it carries in the compass of it all the people of God in
those times that were the children of Abraham, Isa. 14.1. The Lord will have
mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, ^^a. 14.1.
and set them in their own land: And by representation it is to be taken, for
the Church and people of God in all ages, with her he is in covenant: So that
this phrase, the God of Jacob, does import the near interest that is between
God and his Church by covenant, which makes her thus triumph in him, the God of
Jacob.

Our refuge.
Our refuge] or strong hold, where the Church as a Ship in quiet haven may
anchor and ride safe: or it may be a metaphor from the dens or burroughes
where weaponlesse creatures find shelter when they are hunted and pursued by
their enemies: Pro. 30.26.
as Prove. 30.26. The conies are but a feeble folk, yet make they their houses
in the rocks. They are safe in the rock if they can get thither, tho never so
weak in themselves. So the Church, though pursued by bloody enemies, and though
weak in her self, if yet she get under the wing of the God of Jacob, she may be
fearlesse, for she is safe there, he is our refuge.

The sense of all together, is briefly thus; That God, who by a Sovereign
power has every creature at his command, is effectually with us by a special
presence of his providence, whereby he will not only aid us in time of
opposition, and desend us in time of danger, but fight for us, and destroy our
enemies; And this he will not fail to do for ever, because he is engaged to
us by an everlasting covenant of his own free grace. In the sense and
experience of this the Church cannot choose but break out again and again in
this joyful ditty; The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob, etc.

The words thus opened, with relation to ver. 6. where the church had
experience of God with her, when her enemies rose up in rage against her, offer
this point; In times of opposition, God sides with his Church, and takes part
with his people against their enemies.

With assurance of this truth, the Lord encouraged Israel to go out against
their enemies to battle, Deuteronomy. 20.3, 4.
Deuteronomy. 20.3, 4. He appointed the Priest when they came nigh unto the battle to
say; Hear, O Israel, you approach this day unto battle against your enemies,
let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye
terrified because of them, for the Lord your God is he that goes with you, to
fight for you against your enemies, to save you. Which promise, though it was
made to Israel only in the time of their wars, concerned the Church in
succeeding ages, being hereditary to Israel in the mystery as well as to Israel
in the letter: As may appear in that David long after, in his experience found
this promise verified in Gods rising up with him against the enemies of the
Church in his time, that opposed his kingdom and government, whereby he was so
much encouraged, Psalm 118.^ 7
Psalm. 118.6, 7. The Lord is on my side, I will not ^eare; what can man do
unto me? the Lord takes my part with them that help me therefore shall I see
my desire on them that ^ate me. (...) Mu^^u^^^ in lo^^^^.
He was (I say) so much herewith encouraged, Ut de eo considenter gloriatur,
fuerat enim id saepenumero ^e ipsa expertu^, says one, He glories in it
against all his enemies, were they never so many, and his helpers never so few.
This advantage of having God to take his part, raised up his spirit above all
the odds that were between him and the uncircumcised Goliath; and it is notable
to observe what a description of God David sets before the eye of his faith
when he was to enter the lists with that Philistim, 1 Samuel 17.45.
1 Samuel 17.45. Thou come to me with a sword and with a spear, and with a
shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the
armies of Israel, whom thou have defied: he sets God forth in his soveraigntie
over all creatures, whereby he commands and rules over enemies, and in his
relation to the Church, whereby he stands engaged to assist and maintain those
that stand up in her cause, which David looks upon as more then all those
weapons Pro istis omn^bus unu^ tantum te^um hab^o, sed m^ximi pond^^is, n^me
Do^^i. Peter Martyr.
that Goliath brought into the field against him: for God will not fail to use
both the one and the other, as the Church in her need shall require, he will
bridle her enemies by divisio^, if there be no other way to restrain them, and
he will send from heaven to keep them play, if there want humane help to manage
her cause against them. See Calvin on place.
Of both which we may see an experiment, when Cambyses became a Persian scourge
unto the Church, the Lord sends first a single Angel, then Michael the Prince,
to divert him; and in after-ages he raised up the Prince of Graecia to oppose
the Persian, lest he should have oppressed the Church with his might, Dan.
10.13.20, 21. Gods fiding with his Church appears in three things.
Dan. 10.13.20, 21. And as this is a truth in it self, so the Lord is pleased
to manifest it by the Churches experience in three things.

First, In that God upholds his Church and people from ruin in the midst of
destructive miseries, Ps. 124.1, 2, 3.
Psalm. 124.1, 2, 3. in reference unto those manifold insurrections which the
heathen made against the Church, not only in the time of David: If it had not
been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say, if it had not been the
Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Such were our enemies, and such
our danger, that if the Lord had not taken our part, if any other had taken our
part, and not the Lord, we had been ruined.

Pontib devolutus est quo^ ad religiosi principis paraverat ex^tium. Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. lib 9. cap. 9.
as Maxentius to deceive Constantine, and his Army, made a false bridge over
Tiber, where Constantine should pass, but forgetting his own treachery, he and
his own Soldiers passing that way were drowned. Wherein the Psalmist thinks
the hand of God cannot but be acknowledged, Psalm. 9.15, 16.
Psalm. 9.15, 16. The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the
net which they bid, is their own foot taken; the Lord is known by the
judgment which he executes: the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands; Higgaion, Selah. He puts (as it were an asterist upon this passage, such
as we find not in any but in this and Ps. 92.4. [Higgaion Selah] (which whether
it notes a difference in the rune wherein the Psalm was sung, as some
conceive, See Mu^culus he A^sworth (...) locum.
or whether it signifies the fitness of the matter for more then ordinary
meditation, as Junius renders it, Rem sum meditandam, (and some Meditation
Selah) it imports the eminency of Gods hand, when he catches the enemies of
Gods church in their own craft. The Ecclesiastical History mentions a
memorable passage of providence to this purpose toward the good Emperor
Theodosius; when the enemies had sent a shower of arrows against him, by a
sudden and strong wind, they were driven back, and fell upon the enemies
themselves, to their own prejudice; insomuch that the Poet proclaims it as an
act of Heaven done in love to Theodosius.

O nimium dilecte Deo, C^^^^ian.
cui militat aethe^,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti!
dubio Mart, and when she has been hard beset with enemies; Thus he appeared
for the two Tribes and half when they made war with the Hagarites, with
Jetur, and Nephish, and Nodab, the generations of Ishmael; it was not only
brought unto a battle, but it seems the two Tribes and half were sore put to
it, they were driven to cry unto God by prayer, even in the battle, but at
length the Lord took their part, and gave them the day. 1 Chronicles. 5.19, 20.
1 Chronicles. 5.19, 20. And they were helped against them, and the Hagarites were
delivered into their hand, and all that were with them; for they cried to God
in the battle, and he was entreated of them, because they put their trust in
him. He did in like manner appear to take part with Israel against Amalek, who
were so hardly matched, that they could never prevail, but when the succor of
prayer came inn to their aid, that is to say, when God was entreated to take
their part, Exodus 17.11.
Exodus 17.11. We have seen the truth, let us next look upon the equity of the
point, why God should take part with his people.

Babylon (after inquiry) could take of persecuting Daniel, was something of
God, as appears by their consultation, Dan. 6.5.
Dan. 6.5. Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against this
Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God: And when
the Church in misery would stir up the Lord to her assistance, she presents
this as an argument that she was persecuted for his sake, Psalm. 44.22.
Psalm. 44.22. For thy sake are we killed all the day. In all the persecutions
of the Church upon record in Scripture (as far as I have observed) that which
ever stirred up the malice of the enemy, has been Divinum aliquid, somewhat of
God: have patience I beseech you, to glaunce upon a few particulars.

That which caused those wicked enemies in the time of Artaxerxes, so to envy
and oppose the people of God, was that they were going about a Temple for the
worship of God, Ezra 4.1.
Ezra 4.1. When the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children
of the captivity build^d the Temple unto the Lord God of Israel; then the
Chancellor, and the Scribe, and a wicked crew, took counsel how to weaken
their hands, and to trouble them; as appears in the following verses. In the
time of Ahasuerus, Haman, and his confederates persecuted the people of the
Jews for worshipping God according to his own will, Esth. 3.8, 9.
Esth. 3.8, 9. Daniel was persecuted, and the Article upon which he was
accused, was, that he prayed three times a day, Dan. 6.13.
Dan. 6.13. The cause why the Apostles were so hardly handled, as to be beaten
(and for which (if Gamaliel had not been) their lives should have been taken
away) was, that they preached in the Name of Jesus Christ, Act. 5.28.
Act. 5.28. And the three Children were by their enemies persecuted into the
fiery furnace, for no other cause, but refusing to break the commandment of
God, who had forbidden them to worship any image of silver or gold, Dan. 3 12.
Dan. 3.12. How truly said the Church before? For thy sake are we killed all
the day? which cannot but be a prevailing argument with God to take their part;
and therefore David uses it in behalf of the Church, Ps. 74.21, 22.
Psalm. 74.21, 22. O let not the oppressed return ashamed; Arise, O God,
maintain thine own cause; remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily:
He is engaged to stand up and maintain the cause wherein his Church suffers;
She may say, as Josephus reports one Herod spoke to his soldiers; Our cause is
just, though we be weak and few; and where truth and justice is, there is God,
and where God is, there is both multitude and fortitude. And as God is engaged
in the Churches cause, so is he engaged against her enemies, as being his
enemies as well as hers. So the Spirit taught the Psalmist to call them, Psalm.
74.4.
Psalm. 74.4. Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy Congregations; they set
up their Banners for signs.

the God of Jacob, and thereby the Churches refuge in trouble; she is by
covenant his peculiar; by which covenant he promises to have common friends and
common enemies with her; Genesis 12.3.
Genesis 12.3. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses
thee. He speaks here after the manner of Kings, when they made a mutual
confederacy, Sol^nnis foed^rum inter reges formula, ut c^sdem sibi fore hosts
and amicos mutuo promittant. Calvin.
they promised to have the same friends mutually, and the same enemies. Being
in covenant with her, he looks upon the Church as the mystical body of Christ,
the least member whereof, he will as surely defend, as he did the least bone of
his natural body, which he would not suffer to be broken: as tender to him as
the apple of a man's eye is to him, Zach. 2.8. How did the Lord take poor man's
part against all spiritual enemies, when he ransomed his soul from the gates
of death! When Cyrus demanded of Tigranes (who came to redeem his wife that had
been brought into captivity) what ransom he would give for her, he answered
he would redeem her liberty with his own life: So God having espoused the
Church unto himself by covenant, was willing to redeem her liberty with his
own blood, Act. 20.28.

Besides the general covenant, the Lord has engaged himself to take the
Churches part, by particular and special promises; as, Josh. 1.5.
Josh. 1.5. I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee; though spoken to Joshua,
yet intended to every member of the Church of God; and so applied, Heb. 13.5.
as also Isa. 43.2, 3. Thou art mine, Isa. 43.2, 3.
when thou passest thorough the waters, I will be with thee, and thorough the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk thorough the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord
thy God, the holy One of Israel thy Savior. Whether the Prophet alludes unto
the Israelites passage thorough the red Sea, when Pharaoh and the Egyptians
pursued them, and wherein God miraculously preserved and delivered his Church,
I know not; sure I am, water and fire are usual (though figurative)
expressions in Scripture of the Churches enemies and persecutions, wherein God
promises to undertake for her; Isa. 59.19.
as, Isa. 59.19. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the
Lord shall lift up a Standard against them. He will raise up enough to oppose
them; he will (as the Psalmist speaks) give a banner that it may be displayed:
the Spirit of the Lord; either the Spirit of prayer shall do it by bringing in
relief from heaven, or the Spirit of power, whereby God will stretch out his
own arm to fight against them, when by the Spirit of prayer he has stirred up
his people to call upon him.

to behold the works of the Lord, (as ver: following the text) and to consider
how comfortably God has given us experience of this truth, that we may more
clearly see what grounds we have of rejoicing this day, and so sing praises
with understanding. We shall find cause enough to say with David, Psalm. 92.4.
Psalm. 92.4.
Thou Lord have made us glad through thy works, and we will triumph in the
works of thy hands. And again to say with Moses, Exodus 15. The Lord is our
strength, and our song, and is become our salvation: Who is like unto thee, O
Lord, amongst the gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders? God has opened unto us a treasury of mercies, old and
new.

Old mercies.
We have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us, what God has done for
us in their days, in the times of old, how he took our part when destruction
was coming full sail against us in 88. and scattered the Armado, proudly
called Invincible. The enemy said, as Pharaoh, Exodus 15.9. I will pursue, Exodus
15 9.
I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust shall be satisfied upon
them: I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them: but the Lord blowed
with his wind, Ver. 10.
ver. 10. and disappointed them, so that in saving us and our Nation from that
Spanish fury, the Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice.

This day puts us in mind of another, never to be forgotten, deliverance from
popish treachery, more admirable then the former, which was from open violence;
of which we may say (as Hannibal was wont to say of two famous Roman Captains,
Magis se a non pugnante Fabio, quam a pugna^te Marcello timere.
he feared more Fabius not fighting, then fighting Marcellus) our danger was
the greater in the powder treason, because secrecy made the blow more
unavoidable, and had not been discovered but by the eye of heaven: it was a
treachery that wants a name to express it, unless you will call it (as one
does) by the name of a Catholic villa^y. Learned endeavors have been made to
find a parallel in former Histories, but this deliverance stands alone, and is
a Nonesuch. The Text handled in the morning Sermon.
Such a deliverance as you heard in the morning, Ezra 9.13, 14. We may
therefore mutato nomine, not only make it our song this day, but bequeath unto
posterity, for a perpetual Song of Englands praise, that of Psalm. 124.1, 2,
3. Psalm. 124.1 2, 3.
If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may England say, if it
had not been the Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against us, then
they had swallowed us up quick: but blessed be the Lord, who has not given us
as a prey unto their teeth: Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of
the fowler, Ver. 6, 7.
the snare is broken, and we are delivered.

New mercies.
Besides these ancient mercies, which we have by descent from our ancestors, God
has taken our part in these days of Jacobs trouble; how many infernal
conspiracies (well-night as dark and deep as the Powder Treason) have been
lately defeated? Which nothing but the eye of heaven could have seen, nothing
but the hand of heaven could have prevented. Manifold deliverances, with many
glorious Victories, have been given in, upon all which we may write (the King
of Swedens Motto upon the Battle at Lipsich) A Domino facta sunt ista; my
memory is not a sufficient Register (nor were it fit for me at present if I
were able) to give you an account of particulars, they are so many; I will not
therefore tell you of Edg-hill, Newbury, York, etc. which yet are to be
accounted precious and lasting Monuments of the Lords being with us. God has
given us in a bill of later providence for the Church in several parts of the
Kingdom, ^on mouth, New Castle, ^^n mouth, I ever poole ^a^en in about (...)
time.
by reducing several garrisons, by prevailing for us in the field in several
places: God has honored this one day (consecrated principally to the memory
of Englands deliverance from the Powder Plot) with such a co^fluence of
mercies, as might justly require the separation of many days unto
thanksgiving. We had need to look that neither God be loser in his praise, by
giving in so much at once, nor we surfeit in being lifted up by abundance of
mercy. It is reported of Philip, King of Macedon, when he heard so much good
news at once, as namely, that Parmenio his General had got the victory over
his enemies: that his Son Alexander was borne: and that his Chariots won the
prize at Olympus, all in one day, he called upon fortune to spice his joys
with some bitterness, lest he should surfeit of them, and forget himself; we
had need to join with this King in our fear, and our care, that we do not
forget our selves, nor the Lord our God, now that we have received so much at
once: Let us therefore spice our joys in the fruition of these mercies, with a
fixed observation and acknowledgement of Gods own hand in bringing about all
these great things for us, Three Characters that our victories and deliverances
have bin generally brought about by a special hand of God.
and that God has taken our part therein: which in the dispensation of them,
may by an intelligent observer be discerned by three things that have commonly
been evident in all our deliverances and victories, viz.

Edg-hill, at York, to say no more; Ut victoria qu^madmodum a se da^da erat, it
a a se etiam evidenter apparcret. Peter Martyr in Judge. 7.2.
the Lord in those days did by the hand of a few, which all the army could not
do, that it might more clearly appear, that what was done was from God, says
Peter Martyr; even as Judge. 7.2. the Lord would rather give the Midianites into
the hand of 300 men, then Gideons whole Army, Lest Israel vaunt themselves
against me (says God) saying, Mine own hand has saved me. In midst of many
humane helps, God often loses the honor of his help, but when all others
fail, Gods help is glorious; the Psalmist moves God to help his Church at a
pinch, when man's help could do no good, as being then the fittest time for God
to do it; Psalm. 60.11.
Psalm. 60.11. Given us help in trouble, for vain is the help of man: How
clearly has Gods hand been put forth in our victories, when we were even upon
the brink of an overthrow? as Vaux of his giving fire Quantillum abfuit, we
might say of our destructions, from which GOD has set us free.

Israel against Amalek, Exodus 17.11.
Exodus 17.11. while Moses held up his hands: God has broken the arrows of the
bow, the shield, the sword, and the battle, in our Churches, as he did for his
people in Salem, Psalm. 76.2, 3. Aelian.
Psalm. 76.2, 3. because there we prevailed with God in wrestling as Jacob. The
Tarentini had a feast which they called Jejunium, in memorial of that relief
which the Rhegini spared upon every tenth days fast, and sent them when they
were besieged; so (though we sacrifice not, nor ascribe to our fasting and
prayers, yet) we might well set up a feast of thankfulness to God, in memorial
of such public favors, as have evidently been the fruit of prayer and
fasting: And the rather, because the honor of such mercies as come in that way,
is clearly cast upon God, who hearing prayers does whatsoever is done thereby,
in that prayer sets God on work; which was the ground of Luthers admirable
confidence, wherein he was wont to say, when they had prayed together against
the Churches enemies, Vicimus, we have overcome; he knew God would not be
wanting, either to hear the prayers, or by his power to fulfill the desires of
the righteous.

At the former fight about Newbery.
in so much that they sometime triumphed over us before the victory: whereby it
has appeared that victory was given us by him to whom nothing is difficult:
Thus Joshua reasons, Josh. 23.10. Josh. 23.10.
One of you shall chase a thousand, because it is God that sighteth for you: as
he reasons from the cause to the effect, we may all as well from the effect
unto the cause; thus it has been with our armies, therefore the Lord fought
for us. Yea, so much have we seen of Gods going out with us always into the
field, that the enemy was never yet known to prevail against us, but by our
either treachery or negligence; God has never been wanting to us, though we
have been too much wanting to our selves.

Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men! this is a day wherein praises should
wait for the Lord, Psalm. 65.1. Tibi silet laus, Psalm. 65.1.
as Pagnine renders it, Praise is silent to thee, O God, in Sion. Such a throng
of praises, and so great, that they were unutterable, and therefore
silent-praise (as they say of cares, Leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent, Our
praises of God for our late public mercies, should have three special
properties.
) yet though our praises should be more then we can express, yet we should
this day endeavor to express our praises unto God as much as we can, and
endeavor also that our praises should have these three following
qualifications, viz.

us frame our praises to the tune of the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.1. Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory. Not that any
gallant Spirits should be deprived of the honor due unto them, it is their
honor that God will delight to use them as instruments for the good of his
Church. It was a notable custom among the Romans, that when they had obtained
a victory, the General was wont to send Letters decked with laurel to the
Consulls, to require them decernere supplicationes, it seems they made account
that they stood in need of prayers rather then of praises.

Ps. 44.7, 8. Psalm. 44.7, 8.
Thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us,
in God we boast all the day long, and will praise thy Name for ever. We should
not only praise him with high praises, and with the best members that we have,
and highly prize those mercies that he has bestowed upon us, but we should
strive to prize more the having of God, then the having of all our mercies, and
to set up his Name far above all blessing and praise.

Kingdom in our times, which being transmitted to posterity in a much desired
Chronology, would publicly set up lasting Monuments of Gods praise, and
provide for a succession of thankfulness from generation to generation. Such a
providence we find the faithful had in former times; Psalm. 44.1.
Psalm. 44.1. We have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us what work
thou did in their days, in the times of old. They did by tradition engage
us to give God the honor of his mavelous works; as also by stones, and
pillars, and altars, erected in memorial of several acts of remarkable
providence toward them.

Quest. But in these sad times, many make the same question which Gideon made
to the Angel, Judge. 6.13. Judge. 6.13.
If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? Why are we not
delivered from the hands of the Midianites?

Answ. God being with his Church is not presently a Supersedeas to afflictions:
Mat. 8.24, 25.) and yet she may be covered with waves, so that the Disciples
may be in great fear of perishing by the storm: So though God be in the
midst of the Church, so that she shall not be moved, Ps. 46.5. yet she may be
tried as silver is tried in the sire; she may be brought into the net, For what
purposes God suffers his church to be afflicted, while he takes her part.
and affliction may be laid upon her loins, Psalm. 66.10, 11. God may give
Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers; yea, the dearly beloved of Iris
soul into the hands of her enemies, and that for many holy and excellent
purposes.

David was much taken with God, in that he owned him in adversity, Psalm. 31.7.
Psalm. 31.7.
Though the preventing of affliction be a great mercy in it self, yet corrupt
nature is usually more sensible of, and so more thankful for deliverance out
of affliction: and therefore the Lord lets the Church feel affliction, though
he take her part, that she may better prize her helper, and his help.



Israel was fit to enter into the Land of Promise, till the Lord had carried
him through a long and tedious Wilderness, to humble him, and to prove him,
Deuteronomy. 8.2.
to see what was in his heart, Deuteronomy. 8.2. As God is full of love and bowels
toward his Church, like a father toward his child, whereby he is afflicted in
all her afflictions, and very ready to her help and succor, so is he full of
wisdom also in his dispensations to the Church, like a Physician to his
Patient; and therefore will not administer cordialls to her, being full of
corruptions, till he have purged her, and brought her low, it may be, even by
letting blood.

Ephraim was careless of looking after God, till affliction had almost
devoured him, and therefore God withdraws himself, till affliction brings
Ephraim in unto him by prayer, Hos. 5.15. Hos. 5.15.


his presence may give us rest; as he promised Israel, Exodus 33.14. which made
Moses so earnest with God for it, as being not only the signal of his love to
them, Exodus 33.14, 15, 16.
but also as being a means of their security against all the Nations that
would look upon them, (by his being with them) as Gods only people, separated
from all the people upon the face of the earth. And surely the continuance of
his presence with us, will be much according as we carry our selves toward him;
as the Prophet Azariah said to King Asa, 2 Chro 15.2.
2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while you be with him, and if you seek
him, he will be found of you, but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. God
loves his people first, before they love him, but he never forsakes them, till
first they have forsaken him: yea, God looks much upon the carriage of great
men, either to be angry or pleased with, to withdraw or continue his presence
with a people; if the great men had been good, (though the communaltie was
naught in Jerusalem,) the Lord would have pardoned it, but when these also
(that should have known the way of the Lord) have broken the yoke, and burst
the bonds, a Lion out of the Forest shall slay them, and a Wolf of the evening
shall spoil them, Jer. 5.5, 6.
says God, Jer. 5.5, 6. How affectionately is Deborah taken up with praise,
when she saw the Governors of Israel willing to do God service! Judge. 5.9.
Judge. 5.9.
She heartily honored them; My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that
offered themselves willingly among the people: praise ye the Lord! Let us also
rejoice in your willingness among the people, that are the Princes of our
Tribes, and the Governors of Israel, that we may say, Praise ye the Lord,
when we see you (right Honorable) doing what in you lies, to keep God with us,
and that he may continue to take our part: Three things to be do^^ by
Ma^ist^ates, to keep God (...) ou^ side.
to foward you therein, amongst all your other pious endeavors, let me exhort
you to be careful in a special manner of these three things, viz.

the first and great Commandment, Mat. 22.38. These lie so near his heart (as
I may say) that if you be faithful to him, and tender of his honor in these,
you shall strongly engage him for this cause and kingdom. David upon a tender
consideration, laying to heart how meanly the Arc was provided for, while he
himself dwelt in a house of Cedar, had but a purpose of building God an house,
and behold what a good influence this had upon his Kingdom! the Lord ingageth
himself thereupon for Israel, 2 Samuel 7.2.10
2 Samuel 7.2.10. I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant
them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more, neither
shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as before time; a
David-like piety in you, might have a like influence upon England at this day.
You have lately By an humble Address from the Assembly.
heard what horrible blasphemies have been belched out against heaven, and the
glorious Name of our great God, in some corner-Sermons: You know what
intrusions are made into the Ministry, and what confusion is threatened by
divisions and diversities of opinions: lay these things to heart, settle
worship, settle government, speedily, now that you are Directory for Worship,
carried up to the House of Peers.
called upon.

Secondly, See that the Covenant be both taken and performed: It Is no less an
honor to you, custodes foederis, then that you are custodes utriusque tabulae;
It is the Covenant of the most high God, who will be much provoked sure by the
neglect of it, since we find him angry with Zedekiah for breaking a private
covenant between him and the King of Babylon, Ezekiel. 17.16.18. So that the Lord
will let him die in Babylon, Ezekiel. 17.16.18.
seeing he despised the oath, by breaking the covenant, when lo he had given
his hand: And he is well pleased with paying our vows, in way of
thankfulness, as may appear in David's care therein, Psalm. 116.14. You have
holden forth a pious example in entering into our solemn League and Covenant
for reformation; like the much honored Prince Josiah, and that with the same
sincerity (I hope) with all your heart, and with all your soul, to perform
the words of the Covenant; 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32.
O accompany that noble King one step farther, in causing all in Jerusalem, and
Benjamin, to make it, and to stand to it, when they have made it, 2 Chronicles.
34.31, 32. It is not more matter of joy to the Churches See the Letter from the
Churches of Wallacria to the Assembly, lately printed.
abroad, that you have brought forth such a covenant for the three Kingdoms to
be united in, then it may be matter of grief and shame to us at home, that it
is so much neglected as it is, many refuse to take it, many that have taken it,
make no conscience at all of keeping it.

Thirdly, Execute Judgment: if the Lord see the want of judgment among us, it
will displease him, Isa. 59.15. By this Phinehas turned away wrath from Israel;
Isa. 59.15.
and who can tell what you may do for England, if you be not wanting in this?
The Lord would have pardoned Jerusalem, if he could have found but one man
therein that had executed judgment, Jer. 5.1.
Jer. 5.1. As he took away the famine, (which he had brought for Saul, and for
his bloody house) when David wisely condescended to the Gibeonites, and gave up
seven men unto the hand of Justice for their cause, 2 Samuel 21.14.
2 Samuel 21.14. God was entreated for the Land, as if the blood of those
delinquents had been a sacrifice to atone the Lord: The executing of judgment
is the Lords work, and they shall be cursed that do it negligently, Jer. 48.10.
Jer. 48.10. And cursed shall they be that keep back their sword from blood in
this cause. You know the Story of Gods Message by the Prophet unto Ahab, for
letting Benhadad go upon composition, 2 King 20.42.
2 King. 20.42. Because thou have let go out of thy hand, a man whom I
appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and
thy people for his people. In all this, I am a messenger of peace: I plead not
for the shedding of any man's blood, but (as a Physician sometimes prescribes
bloodletting, to prevent bleeding) I plead for Justice upon those few that
would destroy, to prevent judgment upon all the kingdom: Revive therefore
(noble Patriots) those good Laws which we have received from our fathers, and
honorably put them in execution upon those that would subvert them, and so
deprive us of our birthright. The Philosopher was wont to say, that City was
safe, where the Citizens obeyed their Magistrates, and the Magistrates obeyed
their Laws: The Subjects of this Kingdom (as they are zealous, so they) will
be encouraged and continue the more to obey you, if they see you zealous to
maintain their Laws in force, which is the next privilege of the Subject, unto
the freedom of their consciences, and which would be a way to render this
(miserably wasted) Kingdom happy. Remember for what end the Lord put the sword
of justice into your hands, even to execute wrath upon them that do evil, and
for the good of them that do well, Romans 12.3, Romans 12.3, 4.
4. And hearken to the counsels of our righteous God, who judges among you
the gods of the earth: The Ethiopian Judges were wont always to leave the
highest place upon their bench, empty, as a room for God: we know (Honored
Lords) you reserve a place empty for the highest on earth (and it is the
grief of honest English hearts this day that it is empty among you) so we hope
you reserve a place for the most high God in your counsels, and that it is not
empty, but he is among you, to preside and govern all your consultations in
the execution of justice, for which we shall ever pray.

Hitherto of the point observed from the words in their coherence and relation
to the sixth verse, 2. Point.
where the Lord showed himself with the Church, when her enemies rose up in
rage to have consumed her: Now we are to look upon the words in reference to
the scope and purpose of them, namely, to hold forth the ground of the Churches
triumph in Gods being with her: not only that he will be with her always, but
because his being with her secures from others being against her, so as to do
her hurt or prevail against her, so that as she triumphs, she shall triumph;
and that this is the ground, may appear from ver. 5. God is in the midst of
her, Ver. 5.
she shall not be moved; The Churches confidence is built upon a stronger
mountain then David's was; note;

Gods presence with his Church, secures her in time of danger, and makes her
for ever invincible.

The opposition that Kings and Rulers of the earth can make against the Church,
though they be the greatest of men, and combine themselves, is but matter of
derision unto God, Psalm. 2.4.
Psalm. 2.4. No more likely to prevail against her, then an earthen vessel
against an iron mace, which easily breaks it into pieces, ver. 9. God will make
Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: Ver. 9.
all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it, Zach. 12.3. Isa. 8.9, 10.
Zach. 12.3. As appeared when the King of Assyria in all his glory came against
her, 8.9, 10.
Isa. 8.9, 10. All her enemies, though they associate, and gird themselves,
they shall be broken in pieces, says the Prophet, their counsel shall come to
naught, their word shall not stand, and all because God is with us. And indeed,
the Lord is at hand, even at the Churches right hand, to strike through Kings
(for her sake) in the day of his wrath, Psalm. 110.5.
Psalm. 110.5. In a word, Gods presence with his Church, is the sum of all
that God has promised her for temporal salvation, whereby to encourage her in
times of greatest danger and difficulty. It is enough that God is with her,
though she walk in the valley of the shadow of death, (as David said, Psalm.
23.4.) It is a Supersedeas to the cruelty of fire and water (those merciless
Elements) Isa. 43.1, 2, 3. Fear not, Isa. 43.1, 2, 3.
O Jacob, O Israel, (says God) when thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, the holy One of Israel thy
Savior. Vartis excreemur aerunmis, sed tandem cripimur: stuviis umpetimur, sed
non obruimur; flammis urimur, sed non consummur. Calvin.
By water and fire, are meant all kind of miseries and temptations which the
Church can be obnoxious to on earth: though she be brought into variety of
calamities, sometime into the water, sometime into the fire, yet she shall also
be brought through them into a better condition, through fire and through water
into a wealthy place, Psalm. 66.12. Gods presence shall both bear her up in
troubles, and give her rest from troubles at length, as Exodus 33.14. it did to
Israel, and so make her to triumph for ever.

All this Gods presence can do for the Church. Isa. 45.11. Concerning my sons,
Isa. 45.11.
and the work of my hands, command ye me; whereby is intimated, that the
prayers of his people shall have the power, and the effect of a command with
him, so that they should prevail with him (as I may say) ad ultimum potentiae,
in the Churches behalf (though some understand the place otherwise): we find
God opening himself to King Asa, suitable to our purpose, by Hanani the Seer,
when the King relied not on God as before time: after the Prophet had galled
him with a repetition of former experiences, which might witness Gods power and
faithfulness unto him in past deliverances: he sets down this character of
God, that he does not only take notice of his own people, but will show
himself strong in their behalf, (...). 16.9
as 2 Chronicles. 16.9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole
earth, to show himself strong in behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward
him: God will make himself strong, (so the word imports) by collecting and
stirring up all the strength that is in him, to put it forth in the help of his
people, after the manner of men (for so we must understand it) who have
undertaken any thing upon strong engagements, and will do all that lies in
them to bring it about. It was a confident speech of Luther; No man shall hurt
us, Nemo no^ laedet nisi qui Deum vincit.
but he that can first overcome God: And it was upon this ground that God is so
much engaged to the defense of his Church and people, that he must and will set
all his wisdom, and all his power on work, and do all he can (as we say) for
their defense: if the Church be overwitted by politic and subtle enemies,
Gods wisdom shall be too hard for them, the foolishness of God is wiser then
men: if she be over-matched in power, behold here is such a reserve for the
Church as cannot fail, even the power of God, whose weakness is stronger then
men; what a treasure of invincibilitie would here be discovered, should we go
thus on with the rest of Gods attributes, which yet are all equally engaged for
the good of the Church? No marvel then, if all be considered that we say,
the Church is built upon such a rock, as against which the gates of hell shall
not prevail, since God himself will be her rock and refuge, by being with
her. The heathen were wont, when they came against any city to besiege and take
it, to charm out the city-gods, before they would assault or storm it, as
co^ceiving it not possible, while their gods remained in the City against
them: if they had so high an opinion of their Idols, that were the work of men's
hands, how much more should we account of Gods presence in the Church, that
made heaven and earth? how impossible must it be to take the Church by assault
of enemies, or any other way, while God remains in the midst of her?

2. Gods presence with his Church diffuseth it self into all those instruments
or means that are employed for the Churches help, Joshua, when he was employed
as General of Isreal's Forces, the Lord promised to be with him in behalf of
the Church, and thereupon he should be invincible, Josh. 1.5. Josh. 1.5.
There shall not any man he able to stand before thee all the days of thy
life; as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee. By virtue of this presence,
the instruments of the Churches help, are instruments in Gods hand, which puts
upon them such a majesty, and furnishes them with such a power, as that
nothing dare or can stand in their way: When God will use the poorest creature,
as an instrument in his hand, either of mercy or justice, it is exceedingly set
up in esteem, though otherwise in it self it be but contemptible; and by making
them so dreadful, the Lord powers out a spirit of fear and amazement upon the
enemies of the Church, who when they see the presence of God in, and with his
servants, cannot stand before them; Which made the Psalmist so earnest with the
Lord by prayer, to arise and show himself, Psalm. 68.1, 2. Psalm. 68.1, 2.
Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him, flee
before him; As smoke is driven away, so drive them away; as wax melts before
the sire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God. So it was with the
Egyptians, when once they perceived Gods presence with Israel, they were
presently routed, and took it their best course to flee, Exodus 14.25.
Exodus 14.25. Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for
them against the Egyptians: So it was also with the enemies of the Church, that
ver. 6. of this Psalm, rose up in rage against her; the Lord did no sooner
declare himself to be for the Church, by uttering his voice, but as wax
melts before the fire, they melted, the earth melted.

England, that would have bereaved her of such a precious privilege, in
driving away Gods presence from her: such a generation of men there were among
us, that, by compliances with Idols and Idolatry, went about to drive God away,
and yet bore up themselves as the only friends and patrons of the Church of
England. What consistence can there be between the Ark and Dagon? What concord
between God and Idols? By their cursed innovations, the glory was even
departing from our Israel, and the Church of England made even like Jerusalem,
when the glory of the Lord was upon the threshold to depart, Ezekiel. 9.3. Ezekiel.
9.3.
The glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the Cherub whereupon he was,
to the threshold of the house: a sad praeludium (says Calvin) of his departure
indeed; for (though it returned from the threshold of the house, and stood over
the Cherubims again, Ezekiel. 10.18. as loath to depart, Ezekiel. 11.23.
yet) Ezekiel. 11.23. at length the glory of the Lord went not only to the
threshold of the house, but unto the midst of the City, and from the midst
of the city to the tops of the mountains: How far the state of our Church has
run parallel to those tragical dispensations in Jerusalem, I leave to your wise
observations; but sure I am, Gods presence, both of grace in his Ordinances,
and of providence in our State-affaires, (which has been heretofore the glory
of our Land) was not long since in a departing posture upon the threshold with
us; God was weary of our new Moons, and Sabbaths, and the calling of our
Assemblies, he could not smell in our solemn feasts, our sacrifices were an
abomination to him, through the noysomness of those corruptions which Hophni
and Phinehas (superstitious and wicked men in the Priesthood) mingled with
them; yea, look what made the Lord forsake the Tabernacle of Shilo, where he
had placed his Named, Psa. 78.58, 60.
Psalm. 78.58, 60. the same was found in the midst of us, They provoked God to
anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven
Images; whereby they have caused the Lord so far to forsake us, that (as the
Prophet speaks) Here is a great forsaking in the midst of the land, and the
Church as a man in deliquio, Isa. 6.12.
by the conflicts of truth and error, is brought to that pass, Ut nec morbum
far potest, nec remedium, she faints under our hands, while you (the
Physicians of Church and State) are about the cure: and the spring of our
present miseries in the Church, was the late corruption and tyranny of those
in the Ministry, that lorded it over Gods heritage; their Popish setting up
the power of nature, and depressing the grace of God in matters of salvation
formerly, has begotten a sleighting of all inherent sanctification, and a
scorning of all duties of obedience to the Law in these days, under pretext of
setting up the free grace of God; their pressing men with such rigor to
conformity, has begotten an humor of separation from all order and uniformity
in our Church. I might show the like in other evils of errors and divisions
now among us, whereby confusion is threatened both to the Church and State; and
which, and many mischieves of another kind have been occasioned by them.

secure us in time of danger, and make the Church for ever invincible; If God
be with us (says the Apostle, Romans 8.31.) who can be against us? the danger of
our times, the malice of our enemies, How the consideration of Gods presence
with the Church may be improved at present to a fourfold advantage of our
Church.
and the distractions of our selves call upon us earnestly to such endeavor;
and also by taking the advantage and opportunity of Gods presence with us to
carry on the public work of Church and Stage-reformation against all
opposition, with more life and cheerfulness, for which purpose we may make a
fourfold advantage of Gods presence with us.

1. It may encourage men to stand up and heighten their spirits in standing for
the Churches cause, that Gods presence with the Church makes her so
impregnable: if the Lord in former times did but lift up an ensign, if he did
but hiss, the nations from far, and they from the ends of the earth would come
with speed swiftly to the work of the Lord, Isa. 5.26. how much more should a
people that are not strangers, Isa. 5.29.
be encouraged to come with speed swiftly, to the work of the Lord? when he
has not only lift up an Ensign, and given a Eanner to them that fear him,
that it might be displayed because of the truth, Psalm. 60.4. but also he
himself stands up, and having girded his sword upon his thigh, Psalm. 60.4.
with his glory and with his majesty will go before them therein, to be with
and to fight for them. Gideon desired no more encouragement to undertake the
Churches cause, then that he might be assured the Lord would be with him
therein. What great exploration he makes, Judge. 6. Judge. 6.
He questions verse. 12, 13. then he requires the sign of consuming his present
in the nature of a Sacrifice, verse. 17. Then another sign by the dew upon the
fleece, and the ground dry: And again, by the dew on the ground and the fleece
dry, verse. 36. And all this that he might but be sure the Lord would be with
him in the Churches wars against the Midianites, and that he might but write
this Motto upon his Ensign, The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon. Malus miles
qui gemens Imperatorem sequitur.
What faint heart would not gather spirit to follow such a Leader cheerfully,
and that in such a cause as is unconquerable? Luther did hearten himself and
his followers in the work of Reformation (even the same reformation that is now
a doing) that Christ was with them, Si nos ruemus, ruet Christus und, scil^cet
regnator ille mundi. Luther.
and that if the did sink therein, Christ also the governor of the world must
sink with them. It was wont to be the word of encouragement from God to his
servants of old in any great undertaking, Go, and I will be with you. Let it
be the encouragement of men at this day, to show themselves, and to be really
active in the great affairs of the Church and Kingdom.

sufficient pawn of a good issue at length, to make faith and patience hold
out. Deliverance shall come, says Mordecai, though the Queen (upon whom depends
much of the Churches hope) should be unfaithful to the cause, Est. 4.14.
Icrem. 8.15.
Est. 4.14. The case of England at this day, is much like the calamitous
condition of the Jews, Jer. 8.15. We looked for peace, but no good came, and
for a time of health, and behold trouble. We have passed through and beyond so
many horizons of hope, expecting the period of our trouble to have lien in
their several compasses (as that such a battle will bring things toward an
issue; such a man, and such an army will give a good stroke to the business;
by such and such a time, we shall see what will become of things; this year,
and that Summer, Verse 20.
we hope will put an end to all) and still have been deceived of our hopes, as
ver. 20. The Harvest is past, and the Summer is ended, and yet we are not
saved; so that now, when we would comfort our selves against sorrow; Verse 18.
ver. 18. our hearts are faint in us. Against these faintings of our hopes,
apply this truth now set before you, Gods presence with the Church makes her
for ever invincible, and then with faithful Abraham, we may against hope
believe in hope, Romans 4.18. though the vision be yet for an appointed time, we
may believe the Prophets word, and therefore may follow the Prophets counsel,
Hab. 2.3.
Hab. 2.3. At the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for
it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry.

3. To be a preservative against carnal fears which may sometimes surprise the
hearts of people well affected to the cause and Church of God, when the Church
is brought low, even under the power of an insulting enemy, that would be as
merciless as fire against water, the Lord applies this his presence with the
Church (the assurance thereof) as a present remedy in such a case; Isa. 43.1,
2. Fear not, Isa. 43.1, 2.
for I will be with thee, both in fire and water. When the Prophet David
considered his interest in God, he is carried above all fears, and
expostulates, as if it were unreasonable for a man to fear any man, Psalm. 27.1.
or any thing in opposition to God: Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? It were to undervalue God, if we should fear the
creatures, when he is with us. Antigonus, when he overheard his soldiers
reckoning how many their enemies were, he steps in unto them suddenly,
demanding; And how many do you reckon me for? so God may at once both shame
and encourage our fearful hearts, when they are too much apaled at the
multitude or strength of enemies, if he should put us to the question, how many
we reckon the Lord for; and whether he be not an over-match for all the enemies
that the world can possibly muster against the Church? Let us therefore improve
Gods presence with his Church, to stave off all carnal fears, as Caleb and
Joshua did encourage the Israelites, who had been discouraged from looking
after the land of Canaan by the former Spies, that had told them, the
Inhabitants were sons of Anak, and the cities in Canaan were walled up to
heaven, whereby the hearts of Israel were strongly possessed with carnal
fear; Caleb and Joshua strove by this truth to raise up their hearts, Numb.
14.9. saying, Numb. 14.9.
Only rebel not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of the
land, for they are bread for us, their defense is departed from them, and the
Lord is with us; fear them not.

4. To highten our praises; his mercy endures for ever: as Gods presence is a
Shield and Buckler to the Church against present danger, whereby our liberties,
lives, and religion (which have been, and still are at stake) are preserved,
and the Kingdom not given up to desolation; so is it a pledge of perpetual
safety, the Church shall not need to fear that ever her enemies shall overcome,
and lay her waste, it makes her for ever invincible: the Prophet gives this as
a reason why God is so greatly to be praised in the mountain of his holiness,
Psalm. 48.1. because God will establish it for ever, Psalm. 48 1.
verse. 48. It makes every public mercy which the Church receives, an
everlasting mercy, our deliverances everlasting deliverances, our victories
everlasting victories: for though the Church may hereafter in her militant
condition, suffer under the hands of cruel men for a time, it shall be but for
a time; for she is (like the wise man's house in the Gospel) builded upon the
Rock, Mat. 7.24, 25.
even that Rock against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, the storms
may beat upon her, but they cannot beat her down, she shall outlive all
trouble, through Gods presence with her, and that shall give her rest, as God
promised Moses: So our Psalmist concludes, God is in the midst of her, she
shall not be moved, God shall help her, and that right early. Praise ye the
Lord.

FINIS.

