A GLYMPSE OF THAT JEWEL, Judicial, Just, Preserving LIBERTY. By JO. STREATER,
a Member of the Army of the Commonwealth of England serving in Ireland.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle at the West end of
PAUL'S. 1653.

To the READER.
IT is the general temper of People, to slight the looking after matters of
public concernment, they conceiving, that they are matters too high for common
capacities, and more becoming Statesmen. That that I shall urge, is, that
every Member of the Commonwealth, of right and in duty, ought to watch to
their Liberty, and prevent Absoluteness in persons of great Trust. True, thou
art to be obedient to Higher Powers, but that command or exhortation obliges
thee no farther then the Higher Powers act for the general good.

Suppose that the Higher Powers should command thee to slay thy fellow Member
of the Commonwealth, would thou obey them therein? but if they command thee
to preserve and defend thy fellow Member, his Liberty, Life, Estate, thou art
in pursuance thereof bound to hazard thine; That that thou obeyest them in,
thou ought to be able to judge whether he does right therein or not.

Be not mistaken in higher Powers, they ought to be bound up by a law of
mutual consent of the Generality. Alexander grew a cruel Tyrant after his
flatterers told him he was a God. It Is the only way to give the advantage into
the hands of those thou chusest to execute thy Laws of consent, to make
themselves Masters of the common Liberty, to set too high an estimation on
them, or think it is theirs of right: Yet the Authority that should preserve
equity between man and man, should not be slighted, for by that means
Authority will be weakened.

Make good thy claim to Equity, and to thy right in election of persons in
trust; Endeavor to understand thy Liberty; since Monarchy is destroyed, thou
have a perfect equality, in respect of thy Rights and Privileges. Fear not
any, be they never so powerful, if thou have Equity on thy side. Do not seek
and scrape for favors, nor make parties to obtain thy desires; thou know
not what thou do; therein thou betrayest thy Self, thy Liberty, and thy
Country. Do not endeavor to prejudicate. If thou suest for Right, let thy
Judges stand in fear of doing thee wrong. Is Equity and Justice theirs to
give? No, it is their duty; it is not their duty to tire thee with delays.
Endeavor to know the Power of thy Judges, thy right, the Laws; so that though
it be not fit or safe for thee to be a Judge in thy own Cause; yet that thou
may judge him that judges thee. And to the end that thou may know the
position of Affairs, converse often with knowing men: and let knowing men
endeavor to inform the less knowing.

Lycurgus accounted this an eminent prop or pillar to the State of Lacedemon,
that his Citizens should converse and confer often of their Liberties, of
Government, of Laws, of Peace, of War; and every one to be as able to rule, as
those that are chosen to rule: It is hard to rob such a people of their
Liberties. Likewise, one Rule would be well to be observed, That if places of
Government were made less profitable, they would be less desired: when it
must be undergone for conscience sake, esteem of none but such as are truly
virtuous. Those that endeavor to enrich themselves, children, or kindred, are
not persons fit for trust. It is thy duty to watch to thy Liberty; so it is
also thy duty to watch to the Execution of the Laws that are for thy
Preservation. It is not only thy duty to watch to thy own Liberty, but to thy
neighbors Liberty; nay thy poor neighbors Liberty, that the rich and mighty
oppress him not. Hercules was deified for employing his strength in delivering
the oppressed out of the hands of the oppressors.

The way that the Nimrods of this world grow mighty and powerful by, is to
oblige such as may be hurtful to them, so that they may dis-ingage them from
joining with the generality in defense of their Liberty; so that the
Generality having their Captains taken away, become a prey to their
Absoluteness; as AEsop's sheep having their dogs delivered to the Wolves,
became at length a prey unto the Wolves.

Flatter none of thy fellow members of the Commonwealth with Titles, as, High
and Mighty, or Excellent; The Title of Honor, or Honorable, is the highest mark
of desert that a Member of a Commonwealth is fit to attain unto or bear.

Reader, Here thou art guided to know thy self, to know others; Their Power and
thy Liberty. There is no one thing under Heaven the cause of misery by the
assumed Lording of Usurpers, but Thy not knowing thy Liberties and Rights.

Confusedly have I presented thee with a Glympse of that, which I doubt not, if
thou will cast thine eye to behold, thou will discover a greater light herein,
then is discerned by him that is a wel-wisher to Public Preserving Liberty.

J.S

A glimpse of that Jewel; Judicial, just preserving Liberty.
FOrasmuch as Monarchy is destroyed amongst us, it is convenient, and much in
order to the preservation of the just rights of every member of the
Commonwealth, that they should understand their Rights, Privileges and
Liberties. It was observable, that when Rome grew to that greatness, that by
its Virtues and Arms it not only preserved it self, but gave Laws to other
Cities, Commonwealths and Princes, it was when every member of that
Commonwealth perfectly understood the mysteries of State, and were competent
Judges in all matters and causes arising in the Commonwealth, as also of the
disadvantage or advantage of either Peace or War.

Secondly, The great preservation and cause of the growth of the Commonwealth
of Rome, after their shaking off that yoke, Monarchy, was the yearly election
of all Officers in greatest trust, both Military and Civil; for by this means
they were prevented of obtaining to those advantages of making themselves
Masters of the common Liberty.

Thirdly, By this means also every one of the Commonwealth that affected
Government, had hope of having share of the Government; therefore they
endeavored to improve themselves so, as to become capable of such and such
trusts in Government: So that almost every one was an able defendant of their
Liberty and Country: Therefore the greatness of that Empire is not to be
admired; for it is hard to oppose such a composed Body, by such a Body or
power as is acted or supported by the Counsels or Interests of few. Romes power
began to decline, when the power and secret reasons of State were assumed by
few, or one person. They never received such a stroke at their Liberty, as
when Caesar was made perpetual Dictator: Therefore since we find Rome stripped
of her liberty and glory, let England watch to hers: and to that end let us
take notice of the ways how persons that affect absolute Government endeavor
the accomplishment thereof; the which may be found by knowing what should be on
the contrary to preserve it from that danger.

1. A Government should or ought to be* for the conservation of mankind: for
as government and Law is nothing else but a rational restraint of absolute
Liberty; so it is also a rational restraint of absoluteness in commanding:
And natural equity teaches us, 1. That no one should desire profit or honor
by the prejudicing of another. 2. That no one should do or wish that to
another, which he would not should be done unto himself. Now seeing in
Government that every persons interest and good in that body is concerned,
it is clear that the power is essentially in the people. But forasmuch as the
Commonwealth of England is so large, that it cannot meet as Rome, Athens,
Sparta, or Corinth, in a Market place, or in a Theater, in Council, Judgment,
or matters of State; therefore it has been the consent of the Commonwealth of
England, for many hundred years, to contract their Authority in a
Representative or Parliament: Indeed, their Kings never had any other power,
then as their chiefest Minister of State and was no other then a member of the
Commonwealth, bound up by the same Law and Rules of government; witness the
Oath of Coronation, as also the Oath administered to all Justices, both of the
peace, and the several Benches, An. 18, Ed. 3. St. 3. in these words, You shall
swear well and truly to serve your Lord the King, and the People. Likewise the
King often appeared by his Attorney at the Bar of the Commonwealth, sometimes
as Plaintiff, sometimes as Defendant, in several cases at Law; nay, when the
late King was at the height of his Supremacy, Hambden and Chambers brought
their Action against him at common Law, in the case of Ship Money; they knowing
that the power to impose Laws and Taxes, consisted in the Consent of the people
represented in Parliament.

It was notably observed by Plutarch, of Solon; being chosen chief in
Government of the Commonwealth of Athens, the people being assembled in the
Market place* he coming to sit in Council with them, when he drew nigh the
Assembly of the people, he caused the Rod that was born before him (which was a
mark or ensign of Government) the head to be turned downward, to signify,
that essentially the Government was in the People.

2. Therefore seeing that Power and Government is essentially the right of the
People, for the good of the generality, or the greatest number, it is to be
presumed, it must be in opposition to some, namely the vicious and foolish; A
rod for the fools back, as Solomon says. Plato says* That true Government is
when men govern by Virtue and Wisdom; which is in opposition to vice and
folly, as before mentioned.

3. To prevent the having the Power wrested out of the hands of the People by
an assumed absoluteness of persons in trust; Suffer not great power to
continue longer then one year in the hands of any one member of the
Commonwealth. Doubtless, it was upon the same reason of State that that Act of
Parliament was passed An. 4. Ed. 3. cap. 14. wherein it was ordained, that
Parliaments should be chosen once a year, or oftener, if need be. One reason why
it is not for the good of the Public for long continuance of persons in trust,
is because that continuance in any one action or undertaking whatsoever,
burdeneth the spirits; for the spirits that give life to all action, most
usually spend vigorously upon noveltie; but being spent, are no other then as
tired jades, that leave one half of their work undone. A second reason why a
prefixed time for the continuance of persons in Public trusts (as one year, not
more, rather less) would be much to the advantage of the public, is, when they
see one year is the time of their continuance, they will be desirous to do
something in that time worthy of themselves, to preserve their memory, and to
obtain a good opinion of the Public; they will account it unworthy of
themselves to leave any thing undone that should be for the good of the
Public, or that they should not relieve distressed persons that have made
their applications to them for redress: by this means Petitions will not lie
dormant three, four, or five years. Thirdly, It will oblige them to do that
which shall indeed be for the good of the Public, they knowing, that at the
determination of the prefixed time of their Trust, they ate in no other
condition then the rest of the members of the Commonwealth, and so shall have
an equal benefit of those good Laws and Provisions of public safety which they
have been instrumental in for public good. It will not be safe in new
Elections to choose any that have served in a Representative again until five
years be expired or more.

4. In your choice have regard to this rule, to choose men fearing God, and
hating covetousness; for undeniably covetousness is the inlet to all manner of
corruption, oppression, in-justice and Tyranny: Covetousness in a person of
great trust, is evil in these two respects: either first, he is covetous from a
base worldly mind, and therefore unfit for Government; or secondly, being
desirous of greatness, is covetous to obtain wherewith to support his
greatness, or defend him in his greatness; and therefore in a Commonwealth
dangerous.

5. The manner of the choice of Members representative in a Parliament, should
be so, as to prevent making of parties; for the party, or number of men that
prevails in their Election of any one, obliges him that is elected; and on
the contrary, those that oppose that Election, him that is elected will
conceive himself disobliged to them: therefore to prevent those incoveniencies.
A more equality of choice will be safe (as when for Knights of the Shire, and
Burgesses, there are to be two pitched upon by the consent of the County or
Borough) that the County or Borough should choose ten wise and honest men, and
out of them ten, elect two by lot; by this means, making of parties will be
prevented, also many will be prompt to improve their parts, so as they may be
fit for so great a trust; likewise it will oblige more to the owning of that
Government, wherein they see s possibility of having share of.

6. That the persons choosing, as well as those chosen or elected, should not be
persons disaffected to the public Interest.

7. That no one member of the Commonwealth have too much power committed into
his hands, lest he make himself Lord of the common Liberty, or at least become
thereby too powerful to be dealt with; to call such persons to an account may
prove dangerous, for they to secure themselves, usually make use of their power
in defending themselves, as Caesar when he made himself Lord of the Empire.
Alcibiades (being told Pericles was making up his accounts to the Commonwealth)
said, That he rather should study that he might not give the Commonwealth an
account, the which Pericles had done, had not the Commonwealth of Athens
watched him the better.

8. That the Laws of the Commonwealth should be explained and abbreviated, fit
for the understanding of every one of capacity. Vespasian when he received the
power of the Empire, he, to oblige the people, caused the Laws to be written
in brass; for if people understand their Liberty and Laws, they are not so
subject to be oppressed; and therefore it is the policy of him that would invade
the liberty of a people, to keep them ignorant.

9. Those in power should be sparing of the public Treasury, for often times
they dispose of it in favor to oblige many, whereby to strengthen their
interest; which is dangerous; for that which is given by a Commonwealth, or
promised, it must be real, for they have not that advantage, to bestow empty
titles of honor, as Princes have (when their coffers arc empty) to satisfy
the ambitious or covetous.

10. That if a Commonwealth be necessitated to keep arms to justify their
interest, it will be safe that Discipline be strictly observed. otherwise they
will become inconsiderable, and therefore in the Summer, their Forces should
rather be encamped in the field: by this means Discipline would be preserved,
Factions prevented, they would not be fastened to those relations, they would be
more entire in bodies, consequently more ready to answer the necessities of the
public, in case of invasion or insurrection. It was observable, the Romans
were more strict of Discipline in peace then in time of War.

11. That no privileges be taken away from any Corporations or Societies
(provided that every member of these Corporations or Societies have an equal
benefit in those privileges) but rather new granted: by this means Philip the
wise made sure his estate: The Emperor Otho did the like. Laws, Privileges
and Customs, and the like, have been the only Pales and Defenses against
Tyranny and Absoluteness; they have been as meers between common right and
absoluteness; and those that attempt the taking away of these Defenses, may be
justly suspected of making preparation to absoluteness.

12. That no member of the Commonwealth ought to have guards for his person.
Numa Pomphilia being chosen King, he told his Citizens of Rome (upon the
discharging of the 300 men at arms) that forasmuch as he was entrusted in that
Government by them, it was as reasonable for him to trust them with his person.
So Timolian being by the Commonwealth of Corinth sent to aid Syracuse, being
Victor* and having obtained the Castle of Dionysins, caused it to be
demolished, and rather chose to oblige the Syracusians by Justice and Liberty,
then to fasten obedience to them by arms.

13. That it may be made Criminal for any person in public trust to receive
any Bribes, Fees, or Gifts, that shall have Causes or Petitions depending
before them; for by this means creeps in all manner of corruption, injustice,
partiality; by which means also the judgment is overruled and corrupted. It
was to prevent the like inconveniences in administration of public Justice,
that that Statute was enacted. Ann. 18. of Edw. 3. You shall not suffer your
self, or any other for you, to take gift of Gold or Silver, or any other thing,
that may turn to your profit.

14. It will be of great advantage to appoint twelve Counselors of State, that
should be qualified with abilities and judgment in Moral, Civil, and Common
Law, as also the Law of Nations, and Military policy, the interest of foreign
Princes and States, that at all times the Supreme Authority may demand their
advice in cases of difficulty: but it is not fit they should be employed in any
thing but in advice; it is not fit nor safe, they should be qualified with the
least power, not so much as to summon any person before them, nor decide or put
in execution any matter Political or Judicial; it is fit they should continue
in this trust, that they may be the better acquainted with matters of State,
and constitutions of Government.

15. That Judges doing Justice in the name of the people, should be honored
with robes of Honor, which upon the arraying of them, it should de done in the
name of the people: and that they continue no longer wearing those Robes, then
sitting in the Judgment Seat doing Justice: also that Judges should be elected
once a year out of the Learned of the Law.

16. That the better to prevent confusion, that the Authority of the
Commonwealth may be preserved in a lively and eminent manner: to that end all
Courts of Justice should depend one upon another, and all should be governed by
the self same Law: So in all matters of State, all particular Councels should
depend upon one Superior. As all Cities and Corporations, though by the joint
consent of that Society, may ordain or enact any thing for the good of that
Society, yet it should not be Law, until it be confirmed by the approbation of
the Superior Authority, unless it be in some special cases, wherein they have a
clear right by equity in Law to do or cause to be put in execution, such things
as are for the good of that Coporation or Society, so that the execution do not
extend to any others then the members of the same body. Care ought to be had to
unite all bodies in a Commonwealth, so as to depend one upon another, for the
good of the whole; by this means they become powerful, and as a drop of water
being united to the Ocean, becomes part of that infinite body. Tacitus tells
us that the English did consult and make War against Caesar apart, by Cities,
or Counties, and therefore were overcome apart: a union of bodies, so as to
depend one upon another, and jointly to support an Authority over the
generality, there is no strength like unto this: only have care that that
Authority have sufficient checks upon them, that they may be tied up to rules
to act for the general good, and not be swayed to interest.

7 Every one is to understand he is equally interessed with any member in
respect of the common Liberty, and that there is no difference but in point of
Trust: and therefore to clear this point, it is fit to consider what the nature
of Law and Government is in general. Plato tells us, that Law and Government is
to preserve the undigested and huge lump of a Multitude, and to bring all
discord into proportion, so as to become an harmony. Aristotle says, that all
rectitude has a being, and flows from the fountain of being; whereas
obliquitie and irregularities are mere privations and non-entities. Plato also
says, that every thing that is profitable has a being, but no fruit can be
gathered from privation: There is no sweetness in obliquitie; and therefore
Government and Law is an wholesome mixture of that that is just and profitable
to all. Such Laws the Ancients imagined were chained in a golden chain to the
Chair of Jupiter: and sure it is, that equal and impartial Government does
derive from God himself, when it does continue and constitute Laws and
Constitutions agreeable to the welfare and happiness of those that are to be
conformable to them, and that the consent of the whole Body be obtained.
Aquinas says, that Law and Government is a rational Ordinance for the
advancing of the Public good: That is Law and Government that the necessity of
the Public stands in need of, either to preserve it, or to make it happy.
All Law and Government originally arises from the Law of Nature, to preserve
all in being and property. The life and power is most eminently seen in
rational being, as Chrysostom has very rehtorically enlarged himself in the
12 and 13 Oration of his, thus; That all rational beings have a radical and
fundamental knowledge planted in them, budding and blossoming in first
Principles bringing forth fruit, spreading it self to fair and goodly branches
of Morality, under the shadow of which mankind may sit with much complacency
and delight: Therefore for the governing of so glorious beings, it is fit that
Government should be an abstract from the consent, and for the good of the
generality of those that a Law or Government is to regulute or bind. But as it
has been formerly said, such as are of greatest power, (though not of right)
have laid the greatest claim to Government, and imposing Laws. Much like was
that Sophisme affirmed by that Sophister disputing with Socrates, when he
affirmed that Law was an Antipathy to Nature, and that the most eminent justice
of Nature was to rule according to Power: But Socrates (after he had stung the
same Callicles with a few quick interrogations) affirms, That there was no such
harmony as between Law and Nature, that there is nothing preserves Nature more
then Law; but it must be as Aristotle affirms, when it is attended with
Reason and Equity. Though Rome had no Political Laws to check the tyrannical
pride of Tarquin, yet they had a virgin-Law of Nature which beamed out of an
eternal Law, which was of strength and force to revenge a modest Lucretia, and
expel so licentious a Prince from his Dominions. Likewise a late contemptible
Marcionella by putting the Neopolitans in mind of their Laws granted by
Charles the Fifth, did shake the very interest of the King of Spain in Naples,
and nothing could appease them, but by assuring them that they might be
governed by such Laws as should be a preservation to them and their posterity.
This is manifested in every Being, they use to fly from such things as are
destructive to their own Species, and incline to all neighbourly and friendly
beings that comply for preservation. All preservative Government and Law
flows from the law of Nature, but it is to the end Moral. Now since it
appeared, that there is an undeniable right in all rational Being, and that
they stand constituted with this right from the Original, which is the law of
Nature, it being the fountain from whence all other Laws flow: and if natural,
then equal; so that hence may be concluded, that no person or persons has
right to Government, or power in giving Laws, but when they stand constituted
by virtue of an immediate election, or derivatively from such persons as are to
stand bound up by such Governors, or Government, unto which they are to be
conformable; and it is as clear, that there is no way to preserve a peoples
Rights and Liberties, from such as would make themselves Lords thereof, as
often or annual elections; for if the people keep the right of often elections
in their hands, it will make such as affect Government desire to be always in
the peoples favor; to that end, they will endeavor to oblige the people by
acts of Honor and Justice; the people here must take heed they lend not such
persons too much of their favor: to prevent this kind of evil, the Athenians
banished such as had obtained, or did endeavor to grow too great in the
peoples favor, they looking upon them as dangerous persons.

18. One of the principallest reasons of Romes declining in its glory, was when
that persons in greatest trust insinuating into the peoples favor, by that
means enlarged their power, and consequently became unquestionable. You may
discover them treading these steps: 1. They insinuate into favor by pretending
to be publicly affected: 2 They hedge in advantages co enlarge their power. 3.
They find some necessary undertaking or other, thereby to possess the public
with an opinion of a necessity of employing of them, by this means daily
obtaining new advantages. But the safest way for a people in this case, is not
to heap too much favor or Honor upon any one member of the Commonwealth, but
keep such a mean as may not turn to the detriment of the public, and always
provide means to curb their overgrown Members, lest a subversion of their
Liberties ensue.

19. That the Public ought to be preferred before the private: the contrary
have been the overthrow of the liberty of many flourishing Commonwealths; for
whilst men have been bundling up of private advantages, rather then they will
run the hazard of losing of a few inferior and base contentments, (which may be
called quiet, and not liberty) in contending, or at least, they seeing that
such with whom they must contend are more powerful, they despair; never
considering, that it is more honorable to rescue their Liberty from the
powerful: Such a slavish spirit in men to suffer themselves to be trampled upon
by their fellow Members, gives encouragement to many to attempt the making
themselves absolute: therefore a people that will keep their Liberty from being
infringed, must not fear to oppose the most powerful: It Is not to be understood
an opposition by arms, but a legal opposition; but if all lawful means fail,
arms may be made use of.

20. That neither Princes nor Parliaments are, or ought to be absolute in their
power; neither the one nor the other, ought to act any thing that should be
inconsistent with, or prejudicial to the common good of all men. That the
people of England had an undeniable right to contend against absoluteness in
case of injustice or detriment, appears by the second of Henry the IV. Chapter
22. wherein 'twas enacted, That no person should be grieved for suing to break
or alter any thing, although in Parliament enacted: So that it does not only
appear to be the right of every Member of the Commonwealth, but also their
duty, to oppose all absoluteness or illegal power that shall be assumed by any
that shall get the start of them in Authority or Greatness. But on the contrary,
those that shall conspire to break, or alter the position of Government, are no
other then Traitors to the common interest.

21. That all persons upon the resigning his or their Office, be required to
give a public account; for in private accounts there may be connivance.

22. When Magistrates do not answer the end reposed in them, providing for
public peace and Justice: a people in this case may constitute a Power to
question them for their actings: provided also, that they still have regard to
keep life and strengthen their Authority in such persons as shall act to that
end that their trust was reposed in them for.

23. That a people stand not, by the Law of God, or the Law of Nature, bound to
obey a Magistracy in any thing that shall be destructive to the general good,
or that shall be unjust to a particular; but it is the duty of every one, so
prejudiced, to oppose it and declare against it, in testimony that a people do
not stand bound to obey or submit to any thing that shall be destructive to the
general, or unjust prejudice to a particular; as may appear, Anno 2. Edw. 3.
Chapter 8. expressly in these words; That it shall not be commanded by the Great
Seal or little Seal, to disturb or delay common right; although such commands
do come, the Justices shall not therefore cease to do right in any point.
Likewise, Ann. 20. Edw. 3. Chapter 1. It Is commanded, That all Justices shall do
right to all people, not having regard to either rich or poor, without being
let or hindered by any commandment which may come to them from Us, or from any
other, or by any other cause: and if any such do come, either Letter or Writs,
the Justices shall proceed according to Law and Right notwithstanding, as is the
usage of the Realm. So that it is clear, that none stand bound to submit to a
Magistracy or Authority, but wherein the good of the Public is concerned: so
also it may be from hence concluded, that subordinate Officers should rather
endeavor the knowing their duty in relation to the public good, then to
conform themselves to the will of their Superiors: for him that obeys,
should be able to judge whether that which is commanded be in the power of him
that commands, else he that obeys may execute (in stead of the Law of the
Commonwealth) the absolute will of his Superior, which error reduces him to
slavery.

24. The judgments of the people are not so subject to be corrupted as great
persons, for the people have no other end in what they desire, but common
equity; whereas otherwise great persons are swayed by several ends and
interests; and therefore often elections are more safe: for by this means the
people keep the power in their own hands. Election is to be understood a
qualifying of those which are to be elected with Authority to execute Law, that
is extracted by mutual consent of the generality for their good.

25. That all actions in favor of parties be laid aside: this will be a means
to keep all at an even poyze, so that one side should not outweigh in power,
riches or honor; this is, for the preservation of the State of Venice, duly
observed at this day, as may appear by the custom of the Senators to put off
in Saint Marks Church, all affection, malice and quarrels, so that when they
deliver their opinions in Senate, it is clearly for the good of the public,
without having regard of private interest. There is an inscription in Marble,
in letters of Gold, at the entering in of the Council Chamber of Reinsburgh,
Whosoever thou be, Counselor or other, that in regard of thy Office go
into the Council Chamber, out off, and leave before this door, all private
affections, anger, violence, hatred, friendship or flattery; submit thy person
and care to the Commonwealth; for as thou shall do right or wrong in this, so
expect from God who will judge thee in this thing. The Senate of Rome, when
Rome flourished, were enjoined by an Oath, the substance thus: You shall swear
by Jupiter Olympian, and Counselor, and by Vestal the Consultress, and by
Jupiter the Marrier, and Juno the Married, and Minerva the Provident, and
Victor, and Venus, and Amity, and Concord, and Right, and Equity, and good
Fortune, and all other Gods and Goddesses, that I resolve to speak my opinion
according to the Laws and Ordinances approved by the City, according to the
Decrees and Edicts of the Romans, by the which our Commonwealth is governed,
having respect to the profit of my Country with all my power; I shall not suffer
that my judgment or counsel shall be subject to favor, hatred, gifts or
presents; I shall not frame my Sentence to the will of any particular, nor join
my self to any man or party, but only to the common benefit, that I may to the
utmost of my power increase the Commonwealth. So that it appears, that the
Commonwealth of Rome had a necessity to provide against partiallity, and
promoting of private interest: you shall not find one amongst the Romans,
during its glorious freedom (until corruptions gained footing in the
Commonwealth) that was ever preferred for being Cozen, Uncle, Father, Son, or
otherwise related, but their trials were their qualifications and abilities to
undertake in peace or war for the good of the public. In the forementioned
Oath, you may mind one clause, which is, That they shall deliver their opinions
according to the Laws and Ordinances approved by the City or Commonwealth; so
that people that are free from being Lorded over by the claim of any one person
as Monarch, are not bound to observe o^ obey any Laws but such as they shall
consent to by a general approbation. Caius first directed his voice in his
Orations to the people, and not minded the Senate; (whereas other Orators that
deceived the people, and flattered the Senate, directed their voice to the
Senate) He restored the Authority of the people, and minded them that
Government was provided for their good, to deliver them from serving the more
powerful: and therefore it should behove them to watch to their Liberty, that
they should not look upon any circumstances in Religion to be qualifications
for public Trusts.

26. When a Government is contracted into the hands of one or more, that they
come to pretend any thing of right to Government, that Commonwealth is seldom
free from War, both Civil and Foreign: so that that blood and treasure that
should be spent in enlarging the Dominions of the Commonwealth, are spent in
quarrels of such persons as lay claim to the Government: as an instance, the
Wart between the House of Lancaster and the House of York, wherein so much of
our English blood was spilt. That indeed should be an inducement to caution
England never to let any of their members grow too great, nor continue too long
in great Trusts: Many claim a right by no other Title then long Continuance or
Possession. What miserable Wars, Murders, Burnings, Depopulations, Cruelties of
all kinds were committed in the times of Nero, Galba, Otho and Vitellius?
which were personal quarrels of those, to grasp at the Empire, and to hold it
when possessed. Likewise the Civil War between Caesar and Pompey was the cause
of he Roman Commonwealths losing of footing, by suffering two of their Members
to grow to that greatness, to be able to wage such considerable Wars one
against the other, by which means the Victor became able to give a Law to the
Commonwealth, and could no longer relish receiving a Law from them, after he
had tasted what large Command, and long continuance therein was* etc.

27. If the Commonwealth has many Wars, they should not put the Conduct on
one Members shoulders; but rather choose several Members for several
Undertakings; so that by this means there will be several or many of equal
credit, and therefore less dangerous.

28. That those that have the charge of the conduct of Armies, may not have the
power of disposing the Treasury, nor the levying thereof; but the Civil Power
to act in that particular, that the Military power may know they are Servants,
and not Masters.

29. Care to increase Manufacture ought to be had, for that enricheth and
civillizeth the people. Likewise care in Commerce, to poize the exchange with
Foreigners, lest they eat you out of the Principal.

30. Not only to be careful to provide good Laws, but also to provide a due
execution, and that penalties may be inflicted against those Magistrates that
are remiss in the due executions of those Laws and Constitutions as are
provided for the conservation and good of the Public.

31. That private motions or making of friends to obtain any thing whatsoever,
may not be allowed of under great penalties.

32. That all persons in trust should be limited to act according to the Laws,
Customs and Usages of the Commonwealth, and not otherwise then to the
preserving of just and equal Freedom. It is not to be understood of just and
equal Freedom or common liberty, to be any other thing then* to distinguish
and preserve Propriety.

FINIS.

