Die Lunae, November. 9. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Mr Strode do give thanks
to Mr Strong, for the great pains he took in the Sermon, which he Preached at
the entreaty of this House, at Margarets Westminster on Thursday last (being
the fifth of November) the day of the damnable Powder Treason, and that he be
desired to print his Sermon: And that he have the same Privilege as others
have in the printing of their Sermons.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint Francis Tyton Stationer, to Print my Sermon,

William Strong.

(...) THE Commemoration and Exaltation OF MERCY.

DELIVERED IN A SERMON Preached to the Honorable, the HOUSE of COMMONS, at
Margarets Westminster, November. 5. 1646.

Being the day of their public thanksgiving, for that eminent and Ancient
Mercy, the Deliverance of them, and the whole Kingdom in them, from the Popish
and Hellish Conspiracy of the Powder Treason.

By WILLIAM STRONG, a Member of the Assembly of Divines.

ESAIAS 54.15. Behold they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever
shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake.

VERSE. 17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn. This is
the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me,
says the Lord.

Quae De^s contulit gratis, tollit ingratis: Quod i^lo dante fit nostrum, nobis
superbientibus fit alienum,

August. Homil. 14. LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers
near the Inner Temple (...)

To the Honorable THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
GOD has made all his Ministers Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1.2.
and a great Trust he has committed to them, Heb. 13.17.
The mysteries of God, 2 Cor. 2.17.
and the souls of men. That they may rightly discharge this Trust, 2 Cor. 3 11.
a double qualification is required in them, (...) and (...), Ephesians. 4.^4.
sincerity of spirit and liberty of speech: We are neither to use a (...), a
sleight of hand to wrest the word to our sense; nor a (...), to temper it to
the lusts of men. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. (...). Justin. Mart. Epist.
ad Lenam and Serenum. 2 Cor. 4. 2. Ier. 23.31.
Let false Prophets smooth their tongues, and fill the ears of deluded souls
with spiritual flatteries. Those that God has sent, must speak as the Oracles
of God, not sparing the sins, nor fearing the faces of men, least they be
confounded before them: And amongst all that confluence of mercy, which I
desire may be powered down upon your Honorable Assembly from Heaven, this is
not the least, that God may give you, and continue unto you Pastors after his
own heart, who may discharge their trust with boldness and faithfulness
toward God and you; and that you may receive with meekness the engraffed
word, which is able to save your souls.

What is here presented to your veiw, I hope gave no offense in the delivery,
neither will it in the reveiw, being made public by your command. However, I
have discharged what I apprehended to be my duty, Bonae. res neminem
scandalizant, nisi mala^^ ^entem, Tertul de veland. virgin. cap. 7.
to God, to you, and to the whole Kingdom in you; for the wounds of this
people will never be healed with sweet words. If any one shall conceive
something to be spoken here, as savouring of too much boldness and plainness;
I must answer him with Salvian in a like case, Non a mea sibi haec lingua dici
aestimet, sed a conscienti sua; It is not my tongue, but his own heart which
makes the Application.

Two great evils God has blamed in his people in all Ages, Vt accipinat
importuni, donec acceperunt inquieti, and ^bi acce^erunt ingrati. Bern. de
consider, l. 4. c. 2.
unthankfulness for mercies, and wantonness under them.

1. Unthankfulness; We are very apt to be importunate for mercies, when we
want them; and to despise and under-value them when we do enjoy them. Its a
very hard matter to have the same esteem of them in our praises, which we had
in our prayers. God has honored, laden, yea crowned you with mercies; his
faithfulness and truth has been your shield and buckler: He has not only
given you these Ancient mercies, that of 88 and this: The Remembrance of which
you did upon this day celebrate; but he has showed you greater things then
these; that you and the world may wonder; he has since delivered you, from
many invincible Armadoes, and many Powder Plots at once. Let these mercies
never wax old to you; Haec beneficii intet duos lex est. Alter statim oblivisci
debet dati, alter accepti nunquam. Sen. de benes. l. 2. c. 10.
it is an evil that we are all prone to, that as time will wear out the sense
of sin, so it will the esteem of mercy; and he that shall keep either the
one, or the other always fresh before him, had need be anointed daily with
fresh Oil. Docuerunt linguam suam grandia loqui, cum operentur exigua.
Largissimi promissores, and parrissimi exhibitores, etc. Bern. de confider, l.
4. c. 2.
Neither should our thankfulness be only the fruit of the Lips, but of the
Life, The Lord is better pleased with the language of our hands, then with the
language of our tongues. And this must not be for a day and no more; mercies
are eternal obligations; and while we enjoy the fruit of them, its but
reasonable that God should have the glory; and that we should say with
Hezekiah, The Lord was ready to save us, therefore we will sing our songs to
the stringed instruments, all the days of our life in the house of the Lord,
Esaias, 38.20.

2. Wantonness under mercies; Iesuron may wax fat and kick; and when the
filling of a people is according to their pasture, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Ieshuron a
(...) aspexit solicit, observavit: quia Israelitae viderunt presentiam gloriae
divinae. Shind l. Hos. 13.6.
their hearts may be lifted up, and they may forget the Lord; It was Vzziah his
sin and ruin, he was mightily helped till he was strong, and then his he^rt
was lifted up to his own destruction. To loose the fruit of an affliction is a
great provocation, but much more the fruit of a mercy; when cords of love make
a people sit more loose from God, to draw iniquity with cords of mercy, this is
the highest way of sinning.

Its a great testimony that is given of Iehosaphat, The Lord established the
Kingdom in his hand, 2 Chronicles. 26.15 Perdidistis utilitatem calamitatis, and
miserremi facti estis and pessimi p^rmansistis, Austin. de civit. l. 1. c. 33.
2 Chronicles. 17.5.6. His vincit, qui se vincit in victoria.
and all Judah brought him presents; and he had riches and honors in
abundance; and his heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord. We should be
like a spire Steeple, which is minimus in summo; least in our own eyes, when
God has made us greatest in the eyes of other men; we should acknowledge the
Lord to be the God of our mercies, make him the God of our praises, and
consecrate not only the mercy to him with Hannah, but our selves also, as
Hezekiah exhorts, to give the hand, and as the Churches of Macedonia did, who
gave themselves to the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 30.8.
There is as great danger of mercies as of any of Gods dispensations: 2 Cor.
8.5.
Our mercies may become our snares, and that which should have been for our
welfare may become a trap, to take us; for the ground that drinks in this rain
of mercies, as well as that of ordinances, and brings not forth herbs meet for
him by whom it is dressed, is nigh to cursing. These will make the sins of
people like Summer fruits, Socrati cum multa multi pro suis quisque facult^hus
offerrent, Aesc^ines pauper Aud^tor, Nihil (inquit) dignum te, quod dare tibi
possim, inve^^o. Itaque dono t^bi quod unum habeo, me ipsum, Sen. de benef. l.
^. c. 8. Amos 8.1.
ripen them the sooner.

If it prove so with us, we must remember that there be changes of the right
hand of the most high; Psalm. 77 10.(...) mutat^ones dexiera, Call.
he may repent of these mercies, as he did, that he had made Saul King; he may
become our enemy, and fight against us, and may resolve to destroy us, after he
has done us good.

The light that God has caused to rise to us in obscurity, Josh. 24.20. Zach.
14.6.
is such as is neither clear nor dark; we are in continuo crepusculo; we cannot
as yet say all our fears are over, and that the Sun has risen upon us to a
perfect day; and hence it comes to pass, every man's heart is become a
merchant, (...) Psalm. 38.10.
traffiking too and fro, not knowing where to rest. Leave your former mercies
with God, but so as to improve them for God; while you do enjoy them, commit
the keeping of your mercies to him as well as of your souls in well doing;
that if he change his hand toward you again, your hearts may not reproach
you, and say, the time was we had a price in our hand, but we had no heart.
Let your mercies make you more faithful, more fruitful; and then doubt not,
but if God lead you into new troubles, if the bush be brought into the fire
again, the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, shall be with you.

And though the Enemy, now his power is gone, sets all his Policy on work, and
it may be, hopes to effect that by the one, which he could not by the other;
Yet the GOD of your salvation, who has given you these former mercies, Psalm
74.14.
as the Head of Leviathan for food to your faith, and has in the latter
mercies, opened to you in the Valley of Achor a door of hope; Hos. 2.15.
I say, the same GOD who has taken the Lions, will in his own time, take the
Foxes also; For he takes the wise in their own craftiness; Which is the
daily prayer, and shall be the constant expectation of him,

Who is devoted to your Service in the Gospel, William Strong.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS, At their late Solemn
Thanksgiving, the 5th of November, 1646.
EZRA 9.13.14. After all that is come upon us for our evil deeds and for our
great trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such a deliverance as this:

Should we again break thy Commandments and join in affinity with the people
of these abominations? would thou not be angry with us till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?


ALL well ordered States have their public Records, (...) 1 King. 15.23. and
16.5. Ezra. 4.15. and 6.1. Hest. 6.1.
in which as in a common Treasury, all the memorable Acts of that Kingdom are
reserved, to be transmitted to posterity. God in his Kingdom also loves to
have such Registers and Chronicles kept, (...) Esaias. 62.6.
of all his special dispensations; He has made his wonderful works to be
remembered, Psalm. 111.4. And the Scripture tells us, that God has Recorders,
Officers maintained to this end, sc. all those that have pleasure in them; and
the Table in which they are recorded, is their heart, which should be written
as the Prophets role, within and without, both of the word and the works of
God; a Table of mercy and and a Table of duty: For seeing God has a Book of
Remembrance of our works written before him; Mal. 3.16. (...)
it is but equal that we should have a book of Remembrance of his works
written before us; and to read over this book is to be a great part of the
labor of a man's whole life.

Perusing the Annals of England, we find Anno 1605. a glorious deliverance
recorded, which God vouchsafed to the Representative body of this Nation, and
in them to the whole Kingdom, from a Popish and hellish Conspiracy, of long
deliberation and sudden execution. The wood was laid in order, and the child as
it were bound upon the wood; the knife prepared, and the hand lifted up; and
then came the voice from heaven, stay thine hand.

To read over the Records of this mercy, is the occasion of this solemnity;
that we may delight our selves in the goodness of the Lord, and say, Our God
is the God of salvations, to God the Lord belong the issues from death; that we
stand upon the Red Sea, (...) Psalm. 68.20.
and view the head of this Leviathan broken; and write upon the mercy a new
Higgaion Selab, Psalm. 9.16.
as matter of most serious Meditation.

The words read unto you, were uttered upon a far different occasion from
this of ours, that being to them a time of public Humiliation: This to us a
time of public thanksgiving; they were met together to bewail their sins
against God; and we are met to rejoice in Gods goodness toward us. But it is
Tertullians rule, specialiter pronunciata, generaliter sapiunt. De specta^ul.
c. 3.
The Scripture like a well drawn Picture, has an eye upon every one that comes
into the room; and therefore the instructions may be as proper to us as unto
them; though the occasion be different.

The Text contains a serious and hearty detestation of a revolt into former
sins, enforced by these three Arguments.

1. Taken from the justice of God, and the remembrance of his former
judgments; Our dwelling places have cast us out, and by the rivers of Babylon
we sat down and wept, for seventy year: In Babylon we remembered Zion, and
being returned to Zion, it behooves us to remember Babylon; After all this is
come upon us for our evil deeds and for our great trespass.

2. Taken from the mercy of God, Psalm. 78.38. E^^^ 28.8. (...) infra peccata
Ierm.
and that both Punishing and Delivering: First, Punishing, The Lord has not
dealt with us according to our sins, he did not stir up all his wrath, but
stayed his rough wind in the day of his East wind he has punished us less
then our iniquities deserve: Ezech. 37.1.2. Psalm. 136.23.
Secondly, Delivering; We being a field of dry bones, he might have made our
graves in the land of our captivity, and we might never have returned again to
see our native Country; but he remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy
endures for ever; and as be punished us below our desert, so he delivered us
above our expectation.

3. Taken from the issue and the dangerous consequence of such a revolt; Ierm.
34.17.
Many of us have been swept away in this judgment, and we were numbered to the
famine, to the sword and to the pestilence; we were resembled by the hair,
Ezech. 5.2. an unprofitable excrement, some cut with a knife, and some
scattered with the winds; yet a few in number were bound up in the Prophet his
skirt; some written to life in Jerusalem, as it is at this day. But if we
should again break his Commandments, Esaias 4.3. (...)
and not only return to our old land, but also to our old sins, we can expect
nothing but an utter destruction, that as to Sodom, and Gomorrha, God should
leave us no remnant nor escaping.

It cannot be expected that we should treat of all these particulars, which
the Text holds forth to us; therefore from the commemoration of the
Deliverance, and the detestation of the revolt, I will present you only with
these two observations at this time.

1. A thankful heart has high apprehensions of mercy; and looks upon every
mercy as great. 2. The revolt or backsliding of a people into former sins
after they have received great deliverances, is a very high provocation.
To begin with the first.

Doct. A thankful heart looks upon every mercy as great.

The word (...) in the Original has a special emphasis in i^, such a
deliverance as we are not able to express: Our Enemy being the greatest
Monarch of the Earth, and we in as low a condition as could be, prisoners in a
pit, Zach. 9.11. Ezech. 37.2. Esaias 41.14.
dry bones, worms, whom none loved, none feared, but every man ready to tread
upon: And in this condition we had been for seventy years, that we had now even
forgot prosperity, and seemed men ad mancipium nati, Lam. 3.17.
home-borne slaves; who had not only lost our liberty, Ier. 2.14. Ezech. 37.12.
Esaias 53.10.
but our hope too. That now deliverance should arise to us, our light break
forth in obscurity, and we not make an escape, as those that break prison, but
be sent out at the Kings own motion with love and triumph as if we rather
returned from a victory then a captivity; and to have Materials allowed for
the work of the House of God, and moneys out of the Kings Treasury, it is such
a deliverance and so far above our hope, that we could scarce believe our
own eyes when we saw it; Ps^lm. 126.1.
when the Lord turned again the captivity of Syon, we were like them that
dream.

I shall not give you particular proofs of the point, the several Songs of
Deliverance, with which the people of God have compassed him about, and those
torrents of Rhetoric which they have poured out in them, evidently show what
esteem they had of the mercies, adn to what height they did arise in their
apprehensions.

I shall therefore for confirmation give you the grounds thereof.

First, The price of every mercy does arise from God the Author; (...). Arist.
whatsoever is in God or comes from him has in that respect an excellency
stamped upon it; therefore the Holy Ghost in Scripture when he would exalt any
thing to the highest, adds the name of God thereunto, as Abraham called a
Prince of God, that is a mighty Prince; and Rachel said to wrestle with the
wrestlings of God, that is great wrestling: Genesis 23.6. and 30.8.
There is not the meanest mercy but has an excellency in it as it comes from
God: For God to spread your Table, fill your cup, make your bed, draw your
curtains, and watch over you while you sleep; for God to cause his Sun to
shine, his rain to fall on the just and on the unjust: though these be the
most common and ordinary mercies in the world, yet a thankful heart looks upon
them as great, (...) Heb 12.5. Job 7 17. 1 Samuel 24.14. Occumbens Hercu^is a^mis
do ium ingens, Flac. Indignus sum quem vel percutias. Caryl in lac.
in reference to the Author: the least affliction as it comes from God, should
not be despised; God is said to magnify man when he does visit him every
morning and try him every moment Its an honor to die by a great and mighty
hand; David says that Saul honored him and abased himself too much, to
pursue after a dead dog, after a flea; Job looks upon himself as one who was
not only unworthy that God should bless him, but also unworthy that God should
smite him: And if God does magnify men when he does afflict them, How much
more when he does deliver them?

Secondly, Grace is nothing else but the exaltation of God in the foul,
Tendentia animae in Deum.
and therefore it causes men to value all things either as they come from him,
or as they lead to him, and herein godliness consists: and on the contrary,
low and under-valewing thoughts of God and all things that come from him, this
is ungodliness. Hence it is that a gracious heart, if he see nothing of God in
those things which the world counts great he looks upon as nothing: Honor a
bubble, (...) Act. 25.23. Psalm. 62.9. Dan. 4.17. Ecce (^^quit) hanc ^^stiam
(b^ffonem intuitus) tam eximiam creaturam fecit me Deus, and n^nquam gr^tias
egi quod non me quoque tam deformem buffonem fecerit; hoc est quod amare fleo.
Oh Aug^stine sancte quam vere dixisti. surgunt ndoct: and rapiunt Cael ^n; and
nos cum doctrinis ^ostris voluta^ur in can^ and sanguine. Luth. d clam. popul.
de tertio p. aecepto, tem. 1.
the pomp of the world a fan^y, the great men of the world a lie yea, he looks
upon the greatest Monarchs as the Spirit of God styles them, if wicked, as the
basest of men: But on the contrary, wheresoever he sees any thing of God, he
has high apprehensions of it, whether it be in nature or providence. 1. In
nature, Luther relates a Story of two Cardinals riding to the Council of
Constance, by the way they heard a shephead weeping and bewailing himself
bitterly; one of the Cardinals moved with compassion, turned aside out of the
way to comfort him, as his necessity should require, and he found him looking
upon an ugly Toade; and he told him, he could not but weep in consideration of
the goodness of God, and his own unthankfulness, that God had not made him
such a creature as this: With which the Cardinal was so affected, that he fell
off his Mule in a swound, and coming to himself again, he continually cried
out, well said St Augustine, the unlearned take heaven by violence, and we with
our learning wallow in the delights of flesh and blood. 2. In providence, there
is not the falling of a sparrow, the turning of the wind, the changings of
councels, the alteration of affections, or the answer of the tongue, but they
look upon them as great, because they come from God, and are acted by great
Instruments unto glorious ends, for the spirit of the living creatures is in
the wheels. Ezech. 1.20.


Thirdly, They are deeply apprehensive of their own vileness, and
unworthiness of the least mercy: They maintain in themselves a constant
poverty of spirit, and the mercy must needs rise high when the man falls low: a
gracious heart says with Abraham, I am but dust and ashes; with Jacob, I am
less then the least of thy mercies; with David I am a worm and no man; with
Paul I am nothing: with Bernard, tanquam monstrum inter filios Dei sto: with
Eccebolius calcate me salem insipidum; with Hooper, thou art heaven, I am Hell.
When men have such low apprehensions of themselves they must needs have high
thoughts of the mercies; the Schools say humility is vacuum spirituale; so is
pride plenetudo diabolica, a fullness from Sa^an: a person that is great in his
own eyes is ready to think as every honor so every mercy too small for him.

Use 1. It should stir up all our hearts to set a high price upon this
present mercy; Gods eye is upon your spirits in your days of Thanksgiving, as
well as in your days of Humiliation; and as not to be affected with the sin
and judgment in the one, is a great provocation (It was revealed in mine ears
by the Lord of Hosts, Esaias 22.12.13.14.
surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you dye, etc.) So not
to be affected with the mercy in the other, Psalm. 78.42.
They remembered not his hand nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy.
As it is acceptance with God, which we should chiefly look at in all our
services: so it is acceptance with us, which God chiefly looks at in all his
mercies, that we should count them worthy of all acceptance. It is our
acceptance of the mercy, that will make our Thanksgiving to be accepted; this
makes God to smell a savor of rest: G^n. ^.2^. I^^^^. 22.3.
this prepares for him an habitation where next to heaven he loves to dwell,
for he inhabites the praises of Israel.

I hope we are not come into Gods presence this day barely in a form to keep
an Anniversary remembrance according to custom, and no more: There are these
four ends which we ought to propose to our selves, and neither of them can be
obtained unless the mercy be great in our eyes.

First, we are met this day that God may be exalted, that we may make his
praise glorious; now the glory of God is twofold, essentialis or manifestativa,
the first is the excellency of the divine nature in it self, the second is the
shining forth of this excellency unto us and our reflection thereof unto God
again. The highest way of our honoring God lies in high apprehensions of him,
being overwhelmed with his excellency, seeing light in his light; which is that
way of glory which he has reserved for himself in heaven: to speak high words
of God when men have low apprehensions of him, this is not to honor him as a
God: If therefore the apprehension of the mercy does not arise in your hearts,
God is not exalted in your praises.

Secondly, We are met this day, that our hearts may be enlarged, Revel. 5.8.
The Saints are said every one of them to have harps and goldenvials full of
odors; these vials are their hearts, these odors glorious apprehensions and
fervent affections; therefore when men come to heaven, their faculties shall be
enlarged, their apprehensions raised; this is Domus militiae, that Domus
laetitiae. Bern. l. ^. Cap. 14.
Gellius speaks of men whose words are ore nata non pectore; as there are
prayers so borne, so are there praises, and these never enlarge the heart. The
praises of the Saints are melody in the heart to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19.
and it is melody in the heart which only can enlarge the heart.

Thirdly, We are met this day that our mouths may be opened and our glory
awakned, Psalm. 51.15. David does complain of closed lips, surely as it was
his, in confession, so it will be our condition in thanksgiving, if our
apprehensions of the mercy be not raised; either our mouths will be stopped:
or if they be open, we shall but babble verbis humidis and lapsantibus: For God
expects in all our praises that we should render unto him (...) according to
the mercy that we have received from him; 2 Chronicles. 31.25.
and therefore according to our apprehensions of what we have received, so will
our endeavors of a return be. It is with men in thanksgivings for mercies
received, as it is in humiliations for sins committed: If a man have but
slight thoughts of sin as no great offense; he can easily put it off with a
formal confession; so if he think the mercy received to be but small, then a
verbal thanksgiving shall suffice.

Fourthly, We are met this day to abase our selves before the Throne of Grace,
Rev. 1^.16.17. The Elders who s^^^ before God on their seats, fell upon ^their
faces and worshipped God, And they said we give thee thanks oh Lord God
Almighty; the face is the glory of the man, and he that falls upon his face,
abuses his glory: Our mercie^ should humble us as well as our sins. In the
Thanksgivings of his people, when they offered their first fruits to God and
came to rejoice before him, in every good thing that he had given them, they
m^st say, Deuteronomy. 26.5.
A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and he went down into Egypt and
sojourned there with a few, and became there a Nation, great mighty and
populous, etc. When David went in and sat before the Lord, in a day of solemn
Thanksgiving, he said, who am I oh Lord God! and what is my house, 2 Samuel 7.1^.
that then have brought me hitherto! If the mercy seem high, the man will
surely fall low before the Lord. As small sin^ will not work in men great
sorrows, so small and ordinary mercies will never work in men great abasements;
if we once apprehend God to be glorious in mercies, we shall then look upon him
as fearful in praises, but never till then.

If these ends be not attained this day, we may think we have done a great
service, in this formal presenting our selves before the Lord; but we shall
surely find that rule to be true, sordet in conspectu Iudicis, quod fulget in
conspectu operantis; Creg.
and that those services as well as persons, which are highly esteemed among
men, are an abomination in the sight of the Lord, Luke 16.15.

In this deliverance out of Babylon which the holy man Ezra does here so much
exalt, there were many things with which sullen and unthankful spirits would
have extenuated the mercy, and would have been ready to say, This is no such
deliverance as you would make it be: Cyrus indeed made a Proclamation
throughout all his Kingdom, Ezra. 1.3.^.
that we should return to Jerusalem and build the house of the Lord God of
Israel: And that in all places which we sojourned, that the men of that place
should help us with silver and with gold, with goods and with beasts, besides
the free will offering for the house of God that is in Jerusalem: But no sooner
did we begin to lay the foundation, but all the Idolatrous Nations adjoining,
did set themselves to hinder the work, being countenanced and encouraged
thereunto by the Governors of those Provinces; and they prevailed so far
with Cambyses the young Prince, who had the charge of the Empire, while his
Father was otherwise busied, Job. 2.20. Sir Walter Roughley, hist. of the
world, l 3. c. 3. 7. Ezra. 7 25.
that he countermanded the building, and our enemies came upon us and made us
to cease the work by force and power, and thus it remained only a foundation
laid for 46 years together: having from the Decree of Cyrus, received so many
hindrances to the sixth year of Darius. And though the Temple is finished, yet
the wall of Jerusalem is still broken down and the gates thereof burnt with
fire; Neh. 1.3.
and we that are the remnant left of the captivity are in great affliction and
reproach to this day: We are still under the command and power of the King of
Persia; and great men are given to change, and if his mind change, he will
soon reduce us into the same bondage and captivity in which we were; and we
have enemies round about, that watch for our halting, and are daily studying
accusations, and giving informations against us; surely this is not so great a
Deliverance. Indeed, had the Lord brought us out of Babylon, as he did our
Fathers out of Egypt by a mighty hand, with signs and wonders, with silver and
gold, and not a feeble person among our Tribe; and so far avenged our
quarrel, as to have destroyed our enemies before our eyes, that the fear of
us had fallen upon all the Nations round about: such a Deliverance had been
worthy to be exalted. But as for this, we confess its a mercy to return again
to our own land; yet not so great as you would seem to make it. But Ezra
mentions none of these things; for as a believing heart takes in no
considerations that may darken the promise, Romans 4.20. (...).
so a thankful heart takes in nothing that may extenuate the mercy.

There are six things which may extenuate this present Deliverance, and hinder
thankfulness in this solemn day of our Thanksgiving.

1. It is the acknowledgement of a mercy: Had it been of an injury, thereof men
are very tenacious; and they will never forget, even then when they pretend to
forgive; but lay a charge upon themselves as Darius did upon his attendants for
a treachery wrought against him by the Athenians, Memento Atheni^nsium. To
forget injuries, States must enact an (...) as the Roman Senate did after the
death of Caesar, but we need not make an Act of Oblivion for mercies. The
Deliverance out of Egypt was a public and an eminent mercy, which was put into
their Catechism: in the Preface to the Commandments, they kept an Anniversary
remembrance of it; and one of their Sacraments was instituted upon that ground;
and yet the Lord complains, That they remembered not his hand, nor the day,
wherein he delivered them from their enemies, Psalm. 78.42.

2. This is a public mercy: Had it been particular to any one family or
person, he might have been affected with it. For Noah to be preserved in a
common Deluge, or Lot in the general overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha. But
public mercies are looked upon by men as public duties; that which is every
man's work is no man's work. Corrupt nature is nothing else but a principle of
self-love, and all mercies are the less sweet to self, because others have a
share in them, for self would engrosse all unto self: Whereas on the
contrary, grace is a public and princely spirit, which can rejoice in the good
of many, though the man has no interest in it; and his own interest in any
mercy is so much the sweeter because others partake therein together with him:
he can delight in the prosperity of Jerusalem, Psalm. 106.5. Etiam Caesares
credidiss^nt, si and Christiani potuissent, esse and Caesares, Tert. Apol.
and rejoice in the good of Gods chosen, and glory with his inheritance. But a
corrupt heart is so full of self, that though the knowledge of Christ be the
salvation of the world, yet if it cross any self interest, be will be so far
from seeking the good of the public and rejoicing in it, that he will (though
to the damnation of many) endeavor to obscure the Lord of glory.

3. Its a preventing mercy: To see other men executed before our eyes, and we
our selves to be preserved as firebrarnds plucked out of the burning: this
might affect men; but to be carried upon Eagles wings, out of the reach of
evil, Exodus 1^ 4.
and the snare to be broken before we knew we were in danger, and merely the
consideration of it to affect men; to think the Lord delivered us when there
was but a step between us and death, this is difficult.

4. Its an old Deliverance: New mercies may affect men, while the thoughts of
them are fresh, Nihil citius senescit quam gratis, Sen. Psalm. 106 12.
but by degrees the sense will we are out. They that stood upon the Red Sea,
and saw the Egyptians dead before them they believed his words, and they sang
his praise; but they soon forgot his works and waited not for his counsel,
but lusted in the wilderness and tempted God in the Desert. Had we seen how
the hearts of King and Parliament, City and Kingdom, were affected the day
after this Deliverance, when in their public Thanksgivings they said of the
Papists, Their faith is faction, their religion rebellion, and their practice
the murdering of souls and body: we would have thought, there had been no fear
of the grouth and countenancing of Popery in this Kingdom to the endangering
of all the truths of God, both in Doctrine and Worship; much less that ever a
Popish Army should have been raised in this Kingdom for the destruction of the
Parliament; and that by many of those who were themselves Members of the
Parliament; but rather that this whole Kingdom from the highest to the lowest
had taken up Luthers resolution after many Provocations, Brevi efficiam, at
^athe^^^ sit esse Papestam.

5. Because you were not the particular persons delivered: none of you were
Parliament men then. Indeed this Deliverance is in a manner particularly yours,
and belongs unto us, as it were, only at second hand, as we have an interest in
you, as in you our good is bound up; as God has made you the light of our
eyes, the breath of our nostrils, the stay of our Tribes, and the covering
Cherub upon the Ark of God among us: ^^e b. 28.16. Non mir^^s se de
l^beratione laetari quam illos ipsos qui o^im ex Aeg^pto ed^cti crant. M^ll.
P^^l. 66.6.
And though you were not the particular persons: yet its agreeable to the
language of the holy Ghost in the Scripture, to take that as done to our
selves, which was done to our Forefathers, the fruits whereof in our
generation we enjoy: He turned the Sea into dry land, they went through the
flood on foot, there did we rejoice in him. They looked upon themselves
concerned in the mercy, as truly as if they had been of the number of those
that saw the wonders of God in Egypt, and had been baptized with Moses in the
cloud and in the Sea, Hos. 12.4. He met with him in Bethel and there he spoke
with us: They acknowledge the goodness of God unto Jacob, as if they had been
the men who stood before the Lord in Bethel. And so should ye account
Deliverances granted to your Ancestors to be yours, for you enter into their
labors who now sit in their places; and you reap the fruit of all their
hazards and dangers.

6. Its a mercy which (though exceeding great in it self) God has drowned as
it were with greater mercies since: God does sometimes darken former mercies by
greater deliverances; he says, the days shall come when they shall say no
more, the Lord lives which brought up the children of Israel out of the Land
of Egypt; Ier. 23.8.9.
but the Lord lives which brought up and led the seed of the house of Israel
out of the North Country, and from all the Countries whither he had driven
them, etc. The greater mercy should as it were eclipse the glory of the
former, that in comparison it should disappeare, tanquam stellae exiliores as
exortum solis. But though God may thus darken mercies in themselves, yet
greater mercies should not ^so darken the former unto us as to cause us to
neglect or forget them. The greatness of the glory of redemption should not
take off a man's heart from being affected with the mercy of the creation; and
the remembrance of our Redeemer, should not cause a man to forget his Creator.
The greater mercies should be a means to affect a man's heart with lesser
mercies anew: As a great sin humbled for, and repented of, does not make men to
slight small sins, but rather makes a man's heart more tender of them: so a
heart raised to thankfulness for a great mercy, should not cause a man to
neglect and under-value lesser favors; but rather make him the more thankful
for them, and to view over the whole course of mercy which the Lord has showed
toward us, Mich. 6.5.
even from Shittim to Gilgal; that we may know the righteousness of the Lord,
Psalm. 68.26.
and that we may praise the Lord from the fountain of Israel; even from the
time, that the first corner stone of mercy was laid unto this day.

Such thoughts as these Satan will be ready to inject, to extenuate this mercy,
to lessen your thankfulness, and if your Vials be not full of Odors, to clog
yours spirits upon this joyful day. Having thus endeavored to remove those
things with might cause the mercy to seem small: I shall now propose some
considerations which may raise the mercy, and make it glorious in your eyes,
that you may say with Ezra his affection, thou have given such a deliverance as
this.

1. The more bitter the enemies, and the more deadly the danger, the greater
the deliverance, when the snares of death do compass us about and the pains
of hell take hold of us, and then to God the Lord belong the issues from death,
it does exceedingly advance the mercy. Had this plot taken, it would have cost
many men's lives, and these the chief of our Tribes; and how much blood might
have followed, who knows? for the woman rides upon the scarlet colored beast,
and is arrayed in scarlet colored garments, Rev. 17.3.4. And if we had escaped
with our lives, they had been lives worse then death, we had surely lost our
Liberties and Religion: for an especial part of Romes trading is in slaves and
souls of men, Rev. 18.13. so that many of us owe our lives unto this mercy, and
all we that are converted, owe that which is better then our lives, sc. our
conversion thereunto.

2. The deeper a plot is laid, Psalm. 83.3.
and then to be defeated, the greater the mercy: They have taken crafty
Counsel against thy people and they consulted against thy hidden ones. The
thing was ploited beyond the Seas, with the influence doubtless of all the
policy of Rome: Instruments chosen and brought over of purpose, men skillful to
destroy: It was communicated but to a few, and to these under an oath of
secrecy, receiving the Sacrament thereupon; And the assistance of Hell was not
wanting doubtless, Rev. 11.8.
for Rome is (...) Egypt for cruelty, Sodom for filthiness, and for forcery
Babylon the great. And when it had taken effect, the Plot was to lay all upon
the Puritans the godly party of the Kingdom, whom they knew to be extremly
hated amongst us, and therefore we were apt upon any slander raised to believe
any thing concerning them, which for ought we know might have produced as great
a Massacre upon all the godly in this Kingdom, as that in France was. But
there is a God that reveals secrets, before whom Hell and Destruction are open;
much more the hearts of the sons of men; and he discovered it. This shall be
the end of all those that Plot against God, and dig deep to hide their
counsels from him, he will certainly out wit them all at last, and will take
the wise in their own craftiness.

3. The more consident an enemy is of success, the greater is the mercy in
such a Deliverance, when they are folded together as thorns in a confederacy,
and drunken with confidence as drunkards, then they shall be consumed as
stubble fully dry, Nah. 1.10. The Conspirators said, heaven and earth had
agreed together to avenge the iniquity of these times, and the Heretics shall
receive a blow, and never know who hurt them etc. But as Luther said in another
case, Aliter decretum est in Caelo. Mich. 5.12.
They knew not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understood they his counsel;
he did laugh them to scorn, did blow upon their counsel, made the devise to
be of none effect, and wherein they concluded with themselves proudly he was
above them.

4. The more immediately the hand of God is seen in any deliverance, the
greater it is; H^b. 3.8.9. Esaias 52.10.
when the Lord makes his bow naked and his arm bare and does ride for his
peoples safety upon his charets of salvation. Here the children were come to
the birth, the vault was dug, the Powder prepared, the Billets placed, and
all the Instruments of death ready; and the Actors and Confederates most of
them gone into the Country, to expect the fatal blow. Now is God a help found
in the time of trouble; Psalm. 46.1.
cum duplicantur lateres, veniet Moses, is the Hebrew Proverb, that we may for
ever to posterity leave this Inscription upon this mercy, Jehovah Iireh, in the
Mount will the Lord be seen.

5. That it should not end only in our Deliverance, but in the enemies
destruction; and we wash our feet in the blood of the wicked; this does much
exalt a mercy when wicked men are snared in the work of their own hand, fall
into their own pit and necis artificem art perire sua; Esaias 33.11.
when their own breath shall be as fire to devour themselves. And the heads of
these Conspirators stand as public Monuments of the justice of God and man
upon the top of that house which they did desire to have turned upside down. In
this God gave you the head of Leviathan for food to your faith, in all that
wilderness of troubles and fears, which he has since led you through. Zach.
2. Theodoret. in loc.
And has been as a wall of fire round about you: Qui cominus arceat and eminus
terreat; for he has said all that are incensed against thee shall be ashamed,
and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and all they that strive with thee
shall perish, Esai. 41.11. Such considerations as these will raise the esteem
of the mercy and make it glorious in our eyes. Let us now conclude this first
point with the close of Deborahs Song, so let all thine enemies perish oh Lord,
but let them that love him be as the Sun when it goes forth in his might,
Judge. 5.31.

That the revolt of a people into former sins after they have received great
Deliverance is a great provocation: and therefore that which a thankful heart
abhorres: should we again break thy Commandments? the Interrogation has the
force of negation, a detestation.

Here for explication, we will only propose to you these three things.

1. That the evil heart of man is exceeding prone to a revolt, Hos. 11. (...)
and to back sliding: the word signifies, suspensi, men that are always in
doubt, certain and resolved of nothing: the same word that is used Deuteronomy.
28.66. thy life shall hang in doubt before thee: It may be while they are under
the sharpness of some affliction, and the gall and wormwood is yet in their
mouths, or under the fresh apprehension of some late mercy, they may seem then
to be through for God, and carried on to holiness and reformation with a full
sail: But they are as unresolved men, quickly turned about to the contrary
point of the Compass, Heb. 10.39.
and they draw back to perdition, as fast as they did seem before to put
forward to salvation, and to turn again to folly with as much earnestness as
before Psalm 85.9.
they seemed to turn to God and duty, their righteousness is as a morning dow,
and they start aside as a broken bow. And therefore its the title that God puts
upon his own people above all other Nations, b^ck-sliding Israel: (...) Ier.
3.6. and 14: and 22.
the word signifies a people r^versed and turned backward, that had made a
defection from what they were or at least did seem to be. And the great mercy
promised to this people when the Lord shall return to them is, that he will
he^le their backslidings, Hos. 14.45.
and then they need not fear ^u^ of all other things shall be a healing; for
then his anger is turned away and be will ^e as the dew to Israel.

2. It has been the glory of Gods people, and also their glorying, that they
have not made defection and revolt from God in the greatest straito^, Psalm.
44.17.18.19.
Thou have ^ore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of death; though all this become upon us, yet have we not forgotten
thee; neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant, our heart is not turned
back, neither have our steps declined from thy way.

To some men prosperity is a greater trial then adversity, and prove^ a more
dangerous means of backsliding; Hazael when he heard what was Prophesied of
him, his present resolutions were such that he thought it was more suitable to
the nature of a dog then a man, and therefore answe^s; Is thy servant a dog, 2.
King. 8.13.
that be should do this great thing? The Prophet make^ him no answer, but
this, The Lord has shamed^ne that thou shall be King over Syria: and then the
change of his condition would soon change his present resolution, and manifest
to the would that he was such a dog indeed. Many men's hearts change with their
estates, and their lost^ rise with their outward pomp and greatness; many a
man had never been so wicked, if he had not been so great. Now if it be an
evil to revolt from God in adversity, then it is much more in prosperity; to
turn from him when he blesses us, is a greater provocation then to turn from
him when he smites us.

3. There is a fourefold revolt or backsliding from God, which the Scripture
taxes men for, and every one is a degree and step unto the other.

1. In Apprehensions: when a man has not the same judgment and esteem of
God, of reconciliation and communion with him, of Christ and an interest in
him; of grace and the means of grace; of holiness and of the Saints of God,
his holy ones, which he had in times past. This the Apostle blames the
Galations for, cap. 4.15. when he first preached among them the Gospel of
grace, they looked upon his Ministry as a great mercy; they counted his feet
beautiful, and in way of thankfulness, they counted nothing dear to them;
they would have even have plucked out their own eyes; and have given them unto
him; But they had soon lost these apprehensions: and then saw no such
blessedness in the Gospel of Christ, as they had seen; therefore says the
Apostle, where is the blessedness that ye spoke of? And in this all
black-sliding does begin.

2. In Affections: This is the evil which the Prophet condemns in the people
of Israel, under that Parable of the boiling pot: Ezech. 24.3.4.
they had been over the fire both of mercies and ordinances, and afflictions;
and they were so affected, that the scumme did rise, the sin in their
consciences did overspread the whole face of the soul, and they took up great
purposes of repentance and Reformation. But the scum boiled in again; these
affections slacked, their heat abated, and they continued in their former evils
still: This also is set forth by another similitude, Hos. 13.^3.
sc. of a traveling woman, Hos. 13.13. They had many convictions, troubles of
conscience, and semi-perswasions tending to conversion and Reformation, which
were in them, as throws and pangs to travail: but when the child of
Reformation came to the birth, there was no strength to bring forth; they
stayed in the place of the breaking forth of children: and their pains went
away, their trouble ended in trouble, and they were never newborn to the
Lord: Rev. 2.5.
Thus also the Church of Ephesus left her first love: This is backsliding in
affection.

3. In Communion: Thus did the Church through a spiritual desertion and sloth,
back-slide, Cant. 5.1.2. she had but lately recovered out of a desertion, and
attained a small communion with Christ, verse. 1. I am come into my garden, my
sister, and my Spouse; yet is presently cast into a sleep, I sleep, but my
heart waketh: she remits her watch and loses her communion. 1 King 11.9.
This is the evil objected to Solomon, his heart departed from the Lord who
appeared to him twice. Though the state of grace can never change, the life of
Christ being an abiding life: yet a man in this estate is subject to many
spiritual alterations. Our communion ought to be maintained and improved as
well as our sanctification; and there should be as great care taken not to fall
from, but to grow in the one as well as in the other, in privileges as well as
in graces.

4. In Conversation: When men have escaped the pollutions of the world, 2 Pet.
2.20. Math. 12.13.14 2 Pet. 3.17. Iam. 1.27.
and are again entangled and overcome, when the unclean spirit, that was cast
out does return again, and a man falls from his former steadfastness, from the
beauty and integrity of his former conversation, his ways are more party
colored, and he is more spotted of the world; This seems to be imputed unto
David in his old age (its a hard thing to keep close to God, Psalm 2.14.
usque ad decrepitum, and to preserve a man's greenesse, and flourishing in his
age, to grow in grace in the decay of nature) 2 Chro. 17.3. The Lord was with
Iehosophat, because he walked in the first ways of his Father David: David
therefore had his first and his latter ways, and it seems that there was not
the same glory and beauty in the one, that there was in the other. All these
backslidings after mercies, a thankful heart abhorres, as being matter of
great provocation unto the Lord.

God has given you such a deliverance at this, ye do not again break his
Commandments and join in affinity with the people of these abominations;
either those from whom God has now delivered you, or those of the same spirit,
whom he has since cast out before you.

There is a spiritual affinity as well as a corpor^all; Christ tells the
Pharisees ye are of your Father the Devil; Ioh. 8.44. Genesis 49.5. Nec hoc
novum in Scripturis figurate uti translatione nominis ex comparatione criminis.
Tertul. cont. Marcio. 3. c. 8.
and there are some who are brethren in iniquity: It will be necessary
therefore to enquire (as the Prophet does Ezech. 16. The sins of thy sister
Sodom were pride, fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, and contempt of
the powe) what the sins were of those that God has formerly cast out before
your eyes, that you may take heed you join not in affinity with them therein.

1. Their care was more to be great then good: and though their authority might
avail something to restrain sin in other men, Tutum est peccare author bus
illis: (...), Romans 1.^2.
yet they took no care of any personal holiness in themselves; and so sin
was countenanced and grew bold by their example; for they not only did such
things themselves, but favored and delighted in them that did them. Do not you
join in affinity with them in this: Get the power of grace into your own
hearts, be inwardly and personally holy, or else you can neither rule with God
nor for God. There is in the Magistracy as well as in all other things a double
title; Ius politicum and Evangelicum, temporale and spirituale: Its one thing
to have a civil right to a thing by the Laws of men, and another thing to
have a spiritual right, as a part of the inheritance of Christ, in which
Believers have an interest by virtue of their union with him, 1 Cor. 3 22.23
All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Its one thing
to rule by providence, and another by promise: They set up Kings, but not by
me, they have made Princes, Hos. 8.4.
and I knew it not: By Gods providence they did it, and by his permission;
Est^de ^t^^e d^^i it Evangelici, confer facul^^tem spiritualiter dominandi ad
finem spirituatem: sed dominis politici est, tribuere faculiatem assumendi h^c
temporali^ (...) usus temporales Daven. determ. q. 30.
but not by his allowance and approbation. And though it be a truth, Dominlum
politicum non sundutur in gratia, Non me consulto vel approbantem ipsorum
sactum, ad regnum per seditionem evexerunt, Tarn^^i^^oc.
yet Dominium Evangelicum is founded therein only. You will have but a frugle
and an imperfect title to rule, if personal holiness be wanting: This only
will carry true awe and majesty with it. Herod feared John and did him
reverence; its a small honor for to be saluted or flattered rather, with cap
and knee, when you shall be despised as vile persons in the hearts of men.

There is a twofold image of God, the one inward, consisting in a conformity to
God, in knowledge righteousness and true holiness; the other outward, Imago
(...) est (...) specialiter and proprie dicta, vel (...) improprie: ^ugman.
Photinia de imag. Dei in homine ^dis p. 8. Quadum in quibus ra^^ imaginis
principaliter consistit, est and aliquid (...) l^ qu^ i^^g^ Dei inventur,
Aquin. Sum. pre^. q. 93. a. 4.
in a Dominion and Sovereignty over the creatures as, 1 Cor. 11.7. But this
latter is called the image of God, Divines say, improperly, secondarily, and
rather as a consequent of this image then a part of it. Get not only the
outward image of God, consisting in sovereignty, Mr Burges vindiciae legis, p.
115.
but the inward, which consists in sanctity; for then will your Authority be
complete, when you have not only a single, but a double image, not only the
Image of God upon you as Magistrates, but also in you as Saints.

2. It was the great evil of those whom God has cast out before you, they
used all their authority for their own private ends: the advancement of
themselves, the enriching and raising of their families and allies; and when
any one of a family did rise to any place of honor or eminency, all the rest
were raised by him without respect to any thing but consanguinity or affinity.
And though the man were never so unjust, never so unable, yet his relation to
such a great man, was sufficient to qualify him for any place, either of
honor or trust in Church or Commonwealth: As Shebna (with whom Call. did
parallel Sir Thomas Moore in his time) being himself fastened as a nail in a
sure place, Treasurer over the Kings house, Esaias 22.25. Onus] omnes qui eorum
authoritate nitebantur, cum iis coreuere necesse est. Call. Vasa] Id est, filii
amici and quotquot ab eo pendebant. Alap. in loc. Reynolds in Hos. 14.9. Salv.
de guber. Dei, p. 10. Rosin. Antiq. Rom l 7. cap. 48. page 7; 5.
he had his creatures raised by him, and who as a burden bung upon him: But
the Lord says, the nail fastened in a sure place shall be removed, and be cut
down and fall; and the burden that is upon it shall be cut off, for the Lord
has spoken it. Do not ye join in affinity with them in these abominations:
The Civil Law says, Qui rem dopositam in usus suos converter it invito
Domino, furti reus est. Surely all the Authority that is in your hands, is but
a depositum committed unto you, and ye are Stewards, and therefore its not
lawful for you to convert a public trust to a private use. The Heathen
thought that man unworthy of any place of Trust in the Commonwealth, that did
affect to enrich himself; therefore among the Romans, their Law was Qui usque
ad december libras dives esse voluisset, indigrum curia judicarent; and that if
any Senator after his entrance upon authority should be sound guilty this way,
he was to be put out of the Senate. Tertul. Apol. c. 6. Pro magno titulo
ambitionis, Senatu summovebant. Tunc illi pauperes magistiratu^ opulentam
Rempub. (...); nunc autem d ves potestas pauperem sacis esse rempub. Sal. ibid.
They found this evil in the Magistracy to be a canker to the Commonwealth;
and that when persons in public place did seek to enrich themselves, the
public must needs be impoverished thereby.

And happy shall that man among you be, when he shall come to give up an
account to God of this great trust, either at the end of these troubles, or of
his life, who shall be able to say with the Church, Idoneus plane and dignus
qui ponatur custos in veneis, quem propriae cura vinea a commissoruns
diligentia and sollicitudin^ non impedit aut retarda^. Been. in Cant. Sermon. 30.
Cant. 1.6. They made me keeper of the Vine-yards, but mine own Vine I have
not kept.

3. The common evil of those that were cast out before you, was, that they
hated reformation; and though there were many things which they could not but
acknowledge were out of frame, and had need to be reformed; yet being of the
Archbishop of Capua his mind, who when Paul the Third did call a Council to
decree something about the Reformation of the Church to satisfy the people, he
would not yield to have any thing amended, Ipse em^i^ emendationis impatiens,
magna con^entione rec^am that, ne quid ^mnino res^^^^r^^^^, ne L^hera^i ja^e it
quasi ab ipsit propo^dam ad^i istud, secerint. Sleidan. comment. l. ^2.
least the Lutherans should boast themselves that they had forced them
thereunto. I know ye do, nay, ye cannot but see many things amiss in Church
and State; let there be no stop in the Reformation for any private respect
whatsoever, that it may never be objected to us as to Ephra^m, He is an unnise
son, for he should not have stayed long in the place of the breaking forth of
children. Hos. 13.13. Psalm. 82.^.
For the Commonwealth, even the foundations of the earth are out of course.
Truly if a man should with. Eccles. 4.12.
Solomon consider all the oppressions done in the land, and behold the tears
of such as are oppressed and they have no Comforter, and on the side of the
oppressors there is power, but they have no comforter, it would cause a man to
praise the dead which are already dead, more then the living which are yet
alive. Hab. 1.13.
It would make a man to sigh to the breaking of his loins, to see men made as
the fishes of the Sea that have no King over them. God has committed the sword
into yours hand; bear it not in vain; Do justice to all equally; not only
see that great men, who can make friends, have right done them; but defend the
poor and fatherless do justice to the afflicted and needy; Hos. 14.3.
Gods especial care is of such, with him the fatherless find mercy; let them
find justice with you: A good Magistrate is resembled in Eliakim, to a nail
fastened in a sure place, Esaias 22.2.
and they shall hang upon him all the glory of his Fathers house the offspring
and the issue; and all vessels of small quantity as well as great, cups as well
as flagous: Let violence be done to no man, either by your officers of your
Armies. Non solum Magnates sustinebit, sed etiam infinio ordini consulet quo
autem id in Principe rarius est, co majore laud dignum. Call. in loc.


For the meanest subject of England has as truly an interest in the common
justice of the Kingdom (though he sue for it in forma pauperis) as the
greatest. Nemo est omnium principum qui jus habeat vel teruncium exigendi a
suis praeter constitutam censum annnum ^isi populus assenti^tur, Vide Philip.
Cominaeum l 10. in calce.


Do justice to all speedily: Let it not be said that the attendance for
justice is the greatest oppression; and many rather content themselves to lie
down under the burden, then seek a remedy, the seeking where of they know will
be worse then the disease, and therefore men choose vitia far potius quam
remedia. Amos 5.2.
Let jugdement run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream;
remembering Iehosaphats charge, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for
man, but for the Lord, who is with you in judgment; wherefore now let the
fear of the Lord be upon you, 2 Chro. 19.6.7.
take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.

And for the Church, let our Congregations be purged, let the outward Court be
cast out, and let not those ordinances which are only the Privileges of the
Saints, be prostituted to the lusts of every profane man; Let the belly of the
Church (which some interpret of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) be as a
heap of wheat, Cant. 7.2. Mr ^^tions Exposition.
set about, not with weeds, but with Lillies: And do you take care that it be
so in practice as well as in Doctrine, that it may be no more objected to our
shame, that we teach the truth, but practice the contrary. And let not only the
rubbish be cast out, but let the Temple of the Lord be built; there is in
Reformation an Astructive part as well as a Destructive: Let all the Ordinances
of God that are wanting be set up, and all the furniture of Christ's house
brought in, and let every one laying selfe-respects aside, say with Baldassor a
Germane Divine in an Epistle of his written to Oecolampadius, Burroughes
Gracious Spirit, p. 277. Psalm. 2.12. 2 Chronicles. 30.8. (...) 2 Cor. 10.5.
Veniat verbum Domini, veniat, and submitiemus illi, sexcenta etiamsi nobis
essent colla. This were indeed to kiss the Son, to give the hand to the
Lord, and to show forth the power of the word upon our spirits; when strong
holds and reasonings are cast down, and every thought brought into subjection,
to the obedience of Christ.

4. Those that are cast out before you, had no zeal for God in any thing,
wherein their own private interest was not concerned: Though men were never so
blasphemous against God, and wicked in themselves; yet if in their ways of
wickedness they did not entrench upon them, they had no zeal against it at
all. Surely, God did never commit any people to the Government of a Magistrate,
but with this limitation, that they should be so his people that they still
remain Gods people.

All Government depends upon a twofold Covenant: First, inter Deum and Regem,
between God and the King, sc. ut populus sit and perpetuo maneat populus Dei,
that the care of Princes should be that the people so obey them as that they
shake not off their subjection unto God. Secondly, inter Regem and populum,
Sancitur saedus inter Dou^ and Regem, e^ sc. condition, ut populus sit, and
perpetuo maneat populus Dei; Deus enim sua proprietate and possessione non
exuit, cum populum Regibus tradis: sed regendum, curandu^ poscendu^ tradit, non
secus ac is qui gregi pastoro^ eligit, gregis nihil minus Dominus manet.
Stephen, Iunius, vindiciae contra Tyrannos. Q 1.
inter Regem and populum, between the King and the people, sc. ut been
imperanti been obtemperaretur, sc. that the people should obey them, ruling
according to Law, and no otherwise. Its necessary, therefore that Rulers look
first at the Covenant made between them and God, before they come to plead the
Covenant of the people; and they would thereby see that they are as truly bound
to keep the people in obedience to God, as the people to keep themselves in
obedience unto them. Dominium politicum est jus sen facultas, habenadi,
reg^ndi, utendi pers^ni^ vel rebus, sec^^^^^ ^eges rite institu^^^, Daven.
d^term. Q 30.
And the only way to keep a people whithin the bounds of their Covenant with
them, is to use their authority to their utmost to keep their Covenant with the
Lord; for he only it is that gives Rulers the hearts of men, and subdues the
people under them. That Arminianism, Socianinism, and many unheard of
blasphemies should walk abroad with open face, and most of the Principles of
Religion in this Sceptick age be either questioned or denied, as if we were
certain of nothing; and that our condition should be as that of Laish, Judge.
18.7.(...) cohibitionis vel retentionis hares.
where there was no heir of restraint to put them to shame in any thing: That
in a time of Reformation as this is, Satan should cast out a flood after the
woman, is no wonder; but that there should be none to succor the woman, this
seems strange. Surely, God is as jealous now of his name and truth, as he was
in former ages, and so should his people be: Malo in nos murmur h^min^m quam in
Deum; bonum est mihisi D^u dignetur me uti pro clypeo: Bern. de consider.
Ephesians. 4.14.
Be ye therefore as tender of Gods honor as of your own; say the reproaches of
them that reproached thee are fallen upon me; and be willing to sustain the
dishonor your selves, so the name of God be not blasphemed. It will be but a
sad account for Governors at last day to say, I was by God set over this
people, and I have used my power to the utmost to keep them in subjection to
me; but I have taken no care to keep them unto God, but have suffered every man
according to that (...) and craft that is in them, to seduce, and draw them
away from God at pleasure. Ye are indeed told by some, and that to your faces,
that ye have nothing to do in matters of Religion; I dare not presume so
far, as to prescribe to you how, and in what order, or measure your power
should be put forth in the things of God: But this I say confidently, that
Magistracy who will rule with God, must rule for God: Job says, Job 31.26, 27,
28.
if I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my
heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand: (I quote
this place because I think men will not say this is Jewish, and therefore in
the New Testament binds not:) He does not say, has any man a rule over my
conscience in matters of Religion? I may and will worship what God I please; no
Magistrate in the world shall prescribe to me in this, so I walk peaceably and
disturb not the civil State, they are to look no farther. But he was quite of
another judgment; for he adds, this also were an iniquity to be punished by
the judge, for I should have denied the God that is above. And it is not to be
passed by, that he says [This also] he had said the same of ^d^^^ery, verse.
11. This is an heinous crime, yea, it is an iniquity to be p^^is^^^ by the
Judges, unto which and to other sins formerly enumerated, he adds this
also; as that which should be matter of the Magistrates care, as well as the
wickednesses committed between man and man. And I am sure the Apostles rule is,
that we are to pray for Magistrates and all that are in authority, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in godliness as well as honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.

5. Those that God cast out before you, Perstringit impios homines, q^i
c^nque^eban^ur d^ l^bertate Proph^t^^ (...) and objurgationum veh^men tia, acsi
po^ulum and magnates insectari voluissent, Call. in loc. 2 Chro. 30.22.
Ares^endo a ^scit, sc. paul^t^m. and ita tandem pereat ab ipso ab ipso omnis
fortitudo omne aux^lium, omne c^nsilium, Tarnov.
discountenanced the Ministry, and the more faithful any were to God, the more
they were suspected of loyalty to them. They made a man an offender for a word,
and laid a snare for him that reproved in the gate: Do not you join in
affinity with them herein. Those that teach the good knowledge of the Lord,
speak comfortably unto them, let them be encouraged and countenanced by you in
their work: It may be sometimes a look of yours may prevail more with some
then a Sermon of ours.

Those that do neglect their duty, you need not fear will grow too high; for
the Lord has said of the idol shepherd, his right arm shall wither, and his
right eye shall be put out. Wherein they fail, it is proper for you to say to
Archippus, take heed to thy Ministry; and with Iehoash, to call for Iehoiada
and the other Priests, and say unto them, why repair ye not the breaches of
the house? 2 King. 12.7.

But for those that are both faithful and painful, do not you by
discountenancing of them make them vile among the people with whom they have to
deal; do not weaken their hands, who have to their utmost by their pains and
prayers endeavored to strengthen yours. Surely, the strength and glory of a
Kingdom lies in the Ordinances thereof, and if they be once taken away, ye may
say as was said at the death of that great Roman Senator, Succurrite cives,
maenia civitatis nostra ceciderunt. And ye may write upon all your remaining
mercies Ichabod, the glory is gone. Neither is that all the danger, but the
Prophet tells us Ezech. 10.2. when the glory of the Lord departed from the
Cherubines, the command given, was, fill thine hand with coals of fire from
between the Cherubins, and scatter them over the City. Its Mr Calvin's gloss
upon it, they supposed ignem sacrum tantum valers ad expianda scelera, etc.
That the fire in the Temple did serve for no other end, but to expiate their
sin; but God tells them that it would serve also to burn their City.

6. Those that God cast out before you, plotted against Religion and the power
of godliness, and the stream of their lusts ran out that way; Do not you join
in affinity with them herein. I do not now plead for all those that call
themselves Saints, (which has not anciently been the manner of the Saints;)
But for those that do give testimony in their conversation, that they are so
indeed; do not, I beseech you make their hearts sad. Doubtless, it is
confessed by all, that a great part of Englands Interest lies in that Text,
Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. If the differences be
in matters circumstantiall, not in faith but order; and this accompanied with
holiness and humility, I think for such Luther gives a good rule, Igne
charitatis comburendi sunt Haeretici: our glass is not crystal yet, but
mixed with fire, Rev. 15.12.
and when the Lord shall be pleased to restore the one, we may expect he will
take away the other; mean while, we ought to give the right hand of fellowship
to those, with whom we hope to enjoy fellowship at the right hand of God
hereafter. We know the spirit of Antichrist has acted men furiously this way,
and may secretly creep into godly men, as sometimes Satan did into Peter; and
we have seen in our own times, that many have received the mark of the Beast
in their right hands, who never intended to wear it in their forehead.

Having thus finished this Admonition, I shall conclude with a desire that the
Commemoration of this mercy may strengthen your hands, to do great things for
God, in this day of yours and the Kingdom visitation. The civil Law says, if
a man be redeemed from captivity by another, protinus est redimentis; God has
purchased you by the mercy of this day; be through for God; yet are not your
own, let the love of Christ constrain you.

But if not, consider the Arguments which the Text gives you: 1. God will be
angry (will thou not be angry with me) and having tasted of the sweetness of
his love, there is great cause that you should fear his wrath; for as his
loving kindness is better then life, so is his wrath worse then death.

2. A worse and a greater danger may arise; will thou not be angry with us till
thou have consumed us? Gods displeasure is progressive, Hos. 1.3. the Prophet
sets forth the pedigree of Judgment, if Diblaim be the mother and the daughter
Gomer, she will not bring forth Iezreel only, and leave bearing, but
Lo-ruhamah and also Lo-ammi; they are not my people, and I will be their God no
more. The same enemies have vexed you with their wiles ever since, and have
attempted to blow up your Honorable Houses in a more dangerous, and if it may
be, in a more unnatural way: But you may say, hitherto the Lord has helped
us; only consider Ezech. 1.15. All things here below are compared to wheels,
they are in perpetuo motu; and the Government of them is in the hand of Christ;
the spirit of the living creatures is in the wheels; and if he turn his hand,
they will run backward, as well as forward, and as fast.

I shall cease to be further burdensome, and conclude with that of 1 Samuel
12.24. Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth, with all your heart; for
consider how great things he has done for you.

FINIS.

