THE QUEENS RESOLVTION DISCOVERED BY Some Letters read in the House of COMMONS.

From Master Strickland, a Member of of the HOUSE.

Relating her providing of four ships with Ammunition for her coming over
into England, which were stayed by a Statesman of War, upon report of
fourteen other ships she had provided in the Brill in Holland.

Also an examination, and Articles of Sir Edward Rodney, Sir Edward Barkley,
and one Master Dugdale a Divine, and brought to the House of Commons, with a
Troop of Horse, being taken in Sommersetshire.

London, Printed for Rich. Butler. 1642.

The Queens resolution discovered, by some Letters read in the House of
Commons from Master Strickland, a Member of the House, relating her providing
of four ships, with Ammunition, for her coming over into England, which were
staid by a Statesman of War, upon report of 14 other ships she had provided
in the Brill in Holland.
ON Wednesday the 12 of this instant October, was brought upon their knees at
the Bar in the House of Commons as Delinquents, Sir Edward Rodney, sir Edward
Barkley, Knights, and one Master Dugdale, a Minister, taken in Sommersetshire
by the Parliaments Forces the last week, for raising of Forces against the
Parliament, and refusing to obey the Orders and Sommons of the Parliament, upon
their coming to the Bar they were demanded,

1 Upon what command and Warrant they raised forces to oppose the proceedings
of the Parliaments Army, and to disturb the peace of that County, which has
been adjudged actual levying of War against the Parliament, and that
adjudged Treason.

2 Upon what authority they endeavored to raise Money, Plate, and Horse in that
County, for the maintenance of the War against the Parliament.

Upon which they severally answered that they had authority for what they have
done from Marquess Hartford, who had Authority from His Majesty, and by
virtue of a Commission of Array granted to him, which they conceived to be a
legal way to raise and levy men, for the safety of His Majesty's person, and
preserving the peace of the kingdom, upon which it was answered, it was
contrary to the Votes and Judgments of both Houses of Parliament, and to many
Presidents of former times, and the fundamental Laws of the land, which both
Houses had set forth in diverse Declarations and Orders, that every subject
might take notice there of levying them that should refuse the same, or
obstinately reject, and the same void of excuse.

After which they were commanded out of the House, and the Commons falling into
debate of the many misdemeanors and outrages committed by the said knights,
against the Kings good and peaceable subjects, are appointed a Committee to
draw up a charge of Treason against them, and ordered they should be committed
to the Tower in the mean time, and Master Dugdale to be committed to the
Gatehouse, which was done accordingly.

Then was brought before the Commons, Captain Kettleby, one of the English
Pirates, taken by the Earl of Warwicks Ships, upon his knees at the Bar, and
a charge of Treason read against him, containing these Articles.

1 That he the said Captain Kettleby in a traitorous and rebellious manner,
breaking the trust reposed in him by the Parliament, for the guarding of the
Irish Seas, to prevent the coming in of foreign Aid to assist the Rebels in
that kingdom, contrary to his Oath made for his fidelity to King and
Parliament, and contrary to the said trust reposed in him, neglected his
charge, and permitted aid from France to be brought to the Irish Coast, and
endeavored to procure their landing at Waterford in Ireland.

2 That he in a traitorous and rebellious manner, contrary to the laws of this
land, and contrary to his late protestation, taken for the preservation of the
religion, laws, and liberties of the Subjects, has stopped the passage of
certain ships, sent for his relief for Ireland, with Ammunition and diverse
suites of Clothes, and seized the same for the use of his Majesty, to assist
him in his War against the Parliament.

3 That the said Captain in a traitorous and rebellious manner, robbed and
spoiled the Kings good subjects and foreign Merchants coming into this
kingdom with Merchandise, profitable for the Weal public, and seized upon
their ships, goods, and Merchandise, and converted the same to his own use and
benefit, practicing piracy on every Chest he could take.

4 That he being sommoned by the Earl of Warwick to make his appearance
before his Lordship, and answer to such Articles as should be laid to his
charge, not only refused to appear, but in a traitorous manner opposed the
messengers, and charged his Ordnance against their ships, not submitting till
they had compelled him by force.

After the reading whereof, the Commons fell into consideration, to appoint a
time for his trial upon the same, in the mean time ordered, he should again
be committed to the Tower, and appointed the said Articles to be read again in
the House the next morning the second time.

Then was Letters read in the House of Commons from Master Strickland at the
Hague in Holland, intimating that Her Majesty the Queen has provided four
ships laden with Ammunition to conduct her for England, but the said ships were
stopped by a Statesman of War, by order from the States that her Majesty
has at the Brill provided fourteen ships, with pretense to guard her person
likewise for England laden with Ammunition, for which, by the Prince of Orenges
means for certain the Jewels of the Crown are pawned. But the States will
not let any Ammunition come for England against the Parliament to assist His
Majesty in His War, but make stay of the said ships, upon which it is
conceived the Queen will change her mind from coming for England, and take
her journey into France, and endeavor the French Kings assistance to His
Majesty in this War, upon great debate thereof, had by the Commons, it was
ordered Letters should be sent to the Earl of Warwick, desiring his Lordship
to send some of his ships to lie upon the French Coasts for the preventing of
her Majesty's journey thither, and of any forces to come from that kingdom for
England.

Then there was read in the House of Commons Letters from Yorkshire that
Captain Hotham has secured the two Castles of Caywood and Pomfret, and from
Pomfret, marched on Friday last against the Earl of Cumberland, with intention
to give him battle, and for that purpose has procured the high Sheirffe of
that County to raise part of the Trained Bands on the West part of the County,
who are joined with him, and hope with Gods assistance to quiet the peace of
that County in short time, which proceedings the House well approved of.

FINIS.

