The strange VVITCH AT GREENVVICH, (Ghost, Spirit, or Hobgoblin) haunting a
Wench, late servant to a Miser, suspected a Murderer of his late Wife: With
curious Discussions of walking spirits and spectars of dead Men departed, for
rare and mystical knowledge and discourse, By HIERONYMUS MAGOMASTIX.
Eme Lysippo, novos, tota sonat Vrbe, Libellos.

April 24. 1650. Imprimatur. JOHN DOWNHAM.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by John Saywell, at the
Greyhound in Little Britain, 1650.

The strange Witch at Greenwich, etc.
Scepticus. REverend Sir, though my acquaintance be but young with you, yet
imboldened upon these extraordinary courtesies, I lately received from you (ever
obliging my gratitude) by your candid imparting unto me your learned notions,
to my full anchoring and settling in such points and doubts as before, I was
tossed and troubled in unsettled fluctuations, as I then (I thank you) thrashed
out of your full mow, and lighted my dark torch at your bright flame; lapping
as a poor Poet out of your Homericall Basin: so knowing you are as willing to
improve your able parts for public and private good to the inlivening and
inlightning of such weak tenuities as mine, as a full dugd Mother or Nurse to
communicate her milk to a hungry child, as the Sun lends her light to the
Moon, Stars, and Plannets, and his influence to the sublunaries, since bonum
quo communius co melius, good the more common it is, the more commendable; as a
poor Beggar who knows the way willingly to the house again where he
received a Rich Alms: I make bold to thrust my self further upon your favors
so far, as that you would be pleased to inform me both in the quid, quale,
and quomodo, of the Reports in every man's tongue (more common then the cough
and fleame in an old woman's mouth, or Oaths and God dam mees, in the mouths of
some Roarers) of a strange Witch or Ghost now at your Greenwich, haunting the
house of one Meriday, and playing strange prankes by throwing stones at the
glass windows, making the stools, chaires, and other utensills dance
Sellengers round, or rather (according to the Music of these Times, turnde all
frets) passing measure in lofty levaltoes, without either Welsh Ha^pe, Jews
Trumpe, Scotch Bagpipe, or English disorder (I should say Recorder) throwing
also Books, yea the Testament into the fire, as though it cared as little for
it, as a new Enthusiast, Papist, or an Athiest, peerking the ladle out of the
Wives boiling pot below, as high as into the Husbands bed above; putting the
Husbands breeches upon the Wives head (as though the Gray Mare were the better
Horse) not enduring that a boy should be too captious or capritious throwing
the boys cap into the chimnyes smoke, yea as a Lord of mistule, breaking
earthen pots (as fast as some Merchants and Bankrouts in these broken and
breaking Times) with other such reakes and mad merry pranks, as strange as ever
Hobgoblins, pinching Fairies, and Robin Goodfellow acted in houses in old Times
amongst Dayry Wenches, and Kitchen Maids.


Veridicus. Though usually fama mendax, fame be as lying as flying, grown
much bigger (like Snow Balls) by tumbling from mouth to mouth, yet to answer
you in your Jocoserious strain what you have related, and much more as of much
more authentic credit, then what the Popish Proselites believe as Gospel
truth in their leaden Legends of St. Dennyes and St. Guthmar, taking their
heads in their hands, and burying them when they were cut off; of Justina
(being a right woman) who spoke when her tongue was cut out; of St. Tryar who
caused a sheep (as most blabbing meat) to bleate in a Thieves belly, who had
eat it; of St. Francis who caused a Wolf to leave woarying Sheep, calling
him brother Wolf; of the stones who said Amen, venerable Bede, when he had
ended his Sermon; of St. Cuthbert who made the Crows do penance (in black
sheets) for pulling the thatch off his house; of St. Dominick who took up his
books fallen into the Sea as dry as dust, and of St. Margaret who by the sign
of the all wonder working cross, caused a Spider which she had swallowed come
out at her leg by a little scratching, with a number such like, which they
scrape, and scratch, and patch together like shreds in a Beggars Cloak to make
up a fardle of fooleries, and a bundle of bables; for as I have examined the
truth of these things you have related, not only from the Wife, Son, and
Daughter of that Merryday, but from Master Halsepenny and his Wife, who saw a
Laundyron of it self without any visible mover leap out of the fire, a
Candlestick skippe up into the chamber, as other Neighbors other such postures
as true as strange, hearing also strange noises and ratlings, as of Carts or
Waynes rumbling up and down the house when the doors have been locked, and
except a Cat or Rat, no visible Creature within; so I my self being one night
with much company in the house, as we went out a round stone was thrown at my
Daughters heels: another time as I was in the house with the old Wife and two
Children, as I went into the Garden a knife was thrown after me, which I
took up, and with vehemence threw back again to the very place from whence it
came, daring the Witch or Spirit to throw it at me again, and conjuring it in
the name of that Jesus which is terrible to Devils to speak unto me, and to
reveal the reason why it haunted the house, and to return to it own place;
but I had no reply, neither by voice or gesture.


Scept. But did you not in this case use exorcismes, which you so condemn in
Priests and Jesuits?


Verid. I know well both Durand in the Rites of his Church ( lib. 1. cap. 19.)
and Thiraeus (de Demonibus part. 3.) and Delrius in his Magical disquisitions
( Tom. 3.) and Bellarmine, and the Rhemists upon Timothy, 1 Cor. 3. and all the
Rabble of them, make exorcisme or adjuration of Spirits, one of the disorderly
Orders of their Church, and they join it with the Acolythites, Ostiarians
Readers, Priests, and Deacons, and Bristow in his Motives, Bozius and Campian
make it one of the Notes of their Church, as the chief of their Miracles, and
both Staphilus and Smediline, page 404. and Lindan in his Dialogues ( dial. 3.
cap. 1.) and Bredenbachius in his Collations, lib. 7. cap. 40. and cap. 42.
scoff at Luther, and his Protestants, because they cannot conjure Spirits,
which they say was attempted to their great scaith and scorn, both in
Wittemb^rge, Anno 1545. and else where Anno 1563. I know also that they pretend
this exorcizing of Spirits came from Solomon, and so according to Origin
(tract. 35. in Math.) they make it Judaicall, and consequently (since according
to Junius, Judizare est Christum denegare) they deny Christ and his Gospel by
Judaizing; I know also Tertullian in his Prescriptions, cap. 4. deny this power
unto women, yet they brag of their Catharine de Siena, St. Bridget Genoveir,
Anatolia, Euphrasia, Hildegund, and others, that they had this prerogative over
Spirits, yet nevertheless what I did in adjuring the spirit in a lawful
calling, se defendeudo, in defending my self from it, when it assaulted me by
a knife thrown at me, in using against it the name of Jesus, (which according
to Tertullian to Triphon, Lactantius in his Institutions, lib. 4 cap. 17. and
Athanasius in the life of Anthony is so terrible unto, and powerful against
Devils) my act was so far discrepant from the practice of the Popish Priests
in their ordinary adjurations, like the sons of Sceva, Acts ^6 14. in a
foolish imitation and usurpation of that power which Christ gave his Apostles,
Luke 10.19. (interpreted by Athanasius in Psalm. 28. and Bosterus in locum) as
there is discrepance betwixt true Miracles (these sometimes of Jannes and
Jambres of the primitive Heretics, and our modern superstitious Papists,)
which by degrees we shall bring to the test and touchstone.


Scept. I know well this power of adjuring spirits, was not only Apostolical,
but it continued for some times in the nonage and infancy of the Church after
the Apostles, for the confirmation of the faith both of the Christians and the
Gentiles out of whom no spirits could be dispossessed but by Christians, as
we may see in Tertullians Apology ( cap. 23.) and to Scapula, cap. 2. and in
Cyprian (Epist. 2. and 76.) Minutius (in Octavio) with Athanastus, Prudentius,
Justin, and others; but for every mumbling Priest to monopolize it, and to have
that power over demonaicks which Christ had himself, and did only delegate to
his Disciples: yea to take upon them to exercise this their exorcizings of
spiris out of young Children, in baptism, when a pocky Priest (in King James
his phrase) spits in a Childs mouth, this is as ridiculous as gross and
superstitious.


Verid. It cannot be denied that children are in nature the children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.2. born in sin with David, Psalm. 51. none being exempted from the
infection of original sin, not John the Baptist, Jeremy, or the Virgin
Mother (save only the Savior of sinners) yea perhaps by reason of this
original sin derived not by imstation as Pelagians grant but by propagation
as hereditary diseases usually, even Infants may be vexed and troubled with
spirits, as Augustine affirms in his City of God ( lib. 21. cap. 14. and lib.
22. cap. 22.) yet to exorcise them after the fashion of Popish Priests in
Baptism (which was never used to the jewish Children by Leviticall Priests in
circumcision) has neither Precept from Christ instituting Baptism, nor
practice, that I read of in the Primitive Church; but like their Auricular
confession, adoration, and circumgestation of the breaden God, denegation of
marriage to Ministers, vows of poverty, continency and single life; and much
such like trumpery (with Jonas his Gourd) it has grown up of it self: and
therefore being no Plant of Christ's planting, with most of their wild Gourds,
and wild Olives; they and it must wither, being without any root or grafting,
Math. 15 John 15.


Scept. But leaving these deep discussions, I pray you proceed in your plain
story of this house hanted by Witches: I have heard of most of these Pageants
you have related were only done by the wily Wench, who was servant to the
woman taken out of her grave, upon suspicion of her unnatural death: and that
she has troubled and blundered the Waters, and made all this poother, to call
her late Master in question about the death of his Wife.


Verid. It Is very true, that bold faced brazen brow'd wench has had a great
finger in the Pie, and has been a great stickler in these Pageants; for I have
had her in serious examination, and I have with much ado wrested from her thus
much: that being one day in her mothers garden, some three weeks after her
Dames death, that a stone was thrown at her, and hit her on the back, none
being near her, nor within her sight; at which she much marvelling from whence
it should come, she took up the stone, looked seriously upon it, carried it up
and down the Garden, with as much pride and complacency, as admiration: upon
which Satan vehemently tempted her to throw it against her mothers window,
which this obedient vassal did accordingly. Upon which she setting the Devil
a work, as he her, as she broke the ice, an ill spirit has waded and thrown
sorty stones since (as forty can testify) at the same windows, no visible hand
being since, not any terminus a que, local place discerned from whence, or how
they should come.


Scept. And is this all she has confessed*


Verid. Without much wresting and spunging she has freely and penitentially
acknowledged both to my self and others, that since that stone thrown in the
Garden, she her self in a paltry pride to aggravate the Report of spirit
haunting behind peoples backs, when she thought she was free from being
seen, has often in acting and counterfeiting the spirit, thrown stools,
cushions, candlesticks, dishes, and kept the like Revill Rush; and indeed so
long goes the Pitcher to the Well, that at last it comes home broake. Satan
caught her in her own snare, being by a young man taken tripping in the very
act, as she cast a great chip out of a chamber down the stairs into the
house where many people were.


Scept. But as the phrase is, that a pudding has two ends, what one good end
had she in this wickedly, witty folly and knavery?


Verid. You have answered your self and unriddled your own question; for it
was wicked witty folly indeed in a young Impe of 14 year old, that had more wit
to do wickedly, then grace to do good; her fantasticalities being such
mixtures as be in some Tarltanonized leasters and Baffons of ingenious folly
and serpentive knavery; as there be the two species of a Horse and an Ass, in
a Mule; of a Dog and an Ape in a Cynocephalift; of a Leopard and Cammell in a
Camelopardis, and of ignorance and arrogance in some self conceited fantastic.


Scept. And was this the primus motor, and maine original that set her a work?


Verid. These her inward principles and corruptions which you see how soon
they begin to work and act in our degenerate nature, they were as sparks
fuellized by Satan, who as she told me with sad looks and sighs (but with
as many tears as milstones) upon the throwing of her first stone, entered into
her as into Judas and Ananias, and others, and vehemently tempted her to act
all these parts, which I have recited, and many more; baiting his hook with
many delusive promises, that if she would go on as she had begun, what she
did should never be known, and that he would never forsake her, as its
probable he will be as good as his word (as a shame to some of his officers)
banquerouts, Politicians and Impostors, who break their words as Sampson broke
his cords, and dally with promises, as Children with Bables, and old Flowers
thrown by, as old Ladders after their ends be climbed and shaken off, as
Foxes do their Fleas.


Scept. But not to jest with the times which is to touch the Lions paw, or
play with his beard. I see give the Devil an inch, and he will take an ell,
sup of his broth, and cate of his roast-meate, it being dangerous to give his
waters the least passage, or to entertain the least spark of his hellish
heates into a harboring heart, but principiis obstare to resist him in the
beginning, to quench his sparks with prayers and tears in the first kindling,
to crush his injected temptations, as young Serpents in the heads, and
Cocatrices in their shells; yea to pump them out as water out of a ship as
fast as they leaker or dash in: This infernal Fox or Serpent wresting in
himself whole, where he gets but in his head, like a hungry Dog following
still for more, if he get but one luring crust to entice him on.

I see also how soon these young things, God leaving them to themselves, and to
their strong soon budding corruptions, like soft Wax, take sudden
Sathanicall Impressions, like that young Pythonist or Ventriloquist, who got her
Masters much gain by Southsayings, Acts 16. and that young baggage, who like
the cackling of a Hen, that Peter was a Galilean made that Cock cry Craven, to
the denying of his Master, Math. 27. and that young Herodias in whom the Devil
daunced, faith Chrysostom, till her round turnings and mimicall gestures laid
John Baptists round head in a platter, Mark 6. and many young wily Wenches in
our Times, some discovered by Doctor Harsuet, some by Deakon and Walker, in
their printed Dialoguizings, and some by deep and judicious King James, to
have played strange reakes by the tutorings and impostures of Friars and
Jesuits, and by the trainings of some old Witches and Wizzards both black and
white; and indeed I have a strong jealousy that this Impe has a laire Father
or laire-mother (besides Satan the Father of all impostures) some he or she
Witch, who trains her (besides these Legerdemaines) even in Wichcraft it self.


Verid. Truly my jealousies and suspicions in this kind have been and still
are as strong as yours; that as the old Cocks crow, the young ones learn; and
for this purpose I have touched every string, rolled every stone, improved all
my best by my self and friends to find out the old serpent of this young
spawne, and by this Cubbe, I have used all the Terriers of my best wits to hunt
the old Fox to the hole to trap her teachers; but though much suspected,
nothing yet can be detected: Yea I have dealt by all ways and means with the
Wench fair and foul, menaces, threatenings, and promises to reveal her
Magical Tutresse; but as she is as subtle as a young serpent, I can get no
more out of her then water out of a stone, or Oil from a Pumice, whether
guilty or not guilty, I think an English Rack, or Spanish strappado would no
more get it out of her, then Austogiton Leaena and Hermodius confessed in
tortures: Unless we could discover her, as now the Scotch Witches by water
Ordeall (as once amongst the old Saxons) I think its as hard to find her out
in any Witchcrafts, as to find out these minotaures Caniballs and Cormorants,
who have devoured into the Cu^tian gulf of their own coffers, all these vast
sums of moneys even many thousands which they have as sacrilegious thieves
received, deceived, from the charity of Holland London, England, to the relief
of the poor hunger starved Protestants from ^reland, so shearing the Ape,
robbing the Spittle for Achans wedge, and unprosperous Tholous Gold, till the
hook of vengeance stick in the jaws of in justice, Joh 20.10.11.12.13.14.


Scept. indeed Murder, Treason, Witchcraft, Theft, Cousenage, chiefly
walking in a Fox furd Gown, are as hard to be found out, as the head of
Nilus, or as an Officer who smoothly licks his yellow dusted fingers, as the
Harlot her lips, and says I have not sinned, more then some Tailor (stealer)
who looks up to Heaven till he throw Satan into Hell hole, protesting he
takes nothing but that which is brought to him, but leaving these digressions
upon unreformed, yea unquest^oned transgressions, some have a great jealousy
of the old Wife her Mother in Law, that she should be loose in the haft, and
not so good as she should be; yea that she should have a great hand, head or
heart in these witchly or spiritly postures, as though by some explicit or
implicit compact with Satan, she should delude the world by these
fascinations, what think you of her?


Verid. Charity bids me think the best of her, and forbids me to judge
rashly of her lest I enter into a praemunire against God, who is only the
fearcher of the Reins; I have no windows into her heart, and for her outward
carriage it is so candid, square and fair, that I see no cause either in
Reason or Religion to suspect her, unless upon some grounding probabilities I
could derect her; she seems to me to be so passive in the premises, yea so
passionate and compassionate in all the passages recited, so strong in faith,
so frequent and fervent in prayer, so zealous in her devotions, so sincerely
subordinate to all ordinances public and private, that if she be any way
active in this base business, either in complotting, contriving,
confederating, councelling, consenting, countenancing, or concealing: I shall
not only say hypocrisy is spunne with a fair thread, and that all is not
Gold that glisters; but that she were a worse she Devil, yea white Devil
for a woman, then Judas for a man, whose hypocrisy (like a dunghill under a
great snow unmelted) was so long ere it was discovered, John 13.


Scept. If then neither the old woman of the house have been the Author of nor
Actor in these motions and molestations, nor any Witcheraft can be detected,
its probable the Wench acts all her self with her own hands by legerdemaine.


Verid. Something she does, but not all, for sollid witnesses omni exceptione
majores, beyond all exception will depose if need be, (as I will by these
premises lay ten pounds to ten shillings against any Sceptick or Junior Didimu
that will not believe what I relate) that stools in the house, sticks out of
the fire, Laundyrons out of the chimney have removed of themselves, and other
things also, they looking on, and seeing nothing move them more then they see,
a voice, a found, a wind, a noise, a soul in man, or their own hearts, which
they perceive really, though they see nothing visibly.


Scept. Then these motions from an invisible Agent, come either from a Witch
set a work by the Wench, or by some others, or else it is the Ghost or Spirit
of the dead woman her late Dame which walks, as I will assure you many in the
Town, and most in the Country ere she was rooke out of her Grave, did
believe as their Creed verily and assuredly.


Verid. But as a woman being asked by Bonner, if she believed not Christ's body
and blood to be in the Sacrament substantially and really? She told him it
was a substantial lie, and a real lie; so I assure you, what ever the
Pontificians doat or faigne, or our Vulgars dream of the Ghosts or Spirits of
this man, or that man walking after their deaths in this or that shape, is a
very lie, an assured lie; take this from me, yea from Scripture, Fathers,
Reason, and Experience assuredly.


Scept. But do you not believe that many strange visions and apparitions have
appeared unto men, and have revealed diverse strange things unto them and future
events sometimes visible in bodily shapes and forms, are not these the soul^s
of the dead?


Verid. No they are not, yet I should give a lie to abundant Histories and to
all Antiquities, if I should deny all Visions, for the Author of the Book of
the Machab^^s tells us of two young men who appeared to Heliodorus, 2 Machab.
3.25.26. of five to Judas Machabeus, 2 Machab. 10.23. and Zozomens
Ecclesiastical History relates a fear full spectar terryfying Julian the
Apostate, as he was consulting with an Oracle ( lib. 5. cap. 2.) and another
in form of a big woman with a horrid noise in the night terrifying the
Antiochians, lib. 7. cap. 23. and of another appearing to Apelles the Painter,
whose face he burned with a hot Iron, lib. 6 cap. 28. (as St. Dunstan is said
to take the Devil by the nose with a pair of hot pinchers:) yea to reflex
from Ecclesiastical on secular History, a spectar appeared to Julius Caesar,
as he led his Army into France, encouraging him by a loud pipe to pass over
the River Rubico, another to Brutus, telling him he would meet him at
Philippos, another to Dionysius the Syracusan in form of a woman, as he sat
very solitary in the Porch of his house, another to Polizelus the Athenians
General in the Battle of Marathan, where he was victorious, though it struck
him blind, another to Athenodorus the Stoic, which he dispossessed out of a
house in Athens, which it haunted; just as the Spirit now does the house of
Meriday, and another in the Parish of Mentz, who by breaking open doors,
casting stones, pulling down walls (and the like reakes that our Greenwich
Spirit does) troubled and terrified many, and another to Henry the third,
Emperor in Hungary near Danubius in the shape of a black and big Ethiopian,
another also to Maximilian the first Emperor, Anno 1503. in the form of an
Abatesse who was dead; of all which, with many more which I purposely
pretermit, for further satisfaction consult with Came arius in his Centuries,
Cent. 1. cap. 70. cap. 72. with Richtherus in his Occonomicall Axioms, Reg. 2.
and 90. Aretius in his Probleams, Page 113. Pliny in his seventh book of
Epistles (to Sura) Wolfius in his memorable Lecticus, Tom. 1. Aventine in his
Annalls ( lib. 5. Boiorum) Artunus in his first Section of the History of
Millaine, together with Plutark in his Brutns and Dion, Suetonius in his
Caesar, with others all which instances do not only confute and confound the
ancient Saduces, who denied that there were either Spirits or Angels, Acts
23.8. Math 22.23. yea conceited God himself to be corporeal (according to
Lorinns, in acta cap. 23.8. fol. 869. from Chrysostom and Oecumenius) and not
a spirit, denying also the Holy Ghost (according to Hierom in Math. 22.) to be
a spirit, or to be any person in the Diety, nor do they only muzzle the
mouth of Atheistical Politicians, who with that Trismegistus, in Saint
Augustines City of God ( lib. 3. cap. 23.) hold that there be no real or
substantial Devils, but only the Furies and Erinnis of wicked consciences;
but also some neotorick and modern Fantasticks and Scepticks, who conceit all
to be mere fantasmes and delusions in this kind, and no more to be credited
then the fictitious Tritons, Gerions, and Chimeras of the Poets, yea of no more
credence then the old Wives Tales of King Oberon, and Queen of the Fairies.


Scept. To deny all Apparitions of spirits which the Disciples themselves
feared, when they saw Christ walking on the waters, ( Math. 14.26. Mark. 6.46.)
were to deny plain Scriptures, for they thought he had been a spirit; for I
believe the Relation of Suetonius in the life of Nero, that after that
Truculent Tyrant, had butchered so many noble Senators, made Bonefires of so
many Christian Martyrs, put to death his Master Seneca, when he was 114.
years of age, crucified Peter and Paul, and unripped the bowels of his Mother
Octavia, with other such barbarous cruelties, that he was not only racked and
tortured with his own guilty conscience, and terrified with agonizing fears
in his dreams, as were Caligula his Successor, Herod after his assassinations
of the Bethlem Infants, and Jewish Synedrim, Alexander after tue murder of
Clitus Philip after the butchering of his innocent son Demetrins (and our
bloody Boar Richard the third, after his murdering of his Brother and
N^phewes in the Tower by Tirell whose pannick fears and terrors in the guilt
of blood, are more largely related by Patritius, in his books of a Kingdom,
lib. 5. tit. 8. page 313. and by Strigellius in his Ethics, lib. 1. page 6.7.8.
and in his Comments on 2 Samuel 3. page 9. and page 15^. but I believe also the
Relation of the same Authors, that he was so whipped, and scourged, and
scorched in his flesh, as with hot brands, with a spirit in the shape of his
Mother, that as Balthazar consulted with his Magitians in the like pannick
fears, Dan. 5. he used all the helps he could by Magic to appease as he
thought her angry Ghost; neither have I any reason to contradict the received
Relation of that terrible Vision of an ugly man in bulk like a Giant,
appearing in the night to Pisistratus the Tyrant, thundering to him what he
found true, that nemo Improbus, non luit poenam, no wicked man must escape
unpunished; yet for all this I persuade my self, many conceit they see or
hear spirits, when there is no such matter.


Verid. That is certain, for in the guilt of conscience, Theoderick a cruel
King of the Goth^^ thought he saw the bloody head of Symachus which he had
out off, to gape with open mouth upon him, when only the head of a great Fish
was set on his table, by which Guilt of Conscience some have strangely
discovered their own murders, as many notorious Villains have been
discovered by others, of which many instances may be seen in Gualters
Homilies upon Luke, cap. 12. page 324. as also Bucholcerus his Chronologies,
page 59. chiefly in Melancton in locis Manlii, page 290. 308. Sometimes
withal, the senses are mainely deluded, as the Moabites thought the waters
were dyed with the blood of the Israelites, when it was only the Sun which
shined upon them to a waterish redness, 2 King. 3.22.23. But chiefly
melancholy men, Bedlam Birds, and frantic persons, by the tumultuations of
malignant spirits, distemper of their brains and fascinations of Satan
fishing in a troubled water (as his Proselites since in these streams in
Church and State which themselves made) do not only conceit themselves to be
often strangely metamorphized Creatures into Birds and Beasts (which was
Nabuchadnezzar's Case, Dan 3.) yea into Urinalls, Glasses, and the like (of
which abundant instances are given by Gallen, Avicen, our Doctor Bright and
Burton in his love Melancholy) but sometimes they think they see Spirits and
Spectars, yea that they themselves are Devils, as Bessus, and those who
murdered Ibicus, thought chatering Swallows to be their Accusers, as Pluta^k
has it, de sera niminis vindicta; besides those who have been long sick, and
bedrid, or distempered in their brains with swimmings and vertigoes (chiefly
our new Seekers and brain sick Enthusiasts) especially (according to P.
Egineta lib. 3. cap. 16) those who are oppressed with the Ephialtes, or Night
Mare, or riding of the Witch, as vulgar people call it, are most deluded with
seeming Spectars and Apparitions, of all which read for further satisfaction
Aretius his Probleames, loco 113, circa finem.


Scept. But since not only the vulgars as strongly conceit that these spectars,
and visions which have been so often discerned in the visible shapes of this or
that man or woman deceased, are the very persons or ghosts of those whom they
so lively represent: but they are so held by the tenants, and opinions of all
the learned Jesuits, Priests, and Schoolmen, yea by the determinations of
their Councels of Trent, of Constance, and else where, as resolutely as other
Counsels at Rome, cap. 3. and 7.
Carthage, cap. 4. and 5.
Laodicea, cap. 24 and 26.
Antioch, cap. 10.
with their Clemens, epist 5. ad Iacobum^.
, Anacletus, epist. ^.
and Caius, epis. ad felice
determine, and ordain Exorcists to adjure them, to know their errands, and to
conjure them down. I pray you, according to your various readings, satisfy me
from Scripture grounds, and consent of antiquity what they are? and from whence
they proceed in the affirmative? and why they are not the spirits or ghosts of
the dead, according to the vulgar error, if it be an error.


Verid. First to remove the mists and clouds which have so long dazzled and
darkened the blind and superstitious Plebeians, that these walking, or talking
spectars in humane shapes, are such men and women really as have been dead and
buried; this is not only a sixion unprobable, but impossible, for these
Reasons. First, to hold they are the souls of the dead is false: for the
souls of the Saints are in the hands of God, to whom they are commended, Psalm.
31.5. Now who shall take them out of Gods hands, this were, as the Proverb is,
more then to take or pull away Hercules his Club, loves Scepter, or Neptunes
Trident, which the Pagans held impossible. Secondly, they are departed in
peace: as Simeon Prophesied, Luke 2.29. Syracid. 3. v. 3.4. now who can
disturb this Peace, to bring them from Heaven to earth again? Thirdly, they
are bound up in the bundle of life 2 Samuel 25.29. and who shall loose and
unbundle them? Fourthly, they are in Paradise with the soul of Christ's
penitent fellow sufferer, Luke 23.43. and of Lazarus. Luke 16.22. where being
in refr^gerio, in fruition of joy, though not in fullness till the
Resurrection, according to Esdras lib. 2. cap 7. v. 51, 52, 53, and Musculus on
Math. cap. 9 and cap. 27. fol. 641. How can this joy be interupted, by their
activities here on earth again, in such labors from which they have for ever
rested, Revel. 14.13. Now as these spectars are not the souls of Saints, much
less of the wicked: for the day of their visitation being neglected, in which
they should have wrought out their salvation: Luke 19, 42.44. their souls are
enclosed closed in Hell, out of which there is no jayle delivery, Psalm. 55.16.
as the cruel rich Churl experimented, Luke 16.22. their death feeds on them,
Psalm. 49.14. yea the worm ever gnawes them, Mark 9.49. to which Poets alluded
by the Eagle and Vulture ever gnawing on the Livers of Titius and Prometheus,
in their Avernus or Tartarus, as the Tree falls so it lies, whether to the
North or South, Eccles. 11.3. and as they go down to Hell, Psalm. 9.17. with
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.31. so ex inferis nulla redemptio, there is
no redemption out of Hell, its reductio per impossible, they shall never see
light more, Psalm. 49.19. Thus if the souls of the godly would not return to
the Earth if they could; nor the souls of the wicked could if they would, how
then after the seperations from their bodies can they walk here any more?


Scept. Then it is their bodies which walk.


Verid. Bodies to walk without souls, this were but like a Puppet Plays
motion, or as though Milstones and Mountains should walk, or Trees in Jothams
Parable, Judges 9. or any other things inanimate; but to take you from this
conceit, the bodies of the Saints are a sleep in the Lord, as its said of
David, 1 Kings 2.10. and of Solomon, 1 Kings 11.43. as also else where of Asa,
Ezekiah, Jehosophat, that they sleep with their Fathers, they go into their
Graves as into their beds, Esaias. 57.2. they enter into the sleeping chambers of
death, and the doors are shut upon them, Esaias. 26.20. and who shall awaken
them out of this sleep till the last Trumpe, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. at what time, v.
17. they shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and
to be ever with him (not on Earth for a thousand years as our new Seekers and
arch Heretics dream) but in the Heavens (which are Gods Throne) where a place
is prepared for them in Gods House, where are many Mansions, John 14.2. not in
Earth, which is his footstool, much lesle shall the bodies of the wicked kept
in the shackles of the Grave, as Prisoners in Newgate for Tyburne, till the
Resurrection for Hell return, till that time prefixed of God any more to the
Earth, or to their forsaken houses, Job 7.10. they shall rot and perish in the
Grave, the eye which saw them shall see them no more. Job 20.7.8. there shall
they be tied as guilty fellons for execution with the chains and cords of
their sins, Prove. 5.22. their memories shall rot, cap. 20.7. their hopes and
expectations shall perish, cap. 11.8.

Secondly, if the dead walk on Earth, its either by Gods command, or by their
own private motion, not by any mandate from God. of which the Scripture is
altogether silent, ne gri quidem, and according to Tertullian, quod non habet,
ignorant, what it has not, it is ignorant of, quod non jubet, prohibet, what it
commands not, it prohibits, what it affirms not either directly, or by
consequent, it denies; now it is so far from allowing or teaching this walking
of men or their spirits, that it directly contradicts it, Luke 16.26. as a
thing impossible: hence then as its a shame for a Lawyer to plead contrary to
all Laws or booked Cases; is it not more shameful for a Christian, much more
a Divine, to affirm any thing that's not revealed in Scripture, Heb. 1.1.13.
Esaias. 8.10. which being not of faith is finne, Romans 14.23.

And if God neither command nor commend this walking of deud men, much less
can they walk or talk of themselves, with out God, no more then dead Lions
can roar, dead Asses brey, or dead Images speak: Without the impostures of
Devils and Friars, since even Satan himself, the cunning Artificer and
Contriver of these delusions, is chained as a Mastiffe, and grated as a Lion,
in all his powers subordinate unto God, as appears in his reference to Job,
cap. 1. and the Gaderens swine, Mark 5.

Thirdly, Since finis and bonum convertuntur, nothing comes from God, whose end
is not good as well as means, their walking were frivolous, and to no purpose,
since we are absolutely prohibited from any commerce with spirits, Deuteronomy.
18.10.11. and from consulting with them, as leaving the living for the dead,
Esaias. 8.18.19.


Scept. But did not the Witch of Endor raise up Samuel, really with whom Saul
consulted, and so consequently, why may not others appear in their visible
shapes as well as Samuel after their deaths, 2 Samuel 28.


Verid. I know all the Rabble of Schoolmen and Jesuits affirm Samuels real
resuscitation, bewitching the vulgars to believe that the dead appear out of
Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory, to bring the living news of their estate, which
golden dream fills their coffers with gold, and brings golden Gudgeons to
their spread net; yea catches many silver feathered Woodcocks; but they catch
at shadows and Sathanicall shows for Samuels substance: For first, if God
would neither answer Saul by Dreams, Visions, Prophets, 1 Samuel 28.14.15.16. is
it probable that he would answer him by Samuel, at the mediation of a
Pythonist, a Vassaile and Slave to the Devil, v. 7.

Secondly, would God permit Samuels practice in answering Saul to contradict
his own precept, prohibition of inquiring ought of the dead, Levit. 20.27.
Deuteronomy. 18.11.

Thirdly, the real Samuel would not make a lie, telling Saul that the next
morning he should be with him, v. 19. that is in a blessed and beatificall
condition, when indeed being felo de se in a desperate condition his own
self murderer, 1 Samuel 31.4. with other murderers he had no title to
eternal life, 1 John 3.12.13.

Fourthly, I say with Tertullian, absit ut anima cujuslibet justi, God forbid
that the souls of any Saints, much less of the holy Prophets should be in
the power of Satan to call them from Heaven at his pleasure.

Fifthly, I say with Peter Marter; if Samuel was raised, it was either by the
will of God, and Samuels voluntary consenting, or compulsively by art magic:
the first it was not, because God prohibites such consultings with the dead:
therefore to affirm the second were impious and blasphemous.


Scept. But if the true Samuel was not raised by the Witch: what was it then
which appeared to Saul?


Verid. It was a personated Histrionicall Samuel, a deluding Malignant spirit
in the shape of Samuel, just as Cornelius Agrippa, that great Conjurer brought
the shapes of Hellena, Achilles, Hector, and Alexander upon a Stage before
Charles the fifth; and this is the opinion of Cyrill, lib. 12. in Johan. cap.
36. of Theophilact. in cap. 8. Math. as also of Athanasius, and Chrysostom
alleged by Illiricus Cent. 2. and by Diatericus dom. 1. Trinit. part 2.
observe. 1. yea of Augustine in his questions of two Testaments 27. to which
even Pontifician Canonists Consent in the second Book of Deeretalls Causa, 26.
q. 5. cap 14.


Scept. But if it were not the real Samuel which appeared: why is he called
Samuel?


Verid. Augustine in his Epistle to Symplician, tells us, just as the curious
Picture of such and such a Man. Woman, Bird, Beast, or Fish, drawn by some
curious Zeuxes, or Apelles, has their names, as we use to say, this is Hector,
this Caesar, this Cicero, this Salust, this Augustine, Hierom, this the flood
Simois, when they are but so limmed, or pencild: as also this is Rome, this
Millaine, this Venice; when we see them in the Mapps of Ortelius or Mercator.


Phil. But they tell us these spectars that they are the souls of such and such
Men.


Verid. So a counterfeit voice told fond Celestine that he should resign his
Popedom to Boniface: so it goes by Tradition, that a voice told the late Mr.
Crashaw of the Temple, or old Muncy Duncy of St. John's in Cambridge, that they
should go to Geneva to preach the Gospel. Chrysostom on Matthew Hom. 29. tells
us what credit we are to give to the Devil, and to his tellings in such cases,
who is (not as the country Minister read it a Lawyer) but a liar from the
beginning, John 8.44. and as the Father of lies teaches his aequivocating
Jesuits, Monks, and Friars, and all his artifizing Gusmans, and Proselites,
their lying tongues better then their Latin tongues.


Phil. From whence we have the phrase, hic frater, ergo mendax, he is a Friar,
therefore a liar, ^ a Jesuit, therefore a Jebusite. But to satisfy me
further: that which appeared unto Saul was so like Samuel, that what could it
be else, but Samuel?


Verid. And I pray you have you not read how like a Cook was to the Father of
Pompey, Lentulus to Metellus, Ninus to his Mother Somiramis, the two Twins of
Proconesia, and of Hipocrates one to another, both in Pliuny, lib. 7. cap.
10.12.
Solinus, cap. 4. Poli.
Diodorus, lib. 3. de Fab. autiq.
Justin, lib. 1.
and Valerius, lib. 9. c. is.
as also that Cn. Pompeius was so like great Alexder, Plutarke in vita.
a young man so like Augustus, that the jest was the young man's Father had often
been in Rome, and in Casars Court; and that young Sporus was so like Sabina,
Neroes Empress, that Nero made him be cut, and used him as a woman Zephilinus
in Nerone.
. And in our later times, a young man in the Court of Francis Sfortia the Duke
of Millaine, in his light armor, sharp voice and jesture, so like the Duke,
that by the common voice of the Court he was called a Prince; the like
similitude was betwixt Sigismund and his jesting Fool Marchisine, betwixt
Oporinus the Printer, and Albert the Marquess of Brandburge; and many that you
may read of more at large, mentioned by Fulgosus, lib. 9. cap. 15.
Valerius, lib. 9. cap. 13. and 15.
Sabellicus, lib. 1. Aeneid
Stobaeus, sermon. 42.
Boccace in his Book of excellent Women, cap. 2.
Polyanus in his Stratagems, lib. 8.
and Polibius in his Histories. lib. 4. fol. 123.
All as like one another, or more like, then Satan's assumed shape to Samuel;
yea as one egg, one star, and one Pile of grass to another: I my self am able
to speak to this purpose that some 30 years since, I have been often in the
streets took for Mr. Crashaw, when he was Preacher at the Temple, and I at
Saint Brides in Fleetstreet.


Scept. But Sir, these you recite were living, and had the lively fresh colors
and lineaments of nature: but Samuel was dead.


Verid. Therefore it was more easy for Satan to represent his shape, though
not absolutely in a perfect symetry, yet if in any proportion Snul might
think, wherein Samuel was defective of his living shape, it was by the soyling
of the Grave, in which he had so long laid.


Scept. Yet it seems strange to me, that so wise and sagatious a Pollitician as
Saul was, should neither by shape, jesture, nor voice, discern this counterfeit
Samuel.


Verid. To open your eyes with a little Historical Collirium: was it not as
strange, that one was so like Alexander the son of Herod whom his Father slew;
that he was taken and saluted as King in Josephus his antiquities? lib. 27.
another in Leunclavius his Annalls of the Turks, page 34.
and in his Pandects, page 291.
so like the great Sultan deceased in Romania, that he drew to him a great
Army, siding with him for the Turkish Empire: another in Melanctons Chronicles
lib. 4 page 358.
so like Constantine deceased, that he put Michael the Grecian Emperor to much
trouble and loss in diverse set battles: another in the Annalls of Flaunders,
and in Munsters Cosmography page 171 anno, 1225.
called Bertrand a French man, so like Baldwine an Earl of Flaunders, which
was a Prisoner in Constanrinople, that all Flaunders for a time flockt to him,
as their Earl and Lord, broke out of Prison: another both in Cuspinian in
Tiberio, page 13.
and Tacitus lib. 2. page 102.
a base bondslave to Agrippa that was flaine, so resembling him in shape and
phisiognomy, that he embarked all the Roman Empire in Civil Wars; pretermitting
all the bloody broyls stirred up in Thessaly and Macedonia, by a counterfeit
Psendophilip, in Florus his Epitomies of Livies D^eads, lib 49 50. 52.
the distractions wrought in Rome by one resembling Nero, twenty years after
his death, apud Tacitum lib. 18. page 587. and Cuspinian in vita Neronis, page
26.
in Persia by one Smerdis resembling the deceased Smerdis, the son of Cyrus,
and brother of Cambises, in Justin, lib. 1. page 23.
and Herodotus, in Thalia, lib. 3. page 90.
and in the Cities of Marchia by a Psoude-Wolmar a base Milner by his
resemblance of the old Woldemar deceased, fully registered by Peucer in his
Chronicles: lib. 5. page 60.
and in a private Family by one Martin, a French man, long admitted for a
Husband though a counterfeit Knave, mentioned by Cognatus in his Narrations,
anno, 1559, lib. 8.
and Neander in the end of his History, page 23.
with others graphically set out in their true colors by Tholosanus in his
Common Wealth, lib. 7. cap. 18. page 498. 499.
all cousening and deluding the World with their counterfeit shapes and
resemblances, as much as the Ender Witch deceived Saul with her imaginary
Samuel, or as Janues and Jambres deluded Pharaoh with their counterfeit
serpents, or as Apollonius Thianeus, and a Witch called Lamiah, apud Philostr.
lib. 4. de vita Apolliuarii.
cousened Menippus a young man with a counterfeit banquet, as Zeuxis deceived
Birds in Pliny, with painted lib. 53. cap. 11.
grapes.


Scept. Now that you reflect on Jannes his Serpents, were they not real
Serpents?


Verid. Though I know that both Theodoret in his Questions on Exodus, quest. 18.
Philo in his book of Moses, and Augustine in his third book of the Trinity,
as also Aquinas, Tostatus, Burgensis, and Lyra, hold that their Rods were
truly turned into Serpents like the Rod of Aaron; yet I hold them no more
real serpents, then what we have discussed to be real Samuel, but only with
Josephus, lib. 2. Antiquit. cap. 15.
that they did creep in speciem verorum in show and likeness of true
serpents, and with Tortullian, lib. de anima.
that Mosis veritas magorum devoravit mendacium, Moses his truth devoured the
lies of the Magitians, and with Hierom lib. 2. adversus Jovinian.
that Imitabantur signa quae faciebat Moses; and I hold their acts with Ambr.
in 2. Epistola. ad Timoth. cap. 3.
commentitiam emulationem, were in a feigned emulatio, no creatio of real
serpents, which according to Rupertus, solius divinae potestatie est; yea
according to al Orthodox Divinity is the sole and proper work of Gods
omnipotency, not communicable to Angels men, or Devils, no more then to
create any thing ex novo, vel ex nibile, of nothing, in nothing, or to raise up
a Samuel or any other dead man, without such immediate power as the divine
essence gave unto Elias, 1 King. 17.21.22.
Elisha, 2 King. 4.34.
Peter, Act. 9.40.
and Paul, Act. 20.10.
extraordinarily to raise the dead very seldom and sparingly.


Scept. But I pray you since its certain that the dead have been raised since
the times of the Prophets and Apostles, as also that strange Miracles have
been done; what shall we think of them, whether for the matter they have
been done at all, or only feigned by fabulous Historians, or if done I desire
to know the manner how, and by what power they were done?


Verid. That we be not confused, first show me what dead since the Apostles
Times you have read raised, and by whom; then give me some hints of these
which have gone, and do go current for Miracles.


Scept. To improve in the first my poor Historifyings, besides Enoch and
Elias, who I am sure as Types of Christ ascended into Heaven, both in their
souls and bodies, and such as are truly Historified or feined to have
vanished out of the eyes of men, without any visible death or burial, as that
Aristaeus in Horedotus lib. 4. and that Romulus the founder of Rome, who
vanished from the Roman Senate in a great storm near the Lake of Caeprea, as
also that strong Thief Cleomines, who was never found says Sabellicus. lib.
1. cap. 8. after he was shut into a strong and close prison: I have read of a
young boy raised by St. Martin, who dyed in his absence in the house of St.
Hilary; as also by another by the said Martin, who hanged himself, of Musomus
and Chrysanthus raised out of their Graves by some Bishops of the Counsel of
Nice to subscribe to some Orthodox Articles, as also of one Ovo a boy revived
by the prayers of Vulfran, as also of one Evarard a Knight of Germany, who
after his departure revived, and told what strange things his spirit had seen
in Jerusalem, in Lumbardie, in the Tents of Saladine, and else where: the like
being recorded by Fulgosus. lib. 1. cap. 6. of one Stephen a noble Roman dying
at Constantinople, with many more in the like nature, what do you think of
these?


Verid. I think of them as of the lying Miracles recorded by unsure Surius,
Metaphrastes, Abdias, and other Popish Fablers, to be of such Authority as the
Transmutations in Ovid, and the Transmigrations of Pythagoras, since they have
no better Authors then Gregory's Dialogues, Severus, Sulpitius, Nicephorus,
lib. 8. cap. 23. and such Fablers as may vie it for the whetstone, and less
credit I give to all these fabulous Relations of Volateran, lib. 16. and lib.
22. Anthrop, of Pliny. lib. 7. cap. 22. of Valerius, lib. 1. cap. 8. of
Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 6. of Diodorus, lib. ^. cap. 2. of Antiquities, of
Celius in his Ancient Readings, lib. 8. of Macrobius in his Scipioes Dream,
and others who have dreamed, of the Resuscitations of Tindareus, Hercules, and
Aesop the Fabler, of Pamphilus the Scholar, of Plate after his ten days
death, of Isis the son of Orus slain by the Titans of innocent Hipolitus
raised by Neptune, after his cruel Father Thesius had rackt him in pieces, of
Gabienus one of Caesar's Captains, after his throat was cut by Sextus Pompeius,
with abundant others, scattered in the aforesaid Authors, and of one in
Sabellicus, lib. 10. cap. 8. Aeneid, who was raised by Asclepiades at his very
Grave, else mentiuntur Poetae, the Authors are not grave enough to be
believed, as indeed they are not, for to tell you truth, I have perused the
Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, lib. 1. c. 13. and lib. 3. cap. 1.2. and
25. and lib. 9. cap. 1.
more Authentic then either Socrates, Zozomen, Evagrius; or any of his
fellows: as also some of the Fathers, Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. lib. 2. and
3.
Epiphanius, lib. 1. Tom. 1. Hom. 20.
and Ireneus, lib. 3. adversus here is. cap. 3.
as also the German Centuries, Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10.
and Osiander their Epitomizer, lib. 2. Cant. 1. cap. 33.
yea even Nicephorus himself, lib. 2. c. 1.40. and lib. 4. cap. 7.
and Egisippus, lib. 3. cap. 2.
who all of them occasionally have-reflexed on the chief acts, lives, and
deaths of the Apostles; chiefly of Peter, Paul, Thomas, Matthew, Mathias,
Andrew, James the elder, John, Bartholomew, and the rest, some touching on the
act of one, some of another: and I profess, excepting Suidas, who relates that
Saint John revived his Hostess Drusiana after his return from exile (
Domitian being dead) not any one of them, except these being recorded in
Scripture, make mention of any one revived by them from death to life; and is
it likely then this vivificating power was given to Saint Martin, Saint
Vulfran? or any such their imaginary Saints, much less to Asclepiades, or
Apollonius, or any of the Pagans, or to a Popish Priest, or Papized Saint, as
ordinarily in Dalvortius, who rakes up the dung and filth of all other Legends,
as their least petty Miracles which they daily cry up.


Scept. Then you give no credit to the Legend of St. Dominick, that he raised
up three dead men within the Walls of Rome, and forty at a clap, that were
drowned near Tholous, though recorded by Antoninus in his Chronicles Tit. 23.
cap. 1, 2, 3,
and the French Ribadineira, in the lives (or the lies) of his Saints, page 94.
part 2
on which the French Morney reflexeth to their just obloquy in his Mystery of
iniquity.


Verid. I believe it verily, as very a lie, as that the Birds stretched out
their necks to receive a blessing when Saint Anthony preached, and that Christ
and the Virgin Mary sent an Angel to him to come to them to Saint Mary's
Church at Assize in Italy, where they stayed to speak with him, or that Christ
so printed his five wounds in the body of Saint Francis, that he was tipicall
Christ, or that a shining Star was on the forehead of Saint Dominick as soon
as ever he was baptized, by which he was the light of the World as well as
Christ, or that Saint Vincent Ferrier preaching in Spanish was understood of
numerous strangers, every one of them in their own language, or that Saint
Anthony of Padua his Sermons being refused by Heretics, preached to the Fishes,
who all peerkt up their white heads to hear him, and bowed them down to
thank him when he called them Brethren, or that Christ in the presence of his
Mother and Angels espouzed Katherine of Sienna with a Ring of Gold, and four
Rich Stones in it; or that Otho being to receive the consecrated Host, his
naked body, in his sick bed opened, and it leapt into his side: all which I
believe as I do the Chastities of Nuns and Friars, when at the dissolution
of the Abbeys there were detected so many Sodomites, Catamites Priests of
Priapus, and Nuns of Venus, though all averred as well as the real appearing
of Samuel, or the raising and walking of the dead; though these nasty dunghill
Legends, and many such are covered over with the snow of a seeming truth by the
same Anthonine, Part. 3. Lugd. 1543. tit. 23. cap. 14. sect. 4.10.19. fol. 180.
to 188. and tit. 24. cap. 7. and page 384.
and Rabadineira bidem part. 1. page 135 to page 443. and page 384.563.
as also by Vincentius in his Historical Glass or Gloss, Lib. 3. cap. 97.
and by Walsingam Ypodigma Neustriae, Anno, 1215. page 55.
and Bonaventure in his Chronicle, and other Legendaries.


Scept. As my little taper added to your sun, I will acquaint you with my
conceptions, that some divulged to be revived from death were never dead, but
suffered some diliquium animae, faintings of the soul and spirits as they are
called in lying long seemingly dead in some Apoplexies, Palsies, falling
sicknesses, and some women in the disease of the Mother, in the pains of
suffocation and strangulation of the Womb, and in Epilepticks, have bee^e
thought dead two or three days, some for seventy hours, yea some have been
carried out to be buried, and some have been coffened and intombed; when by
reason of the intensivenesse of cold, and the weakness of natural heat,
neither by pulse nor respiration, or any symptoms, any life has been thought
to be in them: now its probable the reviving sometimes of such as these, has
been cried up amongst the Papists for a greater Miracle then the raising up of
a supposed Samuel, by the Wirch of Endor.


Verid. All that you say is so certain in this kind, that abundant Instances
and Examples are given to comment it, historified both in men and women, by
Lemnius in his hidden Miracles of Nature, Lib. 2. cap. 3.
by Casper 'Dornavins in his Physical discourse of Apoplexies, by Cornarins in
his rare and admirable Histories, Hist. 14. page 47 48.
as also by Lusitanus, Curat. 23. cent. 4.
chiefly by Schenkins in his Medicinable Observations Tom. 1. observe. 150.
page 175.
in his second book, Observe. 17.33. and observe. 19. page 40.
and in the 288. and 289 observations of his fourth book, page 684.683.687.
these with Felix Platerus and other Physicians, giving cautions in these cases
and diseases, not to be too hasty to bury such, though seemingly dead, and by
burning old Rags and Feathers, and holding them to their noses, as also by
setting a glass brim full of water on their bare breasts to try the least
motion of the water, and by the least bearing of the purse or breathing, to
discern any rellicks of life ere they be hastily inter^ed.


Scept. I remember Thuanus in his History, lib. 32. page ^66 recires a strange
living dead man, Anno 156 called Lewis in the combustion betwixt the Gu^lphs
and G^bellines in Italy, one siding with an Emperor, another with the Pope (as
some since with a King and Bishops, some with Senators) being shot in the
neck, and earth lightly thrown on him as dead, the next day revived, as he
was all squalled with blood and mire, yea our own Hidropoet Tailor in his
Travells to Ham^^ough, tells us of an ungrateful Gentlemanly ^^i^fe took
down from the Gallows (in a Moon light night where he had hung all day by a
Carter and his Son, who being supped and lodged by them that night, and
paying his young Host and bed fellow with the stealing of his money and clothes
and his old Host with his best Horse stolen out of his stable, being by them
pursued and apprehended again, was hanged by them just in the same place and
posture where they first found him


Veria. That Thief, as more cunning then Cacus or Scyron, or our late
Mongering Ratsey, or Claveri^ (like Pictures, Peacocks, painted clothes, B^lls,
and Bacon) was much better for hanging, like one Hogg which the Lord Bacon
hanged to make him Bacon, claiming kindred of him; but we need not go so far
as Hamburge in this kind, if it be true which is reported of a drunken
Player, acting ever the Clown or the Vice, buried in his deep, dead, and
drunken sleep in a great plague; and of a woman who was so dead drunk, that
she wakened not till the earth was thrown on her Coffin, and she asked if
there were any good Ale to be had in that new World: some also have been
reported dead, like that Redivivns Beza, who were not dead, as I have read my
self in print, mangled by the Irish Wolf, called Rebel; and I was glad to
hear it, when I was often told of my divulged death.


Scept. Ast non mittenda seria ludo, leaving those Jocoserious passages: If any
Spectars have been seen, so lively representing the shapes of the dead, in
voice, color, Lineaments, and proportion, that they have been as strongly
conceited to be persons male or female long since departed, as Saul conceited
the Witches Spectar to be Samuel, or Isaac Jacob to be E^ an: in such and the
like impostures or delusions, or in any such molestations of houses or Persons,
possessed, obsessed or troubled, as now Merridayes house in Greenwich, and many
Nunneries, and Monasteries, as I have read of in Lonicers Theater of Examples,
and in all the Pageants that Satan by himself, or his Witches, Wizzards, and
Magitians have acted to admiration in the Earth, Seas, Air, Elements, or in,
on, or by Creatures animate, or inanimate. I pray you improve you Histori^ all
Philosophical, and Theological knowledge, to discover Satan's Powers,
Policies, and Postures; in his Visions, Apparitions, Oracles Miracles,
Auguries. Prophesies, Revelations, and diversified disturbances of Men, Beasts,
and all sublunaries, by his own immediate might, and malice, and by his
Agents, and Instruments of all sorts.


Verid. Magnum opus aggredior, and quae non virthus istis convenient, nec tam
senilibus annis: You set me more then an Herculian task, and too heavy for my
aged shoulders: yet as some stearnly censure me to have a youthful wit and
memory which indeed is my best treasury, I will tub up these old readings for
your satisfaction, which in my painful youth I lodged in my Magazine: and
herein as I have a large Champion to walk in, and a vast Ocean to sail in; I
will first show what may be done to admiration without Satan. Secondly what,
and how, by Satan. Thirdly, what he and his agents cannot do, in his
limmitted power Fourthly, his impostures in what is done by him or his:
Positively in themselves, and Comparatively paralleld, with Gods own power in,
and by his Prophets, and servants, and in the prosecution of any of these,
Hawk-like I seem to fetch a large compass; yet at last, I hope to fly up to
the head, and to pronounce what you desire, for to satisfy the greatest
curiosities in mystical knowledge, with pleasure and profit. To prosecute all
which in order, method being the mother of memory.

First, many strange and admirable things may be done by natural magic, as
its called by application, of natural causes with effects; as also by
sympathies, and antipathies; as also by Art, and artificial instruments; as
also by Legerdemaine, and slight of hand, as I have seen by some Gypsies and
Juglers; as also by the knowledge of the Optics, and by the Mathematics, as I
shall by degrees give you instances of all these, without any unlawful Magic;
for you must know that the word Magus a Magitian, as also Magurus, like the
word Sophister and Tyrant ere abused, were not so odious and hateful at first,
as now they are, as may be gathered from Proclus Lib. de Magia
and Psellus, L^b de demonibus.
for these were counted and called Magitians as knew not occult and hidden
causes of things, and how to apply these Virtues, latent in nature, and
unknown to vulgar capacities to admirable effects, and such a Magitian was
Adam in his Innocence, who was able by his created faculties to give names to
all the creatures, better the Varro, Nonnius, Isidore, or any mortal man since,
according to their Natures, As Milvus id est Molliter Volans, Lepus. Levipes,
Vulpes Volupes, Culumba Colens, Lumbos, Ferrum a feriendo sum al^is infinitis.
yea better the Moses or Daniel, though the one learned in all the learning of
the Egyptians, the other of the Caldeans, yea better then Solomon himself,
whom Josephus in this nature makes a Magitian; I persuade my self a better
Philosopher then either, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, or all mere humanists met
in one, having not only supernatural but natural knowledge, as the Prophets
and Apostles had the spirit by inspiration; now amongst the rest famous for
such Philosophic Magitians in their Times, where the Platonists.
Peripateticks, and Pithagorians, as in our Modern Times, Zabarell, Scaliger,
Zanardas, and hundreds more; amongst the Ancient Gaulls, the Druides, amongst
the Ancient Indians and Aethiopians, the Bragmans and Gymnosophists, amongst
the Persians their Magi, such as these, who came so far to worship Christ,
bred from the School of Daniel, out of which Magi the Persians often did choose
their Kings. Strabo Lib. 15. and lib. 16.
parallelling them with the wise Chaldeans amongst the Babylonians, and in the
correspondency of their studies, with Moses the Hebrew their profession
according to Tully, Lib. 1. de divinatione.
Celius Rhodiginus, Lib. 3. cap. 42. antiq. lect.
and Plinny Hist. lib. 20.
being divinorum scientiam and ^ul^um, the knowledge and observance for the
most part of divine things, or its ^ltior sanctio^que Philosophia, a more high
and sublime Philosophy then ordinary, and of a large extent, comprizing
Phisicks, Metaphisicks, and Astrology, in which kind of natural Magic or
sublime Philosophy, what student desires further to be informed with the help
of a Library, I refer him to the works of Aristotle, Lib. de admiranda
eruditione.
Plinny, Lib. 2. presertim.
Proclus, De sacrificiis and Magia.
Philo, in his book of special Laws, Augustine in his City of God lib. 22.
cap. 4.5. Albertus called Magnus in his second Book of Mineralls, tract. 2.
cap. 1. v. 17. Ficinus in his fourth book of Platoes Theology, cap. 2 Cardan
in his subtleties, Fracastorius in his sympathies, Pererius de Magia, Del^ius
in his Magical disquisitions his fellow Jesuit Tyraeus in his books of
places possessed, and of the Apparitions of Spirits and Devils, as also with
Sirienns his ninth book of Fate, with Medina in his second book of a right
faith in God cap 7. with Laurentius Ananias in his book of the nature of
Devils with Bartholomew Sybilla in his third Decade of strange Questions,
quest. 3.8 and with our Modern Gregory de V^lentia, 22. disp. 6 q^ 1^ punct.
3. and the clear Valesins in his sacred Philosophy. cap. 3.22.

Now by this mere natural magic, or in plain terms, the producing of Art and
nature into practice; such rare and exquisite things have been done, or may be
done, especially by instruments, without any more confederacy with any Witch,
or spirit, ^hen with a Turk, a Pope, or a Canniball; yea, I persuade my self I
could do such things my self, as I have heard, and read, and partly seen, that
the common people which do not (rerum cogn^scere can^as) know the causes of
many things, (more then a blind man colors) would take me for as great a
Conjurer as ever Cornelius Agrippa, or Doctor Faustus, or for as great a Witch
as Circes, or Medea; at least as great a Juggler as once my neighbor John a
Ley, or Hocus Pocus, or some cunning Wise man, such as Mr. Lilly is divulged,
as though he were a second Merlin; when for all this, I could make a child of
six years old do the like things presently and give as good a Reason of what I
did (as I persuade my self Mr. Booker, and Mr. Lilly can give of their
artificial undiabolized Predictions) as I can give a Reason why I am hot or
warm, when I am in the Sun, or at the fire.


Scept. Indeed Sir, I persuade my self Ignorance is the mother of all
admiration; it being the Fate of all abstruse, and mystical things: that non
^isi peracta laudantur: they are not praised till done, it being no wisdom, we
say in Yorkshire, to let fools see half done deeds, or to expose mysterious
knowledge to ignorants chiefly to arrogants, which is as to cast pearls to
swine, or to offer exquisite music to deaf men; yet I pray you Sir, make me
so happy in the curious knowledge of what yourself, or some Artist can do by
Art and Nature, yet stearing far enough from all Rocks of unlawful magical
confederacy with any Witch or spirit, except with the spirit of God, and your
own spirit.


Verid. Sir, your question is short, but the Resolution long and large, the Sun
being at the point of high noon, c^useth the Son of my mother to think that he
has a belly which has no ears to hear it should be wronged in its ordinary
diet of feeding meat, by mental dishes catered by a discoursive tongue and
brain; when therefore I have given a sop to this craving Cerberus, and paid my
Kitchen tribute to this Minetaure; being a true Englishman, impatient of the
fasts of the Irish with his shamrocks, of the Spaniard with his Lemmons, and
the Welsh with her Sir Jeff^ey Leck: after dinner I shall improve my best to
resolve your Proposals in what nature soever you please to propound them, or at
any other time at your best leisure and pleasure.


FINIS.

