Die Mercurii 28. April. 1647.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Ball, do from this
House give thanks unto Mr. Strong for the great pains he took in the Sermon
he preached on this day at Margarets Westminster, before the House of Commons
(it being a day of public Humiliation) and that he do desire him to Print
his Sermon: Wherein he is to have the like Privilege in Printing of it, as
others in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Jo. Benson, and Jo. Saywell to Print my Sermon.

William Strong.

THE TRUST AND THE ACCOUNT OF A STEWARD. Laid open in a Sermon preached before
the Honorable House of Commons, at Margarets Westminster; upon Wednesday the
the 28. of April 1647. being the day of their Public Humiliation.

By William Strong.

Potes and officio jurisdictionistuae fungi; and humanitatis memisse: vel quia
and vos sub gladio estis.

Tertul. ad Scapulum. c. 4 Confragosa in fastigium dignitatis via est; non in
praerupto tantum illic stabis; sed in lubrico.

Sen. Ep. 14. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Harper for John Benson and John Saywell,
and are to be sold at their Shops in Dunstans Churchyard, and at the Greyhound
in Little-Britaine. 1647.

To the Honorable House of Commons Assembled in Parliament.
I Could not mind you of any thing better then that which God would have
always before your eyes; your latter end, and your last account, that it is
appointed for all men once to dye, and after death the judgment; that after
death, a man's works follow him either in eternal punishment or rewards, and
that with God there is no respect of persons; he that has received but one
talent shall give an account for no more, and he that has received five, shall
give an account for five; the trust indeed and honor is the greater; but so
will also the account be, to whom much is given, of him much will be required.

It will be a dreadful thing for all men with naked consciences to appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, when the Thrones shall be set, and the
Books shall be opened, and the dead shall be judged out of those things which
are written in the books, according to their works. But above all others, the
Accounts of Kingdoms, and the accounts of souls must needs be dreadful. And
yet Angels and men may stand amazed to consider with how much precipitancy and
inadvertency men rush upon both these, as in sin men abstract the pleasure
from the sting, and therefore power out themselves with greediness; so in rule
men abstract the honor and advancement from the account and judgment, and
then its no wonder if with violence they are carried after the one, when they
wholly cast off thoughts of the other.

I beseech you therefore let my counsel be acceptable to you, which I know,
ye will all wish you had taken in the great day of your account.

Be holy your selves even as the Lord is holy in all manner of conversation;
these white Robes and Crowns become none so well as they do the Elders; that
as ye judge with God, so God may dwell in you, that ye may have a double
Image, not only his Image upon you as Magistrates; but his Image in you as
Saints. Ye have greater opportunities to improove; greater temptations to
resist; greater oppositions to conflict with, and (which is most of all to be
considered;) a greater account to make then other men; and therefore need more
of Gods grace; more of Gods presence and his blessing. Ye have begun a work
of Reformation, and ye have professed a more close walking with God then other
men, and are the first Parliament in this Nation, that have undertaken by a
public Covenant, with hands lifted up to the most high God, to endeavor a
perfect Reformation, and that to begin at home, in reforming your own ways;
(...). l. 1. c. ^.
so that we mry safely, and without flattery give you the same encomium that
is given by Lactantius to Constantine the Great: Primus Romanorum Principum,
quirepudiatis erroribus Mijestatem Dei singulariis acveri, and cognovisti and
honor^sti. These are the Titles that ye hold forth to the world known and
read of all men; therefore the eyes of the whole Christian world are upon you,
and the expectations of all the reformed Churches: The Lord teach you to
answer them; That ye may have something which is suetable to your profession
without, that, that may not be objected to you as a reproach which the Father
does to the Philosophers. (...) l. 3. c. 15.
Quos non aliter intueri decet, quam medices, quorum titusiremedia habent,
pixides venen^. Least ye make sad the hearts and shame the hopes of the
Saints, and cause those who are both enemies to holiness, and to you to
blaspheme.

Let not policy give rules to piety, and set the bounds to your Religion; an
evil that has interwoven it self into even the very constitution and
fabric of most Christian States, to appear for God; so far as still to
take care of themselves, and to venture into this sea of Reformation; so as
they may see a safe harbor to put themselves into. This is the way to lose all
your labor: Its an empty win^ that brings forth fruit to it self, if men fast
to themselves, rule for themselves, live to themselves, they will also dye to
themselves; what pretenses soever men may fancy to themselves, and what plea^s
they may have; ut honest piccare videantur.

Be also a refuge to the Saints, love holiness in others; there is not a
greater testimony of holiness in a man's self, then i^ he love the same in
another. God loves his own Image wheresoever it is; so should ye also, there
is nothing will honor you more before God and men. David's eyes in his
Government were upon the faithful; so let yours be, and let not the Kingdom
have cause to continue the complaint, that none are preferred or respected by
you, but friends, kindred or creatures, and if he be never so faithful to God,
and never so serviceable to you; if he come not under one of the fermer Titles,
whatever his desert or his condition be; (...), etc. (...). Orat. adver.
Julian. 1. p. 64 (...). Ethic. l. 8. c. 12. Hister Aminahum. par 2 c 4.
Brisson. de repub. l. 8. c. 1 S. 19. Camerar. operat. succifiv. l. 1. c. 12.
ye have no respect to him, no pray on him; Surely that precept extends to you
also; do go^ to all but specially to the household of faith. Nazian speaks it
both of the goodness and wisdom of Constantius; that he did in his government
affect nothing more, and labored nothing more, then the increase of Christian
Religion, and the flour shing thereof. For he wisely considered that as
Christianity flourished, so did Rome, and the increase of holiness in the
Church, was the glory and stability of the commonwealth.

Be tenderly affected to the people that God has put under you, the Titles of
Fathers and Nurses call for bowels. The difference that the Philosopher gives
between a King, and a Tyrant is, the one rules for himself, and the other for
the Subject. And in an Epistle to Alexander, he did tell him, that a Magistracy
was appoinied by God, (...); to do good to the Commonwealth, and not to
oppress it, or insult over it. Its said of the Pelican that her young one being
hurt by a Serpent, she does recover them with her own blood, which Franzius
does apply, as a glorious resemblance of Christ. But John the 2 King of
Portugal, did make it an Emblem of a good Magistrate, and caused that bird to
be put into his escuttchion, to mind him, and his successors of their duty to
be willing to be spent for the people.

Let not the glossy condition of this world deceive you, there is a time to be
borne, and a time to dye, a time to put off your Robes as well as to put them
on. Its a Ceremony that they use at the Popes inauguration, one stands with two
Reeds or Canes in his hands, on the one a burning torch; one the other a
little course flax, which he lights, and by and by its out, and this he does
thrice, and the Master of the Ceremonies cries, Sancte Pater, sit transit
gloria mundi. Have you such considerations always with you, that ye may never
enter into your house, but with an expectation to be called by God unto his
Bar as soon as you rise.

The Lord make you such as fear God, men of truth, and hating covetousness;
that what ye do or have done for this poor distressed people; (that wereas
sheep not having a shepherd) may be all fruit abounding to your Account.

So prays the unworthiest of the Ministers of Christ, and the meanest of your
servants in the Gospel, WILLIAM STRONG.

A Sermon Preached before THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, at Margarets
Westminster, on the 28th of April 1647. being the day of Public HUMILIATION
and FASTING.
LUKE 16.2. Give an Account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer
Steward.


GReat men have anciently had their Monitors; remembrancers unto them, Fan^ est
fistihbus ^a^asse Agathe. cleareg^. Quarenti causam respondit. Rex ego qui sum
Steania, signl^ sum ge^. t^rt, Satus. Auson.
both of their original, and their duty. The Sicilian Prince had his earthen
place to tell him daily that he was but a Potters Son. Philip of Macedon had
his Page who cried every morning in his hearing: (...). Aelian var. Histor. l.
8. c. 15. Brisson. deform^l. p. 358.
And the Roman Triumphers in the height of all their glory, had a Servant
behind them, who did suggest: Hominem memento te. Great men shall not find a
greater difficulty, Magnus est dives, qui non ideo se magnum pulat, quia diver
est Austin. de tempore. Rev. 25. Bern.
then to keep their hearts low, when their places are high. As in spiritual
things it is hard, being fallen to remember whence we are fallen: So in
temporal things, being risen, it is hard to remember from whence we arose.

Rara Virtus est humilitas purpurata. Its a thousand to one but as they say of
the Pope at his instalment, mutatio nominis, becomes mutatio hominis. And men
called Gods by Office, are apt to conceive themselves to be Gods by Essence.

There is a double curse that is come upon every Creature, and every condition
of the Creature since the fall. It is deceiving, it raises men's expectations,
and it is defiling, it draws out their corruptions.

God has set up his Ministers in an especial manner for this end, Intellig^
percustoder Dutes, Pasto res, Prophetas, Sacerdetes, and verbi Ministies,
quorum onmium (...) ex^ubia^ agere^^^ sa^ute ae securitate populi. etc. Marlor.
in Esayant. ^. a La^^de in l. c. Mr. Newcon^ens Ser. before both Houses, July
7. 1643. 1 Pet. 1.1^.13.
not only to be his Remembrancers (for some apply that unto them as an Act of
Office, Esaias. 62.6.) but to be your Remembrancers and Monitors in his name, who
in them speaks from Heaven.

I will not be negligent (says the Apostle) to put you always in remembrance
of these things, though ye know them, and be stablished in the present truth.
Yea I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by
putting you in remembrance. And the Lord awaken his Watchmen, and your
Remembrancers, that they cease not to warn you night and day with tears. We
must mind you of your condition: You are made of the same clay with other men;
that your hearts be not lifted up above your Brethren. We must cry unto you.
Earth, Earth, ^et. 22.^^.
Earth, hear the word of the Lord. Which the ensuing words intimate, to be
spoken of the King; though many Interpreters apply them to the Kingdom. We
must mind you of your dissolution, you shall dye like men, as other ordinary
men do. Psalm. 8^.^. (...) Regi and (...) Com^. Ep^cter. ^s. 4^.1^. 2 Cor 5.10.
Heb. 12.23. Col. 3.25 and 4.1. Job. 3^.14.21.22.
Nay, in a worse manner; Man being in honor, and understanding not, may be
compared to the Beasts that perish.

And we must mind you of your Account, tell you there is a higher then the
highest, and that you who now judge others, shall be your selves judged: For
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and then the present
differences and distances shall be done away; you shall be stripped of all
these Robes, and stand upon equal terms before God, Index quisque ju^icit
su^ sup^^nu^ Ind^cem (...) Chrylolog. Sermon. 26.
with the meanest under your command. Nay, if you prove unjust Stewards, upon
worse terms; gaining nothing by your present honor, but this, that you shall
have the greater Account to make, and the more dreadful Sentence to expect.
And the higher your advancement has been here, the lower shall your abasement
be hereafter.

There is among Interpreters great difference about the occasion, connection,
and application of this Parable, in so much that Cajetan ventured to say,
Applicationem hujus Parabolae, Cajetan in loc Quasi spiritus sanctut
simictudines a scop^ altenas ossumpserit; ut per^a^ nos d^ceret mysteria
e^l^stia. Sal. meron in Parabolas Evang. tractat. 29. In Parabolis se^pus
dicentu primo attendendus est. Glass. Phi^ol sacr. l. 2. p 451.
non solum difficilem esse, sed and impossbilem: Which Salmeron blames him for,
as speaking unadvisedly with his lips. But I am resolved not to trouble you or
detain you, with any strife of words: Judging no controversy to befit a day
of Humiliation, but the Lords controversy.

That we may find out the meaning of the Parable, let us take that ordinary
Rule given by Interpreters concerning Parables, which is to observe the scope
to which it is applied. In all Christ's Parables there are two things (...) and
(...) and his intention in the former, is commonly declared in the latter. This
Parable ends at the 8 verse, and the Application begins at the 9. And I say
unto you make unto your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that
when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations. He that is
faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much, In hac Paralela
Christus monet. 1. Vtommbus medu du^eant p^ex^mu ben^facere 2 Ejusmodi
benefieia, qua proximo exhibemus, non perite, sed in vitam (...) ferva^i. 3
Decet verum usum (...) temp^ralium etc. Calv. Chemnit. Stella. A Lap. Gasp. M.
loc. in loc.
and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If therefore ye
have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your
trust the true riches, and if ye have not been faithful in that which is
another man's, who shall give you that which is your own? From whence the scope
of the Parable seems evidently to be this. To exhort all men that are
betrusted by God here: with Estates, Honors, Authority, and opportunity to
make use of all these unto spiritual ends, the glory of God, gaining the love,
and refreshing the bowels of their fellow servants; and thereby laying up a
good foundation for themselves, that they may lay hold of eternal life. That
having been faithful in the Mammon of unrighteousnes, God may be pleased to
trust them with the true Treasure. And this exhortation is pressed from the
example of the unjust Steward; who knowing the time of his Stewardship was but
short; improoved his trust, power, and authority, Insolertia (...)
similitudiuis sita est, non tu fact^ improbitate. Grot iule^. No^ aliquande
faci^us damnamus, and tamen laudamus ingentilum. Chem^^t.
to make provision for himself. And the Lord commended the unjust Steward,
propter solertiam, non improbitatem: Because he had done wisely. There is a
sharp reproof contained in these words, the Children of this world are wiser
in their generation, then the Children of Light. Surely the Children of Light
should be as wise in their Generation to accomplish spiritual and eternal; as
the Children of this world are to accomplish their worldly and temporal ends.

In the words we have three things. First, his Office and condition, he is a
Steward. Secondly, his deposition and ejection: The same rich man who committed
to him this trust; does for his unfaithfulness therein cast him out. Thou
may be no longer Steward. Thirdly, the Account that he must give when he
goes out of his Office of all his receipts and expenses, the goodness that he
has received, and the goods that he has wasted: And from hence these three
observations do arise.

First, all men, even those in the highest Place, and the greatest Honor, are
but Stewards unto God.

Secondly, their Stewardship shall have an end, they shall not be always
Stewards. (...) elegaoter Epis^^^^ vel past^r^^ typum getit. Petist^etiam
exte^dia^ principes seculates, qui Regnu, vel Provin. ^^^gubern^^dup asic^untur
Demque ad quemiunque patrem familiar, qu^al^^ rum cu^am ^^rit, vel ad quamvu
Christianum qui conscientia s^a curam hab^t. Salmeton trall. 29. in Parah.


Thirdly, when they go out of their Stewardship they shall give an Account And
these three shall be the bounds of our present discourse.

First, of his Office and condition, he is a Steward. This is by some applied
to the Magistracy, by some to the Ministry, by some to all Rulers, of what
kind soever, by some unto every particular person; who has received some
tallents from God, and is betrusted with his goods whether it be riches,
Honors, Authority, Parts, or whatsoever else, to be employed for the glory of
God, the good of others, and his own spiritual and eternal advantage.

All men, even those in the highest Place, and greatest Honor, are but
Stewards unto God.

In the opening whereof I shall propound to you four general considerations.

First, you are Stewards, and that is a Title of the greatest trust. God has
indeed immediately but one Steward, Jesus Christ the Mediator, the man of his
right hand, the Father has given all things into his hands, Io. 3.35. and 5
22. Math 28 11. Io. 17.2. Isalm 8.6 1 Cor. 15.27. Heb. 2 8. Ephesians 1 22. 1 Cor.
15.28. Heb 2.13. Io. 17.4.
has put all things in subjection under his feet. The dispensation and
administration of both Covenants, is committed unto him. He has made him the
Head of the Church, and over all things for the Churches sake; and at his hands
will the Lord require all these. He shall then give an account of his
Stewardship when he shall give up his Kingdom to God even the Father, that God
may be all in all.

But Jesus Christ has many under-Stewards in the administration of all things
here below. Ephesians. 1.11. and 3.10. Dan. 10 11.
The Angels are therefore called Principallities, if good things be to be
dispensed: An Angel comes to Daniel, and tells him, thou art greatly beloved.
If wars be to be raised; Dan. 10.19.20.
An Angel goes forth to fight against the King of Persia, and then the Prince
of Gracia shall come. Generally, the spirit of the living Creatures it in the
wheels. Enech. 1.20.
Next unto the Angels, Pro. 8.15 16. Io. 5.22 27. 1 Timothy 6.15.
Christ imployes Magistrates and Ministers as his Stewards also. And as Christ
shall give an account to his Father, at the giving up of his Kingdom: So shall
they render an account to Christ at the giving up of their stewardship.

That it is a great trust committed unto Magistrates to be Stewards under
Christ; all the Titles given unto them in Scripture do fully manifest. If a
Kingdom be to be supported, they are the foundations of the earth, upon which
it stands, Ps. 82 5.
(...). If it be to be defended, Ps. 47.9.
yet are the sheilds of the earth. If the City be besieged, ye are the bars
of the gates. If an assault be made, ye are the repairers of the breach. If
wounds be given, ye are the Chyrurgeons, and the healers: If the State be
distempered, Hose. 116. (...) Vectes. Chald. Schindl. Drusius. Ternov. Esaias.
58.12. Esaias. 3.7. (...). Sept. Ps. 15.7.
ye are the Physicians. All these Titles denote the highest trust.

But yet because the more fully ye know your receipts, the better ye will be
able to judge of your accounts: Let us therefore more particularly look into
that trust which the Lord has as to Stewards, committed unto you, in these six
particulars.

First, God has betrusted you with the Laws of this Land, which are the
foundations upon which the Kingdom stands: That ancient hedge, by which we
have been keept hitherto, from running first into a Common and then into a
Wilderness. A hedge, ad seperationem, and ad munitionem; which hedge never any
did attempt to break, but a Serpent did bite him; which boundstones never any
did attempt to remove, but they were hurt therewith, Eccles. 10.8. These Laws
are the common inheritance, and patrimony of every freeborn Subject; the
common refuge and Asylum of every oppressed soul. These are committed to you
as Stewards in a double respect, in the legislative and the Judiciary power.

The legislative power; I say, is yours; because in you all the Laws of the
Land begin; they are by you propounded, by you desired. Flet al. 1 ^7. Sect. 6.
Rex Anglia leges sine subditarum ass^nsu mutare non potest: nec subjectum
populum renitentem o nerare imp^sitionibus peregi^^is; quare papulus ejus
libere fru^tur bonis su^, legibu^, quas cupit regulatus etc. Fo^^escue de laud:
legum Angl. c 9 Rex meliut per altos quam per se^psum judiciaredd^t quo,
proprio ^^e nullus regum Angliae juduiumprese reusus est. ibid. c. 8. p. 24.
Esaias 58.6. Amos 5.21.24. Josh 7.10.
And Laws they cannot be unless by you consented to. Lex Regia non est
quicquid de voluntate Regis tantummodo praesumptum est; sed quod magnatum
suorum consilio and assensu definitum fuerit. Take heed therefore that you
leave no unjust or unnecessary Laws unrepealed: Take heed there be no unjust
or dangerous Laws enacted, lest you establish iniquity by a Law.

The Judiciary power also is yours: See that Justice be executed according unto
Law without partiality without delay: God expects, that in your fastings you
should loose the bands of wickedness, unty the heavy burdens, let the
oppressed go free, and that you should break every yoke. God will not smell
in your solemn. Assemblies unless Justice run down like water, and judgment
as a mighty stream. Seek judgment, releeve the oppressed, then come, pray to
me, and reason with me; this is the Lords order Esaias 1.15. or else God will
answer you as he did Joshua praying, Wherefore lie thou upon thy face? Israel
has sinned in the accursed thing. What accursed things there are among you,
God knows. There is a great cry of accursed things in the Nation. The children
call for bread, and there is none to break it to them. The Subjects cry for
justice, and there is none to dispense it. It is an honorable title indeed for
Magistrates to be called the shields of the earth; but very dishonorable for
them to become scuta praedatorum (as the ordinary Gloss renders that place)
shields of, Psalm 74.9.
and shelters for Robbers. Mountains of prey, Ps. 74.20.
that the high places of the Earth, should be full of the habitations of
cruelty.

Secondly, God has be trusted you with the lives, liberty, and property of
this Great people: Lam. 4.20. Sub cuju, cutela sperate adluc and respirare
possumus Tarnov in loc. Esa 2^ 23. 24. Esa. 32.1.2. Nah. 2.5. (...) Testudo
militaris, sub qua milites tecti murumsubcunt. Drus. in loc. Hab. 1.14.
and for all these you must give an account. Ye are the breath of our nostrils,
the nail fastened in a sure place, upon which the vessels of all quantities
hang. If our liberties be to be defended, ye are our hiding place. If they be
to be vindicated, ye are our covering, under whose shadow, next under the
shadow of the wings of the Almighty, we hope to be safe. If the lives of the
Subjects of England be not protected; if their Property be not preserved; if
their liberties be not vindicated; but they are left, even as fishes of the Sea
that have no King, but the great ones devour the less without control; truly
at your hands will the Lord require it. And though you may be able by your
power now, to preserve your selves, from those violences and oppressions, which
formerly you were liable to, equally with other men; yet know that not only
your own good, Esa. 22.24.
but the good of the whole depends upon you. There must hang upon you cups as
well as flaggons. A good Magistrate ought to be in the Commonwealth as the
soul in the body, which is tota in qualibet part.

Thirdly, God has betrusted you with the Religion, Ordinances, and worship of
God in this Kingdom, and in an especial manner with this great work of
Reformation, which he did so unexpectedly begin, and has so far made bare his
Arm to carry on, against the highest opposition that could be made, by the
power or policy of this, and the neighboring Kingdoms, Romans 3.2. The Apostle
says, The Oracles of God were committed to the Jews (...); so committed that
they were concredited; not for their own persons only, but that they might be
transmitted by them to their posterity. So are the Ordinances of God committed
unto you, that you may transmit them. Surely the stability of the Kingdom
stands in the Religion of it. If the Lord cast the house which he has
sanctified for his name out of his sight, 2 Chronicles. 7.20.
he will quickly pluck you up by the roots out of the land which he has given
you. Ezekiel. 16.39.
If he throw down your eminent place, Ezech 10.2.
they shall quickly strip you of all your clothes, take away your fair Jewels
and leave you naked and bare, Iniqua nonquam regna perpotuo ^^anent. Sen.
Thyest. 2.1
for the fire that burns the City is taken off the Altar. Vbi non est
sanctitas pietas, fides instabile regnum. Wisdom and knowledge shall be the
stability of thy times and strength of salvation; the fear of the Lord is his
treasure, Esaias 33.6. If you would not have the Kingdom to be rooted up; let
not Religion be rooted out. Let it be only Mariana's opinion, ut nihil princeps
de Religione statuat. And let it ever be thought an evil consequence amongst
reasonable men; that because Magistrates cannot constrain men's consciences,
Revel. 17.5.
therefore they may not restrain their actions, their errors. Surely Rome is
Mystery, Babylon the Great mother of the Harlots, Rev. 17.13.14.16.17 Quam
^up^o ata^ habeti, (...) ^^tam consensione Imperato (...) obs quium^ ^am certa
sit (...) r^^ aliena^ (...) nerum, and tan demilla ult^^^ vastatio, (...) and
idemest a (...) utriusque. Brightin. in Revel. 17. Downames Treat. concern.
Antichrist. l. 1. c 9
and as it was the sin of the ten Kings to give their Kingdoms to the beast,
to receive his mark, in their right hand and in their fortheads: Submit
themselves, and use their power, to cause those under their authority to do the
like. So when the Lamb shall overcome them: which shall be by their
conversion, not their destruction, and they shall hate the where, eat her flesh
and burn her with fire: they shall then use their power against her in the
same way that they did for her when they gave their Kingdoms to her, sc. by
hating her themselves, and causing all under their domion, to their utmost, to
do the like. Surely Rome shall fall as well by the Civil, as the Spiritual
power, by the Sword as well as the Word, and the ten Kings shall make her
desolate. This is approved by God, as being the Magistrates duty even in
matters of Religion; which doubtless they shall exercise each of them in their
own Kingdoms respectively; before they shall go forth to make War against
her in a foreign nation. Contra Cr^seen. G^ammas. l. 3. c. 51.
And Austin has concluded, In hoc Reges Deo serviant in quantum Reges. So far
therefore as Religion is corrupted, the worship of God profaned, the faith
once given to the Saints blasphemed; if it come under your cognizance, it will
be set upon your account.

Fourthly, God has betrusted you with the Saints and the Church of God among
you. Iam 1.18. Mal 3.17.
These he has first committed unto Christ, not as an ordinary gift, but as the
first fruits of the creatures, Iam. 1.18. Mal. 3.17. Esaias 49.8. Romans 8.24.^^
Esaias 44.28. Psa. 105.15.16. Esaias 43.4.
as the choicest jewils among all the treasures of the Creation, for whose
sake, and by whose Covenant the world stands, for whose good chiefly the
Magistracy is appointed; for whose sake the Lord will reprove Kings: and for
whose lives God will give Nations. David says, his eyes in government should
be upon the saithfull in the land. Psalm. 101.6.
Take heed how you neglect or despise one of these little ones; and how you
prefer unto these a disciplinarian Saint; but a profane man, a drunkard, a
railer, a cursed speaker, whose Religion began with his opinion; and whose
profession has risen with the hopes of his preferment. Take heed when sentence
is to be executed upon a profane man, who has a member to be cut off; that
you turn not the back of the sword of Authority; and when a godly man has
but a hair amiss, you turn the edge and strike a full blow. This may tend to
advance formility, but will never piety. Surely with God neither circumcision
availes any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature; Gal. 5.6. and 6.15.
Col. 3.11.
and methinks nothing else should avail with us, For the Kingdom of God
consists not in externals, and forms, after this or that way, but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, he that in these things
serves God, is accepted of God and approved of all good men, Romans 14.17, 18.
It is your duty therefore to cherish holiness, in what shape soever it be
represented; and to discountenance profaneness, what vizard soever it may put
on.

Fifthly, God has betrusted you with the guidance of this great people, which
Solomon looked upon as a very great trust; and therefore made it his only
request, 1 King. 3.9.
that God would give him wisdom to go in and out before so great a people.
Ezekiel. 31.17.
You are the arms by which they are led, Psalm. 77.20. he led his people like a
flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron. 2 Samuel 14.17.
You are the Angels that God has appointed for their conduct; and to you the
generality of the people look; as to the pillar of fire and the cloud for
direction. You have a virtuall influence into the whole Nation, the people
generally being a lump ready to receive any leaven: those that will willingly
walk after any commandment whether for good or evil. Let it not be charged
upon you, Esaias 9.16.
The leaders of this people have caused them to err, and they that are led by
them are destroyed; Ier. 50.6.
or that my people have been lost sheep, their shepherds have caused them to
go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains, they have gone from
mountain to hill, they have forgotten their resting place. Formerly neglects
in this kind might be somewhat extenuated, by the extremity of the War; but
now God has subdued your enemies, and made the way plain before you. If some
better course be not taken for the guidance of the people; God will surely put
it upon your account.

Sixthly, God has betrusted you with the prosperity, happiness and hopes of
the neighboring Churches. Public persons should have public spirits, and
these will have public designs. It is a hireling, that looks no further
then his own party, the raising of his own family, and the feathering of his
own nest. The glory of God, the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, the
care of all the Churches, should be the matter of all your debates and
consultations. Private men have but short hands; they can only reach out their
prayers unto the Churches necessities. But men in public imloyments they have
long hands, large opportunities. It were a consultation worthy of a Parliament
to say, (...)
We have a little sister, a dying sister, and she has no breasts, what shall
we do for our sister in the day that she shall be spoken for? Ireland calls,
cries, stretches out her hands all the day long unto you; they have looked for
assistance, even till their eyes fail. God knows where the stop and
obstruction is, and will certainly search it out. For you to have the honor to
be the repairers of the breach, the restorers of Cities to dwell in; for God to
give you your sisters for daughters, (...)
which is the promise made to the Jews in their return; these things should
be great in your eyes.

If you consider these particulars, and take off your eyes from your Honor,
and fix them upon the trust committed to you, and the account that will be
required of you; you will conclude it is no light thing to sit within your
walls. Therefore as the Apostle says of the Ministers. Let men esteem of us
as the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1.
and stewards of the mysteries of God: so we do account of you, as the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of all the precious things of this Nation:
and so humbly desire you to esteem your selves.

Secondly, though you are Stewards, yet you are but Stewards: not owners, and
Proprietaries. For this Steward was accused to his Lord for wasting his goods:
therefore the goods in the hand of the Steward, remained to be the Lords
still. He has not so committed any thing to your trust, as to relinquish his
own interest in it, or care over it; you must therefore employ all according
to his appointment, and direction: lest one day you be found wasters and unjust
stewards. If Ministers who are the stewards of the mysteries of God, in his
word do seek to themselves preeminence; draw disciples after them, dawbe with
untempered mortar; make merchandise of the Truths of God, or the souls of men;
pollute the name of God, for handfulls of barley, and pieces of bread; to slay
the souls that should not dye, and to save the souls that should not live;
this is to abuse their power in the Gospel. So for Magistrates, to make use of
their authority, to enrich their families, gain to themselves a party,
pleasure their friends, and crush their adversaries; this is to abuse their
power in the Kingdom; this is wasting your Lords goods for which he will call
you to an account.

Here give me leave to mind you, First: Le^ est quasi organon divinitus datum,
quo societates humanae optime regantur Stephan. ^nn. vindiciac^^tr. Tyran. q.
3. p. 99. Leges and consuetudines Anglia, etc.
That the Lawe^ of this Land are not yours: you are but stewards; they are Gods
Laws, and the Laws of the people. And though they be not, as the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, unalterable: yet there is some thing sacred in them while
they remain Laws, as being the rules of the common justice of the Kingdom.
The Magistrates are legum custodes and ministri, therefore it is not in their
power to dispense with the Law at pleasure, which is their rule in judging, as
it is the peoples in obeying (except only in some extraordinary emergencyes for
the preservation of the public, which the providence of man cannot foresee,
Poteste, Regis juris est, qui cum sit author juris; non debet inde nasci
injuriarum occasio, unde juranascuntur: and quod ex officio suo aliis prohibere
necesse haber, id (...) persona propria committere non. debet. Potellasenim
juris solius Dei est, injuriae vero D^aboli, and cujus opera secerit, ejus and
Minister erit. Fleta. l. 1. c. 17. S. 8. Si Lex violata unum liabet persu glum
Asylum sceleratorum. omnium foret. Qui vindicando sceleri, gladium a lege
accepit, scelus ipsum adversus legem armate^. Jun. ^in dict. (...). tyran. q.
3. p. 109. Pet. Mat^n 1 Samuel 11. Host. 5.10. Braclon. l. 10.8. Iudex non debet
judicate delege, sed secundum legem: alioquie roerentur omnia. Aug. lib. de
ver^ Relig. Anti^rhus tertiu^ Asiae, Rex omnibus Regni sui V^bibusscripsit
(...) ^^quid in literis, qua ejus nomine scribereatur, legibus repug^aret,
credereat, se ignaro scriptas fulsse and propterea non parerent Dionys H^hcarn.
l. 1. Si Le^es Regibus potiores sunt, si Reges Legibus, ut servi Dominis,
patere renentur; quit non legi, quam regi patere malit Quis regilegem violanti
obsequatur; (...) contr. Tyran. q. 3. p. 107. Rex non est Regm proprietatius,
nec usus (...). Hedienullum ^egnum est, in quo non licear singulis, (...)
jursuum persequi; ita ut s^pius Rex quam pr^^tus (...) cadat. ibid. p. 116.
nor his wisdom prevent: And in these cases, salut populi est suprema lex) but
in a common and ordinary way of justice, the Law should be as the public
standard to measure all by. The Magistrate indeed should take care, and be
exact in the Laws that he makes, that nothing in them be wanting or redundant;
nothing burdensome to the people: But being by serious advice and public
consent established as Laws; if the Magistrate go against them, he shall
incur the sentence, of being one that remooves the bounds. Rex ipse non
debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo and sub Lege; quia Lex Regem facit. Digna
vox est ex Majestate regnantis, Legibus alligatum se Principem profiteri and
majus est Imperio Legibut submittere Principatum.

Secondly, that the Liberty and Property of this People are not yours. You are
not Lords, but Stewards: You cannot grant Immunities or Impunities, which the
Law does not. Leges vitae necisque, potestatem habent non Reges. As you ought
not to restrain those, whom the Law sets at liberty: So you ought not to
enlarge those whom the Law has bound. Surely, clementior pastor est qui lupum,
necat quam qui servat: he that is more merciful then the Law, in this respect
is cruel. And for property the meanest Subject has as true a Title unto his
estate, as the greatest. All things in this Kingdom indeed are yours; ad
Imperium, to command them according to Law, and for the necessity of the
Nation: But they are not yours ad Patrimonium; to dispense them at your
pleasure to whom, when, and in what manner will you.

Thirdly, the Religion of the Kingdom is not yours: It was Jeroboams brand,
and will be to the end of the world; that under his Government the defection in
Religion was made, that he was the Son of Nebat that made Israel to sin: And it
will be Jehu's dishonor for ever, that he made Reformation, but an Act of
Policy, to establish the Kingdom upon himself, and his Posterity. Surely God
did never commit a people to the hand of a Magistrate so; as to divest himself
of his Authority over them; but that they should be so under the Magistrate as
that they continue Gods people still; and it is just with God that a people
should be oppressed, and broken in judgment; if willingly they follow such
commands, Hose 5.11.

Fourthly, Dan. 4.7. Psalm 47.9. 2 Chronicles. 1^.6.
the Public Justice of the Kingdom is not yours: But God, the most High
rules in the Kingdoms of mortal men, the sheilds of the earth belong to God,
he is with you in judgment, and when ye submit your consciences, cast down
your Crowns; rule with him, and for him, then he is greatly exalted.

Thirdly, being Stewards, you must employ all that is committed to you with
wisdom, and faithfulness, Luc. 12.41. (...). Fidel^s est dispensator, qui
non quod suum est quaeris, sed quae Jesus Christi, cujus vices gerit. Quodque
cedit in aedificationem and augmentum Ecclesiae in cuj^^ gratiam fibi omnia
commissa sunt. S^ella in Luc. J^sh. 19.49. Tyrannu^ non solum est sine ^lrulo,
led and ex^^citio.
for the good of the Family, For these are the qualifications of a Steward
mentioned by Christ himself: Who is that faithful and wise Steward, whom his
Lord shall make ruler over his Household?

First, with faithfulness, to give them their meat in due season: To improove
your Authority to the utmost for the public good; not only to deny your
selves, but forget your selves, and with Joseph to provide for the whole Land
of Egypt, and yet to procure no possessions for himself or his sons
therein; with Josua to give the people of Israel possession of the Land of
Canaan, and reserve nothing in it for himself. This is the difference that the
Philosopher makes between a King, and a Tyrant, the one seeks his own, and
the other the peoples good. For Magistrates to eat the fat, Totsere possunt
esse capita tyrannidis, quot sunt species oppressionis. N^c solum Rextyrannus
dici Injuste impera^^ potest; fed euam ahi qui tyt^^hice dominautur. Greg
Theloss. Syntag. jur. l. 6.20.9.
drink the sweet, feed themselves, and not the flock. This becomes not a
faithful Steward.

Secondly, with Wisdom. Magistrates had need be wise; even as an Angel of
God, that you may so manage your Authority as it were to take the people by
guile; to gain upon their hearts; for he that is not in the hearts of the
people, shall have little command of their persons or actions. You are to
engage all sorts to you, and to take heed how you disoblige any in an unjust
way: Especially let your wisdom be seen in managing the public Treasure of
the Kingdom with frugality, and for the public good: (because upon this the
eyes of the generallity are most fixed) that the people may see that you seek
not theirs, but them. Prodigality of the public purse will ever disoblige the
people to their Rulers. When Magistrates shall pleasure friends, raise
servants, advance kindred by other men's estates. The Turks call tribute sacrum
populi sanguinem, Quem profundeto, aut alio quam ad populum defendendum
convertere nesas est, Postdl. l. 3. derep. Ture. l. 4. h. 11.5.
and hold it an abominable thing to employ it to any, but a public use. For
Magistrates as possessors to slay the people, and not hold themselves guilty,
and their own Shepherds not to pity them; to be lavish in the expense of the
Treasures of the Kingdom, that in every public business, because it is the
public, so much shall be expended, when even the Tithe would suffice: These
things take off exceedingly the hearts of people from their Governors. You
should so sweeten your Government with wisdom, that it neither become
burdensome nor loathsome: Ze^h. 1^.16. Carcant sibl Reges and Iudices, ne
conquaetentes repellant, vel pe^ver^e judicent, ob quod in judicio justi Iud^^
filii Dei, Dei co^^uent, etc.
If not your right arm will quickly wither, and your right eye in judgment
will be put out.

Fourthly, to quicken you to all this, there are three Arguments in the Text.
First, you shall be accused unto your Lord for wasting his goods, and no men
have more accusers then those in public place. ('Twere well, if this were not
one of the sins under which this Land groans sc. speaking evil of dignities,
Flera. c. 17. S. 10.
and cursing the Rulers of the people.) You shall be accused if things miscarry
in your hand, by a seduced party, by an oppressed people, and the tears of the
oppressed will come up before the Lord, Zach. 3.1. Dan. 4.17. (...) Notandum
est duplicem personam Angelii imponi primo subscriptores Dei facit in decteto.
Postea dicit postulare, quod Angeli suis votis expectant humiliari cunctos
moitale^ and uno consensu and quasi u. no ore eos accusant coram Deo. Call. in
loc. Bracton. l. 1. c. 2.
because they have no Comforter. There is a cry in tears, as well as in blood.
The Devils will accuse you. Satan stands at Joshua's right hand to resist him.
The Angels will accuse you, the judgment that came upon Nebuchadnezzer (that
oppressing Prince, who gathered the riches of the Nations like Eggs.) Was by
the Decree of the Watchers, and the demand, by the word of the Holy One. And
your consciences also will, with this unjust Stewards accuse you, in that day
when God shall judge the secrets of all men according to the Gospel. Cumquis
habuerit justum Judicem and conscientiam suam testem nihil time at nisi causam.

Secondly, the Text tells you, that unfaithfulness in a temporal trust, shall
be punished with spiritual and eternal Judgments. For he that is unfaithful
in the least, will be unfaithful also in much. If you have not been
faithful, (...). Notandum est, quo loco divinae mundanae fint habendae, mundus
habendas eas p^o re ma^ima; sed Christut diserte testatur quod sit minimum
Chemnit, in loc. Dan. 4.17. Qui dat regnum coeleste solis piis dat regnum
terrenum and piis and impiis Aug. Imperium Turncum quid est, uifi miea canibus
projecta Luth. (...), Arist. Eth^^. l. 1. c. 5.
in the Mammon of unrighteousnessc, who will commit unto you the true Treasure?
If you have not been faithful in that which is another man's, etc.

Here we are to observe three things. 1. The opposition between things
temporal, riches, honors, authority, parts, learning, etc. and things
spiritual and eternal. The one is, that which is teast, (men commonly look
upon them as great things, Jer. 45.5. seek thou great things for thy self;
though they were not so in subsistence: Yet they were in appearance:) But Christ
says that they are the least of all the gifts of God, which God does bestow
upon the basest of men. It is Christ, and grace, and the things that concorne a
better life, which the Lord esteems as great things, and so we should account
them. The one is the mammon of unrighteousness; because they commonly prove
an occasion of sinning, and are a means to become a snare to the owners; but
it is only Christ and grace that is the true Treasure; as the food, so the
riches, that endure to everlasting life. The one is another man's, that is
chiefly committed to a man as a Steward; for the good of others, and it is
this worlds good, which a man neither brings with him, neither shall he carry
with him when he departs; but grace and glory are a man's own, a treasure that
no man shall take from him. 2. Observe the end, why the Lord does commit these
temporal blessings unto men; sc. as a trial of their faithfulness; as men
do their servants of whose fidelity they have no assurance; they commit to
them first things of less consequence, that as they show forth faithfulness
in these, His verbis inclusa est tacita comminatio; negand^ bon^ spititualia
(...) qui abutuntur corporalibus, hac (...) puniendum (...) qui male d^^prulat
bona ^^^fitoris; ut in^^^^um Deus jud^^t aeternir (...).
they may betrust them with greater. 3. The usual punishment that God does
inflict upon men for abusing temporal blessings is, to deny them spiritual,
and eternal. When men's authority, and estates shall draw out their pride,
oppression and licentiousness, that they beat their fellow servants, and eat
and drink with the drunken, they becoming beasts in their lives, its no
wonder, if at death they be compared to the beasts that perish, and that
abusing temporal mercy, God is justly provoked to deny them grace here, and
glory hereafter. And it will be enough to silence them all at last day, to tell
them, because they were not faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, therefore the
Lord did not commit unto them the true treasure.

Thirdly he shall be turned out of his stewardshippe in wrath, for his
unfaithfulness, and be cast out as an abominable branch; the must be no
longer Steward: And this brings us unto the second point proposed, which is,

The greatest Stewardship upon earth shall have an end. Poct. 2.
Men shall not be always Stewards.

God does commonly put men out of their stewardship three ways. Frst, by the
power of an enemy; as Zedechi^h was put out of his stewardship by the King of
Babylon when he was carried captive; soyee may see an enemy in your
habitations; an enemy sitting upon your seats, Esaias. 1.20. Dan. 4.32. Hose.
5.12. Per brachium inteliigitur roour per occulum prudentia. Call. Privati
potestatem non habent, nee ullum jus gladii; and ut gladium us non tradidit
Deus, ita nec usum gladii ab iis reposcit. Privatis dicitur, mitte gladium tuum
in vaginam. A Magistratibus: non geritis gladium frustra. Iun. vindis. p 56.
Nemo de facto Regis presumat disputare ve^utamen in populo regendo supe^io. res
habet; sc^legem per quam factus ut Rex, and Curiam, sc. Comites, and Parones;
qui cum viderint Regem sine frano, fraenum sibi apponere tenentur. Fleta l. 1.
c. 17. S. 9. Job. 3.19. (...). etc. Morbi and si quid aliud nos mortalitatis
admones. Grot. in lo.
supplying your places, and you your selves thrust out.

Secondly, by the tumuls of the people, there is a particular curse of God upon
the Magistracy in taking off the hearts of the people from them: Either openly
and at once; as in the case of Rehoboam, and Nebuchadnezzar, for their cruelty
and oppression, destroying their Land, and sl^tying their people. God giving
them up unto such cursed ways, that their own Subjects cast them out of their
Dominions. Or secretly, and by degrees, for God is not always a Lion to a
State; but sometimes a Moth, and the Prophet Zach. 11.16. speaks of the
withering of the shepherds right arm, which is the decay of his authority,
and ruling power by degrees. Some seditious Libells you know have been
scattered abroad, of the peoples reassuming their power, which doubtless is
wicked; for God never put the sword into the peoples hands; but yet though it
may be the sin of the people, it may be the punishment of the Magistrate, and
the judgment of the Kingdom.

Thirdly, by death, at utmost, then your stewardship shall have an end; these
relations are but for the time of this life, and then these Robes shall be
taken off, then shall ye fail. (...). (which the Septuagint renders often for
that word (...) in the Hebrew, Jer. 42.17. and 22. They shall dye, or fail by
the sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence) and lay down your honor in
the dust. And there is not a sickness, or any bodily infirmity that befalls
any of you, but it is a Monitour to preach this Doctrine; give an account of
thy stewardship, for thou can not long remain a Steward.

And this brings us unto the third point; them shall not be only a laying down
of the present office and honor, but it must be with an account.

Doct.3.
When men in the highest place are put out of their stewardship, they must give
an account of their carriage therein, and the greater their trust is, the
heavier will their reckoning be.

An account unto men, if you would once resolve to adjust the accounts, and pay
the debts of the Kingdom, (which by your own promises ye are engaged to, and
will certainly by all men be expected at your hands) would be unto many an
unjust Steward in these days, as the handwriting upon the wall was to
Bleshazzar, and would have the same effect; their countenances would change,
their thoughts trouble them, the joints of their loins be loosed, and their
knees smite one against another. To all such I say, as one to the King, saying
he is for his accounts answerable to none, ^^racton. l. 1 c. 1.
satu sufficit ei ad poenam, quod Dominum expectet ultorem, and if a day for
these men's Audits here never come; yet this is enough, there remains for them
an account unto God. There is a story of one Usthazanes an Eunuch Tutor to
Sapores the King of Persia, (...) ^ozomen. l 2. c. 3.
a man of great honor at Court, and an especial Favorite who had formerly
been a Christian, and afterward for fear had fallen again to the Idolatry
of the Heathen, and worshipped the Sun: He seeing Simeon the Archbishop of
Seleucia passing by, being carried to prison, came to him and saluted him, the
Bishop with great indignation reproved him for his Apostasy and passed by; with
which he was so afflucted, that he cast off his Courtly apparel, and put on
black the habit of a mourner, and with great bitterness cried out, Oh
wretched man that I am, how shall I appear before God; whom I have denied, and
what may I expect from him; when Simeon my ancient friend will not own me, but
turns from me. Unto God ye must give an account, not only of your selves as
men; but also as Magistrates. Call. 6.^. ^om. 14.12.
Every man shall bear his own burden; every one of us shall give an account
of him else unto God. This I shall reduce to these two neads. 1. As Magistrates
ye shall give an account of your selves. 2. Of the people committed unto you.

1. Ye must give an account of your selves as Magistrates, in these particulars.

1. Of your ends in entering upon this great employment; what it was that ye
did propound to your selves when you desired it; whether it was for a private
advantage or for a public service, to be in a condition to honor God, and
further a Reformation, that the Kingdom of Christ may be exalted: Or else to
be in an estate to secure your selves, pleasure your friends, and to make
benefit of the times (which is to be feared of many who either declined, or
deserted the service at first, and have since desired it, and labored for it)
Then you shall give an account whether your end with Jehu was to raise your
Families, and to rote your selves in the Kingdom, or whether with the bramble
in Jothams parable, your aims were to have other men put themselves under any
of your shadows, that he might become King of the trees.

2. Ye shall give an account of all your parts, and how ye have used them for
or against the truth. Achitophel was a great Politician, whose counsel was as
if a man had asked at the Oracle of God. Tertullus was an eloquent Orator,
facundus sed malo publico, of these they shall surely give an account. Some men
there are, who by their parts of nature and abilities of language, can turn
themselves into any shape, guild and varnish over any thing; so as to put a
fair gloss upon it, who love diverticulaes and turn aside unto crooked
ways; Ps. 125.5.
can like unto the Planets moove with the Orb, and yet reserve to themselves
their own private and proper motion: Can sail seemingly to such a Port with a
full gale, and yet with a side wind turn about to a quite contrary point of
the Compass. Some men there are whose words are full of homonon yes and
various acc^ptations, Ier. 9.5.
who have taught their tongues to speak ambuiguities, that no man can tell
what they say; Ps. 58 2.
because he cannot know what they mean. And whose actions are full of
intricacies and perplexities; like some hurtful beasts, they love confusa
vestigia. They weigh the violence of their hands, Psalm. 94.20 (...) 1 Th^s 2.5.
(...). 1 Pet. 2.16. (...). 2 Cor. ^.2.
that they may be sure to do it within compass: So as to have for it a fair
pretense; they commit evil artificially and by rule, they frame mischeife by a
Law; they do nothing but under a cloak of covetousness or malicionsnesse;
according to the hidden things of dishonesty, that men may have nothing
directly against them, and so they wrap it up. Of all this abuse of parts ye
shall give an account in that day.

3. Ye shall give an account of all that power and authority that God has
given you among the people, and how it has been improved by you, to win men
unto God, to advance his honor, to countenance holiness, and discountenance
profanesse and blasphemies in the Nation. Ye are not Gods by Condition, but by
Commission only: therefore ye must rule with God, and for him, it is an evil
that proceeds from the Ruler, Miche^ 5. Eccles. 10.6. Romans 1 32. Psalm 12.8. Duo
fit^t genera cuslo^om: Al^ circuneuat per civitatem quibus esse cu^a debet, ne
q^il turbetur inter Caves. Alii excabias aguntiun cen bus ut pat^rum, sit
piae^^^m adver^^t ext^^^num hostem. ^^ud m^^eris obeunt Ecclesiaslici; hoc
eiwlis Wagistrattis. Bright^ in l.c. Rev. 4^.
when folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place; not to
honor men according to their worth is evil; but to exalt men for their
wickedness is abominable; for the wicked walk on every side, when the vilest
men are exalted. We read Cant. 5.7. that the Church of God in her desertion
is evil entreated by two sorts, that should have succored her; the Watchmen
that gee about the City, some interpret the Ministers, whose watch is mainely
conversant about those within; for what have we to dee to judge them them that
are without? And the Reepers of the walls; the Magistrates, who are to watch
for the Church against enemies without, for their safety, and protection; the
Church of God is wounded by the one, and disgraced by the other; if this use be
made of power, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, men shall surely given an
account thereof to him who is ready to judge the quick and dead.

4. Ye shall give an account how under your Government Religion has been
reformed or corrupted. There are in Ordinances different degrees of purity,
sometimes the sea is of Glass clear as Crystal; Rev 15 2. Rev 16 (...)
Ezech 47.3 4.
sometimes its of glass mixed with fire, and sometimes it becomes as the blood
of a dead man. And there are different degrees of growth and beauty in
Ordinances; sometimes when the Lord measures the waters that issue out of the
Sanctuary, they are to the knees, and are to the loins, and sometimes they are
but to the ancles. Now Magistrates are watchmen, and as their great care should
be to keep God in the Nation; so their vigilance should especially be
exercised in observing by what steps the glory of the Lord departs. Ezech. 10 4
18 and 11 23.
Therefore the Lord does exactly set down in Scripture how far Religion was
corrupted in every Kings Reign, and how far that corruption was by authority
countenanced; how Jeroboam had his Idolatry, and that unto this were added the
statutes of Omri, and the works of the house of Ahab, sc. Mich. 6.16.
in the worship of Baal, and they did cause the people to walk in their
counsels that the Lord might make them a desolation. And how afterward the
women mourned for Tamuz, Ezech. 8.10 11.14 16. Videntur hi 70 fuisse Senatores
concilii Sanhedrim, erat hic summus Iudaeorum Senatus. A Lap. 2 Kin. 10.30, 31,
1 Kin. 15.14.
and the ancients of the people worshipped the Sun, and all sorts of creeping
things; even all the abominations of the Gentiles. And the Lord in Scripture
exactly records how far the Reformation went in every Kings reign; Jehu took
away the Idolatry of Baal; but yet he retained the Calves. Asa went far in a
Reformation; yet the Lord observes, that the high places were not taken away. 2
Cron. 17.6.
In the days of Jehosophat the Reformation rose higher, and he took away the
high places, and the groves out of Judah. And in Josias time, when there was
the throwest Reformation that we read of in the Scripture; yet the Lord
observes, that there were remnants of Baal, Zeph. 1, 4, 5, 6.
and the Chemarions with the Priests, some that did worship the host of heaven,
worshipping and swearing by God and by Malcham; those that turned back from
the Lord, and that sought not the Lord, nor inquired after him. Its recorded to
the dishonor of the ten Kings; that through their inadvertency, and by their
authority, Rev 17.13.17 I (...) sed (...), p^e^atis ^o^in^ palliata.
they countenanced Popery, and gave their power and their Kingdoms to the
beast to set up that ly. And there is a mystery of iniquity in all ages, under
the form of godliness to destroy the power, unto which Magistrates if they be
not very vigilant may easily concur, and of this also ye shall give an
account.

5. Ye shall give an account how the public justice of the Kingdom has
been administered. Next unto Gods own immediate honor, he has taken care
that justice be dispensed between man and man; next to holiness he loves
righteousness and judgment. Ps 33.5.
And this he has committed into your hands, as he has put the word into the
hands of his Ministers, and they only in a public way are to dispense it in
Gods name: So has he put the sword into the hands of the Magistrates, and as
it is Gods word that is preached by the one; so it is the justice of the Lord,
that is executed by the other. Dent. 33.21.
This is the way to remove evil from the Nation; then stood up Phineas and
prayed say some, Ps. 106.30. (...) Interpellarit. (...) P^jud^e^rit. Montan,
(...). S^pt. Es^y. 1.15.
and executed judgment say others, (for the original word will bear both) so
the plague ceased: The best prayers of Magistrates for the remooving of evil
from a Nation are by letting justice run down speedily, and they will surely
find that all their prayers are ineffectuall unless this concur with them,
the Lord will say, when you spread out your hands I will hide mine eyes, and
when ye make many prayers I will not hear you, for your hands are full of
blood. And the best way to obtain blessing for the Nation is, I^^. 31.23.
to make it the habitation of justice, and the mountain of holiness. Saul for
not executing justice had even destroyed the Nation; so that when David came to
the Crown, he says, the Land is weak, P^^l. 75.3.
and all the inhabitants thereof are diss^lved, I heave up the pillars of it.
And the speediest means to provoke God to execute judgment upon you, is, to
deny the execution of judgment upon others. For thus faith the Lord, Ezech.
34.18.19.22.
Behold I will judge between Cattle and Cattle, between the Rams and the he
Goats. Seems it a small thing unto you, to have eaten up the good pasture,
but ye must tread down with your feetethe residue of your pastures? And to
have drunk of the deep waters but ye must foul the residue with your feet?
Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pusht all the diseased
with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad: Therefore will I save my
flock, and they shall be no more a prey, and I will judge between Cattle and
Cattle, etc.

6. Ye shall give an account how the wealth of the Kingdom has been
expended and employed. If ye refuse to do it unto men, (which we assure our
selves ye will not) there is none can call you to an account here; but there
is an account, that ye shall all give of it before the Lord. Its recorded for
the glory of Joshua and Zerubbabel, that they emptyed the golden oil out of
themselves, Zach. 4 12.
for to maintain the Candlestick. Now for Magistrates on the contrary to
empty the Candlestick to fill themselves, Heb. 2.5. and 1.15.16.
to enlarge their desires as hell, and not be satisfied, to take up all with
the net, and with the angle, and then to rejoice because their portion is made
fat, and their meat plenteous; Hose 12.8.
and say blessed be the Lord, for I am rich, they shall, find no iniquity in
me, will be to their dishonor for ever. How cunning so ever men's contrivances
are, yet surely the Lord will dilligently search it out, Psalm. 10.14.
for he heholds mischlife and spite to requite it with his hand, he is a God of
knowledge, 1 Samuel 2.3.
and by him actions are weighed: For all these things God will bring you to
judgment, when your stewardship shall have an end.

2. As ye shall give an account for your selves; so for those also committed
unto your charge, and put under your command. Heb 13. ly. Ezech. 3.18.
As Ministers in their places are to watch over men's souls, as those that must
give an account, that if the people dye in their sins their blood shall be
required at their hands. So are Magistrates set over Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths, as those that must give an account of them that God has
subjected to their authority. God many times does in judgment to a people,
Ps^y 19.4.
shut them up in the hand of a cruel Lord, and let a fierce King rule over
them: Make them the flock of the slaughter, and raise up a Shepherd in the
Land; who will not visit those that be cut off, neither shall seek the young,
(...) 11.16.
nor heal that which is broken, nor feed that which stands still: But shall
eat the flesh of the fat, and tear the claws in peecees. Though this be a
judgment upon the people, to set a Leopard to watch over their Cities; (...)
34.10. N^^ ^^^untur (...) po^^us l^bdito^^^^, ^^d p^o pro pius, q^ae in cu^odia
subdito^^^ commi^etunt. Aqum. in Ro^^. 14.12. V^^^quisque reddet rationem de
f^^t^s al enis q^at^^^ al^^rum vita ad no st^am cutam ^e^tin^^, and aliorn^^
pe^^ata ex offic^^ nost^i negligentia proveni^^^. l^st. ibid. B^^^^de leg. and
consuerud. Angl. (...).
yet this people will the Lord require at the Magistrates hand. For thus says
the Lord God. Behold I am against the Shepherds, and I will requir^ my flock
at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall
the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from
their mouth, that they may not be meat for them, etc. And the accounts of
Kingdoms will be dreadful; for to whom much is given, of them much will be
required, and therefore it will be good for you to call your selves to an
account before hand, and to judge your selves ere ye be judged of che Lord. I
will conclude this with the serious advice of a great Lawyer of our own; to
the Judges of this Nation. Sedem judicandi quae est quasi Thronus Dei non
presumat quis ascendere insipiens and indoctus ne lucem ponat in tenebras and
tenebras in lucem; and ne in manu indocta, modo furientis gladio feriat
innocentem, and liberet nocentem, etc. Sitting in the seat of Judicature; he
do not judge contra leges, prece vel pretio, lest he be himself judged by
him, who has said vengeance is mine, and I will repay; and with him there is
no respect of persons.

Now that you may behave your selves as good Stewards, and be able at the end
of your shewardships to give a good account, I shall with all humility set
before you these six directions and conclude.

First, make no private advantage of any public Trust. Build not your houses
upon the Kingdoms ruins; if you do, they will not stand; for the foundation
is laid in a curse, and that which is gathered of the Hire of an Harlot, Mich.
17. Prove^ b^aliter loquitur, hoc rediturum ad mer^^dem l^orti, hoc est, in
nihilum quia Dominus talibus divitiis malediect ideoque in funum statimi abire
necesse est, Call. Eccles. 9.15. Mar. 10.29.30.
shall return to the Hire of an Harlot. I confess men pay ill and reward
their best servants, for their greatest services but with forgetfulness and
disregard. But there is a reward that comes from God only; there is no man that
denies himself in any thing, whether Father or Mother, Wife or Children, House
or Land^ for Christ: But the promise is, he shall have an hundred fold more in
this life, and in the world to come eternal life. And surely Heaven Will make
amends for all your services. I am persuaded God has given many of you such
Heroical, and Princely spirits, that you would not for all the world in this
respect, have your glorying made void. And if any shall do otherwise: They
will get to themselves a blot, a wound, and a dishonor, that will never be
wiped off. Surely in maximafortun^ minima est licentia, that may be lawful for
other men, that for you may not be expedient. It may befit the common soldiers
to be scrambling for the spoil; but it will not be honorable for the
Commanders, who should rather say, as Themistocles did after a great victory
won against the Persians, walking up and down among the slain, and seeing
many agreat ^ooty, which he disdained to stoop for; but calling to them that
stood by, said, T^^e hec (...) qui Th^mist^cles (...). Ammia^. Mar^^l. l. 30.
(...) Et involast^ ad spolium Sh^^dl. Luc. 12.42.
It is recorded to S^^s eternal disgrace after his victory against Amalecke,
that he did fly upon the spoil. 1 Samuel 15.19.

Secondly, give every one in the Family his pertion i^ d^^ season. Let Justice
be as common as the Air we breath in. Eccles. 4.1.
Now to hear the cries of the oppre^^ed that have no Comforter; would (...) to
praise the dead that are already dead, ^^^les 4.1.
rather then the living that are yet alive. It may be justice may be done
(where a public advantage may come in another way) upon men that have no
great relation to some in high place; but if they have any of these references,
be the person never so vile, be the matter never so foul, he shall find
friends to plead his cause, and justice against such an one shall find many a
stop. Briss^^ de for^^. (...). 3.
Constantine's Edict would befit a Parliament in this respect; who published to
the people. If any of my Friends, Courtiers, Servants, have wronged any man,
let him come to me without fear, and I will not only right him, but reward
him. Oh what account will Magistrates give in this particular, for honoring
friends, above justice, and above God?

Thirdly, nourish not divisions and parties in the Family; which is a great
evil in a Steward. Quia tempub. fu^^^^ent ^^leiunt and par ^^es (...). Tarn.
in Z^ph. 3.6. (...), etc. Na^^n. orat. 21.
Zach. 10.2. You are called the corner which joins the building, and by
joining strengthens it. It was Athanasius his honor to be percutient bus
Adamas, and dissentientibus Magne^. God has honored you in the one, the Lord
grant ye may be like him in the other. For your differences will occasion, or
at least foment divisions in the whole Kingdom. Blessed be God, our breach is
not so great, with those that agree with us in matters of Doctrine; but that a
little love would cover it, do not you widen it. We have the example of
Christ who has therein left us a copy to write after. He cared not for giving
offense in matters of Piety. When they told him the Pharisees were offended at
him, he answered, Math. 15.14.
let them alou^, they be blind leaders of the blind. Yet he was very careful,
not to give offense in matters of liberty, Math. 17.29.
he pays tribute though it were not due, lest he should offend them. It was a
just reproof that the Mariners gave to the Philosopher in a storm,
propounding questions of no moment, (...). l. 1. c. 2.
(...) while we are sinking thou art trifling.

And we may well apply it to our selves. We are wrangling about curiosities,
when this and the neighboring Kingdom are perishing. And it may justly
provoke the Lord to give us up into the hands of our enmies to bring us to an
accord. And if I may have liberty to profess my fears, I fear our present
divisions may make way for the saddest perfecution that ever was known in
England. For Christ shall have the bitterest enemies in the last days. The
fourth beast is diverse from all those that were before it, exceeding dreadful,
his teeth of iron, and his nails brass which devoured and brake in pieces,
and stamped the residue with his feet. Dan. 7.19.
The Witnesses that did formerly prophecy in sackcloth and ashes, Rev. 11.3.^.
an expression of an afflicted and suffering condition; in the latter days
they shall be slain, and their dead bodies cast out, and not allowed a
burial, the most barbarous inhumanity.

And this bitter emnity shall be colored over with the greatest shows of
holiness: Antichrist fights against Christ under his own banner; he is
compared to a whore, whose lips drop as the honycombe, Rev. 17.4.
and she gives the wine of her fornication in a golden cup; under so much
flattery and show of love and profession of zeal for Christ; that many an
honest and plain hearted man, who have not known the depths of Satan, may be
blinded with such delusions, and may put forth their hand in the persecution
with scorners. Satan can creep into Peter, and for a private end, cause him to
dissemble, and then Barnabas also may be carried away by the same dissimulation.

Fourthly, use your Authority to engage the Saints to you; who are the best of
the Family, and in them your strength lies. Zach. 1^.5.
Take heed how you grieve them, that you do not (...) 1 Cor. 8.1^. Verberare.
Percutere. M^^. Vulnerare. T^^m.
which are the sharpest strokes, and the deepest wounds. It had been but to
little purpose for Joshua to have fought in the Valley; had not Moses his hands
been lifted up upon the Mountain; and the success varies not according to
Joshua's fighting, but Moses praying. Revel. 8.5. Judgments are executed upon
the enemies by coals that are taken from the Incense Altar, and are poured out
in the same Censer, in which the prayers of the Saints were offered. And from
thence came the earthquake, the thunderings, lightnings, and voices. Take heed
of disobliging the Saints in truth (I speak not for any that do proudly
appropriate to themselves the name) losing their hearts, and their prayers, and
all this for matters circumstantiall wherein our own light is not fully
clear. Indeed there will come a time when Ezekiels Temple shall be built, and
the Lord will show his people the Pattern of his House, and all the forms of
it. When New Jerusalem shall be built upon the foundation of the Apostles
Doctrine, Rev. 21.14.
and men shall clearly see how every thing is grounded thereupon: But mean
while, agreeing in fundamentalls, till the Lord clear these things to us, we
should pity on another, pray one for another, as coming all forth ex eodem
utore ignorantia. Tertul.


Fifthly, improve your Authority to perfect the Reformation begun. Take care of
your Masters goods; lose not what is already wrought: Hose. 13 13.
Do not with Ephraim as an unwise stay long in the place of the breaking forth
of children: Yet think not that we are already perfect; look unto that
pattern which the Lord has set forth in the latter days, and see how far we
come short, 2 Kin 13.18.19.
and let us press hard unto that mark: to be content with low things, is an
Argument of low spirit, and to write a nil ultra upon every new degree
attained. (...) 6.10.
The Church indeed in this world will be only fair as the Moon, which has
some spots, and is not perfectly enlightened: Yet let us set before us the
purest pattern, and strive to it.

In this last Church. 1. The Doctrine of Christ shall be preached with so much
evidence that all men shall be convinced, in comparison of the light that now
is: it shall be as the light of the Sun, which only makes it day. Esaias. 31.26.
2. The Ordinances shall be pure without all humane mixtures and contributions;
the Temple and all things therein shall be measured by the golden reed of the
word, Rev. 21 15 16.
and Jehovah shall be one, and the unclean spirit with the false Prophet shall
pass out of the Land. Zach. 13.2. and 14.9.
3. The members of this Church shall be holy, Esaias. 54.11.12.
the foundation shall be laid of Saphires, the windows of Agates, the gates of
Carbuncles: There shall be no (...) there, Rev. 22.3.
by reason of holiness, no need of putting censures in execution; for they
shall write upon the bells of the horses holiness to the Lord: Zach. 14 20.21.
And every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holiness to the Lord: And in
that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of
Hosts. And there shall be such a spirit of discerning, that only open and
profane men shall be without, but also every one that loves and makes a lie.
Rev. 22.15.


4. From these Ordinances there shall be abundance of Converts, for the more
purity the more power. When the waters shall ishue out of Ezechiels Temple,
every thing shall love where they come, and the fish shall be as the fish of
the great sea exceeding many. Esech. 47 9.


5. Their Communion with God shall be glorious, and full of evidence: The glory
of the Lord, and of the Lamb shall be to them, Rev. 21 23.
as the Sun in the Firmament, a constant and a perfect Light, (for the more of
Gods order the more of his presence) the name of the City shall be Jehovah
Shamah, the Lord is there. Ezech. 48.35.


6. There shall be a perfect and sweet Communion one with another; as Communion
with God grows; so does the Communion of Saints grow; the nearer the lives are
to the Center, the nearer they come one to another. All divisions shall be
taken away about the ways of worship, Jehovah shall be one, and his name one,
Zach 14.9.
they shall glorify God with one mind, and one mouth, serve the the Lord with
one shoulder. Zeph. 3.9.
Bless God for the Reformation begun, and strive to perfection: Always have
an eye unto this pattern, and so far as ye come short; so much is wanting of
that pitch, that the Lord has set forth as attainable in this life.

Sixthly, follow your employments as Magistrates, yet so as you neglect not your
duty as private Christians: Make use of all for your spiritual and eternal
good; that being faithful in that which is another man's, God may give you that
which is your own. Consider your selves to be Stewards, and make your accounts
even day by day; and when you come from judging publicly; then judge your
selves in secret before a higher Trybunall then your own, that you may give an
account with joy, and not with grief in the end. Think of your Honor so,
that you forget not your Office, ye are but Stewards: So rejoice in your
Office, that you remember your end: Ye shall not be always Stewards. So glory
in your receipts, and exaltations, that you forget not the account of your
stewardship. And this (in the name of the Lord who has given to his Ministers
great liberty of speech) I charge you before God, and the Elect Angels, and
before Jesus Christ, who shall judge quick and dead, at his appearing, and in
his Kingdom. So this shall be a joyful voice to you: Give an Account of your
Stewardship, for ye may be no longer Stewards.

FINIS.

