THE FLOATING ISLAND: A TRAGI-COMEDY, Acted before his Majesty at OXFORD, Aug.
29. 1636. By the Students of CHRIST-CHURCH.

Written by WILLIAM STRODE, late Orator of the University of OXFORD.

The Aires and Songs set by Mr. HENRY LAWS, servant to his late Majesty in
his public and private Music.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for H. Twiford in Vine-court Middle Temple, N. Brook
at the Angel in Cornhill, and J. Place at Furnivals-Inne-gate. 1655.

To the Reader.
BEfore you read so far as the Prologue, be pleased to consider this
Tragi-comedy was both written and presented above eighteen years since; and if
now it seem (in Language or Plot) to fit these times, it must be by Prophecy,
the Author also himself having been long dead. He wrote it at the instance of
those who might command him; else he had scarce condescended to a Play, his
serious thoughts being filled with notions of deeper consideration. It Is
sufficient for its worth that the best liked it best; the rest (especially
those great ones of the weaker Sect) should claim no lawful Judicature over it,
since it was not written for them, though they thought themselves too severely
dealt with, which yet was an injury to the Author as well as his Poem. Were
this translated into Latin or Italian, it would be grateful to foraign Wits;
and if at home it find less welcome, it is because there is not so much true
wit among us as was or ought to be. It is not now inscribed to any for
Protection, but left dedicated (as it was by the Author when it was first born)
to the Authors noble Patron. If you bid this welcome, you will be gainers by it;
for then you will encourage us to publish other Pieces of this Authors, which (we
dare say) will convince you to say (what the best and most knowing of this
Nation have confessed) that our Author was one of the (...) judicious wits of
England. Farewell.

To my most Honored Patron, Sir JOHN HELE, Knight.
THis Draft at once cried Up and Down amain
By diverse men, up by the same again
At diverse times, has planely found thereby
That it has censured been Tumultuously.
Twixt Actors and Spectators did appear
Small difference; and through a Jealous fear
The Scaffold played the Stage; to say it I Am loath,
Affection against Reason played in both.
Yet Reason at a nearer view gained sway,
The Censure ended just as does the Play.
After this various Fate, because indeed
Of pleasing more then Four there was small heed,
From Court and Oxford home it comes to you,
Secure of Reason and Affection too.
You lent the Author; and it is therefore just
The work should yield you Tribute for your Trust:
If Friends make wits, and wit-wrights Poets be,
Then This is His, and He your Poetry.
Your most Humble and most affectionate Servant, WILLIAM STRODE.

Authori Illustri.
Mill modis superare Tibi conceditur astra,
Quae solum caelo splendida sunt nitido:
Dum Tua lux tenebras, et opaca nube recessus
Invenit umbrosos, et sine sole vias.
Gemmula nocte micans non est vulgar bus apta
Auribus, aspectum Principis illa decet.
Haud minus ista Tui Comaedia Principe digna,
Nec nisi Regali conspicienda foro,
Transtulit in Scenam quae res penetralibus imi
Pectoris inclusas, implicitumque nefas.
Ipse oculus mundi nostris valedicit ocellis,
Cum semel occiduos aequore mersit equos:
Ter sex (STRODE) tuus solares splendour in annos
Fulsit, et in dubio lumine fulget adhuc.
Tu tamen ecclipsin pateris, signumque futuri
Deliquium nostri funeris illud erat.
J. D.

After the Appearance of a FLOATING ISLAND, Enter the Prologue, as coming out
of the Sea. To the King and Queens Majesty.
WHatever Element we light upon,
(Great Monarch and bright Queen) it is yours alone.
Shook from my station on that giddy Shore,
That flotes in Seas, in wretchedness much more,
I hardly escaped to tell what storms arise
Through rage of the Inhabitants: mine eyes
Behold a wonder; Blustering Tempests there,
Yet Sun and Moon fair shining both so near.
Should your Land stagger thus, I wish the Age,
Might end such acting sooner then the Stage:
Yet in these Tumults you shall only see
A tottring Throne held firm by Majesty.
To the University,
Before whom it was afterward acted.
WHich is more waving, yonder Sea, or Land,
Or Passions dwelling there, we doubt; but stand
Here firm and safe; for blustering Tempests there
We see in every eye, fair clearness here.
The Sun and Moon, more out of sight then mind,
Have for our comfort left these Stars behind.
We hope to find Spectatours, and we may,
For you will not act the Humors of the Play;
Or fret at Passions e're you read them calmed
In the next word. Your stomachs feel no Qualm
Rising through smell of rude Philosophy:
Nor shall you find much more then to descry
An Academick Birth. The Royal race
Of Austria thinks the swelling lip a grace,
And would not lose that mark by which it is known;
Men love the Blot which proves the Child their own.
Whether you come to see a Play or hear,
Whether your censure sit in the Eye or Ear,
Fancy or Judgment, Careless of Event
We aim at Service; cannot miss the Intent.
The Persons.
Prudentius the King deposed. Intellectus Agens his Counselor. Sir Amorous a
Courtly Knight. Hilario his Son a merry jovial Gent. Malevolo a Malicious
contriver. Melancholico a Malecontent turned Puritan. Irato an Angry Lord.
Audax a bold Captain. Sir Timerous-Fearall a Cowardly Knight. Livebyhope a
Favorite Desperato a desperate Soldier turned Physician. Memor a Lawyer and
Recorder. Fancy the new instated Queen. Concupiscence the lustful daughter of
Amorous: Fuga the coy daughter of Malevolo. Morphe the beautous Mistress of
Amorous. Morpheus the God of Dreams. 6 Dreaming Masquers Groom of the
Chamber. Ovidian a Poet. Model a Tireman. Painter Musician Hilario's boy, and
Atendants.
The Floating Island.
ACTVS I.
SCENA. I.
The Scene turns to the Court of Prudentius. Enter from several ways Sr.
Amorous, and Morphe. AM. Well met sweet Morphe,
Empress of my heart,
And all hearts else, if made of flesh like mine.
You must not pass untouched.

Mor. What mean you Sir?

Am. To print you Mine;

Mor. Hands off Sir Amorous.

Am. Why should such coyness wrinkle such a Brow?

Mor. Why should such boystrous incivility
Defile your Courtship? All your courtly Arts
Of Singing, Playing, Dancing, Poetry,
Will grow suspected pleaders of mere Lust:
Forbear for my sake: this rude force in you
May chance to blot a white repute in me.

Am. The blot I Will thus rub out.

(Offers to kiss. Mor. I Will wash it thus.

(Spits. Am. How can the eye, that sees not love the light?
Blame your own beauty if you blame my Love.

Mor. I blame the Expression.

Am. If the thing be good,
Expression makes it better.

Mor. Yes, if chaste,

Am. Chaste Love is nothing.

Mor. Nothing to the unchaste.
Forbear I pray, and fear a near example.
Do you not know the King has taught the Passions
Within this Floating Isle more modesty,
By banishing your child Concupiscence?

Am. Others perhaps shall quickly know I know it,
And that I know it as rough tyranny.
What for a trick of youth such Discipline?
Does breeding Subjects call for Banishment?
Or giving life deserve a civil Death?
Hold; stand; in vain you strive; I am resolved;
Should now the King look on, and call a Kiss
Treason, should poison punish this swet touch,
Thus far I durst presume.

Mor. Shame on your rudeness.
(Ex. Mor.
Am. Are not our Eyes and Lips and touch our own,
Not to be used without a special warrant?
At length we shall not satisfy mere Nature,
Nor spit without a Counsel. If my Girl
Partake my spirit, then like me she will try,
What fury Love can in the Passions raise,
To shake this Stoic from his chair of Rule.
I Will move my Fellows.

SCENA II.
Enter to him Irato, Malevolo, Audax. Ir. How? not fight this Duel?
Duel forbidden to the Valiant?

Am. Some other cause, it seems, moves these already.

(aside) Mal. Be sure, Irato, by Prudentius law
Personal Valor now is nothing worth.
Hope with his Pen, Sr. Timorous with his knife,
Or Desperato's man with single Halter
May pass in equal rank with you, or me,
Or Captain Audax.

Au. Not with me, I tro.

Mal. Yes, if this Law should stand.

Am. Not so however.

Mal. Not if?

Au. If to a generous Passion?

Am. I see these sparks are glowing. Noble Sparks,
Let Amorous add fire. Love burns with Hate.
Thy Hand Malevolo, and against the King.

Ir. Why what is your grief?

Am. My Daughters Banishment.

Mal. Great cause: yet none need press a single grief:
We find our selves all pinched of liberty:
We walk in chains, called Justice, Temperance,
Such rusty curbs; and none can further start
Then the strict keeper will allow us length.

Ir. It Is so; we are used like Dogs, or ring'd like Bears;
Whither Prudentius leads us we must follow:
But if we take a loose, or swell and roar,
We must be whipped for it; Sirs, Prudentius whips us.

Am. Can this be brook'd by them that draw the Sword?

Ir. And amongst them, by one that will exact
Life for a word, pay death for crabbed looks?

Au. And amongst them, by one that scales the wall,
That swims in Armor, flies against the mouth
Of thundering Ordinance? must also He,
Must He be ordered by a sit still thus?

Mal. So he has been. For my part, if I broach
Some biting Libel, venomous word or Book
Against some prosperous Object which I hate,
My Ears are questioned. Locks which I have scorned
Must hide my Ear stumps.

Ir. And me thinks I spy some want upon your Nose.

Mal. Is your spleen up?
Rage for your self. You also may remember
Brave Lord Irato when you hardly kept
Your Neck. Some fellow Peers, for as few blows,
Have lost it quite.

Ir. My Veins will burst.

Mal. And Captains
Not to be numbered; All as bold and stout
As Audax here, for undertaking rescues,
And following them too far in open streets,
Have been casheered of Lberty and Life.

Au. But shall not be again. I Will hang the Law.

Mal. Then as for you, Sr. Amorous, you may talk
Not only of your Daughters Banishment,
But of your Sisters whipped, your carred Aunts,
And Mulcts upon your self.

Am. The truth to tell,
My hard restraint is worst of all. I live (If it be life) confined to mine own
Bed: Prudentius bridles up my mouth from kissing,
Yea and from speech, and calls that stinting manners.
I cannot cast a fair inviting look,
But he pulls back the Nerve. I scarce dare think,
Or sigh beyond my stint. One Sigh a day
Is all that I must spend for her that keeps
And may command my breath. Prudentius
Locks up my wind like Aeolus; it is calmed,
And may not issue forth to bear a whisper.

Ir. Mend your Comparison. Prudentius
Like Aeolus? No, Aeolus sometimes
Permitts a Tempest: does Prudentius so?

Au. The Passions cannot stretch beyond his line,
But they are censured, Perturbations called,
Breakers of Peace; if calmed, they nothing are:
We lose both Name and Nature by restraint.

Ir. For what is a Lord I ask you but his Anger?

Mal. Or what is a great man but oppression?

Au. A Captain but his Cutting?

Am. And a Knight
What but his Pleasure? O this frost of Reason
Has numd my Joints. I that with sprightly vigor
Dancing to please my Mistress, could have rose
To fetch her from the Moon (had she been there)
Or as she stood salute her, now have lost
Those active legs, and not by doing service
To any Creature but Prudentius.
I live a Hermit in the Court; to me
It seems a College or a Nunnery.

Ir. To me a Prison.

Au. A mere School to me.

Mal. To me an Inquisition: worse: a Hell.
Where Objects still we meet, and may not reach.
You Amorous like Tantalus behold
Two red white Apples in a well made face,
Which you as soon may touch as reach the Sun;
Which does but scorch the gazer.

Am. I Will to Hell:
It Is less to sterve for Apples then for Cheeks.

Mal. You being stirred Irato thirst for blood,
And thirst you may, but not be satisfied:
You must take blows and beare'em; your Reward
(O poor!) is to overcome by suffering;
As now I kick you; stand: you must not rage,
For this is Patience; now I pull your Nose;
You must not fume, least you impatient prove.

Ir. Let me kill thee, or serve Prudentius still.

Mal. you must keep Peace. I speak but as a Friend;
And only tell what you have told your self.
You Audax, like Ixion, though you dare
To set on Heaven, must wheel about your self
When Reason bids you.

Au. Audax will run on
Though thunder meet him.

Mal. Yes; but I my self
Like Titius vainly feed the Vultur Hate
With mine own heart, and wreck it not on others,
Those Favorites which I hate. Shall this be ever?

Ir. How long shall I like to a painted George
Advance my idle Sword? What must I strike
Like Jack o'th clock-house, never but in season?

Mal. How long shall I like a grim Statue stand,
Look hatred and use none? Prudentius
Has he Medusa's head?

Am. Hey ho, how long!

Au. How long shall I like a fell Mastiff held,
Yelp for the glorious danger that I love!
Water it self if bounded in too straight,
Will foame and swell and break thick bonds of Rock.
I wish we Passions were as strong as water.

SCENA. III.
Enter to them Hilario Singing, Dancing and Passing by. My limbs I will fling
Out of joint, and sing,
And dancing will shake my hair:
Not how at each beck,
Nor break my neck
With sorrow and deep despair.
Such a chirpiu din,
with mirth within,
And a head not needing a cloute,
Is much better far
Than a careful chair,
And a wreath of thorns without.
(Exitarus. Am. The Boy may be our Tutor. Hilario my Boy!

Hill. Sir.

Am. We were taking care how thou may be merry thus always; never be
checked for drinking, for singing, or for playing thy prankes.


Hill. I imagine your design: and thereto promise, give, grant, let, set and
submit my full assent and consent: In witness whereof here is my hand with a
clap, and my seal with a kiss; Your son and servant Hilario.


Am. But stay, whence now?

Hill. From my blubbering Sister Concupiscence;
who desired me forsooth
To arm and conduct her to Lady Fancy.

Am. And whether bound?

Hill. I go to be merry with or upon
Melancholico and Desperato,
Either to quicken their dumps, or by laughing
at their dullness to heighten my self.

Am. Where are they?

Hill. Not far; close by; here at the Heart.

Mal. Courteous Sir, send them hither,

Hill. I shall or will Sir.

Mal. We must no longer ripe up greivances,
(Ex. Hill. But think of Remedy.

Au. Passions must not stay.

Ir. Why with a murraine do we stay to say so?

Mal. In brief do all consent to free themselves
From this oppession?

Ir. What a Question's that?

Am. Give a Command that it be asked no more.

Au. We all consent.

Mal. All are not here.

Am. Indeed
We want two serviceable men now sent for.

Ir. Delays intolerable!

Am. We want besides Sir Timorous Fear all.

Au. We Will force that dowty Knight
To know his good when all is done; and so
Prevent his Treason.

Ir. Consultation too.

Am. And where is Livebyhope?

Mal. No matter where.
His hopes will make him turn to any side
That shall succeed.

Am. For femal Passions,
Their fortune lies in ours.

Mal. Then to proceed,
The way to free our selves lies, thus, or thus;
Kill, or dethrone Prudentius.

Ir. I begin To think on Sr. Raviliack, and Sr. Garnett.

Au. The boldest way is safest.

Ir. Yes, if bloodiest.

Am. Or if he will escape.

Ir. Let him go far enough.

Mal. Then who shall do the fear?

Au. I.

Ir. I, or else
I Will kill some other; what? should I for get
My ancient Trade of killing?

Mal. Let him do it
Who first has opportunity.

Am. To this We all must swear.

(They lay two Swords across) Ir. By all the wounds which on my flesh are
scor'd,
And all the ghosts I Have made.

Au. By all attempts
And all the mines of Bullets in my Entrals;

Mal. By all my pangs of hare and black designs;

Am. By all the goodly Nymphs, and Morphe chief.

SCENA IIII.
Enter to them Prudentius, Intellectus Agens, and Liveby hope with Attendents.
Pru. Do You long for action? have ye too much Peace?
Orecloy'd with blessings? you Malevolo
Bend hate against the unjust.

Mal. My hand is crampt;
Strike Audax.

Au. O his brow! I turn to fear.

Pru. You Amorous love true beauty, Honesty.

Mal. Thy spleen Irato.

Pru. Thou Irato fight
Merely for public peace.

Ir. Sweetness!

Mal. Witchcraft!

Pru. Audax, be bold, but stay till I have bid

Ex. Pru. and Int. and Liveby* following. Au. S't. Liveby hope

Live. I must attend his Majesty.

Int. Go back, and secretly oreheare this meeting.

(Live. returns* Am. Ha! What Schooling call you this?

Mal. What Vision?
That Eye of subtle Intellectus Agent
Troubles me somewhat; and I doubt of Liveby.

Ir. Now I could kill my self.

Au. Now I, Prudentius
He came upon us like the Basilisk,
Or like a Wolf; but had we seen him first --

Mal. You could not do it then: never by day.

Am. Why so?

Mal. You saw the cause. His flaming Temples
Strike with such charming Power, such secret Spells,
That if you see the Light upon his Face,
Your spirits quail; it must be done by night.
And Desperato, he must be the man.

Au. Why He above All Us?

Mal. Tush, we are foyld;
Already foyld; and may be so again.
Besides Irato spends himself: he is now
So full of heat, I doubt he will then grow cold.
But Desperato to his mischief goes
With art and argued resolution,
Strong in cold blood.

Ir. I perfectly abhor
All Judgment, Plo^^s, and Consultations*
To canvase thoughts, to toil and vex the
In weighing means, and picking out the best,
This is as bad as to have served Prudentius.

Mal. And how thinks Audax?

Au. So. Or else I Am mad.
To plot is base; and to demurr contrivance
Of things that should be done, as soon as thought,
Is foolish too. What turn our powder up,
Then smother't under ground, then by degrees
Give fire! Such creeping mischeife has no luck.

Ir. Come Martial Law, come Captain Martial Law

Au. And wise Malevolo, when have you e're heard
Of great attempts without the hand of Audax?
Come we will to it presently.

Mal. Even as you please.

Live. (in secret) I sweat with hearing.
Il now run with this Least I may come too short of telling more.

Am. Only this word.

Live. Then yet I Will stay.

Am. Be sure,
If you miscarry we are all undone.
Go with Ulysses in this night-attempt,
Be each of you to him a Diomed.

Mal. Stay till they come.

Am. Lo here they are. Who else?

SCENA V.
Enter to them Melancholico, Desperato and Sr. Timorous. Ir. What and Sr.
Timorous too? Come* mend your pace.
What? does Prudentius moderate your feet?
And make you snayles as well as slaves?

Mal. Free Passions,
(So ye must be) we know your greivances.
Brother Melancholy, discreet you are,
But not expressive; unprefer'd you are,
Because precise; but say, would you with State
Insold your arms; look sad, and feel content;
Live careful over bags, retire your self
To solemn grief in Temples of delight,
Sigh in a Sisters bosom, and complain
Of Persecution at a plenteous Feast?

Ir. Yes, yes. I Will answer for him.

Mal. Sooth, you may.
Sadness is pleasant, but the cause is not.

Au. And Desperato, once my old Comrad,
Once Noble, and again to be the same,
But now as void of cash as of employment,
Would you, in Peace forgot, bard of a Pension,
Having no lands but bare highways, now run
All hazards for new Fortune?

Desp. Yes apace.

Ir. Why parley then? can he not first draw blood?
Do Cutters ask what money have you first?

Tim. Blood and Cutters? his speech is rough.

Mal. he is mad.
Say on.

Ir. Nought's done through such long talk.

Mal. Such Choler.

Au. Would thou have power to raise more flames then Nero,
To fire the World, prevent his final doom,
Stare awfully, stab others with applause,
Hang, drown thy self, to immortality.

Desp. Such change I long for; roused from Lethargy
I am revived.

Au. Thou lie, thou art not yet.
(Desp. offers to draw) Hold, hold thy hand: I did but tempt thy mettle,
To search the truth.

Desp. And Sir, it is well you say so.

Ir. This Bully,s right, why now I Am pleased

Am. Sr. Tim.
My fellow Knight, you know (but do not tremble)
How often the King has misimpos'd on you
Those dreadful, those horrible, terrible

Tim. Good Sir.

Am. Those heart-labouring employments,
Which Audax begged.

Tim. I pray.

Am. He sought thereby
Merely to vex and to disgrace your spurr*
But would thou hug thy Pillow or thy Love
Without disturbance, or the noise of danger?
How say?

Tim. I love to live, and love in safety.

Mal. Then in a word.

Au. He first kick hence this Knight,
He Will prove a five through fear; his trembling humor
Will shake our secrets out.

Am. Which to prevent,
He stirs not from this company.

Mal. Then know,
Our common medicine is Prudentius ruin.
Last comers, do ye twist in full consent?

Mel. and Desp. We do.

Ir. then kiss the Sacramental Sword.

Am. Sr. Tim. you came unsought, but being come,
You must consent, or will be beaten to it.

Tim. I, I do consent -- but caution must be had;
This is no common sport: what Engines use ye?

Au. Not you, be sure. Will Desperato join
With me and this brave Count?

Desp. Yes, and strike home.

Mal. Then for the time: we think close midnight best.

Mel. And fittest; cause the crowned
Fox is watchful.

Tim. Be sure you take disguise to pass unknown,
Though it be night.

Au. O wit and valor both!
Vizards to Passengers will be but signs
Hanged out to move suspicion; and to leave
Him ignorant whom we assault is loss*
Unto the glory of our bold revenge.

Mal. What shall be done with Memor the Recorder,
One whom I hate, yet have no reason for it,
Like an old debt-book, or mine own Conscience*
Shall he be blotted out, or shall he stand?

Am. Alas he is all Record, Example, Custom,
What Is done Quadragesimo primo Henrici tertii,
Tricesimo primo Henrici octavi;
And these suit more with Passion then with Reason.

Mal. What shall be done with Common sense the Judge?

Am. He also more inclines to sense then Prudence,
Leanes to the Commons rather then the King.

Au. As for the rest, they never shall trouble us;
Cut off the head, we need not fear the Members.

Mal. Who shall succeed? I mean, in place, and show,
Not in the tyranny of strict Command;
Who shall assemble, lead, encourage us,
And give some fashion to our Commonwealth?

Am. What say to Fancy? will not Fancy do it?

Au. No better choice: for Fancy nearest is
To unyoak'd Passion.

Am. And it is most proper,
That since by Passion this revolt is made
From Reason unto Sense, the Rule should pass
From man to Woman.

Au. She, she, Fancy she.

Live. (in secret) O now for wings like thought, this to relate
First to the Agent of Prudentius;
And then to bear first news to new Queen Fancy.

(Ex. Live. Au. She, Fancie's Queen.

Am. She Will be a pleasant Mistress
Rather then Governesse, leading each Passion
Whether himself inclines. Nay she will invent
New Objects for their several content.

SCENA VI.
Enter to them Groom of the Chamber. Groo. Silence through all the Court, the
King would rest.

Desp. Let him Eternally.

Mal. The time grows nigh.
You three to the task of Blood: the rest to Fancy.

(Ex. Passions. Groo. I doubt this earnest talk portends no good,
The business has been hot. --

Enter form the Bedchamber Prudentius Crowned, and Intellectus Agens. Pru. We
would be private.
(Ex. Groom. Liveby the Relator is most creditable.

Int. A right ingenuous man.

Pru. And you have sent him
To take advantage of the changing State,
With Caveat to reserve his heart for Us.

Int. The Pinch and my best thoughts did so instruct me.

Pru. It Is well, I dearly thank your sharp observance,
Suspecting Treason by their startled brows;
And then your art of finding out, and now
Your Providence for our Restablishment.
But O, O this ungrateful Rout, whom I have taught
Both how to Fear and Love, and what to Loath,
Wherefore to Greive and Joy, and in what place
To rouse their anger and audacity
By Rule and Circumstance, and with such Sweetness
As might befit a Wooer more then King.
Have I these Vipers bred within my Breast
With greater Care and Pangs then can a Mother
The Child within her womb? have I broke sleep
Tossed after slumbers, early rose, and spent
The day from Sun to Sun in painful Counsel;
Sent Birds about their Coasts, sent Eyes and Tongues
Abroad the world, to watch and guard,
and work,
And keep all safe, and make them great, for This
For This Reward? Ask Heaven and Earth, if I
Have not with utmost care procured them Bread,
Cloth, Health, Peace, Manners, and Religion!
For Prudence is the womb and Forg of all
This mortal bliss. What ere I took from Them
Was for their use; like Vapor now exhaled,
And soon returned in Showers to fat their Land.
Often have I bore them under both these wings,
One under each, when they inclined to Fury,
Would push each other down a Precipice,
Not steep like the Alps, but steep on either side,
There on a narrow ridg, an edg, a Third,
(Such is the mean, so placed betwixt two Gulfes)
I bore them in their Strife. For this and more
They have not paid (what is cheaper?) Single Duty.
Nothing but Grudgings, Whispers, Evil words:
These are their Thanks.

Int. The greater glory yours:
What Crown like This to govern out of alms!

Pru. But now they seek the Crown; my life they seek.

Int. They Will beg hereafter that you will take the Rule,
Which now they wrest out of your hands.

Pru. Perhaps.

Int. Mean while your life is safe.

Pru. And while it is safe,
Though they forget their Duty, I, le not leave
A Fathers care, but will be still a King
In love, though not in power.

Int. This is a sign
Of future greatness. Then cast off this Crown
As but the sheddings of renewing State,
Now to be burnished. Leave it on your Pillow:
For that they seek. But it returned shall be
With double service both of Heart and Knee.

Pru. Be Thou my Prophet.

Int. Ware; the Caitiffes come.

SCENA VII.
Enter Audax, Desperato, Irato with Swords: the first bearing a Torch. Au. This
Torch must out, or some must blind their eyes;
And look not all at once, least all be
struck.
The Chamber's here.

Desp. Come set your Points
And Postures right; stand sure.

Pru. Why should not I
Step in, and daunt them?

Int. It Is not safe to tempt
United Impudence too far: withdraw.

Pru. When Folly's ripe, I Will to my Diligence.

Int. And I to serve you with Intelligence.
I Will guide you to some Cloister.

Ir. Now: there is the Nest.

(Ex. Pru. and Int. Desp. But what? the Eagle's flowne.

Ir. Damned Treachery!
Treason amongst us Traitors!

Desp. Less Resolution
Then mine had served this Task.

Au. How'ere my Lads,
(Brings forth the Crowd. Our Labor is not lost. Here Is what we seek for.

Ir. Thus when the Beaver smells the Hunters aim,
He throws away the price of his escape.

Au. Now shall I offer what affront I please.

Ir. I Will stab with honor at what word mislikes me.

Desp. No Peace shall stand unless our pleasure make it.

Au. Fancy, we come. Stay, hark, stand, hark. This sound

Music begins softly. The Sirens make, 'cause Fancy shall be crowned.
(Ex. Omnes. Finis actus Primi.
ACTVS II
SCENA. I.
The Scene turns to Fancies Court.
Enter Concupiscence and Fuga. Conc. The Day appears in Scarlet; and the Sun
Seconds the luster of our rising Queen.
I nere longed more for night, then for this morning.

Fug. Twill be to you a double day, and bring
Your Mistress Majesty, you Liberty.

Conc. Fuga, the case is alterd; he that banished,
Himself is vanished. Thus the King and I,
Or I and he, are up and down like Buckets.
Ha wench! these Moral men are taught,
I tro,
What it is to wrong kind hearts. Return with me
Periwigs, Powders, Fucuses for Ladies,
Chioppiens for short, for crooked Farthingals;
For tainted Artificial breath; Teeth moveable;
Such as may serve a Family by turns,
To eat, and laugh abroad: now welcome helps
For all decays of Nature, Arts for allurement;
Be licensed Ladies for Variety
Now to mistake your Servant, Usher, Page,
For your own Lords, and without Heresy
In married State.

Fug. Fie Madam how you talk!

Conc. How talk I Madam Simpers? do not thus
And broader too as mincing Dames as you,
When met together? Do you see your Servant?

SCENA II.
Enter to them Sr. Timorous with a Paper. Conc. Sr. Timorous Fear-all inches
and inches to you
Just like a Spy.

He steals to Fuga and offers the Paper, she refuses; Concup. snatches and
reads it. Fug. And still he comes in secret
Least he be spied.

Conc. What Is this? a silent motion?
The Bill hung out will show us what it is.
Lady, I dare not with the praise of arts
With any thing but Love assay your parts;
Which are so rare, that when I strive to write,
The scant Expression seems not Love but spite.
Well wrote Sr. Tim.

Fug. You cannot say well spoke.

Conc. Can you not use your mouth? no way, Sr Tim.?
Why do you love? you are not fit to love;
Think me your Mistress; now address your self
In form befitting.

Tim. Hum!

He offers to Salute and steps back again; she makes to him. Conc. I must make
up
Your will with my performance.

Tim. Hum -- I fear Fuga will frown.

Conc. Thy Mother was a Fuga.
Nor give nor take? not in a fair Salute?
Tongue-tide and Lip-bound too? O that it were
In fashion for my Sex, my Sex, to woo.

Fug. Lady, you seem to me in word and action
Too loose and open.

Conc. My Complexion
Is I confess the same with Messaline's;
We might have layn together in one Egg
As well a Helena and Clytemnestra.
To me no such desire as of our Like,
No Joy like Union. But your ears and age
Want breeding yet;
I Am sorry for offending:
I thought I knew my Sex; but if I do not,
I know my self.

SCENA III.
Enter to them Hilario. Hill. What here ye whirlygigs, while Queen Fancy calls
you? Where Is Concupiscence, where is Concupiscence? After all your Starching,
Quilling, Turning, Seeking, Pinning; after your Jury of Pedlars, Tirewomen,
Lacemakers and Semsters, still where is Concupiscence? Your Lady Fancy finds
many grievous defects; there wants a Pin or two at least. One of her ribband
Fancies are loose; a long hair has un weaved it self out of its curled
Sphere, and passionatly broke forth out of Order. Fly, fly, ye Baggases.


(Ex. Conc. Fug. Baggases?


Hill. As for my Sister, she is one I Am sure: She colors for it; her willow
gown with ^ay me forsaken wretch is a Challeng, a mere Challeng to all
pittiful-minded Amoroses: She Is true touch, all the world can tell. Wu'd you
were so too Lady for Sr. Tim's sake. Stay Fuga, you must stay one minute; for I
must show on you how Sr. Tim. must woo.


Fug. I see every one's ready to be a Dunces Teacher.


Singing and Dancing he drives her to the drink of the Stage; She returns to
escape. So twice or thrice. Hill. Thus Sr.


Tim. This is Loves Trenchmore.


Fug. Fie on you all.


(Ex. Fuga. Hill. A prity wench. Sr. Tim, but that she is sawe'd
With some of her Fathers Humor; this coyness calls her
Ma'evolo's Daughter. But what of that?
Every coy less is of Cockeril condition,
And must be wooed as Cockerils fight, chase and retreat;
And then she will love you like your shadow;
Fly thou, she will follow; follow thou, she will fly,
For I say no, and for her no say I.
Thus when a long time ye have turned backs one to another,
Ye may at length turn faces.

Tim. Sr. I shall sometimes
Repair to your wit for my direction.

Hill. You may -- and I shall readily afford it to your folly


(Ex. Tim. For mine own merriment.

Enter Hilario's Boy. Boy. The Queen's at hand.


Hill. And they not ready yet with their tedious Phantastticalia!


SCENA IIII.
Enter also Fancy, Concupiscence going backward before, carrying an Vmbrella
over her, Fuga and Memor following. After a while the Solemnity. Mem. Just in
that Posture, Madam, as you walked,
Horacius killed three men.

Conc. Three? what no more? Why, I have killed three hundred, would three
thousand.


Fan. Where Is that appearance which we have expected? And where is my glass?


Fug. You have one in your watch.


Fan. That Is not big enough. Run Fuga; come hither Concupiscence, pin this
handsomer.


Ir. Au. Desp. (within) I Will bear The Crown or nothing.


Mel. (within) I the Crown or nothing.


Live (Enters and out again) I Will fit each Passion to his own content.


Hill. Boy, fill up the Time with noise.


Boy. (Sings) Hail thou great Queen of varous Humors,
Some loving hearts, some raging tumors,
Some sadder souls embracing Rumors;
Such a mixed crew
None yet ever knew
So steady and true
As these in heaping honors on you.
Enter in the midst of the song Amorous ushering the solemnity, Irato bearing
the Sword, Malevolo the Scepter; then six others bearing six Crowns, two in a
rank. First Audax on the right hand bearing a Crown of Gold, and with him Poet
Ovidian a Laurel: then Desperato a Turkish Turbant, and with him Timorous a
Persian Cydaris: Lastly Livebyhope a Crown of all colored feathers circled at
the bottom with Pearl, and with him Model her Tireman a Coronet of black
beaugled wire set with black and Silver spangles. Having done obeisance, they
stand and present in Order.
Am. Great goddess, most adored of men, behold,
Amorous thy lovingst Passion, brings the rest
To offer at thy Feet Ensigns of State.

Ir. I that unsheathed my anger with my Sword
To make thee great, present this Sword of Justice.

Mal. I that with Plots have wrung this awful Secpter
From other hands, will hold hold it fast in thine.
I Will find or make new matter of great ruin
To raise thy Throne,

Au. This massy Crown of Gold,
The price of nightly danger, won by Audax,
Left by Prudentius, let it crown thy Temples,

Ovid. Else let thy shining brow recrown this Laurel,
Worn but by Caesar Monarch of the world,
And thy Ovidii, makers made of thee.

Desp. Let Desperato wrap thy semal head
With Imniu State, the Crown of that grand Seignior
Who worships most these two, Woman and Fate.

Tim. But Timorous brings the Persian Cydaris,
Which dropped from Xerxes Temples in his flight.

Live. Liveby a Crown of Feathers here presents
To represent the light and easiy yoke,
Which all the Passions hope.

Mod. Model thy Tireman
Offers for company this Crown, not costly,
But yet of pretty Fancy, new Invention.

Fan. We thank the wit and pains of all your service.
We Will wear these Crowns in turn, and try them all. Liveby, reach hither. --
Where Is Recorder Memor?

Live. reaches his feathered Crown. Au. reaches the Golden, Mal. the Scepter.
Mem. Here.

Au. First take this, the chief true real Crown.

Mal. These were the honors which Prudentius wore.

Fan. Were those his honors? they shall never be mine.
Those only I except.

Ir. Wisely excepted:

Am. Great Lady, say not so: put on this Crown,
And with your Head crown it: then let your Hand
Give Life unto this Scepter, and to Us:

Fan. I Will rather not be Empress, then assume
Or that, or this.

Au. Say so?

Hill. Prettiest of pretties;
We here would have a Queen, and she will not wear
The Badg and Ensign that should make her so.

Fan. Is none a Prince, but she whose head supports
The burden of a Crown?

Live. Indeed Authority
Lies not in this: then Kings could do no more
Without the leave of this Authentic toy
Then can a Constable without his staff.

Fan. A Crown would crook my neck, which for a Realm
I would not mar.

Hill. Nor mar that Ruff for three.

Fan. If this condition needs must be enforced,
I willingly resign what you conferr.

Mal. Then some of us shall be a gainer by it.

Am. Do not so slight the labor of your Servants,
Who ventured far to gain this wreath; in which
Lies the significance of all the rest.

Ir. Let her refuse once more.

Fan. My Noble friends,
It signifies too much, too great a Care,
Too high Command. Should my free wandering thoughts
Be hoop'd and compassed in with weight and care,
Or should that staff keep down your sprightly humors, Fancy might then be
styled Prudentia.
No; though I reign, provide your selves live free.
This only is my Law, that each man use
His proper humor, be it Vice or Virtue,
Inordinate or stayed. Who minds his pleasure
Shall best deserve; my self will teach him how;
And guide him in it. For your own sakes and mine,
Offer no more that badg of Tyranny.
All but It. Mal. Au. and Desp. Fancy beyond all Fancy.

Ir. Plague on Dissemblers;
First on her self; then on these rascals here;
Who first persuaded her to take the Crown,
And then admire her for refusing it.

Live. Pleases your highness with your radiant hair
To grace some other badg of Majesty?

Fan. To show I do not quite reject your Favors,
Nor slight the proffered Rule, reach me the Laurel,
And then the glass. she looks


Live. reaches the Crowns in turn. Mem. Even thus did mighty Caesar!

Fan. It Is too Imperious This.

Mem. Wit beyond Caesar's!

Au. Excellent Lady!

Fan. It Is too Imperious
If rule it mean; if height of wit, too low:
It Is like a Tavern, Bush and begs for sale,
Which Fancy scorns. Small Poet, take it you.
What Is next? the Turbant. -- What a Turk am I now!
Had I with this a large Seraglio,
I Would lend them to Sr. Amorous. -- The next. --
This Persian Cydaris has made some Sophies
That scarce were wise before: when I sit next
In Solemn Counsel, I Will wear This. -- But now; --
This feathered Crown like a Mercurial hat
Shall lift me from the ground; herein I Will grace
The present Fashion. -- The Tiremans Coronet
May be in Fashion too; and pity it is not;
I like it well. -- But Liveby, it is your Favor
That must take place, and give us Majesty.
Set it on firm, and somewhat glancing. -- So.
I, marry Sir; why, this befits us right.

Hill. Wu'd I had brought my Fools Cap to present her,
My fools Cap would have gotten the start of Favor
From Live by for ever.

Fan. Thanks Liveby, and I Will study a Reward.

Live. Your humblest Creature.

Fan. This fits the Quality
Of our intended Rule, which shall be light,
Light as your Liveby said, and soft and sweet,
And various, and pliable to every passion.
I Am bound to All, and much to Amo ous,
And most to Liveby For besides this present,
You brought me tidings first of this advancement,
And Crowned me in my Ear. Who likes the news,
Must needs regard the teller. -- One I miss
Amongst the Passions, Melancholico.

Live. He sullen grew because he might not bear
The massy Crown. --

SCENA V.
Enter to them Melancholico bringing Fancies Picture Crowned with Gold. Painter
and Musician. Conc. -- Now he has brought himself.

Fug. And somewhat else.

Mel. Although I wanted Grace
To plant the massy Crown upon your head
In the true substance, yet I found a way
To crown you in this Picture. Here Is the Painter;
And here a tried Musician; men of Arts,
Which Melancholy much affects.

Fan. And I.
But mende your piece. That Crown delights not me.
Some sudden business calls me to conferr
With certain Femal Artists! -- Liveby,
Take you the keeping of those Ornaments. --

(She offers to go forth. Mal. What? have we made a shittlecock our Queen?

(She returns.) Fan. Stay, I had quite forgot to strew mine honors
On these deservers. You Malevolo
Be our chief Counselor: be you Irato
The Lord Controwler: Livebyhope shall be
The Master of Requests: you Amorous
Shall be the Master of our Ceremonies;
For which here is Poet, Painter, man of Music,
And man of Properties: I give you leave
To use them for your self in wooing Morphe.
But you my Poet whom I well respect,
Shall be my Secretary, and you shall turn
The long-breathed style of Proclamation
To Lyrick Verse.

Live. Most understanding Queen!

Ir. A pretty Curr! my hands now itch to try
Whether he be true Spaniel breed, or no;
O I could beat and kick him, and see whether
He Will fawn then to. -- You were not best to flatter
Your self into an Earldom, one degree
Above mine Honor.

Tim. Take heed my Lord: he is likely to be great;
A Favorite can hurt.

Ir. What then? must I
Therefore take heed? bid me take heed again,
And it shall be the last, last Caution,
You ere shall give. What? give a Lord
good Counsel?

Fan. The rest, if they themselves can find a way
How I may pleasure them, I Am crowned their servant:
You know your Law; each man pursue his humor.
I Will rule by Fancy since I am Queen Fan;
And use as little wisdom as I can.

Au. And so it seems.

Ex. Fan. with her women. Am. Live. Mem. Poet, Mus. Hill. Ha ha ha ha ha ha --
How merry shall I live! -- Hill.
--

(I'v eman. Ex. Paint. Sr. Shall I mend This piece?

Mel. Mend! mar, or break it if you will.
Now shall I turn far more precise then ever,
And praise Prudenius days throw discontent.

Au. Slighted? contemned? bafled? fools preferred?
(Ex. Mel. and Paint. I Am well rewarded.

Ir. Hark Sr. Timorous,
You gave me Counsel.

Tim. Out of Love indeed Sir.

Ir. You gave Prudentius warning to escape.

Tim. Not I, indeed not I, Sr. Amorous knows

Ir. How ere I Will kick thee now, cause it is my humor;
I Will take thee to be Liveby, it is my Humor.

Tim. The Queen shall know how you
have kicked my Knighthood.

Ir. I kicked thy breech, two foot above thy Knighthood.
I trust I shall have cause to kill thee too.
Mean while, to stir my choler, I Will controwle Roughly, most roughly.

Desp. I to feed my humor,
(For little I shall have to feed my body)
Must run some desperate course. The stream of Favor
(Ex Desp. Runs cross from me, to Hope and Amcrous.

Au. Did we expose our selves to utmost danger
To gain a Crown for Her that more regards
A Cap and Feather?

Mal. I her Counselor
Who alters with each puff, more flickering
Then Flag or Streamer? Then I Will write on Sand,
Or print the Air. But still I wonder much,
How Liveby being absent from our Counsels,
Carried the first Intelligence. His telling
In Her esteem outweighs our Action.

Au. This shows what women love, the Tongue and ^atling.

Mal. How says this man of Fate? is Livebyhope,
That primrose thing, that forward bud, long lived?

Ir. Ha! I think no; unless I may control him
To be no Favorite.

Mal. Men of that calling, If I might counsel them for their best safety,
Ought not to live too long. For we can hate.

Au. Challeng.

Ir. Or stab.

Au. And call these things our Humors.

SCENA. VI.
Enter to them Intellectus Agens. Int. The safest Armor is un weapon'd
boldness.
Thus priviledg'd I Will trust their savage hands.
All happiness, that is, true Liberty
Unto the Passions; how do you like your choice?

Au. First tell us where Prudentius hides himself.

Int. Within a Sanctuary, where his thoughts
Are sequestered from earthly cares to heaven.

Au. Our choice we like beyond Prudentius,
Just so, as Fancy Livebys feathered crown
Beyond my Golden.

Mal. We like the power of choosing.

Ir. And some variety though joined with loosing --

Ex. Passions. Int. Who ere Usurps, considers not his task,
How he must sooth the lowest of his villains,
Give highest place and all to every one,
Else all will be displeased. The King shall know,
What seeds of discontent and headlon folly
Appear already in this warring state.
Closed in too safe, they broke their hedge; what less
Then wandering now through wretched wilderness?

Ex. Int. Agens. Finis Actus secun.
ACTVS III
SCENA I.
Enter Memor and Sr. Timorous. Mem. I think your cause exceeds the Cognizance
Of common sense. He like a Juryman
Can only sinde and judge the outward fact:
As whether now your kicks look white or blew;
Whether his threatening words were high or low;
What favor followed, whether sweet or sour;
Whether the kicks were Rough or gentle; (Rough
Your Grinkling says) These with some other notions
Thereto belonging, as the quantity,
The Figure, Number, the swift motion,
Or ceasing of your kicks; these he can judge of.
But as for higher speculations
Of Passions rising out of mere conceit,
How it was raised, what punishment is
due,
This proper lbyelongs to Fancie's audience.
Was there no cause?

Tim. None given, but apprehended.

Mem. The worse for you; this shows there was no malice,
But single heat. Were the kicks thick and many?

Tim. Six strong ones in one instant.

Mem. Still the worse.
It shows mere heat. What said he, 'twas his humor?

Tim. Even so.

Mem. Yet worse. It Is Law, that every Passion
May follow his own humor. Anger's his.
Besides he is writ a Lord: all things considered,
I give you counsel to be patient,
To ask if he be pleased to give you more;
To break a Tooth, pull Hair, strik out an Eye.

Tim. Accept my thanks: I see the Law it self
Is very Timorous against great Persons. --
(Ex. Tim.
Mem. I now can see no use of Law at all,
Law is casheer'd: where all things are permitted
What need of plea? what can be called unjust?
And are not these the Popular days we looked for,
When we expected Cunning should be Sovereign?

SCENA II.
Enter to him Malevolo. Mal. In mischief we must use the men we hate.
You are the man I seek. Have you considered
Those State-projections?

Mem. Sr. we want some Laws,
Such as were made for certain Lord Protectors.

Mal. Indeed this lawful murder is an Art
Of Excellence, and yet as easy too
For Statesmen Lawyers as Physicians.

Mem. An Art familiar in the Roman State,
As ancient too as the first Monarchy.
O I could tell you Laws worth millions to us,
By fair intrapping of the wealthy Clergy.

;Mal. Have you no model to ensnare a Prince?

Mem. Henry the third, though wise and valiant,
Was caught in a strong line knit by himself,
Here ith mad Parliament,

Mal. As how?

Mem. Twelve Peers
Under pretense of evil Officers
And grand abuses, were selected out,
Strengthened with Laws to prune Prerogatives,
To tutour and reform the State; to size
The Kings expense, and to appoint him Servants,
Both menial and forinsecal.

Mal Is It possible The King should seal to this?

Mem. O Poverty,
She to Obedience is the Lay-mother.
As some say Ignorance is the Clarklike,
Betwixt Superiors and Inferiors,
Look either way, this rule is mutual,
The poorer must be servant to the richer.
Henry brought low with various Action
Could not subsist without their subsidies.
Keep thy Prince poor, then thou shall rule thy Ruler,
And subject thy Commander.

Mal. This we tried To fasten on Prudentius: but he
Too wise, too frugal was. Now Fancy
Through giddiness of mind, and vast expense,
Will prove less wary and more prodigal.

Mem. Let some insnareing Law be once proposed, Fancy will yield, not ponder.

Mal. Well, think you;
I Will speak and speed. O it is the praise of hate
To practice ruin and pretend the State.

Mem. But Sir, I trust upon your furtherance
(Mal. about to go. About impropriations.

Mal. You I Will remember
First, or my self I ever shall forget.

(Ex. Mal. SCENA III.
Enter Fancy in a Cydaris, Concupiscence, Fuga, Hilario before them. Fan. The
Cydaris well fits me; now must I
(...) ^^er this Persian Crown with mutual fitness.
What thing was proper to the Persian Kings,
Say Memor.

Mem. Persian Kings did wed their Sisters.

Fan. Though in my Person thus I cannot wed,
I Will license others. You Hilario
May, if you please, enjoy your lively Sister
Concupiscence.

Hill. I thank your Majesty
Both that I may, and may not; for to me
Nothing so pleasing is as Liberty.
I would not be bound to that neither, though I love it best;
If I were, I should long for the prison.
Bind me to be rich, I shall play at Duckes and Drakes with pieces;
Bind me to my good behavior, I shall feel an itching desire to beat the
Justice.
O what a Prentise should I make! I should run away no oftener then I came in
fight
Of the threshold. And most of the Passions,
I think, have a spice of this humor.

Fan. But can no bond please you like Liberty?

Hill. Neither bond of Matrimony, nor bond of friendship,
Nor bond of Usury, nor bond of iniquity;
I rejoice in the present, I desire nothing, and therefore would be tied to
nothing.

Fan. Concupiscence your Sister's of another mind.

Conc. I could well endure to be bound, so I might be loose too.

Fan. The Theme which I proposed was Royalty,
No less then Persian. Then Concupiscence,
How is it we are so thinly waited on,
By Femal Passions? are there no more women
Of Passion kind?

Conc. Of Passionate enough.
But to say Truth, the Femal Passions
As soon as they are born, turn all to sins
And they are all my Children.

Mem. Then have you
More Daughters far then Danaus, or Margaret
Countess of Henneberg: whereof one did equal
The weeks, and the other the days of the year
With numerous issue.

Conc. I have more by thousands.
I Am as Fruitful and quick of Delivery
As any Uermin, spreading as Potatoes;
My race ruas over the World.

Fan. Or what age are they?

Conc. As old as my self very near.

Mem. Then you
Continued a maid no longer then Quartilla.

Conc. O never at all that I can remember.

Mem. You bear your age exceeding well.

Conc. I hope
I shall be young forever; I have the virtue
Of making old folks young by touching them.

Fan. Are none of those your Children ripe and handsome
And fit for our attendance?

Conc. Pride my Eldest
She is the likeliest.

Fan. Let her be admitted.

Conc. She Is now in the Spanish Court; but when she comes --

Hill. Then the Court and her Mother will teach her to fall both ways,
Forward and Backward.

Fan. Till she return, is it not in Fancie's power
To change a Sex, and make some Passion Female?

Mem. The like has been; I have heard of a Femal
By mere force of Fancy turned Male. So Iphis
A Maid, in love with a Maid, was transformed
Just on the marriage Eve. Tiresias
Was Male and Femal annually by turns;
Some Hermaphrodites have been both at once.

Conc. Wud I could live and turn Hermaphrodite.

Fug. Wud I could live and be of neither Sex.

Fan. What think ye of transforming Amorous?

Hill. He Is undone then: he cannot show his legs, nor use his Postures
Nor enjoy his Idol Morphe.
No, change Sir Timorous,
He Is as fearful as a Hare, and may be as changable:
He has many Symbolical conditions of womanhood already:
He is Femal in every part but one, and half Femal in his clothes
Give me but an Inch of Ribband from Fuga,
and I Will undertake to present him
The Lady Timida.

(Ex. Hill. Fan. Fuga
Give him one of your changable Fancie's,
Thus first our selves must whet our own Invention;
Else others will not stir. Men do not strive
Methinkes to please me as they ought to do.
No other rarities these many Ages
But Powder, Printing, Seaman Card, and Watches?
So much vain dotage for the fond Elixir?
Why are not yet my Christals malleable,
To make our Gold no Gold, and foil the Di'mond?
Why want I Instruments to measure out
The Year, the Day, the Hour, without the help
Of Sun, or turning of these tedious wheels?
Nothing to carry me but Barges, Coaches?
Sedans, and Litters? through the Air I Would pass
By some new waftage* I must have my house
Conveyed by wheels and sails and plummers hung
In some deep pit, deep as the way is distant,
To hurry me, my Family, and it,
Whether I please. I Will travel like the Snaile,
With all my house; but swifter then the Faulcon.

Fug. Rare Lady!

Conc. Ravishing Inventions!

Fan. Why have not I not my Beds stuffd all with wind,
Baths filled with Maydew, Flowers preserved till winter,
As well as Snow till Summer: choicest Fruits
Growing and ripe in midst of January?
Why have not I Ponds running through my Cellars,
For Bottles and for Fish called by their names?
Why not in drough an Artificial rain,
Scattered by spowtes, to cheer my Paradise?

Mem. I wish you had these things; I nere saw such.

Fan. Cheap I can have Aeolian bellows made
Within the Bowls of Andirons, where the water
Shall blow the fire by which it is rarefied.
I will have Vaults which shall convey my whispers
In steed of Embasies to foreign Nations;
Places for Echoes to pronounce a speech,
Or give a Suffrage like a multitude:
Consorts well played by water; Pictures taught
By secret Organs both to move and speak:
We spend our selves too much upon the Taylour;
I rather would new mold new fashion Nature.

SCENA IIII.
Enter Amorous and Liveby one way, Malevolo another way. After a while a Show.
Am. Pleases your Highness to behold a Show,
Wherein some Passions are displayed by Dreams
How they affected are by Day.

Fan. I Will see it.
What means that whisper?

(Mal. and Mem. whisper. Mal. It Is an honest project
Thought on by Memor, out of love to Churches,
To buy back saleable impropriations
With charitable money. Does it please you?

Fan. This task was fitter for Prudentius
Then Sense or Passion. This although I grant,
Yet take it with condition. Memor knows
Conveyance old and new, the Right and Wrong.
In things not sacred he may use his cunning,
In this he must be just. To you I say,
It was not seasonable to move this business
When Shows were coming.

Mal. This your self did move
By asking.

Mem. Now.

Mal. Then make you here a Law,
That none these three days shall prefer a Suit
Or motion under forfeiture of life.
Me you shall find content; I Am no Troubler.

Mem. This trap is laid full right.

Live. Stay, stay great Queen.
This Law will seal my mouth, and tie your hands,
And stop the necessary speed of business,
Whereby your Crown may be dissolved.

Fan. Away,
Away Malevolo.

Mal. My snare for Liveby
Is brok, but violence shall it supply.
You Memor have your wish.

(Ex. Mal. and Mems Enter Amorous with the show. Morpheus in a Cloud-coloured
Cassock with a wreath of Poppies and a Caduceus from a black Cell. Then at his
call, six sleeping Persons in their night caps half down their Faces, and in
their wastcoates, representing in their clothes downwards Memor, Malevolo,
Irato, Timorous, Hilario, Desperato. Morpheus shakes his Caduceus over them
severally as they stand in Couples. Being moved they fall successively into
their proper gestures, and lastly all dance together in those gestures.

More. I Morpheus King of Dreams, whose might
Can equal Fanci's in the night,
Have caused the night six dreams to send:
As I appointed they attend
They enter from a black Cave. Now Memor turn thy Books and prate,
Plead with thy hands and fees then take.
Shrug, scratch, Malevolo, and grin,
Grasp thy foul heart and feel thy sin.
Irato, bend thy fist and draw,
Offer to thrust, keep fear in aw.
Shak Timorous, offer to fly,
Begin to sink, offer to die.
Hilario clap thy hands and laugh,
Skip, leap, and turn, offer to quaff.
Despair start, stand, and crush thy throat,
Then stab thy breast and groan death's note.

The Dance. (After the dance, Ex. Masquers. Fan. Whose labor was this sport?

Am. Livebys invention and my contriving.

Fan. For this I Will send you to your dearest Morphe.
Go at what hour you please, and say I want
Her company at Court. You, Hope, for this,
And for preventing that pernicious Law,
Ask what you will.

Live. Grant the Monopoly
Of Watches, or of Beavers. Fan take them both;
And ask again.

Live. When woodlands shall be turned
To other use, grant me a twelfth as forfeit.

Fan. Be it confirmed*

Live. I was about to ask
The Patronage of Churches in Sea-towns;
Where popular choice maintains a Faction
Brought in with Merchandise from foreign parts.
But that were better taken to the Crown.

Fan. Take what thou will. Thou
begst to give us share.
None can please all, the best the better fare.

(Ex. Omnes. SCENA. V.
The Scene turns to feilds, walks and scattered houses. Enter Hilario, and
then Sir Timorous with Fuga's ribband. Hill. By this way Sir Timorous should
come; whom I as sent from his wronged Lady Fuga have engaged in a quarrel
against Audax. And yonder comes the pitiful Earthquake most lovingly trembling.


Tim. What should I do here? some desperate knave or other, Desperato himself
(it may be) has robbed me of my best weapon. I thought not to have fought with
steel, but with Gold; and to have brought this needy Captain to an honorable
submission by dint of Cash. What disasters have I? That unreasonablly wicked,
that divlish two faced Cutter knew me too well: for when I drew this harmless
blade, he looked upon it as slightly as upon a riding wand; and bad me
familiarly put up that, and draw my purse. Certainly I have too much of the
Mother; I am that which they call a Coward, and all the world knows it.
Wherefore (O Ribband) I take it extreme scurvily of Fuga, that she being of the
same temper her self, does not consider her temper in me.


Hill. Now this Craven stands as ticklish on the point of running as a Bowl on
the top of a ridg.


Tim. Two steps further I Will move. I have been coming a quarter of a mile these
two hours at least; and yet I sweat till the very drops run a race; my shaking
fever is turned to a cold sweat, and that is a true Prognostication of death.

Puts on his Cap. Good night to all the world; for this is that fatal piece of
ground which I shall anon-measure with my Carcass. Never a Bush nor Hole here?
though it be called Champion ground I shall not fight: perhaps I shall make use
of its plainness, and give ground a mile or two; that shall be my way of
fighting. For if I the Challenger stand still on my guard, it will not stand
with mine honor: And then while I keep my backsword point still in his face (I
have seen the play at cudgells) he will wheel about me, and falsifying a blow
at the head will strike me just on the legs where my heart lies. Then shall I
be quite spoiled for running away; which I think I had best do presently, for I
hear him coming. O --


Hill. Now I see Sir Tim, thou art a Lad of mettle.


Tim. Mettle? I protest Sir I had rather drink this cold iron filled small to
dust and be a Lad of mettle so, then to thrust it whole into any man's flesh
whatsoever; much less into my Enemies. You see then what power Love has, and
how Fuga is beholding to me.


Hill. Most dreadfully.


Tim. Is not the time yet past? I think I may retire with honor, and say he
durst not meet me.


Hill. It wants yet half an hour. If you hold not out your time, then he will
assault you openly in Court, and make your shame public, which otherwise will
be but private. I Will stand secretly by you, and if need require will step in and
part you.


Tim. Stand not far off I beseech you for when I am killed I shall not be able
to call. -- O my heart! -- the Gyant's coming -- O -- Hilario -- Malevolo
passes by.


Mal. Saw you not here Irato?


Tim. No believe me Sir; no I thank heaven. Hilario! -- Now comes Audax. O -- I
have but a minute to live. Irato passes by.


Ir. How now stinkerd, how does thy breech? sawst thou not here Malevolo?


Tim. He past by in have; just now in have. -- Well. Two Furies are past. I Will
not wait for the third, go Love and Honor whither they will. Hilario! -- I
fear he has left me. I Will raze my Flesh with a slight cut, and swear I
received that wound in fight. But now I think on it better, I have an issue
under my left arm; I Will force that bigger till it bleed, and swear that into a
wound. For sure a fresh one would be far greater pain. Soft, I am loath to
suffer so much, if I may choose Hilario? --


Hill. What a Champion are you? not dare to look a man in the face?


Tim. Sweet Hilario, I consider thou have no Sword to help me: stretch thy wit,
and invent some speedy way, how I may escape with honor, and not fight?


Hill You cannot possibly escape fighting.


Tim. Sweet Hilario do not kill me before hand with saying so.


Hill. Why then will you be ruled by me?


Tim. In any thing, any thing. Quickly for love of Life.


Hill. I have promised to furnish the Queen with a new Lady attendant.


Tim. What then?


Hill. Put on Woman's apparel, you shall be she; by name of Madam Timida.


Tim. Ha! Say on.


Hill. Then shall you be free, not only from this quarrel, but from all future
beatings and challenges.


Tim. Safe and sound!


Hill. Then shall you have perpetual access to Fuga, bully.


Tim. Safe and delicious!


Hill. Then to steal her affection you may habit your self like her.


Tim. Safe and wise!


Hill. Then as for you honor, who can upbraid you when you are no where to be
sound: twill be supposed by your sweet friend, that you died in her quarrel,
Audax if he himself talk will be dangerously questioned.


Tim. But will you be secret?


Hill. For mine own sake, mine own sake, Sir Tim.


Tim. Dearest Hilario, thou art my preserving Angel.


Hill. Make have, before you can new cast your self I Will come to present you.

(Ex. Tim Poor snake, I delivered no Challeng; I only frighted him to a more
willing Metamorphosis.


SCENA VI.
Enter by him Concupiscence in a Citizens habit. Conc. Hey ho for a husband;
Two three, or more,
As many as I meet; it is fit, that we
Ladies Attendant should be qualified
For three at least.

Hill. What ere the habit be, this is the Face
The Voice and language of Concupiscence,
Why, how now Sister, taking the Air alone?

Conc. A safe Conscience never fears any man.

Hill. I think thou fear not any, but love all.
Such was thy wont; and have thou now a Conscience?

Conc. Be grave or silent, know I Am rectified.

Hill. Pox on your train: by feigned honesty
You seek to woo me. I Will unvaile you straight.
What think you of two husbands, three, or more,
As many as you meet?

Conc. Why did thou hear me?

Hill. Ladies Attendant should be qualified
For three at least.

Conc. That I spoke merrily.

Hill. If thou had ten, thou still would cry more Hymen's.

Conc. If so you think, think on, I think so too.

Hill. But when will all thy maidenheads be spent?
Tell me sincerely, truly, and bodily.

Conc. They come again like Teeth, I Am breeding now.

Hill. Then are thy maidenheads like Hydra's heads,
Not to be tamed but by a Hercules.
Who has the next?

Conc. I am resolved to part it
Betwixt a Courtier and a Citizen:
The Courtier has the maid, the Citizen
Shall have the head.

Hill. Sister, I cannot wed you,
You have too much complexion for my use:
But I Will provide you one shall bear the name
Of Husband.

Conc. Let him be honest, quiet.

Hill. Of you own garb, say he be Melancolico.
And so I Will rid my self of Fanci's march.

Conc. I care but for his shadow having Servants.

Hill. Farewell Carnality.

(Ex. Hill. Conc. Hilario thinks
He took me, when alas it was my intent
The Boy should overheare, and so become
If not a Husband, such an Officer.

SCENA VII.
Enter to her Audax. Au. What Is here? Concupiscence?

Conc. Nor stare, nor startle;
As I hope to look saire, I Am nothing changed
In mind or body. No where, but in habit.

Au. And why in This?

Conc. O for Variety.
Fancy permits all change. This dress sometimes
Pleases the Courtier better then his Ladies.

Au. Is it but so? come then my Paphian drum,
I Will brace the close.

Conc. Soft Sir, you march too feircely.
I have a task which first you must perform;
I fear you will not do it; you do not love
me;
Promise me first; the task I can assure you,
Befitts your Valor, and will pay it self.

Au. Is it to kill the Queen, that thou may reign?

Conc. No, nor her maid; thou shall but use her kindly.

Au. Speak plain, be bold.

Conc. Then thou shall ravish Fuga.
She twits me with my Servants, Favors, Looks,
My Words, and scapes: in This you bear a share.
If this to me bring shame, you are not free.

Au. Is this your heavy task? no more but This?
Only to ravish? is not the work Reward?
I Will do it effectually; Her self shall thank me.

Conc. But I Will outthank her far; I Will ravish thee
With fast embraces. Take this kiss in earnest
Of future payment. Though I seem a Vestal,
To thee I Am Venus.

Au. Venus, be secured.

(Ex. Au. Conc. Then, when her fruit shall swell, and I stand simpring,
Turned to a seeming Saint, O how I Will triumph
In grave reproof and holy Admonition!
This it is to be too chaste. -- here come the Stagemen.

SCENA VIII.
Enter to her Malevolo, Irato, Memor. Mal. Sir you and we were acted at the
Court.
We loosers are made laughing-stocks, and sport
For open Stages.

Ir. Tell my Sword the Author;
That it my write his doom upon his flesh.

Mal. This Creature can inform us.
Who I pray
Were your late witwrights in the Masque?

Conc. Hope pend it,
My Father Amorous (without Offense)
(Ex. Conc. Contrived the Show.

Mem. This trick Malevolo
Was chiefly meant to you, because your pen
Has scourged the Stage.

Ir. However Lord Irato
Shall act a red Catastrophe on Liveby:

(Ex. Ir. and Mem. Mal. I Will watch his haunt and hunt
him to his fall;
You Amorous too. This mirth of theirs at last
Shall close their sweetness with an Aloed taste.
These once removed, who can be great but I;
Whose word shall sway but mine? Then power is sweet
When Rubs are made the stairs to mount our feet.

(Ex. Mal. Finis Actus 3.
ACTVS IIII
SCENA I.
Enter Desperato in a Physicians habit. Desp. Whatever chang succeed, still
wretchedness
My old inseparable mate hangs on.
Therefore I seem ridiculous; my grief
Is others mirth; Malevolo says I Am acted*
Henceforth I Will find new Company: since Fate
Bars me from others happiness, I Will spread
My misery to others; and I Will thrive
Merely in spite, to make men miserable.
This is my humor; it is begun already.
The Gold I took from Timorous, if questioned,
I can defend; I took it in my humor;
And that is good law; I took it in a humor
Most desperately bent; and it has made me
Such as men see, an able man for mischief;
Clad me in the outside of a mystery,
Furnished my shelves with Pots, with Boxes, Names,
Slight Medicines, and strong Poisons. Time has been,
When I in War served Death a Prentiship;
There learned to open Veins, to lance and kill;
Now I am free o'th Trade; a Soldier then,
Physician now; I Will do the self same work,
But now more Artificially. --

SCENA II.
Enter to him Melancholico. Mel. -- The godly
(...) in distress; the wicked, that usurp
The Childrens right, do here grow fat and prosper:
Wherefore I thought of drowning. Verily
^^ulesse that Conscientious Lawyer,
Good Memor, from rebought Impropriations,
Had thus deducted and distributed
The better part to us oppressed Brethren,
Affliction some, and some Devotion
Had brought me to despair. Now I Will not see him.

Desp. Methinkes dejected Melancholico
Should prove fit Timber for my fatal work.
What, Melancholico? not know your friend,
Whose medci'nal skill cures Body, Mind, and State?
Trust thou art not over lucky; art?
Do feel no misery?
I thought ere this should have had thy custom.

Mel. Verily
My sickness could but little cure your purse.

Desp. It might have brought me practice howsoever,
And that is the only Fee of new professors.

Mel. But are you then indeed a true professor,
And one of Us? Sooth I profess sincerity,

Desp. Has not the same which caused sincerity,
Caused a foul spleen? no Hypocondrick Vapors?

Mel. For that a godly Lawyer gave me physic:

Desp. Then take it next from a Divine.

Mel. That Lawyer
First took it from Divines, then gave it me.
And I can give you counsel to your physic:
You have a fair advantage in men's sickness
To prick the Conscience, and to let them know,
Their only way is to relieve the Breren,
And (...) their stock of holy usury
For new Plantations. You shall have a share.

Desp. This is a verier rogue then I my self.

Mel. And what I pray moved you to turn Physician?

Desp. Want set me on, a booty set me up.
Now let me know of mutual courtesy,
What was your Dos?

Mel. 'Twill buy all yours; 'twas Gold.

Desp. Why then, thou'st run unto presumption,
Not to despair. I hear you are to marry;
Which if thou do, then thou will come to me,
For Ratsbane, Hensbane, some such wholesome banes,
To cure thy bands of Matrimony.

Mel. Hence.

(Ex. Desp. SCENA III.
Enter to him Hilario and Concupiscence. Hill. Friend Melancholico,
How is it? Sister, stand by a while. Methinks
Upon a sudden you are grown brisk and cheereful,
Fit company for me, nay for a wife.

Mel. You Will never leave your waggery and jeasting.
" You called Peculiars rags of Popery.

Hill. Sometimes you are too sad and solitary:
Is this jeasting? and solitariness
Requires due Recreation; Is this jeasting?
And Recreation much consists in
The yoke of a meet helper; you may call
This jeasting too; but is it not sport in earnest?

Mel. The Saints allow no sport.

Hill. Then love in earnest.
You know you cannot well converse with men;
Your looks are indisposed, your language sparing,
Your manners different. But to a woman
A long Parenthesis of busi'd silence
Does passing well. Then in her company
You have a world, and none to contradict.
And in her Ear you may reform the Church,
Or purg the State, as safe, as if you spoke
Unto the Air or whispered to your self,
For so she is. Think on a wife.

Mel. No wife.

Hill. Then on a spouse.

Mel. Now you say somewhat.

Hill. Now.
He Will marry words not substance. The word whore
Would have spoiled all. This blockhead suites with me
As frost with fire. But for your sake I Will thaw him.

Mel. Have you not injured that fair promising Sister
By leaving her alone?

Hill. She meditates.

Mel. She walks gravely, turns her eye devoutly.

Hill. The white's pure, the black as full of Adultery
As thou art of Hypocrisy; she harbors
A good conceit of you. Shall she concive Further?

Mel. If that her name be right.

Hill. She was Concupiscence, now called Temperance Sister
This is your Husband whom I so commended.

Conc. I choose not for my self.

Mel. Sister and Spouse,
If so you please, our hands sha'l us unite
Marches are made in Heaven; few words suffice
The Night consummates. As for other rites
I hold them superstitious Ceremonies.
I had forgot her Portion.

Hill. She Is a widow,
He show you her Estate.

Mel. He first retire
And clasp her hand in zeal.

Conc. my Lord and Bridegroom.

Hill. The Devil and his Dam you are. Come Brother.

Mel. Once more. I like your meditation,
But do not spend your self therewith too much.

(Ex. Hill. and Mel. Conc. Now I am double sheltered in my hear,
With name of Husband, and this formal guise.

SCENA IIII.
Enter to her Audax. Conc. Now welcome Servant; have you won the Fort?

Au. Hell take her, she is a man.

Conc. A man?

Au. Just so I found, scarce left him so.

Conc. O you mistook. Sir Timorous is transformed to wait at Court:
It Was Phanci's own device. O I could laugh.

Au. I made him so much woman as to cry;
" Else I had made him woman with my Sword.

Conc. Alas poor Timida.

Au. The thing so trembled,
No leaf nor ague like him.

Conc. Ha ha ha.

Au. Did you intend to put this trick upon me?

Conc. No by the kisses which shall satisfy
Thy height forthwith, and pay thy error full.
Besides I Am satisfied with this mistake
As well as with the right. Aspersion
Shall blot the name of Fuga full as much.

SCENA V.
Enter to them Sir Tim. as Timida. After a while Fuga, alike dressed. Au.
What Is this? the He or She?

Conc. No matter which.

Au. If it be she, I Will ravish her; if he,
Then thou shall do it.

Conc. Neither* it is done enough.

Au. Tim has a fine time on it.

Conc. Come, you have a better. --

Tim. Is this to be a woman? O I could tear,
(Ex. Conc. and Au. As timorous as I am, my lawnes to rags,
And scratch my face, and stick my heart with pins,
Or straight turn valiant. Wud my Fuga knew,
What she has escaped through me.
And here she comes.
(Enter Fuga. O Fuga, female habit and strange sufferings
Have lent me tongue enough. Now I can speak;
And boldly say I have deserved your love.

Fug. Wherein Sir Lady?

I Tim. Now in this your habit saved you from a hideous ravishing. Audax with
whom I should have fought, came on me
With love more rude then rage, blasted my face
With breath like brimstone, turned my limbs like twigs;
I live by miracle.

Fug. You came too near
Uuto a Sex from which you should keep further.

Tim. Shall I not then be near and dear unto you?

Fug. Experience tells you what a boystrous thing
It Is to be ruffled by a man.

Tim. Still so? Why I have been a woman for thy sake;
I hear within these weeds a mind as tender,
White skin, blew veins, and arms as soft as thine.

Fug. But still you are a man, and I still Fuga.

Tim. Nothing can merit love from pevishnesse.
What shall I do? I Will straight turn man again,
And suffer for my self. Farewell coy woman,
Ungrateful, and unwise. My ravishment
Is fairly past, but yours may be the next.
How ere when I appear my self, the noise
Of what is past will light upon your name.
I bore the loathsome suffering for thee,
Now shall thou bear the foul reproach for me.

(Ex. Tim. Fug. Much I was overseen, too much extremely;
I could run after him; but if he turn
I shall run back again. O I am lost;
My Honor, Safety, and perhaps some liking,
All these are lost, with these I Am lost, lost Fuga.

SCENA VI.
Enter to her Amorous. Am. This change of State gains me small perfect
pleasure.
Mere meditation on Morphe's beauty
Will not suffice. Come Fuga, since thy Ocean
Cannot be minish'd by some drops, give freely
What Audax forced.

Fug. That I am miserable
Is It not enough, unless I bear more burdens
Of common scorn, or (which is worse) true stayning?
Good Sir, of all the Passions you are gentlest;
Though you esteem me light, which I am not,
Yet take some weight unto your self. Consider
That after this you cannot worthy be
Of Morphe, never woe with confidence.

Am. Thus still a Female Sermon puts me by,
And I gain nothing by my Liberty.
Once more I ask.

Fug. Once was too much before.

Am. Once more.

Fug. First kill me.

Am. Then to make you quick
Is past my cunning.

(Ex. Amorous. SCENA VII.
Enter Hilario, Concupiscence, after a while Melancholico. Hill. Joy to you
Madam Fuga, you know why.

(Ex. Hill. Conc. If I could give you Joy of what I loath,
And you delight in, this if I could do
Without a sin, I would.

Fug. Is false report
Worse then true guilt? how is it this filthy Strumpet
Looks like a Saint, and I as foul as hell?

Conc. Lady, an Eye refined sees more then dull ones,
And Holiness far clearer then Uncleaness.
I wonder what loose words and actions
Have passed from you, to give incouragment
To the kind ravisher; for I have heard
None can be ravished without some consent.
Be humbled, know you fault, live chaster Lady.

(Enter Mel. Fug. Sure I should think I Am guilty.

Mel. Out upon thee.
Fie Temperance, what here? will thou have Eggs
And rotten Oranges flung at thee too?
What can you choose no other company
But this lewd, cracked abominable piece?

Conc. You see your company is scandalous,
I must take leave.

(Ex. Mel. and Conc. Fug. If there be any power
To see and judge, I challeng his assistance.
What have I done, unless too steadfast coyness
Be now accounted looseness? what is my Crime,
That such a general storm of loud disgrace
Conspires to bear down Innocence? Hold heart,
Hold my weak spirits: for if this continue
I shall grow desperate. --

SCENA VIII.
Enter to her Malevolo. Fug. -- Pity me Father,
My name is stained beyond all patience.
Sir Timorous having foolishly put on
My shape; in stead of me was rudely ravished
By blustering Audax. The reproach is mine.
You know a darksome cloud can much obscure
The face of water though as pure as Crystal.

Mal. Audax shall rue this base attempt, whose shadow
Blots your opinion, and portends more danger
Unto your Person. Cast your cares on me.

Fug. I may communicate, not cast them off.

(Ex Fug. Mal. I thought to use him in a bold design
Against Liveby, and I will; it is dangerous
Unto himself. If combat rain one,
Vengeance persues the other: thus I Will make
The vanquished and the victor both my prey,
And whilst they fight, my self shall win the day.

SCENA IX.
Enter by him Irato and Audax quarreling. Ir. What, you that Office? know your
turn; give place
First to your betters. You be General?

Au. Yes I. And know, that whilst I hold a Sword
To prove my worth, the Sun beholds none better.
Neither your Lordship nor Controwlership
Can dastard me.

Ir. But I shall teach you distance.

Au. Make me draw back one inch, and gain this place,
Then thou gain'st That. Be calmer good Irato.

Ir. Unwing the Lightning, stop Araxes floods,
Then may thou stop my wrath, and guard thy self
Against my stroke.

Mal. Hold, hold; what means this Fury?
May I be Umpire in your difference?

Au. Know it you may; this feirce and haughty Lord
Crosses my aim, and stands Competitour
For what he understands not, to be General.

Ir. Not understand? give way Malevolo.

Au. You may be fit to quarrel in a Tavern,
But not to lead an Army.

Ir. Give me scope;
Unless thou would be broached on the same blade,
And coupled plung in Styx; open the way.

Mal. Why would you seek this Office?

Ir. Cause I scorn
That any man should be preferred before me.

Mal. And why would you?

Au. Because I can do service;
And would gain honor, equal unto His.

Mal. There Is yet no Army levi'd, there is no cause,
But doubtful Rumor.

Au. When there is, I Will lead it.

Mal. Yes, both alike; while you contend for shadows, Liveby will bear the
substance from you both.
Rid him, then you may talk.

Au. What says Irato?

Ir. Agreed.

Mal. Then you shall take him now in the Evening,
Coming from Intellectus: there is his haunt, --
(Ex. Ir. and Au. Now try your fury on a third; for I
Stanch'd not this combat out of love, but hate,
To turn them hot, and mad, on Liveby's blood;
That done, meet seas again; I Will be no Isthmus;
But spur their heat, and clap them on the shoulder.
For I my self first raised this brute of war,
For fuel of some new commotion;
Which luckily takes fire betwixt these two.

SCENA X.
Enter by him Amorous and Musician. Then Morphe. Mal. Now Amorous; you sit in
Fortunes lap,
Your Mistress sits in yours; you spend your days
In Honor, and Delight.

Am. I shall the more,
If with your liking.

Mal. Mine? I am your Theme
For mirth at Court; one of your Hobby-horses: And glad of such perferment; but
I Will dash
And poison your sweet delicates.

Am. Your hate (Ex. Mal. Shall not break off my Scene of Love.
Stand there,
And send thy notes like shafts through Morphe's Ear.
Musician Sings. Sweet Morphe lend a feeling ear
To the soft strains wherein I bear
My soul, and sigh it out to thee
Composed of sweeter harmony;
With one kind word or smile
Reprive the man a while,
Who life does crave
Thy print to save,
And fears to make his breast, thy Pictures grave.

Mor. (Above) Why do you trouble both your self and me,
With such fond circumstance of open wooing?

Am. I Am glad at any rate to hear your voice,
Though sent in chiding. But my dearest Morphe,
I have a business to you from the Queen,
Besides mine own.

Mor. This you pretend to wrong me.
Though I be loyal, yet my loyalty
Ought not to make me Traitor to my self.

Am. If I be false or any way immodest,
Accuse and shun me.

Mor. Shall I then believe you?

Am. Add to that curse a greater if you can,
And may it fall upon me.

Mor. Well, I come.

(Mor. descends. Am. Now having liberty to act my will,
No Law but this vain curse to hold me in,
How shall I bear my self?

Mor. What wills the Queen?

Am. She calls you to her company at Court.
She wants your privacy; you likewise want
Her public presence: O you wrong your beauty
By shutting such a Jewel from the gaze
Of solemn adoration.

Mor. Pray excuse me;
If I have beauty, let me keep it well.
The various Fashions, and new Fancies there,
In the opinion of us plainer beauties,
Do but Sophisticate the Elements
Of native Color, and distort the lines
Of proper figure. What should I do there?
Say I am sickly, as this news has made me.
Farewell Sir Amorous.

Am. Nay, it is not modesty
But blunt stupidity to part so soon.
May I not walk and take you by the arm,
And pass a fair discourse? what hurt in This?
May I not feed my spirits with the air
That fans your cheeks? lighten mine eye from yours?
Is this immodest?

Mor. Hark.

Am. It Is the clash of weapons.

SCENA. XI.
Enter Live by hope persued by Audax and Irato They speed him and pass along.
Live. Help Amorous, help. -- O -- it comes too late.

Am. Ignoble Swords, and bloody butcherers!
Who would believe that two such Hercules
Should join against a single Hylas thus.
It was not manly. -- Morphe -- O my life!
(Mor. Sownes. This hideous sight has struck her gentle spirits
With frighted numnesse. Water, spirits, help. --
Enter Mus. and out again Out strip the wind, fly for a Physician. --
I Will rub her Temples, rouse her by the name
Which she best knows: Morphe.

Live. O!

Am. Life there appears;
Is there none here? how should I save them both?
Help there, it is but a Sown. I feel some breath.
I Will bear her hence. -- O that my arms might clasp
(Ex. Am Her living thus, and willing. --

SCENA XII.
Enter Intellectus Agens. Int. -- Hence did thrill
That peircing noise. What Is here? see false mine eyes!
Poor Liveby slain? then for thy Sovereigns favor
Thou diedst a Martyr.

Live. O, Intellectus help.

Int. He speaks; there is hope of life. If Art can save
A third so mangled, thus I Will bear thee to it.
Although my breast have used to bear it is burden
(Ex. Int. bearing Live.) Within, and not without. --

Am. (above) -- Look carefully
Unto your Lady. Let the Physitan
First speak with me. -- Now to my second load. --
(He descends.) What? vanished? I have heard of walking ghosts,
Never of walking carcasses. Then surely
The Murderers have dragged him hence. His blood
Will rise upon their cheeks; and it shall speak
Loud on my Tongue. --

SCENA XIII.
Enter by him Fancy in a Turbant, Fuga, after a while Musician, Desperato.
Fan. -- Now in my Turkish Turbant
I walk to find Sir Amorous in his heaven.
Be not so deeply discontented Fuga.

Fug. Unless you clear me openly, I die.

Fan. I find you Amorous somewhat near your Center.
Your Morphe fittest is to be a Queen.
I go to wait on her, and fetch her home
With me.

Am. Sweet Soul (that is all she is by this)
I cannot tell you in what world she is,
Nor where I am my self.

Fan. And why?

Am. She Is dying,
Frighted with such a dismal accident,
That when I tell it, I much fear your highness
Will be as weak as she.

Fan. Speak, I am armed.
Where Is Livebyhope?

Am. The same I feign would know:
Last when I saw him, he was laid for dead.

Fan. How dead?

Am. It Is so. Just now: not far from hence,
Two bloody Villains, Audax and Irato,
Persued and sped him with two mortal wounds.
I ran to help; Morphe fell in a Sownd;
I bore her hence; mean while his Corpse were gone.

Fan. I am perplexed beyond my power of bearing.
My arm is lopt, my Kingdom is all tumult*
The Passions taking vantage of my Law,
Follow their humors to their mutual ruin;
Enter Mus. with Desp. Am. seems to talk with him. And run like Vessels till
they quite run out.

Am. Mix some ingredient to excite her Love.
Doctor, thou shall be rich,

Desp. I Will fit you all.
Morphe for physic sends, Malevolo
Has purchased me long since to give her poison;
Sir Amorous buys a Love-pill: I my self,
Even I, that will be Master in conclusion,
Intend to mix them all: then fight confusion.

(Ex. Desp. SCENA XIIII.
Enter to them Audax and Irato, at length Malevolo secretly. Au. Pleases your
highness to decide by choice,
Or leave it to our Swords, who shall be General?

Fan. Then I am bound to honor one of them
For their good service. Bloodhounds, have ye murdered
One worth you both? and dare to ask reward
Of me? of me so wronged? So both will join
In mutual revenge, and fall together,
Fight for it.

Ir. Fond Queen, what if our rage proceed,
To hew Sir Amorous for telling this,
You for distasting? all will be but humor.

Au. Then give us not occasion to proceed.

Fan. Proceed, I pray you, do. Lo, here is my breast.
Tent it; to find the grief which I conceive
For Livebys Death, and your more horrid Lives.
What, have ye surfeited with blood? good Amorous,
Do It thou, do it straight: what these refuse as Rebels,
Do as a Friend. Kill me, but kill me gently,
With some sad strain under this spreading Oak.

Am. I hope 'twill ease not kill you.
Sing of Venus.

(Musician Sings. Once Venus cheeks that shamed the morn
Their hue let fall;
Her lips, that Winter had out born,
In June looked pale:
Her heat grew cold, her nectar dry.
No juice she had but in her eye,
The wonted fire and flames to mortify.
When was this so dismal sight?
When Adonis bad good night.
(Ex. Mus.
Fan. The same which turned her beauty, turns my Fancy,
Alas poor Liveby. -- What dee mean to thrust?
Fie what a press is here? stand off; for I
Am but a Cloud: your Elbowes pierce me through;
Your hot and angry breaths will straight dissolve me.
(Enter Malevolo secretly. And I shall crack into a shower of Tears.

Am. Alas she is crak'd indeed, the
Queen's distempered.

Fan. Do you not see, and hear a Lamb there bleating?
Pray kill him not, he bears the head of Liveby.

Au. In a mad world what use of place? what business?

Ir. Now had I any anger left, I Would shred
That Fiddler into Atoms.

Au. O, I Am struck
(Plague on Malevolo that fets us on!)
I Am struck at heart with leaden heaviness!

Ir. I feel my veins now curdled; what success
But Horror of this Fact?

Mal. I see and hear
(Ex. Ir. and Au. Enough to grate me. O that plotts well laid
(Ex. Mal. Should thus be dashed and foyld. --

SCENA XV.
Enter Melancholico with a Petition, after him Sir Timorous in man's habit. Mel.
-- That naughty Boy Hilario has matched me to the Devil.
Hell flames are in her; she has stuck a brand
" Into my bones; I sue for just divorcement.

Am. Did not you snuffle till you matched my Daughter?
Peace, or you will shame your self.

Fan. A pretty Picture, Here Is Day and Night united in one piece;
Look here a Swan, look there a foul black Raven.

Tim. Justice great Queen against a multitude.

Am. That Is hard to be obtained.

Tim. Against Irato, Tilario, Desperato, Audax:
Some beat, some cheat, some rob, some ravish me.

Fan. What say? Go on and still that howling kennel.
I know you well, for all you are a Tortesse,
And have lived like a frog in diverse Elements.
Of what Gender are you? Go learn of Protens
How to do tricks. If you be dull and blockish,
You must be beaten. Come to me for Justice?
Judge one another, or get you all to Liveby.

Tim. He Is in his grave.

Fan. And therefore get ye to him.

Tim. No doing's here: I Am gone.

Mel. And I: but whither?

Ex. Tim. and Mel. Fan. No Amorous, Liveby sleeps, but Morphe's dead.

Am. Heaven help you Lady.

Fan. But I can soon restore her.
" Take you the sent of a Travelers toes,
" The sneeze of a Sleeper fresh from his nose;
" The fat of a Friar well fed with fasting,
" The lean of a Drunkard consumed with tasting;
" The juice of a Lemmon tha's civil at seasons,
" Twelve dancing Capers, ten lunatic Reasons;
" Two dying notes of an ancient Swan,
" Three Sighs a thousand years kept if you can:
" Some scrapings of Giges his Ring may pass,
" With the skin of a Shadow caught in a glass;
" Six penny worth of Thoughts untold,
" The jelly of a Star before it be cold;
" One ounce of Courtship from a country-Daughter,
" A grain of Wit, and a quart of Laughter.
" Boil these on the Fire of Zeal or of Lust,
" With some beech Coals, least the Vessel bust.
" If you can get these Ingredients, I'e compound them for you.
" Then when she is perfectly recovered, she shall be married
In rich cloth of Rainbow laced with Sunbeams.

Am. I hope Desperato has given her other Physic.

Fan. Desperato? is he her Physician?
Since hope is dead, we all must to despair.

SCENA XVI.
Enter Model bringing a message. Mod. Pardon the messenger if he relate
What he could wish were false. Morphe once was:
But after physic brought by Desperato,
Raging and crying Amorous, She died.

Fan. Lo now, believe your Cybill next.
Ex. Fan. Fug. Mod. --
Am. -- If madness
Be now so near allied to prophecy,
I shall grow Prophet too. What angry Star
Thus frowns on all the Passions, most on me?
Ere since Prudentius days, we only toiled
In wretched mazes of confusion,
Mischief, and discontent. I have not passed
One hour in those delights whereof I dreamed;
And now the object of my happiness
Is clean extinct. But how? O there is the torment!
My torment's doubled through my self the cause.
Cursed be my heedlesse Love, which not content
With likely hopes, with honest ways of wooing,
The ways to long injoyning, headlong ran
To arts forbid. She had such Innocence
Even in her body, Temper so unforced,
That violent mixtures tending but to Love
To her were poisons. Yet methinks, sometimes,
There Is Death in Desperato's looks; perchance
He Is devil in his dumps, as I in lust.
Where shall we find the bottom of our woe,
Who but on Passion have no ground to go!
Ex. Am.
Finis Actus IIII.
ACTVS V
SCENA I.
The Scene turns to the house of Despair. A Table there laid.

Enter Desperato. Desp. Grow blacker yet my thoughts, grow blacker yet:
Your Plummets have not fadom'd the full depth
Of Passions misery. I have invited them;
But I must chang their Cheer; and make it stronger
Then food and bare discourse. I only live
For others-death, and then I Will fill the heap
With mine own ruin: rather with mine ease:
For now the Passions flow like shoales of Fish
Into my net; they sue to me for Counsel;
Even to me; whose joy is in their death.
Just so the fearful Dear persu'd with dogs,
Flies to the keepers lodge, a surer Fate.
To poison is dull art; my self am sorry
For doing ill so poorly; my design
Is now more glorious; for I Will make them act
Their death upon themselves, and thank me for it
Amidst their groanings. There have been with me
Fancy herself, distracted for her Liveby;
Irato, Audax for massacring him;
Sir Timorous and Fuga for impatience
Of their abuse. Unless Recorder Memor
Skilled in the Law, have ways to escape my Noose,
I doubt of none. I Have bid them to a Feast;
But such a one, as Tantalus would shun;
Where I shall feed on all the guests that come.

SCENA II.
Enter Sir Amorous. Am. Black Desperato, did I lay two thrids
Upon thy spindle? have thou cut them both,
Morphe's and mine?

Desp. Why Sir, I mixed your Philtre.

Am. She lives not me to love nor to be loved.
Did thou mix nothing else?

Desp. You know sometimes
That Death and Cupid do mistake their sh^^^es:
Had I mixed Poison too and served two humors,
Both mine and yours, it might be well digested. --

Am. If I had not a dear request unto thee,
To give me of the same, I would exact
Thy life for hers, however it was spilt.

Desp. If I had not designed to kill some others
Out of mere kindness, thou shoulst try my skill
Of letting blood as well as giving physic.
But since I owe thee kindness out of hate,
Come to my Banquet, thou shall have thy sauce.
There thou shall meet thy friend Malevolo,
Who shared in this, and gave as much for Poison
As you did for your Philtre. I dealt honestly,
And pleasur'd Both. Come, thou shall have thy sauce.

Am. Devil, I thank thee. --

(Ex. Am. SCENA III.
Enter Malevolo. Desp. -- Now* Malevolo.

Mal. To hate was still my honey. But this gall
Of being hated totally of all,
I cannot bear: for now I cannot hurt,
Having no Credit. Give me from thy store
A dram of Poison. I have been thy friend,
Let it be strong.

Desp. First shake hands you must
With all the Passions, or at least make show
Of formal reconcilement: stay a while,
My Guests and Cheer are coming. --

SCENA IIII.
Enter to them Irato, Audax. Ir. -- Have we found
This monster here? we will send thy ugly soul
Unto her fellow Feinds for tempting us.

Mal. I prompted you to kill. Were not you ready
To do as bad as I could say? Mean while
I turned you from destroying one another.

Au. It Was for thine one black Ends.

Mal. And say it was:
Might not I hate, as well as you might kill?
My humor was as lawful.

Au. Had thou kept it
Home to thy self.

Mal. I labor not excuse,
But accusation of your equal Crimes.

Desp. He says the right; and hospitality
Does now require, ye should deferr your Broils.

(Ex. Desp. SCENA V.
Enter to them Fancy in the Tiremans Coronet, hair dissheveld, in black and
Silver habit. Fuga, Amorous, Timorous. Fan. Sir, here is a Crown, (and it is the
worst of mine)
Not to be matched in all the globe of heaven
Now shall I feed upon Ambrosia?
Most divelishly. What gods are these two Mars-es?

Am. Hell is broke loose; here are more Feinds then two.

Fug. It shames me to look up; through grief I cannot.

Tim. Wud I could die a sleep in some dark hole
Unknown unto my self and all the world.

Am. Malevolo, the art damned.

Mal. How know you that?

Am. And thou must sink to hell now instantly
For killing Morphe. Thou shall drink the same
That very Poison.

Mal. Well, so you will begin.

SCENA VI.
Enter Hilario before Melancholico and Concupiscence, brought in a Sedan. Hill.
Now Sister you are right: now you can snuffle
' As well a Melancolico. Care of fiction
" With help of somewhat else has brought perfection.
" None come in Pomp but you: weakness is stately.
" Twere brave if these two beasts that draw without
" And these two rotten carcasses within
' Made it not look so Cart-like. My clean couple,
If you would be divorced, there is none can do it
Like Desperato; he can separate
At a worlds distance; that ye never shall meet
To clamor me or others, or your selves.

Fan. A pretty kind of Coach; one horse before
And one behind!

Am. Horses? why, these are Men.

Fan. I see it now; it is the glassmans pack.
Have you good choice of Glasses, made in Figure
Of Guns and Trumpets, or of Rats and Owls?
Last time I saw the like, I bid a Gallant
Begin a health, and after break his glass:
So did the rest; but do not do so now,
Least for a Glass some should mistake a Lady.

Hill. Femals are Venice mettle.

Am. These sad men
Use to be sumptuous in their Feasts.

Hill. And witty.

Tim. I fear 'twill be too great.

Ir. Too tedious.

Au. Welcome and bold I Will be. --

SCENA VII.
Enter Desperato before his banquet served in covered dishes, Desp. -- Aerious
Queen,
Here are no Phoenix eggs; had nature any,
You should have some: and eggs sublimed with Amber
I thought too mean. I have not now selected
Rare filling meats, but rarely physical,
And swiftly curing all the maladies
Which time can throw upon the face of man.
Each dish contains a general remedy,
Beyond the Elixir, or the golden Liquour,
Though it were drunk in the Antimonial Cup.
Open and try.

Am. What Is here? Knives, Bodkins, Daggers?

Mal. Ropes, silken, hairy, hempen?

Tim. Little papers,
Of witty, loving, raging, sleeping poisons?

Desp. There Is Wine to temper them.

Hill. So, where is the Wine?
I still come somewhat merry to a Feast,
And still go merrier back. This is my mess:
All this to all.

Fan. Is this our entertainment?

Desp. Could Art invent, or Wealth procure you better?
The Greatest, Wisest, Stoutest, and the fairest
Have chose these Cates to relish their last palats:
Have you not heard of Mithridates, Cato,
Of Hannibal, and Cleopatra? These?
These gods on earth have travl'd to their home
With such provision. Taste. One taste of these
Forever frees from Hunger, Thirst, Want, Grief:
These are receites for immortality.

Tim. But through a mortal way.

Desp. That sleeping Dos
Will steal thy fearful soul insensibly.

Tim. Then that shall bear me hoodwinked unto Lethe;
There I Will forget my wrongs.

Hill. Manners however;
First let the Queen begin. I broke that Rule
My self, and therefore m^m. -- Well danced youd Scaffold.
He falls into a Chair.
Desp. These things the most of you desired; All want,
You Are welcome all.

Hill. No, no more I thank you.

Desp. Death to the wretched soul as needful is,
As sleep unto the weary. Why should men
Condemnd to misery thus toil to mend
Their Fates which cannot alter?

Hill. This Desperate
What a gift he has! he never was at the University;
Never took Orders, and yet lectures as good Divinity
As commonly we find in most Dutch Systems
Or City-conventicles.

Desp. Pleases your Highness
To choose and give the signal, that we all
May wait upon your dying.

Fan. Reach me then
The witty poison.

Am. Me the loving mixed;
That when I die, embracing her Idea,
My Soul may keep that print, and bear from hence
A heaven within me. He that stripped of flesh
And lust still loves, will show true love indeed.
But you Malevolo shall take my part.

Mel. My place in heaven is sure; what need I have?
Yes, 'cause I live in hell.

Desp. Then take these banes
Mentioned before.

Hill. Do; as good he poison thee
As thou else drown thy self.

Mel. Poison I have too much,
Already, and in vain. Reach me your halter.

Hill. Hoh hoh hoh; a halter? a dagger, he is so rotten,
He Will never hold hanging. Now for my part, sleep
Kills me sufficiently; I Will die before hand.

Conc. In lust I lived with man; to kill that sin
Lend me that poniard, so I Will manly die.

Fug. This Bodkin is my husband; this alone
Shall know my flesh, and find I was a Virgin.

Au. Come join Irato, as we lived lets hang,
Two nooses and one rope will serve us both.

Ir. It Is a dogs death, and therefore not unfit.

Hill. Hoh hoh hoh.

Mal. Choice I neglect whatever can dispatch
Loathed life is sweet. My hate would feign turn home,
But cannot: Still me thinks I feel content
In seeing such a fruitful race of mischeife,
Because it sprung from me. If Fancies madness
Had not unhinged the course of my design,
And brought remediless confusion
On all the Passions here at once; unseen
Beloved and honored, I with Art and Pleasure
Had done what Desperato does by chance.
He only held the Net; I hunted in
The store of game: The praise is mine. And now
I die not with remorse of hate, but want
Of objects to be hated. Thus the worm
Having consumed the Orb wherein it lived,
Does lastly turn its hunger on it self.
Should I survive I could not find more work,
Unless I learn,d to pity what is done.
That Is worse then death.

Desp. When I have rid you all,
If I slink off let all the world besides
Fling stones. In such good company to fall,
Must needs be lightsome. And before out death
A Hymn is necessary. Then sing good Fellow.
An Attendant sings in a base.
Come heavy souls oppressed with the weight
Of Crimes, or Pangs, or want of your delight,
Come down in Lethe's, sleepy lake
Whatever makes you ache.
Drink health from poisoned bowls
Breathe out your cares together with your souls.
Cool Death's a salve
Which all may have
There Is no distinction in the grave;
Lay down your loads before deaths iron door,
Sigh, and sigh out, groan once, and groan no more.

SCENA VIII.
Enter toward the end of the song Intellectus Agens with a book. Livebyhope
and Morphe. Au. Ha! thou come to challeng: but thou art spirit,
I cannot wound thee. Stay some few short minutes,
Till I have quite undressed me of my flesh;
And stand on equal terms, then I will fight.
Else if thou can, kill me; and take my flesh;
Then I Will kill thee again. Thus over and over
Wel'l kill each other and be ghosts by turns.

Ir. My anger is not high: I only guess
He comes to show the way to following ghosts.

Fan. I gave him once a house, my most remote,
Perchance it is in Elysium, he invites me.

Am. But Morphe stands as if she bid me come
Like a clear spirit fitly to salute her.

Mal. Why should that sight fling Ice into this heart?

Tim. and Fug. O horrid!

Desp. Come what will, I can but die.

Mal. Has this shrewd Scholar conjured up these ghosts?

Int. I see you are amazd; the snares of death
Are tangled on your hands: you think these sights
A pair of ghosts; feel, and when you feel them
True flesh, alive and warm, next you must know
They are a token sent from Prudentius.

Am. How? from Prudentius? has he raised the dead
And wretched both at once? and sent me Morphe?

Fan. And given me hope again? a dainty show,
Who'ere contrived it.

Am. Be thou shade or substance,
Since thou appear'st in such a lovely shap,
My soul I'e mingle with thine airy hand,
And strive to suck from thence the hated poison.
But soft, I may do rashly.

Int. Know once more,
These are not ghosts, nor ever were; but live
Preserved with care, and sent with love from him,
Whom ye refused, your King Prudentius.

Am. By heaven, true flesh and warm.

Fan. Why speaks not Hope If he have breath?

Ir. Speak: free us from thy blood,
For which we have been angry with our selves.

Au. Speak, if thou can, thou must.

Live. I feared to startle
Unsettled heads with unexpected speech.
High Mistress, your distracted grief for me
Had almost killed me when I was recovered.

Fan. I am recovered by this voice.
Then tell me
Thy preservation.

Live. Audax and Irato
Know how they left me.

Au. Kill us for amends:

Live. Alas your death's would profit me no more
Then mine could you: but gracious Intellectus
Found and releiv'd me, while Sir Amorous
Carried in Morphe.

Int. Him I took up gasping
Tempered like Ice before it thaw and crack,
In such a glimmering state of doubtful life.
As Candles have before they blaze and vanish.

Mal. These ropes will all be mine.

Int. And her I saved.
By looking on her mixed and poysnous physic.
The simples I extracted, and gave out
The same effect which likely would have followed.

Am. Pardon my fault, I nothing mixed but love,
Those villains added poison.

Mor. Heaven forgive
As I forgive you all.

Am. Give me some poison, (Int. Live. and Mor. stay him. You stay me too?

Mor. Although I love thee not
Beyond an honest man, I cannot see
Thee die neglected.

Hill. What a coile is here
With ghosts? I cannot take my rest for ghosts.
People, you are welcome to this world. How fare
My fellow sleepers, ghosts, your Countrymen.

Int. Thank not my care for this, but thank Prudentius;
Ask not what Genius sent me to relieve
Expiring Hope, it was Prudentius:
Ask not what star compelled my timely visit
Of Morphe poyson-trap'd, it was Prudentius.
From him proceeds their preservation;
And yours in them. Snatched from the jaws of death
As lights blown in again you live through him.
This is your castaway, your dross, Prudentius.

Ir. I think we wronged him in our heedlesse anger.

Au. And yet his love seems payment for desert.

Fan. How shall I rule this crazed and tottring State?

Mal. I smell in what half point the wind is turning.
One breath will carry all the Passions
Back to Prudentius sails. Now for a fetch.
Well, I Will prevent them all. Call back Prudentius,
(alowde) Let Us sue to him for grace.

Au. Call back Prudentius.

(alowde) Mal. It Is quickly done. If this way lead to peace
I opend it; but still I would stand safer.
Audax, you have a Drum. Now do not you
And Lord Irato end your business sneaking.

Fan. Liveby you kept the Crowns: go with him Amorous,
Carry his own: I never esteemed the Golden.
I can be Queen alone, and govern subjects.
Of mine own making; more, then Kings can muster
Or Earth bring forth.

Am. I Will take Recorder Memor
To lay our suit in form. Then on our knees
We Will beg to serve him so, even so forever.

Hill. Come, to our old new Sun.

Int. He Is in his Court;
And now me thinks his presence guilds the walls.

(Ex. Int. Live. Am. Mel. Though weak we will go along.

Conc. Weak legs can kneel.

Desp. This piece of mine own banquet le assume
And walk in penance of a solemn halter.

(Ex. Om. preter. Mal. Mal. I Will go some nearer way, and recompense
My forward breach with much more forward duty.
For this Event spun out by Intellectus
Makes me think honesty may weigh with cunning.
Some sheep, some Fox will make a perfect man.
However, me thinks, these Swordmen might compound
Our Peace in Arms, and plead with violence.

SCENA. IX.
The Scene returns to Prudentius his Court. Enter one way Prudentius, Memor
with the Crown, Intellectus, Livebyhope, Amorous with the Sword. By another way
Malevolo soon after. Mem. Without a Seizin no possession.
Your Crown is undefiled, untouched.

Pru. Place thou
The world in my balance, place in theirs
All Levity, then weigh them both. Next tell me
How ended those commotions which arose
Betwixt the third King Henry and his Rebels?

Mem. He sentenced his Metropolis to flames
Their goods to his Exchequer, and their lives --

Pru. No more. Should I do so? do not I know
What doomes have passed upon untrusty
Lawyers? --

Mem. I Sink before your mercy, be it like Henry's.

Mal. Kneeling is but a Subjects Complement. I sink.

Am. And I.

(a Drum.) Mal. we might have stayed to hear What means this Drum.

SCENA X.
Enter Irato, Audax. Au. -- We have descri'd a Fleet;
And therefore called to arms.

Ir. Submissively
We prostrate our repentance with a suit,
That I and Audax may decide in Duel
Who shall be sacrificed for both to justice,
And the Surviver may be General.

Pru. The Fleet which you suspect, is your defense;
Unknown to you I sent it forth to guard
This Island from the dangers you have called,
By Tumult, Lust, Debate, and Discontent.
As for your Duel, it is a Savadg fury
By us forbid. But you have lately tried
A new found Duel, (was it honorable?)
Two upon one. Or was it Captain like
To kill a friend? In any likely way
Hope would have furthered Audax: but when boldness
Grows impudent it turns a foe to Hope.

SCENA XI.
Enter Fancy, Fuga, Hilario, Timorous, Melancholico and Concupiscence. Soon
after Desperato. Fan. King of Affections: --

Pru: Queen of Inventions. --

Fan. Unless you think your self beholding to me
You are not fit to be my King. The
Passions
I have so suffered in absurdity,
That now they beg your reign which they shook off.

Hill. I see there is some mirth in misery.

Fan. I kneel unto your grace to use me so,
As one that has been Queen, and yet no Queeen,
Rather a show then Sovereign. I walked
But in mock-majesty. Say it were true,
I sought it not, and what is worth a taking
If not a Kingdom?

Hill. Down my frolic joints,
Kneeling is now in fashion. Down, down Fuga;
Concupiscence and Melancholico
Favor your selves with kneeling.

Mel. I kneel not
To thee, but to thy power; I kneel to thee
But not adore thee.

Conc. Pardon.

Enter Desperato. Desp. -- Thus attired
I wear my sentence. Sir, I can but offer
That power of doom which I my self might take.

Pru. If you ask pardon, ask it of your
Prince;
For I nor am, nor will be.

Au. Royal Sir,
Why have you given us lives, if not to take
Or to preserve them?

Am. Hope, speak for us Hope.

Live. Be pleased thou god on earth.

Int. I likewise join
In this request.

Pru. I Will send them Epimetheus
My Brother Afterwit; and he shall rule them.
Those fools whom Prudence cannot prerestrain,
The lash of Afterwit brings home again.

Au. We Will die upon this place.

Mal. And each man turn
To his own grave.

Pru. Do, and do not burden
Me with new cares for new Rebellion.

Au. We groan unto you?

Pru. Why? for here are many
That would be Kings, Amorous, this gay thing,
He offers about his Crown. Which overlookes a
Kingdom, may command
All Choice of pleasure: take it for that use:
No? then Malevolo to devour your flock,
TO ingrosse the Elements, and let none breath
That may resist, and only spare a few
That may for fear do service, is it not glorious?
Work with this Engine. No? are you grown modest?
Then Desperato, what a life it is
To have the power of hanging, or of causing
Some to prevent the gallows in their prison.
What, hang your head so dully at a Crown.

Hill. This is to offer Sallets unto dogs.

Pru. Irato, anger is a Kings perfection
As roaring is the Lions. When his eye
Darts lightning, when he snaps his dagger hard
Cries hah and starts, does he not then seem god like,
And well deserve the name of Thunderer?
Be thou that Jove. Not you? Then Captain Audax.
You took great pains to win, now wear this Crown.

Au. Any but yours I would.

Pru. Could ye get Crowns
Abroad as soon as pull off one at home,
Ye should be Kings or Deputies all over.
Now there can be but one: would that be Memor.

Mem. In all records I find no Lawyer Crowned.

Hill. A Lawyer needs it not: to pen the Law,
And then interpret it as much as making.

Pru. Fancy you must be troubled once again
With this bright load.

Fan. I loathed it at the first.
Grant me the Sovereignty of changing fashions,
Promotion of new Projects, leave to wear
Such Coronets at these, I ask no more.

Pru. When I am King, be this thy Royalty.
Poor Diadem, since here thou can not get
A Master, lie thou there for the next commer,
Or sink into thy Oar. -- None stoop
to take thee?
What all refuse, I once refused of all
Am fit to wear.

Au. Long live Prudentius.

(Int. and Live. Crown him.) Pru. Then once more chained in Gold, I Will bear your
burden.
Henchforth to awe your folly, be assured,
None of your crooked actions words or looks
Has escaped my notice. They camefresh unto me
With tongues of spirits: But I Will leave the chiding
To your own Conscience. Now, thus reconciled,
I Will pardon your deserts, cannot reward them.
If you expect in sign of peacesome matches
You are deceived. Amorous shall not wed
Morphe, without a fair probation.
And Timorous I forbid; such must not marry
As have no mettle, least they spoil their race.
But Melancolico and Concupiscence
Shall keep their state; in the suburbs, or New England.
Now rise. For show of future correspondence,
Rank your selves friendly with your opposites. --

Am. I live not by my line of life, but yours.

Mal. Love is a willing Passion, full of sweetness,
But not so serviceable as loyal hate;
This loves with zeal and with comparison,
Works against all for one. to serve your State
Let others love, whilst I for you shall hate;
My self, if that you please; and others so,
That hate with virtue hand in hand shall go.

Pru. It Is well, it is very well. Live as you look,
Irato bear the Sword: I Will view them all.
Thus betwixt love of good, and hate of ill.
With slight of this; and chaste desire of that,
With sadness to be wise, joy for good ends
Boldness for just attemps, Fear of unfit;
Hope for true peace, despair of nothing less
Then mere Impossibilities, we will walk
To Immortality upon those lines
Which a wise Princes breast naught else defines.

Exeunt Omnes. A Scheme of Posture.
Prudentius Fancy Amorous Concupiscence Hilario Audax Livebyhope Irato
Intellectus Memor Malevolo Fuga Melancolico Timorous Desperato
After the music ended, the Island appearing Settled. Enter the Epiloge. To His
Majesty.
BY this short Model of self-policy,
We find what use of Outward Sovereignty.
The Isle is settled, rage of Passion, laid,
And Fancy stoopes to Prudence. Things so staid,
Our Scene which was but Fiction now is true;
No King so much Prudentius as you:
Whose Rule is Reason, Throne the heart; And now
No souls so Passionate as we; that bow
Both with the weight of Duty and of Debt.
Henceforth our hearts all motion shall forget
But yours. Your Rule alone is fit to sway;
Yet we no less your benefits obey.
Twixt both, our loyalty will nameless prove;
That makes it Virtue, these will have it Love.
To the University.
THe Isle is settled, Rage of Passions laid
Fancy to Prudence bows. Let all be staid
In your Acceptance too, and then each breast
Will cease its Floating, and as firmly rest
As does our Scene. One Passion still would prove
An Actor when the Scene is shut, Our Love.
FINIS.

