HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER TO Lieutenant General Cromwell, concerning the Treaty;
and His Desires therein, touching the Army, and all other His liege People of
what Sect or Sort soever.

Together with His Propositions, concerning His Royal Consort the Queen, and
His Gracious Remonstrance touching the Church of England.

Die 16. Octobr. 1648.
THese Papers are examined by the original Copies, and

Subscribed CHARLES REX.



C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Imprinted at London, for R. Williamson, 1648.

C R
depiction including a royal crown flanked by the Scottish unicorn and English
lion
His Majesty's LETTER TO The Lord General Fairfax, and Lieutenant General
Cromwell, communicating his Resolution and Desires touching the Treaty.
Right Honorable,
DIvisions in the Church, cause distractions in the State, and the seven years
separation between the Head and the Body, causes the rest of the members to
endeavor a uniting, a personal Treaty being conceived the only means for
obtaining thereof, and putting a final end and period to all the unhappy
differences throughout ^^e three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland: In
consideration whereof, His Majesty desires that all obstructions may be
removed, that may retard so blessed a work, promising to leave no means
unattempted, for the settling of a firm and lasting peace throughout his Realms
and Dominions; and the better to satisfy his two Houses of Parliament, he has
been graciously pleased to pass the Bill for recalling all his Decclarations
and Proclamations, published against either or both Houses of Parliament; as
also, the Bill for confirming the Militia in the power of Parliament for 20.
years; promising upon his Royal word to enact the same, and all other Bills or
Propositions whatsoever, that shall be agreed upon by his Majesty, and the
Commissioners of both Houses of Parliament, etc.


And it is reported at Court, that the King has sent a Letter to the Lord Genesis
Fairfax, and Lieut. General Cromwell, viz.

Desiring them to use all means possible for the propagating of this present
Treaty, and to endeavor the settling of a firm and lasting peace throughout his
bleeding and distracted Kingdoms; that so all his liege people of what sect or
sort soever, may no longer feel the cruelty and oppression of a most bloody and
intestine war, but (after a seven years Pilgrimage in desolation and confusion)
for the future, enjoy a true and everlasting peace.

And truly, I am confident, that no man desires peace more then his Majesty,
but yet scruples at the Directory, and argues stiffly for Episcopacy; as
appears by his ensuing answer to the Proposition touching the Church of
England, as follows.

1 As to the Exceptions that his Maj. said nothing to the consenting to a Bill
for the abolishing of Archbishops, etc, nor that the Ordinance for abolishing
them be confirmed by Act of Parl. the Form of Church government and Directory
for worship which you presented to him, and thereby has established the
actual possession, and public exercise of these Forms, and has suspended the
present Government and Form of worship established by law, but desired a
co^sultation with Divines in the mean time for a future settlement, as in that
paper is expressed: His Maj. therefore declares, that the reason why he did not
answer to that part of your Proposition, was, because he was not satisfied in
his conscience; H^ can be content to the utter abolishing of Episcopacy; the
substance whereof he conceives to consist in the power of Ordination and
Jurisdictio^, as they were exercised by the Apostles them selves, and others,
by authority derived from them, superior to Presbyters and Deaco^s in the
primitive times: but because he acknowledges that Bishops were to have council
and assistance of Presbyters in Ordination and Jurisdiction, and in the last
were, and are limited by the Civil power, his Maj. desired the consutation
with the Divines, to the end that he and his two Houses might determine in what
manner Ordination and Jurisdiction might be moderated and regulated for the
future government of the Church, His Majesty's Resolution being to comply with
his two houses for the alteration and regulating of his present Hierarchy and
Government, so as Episcopacy reduced to the Primitive usage may be settled and
continued in this Church: and therefore his Maj. heartily desires their
concurrence in the one, that he may with more freedom give his assent to the
other.

2 As to the Exception, that his Maj. has not expressed his consent for
settling of Bishops Lands upon trustees, and for the sale of those lands, its
true, he has not to alienate the Inheritance of those lands, and herein he
believes he has concurrent opinions of many Divines, that in other points
differ much among themselves, but his former answer containing a large offer of
sa^^sfaction to al those that have purchased, or disbursed moneys upon those
lands, he hopes that answer, to which he now refers, will be satisfactory to
his two houses.

3 His Maj. will confirm the public use of the D^rectory in all Churches and
Chapels, and will consent to the repeal of so much of all statutes, as only
concerns the Book of Common prayer, and also to the taking the same away out of
all Churches and Chapels; provided that the use thereof may be continued in his
Maj. Chapel, for himself and his Household.

4 And whereas you desire to know whither his Maj. by saying in his paper of
the 13 of Sep. that he will give his Royal assent to an act for the better
observation of the Lords day, intends the confirming the Ordinance presented
unto him, his Maj. thereunto answers, that the Bill for suppressing of
innovations, to which you desire his concurrence, which he is willing to give,
contains in it full provision of the due observation of the Lords Day, and if
that be not thought sufficient his Maj. will consent to pass an Act to confirm
the matter of the Ordinance for so much as concerns the Observatio^ of that
day.

5 His Maj. conceived he had given a full Answer to your desire, that there
might be a stricter course taken to prevent the saying or hearing of Mass in
the court, or any other place of this Kingdom, or Kingdom of Ireland: It is
well known of what profession his Royal Consort is, and what provision is made
by the two Crowns in the Articles of Marriage for her exercise thereof. But
what ever particulars shall be proposed to him for restraining it to the places
aforesaid, and limiting it to her Majesty and her own Family, wherein are but
very few English and not many French of her profession, his Majesty never did,
nor will deny his consent thereunto.

And lastly, concerning the Covenant, and the Ordinance concerning the same,
his Majesty's Answer being, That He was not yet satisfied to take it, or impose
it on others, He conceives his two Houses will not insist upon it at this time;
and the rather, because the ends thereof will be obtained by the Agreement, if
happily concluded, which God grant.

These Proposals were delivered to the Parliaments Commissioners on Monday
last, in the Treaty Chamber, by His Majesty, and Subscribed CHARLES REX.

Since the reception of these Proposals the King and the Comissioners have
debated the Bill of Ireland, which has been the main business insisted on for
these four days; as for other particulars I shall reser you to the enclosed,
and remain

Newport 13. October. 1648. Your Honors devoted Servant, W. STRETTON.
Sir,
ON Wednesda^ last, the King and the Commissioners met in the Treaty Chamber
about 8 of the clock in the morning, and had much dispute upon the paper
concerning Ireland, and it is conceived, will make a speedy conclusion
thereupon; After which, the Bill of Church government is to be tendered again
to his Majesty, and this day upon a motion to the King, touching the same, the
Bishop of London rose up at the Council Table, and made a very learned Speech
to the King, and the Commissioners on both sides* touching the Discipline of
the Church of England, in relation to Presbyters and Elders; and after a
Conference between the Clergy, the treaty was adjourned till Monday.

Newport 14. Octo. 1648.


FINIS.

