THE SAINTS COMMUNION With GOD, And GODS Communion with them in ORDINANCES. As
it was delivered in Several SERMONS

By that Faithful servant of Christ, Mr. WILLIAM STRONG, Late Minister at
Westminster.

LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge at the Bible on Ludgate Hill, and To:
Gibbs. in Chancery Lane. 1656.

To his Honorable friend, Collonell William Purefoy, Recorder of the famous
City of Coventry.
SIR,
THis Book falling by Providence into my hands, and the earnest entreaty of
diverse Christian and pious friends in London, having drawn from me the Epistle
to the Reader, as also having heard much of your being an admirer of the Author
hereof (Reverend Master Strong, now blessed in the Eternal Mansions above) I
made bold to commend the book also to your self, as an humble acknowledgment
of the faithful service I owe you, by the same way of fellowship and communion
in Gospell-Ordinances, with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: we
must all attain to that blessed and eternal communion, where the presence of
God and Christ in glory, shall transcend the purest Ordinances here below. But
if either we turn our backs upon holy and precious truths received, and once
publicly professed, or let our zeal cool, or by sitting still go not forward,
we both lose the comfort of communion here, and shall have less communion in
glory. No doubt, Sir, but it is a wild age wherein we live; many stupendous
changes, strange turnings, and amazing alterations we have seen, both in Church
and State, and who knows what yet any of us must undergo; we have therefore
more need to stick to our principles, more faithfully to own Gods name, and to
maintain our practice in holiness with more vigor and constancy, that in the
end we may reap, if we faint not. Which that you, Sir, my Honorable friend,
may still perform, and bring a greater glory to God, and do more good to that
my native City of Coventry, where I was once an unworthy Lecturer, and to the
whole Country better service, shining more gloriously in the end of your days;
that so when you have finished your course with joy, and kept the faith, the
hour of temptation which now is upon all the earth, that then you may receive
the Crown laid up for you, which your Son and Wife, now both blessed and
glorious, are enjoying to all eternity, is, and shall be the hearty and earnest
prayer of him, who doubts not of your candid acceptance of this my bold
presumption, but desires in all things ever to be found,

Sir Your most humble and faithful servant upon the best account,JOHN HERING.
From my Study Brides-Churchyard, London.
Christian Reader,
AT the earnest entreaty and request of some Pious and Christian Friends, who
find sweet Communion with God in Gospell-Ordinances, I am bold to commend the
reading of this book unto thee: The Author hereof I believe is now in Heaven,
receiving his wages after his work is done; and a glorified Saint, enjoying
eternal Communion with God above Ordinances. We must all confess, that in
respect of human frailties, we are not so STRONG, but that weakness will
attend the best of us, whilst here below in our pilgrimage to that Heavenly
Canaan: He will be much deceived, that reckons this World his Heaven, but does,
and will find it his Wilderness, and at best, but his passage through the
Red Sea; and here we have need of Moses, not only to kill the Egyptian for us,
and to bring us out of Egypt; and also lift up his Rod, and stretch forth his
Hand, and so divide the Red Sea, that our passage may be safe; but also of a
Joshua to bring us into Canaan, and this is our Lord Jesus Christ, who is God
blessed for evermore. No true Saint in this life can live without or above
Ordinances, no more then the natural body can live without food and raiment.
God in his infinite wisdom and mercy, has admitted the Churches new born
babes in all ages to Ordinances, whereby Grace, and the seeds of Regeneration
may be, through mercy, conveyed to them: and are not Saints to the end of their
days perfected by them also, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Some
waters are contained in Springs and Wells, some in Conduits and Pipes, and some
also in the main Ocean; yet they are all conveyances of Water for the several
uses of the sons of men; and they are all bounded within their due limits:
And so it is with Gospel Ordinances; there is the Wells and springs of life,
there is the Pipes of spiritual Comfort, and there is the Ocean of mercy, and
all the privileges of free Grace conveyed to the believing soul. All those in
these licentious days (which God will require some where) that cry down
Ordinances are forced themselves to devise new ways of conveying their
apprehended spirit unto us. And should we refuse the ways of Gods own
appointment? Wherever God shall record his Name, shall we deny to worship him
there? How then will God come unto us, and bless us, as he has promised? Let
those wild men of this Age, that have been at Jericho in stead of Jerusalem,
resolve the question, how the Lord will appear in ways and Ordinances that are
not of his own institution and allowance? Will he not sadly, personally, and
publicly say to them at the great day, who has required these things at your
hands? bring no more vain oblations.

Reader, I will say no more, but beseech thee to turn thy reading into prayer,
and thy praying into humble and holy practice, that thou may know the Trinity
in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, which reason cannot understand, and may enjoy
soule-Communion with all the Persons in the Trinity by Faith in
Gospell-Ordinances; and that both in the Temple, and also in every
Administration of the Lord Jesus to thee, thou may cordially, affectionately,
and with comfort say, Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there: And with Jacob in his
Pilgrimage be able to confess, Surely the Lord is in this place, though
sometimes I knew it not through mine own default. And that thou may find all
mercies and glories bottomed on thy spiritual Communion with God, reconciled
to thee in Christ thy Redeemer, is the desire of him, who thirsts after more
Communion with God and Christ in holy Ordinances, and begs always to be found
upon a spiritual account

Thine in the Lord Christ, JOHN HERING.
From my Study in Brides Churchyard London, Octo. 27. 1655.
The Saints Communion with God, and Gods Communion with them in O dinances.
Exodus 20.24. The latter part. In all places where I record my name, (or where
I cause my name to be remembered,) I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.


THe whole Chapter is made up of Gods giving the moral Law: In the giving
forth of which law there are many remarkable passages; as why it must be given
from Mount Sinai? why immediately after their deliverance out of Egypt? why in
thunderings and lightnings? why the world in its infancy lived without a law
written? These things I have already spoken to. The words which I have read are
a promise made unto the places of Gods public worship, which were typical,
for respect to places is done away, John 4.21. The hour comes when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. All acts of
worship are to be done to God as a Father, and respect of places being done
away, now children may every where worship their Father. The whole Jewish
Religion lay in these 4. things. 1. In holy times. 2. In holy places. 3. In
holy persons 4. In holy things. The Apostle 1 Jam. 27. has wrapped up a Religion
under the new Testament; pure Religion and underfiled before God, and the
Father is this, To visit the Fatherless and widows in their afflictions, and
keep himself unspotted from the world.

Jesus Christ was made known four ways in the old Testament, by promises, by
prophecies, by Types and shadows, and by Apparition. The blessing in this
Text comes under an Apparition, for it is nothing else but the appearance of
God in divine Ordinances, now respect to places being done away by the
promulgation of the Gospel. The promise, though it do not relate to the
place, yet it does relate to the Ordinances, so that in all places, if you lift
up holy hands without wrath and doubting, and worship the Father in spirit,
this blessing belongs to you. In all places where I record my name, etc.

The words themselves being a promise have these particulars in them.

First, the Author of it, that is God the Father. Secondly, the extent of it;
and that is all places where I record my name. Thirdly, the nature of the
promise, and that in two branches. 1. Of communion, I will come unto you. 2. Of
benediction, I will bless you.

Wherein you have 3. things.

1. The union of them, meeting and blessing. 2. The order of them, first
meeting, and then blessing. 3. The Object of them, (the sincere seekers of God)
I will come unto thee and I will bless thee.
There Is but one thing in the Text that is difficult.

In the place where I record my name, In the Hebrew it is (...) becol hammakom
asher azkir etsheni; that is, In every place where I shall cause or make my
name to be remembered; or in every place where I shall mention (or make
mention) of my name: for the word (...) azkir is in the conjugation hiphil,
which usually imports an action done or caused to be done by another, as here,
I will cause to be remembered, the name of God has several acceptations in
Scripture; By name of God is here meant the public worship and service of
God, Jer. 7.12. Go ye to (...) Shil^h, the place where I have set my name
that is, my worship and service. So its said (...) Jehovah echad ushemo echad.
Jehovah shall be one, and his name one, that is, he shall be so worshipped as
he is one in essence. In all places where I record my name I will meet you and
bless you.

For the explication and confirmation of the two chief heads the text points
at, viz. 1. That by recording, remembering or mentioning the name of God, is
meant, the setting up the worship of God in his Ordinances and 2. that
wheresoever the name of God is thus recorded, remembered, or mentioned; that is,
wheresoever God is worshipped in his Ordinances, there he does promise and
command a blessing; or there he will meet those that record his name, in the
worshipping of himself, with a blessing. There are two or three other
parallel places of Scripture deserving special consideration; as 1. for the
first point, there is a most remarkable expression, Psalm. 22.27. All the
nations of the world ((...) Jizkeru, the same Hebrew root with (...) azkir,
here in the Text) shall remember; why, what is that? or what shall they
remember? even this, they shall turn to the Lord and worship him his name in
his Ordinances; as is explained in the words following of the verse; And all
the families of the nations (...) jishtachavu) shall (bow down themselves, or)
worship before thee, etc. and so Psalm 86.4. All nations whom thou have made,
shall come, ((...) Vejishtachavu) and they shall worship before thee; And how
shall they do so? even by recording, remembering, and making mention of the
glory of thy name; as in the words following, ((...) Vicabbedu lishmecha) and
they shall glorify thy name. 2. For the second point, that the Lord (as he
has promised, so he) does come and meet those with a blessing, who do thus
glorify and worship his name in his Ordinances, so that they shall never do
it in vain, and for nothing; see those two precious texts in Isaiah his
prophecy, viz. Jsa. 64.5. and 45.19. first in Isaiah 64. v. 4. The
incomprehensible mercies and goodness of God, which he has laid up and
prepared for his people, is set forth; since the beginning of the world, men
have not perceived by ear, neither has the eye seen, etc. And then mark what
follows, verse 5. Where the Prophet describes those, who^ the Lord will come
and meet with all those incomprehensible blessings, viz. Those who wait upon
him, and rejoice in his worship, working righteousness, and remembering his
name in his ways and Ordinances; Thou meerest him that rejoices and works
righteousness, those who remember thee in thy ways, etc. So that no less
then blessings incomprehensible by the understanding and mind of man, do wait
upon those who wait upon God, and who remember his name in his worship, ways
and Ordinances; And therefore that other cited text Isa. 45.9. is fully
verified; that never did any of the sons of Jacob (true Israelites) seek God
(in his ways, worship and ordinances) in vain; I said not unto the seed of
Jacob, seek ye me in vain, or for a void or empty nothing, as the word (...)
tohu imports; no, the sincere seekers of God, in his worship and ordinances,
shall not be sent away with tohu, vacuity and emptiness; but with their cup
overflowing with all the fullness of incomprehensible blessings. Thus does the
Lord come and meet them with a blessing who remember his name in his worship
and ordinances; in all places where I record my name, I will meet you and
bless you. But we are to consider, that in relation to Ordinances, there be
four sorts of men.

1. Some they are altogether below Ordinances.

2. Others are altogether above Ordinances, they look upon them as milk fit
for babes, but not as meat fit for strong men: they look upon them as the
shadwes of the evening, fit to be stretched over the persons, whose knowledge
is not very high, 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, where
unto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. They think
that all these morning stars must away as soon as ever Jesus Christ has
risen as a Sun in the Heart of the Saints.

3. Others, they are such as take up their rest in Ordinances, and conclude the
goodness of their estate by Ordinances, because they have the enjoyment of
Ordinances, therefore they think they have the enjoyment of God.

4. Others neither rest in, nor yet rest from Ordinances, and these are persons
indeed that are like to meet with a blessing when they come to God, when these
come to worship him, they are made welcome to him, and they shall be blessed by
him; such a spirit is fit for Ordinances, and such a spirit shall receive much
blessing by Ordinances.

The propositions that lie in the words are these.

1. setting up of his public Ordinances, is, that he may have Communion with
his Saints, and that his Saints may have communion with him.

2. The times of a Saints Communion with God,

Communion times are blessed times, and they are blessing times. Blessedness is
out of the reach of the whole Creation, one Creature cannot make another
blessed, nay all the creatures cannot make one creature blessed; Man is fallen
too low for his fellow creature to advance him; He is too sore for the whole
creation to make him a plaster. It Is impossible for the whole creation to make
any part of amends to man for the wrong that he did himself; creatures cannot
take off that curse which they lie under themselves, how then can they give the
blessing that is wanting to others? nothing is in working above what it is in
being, the world in being is poor and beggarly, therefore it can never make us
rich, Hos. 2.21. I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, etc.
The heavens they cry to God, the earth that cries to the heavens, the creatures
they cry to the earth; still we are led up the Stairs by one creature to
another, till we have past through them all to God himself, and therein
indeed does our blessedness lie; creatures want a blessedness for themselves,
how can they give a blessedness unto us?

3. Doctrine that might be raised from the words, viz. That the foundation of
all the blessedness of man is the will of God; I will meet them and bless
them. But it is the first of these I shall speak of, viz.

Doct. That one of the principal ends which God aims at in the setting up of
his public Ordinances, is, that he may have communion with the Saints, and
that his Saints might have communion with him.

Every man while he lives here is at a distance from God, there is a twofold
distance that is between God and the creatures. First, a distance in point of
Reconciliation. 2ly, a distance in point of communion: there is a Natural
distance as we are creatures, and a moral distance as we are sinners.

I shall premise three things.

1. The Scripture holds forth such a state.

2. The Communion that the Saints have with God, it is with all the persons in
the Trinity.

3. That this Communion in this life is chiefly in Ordinances.

First Position; Tim. 3.16. Great is the mystery of godliness, but yet in this
there are some mysteries greater then others: Observe there is such an intimacy
spoken of, 1 John 1.3. Our fellowship is with the Father and with his son
Jesus Christ. Then the Saints have a fellowship with the Father and with
Christ, yet notwithstanding some of them have a more peculiar fellowship with
God then others. It Is true, whosoever he be that is taken into union, is taken
into communion too all the Saints having a communion with themselves have a
communion with Christ also, for they do all meet as one with him, as lines in
the center: yet there are some Saints in this life have a more peculiat
communion with the Lord then others; Numb. 12.8. etc. If there be a Prophet
(says God) I will speak to him in a dream, in a vision, but my servant
Mos^s, it is no so with him, I will speak to him mouth to mouth as a man to his
friend, and the similitude of God shall he behold; He shall have such
discoveries of God as ordinary Saints have not, he shall have such communion
with God as ordinary believers have not.

Now this communion of God with the Saints, will appear to be a very great and
glorious intimacy and familiarity, if you look to the several denominations
that are given to them in the Scripture, all of them imply a very great
familiarity; As

1. They are called his friends, Abraham was called the friend of God, Jam.
2.23. I have not called you servants, but I have called you friends, John
15.16. And as Jesus Christ calls them friends, so they call him friend too,
Cant. 5.6. This is my beloved, and this is my friend O daughters of Jerusalem.
What is a friend? truly it is as a man's own self, Deuteronomy. 13.6. thy friend
which is as thine own soul; Then friendship speaks high familiarity, Austin
speaks of himself concerning a friend of his, when he died, he professed he
was put into a great straight, whether he himself should be willing to live,
or willing to die: he was unwilling to live, because one half of himself was
dead, yet he was not willing to die, because his friend did partly live in him
though he were dead.

2. He does call the Church, the Bride, the Lambs wife. There is the same
resemblance between Christ and his Church, as between man and wife; Now you
know husband and wife become one flesh, so that this matrimonial union is but
a shadow and resemblance of the glorious union that is betwixt Christ and his
Church: there is a great deal of intimacy betwixt man and his wife, therefore
she is called Deuteronomy. 13.6. the wise of his bosom, now what is the bosom? it is
the seat of secrecy, and the seat of intimacy: For this cause the Lord: Jesus
Christ is said to be in the bo^^^e of the Father, John 1.18. as one that is
acquainted with all his secrets, and as one that enjoyes the most intimate
familiarity with the Father. So thou art the wife of the bosom of Christ. This
I think to be the meaning of that, Lu. 16.23. It is said Lazarus died and was
carried into Abraham's bosom: Dives when he dyed was in hell torments: surely
then the other was in heaven, why is it called Abraham's bosom? it is a place
of rest, and a place of love. All the Saints being Abraham's children are of
Abraham's Covenant and promise, they are received into Abraham's bosom in glory
with a great deal of love, and are taken into his bosom as into the resting
place. Thus the Children of God stand in the same relation to Christ as a wife
to the husband.

3. There is yet a higher expression of Intimacy then this, all these are but
external and fleshly, but the union of the Spirit is much more strong, 1 Cor.
6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit: He that is joined to the
flesh is one flesh, but he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, it is as
if there were an union of two souls. Cyprian when he would express this
union, says, it is a union of wills, and a confederacy of affections, they grow
into one spirit: These relations do import thus much, for the Lord Jesus Christ
does not give empty Titles.

It will further appear if you consider those high Acts of Intimacy that the
Scripture speaks of, I will name four.

1. Christ and his people are said to walk together: Christ walks in them,
Revel. 2.1. he walks among them. 2 Cor. 6.16. and we read of Galleries in
which the King is held, Cant. 7.5. what be those Galleries? places of intimate
converse, where friends walk together, and enjoy communion one with another,
now can two walk tegether except they be agreed? Amos 3.3. walking implies
intimacy and familiarity.

2. They supp together; now to eat and drink together in Scripture is an
expression of great familiarity, and therefore says the Apostle with such an
one eat not; that is, withdraw familiarity: not to eat with one is an
Argument of withdrawing familiarity, but to eat together is an argument of
familiarity, Revel. 3.21. I will come to him and sup with him, and he with me.
And for this cause, when the Communion of Saints is set forth, it is set forth
by eating and drinking together at the same table, we being many are one bread
and one body, 1 Cor. 10.17. we are many in number (as Erasmus has it) but by
the consent of our spirits, we become one bread: when the Lord would express
the intimacy the Saints have with him, then he is said to sup with them and
they with him, and mark how he does cheer them up, Cant. 5.1. Eat O
friends, drinkeye, drink ye abundantly O ye beloved.

3. They do not only sup together, but they dwell together; Christ dwells in
your hearts by feith, Ephesians. 3.17. It is the great command the Lord lays upon
the husband, he must dwell with his wife, now if Jesus Christ will undertake
the Relation of a husband, he must dwell with his spouse. In John 14.23. he
tells you he will fulfill his relation, I will come to you, and make my abode
with you, as if the Lord could never speak enough, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell
in them, and I will wake among them.

4. They do not only dwell together, but they lie together: Christ and his
people lie in one bed, Cant. 1.16. Our bed is green; it is not (...) grarseni,
my bed, but (...) grarsenu, our bed, what is that? truly they are those
Ordinances of worship in which the Lord together with his people does exercise
those high Acts of intimacy and familiarity; that will appear if you compare
it with 57. Isay 7.8. Thou set thy bed upon a high mountain, and thither
thou wentest up to offer sacrifices, thou have enlarged thy bed, etc. what is
that? Floreli^s upon the place, faith it was Idolatrous worship, wherein they
did commit spiritual Adultery; now the Lord calls that the bed, Idolatrous
Ordinances are the bed of Idols: so on the other side, the bed wherein the Lord
Christ and his people enjoy intimacy and familiarity is the bed of Ordinances;
and for this cause the Church glories in this Cant. 1.13. he shall lie all
night between my breasts. So much for the first thing I promised, namely, that
the Scripture holds forth such such a state of Communion between God and his
people; I shall but name the other two, and so pass on.

with the Son, but with the Spirit also, with all persons in the Trinity, the
people of God have community, 1 John 1.3. Truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. The

of Ordinances.

For the opening of this I shall show you what fellowship with God in
Ordinances means: And first, I shall lay down some Scripturall proofs of this,
that the main end of God in setting up Ordinances is, that he may be glorified
in communion with his people, and then some Positions for the right
understanding of this communion; and after that I shall give you the grounds,
the properties, the Acts, and the ends of communion, and then apply the whole.

Revel. 21.3. When God comes to reform his ordinances, and to purge his Church
I heard a great v^yce saying, behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he
will dwell with them: The Tabernacle and Temple were places of public
worship, it was his dwelling and his walking with them; dwelling notes
constancy, and walking notes familiarity, he will be constant, and he will be
familiar with his people in Ordinances. 48. Ezec last. And the name of the
City shall be the LORD is there: It Is a prophecy that receives it is
accomplishment, when Jews and Gentiles shall be brought to worship God; now
when these two shall be made one in the hand of the Lord, then shall the name
of the City be called (...) Jehovah shaumah; that is, the Lord is there.

Chron. 30.18. The Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God,
though not according to the purification of the Sanctuary. As a Bride prepares
her self for her Bridegroom, so do the Saints prepare to meet with God in
ordinances, they trim up their laps to meet the Bridegroom. So Heb. 10.22. Let
us draw near, etc. Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow
upon my garden, that the spices thereof may blow out: and then it follows, let
my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruit; They begged a
North wind for ripening, and the South wind for refreshing of all their
fruits; but for what end? for no other, but that her beloved might come into
his garden, and that he might taste his pleasant fruit.

Hos. 5.6. They shall go with their flocks and herds to seek the Lord, but
they shall not find him for he has withdrawn himself from them; that is, they
should go to Acts of public worship; ah but they should enjoy no communion
nor society nor fellowship with God, for he had withdrawn himself from them,
when they drew near to him, he should draw back from them, he should leave
them to the naked use of Ordinances, which was one of the greatest curses in
the world. Alas what, sapp or sweetness can be found in an Ordinance that is
appointed by God, if God himself who is the sweetness of all Ordinances be
withdrawn from them? Hence then do these positions clearly follow.

him, they are all in vain. To converse with Ordinances, and not to converse
with God, to have to do with Ordinances, and not to have to do with God, alas,
they are but dry breasts, and a miscarrying womb, that will never bring forth
the fruits of holiness. Ordinances without God are but like bones that have no
marrow in them, they are but like shells without a kernel; your hearing will
be vain, and your hearing will be in vain; your praying vain, and your
praying will be in vain: There will be no spirit moving, no voice answering,
no heart warmings, no soule-refreshings, n^ God-meetings. It Is a sad thing for
God to do these two things: first, to leave Ordinances to men. Secondly, to
leave these men to these naked Ordinances. The poor man that lay at the poole
of Bethesda, lay there long, and longer he might have layne, if Jesus Christ
had not come and given cure to him. There are three things in Ordinances when
they become effectual, there is a Majesty, a sweetness, and a power.

First, There is a Majesty and glory in Ordinances.
A Majesty and a glory discovered 2 Cor. 3. last, We all with open face behold
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, etc.
What Is that? The glass is Gospell-Ordinances, they are the windows by which
we look into the glory of God: Alas, without this, Preaching is but babbling,
Praying is but howling. It Is not the Ordinances that puts a glory upon God, but
it is God that puts a glory upon Ordinances: what is that that puts a beauty and
glory upon all the Ordinances of God? it is the presence of God, the very
presence of God makes all glorious in heaven, and the very presence of God
makes all glorious in the Church; (...) Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there is
the glory of all Ordinances: yet if you have not God in them, you may say as
she said, the glory is departed, they are but like the beams that are cut off
from the Sun, if God be not in them; thus there is a Majesty and a glory
discovered.

Secondly, is no sweetness in them, for Ordinances to the Soul, when the
presence of God is departed from them, carry no more taste nor sweetness in
them, then is in the white of an egg. The word is sweeter then the honey and
the honey comb when God is in it: what is that that gives a Soul to taste any
sweetness in any Ordinance? you may find it, Cant. 2.3. I sat under his
shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto my taste. (The word is
very significant, for it imports sweetness, or all kind of sweetness; his
fruit was (...) mamtakkim, all sweetness.) What Is the ground that men grow
weary of Ordinances? it is because they taste no sweetness in them? what is the
ground they taste no sweetness in them? it is because God is withdrawn from
them.

3. Thirdly, there must not only be a Majesty and a glory discovered, and
sweetness tasted, but there must be a power felt if ever Ordinances do you any
good, Isaiah 55.1. Who has believed our report? why? they had made reports to
be believed, but none had believed the reports that were made; many hearers but
few believers; 'its spoken by way of complaint* who has believed our report?
why? what is the ground that the report is not believed? To whom is ^he Arm of
the Lord revealed? If the Arm of God be not revealed, no reports of God will be
believed. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ says the Apostle Paul,
why? it is the power of God to Salvation. So the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal but mighty; mighty, how? through God, for the bringing down of every
lust that exalts its self against him: If God be not in an Ordinance, an
Ordinance is of no effect. The

in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God to a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.
When once we are brought to a perfect man in Christ Jesus, then, and not till
then, shall all Ordinances be taken from us. In the state of our perfection
God will do these two things: First, he will succeed all Ordinances;
Secondly, he will exceed all Ordinances, all our vailes shall then be taken
away, when we come to look God in the face, Cant. 2.17. Until the day break,
and the shadows flee away, turn beloved, and be thou like a Roe, or a young
Heart upon the mountains of Bether. Some expound it of the night of troubles,
and of miseries that the Church of God lay under; others of the obscurity and
darkness that was upon them: others of those ceremonies and shadows that
they could not see through; others of the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ as
the Sun in to the world to make day, until the day break; others of Christ's
last appearance removing all clouds and vailes, and causing the day to break
forth, and the shadow to fly away; until the day breaks forth, the shadow
nere flies away: when once the Communion of the Saints of God shall be
perfected, then al Ordinances shall be removed, the substance shall succeed
and exceed the shadows. Thus Communion with God in Ordinances shall last till
Jesus Christ make a surrender of his Mediatoriall Kingdom, when Jesus Christ
shall give up his kingdom to his Father, and all the Saints shall be
perfected, then their Communion with God through Mediums shall be done away. The

Heb. 9.10. They are called carnal Ordinances, for the most part they had but
transient, not constant acts of Communion with God, and these acts of Communion
they had but seldom, compared with those acts of Communion that the Saints
have under the Gospel. Now, as the Ordinances grow up in purity and
perfection, so should we grow up in Communion with God in them: for the more
spiritual the Ordinances are, the more there is of these three things in them.
1. There Is the more of the nature of God in them. 2. There Is the more of the
presence of God with them. 3. There Is the more of the blessing of God upon
them. The ground of Gods withdrawing and departing from Ordinances has been
men's intolerable corrupting and defiling of them, so that he would neither
own the worship, nor the worshippers at all, Rev. 2.1. who walks in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks: If the Candlesticks be gold, and there
be no dross in them, then he will walk in the midst of them; but if they be
drossie, and not golden Candlesticks, God takes no delight to walk among such,
Cant. 2.16. My beloved feeds among the Lillies; It is not said he feeds among
Thorns, but he feeds among the Lillies.

But for the further clearing of the Saints Communion with God; I shall do
these four things.

1. Give you the grounds, of all the fellowship and the Communion that the
Saints have with God in Ordinances. 2. Show you the properties of this
Communion. 3. The several Acts of Communion. 4. Those glorious ends that God
aimed at in the giving forth Communion unto the Saints in Ordinances.
But before I enter upon these, I must promise some few particulars.

Object. It will be said, God is in Heaven, and the Saints are upon the Earth,
God is a consuming fire, and we are but as withered stubble, how shall we draw
near unto God, or appear before him?

Ans. There are two sorts of persons in the world, First, Sinners, Secondly,
Saints; unregenerate men, and regenerate men, and they are both called upon to
draw nigh to God. Jam. 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you:
cleanse your hands ye Sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded:
observe those three tings.

1. Here Is a duty injoined; drawing nigh to God. 2. A blessing promised; he
will draw nigh to you. 3. There is a threefold duplicity mentioned, sinners and
double-mindded, cleanse and purify, hands and heart.
The first shows the persons to whom the duty is in joined to draw near to
God; Liz. Sinners and double minded; the other two points are the way and means
by which the duty enjoined, may be rightly accomplished, viz. by cleansing and
purifying our hearts and hands.

But it is to be marked that there is twofold drawing nigh to God.

1. In point of Conversion. 2. In point of Communion.
So that you that enjoy Ordinances, and are not converted, you can have no
Communion with God in Ordinances. And for the proof of this, that ungenerate
men can have no Communion with God in Ordinances, will appear by these
Arguments.

Ephesians. 2.13. Ye who were sometimes afarr off are made nigh by the blood of
Jesus: when once a soul is made nigh, then it can draw nigh. The Prodigal Son
when he is returned home to the house of his Father, and made nigh to him,
then the Father kisses him and embraces him, Luke 15.20. love is very quick
sighted, he saw him; and it is very tender hearted, he had compassion upon him,
and fell upon his neck, and kissed him: will you see what a man is in his
natural estate, which clearly speaks he has no communion with God, Ephesians. 2.12.
That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth
of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world. There are five withouts, without Christ, without the
Church, without the promise, without hope, without God in the world. Can two
walk together except they be agreed? God and a sinner are not agreed, there is
no walking together therefore. A man must be made a free man before he can
trade as a freeman; so before you can have any intercourse with heaven, or any
free trading there, you must be made free of the city above.

Ephesians. 4.18. having their understandings darkened, being alienated from the life
of God. No things have any Communion, but only those that live the same kind
of life with that with which they have Communion: a Saint lives the same kind
of life with God, though he has not the same degree of life with God.



1. He takes up his fellowship and Communion with sin; sin is the only Jewel
that he wears in his bosom, 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. what fellowship has Christ with
Belial, etc. and Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God; Enmity it is
the highest degree of hatred, it is the affection set on edge against God; an
Enemy may be reconciled, but enmity must be destroyed; what fellowship can they
have with the Father of lights, whose fellowship is taken up with the works of
darkness?

2. They are swallowed up with the fellowship and Communion with sinners; those
that are Gods professed Enemies, are their bosomfriends, the darling delights
of their Souls are in the Society of those in whom God takes no pleasure, nor
no delight.

3. They take up their fellowship and Communion with this world, James 4.4.
know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God, whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the world, is the Enemy of God: they make up
their Heaven upon Earth: there are three things wherein they go out to the
world.

1. They let out their choicest love. 2. They lay out their choicest pains.
3. They Anchor their greatest hopes upon the world: Now those that are taken
up with the fellowship and Communion with this world, at what a distance do
they stand from Communion and fellowship with God? Creatures has their hearts,
God has them not.

4. They are swallowed up in Communion and fellowship with false foundations:
this is a certain rule, that look whatsoever the foundation is that we build
our souls upon, that is it with which we have Communion, Job 8.14, 15. He shall
lean upon his house, but it shall not stand, etc. Those hopes that it has,
that it shall go well with him to all Eternity, these are called his house, he
rests upon them, and he has Communion with them. Houses, 1. They are dwelling
places, a man lives in his house. 2. They are hiding places, in the time of a
storm men retire to their houses for shelter. 3. They are resting places.


4. They are places that when once they are built, men will keep them if they
can from falling down; Now sinners are swallowed up in Communion and fellowship
with those false bottomed hopes that they have laid their souls upon, they
rest in those houses that they make to themselves, though their hopes be but
like Spiders webs, yet they lean upon their houses.

5. They are swallowed up in fellowship and Communion with the very Devil
himself, 1 John 5.19. we know that we are of God, and that the whole world lies
in wickedness; In the Greek it is thus, and the whole world lies in that wicked
one, the Devil, and they maintain Communion together, the evil spirits haunt
their Spirits. The Devil in Scripture is said to have all those Acts of worship
performed to him by sinners, that Christ is said to have performed to him by
Saints: has Jesus Christ his Ministers? the Devil has his Ministers also;
Ministers of Satan transforming themselves into Angels of light: has Christ
his Churches? so has the Devil, which is call-the Synagogue of Satan: has
Christ his Ordinances and Altars? so has the Devil too, he has his Table, and
his Communicants; you cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of
Devils.

under a Legal Covenant: Evangelical Communion is not bottomed upon Legal
Covenants. In Conversion there is a double change.

1. A change of a man's nature, and that is wrought within him.

2. A change of a man's state, and that is wrought upon him.

Every unregenerate man is under the first Covenant, which admits of no
Communion with God since it is broken. There are five things we lost in our
fall; 1. Our holy Image, and became vile; hence 2. Our Sonship, and became
slaves. 3. Our friendship, and became Enemies. 4. Our Communion, and became
strangers. 5. Our glory, and became miserable.


Now it is impossible till sinners be translated from a broken Covenant of works
that was made with them in Adam, to a Covenant of grace that is made in Christ,
that ever they should come up to Communion with God: you must know this, that
Communion with God is no Legal dispensation, and therefore every person that is
duly under the Law, cannot enjoy Communion with God.

Having premised these, I come to those four partioulars I laid down, viz. to
give you the grounds, the properties, the Acts, and the ends of the Communion.

First, For the Grounds of all the fellowship and Communion that the Saints
have with God in Ordinances and they are five; for this Communion arises, 1.
From his electing love. 2. From the Covenant-state wherein believers stand. 3.
From our union with Jesus Christ. 4. From our Interest in the Spirit. 5. Our
conformity to the Lord Jesus Christ.


you unto three great ends, in subordination one to the other; he has chosen
you to salvation, to reconciliation, and to communion, Psalm. 4.3. The Lord has
set apart him that is godly for himself. God has picked and culled every
Godly man out of the world, and set him aside; For what? for himself; for
himself, what is that? It does not only note for spiritual service, but for
the highest privileges: he has set the godly man apart for these two ends:
First, for the enjoyment of communion with him on earth: Secondly, for the
fruition of blessedness with him in heaven. The Lord has set, etc.

1. Consider who is it that has done it? It Is God that has set him apart. 2.
What has he done? He has set him apart, put him distinct from all the world.
3. Who is it that is thus set apart? It is the man that is godly. 4. What is
the end of this action, for which this man is set apart? He is set apart for
God.
It Is the choycest duty that belongs to us to set our selves apart for God; and
it is one of the choicest mercies of God, to set us apart for himself. The Lord
does separate to himself for employment, and for fellowship; he will employ
that man, and he will have communion with that man. The Angels, they are of all
creatures taken to special communion with God, they behold the face of God the
Father which is in Heaven. It was excellently expressed by Tertullian, the
Saints in this life are the men that are the Lords attendants, setting the Lord
always before them, and standing always before him, waiting upon him. Zech.
3.7. Thus says the Lord, if thou will walk in my ways, etc. I will give thee
(...) mah-lechim, Walks: that is, places to walk: (...) ^en hagnomedim
ha-elleh, inter stantes illos, among these that stand by: Who be they? The
meaning is conceived to be this; the Angels, they always stand before God,
thousand thousands compass his Throne; now when the Lord speaks of taking a
people into intimate familiarity with himself, he says, he will give them
walks, or Galleries to walk in among the Angels themselves, to attend upon
him, and hence are those and such like expressions of this their office and
duty: I have set the Lord always before me, etc. and as the eyes of Servants
are upon the hands of their Masters, and as the eyes of a waiting-Maid unto the
hand of her Mistr^sse; so our eyes are upon the Lord our God, (waiting) till he
have mercy upon us, etc. Now had the Lord chosen you but to Salvation, when he
did leave the Angels to fall under the curse of their covenant broken, this had
been a great mercy; but this will not satisfy electing love, only to make up
old breaches, and then to shut up its bosom: or to say to us, as David said to
Absolon, let him return to his house, but let him never see my face; no, but
God will have his children look him in the face: therefore in the Luke 214.
there is not only glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth, which is
reconciliation, but there is good will toward men: There is fellowship and
communion, peace will not serve loves turn, but there must be good will too.
The love of God did not only ordain us to friendship, but it did ordain us to
fellowship. The Father in love came forth from all eternity to us, that we to
all eternity might enjoy communion with him: I had almost said that the very
essence of the love of God, and all the actings of it, lead to communion and
fellowship with him.

Adam had sinned, he ran away from God; when he made himself a sinner, God
made him an exile: Now in the Covenant under which Adam was, he had communion
with God as a Creature with his Creator, but not as a child with his Father.
Now the Covenant of grace, it is a conjugall Covenant; and conjugall Covenants
are all of them made for the enjoying of communion, Hosea 2.19. I will betroth
thee to me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies: Mark, there are four things
in these words, that point out the firmness, and the stability of our
Marriages with Christ: First, it is done in righteousness; Secondly, in
judgment; Thirdly, in loving kindness; Fourthly, in tender mercies: Now what
are the fruits and effects of this same conjugall relation, and of our joining
to Christ? See Chap. 3.3. And I said, thou shall be for me many days, and
shall not be for another, so will I be for thee. Christ promises to be for the
Saints, and he engages the Saints to be for him, Ephesians. 2.12. Strangers to the
Covenants of promise, without God, and without hope in the world; Till such
time as a man be brought into Covenant with God, he is a stranger to God, and
therefore has no communion with him; he stands at the greatest distance from
this fellowship with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ. But now, when
a man is brought within the verge of the Covenant of grace, then has he
communion in all the grace of the Covenant. The Covenant of Grace has two
properties peculiar to it, which were not in the first Covenant: First, there
is Foedus Amicitiae, and Paedus Conjugale; a Covenant of friendship, and a
Conjugal Covenant. This is the great end of the Gospel, Luke 2.14. the Angels
described the purpose of God, and what is it? to give peace on earth, and good
will: God contents himself not only with peace, but good will; not only
reconciliation, but communion: and the Lord delights his people should come to
him in a familiar way, under terms of intimacy, Hos. 2.16. a strange
expression, Thou shall not call me (...) Ishi, (says the Lord) and shall call
me no more (...), Baali: Baali signifies my Lord; God would be called by Lord
no more; but call me Ishi, what is that? my Husband.



1. An union Political, as between a King and his people. 2. An union
natural, as between head and members. 3. An union sinful, as betwixt one
sinner and another. 4. An union Hypostaticall, between the two natures of
Christ. 5. An union mystical, and that is between Christ and the Saints.
Look what Righteousness Christ as Mediator has, is yours; and the communion
that Christ has with the Father, we have interest in it also, 1 Cor. 12.12.
For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the memes of that one
body being many, are one body, so also is Christ. God the Father never looks on
Christ and the Saints as two, but as one. Will you take a view of Christ's
communion with the Father, Dan. 7.13. I saw, and behold one like the Son of man
came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they
brought him near before him. 1 John 18. He lives in the bosom of the Father.
The bosom it is the seat of secrets of love, and of fellowship.

Now in this his communion with the Father, we are in no less then the whole
of our Salvation interessed; for he is brought before the Father standing at
his right hand, and lying in his bosom, not only to enjoy communion with his
Father himself, but to intercede for our communion with him also.

Union that disposes for communion. There can be no communion where there is
no union, Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me. First, there must be opening of the door, and Jesus Christ must come
in, before ever there be supping together: none of the fare that is to feast a
Chrian comes, till Christ him self brings it: If the door be shut against
Christ's person, then there is a Baracado to all communion. Cant. 5.5. I am come
into my Garden, my sister, my spouse, etc. And then, Eat O friends, drink, yea,
drink abundantly, O beloved. There are two things that we enjoy by virtue of
our union with Christ. First, satisfaction in him. Secondly, Communion and
fellowship with him. Look what fellowship and Communion Christ has with the
Father, it is by virtue of his union with him, and look what fellowship and
Communion we have with Christ, it is by virtue of our union with him, 1 Cor.
3.22.23. mark how the Relation there rises, All are yours; how comes that? ye
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: and Romans 5.2. by whom we have access into
this grace wherein we stand: note this; 1. Believers have under the Gospel
access into glorious grace; into this grace. 2. That the meritorious cause of
believers access into this grace is the Lord Jesus Christ; by whom. 3. The
same state of grace to which the Gospel brings us, in that estate does Christ
keep us; wherein we stand.


4. That a Saint through the sight of his access to, and his standing in this
grace, is made to rejoice in hope of the glory of God, as is expressed in the
words following; for the clearing and confirmation of the substance of all
those four particulars, viz. that believers have access unto, and are kept
into that state of grace wherein they rejoice and glory, only by Jesus Christ
and his mediation there is a remarkable expression of the Apostle, in Ephesians.
2.13. but now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by
the blood of Jesus; for he is our peace, who has made both one, and has
broken down the middle wall of partition: Those who are without Christ, are
afar off three manner of ways: 1. In point of opinion and apprehension. 2. In
point of fellowship and Communion. 3. In point of grace and conversion.


Now as Joseph said to his Brethren, bring your Brother Benjamin with you, or
else see not my face any more; So does God say to sinners when they come nigh
to enjoy communion with him, bring Jesus Christ in your arms, or else never
look me in the face. It Is the custom of some Countries and foraign Nations,
that when ever they speak any thing to the King, they take up his Son in their
arms; sure I am it is the custom of Heaven, that who ever shall have Communion
with God and enjoy fellowship with his spirit, they must take his Son in their
arms, and carry Christ along with them. Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore come
boldly to the Throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help
in time of need. God has set up a Throne, and that The One that he has set up
is a gracious Throne; and it is set up for poor sinners, and for poor sinners to
come freely and boldly too; to take liberty in speaking to God: it is set up for
these two ends, for the obtaining of mercy, and for the finding of grace that
may help us in time of need; that is, for the finding of favor, and fellowship
with God. And it is upon the alone account of the Lord Jesus Christ, that we
can come with boldness to it. Look on the words foregoing, verse 15: For we
have not an high Priest, that cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, etc. Let us therefore come boldly, etc. John 14.6. I am the way,
the truth, and the life, there is no coming to the Father, but by Jesus
Christ: and Heb. 10.19. Having therefore brethren, boldness to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus. The sinfullest wretches in the world, if they be
brought into Jesus Christ, may come boldly, and have communion with God the
Father, Cant. 1.4. The King has brought me into his Chambers. There is no
going into the chambers, the places of communion with God the Father, but by
being led by the hand of the King of Saints, the Lord Jesus Christ thither.



1 It Is a Spirit of Union. 2 It Is a Spirit of Unction. 3 It Is a Spirit of
Action. 4 It Is a Spirit of Fellowship.
As

1. It Is a spirit of Union, Its that which is the everlasting tie of the God
head in it self, the spirit running forth through the Father, and the Son; or
proceeding from the Father and the Son, as it is expressed in the Gospel; so
it is that which is the very tie and knot of the Saints and Christ, 1 Cor. 6.17.
He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit.

2. It Is a Spirit of Union, 1 John 2.27. but the anointing which ye have
received abides in you, etc. The ointment that was powered upon the head of
Aaron it ran down to the skirts of all his Garment; the spirit of God like to
ointment that was powered forth upon the head of Christ, and it does run down
to all his members.

3. It Is a Spirit of Action, says the Apostle; If ye through the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the flesh. The spirit is the powerfullest weapon in our
hands to put flesh to death in us; it is not an idle, but an active spirit.

4. It Is a spirit of fellowship and Communion, Ephesians. 2.18: For through him we
both have an access by one spirit, unto the father, we both have access; that
is, Jew and Gentile; though they are two Nations, that one spirit leads them
both to the Father; The Spirit of Christ is not only a spirit of manifestation
and of revelation; but it is a spirit of Supplication and of Manuduction, It
leads us by the hand to the Father, Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they the Sons of God.

Thus you see that intimacy is grounded upon your Union with Christ. The ground
of all Communion is Union, now answerable to the Union such must the Communion
be, if the Union be very near, truly then the Communion must be very
intimate, Ephesians 5.3. We are of his flesh and of his bone, it is so near;
nay nearer, he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, what is the end why
the Lord has made so near a Union? truly it is that there may be an intimate
Communion answerable, he is in us like leaven, even as the leaven incorporates
it self, that there can be no separation between it and the dough. One end of
the Hypostaticall Union was the mystical Union, Christ takes the two natures
into one person, that so you might become one with him Consider, there is a
moral union that is made by love, for love is Affectus unionis, an uniting
affection, such a union the Angels have, and Adam had in the state of
Innocence; I but there is likewise an union that faith makes, a mystical
union, that is another kind of union then ever the Angels had, or can have;
The Angels are never said to be the brethren of Christ, and the members of
Christ, Christ is said to be their head, but they are never said to be his
members; there is some thing morein that mystical union which is by faith
between Christ and believers; then there can be in that union which is between
Christ and the Angels. Now if the end of union be Communion, why has the Lord
made so near a union, but for an intimate familiarity and communion.

God. The less any man has of a Divine Resemblance, the less he enjoyes of
a Divine Communion; When our Images shall be perfected, then our communion
shall be completed: the more imperfect our Image is, the more imperfect our
Communion is.

I shall lay down two propositions.

1. That a Saint has a conformity, and a resemblance of God upon him. 2. That
his conformity and resemblance to God, is the ground of his communion with
God.
1. That a Saint has a conformity, and a resemblance of God upon him, 1 John
4.17. For as he is, so are we in this world. And 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given
unto us, exceeding great and precious promises, that by them we may be made
partakers of the Divine Nature. There Is a kind of impression of the glorious
attributes of God instampt upon every Christian.

1. There Is a kind of Omnipotency, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through
Christ, that strengthens me. What can Omnipotency do more then all things? and
yet Paul can do no less, by the strength he receives from Christ.

2. There Is a kind of Omnisciency in all the Saints, 1 John 2.20. But ye have
an Unction from the holy one, and ye know all things. There are some footsteps
of that glorious Attribute of God, that are to be seen upon gracious souls, 1
Cor. 2.15. He that is spiritual judges all things, yet be himself is judged
of no man: He is the judge of all, and yet none the judge of him.

3. There are some impressions of the Allsufficiency of God, that is engraven
upon a Christian, Phil. 4.18. I have all, and abound, and am full. So 2 Cor.
6.10. As having nothing, and yet possessing all things. So 1 Timothy 2.6.
Godliness, with contentment is great gain. The Greek reads it thus, Godliness
with selfe-sufficiency is great gain. So Solomon tells us -- that a good man
shall be satisfied from himself, not from another, but from himself: There is
some kind of impression of the All Sufficiency of God upon a Christian.

4. There Is a kind of Omnipresence of God upon a Christian. Heaven and earth
are the two great Continents of all things; now a Divine soul is traveling in
them both at once, Phil. 3.12. Our conversation is in heaven; though they
themselves were on earth, yet their conversation was in heaven, so that they
are both in heaven and earth at once: where ever God is, there the Saints are,
for they have their dwelling places in him, Psalm. 73.23. Nevertheless I am
continually with thee, thy right hand upholdeth me. A Christian runs through
all states and things with God himself, he is led by his Fathers hand through
every state.

5. There Is a kind of immortality put upon a Saint; mortality is written upon
the face of all things that are below, every thing is liable to the stroke of
death; yet a Christian, though he die daily, yet lives for ever; though the man
die, yet the Saint does not, grace is never laid in the grave, John 11.26. He
that believes in me shall never die: that is, he shall never live
uncomfortable, for an uncomfortable life is equivalent to death; and he shall
never dye eternally, he that believes in me, the second death has no power
over him; he may die as a man, but he shall never die as a believing man.

6. There Is a kind of immutability and unchangablenesse upon a Christian: In
regard of his state he is immutable, he can never change, though in regard of
the degrees of his state he is changing daily: look what now he is as a Saint,
that he shall for ever be, he shall never lose the graces that he has
received, for the gifts and callings of God are without Repentance; that is, he
never repents, nor exercises any acts of sorrow, for the bestowing of grace
upon any of his people. A believer lives unchangably in the midst of changes,
he lives peaceably in the midst of troubles, and cheerfully in the midst of
wants. Thus you see that a Saint has a conformity, and a resemblance of God
upon him.

The second Position I laid down, that this conformity is the ground of
communion: the more likeness there is in any creature one to another, the more
love, and the more love, the more desire of communion; Birds of a feather will
flock together: Things that carry a contrariety can never admit of any
community: what communion has light and darkness together, which are so
opposite to each other? The light expells the darkness, and the darkness
draws a shadow over the light. The Holy Ghost tells us in plain language,
that light has fellowship with nothing but light, and darkness has
fellowship with nothing but darkness, 1 John 1.6, 7. If we say that we have
fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: But if
we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.
There can be no communion with Christ, except there be a conformity to
Christ. Now many Souls are there that delude and deceive themselves, and
think they have communion when they have none; but alas, if you be not made
like unto Christ, you can never have communion with Christ in grace, nor
communion with Christ in glory.

Thus you see this Communion arises from the conformity that is in the Saints
unto Christ: likeness is the ground of love, and suitableness is the ground of
intimacy; that is the reason why you say a man is known by his communion.
Princes you judge of their tempers by their favorites; the reason is, because a
man's Spirit never closethin intimat society with any man, but one that has a
sutablenesse with himself. 1 Cor. 6.17. There can be no communion betwixt
light and darkness, Christ and Belial; where there is no conformity, there is
no communion, Romans 8.29. what is the great end you aim at? to be like unto
his Son. So then, when your conformity shall be perfect, then your communion
shall be swallowed up in vision, for vision is but union perfect.

Secondly, To give you the Properties of this communion, and they are these
six.

1. It Is a Superlative, and transcendent 2. A free and voluntary 3. A close and
near 4. A growing and increasing 5. A Spiritual and Supernatural 6. A
delightful and complacentiall
Communion.

1. It Is a Superlative and a transcendent communion, a communion that is above
all communions, it excells all other communions and fellowships in the inferior
world. There are two very sad sights in the world; one is to see a bad man
inflamed with joy; the other is to see a good man devoured and overwhelmed with
sorrow. Let me pluck down the pride of the natural man, and raise up the
heart of the spiritual man. There be many other communions in the world, but
this is above them all, the communion that the Saints have with God compared
with other Communions, it is as Saul among the people, that was higher by the
head and shoulders then the rest of them, it is as the Sun compared with the
planets far larger, and far more glorious then any one of them, nay then all of
them: you that take up the communion without God, below God, besides God, nay
(it may be in some things) against God; know this, that it is much inferior to
the Communion that the Saints have with God, Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me with
with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better then wine. It was the
saying of a precious Saint, That one hours communion with God was more worth
then the whole world; and indeed the Saints are able to set to their seal
that this is true; will you see them doing of it, Psalm. 84.10. For a day in thy
Court, is better then a thousand: I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house
of God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness. One days communion with God
is more worth then all the communion you have in this world. You that are
rocked in the cradle of Creatures, and take the cream of them, that have all
the bosoms of created Excellencies to receive from, and to communicate your
selves too unto; alas, there is more sweetness tasted in the enjoyment of the
least part of God, then in the greatest part of the world. Are not waters much
more pleasant in their springs then in their streams? the Saints and people of
God they drink at the fountains head when they go to God, and take in all at
the first hand, the creatures milk out no sweetness but when God fills their
breasts. The communion that the Saints have with God is Superlative and
transcendent in a six-fold respect.

1. The dignity and excellency of all communion is according to the persons
with whom we communicate, 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard,
declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; why, with whom
is your fellowship? Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his son Jesus
Christ. The fellowship that the Saints have, is with all the Persons in the
Trinity. In this communion, there are these two things: First, the persons
dignifie the communion: Secondly, the communion dignifies the Persons that
enjoyes it: For a Beggar to have communion with a King, is a very high
privilege; but nothing, compared with the Saints enjoying communion with God.
Ordinary communion with extraordinary persons, raises it to a great height.

2. Our communion with God must needs be a superlative communion: Why? because
it is the foundation on which all other fellowships are laid. When we brake
with God, all creatures brake with us; when man fell from his holiness, he
fell from his happiness; when he fell from his Image, he fell from his
excellency. The creatures stood upon the same terms with us, as we stood with
God, and by falling from God, all creatures fell from us. There were two things
that we lost in relation to the creature: 1. Our dominion over them; 2. Our
communion with them. All men that live in their natural state have no real
communion with the creature, all creatures are become enemies to them, since
they themselves became enemies to God; creatures had no longer their commission
to be obedient to us, then we were obedient to God. I but observe now, when
once we are restored to God, and brought into communion with heaven, all the
creatures are restored to us, when once we our selves are brought to God, Hos.
2.19. unto 22. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, etc. and then, I will hear
the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the
corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.

There is a five fold communion, that is bottomed upon our communion with God.

1. The communion that the Saints have with the Angels, is all bottomed upon
the communion they have with Christ. 2. The communion that the Saints of God
have one with another; Saints should never have had communion with Saints if
they had not had communion with God 1 John 1.3. These things write we unto you
that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. 3. The communion of the Church of the
Jews with the Gentiles, that is laid in their communion with God. 4. The
communion the glorious Saints have in heaven with the glorious Saints on earth,
that is bottomed upon their communion with God, Heb. 12.22, 23. 5. The communion
that we have with all the creatures, that is bottomed upon our communion with
Christ.
3. This must needs be the most superlative communion which is made between
God the Father and Jesus Christ, and all the Saints; why? because when once it
begins, it never ends; perpetuity adds an excellency to it. Things that are
evil are much more evil, by how much longer their continuance are; So it is
in things that are good, they are much better by their continuance. Some
interpositions there may be of a Saints communion sometimes, but no
dissipation of it: The interruptions that the communion of the Saints meet
withal, are but as clouds before the Sun, that quickly make their departures
again, when it shines forth upon them. Other communions often end as soon as
ever they begin, they are lost as soon as ever they are found, they are taken
out of our hands as soon as ever they are gotten into our hands; friends
quickly die and leave us behind them, or it may be we our selves dye and
leave our friends behind us, and so the knot of communion is untied; They are
not long lived that have the longest life: But a Saint in communion would never
attain his end, if his communion should ever come to an end. Such as the
foundation is, such is the building that is laid upon it; the foundation of all
communion is laid in love, and love is laid from everlasting to everlasting;
God must first cease to let out his affections to the Saints, before ever he
can cease in communion with them.

4. It must needs be the highest communion, because it is the open door to all
a Saints blessedness, so you have it in the Text, I will meet them, and bless
them: What a blessing did Jacob receive, when the Angel wrestled with him all
the night? But Jacobs wrestling goes before his blessing: Our communion makes
way for our blessedness, there are no favors, but come in through the gates
of communion.

5. It must needs be the highest communion, because all other commnnions are
but dark shadows and resemblances of it; the uttermost that all Communions
among all the creatures amounts to, is but a resemblance and a dark shadow of
this communion with God: It Is resembled by the Vine and the branches, the head
and members, the friend and the friend, the husband and the wife; but alas,
these are but the fingers of the dial without, to let us see how the wheels
move therein: Look how much the substance outgoes the shadow, so much does the
love of Christ, and our communion with him, outgo any resemblance that can be
made of it.

6. Our communion with God, must needs be superlative communion, because all
other communions is to be laid down in order, to the taking up, and the keeping
up of this communion with God: look what fellowship soever any man has, or
what communion soever he can have, that is inconsistent with his communion with
God, is all to be laid down for the enjoyment of communion with God; therefore
it is the most transcendent communion.

I might give it you in four particulars more, there is no communion so
desirable, so profitable, so powerful, so perfect, as this communion with God.
This is the first property of communion with God, it is a transcendent communion.

II. The second property of the Saints communion with God, is, that it is a free
and a voluntary communion: the communion that the creatures have with God, and
that God has with them, is not brought in by force.

1. On Gods part to the creature, it is free and voluntary. 2. On the creatures
part to God, it is free and voluntary.
God makes choice of the creature for communion with himself, for the
unveiling of his glory, for the opening of his bosom, for the bestowing of his
love, for the pouring forth of his Spirit, God freely and voluntarily opens his
bosom to the Saints, and the Saints do freely and voluntarily open their
bosoms to God. Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man
hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him; and sup with him, and
he with me. The doors are not broken open, but they are set open when Christ
comes in; Christ comes it is true, undeserved, and many times undesired, but
where he finds not the will free, he makes the will free to embrace him. The
will of God is in nothing more set forth to the creatures, then in communion,
and the will of the creature is in nothing more let out to God, then in
communion also: Communion is so much the more choice, by how much the more it
is chosen. Cant. 1.4. Draw me, and we will run after thee: When Christ draws,
she will not withdraw from him, but she will follow after him. The several
dispensations of communion, speaks it out to be a free communion.

1. Some have a more clear and distinct communion with God then others have
had: In Numb. 12 6, 7, 8. And he said, if there be a Prophet among you, that I
the Lord will make my self known to him in visions and dreams: But my servant
Moses it is not so with him, for I will speak to him mouth to mouth (that is,
apparently, and not in dark speeches) and the similitude of the Lord shall he
behold. Some men's communions are more clear, and less clouded then others:
Some men they talk with God face to face, as men talk with their friends; but
others, they see only the backparts of God, communion is more clouded to them,
they cannot enter within the veils; but these are taken within all veiles, and
they have more naked viewes of Divine glories, then others have: Some souls
they have sweet enjoyments of communion with God, and yet have not so clear
discoveries, as to be able to demonstrate their communion: Whence is this? but
because communion is free and voluntary, and so God dispenceth it according to
the rules of his own will.

2. Some men's communions with God is more constant than others; some they walk
continually in the light of his countenance, and ever sit under the hearing of
the joyful sound; others complain again, as in Jer. 14.8. O the hope of
Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, why should thou be as a
stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a
night? With some God stays but a little while, with others he takes up his
dwelling, they are always under the dew droppings of divine communion, and
have the constant flowings in of a divine presence: He lies down with some
souls, and rises up with them again. I have set God always before me, says
the Prophet, he is at my right hand, I shall not fall. God was never out of his
sight, his eye was fixed upon him, his soul was running out after him, Psalm.
73.23. Nevertheless, I am continually with thee, thy right hand has upheld
me. It Is a free and voluntary communion. Though desires be the actings of the
affections, yet they are the issuings forth of the will: Cant. 4.16. Awake O
North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof
may blow out: let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant
fruits: and Cant. 7.10. I am my beloveds and his desire is toward me; there is
the going forth of desires to each other for the enjoyment of one another: no
communion so free as the communion that is betwixt Christ and the Saints,
between God and his people.

III. Property of communion that the Saints have with God, it is a very close
and near communion, so my Text, I will meet them and bless them. Look as the
union that is betwixt Christ and a believer is very close and near, so the
communion that is betwixt Christ and believers is very close and near also,
they are joined each to other. There are two things that hinder communion. 1.
Difference of persons. 2. Distance of places; both these are taken away in
Christ, when the soul comes to approach the presence of God and stand before
him, it is made one with him, a soul cannot say as he said in Numb. 26.17. I
shall see him, but not now, I shall behold him, but not nigh: no, this
communion it is called an appearing before God, it is called a drawing nigh to
God, a supping with God, it is not a communion at a distance, but a Communion
in presence, it is not a communion without doors, but a communion within
doors, it is Gods coming into the Soul, and the Souls coming up more and
more into God, Cant. 4.16. Let my beloved come into his garden and eat his
pleasant fruits, and Revel. 3.20. I will come in to him and suppe with him, and
he with me. It is a Soul creeping into the very bosom of Christ, it is as it
were the child getting into his Fathers Arms, or the husband lying between
the breasts of his spouse, as Cant. 13. A bundle of Myrthe is my welbeloved unto
me, he shall lie al night between my breasts; and Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near,
etc. Observe, all communion is according to the union, the farther off any
thing is in unio^, the greater distance in point of fellowship. So it is here,
the neearer the union, the closer the communion. A child is farther off in
point of union then a spouse, a servant farther off then a child, the highest
union has always the closest communion.

Jesus Christ and the Saints have the nearest union, for they are made one
spirit; The bond of all union below is flesh, but the bond of all union above
is spirit, Jesus Christ and a Saint is so one, as the Father look? upon them
all in him; he never looks on them as subtracted, but as united.

There is always the closest communion where there is the choycest love; but
there is the choicest love between Christ and the Saints; therefore the
closest communion. Love cannot live at the least distance from its beloved,
love lets nothing come between, or interpose between it and its object, it is
like a falling mountain that breaks down all that is betwixt it and its
rest, love is never so near, but it would still be nearer; when it has got
its object, its eye, it would then have it in his Arms.

IIII. Property of the communion that the Saints have with God; it is a growing
and increasing communion, it every day creepes up to a greater height, and to
taller stature, no communion is capable of such increase as our communion with
God. There are two things you may consider in relation to the souls of the
Saints: 1. They grow up by communion with God. 2. They grow up in communion
with God: the more a Soul converseth with God, and the oftener it does approach
unto him, it comes to see a greater beauty in God, to taste a greater sweetness
in God, and to enjoy a greater presence of God. Consider three particulars.

1. Look how a man's apprehension grows of God, so his communion grows with
God, most men's apprehensions are below God, but the best men's apprehensions are
too low of God: when men raise apprehensions of God, and with thoughts of the
glory and excellency of God upon them, then are they raised in their communion
with God: As the Souls apprehensions of God are raised by degrees, so his
communion with God is raised by degrees also, Jsa. 6.3. The Angels they have
glorious acts of communion with God, they always behola the face of God, they
are holy, holy, holy; when men have low understanding, slighting thoughts of
the glorious Majesty of God, and of the holiness of God, they can never enjoy
excellent and glorious communion with God; for such as a man's apprehensions are
of God, such is his communion with God. There are 3 things that are according
to our apprehensions of them.

1. Such as our apprehensions are, such will be our estimations; as we see
things, so we prize them. 2. Such will be our applications, if they be raised
toward a thing, we apply our selves to it, that we may have the enjoyment of
it. 3. Such will be our communions: none shall ever take delight to draw near
to those things wherein we see and judge no excellency.
2. Consider, as men grow up in conformity to God, so will they grow up in
communion with God, for as conformity is a ground of communion, so the more
conformity the greater the communion still. As the life of holiness grows up
within us, so communion with God flows in upon us, Phil. 3.10. That I may know
him and the power of his Resurrection, etc. The more conformable Paul was made
to Christ's death, the more communion he enjoyed in Christ's Resurrection. 2 Cor.
3. last, We beholding the same Image as in a glass, as the glory of the Lord
are changed into the same image from glory to glory.

3. The more a Saint grows in largeness of affection, the more will he grow up
in spiritualnesse of communion, love draws the heart strongly after God, many
waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it. At the first
entrance upon our communion with God, the soul is but weak and poor, it has
but some tastes of God, but it comes for more, till at last it feed upon a full
Table. 1 Pet. 2, 3, 4. If you have tasted that the Lord is gracious; What then?
to whom coming as unto a living stone, dissallowed indeed of men, but chosen
of God, and very precious. Ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual
house. The more we taste of the graciousness of God, the more still do we come
into communion with God.

It Is very observable in the Song of Solomon, that the Spouse at first she had
but some kises of the lips of Christ, but afterward she is taken into his
Chambers, and at last she is brought into his Banqueting house, into his house
of Wine. There are four things that communion leaves in the soul, after any
precious acts that it has enjoyed.

1. Communion leaves in the soul a sweet remembrance in it, Cant. 1.4. The
King has brought me into his chambers, We will be glad and rejoice in thee, we
will remember thy love more then wine. The Acts of the love of Christ showed to
a soul in communion with him, is increased by it. Psalm 42.4. When I remember
these things, I power out my soul in me: These things, what things? when I
went with the multitude that kept holy day: that is, when I went with thy
Saints to worship thee, where I enjoyed communion with thee.

2. It leaves an impression of grace and holiness of God upon the soul. Cant.
5.5. I rose up to my beloved, and my hands dropped with mirrh, and my fingers
with sweet smelling mirrh upon the handles of the lock. Moses his communion
left an impression of the glory of God upon him, when he comes from the
Mountain, he comes with his face shining: there are bright beams of Gods face,
to be seen upon Moses face.

3. It leaves in a man a love to those Ordinances, where he had this communion:
O how much is the soul in love with those Sermons, in which communion with God
is obtained, and with those prayers in which he has the enjoyment of God.

4. It leaves in the soul an instinct after further fellowship, and after
further communion; so that the whole desires of the foul are carried forth now
after greater and larger enjoyments, after higher and more glorious incomes,
and fresh influences of the divine presence You never knew what it was to enjoy
communion with God, if your hearts run not out after further and greater
communion.

The V. Property of communion and fellowship that the Saints have with God in
Ordinances, it is spiritual and and supernatural. First, it is not all
theabilities of nature that can make up this commumunion, it is not all the
education of the world that can bring a soul into the presence of God; or any
parts and gifts that is able to raise the Soul into communion with God. It is
a spiritual communion, it is the Spirit of God coming down and taking the
Spirits of the Saints up to its self, Revel. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the
Lords day; when he was in the spirit of the Lord, then he had communion with
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. last, we all with open face behold as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, etc. we see the glory of the
Lord; I but what is the eye by which you see it? it is the spirit of the Lord.
This is an unerring rule, that such as the union is, such the communion must
be; but the union that is spiritual, and therefore the communion that must
needs be spiritual also, 1 Cor. 6.17. They that are joined to the Lord are
one spirit.

2. Such as the persons are enjoying communion, such is the Communion of those
persons: now the persons enjoying communion they are spiritual persons,
therefore the communion that they enjoy is spiritual. God is a spirit, and the
Saints are spiritual, and therefore have communion one with another in a
spiritual manner.

3. Such as the means of communion is, such is the communion it self; now all
the means of communion are spiritual, therefore the communion it self must
be spiritual. The Ordinances, they are all of them spiritual, they are not
carnal Ordinances, though many persons use them carnally. The words that I
speak (says Christ) they are spirit and they are life; that is, they be full
of vigor, full of power, full of majesty, and full of authority. As no means
attain their end but such as are suitable to that end, so no end orders the
means, but such as agree with it. The communion the Saints have with God is a
spiritual communion, and therefore look into your spirits, whether or no you
do enjoy communion with God.

The VI and last Property of the Communion that the Soul has with God, it is
a delightful fellowship and communion, the Soul comes to take up its delight
and complacency in the enjoyment of God, when once it is brought into communion
with him, and God takes up his delight and complacency in the Soul, when once
he comes to have communion with it. There is no communion so delightful as
the communion that is made between God and the Saints. There be many most
patheticall expressions (in Solomon's his Song of Songs) holding forth the
unexpressible sweetness and delight in this communion between Christ and the
Soul; but two of them are chiefly remarkable and to be taken notice of, viz.
Cant. 2.3. and 5.16. The words of the first Text are these; As the Apple tree
among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons; I sat down
under his shadow, with great delight; or as it is in the Hebrew, I delighted
[my self] greatly ((...) chimmadti being the conjugation piel, which much
intends and augmenteth the signification of the root;) and I sat down, or
I desired exceedingly, (for the proper and radical signification of the root
(...) chamad, is, he desired; and in piel (...) chimmed, he desired greatly or
exceedingly; and (...) chimmadti, I desired greatly) and I sat down, (to wit
to enjoy him and communion with him, and to taste the sweetness of his fruit;
and what follows?) and his fruit was ((...) matok lechikki) sweet to my
palate; according as I desired, which made me to delight my self abundantly
in the enjoyment of him, and communion with him: That is the force and emphasis
of the first text; But further, as if this were not enough to express the
sweetness and delightfulness of this communion; therefore in that other text,
Cant. 5.16. these same roots (...) chamad and (...) matak, are raised up
higher, as it were, to express a higher degree of delight and sweetness (in
this spiritual communion between Christ and the Soul) thus, his mouth is most
sweet, yea he is altogether lovely; that is the expression in your
translation: But the original words (which no translation in the world can
reach, nor rise to) are those; (...) chicko mamtackkim vecullo machamaddim; and
word for word translated they sund thus, or to this sense; his mouth ((...)
chic-co) or the place of his mouth (is all) sweetness, full of (nothing but)
sweetness; for the word (...) mamtakkim, is a nowne in the plural number,
importing dulcedines sweetnesses; that is all sorts of sweetness, or
sweetness it self, and all the species or kinds of sweetness are all laid
up, and hid as it were in the palate of his mouth to be tasted by Souls taken
up to communion and fellowship with him; that is the force of the first word
(...) mamtakkim, sweetness, from the former root (...) matak, he was sweet;
and the other word in this text, (...) vecullo machamaddim, has the like and
no less emphasis, importing this, and he is all, desires or delights, or all
of him, all and every whit or part of him, ((...) cullo) is nothing out
delights ((...) machamaddim, being also from the former root (...) chamad, he
desired, a nowne in the plural number, setting forth him, and all the parts of
him to be pleasures and delights, that is most pleasant, most lovely and
delightful; even to be all delights) and desires, that is most desirable and
most worthy to be the object of all desires; and therefore he is called (...)
chemdat col haggojim, the desire of all nations; Hag. 2.8. (...) zeh dodi,
this, and such is my beloved, so sweet, and so delightful is the tasting of
his fruit, in the enjoyment of him, and communion with him; says the believing
soul, to invite all the daughters of Jerusalem to come and partake of such
exceeding delight and sweetness, (...) betzillo, under his shadow; for no
shadow yields such shelter, no shadow yields such comfort, as the soul
sitting under Christ as a shadow; that is enjoying her communion and
fellowship with him. What delight does the tender Father take to have communion
with his beloved child? and the loving husband take to have communion with his
beloved wife? what delight do friends take in having communion with each
other? O how much more, and how much higher is the delights of Christ raised in
having communion with the Saints, and the delights of the Saints raised in
enjoying communion with Christ. And hence in the same chapter, Cant. 2.14. The
^ice of Christ to the Church, is thus, O my dove! that art in the clifts of the
Rocks, in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me
hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. So much
for the properties of communion.

Thirdly, I come to the acts of communion; and they are many and various: I Will
name the chief of them.

1. Mutual manifestation. 2. Mutual contemplation. 3. Mutual admiration. 4.
Mutual delight and satisfaction. 5. Mutual communication of secrecy.
The first act of communion is manifestation, and that 1. Of God to man. 2. Of
man to himself.


1. ^f God to man, and that three ways of his Presence, of his Glory, and of
his Grace.

1. Of his presence Says Jacob, Genesis 28.16. God is in this place. And John
14.21. I will manifest myself to him.

2. Of his glory, Psalm 63.3: Iosee thy power, and thy glory, so as I have seen
thee in the Sanctuary.

3. Of his grace, Heb. 4.16. Let us come boldly to the throne of grace, etc.
God in Gospell-Ordinances through Jesus Christ, sits upon a Throne of grace;
and when we go unto the throne of grace to receive from him, we must go with
boldness. Now there are two chief acts that you are to exercise about this
presence of God, when it manifests it self to you in the use of Ordinances.

1. The foul sees and observes this presence of God, manifesting it self, and
beholds it. It is David's wish Psalm. 27.4. That I might dwell in thy House, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. As the Ordinances
of God are the glory of a people, so the presence of God is the glory of the
Ordinances, and the soul that enjoyes communion with God, it eyeth and sees
the glorious presence of God in Ordinances.

2. There Is not only an act of beholding, but there is an act of adoring the
presence that we do behold, doing homage to it: The Angels that have a more
immediate communion with God then we have, they fall down before God, and adore
him. And so the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 6.5. Then said I, woe is me, for I am undone,
because I am a man of uncleanelips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord
of hosts. And Rev. 4.10. And the twenty four Elders cast down their Crowns at
his feet, and fall down before him, etc.

Secondly, there is an act of Revelation of man to himself, to know himself.
Man in himself, is dark in discoveries of himself, 2 Cor. 4.6. For God, who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. Prove. 20.27. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, searching
all the inward parts of the belly. It Is not the presence of the Lord in heaven,
but the presence of the Lord in Ordinances that is the candle of the Lord. Now
in this act of the Revelation of man to himself.

1. It discovers the secrets of the heart, 1 Cor. 14.25: And thus are the
secrets of the heart made manifest.

2. It discovers the principles, and grounds, and ends of his action; the Word
of God discovers it to him, and the presence of God in it.

3. It passes a sentence upon a man according to that light, Ezekiel. 20.3.4. Son
of man, will thou judge them? that is, by Ordinances. A soul is then judged by
Ordinances: First, When it is mightily ashamed in the Divine presence, for its
nonconformity unto God: and Secondly, when it takes the judgment that the
word gives, and lies down with silence under it. This is the first act of
communion, an act of manifestation of God to man, of man to himself: Of God to
man, of his Presence, of his Glory, of his Grace: Of man to himself, in the
secrets of his heart, and in the principles and grounds of his heart.

The second act of communion, is mutual contemplation, the soul does
continually converse with Christ by secret meditation and contemplation. There
is a beholding of the beauty of Christ, which is called the beauty of
holiness: Holiness is the beauty of a Saint, and Christ is the beauty of
holiness. The Saints set forth Christ to be the fairest of ten thousands,
fairer then the children of men, Christ replies again, O thou fairest among
women. The Saints they behold and contemplate the beauty of Christ; and Christ,
he beholds the beauty, and contemplates the excellency of the Saints: The
Saints, they are taken up with the love of Christ, and Christ he is taken up
with the love of them: thus they admire the virtues one of another. You know,
it is never well with friends unless they be together; what a shift will lovers
make to enjoy each other? So it is between the Soul and the Lord, Psalm
139.18. When I awake, I am still with thee: Why? a man might have told David,
God is in heaven, and thou art upon the earth. In my bodily presence I am from
him, not with him; but in the presence of spirit, and in the meditation and
contemplation of soul, I do never ly down, I do never rise up, but I am with
thee. By the Covenant of Grace, and the Ordinances of the Gospel, you are come
to God, the judge of all things; you have intimate fellowship with him, as well
as with the Saints. Austin says, The soul does often and familiarly walk the
streets of the new Jerusalem, Seeing there the Patriarchs, and the Prophets,
and the Lord Jesus Christ: This the soul does by fiduciall reasoning, and by
high and glorious meditation and contemplation.

The third act of communion is mutual admiration, the soul is admiring those
excellencies that are in God, and Christ is admiring those excellencies, and
being ravished with the beauties that are in them. Thou have ravished my heart,
my Sister, my Spouse, Cant. In the Book of Exodus, it is said, the High Priest
carried the names of the children of Israel upon his Breast Plate: A Jewel set
in the Breastplate of Christ, O how shining and glorious is it! The Saints, as
Jewels, are very taking, but being set in Christ's Breastplate, are more
taking: This is my beloved, this is my friend, O you daughters of Jerusalem.

4. The fourth act of communion between Christ and the soul, does consist in
mutual delight, satisfaction, contentment, and rejoicing in each other. There
was a great fellowship and communion betwixt David and Jona^han, and they
rejoiced in each other. There Is a great fellowship and communion betwixt wife
and husband, ^e^her be as the loving hind to thee: and Esaias 62.5. I will
rejoice over thee, as a Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride. O the contentment
that the soul takes in Christ, and the contentment Jesus Christ again takes
in the soul that he has communion withal, Isa. 53.11. He shall see of the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: Psalm. 17. last. I shall be
satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness. (...) chelek Jehovah guammo; The
Lords portion is his people: in Deuteronomy. 32.9. and so (...) chelki Jebovah amerah
naphshi. The Lord is my portion says my soul, Lam. 3.24. therefore the Soul
studies Christ, and Christ studies the Soul, the king shall take pleasure in
thy beauty: you know the command is unto a man, Prove. 5.19. concerning his
wife, let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished always
with her soul, now the Lord Christ his people satisfy him at all times, it is
all the portion he looks for, Isa. 62.4. he calls her name (...) chephtzi
bah, or Hephzibah, my delight in her.

5. Act of communication is communication of secrets, love gives gifts, and it
gives counsels too. The carriage of a Saint in communion, when he receives the
communication of Secrets must be thus.

1. He must come with holy and sanctified thoughts of God. 2. He must come with
apprehensions and thoughts of his own vileness; To him will I look (says God)
that is of an humble heart: With an eye of inspection? no, but with an eye of
respect, with an eye of compassion, and with an eye of approbation. 3. He must
come with seriousness of spirit, and with solidity of heart to the Ordinances,
if he would enjoy communion with God in them, and have the secrets of God
revealed to him. 4. All a man's graces should be acted, when he comes to attend
upon God. And 5. He must bring the Lord Jesus Christ in his arms: as we
perform no service but by him, so we have no communion with God but through
him. Christ is a two fold Mediator: First of reconciliation for enemies and
strangers: Secondly, for communion, and communication of secrets to those that
are reconciled.
Now in all those, and all other acts of spiritual communion, there is one
special and choice qualification of them, that they are performed and acted
with much intimacy, or with very intimate and familiar correspondence between
Christ and the soul, which appears in these particulars.

1. The soul has a great deal of intimacy in those acts of communion with
Christ; for it looks upon him as reconciled, as one that bears nothing but
good will to it. It Is ungodly men that look upon God as a stranger, God shows
them the back, and not the face, Jer. 18.17. but it is not so with his people,
he does remove all clouds, he shows them his face, he does cause his face to
shine upon them, Psalm 104.37. My meditations of him shall be sweet. Mark what
is that which sweetens David's meditation of the Lord? Truly the reason was
this, because he looked upon God as reconciled and at peace with him, therefore
whatsoever was in God, was his. Not to look upon God as a Judge, but as a
husband, as a Father reconciled, and so the soul has an interest in
whatsoever is his. Thus God is said Psalm 116.7. to be the rest of the soul,
Return to thy rest, O my soul. Thy rest, for truly when the soul wanders from
God, it is restless. That Is an excellent expression, Psalm. 38.10. My heart
pants, you read it; but in the Original it is thus, (...) libbi secharchar;
my heart went about to and fro like a Merchant: For it is from the root (...)
sachar, which signifies to go about, or to run hither and thither, properly to
traffic, and play the Merchant in buying and selling: So the soul runs to
this creature, and is trading with that creature: But when once the soul
pitcheth upon God, it rests there as upon a rock of ages.

2. Their fellowship with Christ is in things of the highest nature, therefore
there is a great deal of intimacy. A man may have acquaintance in ordinary
things, but familiarity in things of the highest concernment, must needs argue
a great deal of intimacy, your fellowship is in the Spirit. As the Devil is an
enemy to your fellowship with God in heavenly things, and things of Eternity,
Ephesians. 6.12. So the intimacy you have with Jesus Christ is in things
spiritual, and of an eternal concernment, and they are these four.

1. It Is fellowship with Christ in his graces, in the graces of his spirit, We
have an Unction from the holy one, 1 John 2.22.

2. It Is fellowship with Christ in the motions of his spirit; they that have
received the spirit of Christ, are led by that spirit, Romans 8.14.

3. It Is fellowship with Christ in the sealings of his spirit, After you
believed, you were sealed by the spirit of promise. Ephesians. 1.13.

4. It Is fellowship with Christ in the earnest of his spirit, which I think is
more then the sealing: sealing puts the state out of controversy, but earnest
gives a man a taste of that glory before hand. As a wicked man in this life, by
the spirit of bondage does receive a judgment, a kind of sense and taste of hell
in his soul before hand, Heb. 10.27. So does the Lord let into the souls of
his people a fore-tast of glory; Here is a great deal of familiarity.

In the third place, this intimacy that the Saints have with the Lord Jesus
consists in this, they do come to him with boldness, and have access with
boldness to the Throne of grace: It is called drawing near, Heb. 10.22. All
ungodly men, they stand afar off from God, he comes to God as a stranger, he is
afraid of him: But the drawing near of the children of God, it is called Job
22.26. A listing up their face to God: They shall have boldness in the presence
of God, as a man that lifts up his face without fear in the presence of his
intimate and familiar friend, Hos. 14.6, 7. Their small shall be as the Wine of
Lebanon. It is an observation of Galen, all other things grow old, and will
grow the worse for time; but Wine, the longer you keep it, the better will it
be, time does not make it grow worse; and that is the reason of that expression
of our Savior, He that has tasted of old Wine does not by and by desire new.
Now they shall come into the presence of God, and their services shall be
accepted of him, as the Wine of Lebanon: What is that? That is, (as one says)
the older they be, and the oftener they come into the presence of God, the more
acceptance they find with him, because their smell is as the Wine of Lebanon.

In the fourth and last place, they have a great deal of intimacy which appears
in this, they are always calling one another to further fellowship, and are
never satisfied. Our Savior Christ is always crying, Open to me my Love, my
Sister, and my Spouse; and the Church she is always calling, the Spirit says
come, and the Bride says come; come away my beloved, come away like a Roe, or
a young Heart upon the mountain of spices: By these Mountains of spices, I
conceive to be meant the promises; and the Lords making have upon them, is for
the accomplishment of them. Set me as a Seal upon thine heart. All this ^s
nothing else, but the Church still calling to the Lord for further fellowship.
True grace is a spark begun here, and it will never cease aspiring, till it
has got to him that is the fountain of all in glory.

IIII. I come to the ends of communion, why God will have any fellowship at all
with the Saints: and seeing he will have fellowship and communion with them,
why he does not immediately translate them to glory.

Observe; he that accomplisheth the best and the greatest ends, is the wisest
man: the more ends any action accomplisheth, the more excellent is that action.
Mordecai's action was a most excellent one, because it brought about so man
y^^nds; there was a great plot defeated, great enemies subdued, the state of
the Church was restored, the Kings affections rectified, and himself honored
and advanced. There are eleven ends why God will have fellowship and communion
with his people.

The first great end of God in communion, is, that he might manifest and impart
himself to the creature: Gods imparting of himself to the creature, as it is
an act of communion, so it is the very end of communion too, John 14.21. I will
come to him, and manifest my self to him. There were two ends for which God
created the Angels; the one was for glory, and the other was for communion;
that they might behold his face: and that he might impart himself to them.
There is a double end of communion; some have communion for need, others have
it for delight; some have communion for need, they impart their wants to have
them supplied; others have communion for delight, their communion is out of
abundance of desire for communication; not that they might receive from others,
but that they might give to others. God has not communion with the creatures
out of need, but out of delight, not that he needs the creature, but that he
might give forth of his abundance to the creature. God sets apart the man that
is godly for himself, not for service only, but for communion and
communication also. This is one of the great ends of God in communion, that he
might impart and communicate himself unto the creature. The

2. End why God will have communion with the Saints, is this; that he might
thereby set forth unto the Saints, the perfection of the mediation of Christ,
and that in these two things; 1. In his being able to cure all the wounds and
bruises that sin had made upon a man: By sin we lost both our Image and our
fellowship. Now Jesus Christ, he does not only make peace with God, so that he
does not destroy us, but raises a way of communion with God to receive us.
That Is a type of Christ, Exodus 25.22. I will meet with thee, and I will commune
with thee from above the mercy seat, etc. 2. He is able to give you a more
perfect communion then Adam had, as he gives you a more perfect righteousness.
As we have not a distinct righteousness from Christ's righteousness, so we
have not a distinct fellowship from Christ's fellowship. All the communion that
Christ has in the humane nature with the Father, it is for us, and in our
behalf.

3. End why God will have fellowship and Communion with us, is this, that in
this fellowship all other fellowships may have their foundations laid, there
had never been any kind of fellowship if there had not been first this kind of
fellowship: when you brake with God, all Creatures brake with you, for upon the
same terms that we stood with God did all Creatures stand with us: the
Devils they have no fellowship among themselves, other creatures that are
separated from God, they have no fellowship at all; But now the Saints of Jesus
Christ have fellowship with the Angels, I, with all the Saints, they shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven They have
fellowship with the Angels, Jacobs Ladder which is Jesus Christ, there the
Angels come down and go up again; and they have fellowship with the Saints,
the Communion between Saints and Saints, is bottomed upon the Communion that is
between Christ and Saints, Ephesians. 1.10. That in the dispensation of the fullness
of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are
in Heaven, and which are on Earth, even in him. The

4. End why God will have communion with his Saints, that he might confirm
them and make them like unto himself; God loves to see his own picture upon
his own people. The more any man is molded into the sorry things of this
world, the more like them he is: the more communion he has with them, the more
conformity. He that walks with the wise shall be wise, So it is with the
Saints, the communion they have with God, the more conformity they have to him,
for communion makes conformity and carries it on to a greater height: what is
the reason the Angels are more holy then men? it is because they have more
communion with God then men have; what is the reason the glorified Saints are
more holy then the gracious Saints are? it is because they have more Communion
with God: What Is the reason one Saint is more holy then another? it is because
he has more Communion with God then the other; according to the degree of our
Communion, such will be the degree of our holiness and conformity to God.

The fifth end of Gods Communion with the Saints is, that he may act and
strengthen their graces, Cant. 1.12. While the King sits at his Table, my
spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. Every thing the nearer it comes to
it is Center, the swifter it moves; Communion with God, and the Souls enjoyment
of God, it is the very Center of it, and and the nearer it comes to this, the
swifter still it moves. It Is observable of Abraham, that he put forth the
greatest Acts of humility in his Communion with God, O Lord I am but dust and
ashes; and Jacob he put forth the highest Acts of zeal in Communion with God,
I will not let thee go except thou bless me: and Moses put forth the greatest
Acts of prayer in his Communion with God, O Lord pardon the sin of this people
which is very great: one of the great ends that God aims at in Communion, is,
the exercise of your graces, he would not have the graces of his people to lie
still, to be like swords rusting in the scabbards, but he would have them
exercised; he would have your patience set at work in waiting upon him, your
faith set a work in resting on him, your zeal set a work in longing after him,
your zeal set a work in acting for him. God does not love any Heavenly Talent
should be wrapped up in a napkin; he was a sinful servant that was a floathful
servant that laid up his Masters Talent, when he should have laid out his
Masters Talent: God loves to see us exercise all our graces, and thence it is
that he has Communion with us.

6. End why God will have fellowship and Communion with his Saints is, that he
may sweeten the whole course of our lives: while we are in this world we meet
with many bitter things, and it is only Communion with God that can put
sweetness into them. Jesus Christ he was a man of sorrows, and what upheld
his life? only Communion with God, the Lord stood by me and strengthened me.
Now that which upheld the life of Christ, that is it that does uphold the life
of every Christian, and that is communion with God. The same words Paul makes
use of, The Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, whose I am, and whom I
serve. This is the mighty end that God aims at in communion, that he may
sweeten all the course of our pilgrimage, while we are going to heaven. This is
the bunch of grapes that God gives his people to feed upon in their wilderness
state, they would be out of heart, if they had no communion with him: This is
that sweet wood, that is cast into the waters of Marah, to make them sweet and
pleasant.

7. Therefore has God communion with his people, that he may prepare their
hearts for desertions; that they may be affected with them when they come, and
that they may not be dejected under them though they long continue, that they
may not think their cloud shall never be blown over, though their Sun be hidden.

1. That they may be affected with desertions. Says David, Thou did hide thy
face, and I was troubled. If he had never seen the face of God, he would never
have been troubled for Gods hiding of his face. The Saints of God, if they had
not some tastes of communion with him, they would never be troubled for his
withdrawment from them. 2. That they may not be dejected under them: David, he
calls to mind his song that he made in the night, and the remembrance of that
was exceeding sweet, and exceeding pleasant unto him; the remembrance of former
communions that he had with God, bore up his spirit, when many troubles were
upon him.

8. End why God will have communion with his people, it is to put them out of
taste with all the pleasures of sin and the creature, Phil. 4.7. And he peace of
God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds, etc. It Is
usual, when any epithet of God is added to a thing, it signifies and notes
the excellency of it: it is the peace of God, a peace that comes from God, a
peace that brings to God, a peace that makes us live like God, in such
sweetness, and peace, and contentment. Now this peace, it puts a man's mouth
out of taste of any of the sweet nesses and of the pleasures of sin, Thy loving
kindness is bet^e, then life, says David. And, Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better than Wine, says the Church. There
is nothing puts us out of taste with the pleasures of sin so much, as a souls
tasting of communion with God: when a soul has drank the old wine, it cares
not for drinking of new, because the old was better. The loving kindness of
God in communion with him, is that which takes off the palate from tasting
sweetness any where else. The more any soul is brought into communion with
God, the more does it disrelish the pleasures of sin.

9. End that God aims at in giving the Soul Coumunion with himself, is, that
it might aggravate their sins in the day of Repentance: Sins against Communion
are great aggravations. Solomon departed from the Lord when he had appeared to
him twice, which migh tily aggravated his sin. 1 Kings 11.9. God kept an exact
account of his manifestations, that he might aggravate Solomon's sins in the day
of his Repentance. O when a soul comes to fit down and consider, I have not
only sinned against so many mercies of God, and so long tired out the Patience
of God, but I have sinned against Communion with God, Jesus Christ took me into
his banqueting house, and his banner over me was love, He stayed me with
flagons, he comforted me with Apples, his left hand was under my head, and his
right hand did embrace me; and yet I finned my self out of the sweet embraces
of Christ. O how does this melt the heart when it comes to mourn for sin, the
sense of the sweetness of his communion that he had with God, puts double tears
into his eyes, and double sighs into his spirit. There Is no such aggravation of
sin as communion with God.

10. Therefore God has communion and fellowship with his people, therefore
does he meet them that he might bless them, Exodus 20.24. Communion times are
times when all requests are granted. King Ahasuerus grants the request of
Hester, when he comes to sit with her at a banquet of wine. The greatest
blessing that ever the Saints do enjoy, it is in times of communion with God: O
then, how are their consciences filled with peace! O how are their hearts
filled with joy! God makes large distributions of spiritual blessings, when he
admits the soul into communion with himself: What blessing is there that the
soul may not have, when it has communion with God in Ordinances?

11. End of Gods communion with his people here, is, that his fellowship here
may be the first fruits of glory hereafter. When God will bestow any great
mercy upon a man, he gives him a taste of it before hand, that he may set him
upon more earnest and eager longings after it. Gods people they have the first
fruits of all their mercies in this world, and the full crop of them all in
another world. When the soul is made to taste of the sweetness of communion
with God, O how it longs to be with God, how many prayers does the soul make
to God, that he would tak it home to himself, that it might ever lie in his
arms, and ever dwell in his presence! I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is best of all: What was the ground that raised up such desires
in Paul to be with Christ? It was because here he had tasted of the sweetness
of Christ; and if Christ in this world was so sweet, if a Christ on earth was
so sweet, then a Christ in heaven would be much more sweet. And on this ground
the Church calls to Christ, Make have my beloved, and be thou like a Roe or
young Heart upon the mountain of spices, Cant. 8.14. And in Revel. 22. when
Christ had told the Church, that he would return again unto her to have more
communion with her; she cries out, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus: She puts her
prayers to Christ's promises, and says, Amen Lord, so let it be.

Application.

THere are three Uses I shall make of this point.

1. Information: 2. Examination: 3. Exhortation.

1. For Information.

1. Behold here the infinite delight that God takes in the society of all his
Saints, that he would set up all Ordinances for this end, to have communion
with them, and that they might have communion with him; that he might have the
enjoyment of them, and that they might come to the participation of him. It Is a
wonder of mercy, and of condescensions, that the most High should stoop to such
low persons: He that had infinite blessedness in the society, and in the
enjoyment of himself, he that took so great a delight in his Son, and in the
society of the Angels, that he should take any delight to impart himself unto
poor sinful dust and ashes, to men, nay, to worms, and no men. When men set
up variety of means for the accomplishment of their ends, it is a great sign,
that their hearts are very much set upon them. Consider what variety of
Ordinances God has set up, for the communication of himself unto believers.

2. Behold here, what should be the main end of the Saints, in the use of all
Ordinances; namely, communion, and fellowship with God: look what was Gods end
in appointing Ordinances, that should be our end in using of Ordinances: In
praying we should seek the face of God, and in hearing, we should hear the
voice of God, hear what God the Lord will say; and in meditating, my meditation
of thee shall be sweet: and in conference, Psalm. 145.11. They shall talk of the
glory of thy Kingdom, and speak of all thy power. In receiving the Lords
Supper, what should be a Saints greatest delight in coming to that spiritual
Banquet? It should be meeting with Christ in that Ordinance. We oftentimes lose
all the blessings of the means, because we propound not to our selves communion
with God as the end. Many souls that come to Sermons, Christ may say to them
as he said to those, What went ye out into the Wilderness to see? a Reed
shaken with the wind? You are to do as the wise Virgins did, to go forth and
meet the Brides groom, and to trim your Lamps for the meeting of him. If
communion be not your end in Ordinances, Ordinances will be nothing available
to you; you will lose all the Ordinances that you enjoy, except you meet with
Christ in them.

3. Is communion with God, the great end of God in Ordinances? Hence then learn
this, that when communion with God in Ordinances is not enjoyed, then the
ultimate end of all the Ordinances is frustrated; you lose the end for which
all Preaching, and Praying, and Hearing was ordained; while communion is
missed, while you have no communion with God, Ordinances never attain their
appointed ends. How sad is it to use the means, and never attain the end, and
yet this is the case of thousands of souls, that live under choice
administrations, and yet are never brought into a state of communion; they are
so far from enjoying communion with God, that they know not what it is to have
communion with God, though it be declared to them. How many are there that lie
a long time at the pool, and yet never see any Angel come down to stir the
water; that lie by the sides of the pool, but are never put into the pool? O
how sad is it, that such excellent Ordinances should lose their ends, and that
we should so long have the enjoyment of them, and yet never be bettered by
them; that we should never attain those ends for which they were ordained.

4. Is it so, that the main end of God in establishing and setting up of
Ordinances, is to enjoy communion with himself? then let every soul take heed
of throwing down of Ordinances, let every soul be exceeding tender of the
appointments of God, lest they throw down the means of their communion with
God, and live without. God in the world: Though God has not tied himself to
Ordinances, yet he has tied us to Ordinances; and in mine own experience, I
have known many men grow worse, but never any man grew better by the neglecting
of Ordinances. There is no communion to be had with God but in Ordinances; and
therefore if you go from Ordinances, you will be fetched home by a smarting
rod, if you belong to God. What ever you do, be very tender of
Gospell-Ordinances: For if he that despised Moses his Law dyed without mercy
under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer panishment shall they be
thought worthy, that trample under foot the blood of the covenant, wherewith
they were sanctified, and count it an unholy thing? O it is sad to see how many
souls there are, that cast dirt upon those Ordinances, that are the Charriots
in which Jesus Christ rides, to take up souls into communion with himself.

5. If communion be the main end of God in setting up of Ordinances; Behold
then whence it is, and why it is, that the Saints of God are so much troubled,
when they want the sensible enjoyment of communion with God: they know the
truth of this truth, the Ordinance in its end is lost to them. When a child
goes out to seek his Father, and cannot find him, it is a great grief to him:
Believers go out in Gospell-Ordinances to seek after God, and when they cannot
find him, it must needs be very grievous to their spirits, Cant. 3.1. by night
upon my bed I sought him whom my soul loved, but I found him not: Divine
endeavors do not always meet with Divine successes; she sought him, I, but
she found him not. So many a soul comes to meet with God in an Ordinance, but
God is withdrawn from them, they cannot see his face though they come to seek
his face, and the sorest affliction that a child of God lies under, or can lie
under in this world, is the withdrawment of God from Ordinances, when he thinks
to find God in them, he is departed from them; they shall go with their Flocks
and their Herds to seek after the Lord, but they shall not find him, for he
has withdrawn himself.

6. Is it the main end of God in setting up Ordinances, that his Saints might
have Communion with him? Then learn hence the ground why the Saints set so high
a price upon, and are so often found in Divine Ordinances, it is because they
there meet with Communion with God; now the meetings with God is the ground of
their so often appearings before him: Alas, it is not their meeting together
that they aim at, but their meeting with God that they look after, if God be
wanting, all is wanting, if God be there, nothing is wanting. Ordinances alas
they can do nothing without God, they are but painted swords in dead men's
hands, they cannot raise the heart when it is fallen, they cannot refresh the
heart when it is sad, they cannot enlighten the soul when there is a cloud upon
it, they cannot draw the heart to Heaven when it is earthly, they cannot
resolve any doubts that are upon their spirits: no, these things are too great,
and too good for Ordinances to do, it is only the God of the Ordinances that
can do all all these things. Alas, if there were nothing but the very
Ordinance, believers would never be so often in the use of them, if there were
nothing but a little bread and wine at a Sacrament, who would sit down at it
with such great delight? If there were nothing but praying in prayer, who would
lose any time about it? if there were nothing but hearing in hearing, if there
was not the power of God going along with the voice of man, what is it? And
therefore when you see the Saints and people of God so often employing
themselves about spiritual Ordinances; when you see them begin the day with
prayer, and end the day with thanksgivings; when you see them fixing their
souls to meditate upon God, you may well conclude there is more then the bare
Ordinance; nay, in every Ordinance remember it is not for the Ordinance sake,
but for Communion with God which was the main end why God set up Ordinances.

and Communion with God or no.

This is a serious question, and deserves more then a slight answer. Communion
with God is a thing of more concernment, and of greater moment then most men
are a ware of, and we use to try things that will not be taken from us without
trial. Consider three things: 1. God has scales to weigh all your graces. 2.
He has touchstones to try all your graces. 3. He has Fanns to sift all your
graces.


Rev. 3.2. thou have a name to live, and art dead; And then you use to try
those things where there may be credit. Sometimes men take that for fellowship
with God in Ordinances which is not; and sometimes mendeny that for fellowship
with God in Ordinances: that is;

First, Some men take that for fellowship with God in Ordinances which is not.
There are two things that look like fellowshp and communion with God in
Ordinances that are not.

1. There are some imperfect approches of God unto the souls of unregenerate
men in ordinances, when there is no reciprocal approaches of the spirits of
unregenerate men to God.

2. When their spirits are only passive and not active, God calls upon them to
seek his face, but their hearts never answer, Lord thy face will I seek, as the
heart of the righteous do.

Secondly, some men deny that for Communion with God in Ordinances which is
Common.

Take these two distinctions.

1. Did. Communion with God in Ordinances is sometimes secret, and sometimes
more manifest: First, it is secret: God does not always speak peace with a
loud voice, he sometimes speaks peace with a still voice, Cant. 5.4, 5. there
Communion with God is more secret, My beloved put in his hand by the hole of
the door, and my bowels were moved for him. I rose up to open to my beloved,
and my hands dropped with mirrhe, and my fingers with sweet smelling mirrhe
upon the handles of the locks. Secondly, It is more manifest: sometimes they
are in hidden rooms, in secret chambers together. At other times they are
walking in the open galleries.

2. Distinction: There Is a Sanctifying Communion, and there is a ravishing
Communion: The sanctifying-Communion may be where the ravishing Communion may
not be, Ps. 51.8. make me to of hear joy and gladness, etc. David he had a
sanctifying Communion before, but now he beggs for a ravishing Communion with
God that would raise him up to a rejoicing in God.

Now you may know whether you have fellowship with God in Ordinances or no by
three things.

1. By something Before duty. 2. By something In duty. 3. By something After duty.
First, by something before duty. If you have Communion with God, you may know
it by these three Characters.

1. If God before raise up thy heart to make fellowship thy end in duty. O show
us the Father and it suffices us, that was the Disciples end in their prayer
to Jesus Christ; show us the Father, nothing but the Father would suffice them:
So when thou come to Ordinances, and say, O that I might see the goings of
God my King in his Sanctuary! O that I might be able to see the prints and
footsteps of God in such and such an Ordinance! God will never deceive the
expectations of his people; These expectations they are raised by him, and they
shall be fulfilled by him, Jer. 29.11. I know the thoughts that I think toward
you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an
expected end: They looked for peace, I, says God, an Olive branch shall be
sent them; they expect my presence, they shall find my presence. If God before
hand raise up thy heart to make fellowship thy end in all thy Actions, then
thou may certainly conclude thou shall have fellowship with him.

2. If God before hand put thy heart into a suitable frame to the duty, then
thou may assure thy soul thou shall have fellowship with God in the duty; if
thou find those graces exercised by thee, the duty calls for from thee. When
God called Moses into the Mount, he was sure to have communion with God: Why?
because God gave him such dispositions, as fitted him for communion. When once
the heart is put into communion frame, it shall never go without it: if thy
shoes be put off, and the place on which thou stand be holy ground, never
fear, but thou shall enjoy communion with the holy God. There is a remarkable
passage the Psalmist has, Psalm. 10.17. expressly pointing at this, that God
does first put the spirits of his people in a frame, suitable to communion with
himself: And 2. he comes unto them with a blessing, enclining his ear to
hear and accept them favorably, or that whenever the Lord does put the
hearts of his people into a prepared frame, then he does incline his ear and
hear them: the words are those, (...) tachin libam, (there is the first) thou will fit, dispose, direct, or prepare their heart; or thou will cause their
heart to prepare it self, as it were; for (...) tachin is the future hiph.,
from the root (...) chun, he prepared or fitted, etc. and then observe what
follows: When once thou have thus fitted and prepared their heart, then
(...) takshib ozn^kah, Thou will prepare thy ear to hear; or thou will cause
thy ear to be heard, and to be attentive in hearing their suits and
supplications: for the word (...) takshib is also future hiph. from the root
(...) kashab inkal, he was attentive, or he heard with attention. So that God
never puts his people into a prepared posture for communion, but he gives them
communion. When duties answer to our hearts, and our hearts answer to our
duties: This is the workmanship of God, to frame the heart for duty, as well as
to cut out duty for the heart. And hence the Psalmist knowing this, that it is
the order and work of God; first, to prepare the heart for communion, and then
to incline his own ear to hear his people, and to entertain communion with them
in Ordinances; he does observe this order, and follow it with a practice
suitable to it in his daily addresses to God, that is thus: wheresoever he does
find his heart put into a fitted and prepared frame for -- communion with God,
he does not let it dye again, and go out of frame by a sloathfull neglect of
such a disposition of heart: No, but he immediately sets himself to duty, to
worship God, and to the acts of his Worship, in his Ordinances, as he
expresses himself in another Psalm; viz. Psalm. 57.7. thus: (...) Nac^on libbi
elohim, nachon ^ibbi^, (there is the first, he finds his heart fitted and
prepared for communion with God) My heart (says he) is fitted or prepared (for
the word (...) nachon is the passive conjugation niphal, signifying, he is
fitted or prepared, from the same root in the former Text (...) chun, he
fitted, or prepared in the active; and so it is rather to be rendered, prepared
or fitted, then fixed, thus; (...) libbi, my heart, (...) nachon, is fitted or
prepared) O God, my heart is fitted or prepared (for communion with thee.)
Well, what follows? He presently sets himself upon that great duty and
Ordinance of communion with God, in the praising of his Name, and singing forth
those praises, as in the words immediately following in the same verse thus: My
heart is prepared, O God, my heart is prepared: (therefore) (...) Ashidah
va-azameral, I will sing and give praise.

3. When the heart is carried forth in its utmost strength after duty, then
thou shall enjoy communion with God Dan. 9.3.22. compared. Daniel he sets his
face toward Jerusalem, and the Text says, that at the beginning, the Angel of
th Lord came and touched him: O Daniel, greatly beloved of the Lord, thy prayer
is heard. When the soul puts forth his greatest strength in duty, then does it
enjoy most communion with God in duty: The more active thou art in employing
thy self about this work, the more in-comes from God will there be in this
work. That Is the first particular.

Secondly, in the duty: If there be ravishing discoveries the heart knows it,
God is his own witness in the Spirit. I, but if there be but an humbling
fellowship, though there be not ravishing discoveries, it is an evidence. Now
the dispositions of the Soul in the duty which speaks communion with God, are
these.

1. It is a very humble fellowship, it lays a man very low in his own eyes,
and raises God very high. How ready are we then to cry with Peter, Lord depart
from me, I am a sinful man. The heart will be humble, and the presence of God
will be dreadful.

2. The appearance of grace will be powerful, it will set the heart against
every sin. When Moses came from the mount of communion, how zealous was he
against the sin of Idolatry?

3. There will be an answering of the heart, for it is an echoing fellowship.
The Lord says, thou art my people, and they will say, thou art my God: If he
say, seek ye my face, they will answer, thy face Lord will I seek.

4. It will be a heating fellowship. The Disciples said, Did not our hearts
burn within us, while he talked with us? O it will be a heating fellowship, it
will kindle fresh flames of love toward Jesus Christ, it will make your souls
burn toward heaven.

Thirdly, after the duty, you may know whether you have fellowship by these
particulars.

1. It will leave a sweet remembrance behind it, Psalm 42.4. When I remembered
these things, I power out my soul in me; for I had gone with the multitude, I
went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with a
multitude that kept holy day. The soul can never forget those times of
communion that it had with God, nor those bosom embraces, nor those sweet
kisses that it had from the lips of Christ: These mercies are too great to be
forgotten by a soul that does enjoy communion with God.

2. It leaves an instinct in the soul after farther fellowship with God. If a
man fall into sin but once, it leaves a pronenesse in a man to fall into it
again: So 't is in communion with God, if a man enjoy communion with God but
once, it leaves a greater pronenesse and aptitude in the man to look after
communion with God again. A soul that has had communion and fellowship with
Christ, O how does it long after further fellowship with him.

3. It leaves in a man a love to those Ordinances wherein it had communion with
God: O how is the soul in love with those prayers which brought Christ to it,
and in love with that Word wherein Jesus Christ spoke to his soul: How is it
taken with every Ordinance, wherein the influences of Heaven are distilled and
drop upon them.

4. It leaves an impression upon the soul of the holiness of God. The
holiness of God is of a transforming nature, Acts 4.15. They took knowledge of
them that they had been with Jesus. They saw that they had enjoyed communion
with God, why? there were such beams of the Majesty, and the beauty, and the
glory of God left upon them that they that saw them might easily know, that
they had seen God, and had enjoyed communion with him: and it is said of
Stephen, they beheld his face as the face of an Angel, when he was before the
Council.

5. If you have fellowship and communion with God, you will have acquaintance
with God, and familiarity with him, Job 22.21. Acquaint thy self with God,
etc. A soul cannot enjoy communion with a stranger, till he be familiarized
into his acquaintance. Communion speaks the choicest familiarity between
persons If your souls have had communion and fellowship with God, then you are
brought into acquaintance with God.

6. If your souls have enjoyed communion and fellowship with God, you will be
sure to keep God company, and walk with God, let others walk which way they
please. It is said of Enoch, to his praise, that he walked with God; and God
spoke to Abraham, Walk before me, and be thou perfect.

7. A soul that has communion and fellowship with God in Ordinances, is
sensible of all. Gods withdrawments, he knows when God comes in, and when God
goes out at an Ordinance. How many persons are there that never mind either
the accesses or recesses of Christ or the Spirit, when they come in to appear
before God in Ordinances.

8. There will be a sweet agreement between Christ and the soul: can two walk
together, except they be agreed in what path they shall go, and what steps they
shall take? that which was Gods way shall be the souls way, God will not go
one way and let the soul go an other, then it can have no Communion; But when
God and the soul tread both in the same steps, there is a sweet agreement, and
delightful harmony between them.

9. A soul that has Communion with God, highly prizeth the presence of God,
and the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ; If thy presence go not along with us
(says Moses) carry us not from hence: and nothing gives the soul content, if
it has lost Communion, till it be restored again, it can bear any thing better
then a breach in its Communion, no loads lie so heavy upon it as a departed
Savior: how does the soul lament after the Lord, when it cannot find the
Lord? it is restless till it come to lie in it is beloveds bosom.

Lastly, A soul that has fellowship and Communion with God, it cuts off all
other contrary fellowships that are inconsistent with it; cuts off all sinful
and carnal fellowship. They will have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness that have fellowship and communion with the Father of lights.



There are three things that we are to look after to attain to communion with
God.

1. We must have a right path. 2. We must have a staff of strength and power.
3. We must have true ascents and fellowships.
First, we must have a right path, and that is Jesus Christ, there is no
coming to the Father but by the Son, J^h. 14.6. I am the way, etc. There is a
choice way to God, but there are no choice of ways to come to God; pass by
one you pass by all: Heb. 7.19. For the Law made nothing perfect, but the
bringing in of a better hope did: by ^he which we draw nigh unto God: what is
that better hope? It is Jesus Christ: hope depends so much on him for the best
things, that he is called our better hope, by which with assurance we may draw
nigh to God; that is the Apostles encouragement, Heb. 10.19. by the b^ood of
Jesus we have boldness to enter into th holiest.

Secondly, we must have a staff of strength and power, and that is the spirit
of God, Jude 20 Verse, praying in the Holy Ghost. As it is the office of Christ
to interceed with God for us, so it is the office of the spirit to interceed in
us; the prayers that go up to God, come down from God. There are two burdens
that are too heavy for us to bear;

First, the burden of sins.

Secondly, the burden of suits.

Thirdly, we must have true ascents and footsteps, else we shall never come up
to Communion with God.

There are six several ascents and foot steps by which we ascend to the
Throne of God for the enjoyment of communion with him.

1. The sense of self-indigency: we never enjoy communion with the fullness of
God, till we see the Emptiness that is in our selves, a full soul loathes the
honey Come, though it have never so much sweetness in it, the whole never
prizeth the Physicians. Medicines: sense of want draws the Creature down on
Earth, and then leads it up to Heaven.

2. Sense of our own utter inability to supply our own necessities, Psalm.
73.25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee: my flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever. If there be any thing that you expect
satisfaction from besides God, you will never come to communion with him: you
will then look after fellowship with him, when you see all your happiness in
him. The.

3. Footstep to Communion with God is sense of our own unworthiness, that God
should give supplies unto us: when Jacob was brought so nigh into fellowship
and Communion with God, when he was struggling with God, and would not let him
go till he had got a blessing, then he let go all opinion of worth in himself
to receive a blessing, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies. There is no drawing nigh to the most high God without low thoughts of
our selves: the proud look disdainfully upon God, and meet with disdain from
him. The

4. Footstep to Communion is the clear knowledge and full acknowledgement of
the power and sufficiency of God to help us, and to fill us, Heb. 11.6. he
that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him: what is that? It lies in two things.

First, that God needs no Creature.

Secondly, that he is enough to supply the needs of every Creature.

5. Foostep to communion is, to believe that the Lord stands ready to embrace
us in all our commings to him, and to give us all the good that we come for; to
believe that he is ready to supply us in every good we seek from him: we honor
God most when we expect the greatest incomes of mercy from him. He has not
said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me (...) thou, for a vain, void, and empty
nothing. The greatness of God gives him power, and his goodness gives him
will to supply us: therefore we should believe without doubting his readiness
to supply us, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near in full assurance, etc. In what
assurance must we come? Even in this, that we shall be answered in whatsoever
we ask. As Faith must be mingled with every word of precept that Godspeaks to
us, so it must be mingled with every word of prayer that we speak to him, James
1.5, 6. If any lack wisdom, let them ask it of God, that gives to all men
lib rally, and upbraideth not.

6. Footstep of our Communion with God, is boldness in all our approaches to
him: As God opens his heart freely, so we must open our mouths boldly. Holy
boldness is the highest act of Faith, and the nearest step to God; when the
soul is got thus high, it is upon the top of Jacobs Ladder, Heb. 4.16. Let us
come boldly to the Throne of grace, etc. Boldness is a grace, that is most
suitable to the Throne of grace. Let me speak with reverence, we are gotten to
Gods side, when we come with boldness, grace can step no higher; the next
degree of ascent is to be swallowed up in glory. In every Ordinance we have a
vision of God by faith; and in every duty, we should come to God with boldness
and joy. To conclude all: Would you have Communion with God in Ordinances? Then
let me commend to you these five things.

First, there must be a being near to God, before there can be a drawing near
to God; you must labor after Reconciliation, before ever you can enjoy
Communion; while you are enemies, you will be strangers. Till God be brought
near to you, you can never draw near to God: We are first brought near to God
by the blood of Christ, before ever we have Communion with God in Ordinances.

Secondly, He that desires Communion with God in Ordinances, must look upon God
as present, and not as absent from him, without this, we can never enjoy
Communion with him. Rev. 4.6. there is a high Throne, which is nothing else but
a representation of God to his people in Gospell-Ordinances, there they behold
his glory, and enjoy Communion with him. He that desires Communion with God in
Ordinances, must look upon God as present; first, in Majesty; secondly, in
jealousy; thirdly; in authority; fourthly, in purity.

3. If you would have Communion with God in Ordinances, then in every Ordinance
make Communion with God your end. The hypocrisy, or the sincerity of every
man's spirit is mostly seen in his end. There Is a double end that every man
should propose to himself in coming to Ordinances, and when this end is
unproposed, Communion with God is un-enjoyed. First, they should do them as
acts of obedience in reference to Gods command: Secondly, they should use them
as means of Communion, in reference to Gods promise. In every Ordinance you
should make Communion with God your end, and use the Ordinance as a means for
the attainment of that end, thus; I am going to such a duty Lord, and this is
my end, to enjoy thee in it. I am going to pray, and I would have the enjoyment
of God in prayer. This is the end you should propound, when you go about every
Ordinance.

4. Get divine and spiritual apprehensions, if ever you would enjoy Communion;
for according to our apprehensions of God, such will be our enjoyments of him,
and such will be our Communions with him. Some persons have to do with God in
Ordinances, that never think what that God is with whom they have to do. The
only way to raise up our Communion with God, is, to raise up our apprehension
of him: if we know him but a little, we can never enjoy much society and
communion with him.

5. Make use of former experiences, if you would enjoy communion with God: the
experience that men have had of the sweetness of God, will stir up their
hearts to long more and more after communion with God. He that has tasted of
the sweetness of God, cannot sit down satisfied, except he meet with God in
the Ordinance.

FINIS

