LYDIA'S Heart Opened: OR, DIVINE MERCY Magnified in the Conversion of a Sinner
BY THE GOSPEL Being the sum of several SERMONS Preached lately by James Strong,
M. A. and Minister of the Gospel.

Nullum est peccatum, quod si non fecerim tu fecisti; si abstinuerim, tu
jussisti, and quod tibi crediderim, gratiam tu infundisti.

August. Lib. Soliloquiorum, Cap. 15. Jesus the Author and finisher of our
faith,

Heb. 12.2. That no flesh should glory in his presence; But let him that
glories glory in the Lord,

1 Cor. 1. ult. LONDON: Printed by A. M. for Edward Brewster at the Crane in
Pauls-Church-Yard, 1675.

To the Religious Mrs. Mary Speak of Whitelackington, the Author wishes a
confluence of Spiritual blessings in our dear Lord Jesus.
MADAM,
THese few notes following were preached but with an ordinary intention, but
through Divine mercy, both with your self and others found more than ordinary
reception; so oftimes I have observed when there is least of man's strength,
there is most of Gods. Many have been too wise, and too mighty to do Gods work;
but never any too foolish or too weak that have been employed by him. The Word
is that spiritual sword wherewith God wounds the hearts of his enemies; but as
Scanderbeg's Sword could do nothing without Scanderbeg's Arm; no more can this
sword, unless it be weilded by the arm of Omnipotency. The reason why men do
not believe our report, is, because the arm of the Lord is not revealed, Isa.
53.1. Sure I have reason to hope, that that day when we discoursed of Gods
opening Lydia's, there were many other hearts opened also. My Notes which were
desired by your self, and several others, I could not so easily do by
transcribing them as by publishing them. And though Truth need no Apology, yet
I must tell the world, that this had been as like to have slept in darkness, as
many other Exercises have, had not the more than ordinary success wherewith God
attended it in preaching, provoked me to this service.

Ministers are by Christ called spiritual Fishers; a busy employment, full of
toil and danger, since the place of fishing is not a shallow stream, but a
raging and tumultuous sea, in which after we have tired our selves, and spent
our strength, nothing so breaks our hearts as this, that we labor all night
and catch nothing. But Oh if at last we cast out the Net, and enclose a
multitude, it is no wonder we are not able to bear our own joy, being astonished
as Peter, Luke 5.9.

Madam, excuse my boldness in prefixing your Name to this small Manual. And
indeed I had not had confidence, but that I presume you have with that other
Mary sat too long at Christ's feet, to be ashamed of Christ's Truth. What inward
comforts soever God has given you by your constant and diligent attendance on
his Worship, give God the glory; a dram of that sweetness that flows from the
upper springs, will allay the bitterness of those Mara-like waters wherewith
God drenches his dearest Servants. For our part whom God has entrusted with
the Mysteries of the Gospel, though we are on every side oppressed, yet it is
mercy we are not suppressed under all other hardships; we have yet cause to bless
God, who has not taken the Word of Truth utterly out of our mouth. He never
well understood what, the calling of a Minister was, that thinks strange of any
suffering in the service of Christ. It would well become a Ministers mouth what
Pompey once replied to the Mariners, who dissuaded him from sailing in a storm,
when he was employed for bringing provision to Rome, under a strait Siege; It Is
necessary that Rome be relieved, but it is not necessary that we should live.
Sure it is necessary that Christ's sheep be fed, but it is not necessary that we
should live.

The subject of these few Papers is of incomparable weight. The more I know my
own heart and its deceits, the more jealous I am of others: Oh what a wily
enemy do we carry in our own bosoms! How many treacherous reaches has it to
ruin our Immortal souls! Simon Magus seemed zealously to desire the Spirit, and
would have bought it at a great price; but this poisoned his Religion, that his
heart was not right in the sight of God. Ah what faint and frigid services do
we bring before God, while we serve him with our mouths* and honor him with
our lips, but remove our heart far from him? It Is true till the heart be
renewed, God will have none of it; but when once it is renewed, it makes every
thing else to be accepted. It Is the same to all other services that Benjamin
was to his Brethren, and there is no seeing Gods face without it. Oh how sad
were it, if at last we should spoil all our services and sufferings by doing
good duties with bad hearts. For preventing which danger we have cause to bless
God for the labors of many egregious servants of his, who have left the Church
a rich treasury of instructions, into which if by casting my mite I may in any
measure serve the Lord Jesus and his People, it is more than sufficient
recompense to him, who subscribes himself,

Yours, in the service of the Gospel, J. S.

Act. 16.14. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of Purple, of the City
of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened that
she attended to the things which Paul spoke.
AS in the Evangelists we have (...) Christi, the Records of the Acts of
Christ, while he was conversant on the Earth; so in this Book we have (...)
Apostolorum, the Acts of the Apostles. In which History we have a lively
representation of the state of the Church, while she was young and in her
Gradle, her increase and growth; what was the Doctrine of the Apostles, with
what holy boldness they preached Christ in the midst of a thousand troubles and
torments; here we may read what was the fruit of the Gospel, and how it got
growth in the world in despite of all opposition; as also what is the
difference between true Doctrine and false, with what malice and subtilty false
Apostles oppose the true, what rest and breathings God gave his Church, and
never was wanting for her protection and preservation.

This History by the consent of all bears date from the Ascension of Christ
unto the first year of Paul's coming to Rome, which was the space of
twenty-three years, in which we have a clear proof of the exact performance of
all the Promises Christ made his Apostles; as of sending them his Spirit,
induing them with power from on high, the calling of the Gentiles, etc. But not
to carry you back further than is needful, we read ver. 9. of this Chapter,
that Paul by the Ministry of an Angel is called to Macedonia. A Vision appeared
to Paul in the night, there stood a man of Macedonia and prayed him, saying,
Come into Macedonia and help us. Where by the way we may note, that Ministers,
how meanly soever esteemed in the world, are those by whom God helps his
perishing people. This title the Apostle owns, a helper of his peoples joy, 2
Cor. 1.24. Those that cannot help themselves sometimes, can yet help others,
poor themselves, yet make many rich. Luther boldly told the Prince of Saxony
(Scire te velim, etc.) I would have your Highness know you have more need of my
Prayers than I have of your Protection.

Well, now it appears indeed that Christ by his death has pulled down the wall
of partition between Jew and Gentile, and that God has put no difference
between us and them; for what was Macedonia at this time when Paul was called
to preach Christ there, but a mass and mixture of Ignorance and Atheism, as we
and other Gentiles were without God, without Christ, and without hope, Ephesians*
2.12.

Being come to Macedonia he begun to preach at Philippi, ver. 12. and his
encouragements at first were but mean, for his auditory were only a few poor
Women, ver. 13. Gualter on the place excellently notes, how God exercises the
faith and constancy of his Servants. Paulus vocatus per Angelum: putaret
aliquis omnes ei obviam venturas, etc. Paul was called by an Angel, who would
not have thought, that the whole Country would have flocked to hear such a
Preacher? But alas Paul's hopes fail him, not one man came to hear the great
Apostle, only a few poor Women, and among these God singles out one, and marks
her up for mercy, v. 16. A certain woman named Lydia, etc.

We have here then the History of Lydia's Conversion; and here again we have,

1. The Apostle preaching. 2. A weak Woman hearing. 3. The great God blessing
the Sermon.
Or we hare, 1. The person convetted, who is several ways described.

1. By her Name to confirm the truth of the story; Lydia. 2. By her Sex, a
Woman; that Sex by which sin entered into the world. 3. By her employment; a
seller of Purple; a trade (as one observes) serving not so much for necessity
as for pride. 4. By the place of her abode; a stranger, one of Thyatira a City
of Lydia: all these difficulties God breaks thorough; humane improbabilities
are no prejudice to Omnipotency. Though we are by nature like the Prodigal, are
run into a far Country, yet our Heavenly Father can easily bring us home. 5.
She Is described by her Religion, she was (...), a Worshipper of God. A Gentile
she was, yet some dark notions she had of God, which she got either by the
light of nature, or by tradition from her forefathers, or some familiar
acquaintance with the Jews, such another as Cornelius was, Act. 10. But
whatever dark apprehensions she had of God, yet she fell far short of a
Christian, for till the heart be made good ground and purified by Faith, it is
impossible it can bear good fruit,
2ly. We have the means of her Conversion.

1. Paul Preaches. 2. Lydia heard the Word. 3. God makes the Word effectual, he
opens her heart.
It Is this latter part of the verse that I design for the subject of my
discourse, viz. the means of Lydia's Conversion, God opened the heart of Lydia,
etc.

The first thing that I shall note is this:

Doct. 1. That it is Gods work to open man's heart. God may and does use
inferior means to knock, but none can open but himself. Gods word in Scripture
is called a hammer, Jer. 23.29. With this God beats and knocks at the door of
our hearts, but no heart opens, unless it be held in the hand of his own
Spirit; hence is that complaint of the Prophet, Isa. 53.1. Lord, who has
believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed! No
wonder that men believe not the report of the Gospel, whilst God does not put
forth or make bare his own arm.

But for methods sake, in prosecuting the Conclusion, I shall observe this
order.

1. I shall show what is meant by the heart. 2. What it is to open the heart. 3.
I shall prove that it is Gods work to open the heart. 4. Show why God opens the
heart. 5. Answer an Objection. 6. Lastly, come to Application.
1. Then let us enquire what is meant by the heart; and here to pass by the
various significations of the Word in Scripture, by heart here we are to
understand the rational Soul, with the faculties and affections which are
therein; for as the heart is the fountain of Natural life, so it is of
Spiritual. This is the womb wherein Christ is first formed: see Romans 10.10. For
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, sc. Here faith is seated, here
its born and breaths its first breath, Act. 8.37. Philip to the Eunuch, If thou
believe with all thine heart, thou may be baptized. There is no less in
that zealous Prayer of the Apostle for his Ephesians, chap. 3.17. where he is
upon his knees to the God of Heaven, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by
faith.

3. Let us inquire what it is to open the heart. In short, to open the heart is
to convert a soul, or to turn a sinner from the power of darkness unto God. The
word in the Original that is here used, signifies properly to open a door: Now
our hearts in Scripture as they are usually called doors, so by nature they are
all shut, and that under three several locks, and God in our Conversion opens
them all.

There is one lock or bar of ignorance, and this is Gods first work to open our
understanding: by nature we are very darkness it self, Ephesians. 5.8. Like that
poor man born spiritually blind, thick cataracts there are upon all our eyes,
unless God touch them with the hand of his Grace, and say, Ephphata, be opened.
Now as the first creature that God made in the first Creation was Light, Genesis
1. so it is in the new Creation he commands light to shine out of darkness. Oh
the gross and rude notions and apprehensions that we have by nature of the most
fundamental Truths or the Gospel! How hardly are we persuaded that by nature we
are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity? tell a poor sinner
that he is the servant of sin, he will reply as the Jews, he was never in bondage
to any man. How hardly were the Disciples themselves persuaded that Christ's
Kingdom was any other than an earthly Kingdom! With what difficulty were they
brought to believe that their Lord and Master was risen? nor had they at last,
had not Christ himself opened their understandings, that they might understand
the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. O rich mercy! O Divine work! The Preacher tells us,
It Is a good thing for the eyes to see the light; What a mercy is it then when
Christ opens blind eyes to see the wonderful things contained in his Law, Ps.
119.18.

2. The second bar or bolt that by nature is upon our hearts is stubbornness,
this sticks to our wills; man by nature is a way ward and a self-willed
creature, our wills are imbondaged to sin, and though we have a will to destory
our selves, yet we have none to save our selves. Corrupt minds know no other
law but their own lusts; and of these they cry out as Israel of their Idols,
Strangers have we loved, and strangers will we follow, Jer. 2.25. When Christ
comes and knocks at our hearts, corruption presently rises to oppose him, we
will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. But God comes with his key
and opens this door also; he makes us of an unwilling to be a willing people,
Psalm 110.3. This God does not by violence and compulsion, but in a sweet and a
gracious way; he persuades Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27.
God reasons us out of our rebellion, making use of that excellent gift of
reason wherewith he has adorned his creature. And thus debates the case with
him, What reason have you to forsake me who am a fountain of living water, for
broken cisterns that will hold no water? Why will you die O house of Israel?
When all was well between God and you, was it not better with you than now?
Turn you, turn you therefore from your evil ways. Thus God treats man as a
reasonable creature, and takes the hint of his own gifts wherewith he bath
endowed his creature.

3. There Is one lock or bolt more which God opens, and that is the Affections.
Man by mature cannot delight in God nor love him, but when God woes in earnest
he wins our hearts* and engages all our affections to himself; so that we love
nothing but God, or for God: for when once the Will is won, all is won. For the
Will among other perfections of the Soul, has the dominion over all the other
faculties and affections, when therefore it has fixed the desires, or some good
that is proportionable to the wideness of the heart, it uses its liberty for
the choosing of such means as are most proper for the attaining of that good,
and imploys all the inseriour faculties for the execution of these means. In
short, as soon as the Soul becomes ravished with the apprehension of that
infinite goodness that is in God, it is earnestly drawn out to desire union with
him, and participation of his glory. So that now God is the adequate object of
all our love, joy and desire: and that this is no other but Gods work, see
Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
seed to love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, etc.
But this is more directly our next work.

3. The third thing proposed is to prove, that it is Gods work to open man's
heart. He that made the heart can only open it, men may knock, but there is none
can open and enter but God alone. We read in the Acts, when the Exorcists
undertook to cast out unclean spirits, the Devils answered, Jesus we know, and
Paul we know, but who are ye? Act. 19.15. It Is so here, longer than God owns
his messengers, and stands by them, Sin and Satan tell us, God he knows, and
Jesus he knows, but who are you? A lively abridgment of Gods dealing with his
people in this case we have in Cant. 5. where Christ comes and wooes his
Church, and lays her open, ver. 2. but see what silly and sinful excuses she
makes to put off Christ, ver. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on?
But Christ had a purpose to enter, and therefore we read ver. 4. He put in his
hand by the hole of the door, and then her heart was affectioned toward him.
What is this hand or finger of Christ, but the efficacy of his Spirit, whereby
he puts back the boult, or unlocks the door of her heart, before she could come
and entertain him?

Christ first bores and digs thorough the heart, and makes a passage for
himself to enter, and then comes in and takes possession.

The arguments for proof follow, of which the first is this:

Res. 1. Our hearts by nature are all possessed by Satan, and strongly fortified
against God and Christ, whence Christ thus frames his argument; That the strong
man armed keeps the house till a stronger than he comes and bind him, Mat.
12.29. Satan has the possession and will not leave his hold until he be
overpowered; so much that Scripture imports, Col. 1.13. Who has delivered us
from the powers of darkness, (...), has delivered us by force; so strong are
his chains that nothing can break them but the hand of Omnipotency; but Oh here
is the happiness of Christ's redeemed, that stronger is he that is in them,
than he that is in the world! Thanks be to God who has made us conquerors
thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, I Joh. 4.4.

Res. 2. If God come into the heart he enters the right way, he does not climb
up the walls, nor creep in at the windows, such an entrance is not for the
honor of the King of Saints, and therefore he bids us open the everlasting
doors, etc. Psalm. 24. as when a King enters a City, the gates are set wide
open, or thrown off their hinges, to congratulate the Kings coming, and ta show
their joyful entertaining of their lawful Sovereign; such an entrance is
Christ's. God makes no forcible entry, does not break the house, or enter
against his peoples will; no, he sweetly subdues us, as he that opens with a
key: now none but God has a key to open those doors, Rev. 3.7. The Angel to
the Church of Philadelphia, etc. Thus says he that has the key of David,
which opens and no man shuts. It Is wonderful to see the strongest hold,
and most impregnable castle that from outward force is free and invincible; yet
it is but the turning of a key that presently opens it, and gives entrance
without blood or blows; so it is here, God oils the lock, and turns the key, and
the Soul opens.

Res. 3. All heart-work in order to Salvation (if it be effectual) is ascribed
to God. Take a few Instances.

1. God searches the heart, Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart, and try
the reins; he only knows it that made it, even he whose eyes are like a flame
of fire, that pierce to the bottom of hell. The wiles and wickedness, the
depths and deceits of this member are so many, that the Prophet cried out, Who
can know them? Jer. 17.9. Who? none but an Omniscient God, before whose eyes
all things are naked and bare.

2. God opens our hearts to our selves (so much as we know of them savingly),
Deuteronomy. 8.2. God minds Israel of the tedious and tiresom travel of theirs through
the Wilderness forty years, which was to humble them, and prove them, to know
what was in their heart; not that God might know, but as Austin observes,
Tentat ut sciat, id est, ut scire nos faciat: God trys to know (that is) to
make us and others know what is in our hearts. We are by nature as great
strangers to our hearts as Hazael, who when the Prophet told him, He should
burn Isreal's Cities with sire, slay their young men with the sword, dash the
infants against the stones, and rip up the women with child; He abhors these
cruelties, with this strange question, Is thy servant a dog, that I should do
this? 2 King. 8.12. Such barbarous cruelties seemed at this time too odious for
Hazael; but afterward the event proved the Prophecy true, chapter 13. We all as
little know our hearts as Hazael, or the depths of our own corruption.

3. God alone melts and softens the heart. Ezekiel. 11.19. he promises to take
away the heart of stone, and give a heart of flesh. He that turns the flint
into a fountain, and fetches water out of the hard rock, is only able to break
a heart of stone, and to make it a Hadadrimmon, a very valley of tears.

4. He comforts the heart. Hos. 2.14. after he has brought his Church into the
wilderness, then he promises to speak to her heart, such comfortable words as
no man can speak. When all other comforters, like Job's, prove miserable
comforters indeed, then God says, I, even I, am he that comfort thee, etc.
This is Gods propriety, Isa. 57.15. He alone revives the spirit of the
contrite, etc.

5. He new-makes the heart. As there is no mending of a cracked Bell, but it
must be new cast. So it is with a corrupt heart, it must be new made, or there is
nothing done. God begins (as it were) a new Creation when he converts a Soul.
So prays the penitent Psalmist, Psalm. 45.10. Create in me a new heart, O Lord.

Q. 4. The next thing is to show, why God opens the heart.

A. In short: It is to possess it, and to dwell in it. God has two Houses to
dwell in; the upper house is heaven, the lower house is the hearts of
believers. Isa. 57.15. Thus says the high and excellent one that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is the holy one, I dwell in the high and holy place, with
him also that is of an humble spirit. We may here stand and wonder, that he
whose nature is Majesty, whose place is Immensity, whose time is Eternity,
whose life is Sanctity, whose power is Omnipotency, whose work is Mercy, whose
wrath is Justice, and whose throne is Sublimity, should yet delight to dwell in
a poor humble and broken heart, [Trap in loc.]. When Solomon had built that
famous Temple for the worship of God, he admires the infinite condescension of
God, in stooping so low as to have communion with sinful men: 1 King. 8.27. Is
it true indeed (says he) that God will dwell in the earth? Lo, God yet has
more intimate converse with poor believers; he indeed dwells not in Temples
made with hands; no, the hearts of his people are Temples of the Holy Ghost,
and of these he says indeed, here will I dwell for ever.

Obj. There is one objection against this conclusion, and it is this: It seems
that man has power to open his own heart; why else does Christ Jesus bid the
Church to open? in Cant. 5.2 Open to me my sister, etc. And in Rev. 3.20. If
any man open, I will enter.

Ans. I shall answer in the words of Peter Martyr, Dicimur aperire quatenus id
Deus in nobis facit, nam is facit ut aperiamus. We are said to open in that God
makes us to open; for he works all our works for us, and crowns them in us.
Certum est nos facere quod facimus, sed Deus facit ut faciamus.

It Is true, man must not be idle but active in this great work (as afterward
we shall show) but God evermore works (somewhat in the Soul, and leaves some
impression by his Spirit in the heart, which stirs up an endeavor to seek
after him, and to open to him. In that 5th of Cant. the Church confesses
Christ's fingers were first in the door, before her heart was affectioned toward
him. Thus no man can come to Christ, unless the Father draw him.

Use 1. And is it thus, that it is Gods work to open man's heart? It teaches
then to abhor the execrable and blasphemous invention of Free Will, whereby the
Arminian brood take the Crown from Gods head, and set it on the Creatures;
robbing God of the glory of his own grace, who is both Alpha and Omega, the
Author and Finisher of the work of grace in his redeemed. Neither will it help
them to grant only that God has a hand in renewing us as a Moral Agent, by
propounding only the goodness of Christ* and Grace, and persuading us only by
rational Arguments to embrace it; for a Moral Agent works no real effect, but
God works something in us: the Church found some mirrh which Christ left behind
him dropping from his fingers, before she opened to her beloved, Cant. 5.5. The
Apostle therefore resolves all into the mighty power of God, even that power
whereby he railed his Son Christ from the grave: Ephesians. 1.20: where he prays,
that his Ephesians may know what the exceeding greatness of his power is toward
them that believe, according to the working of his mighty power which he
wrought in Christ when he raised him up from the grave. Now did God only
persuade Christ to rise out of the grave? no, but he put forth his almighty
power for the effecting thereof: for could the Soul of Christ, which for a
while was separated from his body, be brought again to that body but by the
Almighty power of God? well, the same power is exerted in raising a Soul dead
in sin to the life of Grace that was exerted in raising Christ Jesus himself
from the grave. The case may be thus exemplified, for as the Marigold opens her
leaves to the Sun, yet the Sun first shines on it, and warms, it with its
beams; it is so with us, we open willingly our hearts to God, but God first
warms our hearts with the sunbeams of his Grace; for without him we can do
nothing.

Use 2. It serves for ever to humble us, to consider that natural wretchedness
wherein we were born. The doors of our hearts are all shut by nature against
God and Christ, fenced and fortified with strong corruptions attd sinful
resolutions to resist God and his dear Son. We read Joh. 20.19. When Christ
first appeared to his Disciples, after his Resurrection, he came when the doors
were shut. Such is our case when first he comes to visit and awaken poor lost
Sinners, there is no room nor entrance for him till he make way for himself, by
his own Almighty power. This for ever should abase us in our greatest
seize of Grace, to consider and remember what we were by nature. It Is
storied of Willigis a poor man's son, the son of a Wheeler, afterward Bishop of
Mentz, when he was advanced to the honor of that Bishopric, to suppress that
pride which the greatness of his place exposed him to, that he caused several
Wheels to be hung up about his Chamber, with this inscription, Memento Willigis
unde eras: Remember Willigis from whence thou art. Oh that we could look back
to the rock from whence we were hewnl etc. we should find that we are but the
sinful slime of rebellious Parents loins. Thus God pricks that swelling tumor
of pride in Israel to which she was subject by her advancement, and bids her
remember that a poor Syrian ready to perish was her father, Deuteronomy. 26.5.
Whatever honors or excellencies we have received by Christ; yet the Apostle
tells us it is our duty, to remember that by nature we were children of wrath
even as others, Ephesians. 2.3. Here Is a holy art to make the elder brother
Corruption to serve the younger Grace; a serious remembrance of our natural
vileness may keep the soul humble in our greatest seize.

Use 3. It informs us of the piercing power of Gods Word, however weak and
contemptible in the eyes of carnal reason. Its sound is heard in the ear, but
its force is felt in the heart. Paul preaches and Felix trembles; Peter's Sermon
pricked the Jews to the heart, Act. 2.37. This was the fruit of Christ's dealing
with his Church, Cant. 5.4. as soon as she felt his hand in the hole of the
door, her very heart was affectioned toward him; justly therefore it is called a
sharp two-edged sword, etc. Heb. 4.12. Elisha had his sword as well as Jehu.
And God hews his enemies by his Prophets, and slays them by the words of their
mouth. This sword is like Readiness it, never returns empty; if it does not
destroy our sins, it will destroy our souls.

Use 4. It cautions us against a mistake. When we hear that it is Gods work to
open man's heart, we are apt to conclude that God expect nothing from us. Take
we heed we do not thus abuse the grace of the Gospel, God delights to improve
his own gifts, he has endowed man with the gift of Reason, and saves him as a
Reasonable Creature. And therefore though all means of Grace have their virtue
and efficacy from God, and he alone is the principal cause and author of our
Salvation. Yet God expects when he persuades that we consent, when he wooes by
his Word that we yield, lest striving with our Maker, we provoke him to deal
with us as he did with the old World, when for their contumacy and impenitency
he resolved, that his Spirit should no longer strive with man, Genesis 6.3.

Use 5. The next Use therefore shall be of Counsel (or rather Command) in the
name of the great God of Heaven and Earth, that when God by his Word calls to
us from Heaven, and bids us open, that with a holy readiness we open those
everlasting doors. To provoke you to which duty I shall add these
Considerations.

Arg. 1. So long as our hearts are shut against God, we our selves are shut out
of all comfortable communion with God. God delights in none but where he is
entertained: mark that Scripture, Rev. 3.20. If any man hear my voice and open
the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him. I Will feast that man with my
Presence, my Grace, my Comforts; this man only shall know indeed what is that
plenty, rarity and variety which is in that feast of fat things that I have
made in my holy mountain. To such I will make known my self; I Will take them
into my embraces, feed and feast them with my Promises, they shall see my face
and know by experience what it is to have fellowship with the Father, and with
his Son. Now pray consider, could you be content to live a few years in the
World, and to hear only what a blessed thing it is to enjoy the love of God,
and the light of his Countenance, the sweet and soul-ravishing Comforts of his
spirit, and yet to live and die and go to your graves and never know nor taste
any of this spiritual sweetness? this must be your case if your hearts be not
opened.

Arg. 2. Consider that God yet offers to open your hearts, though we perhaps
have stopped our ears thousands of times, yet he once more stands at the door and
knocks, and cries, open, open. And I make my appeal to your own Consciences (if
there be any life or tenderness in them) whether you find not God striving to
come in, while by the hammer of his Word he knocks and begs you by his
Messenger to give your hearts to him. Is not God at this instant convincing
some that he is a lost perishing creature in himself? is he not showing you the
incomparable excellency of Christ, and his al-sufficiency to save Sinners? Oh
how think you to escape if you neglect so great Salvation! you have heard of
that fearful resolution of God against the impenitent old World, when by the
preaching of Noah a hundred years together God had persuaded them to repent,
yet all to no purpose? what says God at last? My spirit shall not always strive
with man. Oh when God strives with us in mercy, and we strive with God by
impenitency it is sad! Woe to him that thus strives with his maker.

Well, whatsoever was written aforetime was written for our instruction. If we
will not take example from the old world that is past, be sure we shall make
example to the new World that is to come, Isa. 45.9.

Arg. 3. Consider to whom it is we are to open, why it is to Christ, Open to me
my sister, etc. an Emphatick word, and as Ezekiel's Wheels were full of eyes,
so is this word full of motives: To me that am thy Savior, thy King, thy
Priest, thy Prophet, thy Bridegroom, thy Beloved, thy Brother; Ah who would not
open to such a one? As Laban said to Abraham's servant, Come in thou blessed of
the Lord, why stand thou without? Genesis 24.31. so should we say when he comes
to our door; yea, as Lot pressed the two Angels greatly when they seemed
strange, and overcame them with his importunity, that they came in, Genesis 19.3.
so should we.

Arg. 4. Consider Gods end in opening of the heart, it is to dwell there; God
dwells not in Temples made with hands, but as he has chosen Heaven for his
glorious Presence, so he has chosen the heart for his gracious Presence, Isa.
57.16. Neither will God come in empty, he brings Salvation and all other
blessings with him; thus Christ told Zacheus, Luke 19.9. This day is salvation
come to thy house. There Is nothing lost by entertaining this guest, where he
comes his reward is with him; if Obed Edom's house were blessed for
entertaining Gods Ark, how blessed is that heart that opens and entertains God
himself?

2. But some may object that Believers have opened already, and that Christ
dwells in them by faith, and since they have good evidences that they are such,
what need more ado for them?

A. There are diverse degrees and measures of Grace whereby Christ dwells in his
Elect; and though we have already opened to him, yet it is our duty to open
wider still. Our case is like that of the blind-man whom Christ cured in the
Gospel, who after the first touch saw men as trees walking; but Christ touches
his eyes again, and then he saw plainly, Mar. 8.25. It Is just so with the best
of Gods Saints. Alas we have but a little of the Power and Spirit of Christ at
our first acquaintance with him, and therefore we must evermore widen our
hearts, and make more room to entertain him.

Arg. 5. Consider the many engagements God has laid upon us to open our hearts
to him.

God has opened his heart to us, he has not locked up the Mysteries of the
Gospel in secrecy? No, as we read of Sampson for the love he bore to Delilah
he told her all his heart; so has God to us, he has kept nothing from us that
may make us wise to Salvation. The Apostle tells the Church of Ephesus, That he
had showed them all the counsel of God, Act. 20.27. And that the will of God
was never revealed to other ages as now it is revealed to us, Ephesians. 3.5.

2. God has opened Heaven to us, that for sin was shut against all Adams
posterity: for as Adam sinning was driven out of an Earthly Paradise, so was he
also out of the Heavenly Paradise; and Christ came from Heaven, and suffered
death for us that he might open a way for us again into Heaven, therefore he is
called our forerunner, Heb. 6.20. Whither our forerunner is entered in for us.
The Holy of Holies in the Sanctuary was a type of Heaven, this holy place was
severed or parted from the body of the Sanctuary by a veil: at Christ's death we
read this veil rent in twain, Mat. 17.51. hereby showing us, that Christ by his
death has made an open way for us into the Holy of Holies in Heaven; God has
paved us a way in the blood of his Son, and now we may come with boldness.

3. God opens his ears to our prayers, Isa. 37.17. his eyes to distresses,
Exodus 3.7. I have surely seen the affliction of my people Israel, which are in
Egypt, and have heard their cry, etc. He hears his peoples prayers, and their
enemies threats; he hears the railing of Rabshekah, the cursing of Shimei, and
the least injuries that are plotted against the just, shall not we open our
heart to him?

4. He has opened hell and the grave for us: We read when Christ suffered, at
the Resurrection many dead bodies of the Saints which slept arose with him,
Mat. 27.53. to assure us that he has the keys of hell and of death, and that
he will not leave the dust of his Saints for ever under the power of death; No,
I know thou will not leave my soul in the grave, etc. Psalm. 16. The grave
(until Christ's Resurrection) was an impregnable hold, and from thence had been
no redemption, had not Christ opened it for our deliverance.

5. God opens his hand to us daily in the gifts of his bounty, God comes laden
with plenty of all good things. He opens his hand and fills every living
thing with goodness; whatever wants the poor creature sustains God alone
supplys them all. Oh shall God open so much to us, and shall we not open our
hearts to him? it would be horrid ingratitude, should we thus requite the Lord.

The duty though most reasonable yet it is difficult, these Directions improved
may make it easy.

Direct. 1. Be faithful and diligent in searching into the state of your
hearts, know that there are a thousand deceits that lodge and lurk in the hearts
of the sons of men. The Psalmist tells us, That the ungodly boasts of his
hearts desire. When Solomon assures us, That the soul of the wicked desires
evil, Prove. 21.10. O let not your treacherous hearts deceive you, pose your
selves with such serious Questions as these: Heart what is thy case? how is it
with thee, tell me faithfully, whether thou art the old heart, or the new?
whose Image do thou bear, Christ's or Satan's? Art thou a dead heart, or a
living? have thou been ever new-made or no? have thou new affections, new
motions and desires or no? tell me, has Christ taken possession of thee or
not? These would be close Questions if our hearts were held closly to answer
them. Know you not (says the Apostle) that Christ is in you except you are
reprobates?

2. If you find not Christ within you, mourn over your empty hearts: What a
lamentation did Mary make when she found the grave empty, when she sought
Christ, Ah they have taken away my Lord, etc. Much more reason have we to break
our hearts with sorrow, if upon a serious search we find not Christ in our
heart: Oh cry out, Sin and Satan have robbed me of my dearest Savior, no
tokens or footsteps of Christ to be seen in me.

3. Seek Christ diligently, imitate the Church in a like case, who sought
Christ Jesus at home and abroad; by night upon her bed she sought him whom her
soul loved, arose and went about the City and enquires of the Watchmen, and all
to find her Beloved, Cant. 1.5.

4. Be gleaning in Gods field; the Ordinances of God are a spiritual harness,
where you may fill your empty sacks, as Joseph did his Brethrens. Ruth gleaned
in Boaz's field among the sheaves and reapers, and so returned laden. Christ's
Ordinances are like Isreal's Camp, where the Heavenly Manna falls. If your souls
are sick of love to Christ, here he is present to refresh you with flagons of
spiritual liquor far better than wine. Take then Christ's own counsel, get forth
by the footsteps of the flock, and feed your kids beside the shepherds tents,
Cant. 1.8. The Prophet calls the Word a hammer; come under this hammer and
there is hope of opening. Again, the word is Christ's voice, and it is worth our
observation, that the Church first cried out, It is the voice of my Beloved
that knocks, before she opened, Cant. 5.2.

5. Affect your hearts with the incomparable excellencies of Christ. We are all
in a deep sleep by nature, and who will rise and open to one whom he does not
know? Observe when Christ solicited his Church, she had never stirred out of
that deep slumber she was in, and opened to him, had she not been thoroughly
convinced of those rare endowments that were in him; witness that rare
description she makes of him from the 10. v. to the end of that Cant. 5. the
daughters of Jerusalem wondered she troubled her self so much about her
Beloved, to whom she replys, Do you wonder; my beloved is white and ruddy, and
the chiefest among ten thousand, etc.

6. Labor for Faith as for Heaven it self; as Faith empties the heart of sin,
so it opens the heart to Christ: unbelief bolts the door against him, but Faith
unlocks it. Christ could not do many mighty works in Nazareth because of their
unbelief; away then with all sinful fears. Though we have many misgivings
within us, yet lament them with bitterness and cry out I believe, Lord help my
unbelief. Mind that blessed promise, Mat. 2l.22. Whatsoever you ask believing,
it shall be given you.

7. Lastly, get your hearts warmed with the grace of Love; though they are cold
by nature, yet beg a spark of this Heavenly fire from Heaven. Love is of a
dilating and widening nature it makes room in the heart for Christ, read Joh.
14.23. If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will come to
him, and we will dwell with him. Can we possibly bolt the door, and keep out
him whom we love? no, the love of God will constrain us to let him in, and
entertain him, 2 Cor. 5.14. The word there used signifies to streighten, or to
keep in, but that is from other things as from sin, and the world, that so the
soul may be the more free for God: Oh then that the measure of our love to
Christ might be beyond measure! this one rule, if practiced, would do the work
for all, God never parts from that soul where there is but love to entertain
him.

Use 6. Lastly, its matter of unspeakable comfort to as many as (with Lydia)
have their hearts opened; Oh what heavenly peace and security, what rivers of
spiritual pleasure and joy should overflow our hearts as soon as God has
opened them! Has God opened thy heart? know that God has brought Heaven into
thy heart now, and the same God will bring thee into Heaven shortly. When
Lydia's heart was opened, how was her joy increased, and her affections
enlarged; we read she sought acquaintance with the Apostles, she could no
longer be a stranger to them who had been the instruments of her Conversion,
but besought them earnestly, saying, If you have judged me faithful to the
Lord, come into my house and abide there, and she constrained us. Her heart
could not hold her comfort but must now impart some of it to them, from whom
she had received it. If any of us have shared with Lydia in the Grace of the
Gospel, make a little room more in these narrow hearts of yours to entertain
some part of her comforts also.

Q. You will tell me you would willingly, but you doubt whether your heart be
opened or no?

A. For your resolution, you may know that your heart is opened by God. If you
find your love, and your affections carried out to God above all things, in
Ezekiel. 44.2. where the Prophet describes the New Jerusalem. We read the Lord
brought him to the Eastgate of the Sanctuary, and said unto him, This gate
shall be shut, and shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it,
because the Lord God of Israel has entered by it. This gate is a figure of the
heart, which being once opened to God must be opened to nothing else. We may
know then that our heart is opened to God, when it is shut to all vanities in
the world, God will have all the heart or none, nothing must share with him; a
heart possessed by God loves nothing but God or for God.

2. If our heart be opened to God, it will cast out all sin; as when the graves
were opened at Christ's death, we read they sent forth their dead, the dead
bodies arose, as soon as the graves were opened; so 'twill be in a soul that is
opened to Christ, it will cast out all dead works, works of sin and darkness:
If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin.

3. A heart opened to Christ will send forth all sorts of spiritual Graces,
duties and performances: as it is with the Earth while it lies bound up and
frozen in the Winter, it is barren and brings forth nothing; but as soon as the
spring warms it with the Sun, and opens it, it sends forth all sweet herbs and
flowers; even thus we may know that Christ is within us by the Graces and
gracious performances that are without. Christ is a living root, a root that
never ceases, but like Aaron's rod is always blooming and blossoming.

4. Where the heart is opened to Christ all is opened, all the parts and powers
of the whole man God; is so entertained into one part, that he is kept out of
none, it is all suitable where God has opened the heart. A taste you may have
in these Particulars.

1. There Is an open ear to hear the Word of God, till God has taken possession
of the heart, we are like the deaf Adder that stop our ears to the voice of
Gods sweet charmers, Isa. 29.18. In that day shall the deaf hear the words of
this Book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and darkness.
(1) The blind and deaf Gentiles, shall in the days of the Gospel be both
enlightened and enlivened with saving knowledge: whenever God commands men to
return from iniquity, he opens their ears to discipline, Job 36.10. Gods Word
comes with authority and makes its own way to make room for Christ when once he
has taken hold of the heart.

2. There Is an open eye to see the will and mind of God; we are all by nature
as well blind as deaf in things that are spiritual, but God makes the eyes of
the blind to see as well as the ears of the deaf to hear, Isa. 35.5. (that is)
God so far enlightens our understanddings, that the mysteries of Salvation are
revealed and made clear to us. Gods Word comes now with a Commission, when it
goes forth it gives light and understanding to the simple. Gods redeemed shall
never miscarry through ignorance. They have an unction from the holy one and
know all things, 1 Job. 2.20. (1) Whatsoever is necessary to Salvation; in
lesser errors Believers may be entangled, but in Fundamentals they shall never.
If any man be a doer of Gods will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be
of God, Job. 7.17.

3. There Is an open hand to do the work of God, such whose hearts God has
opened are not only hearers of the Word but doers also; such a one shows his
Faith by his Works, you may see what such a one is within by what he is
without. Like. Noah's Ark he is pitched within and without, there is grace within
and grace without, he shows by a good conversation his works in meekness and
wisdom, Jam. 3.13.

4. Lastly, where God has opened the heart, there is also an open mouth to
praise God. This is added to complete the work, Isa. 35.6. God promises to make
the tongue of the dumb to sing. Such souls whom God has visited in mercy are
not able to conceal either Gods mercies or their own comforts; no, they must
speak of the loving kindness of God, though it be before Kings. They must bear
a part with Zachary, though once dumb yet as soon as his tongue was loosed
cried out, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel who has visited and redeemed his
people, Luke 1.68.

And so much of the Author of Lydia's Conversion, or that great work of God in
opening Lydia's heart; next let us consider the means whereby'twas wrought, she
attended to the things which Paul spoke.

What this attention of Lydia was, is worth inquiry, (...). The word here
translated attention, signifies properly to give heed, (...), scil. animum, to
apply the heart or mind to a thing.

In the New Testament, the word is used in a double relation: 1st. To things
hurtful. 2ly. To things usefal.


1. To things hurtful, in Mat. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets, (...), etc. The
same word that is used here (that is) take heed that you avoid them, lest you
are ensnared by them.

2. The word is used in relation to things useful, as in Act. 8.6. The people
gave heed to the things that Philip spoke, (...), etc. the same word that is
used here; so Lydia attended or gave heed, or applied her heart to the things
spoken by Paul.

This heedful hearing is opposed to all manner of slighting, opposing, or
turning away our ears from hearing the Word: such hearers we read of Acts
13.45. The Jews filled with envy spoke against the things spoken by Paul,
contradicting and railing on them. And such were those bidden guests that were
invited to the Wedding, that made light of it, Mat. 22.4, 5. Well then, there
was both an attention of the ear, and an intention of the mind and heart in
this hearing of Lydia.

And this being the sense, it offers us these three Conclusions.

D. 1. That the preaching of the Word is the ordinary means of converting souls.

D. 2. That a serious firm and fixed applying our hearts and minds to the Word
of God is required by God of them that hear it.

D. 3. That such an attention can never be given to the Word preached but by a
special work of Grace. Lydia might have heard Paul preach, but she had never
heard them if God had not first opened her heart.

D. 1. That the preaching of the Word is the ordinary means of converting
Souls. It Is true the power of God is unlimited, and not bound to means; God
could have taught the Eunuch without Philip, he could have converted Paul
without Ananias, instructed Cornelius without Peter, and have opened Lydia's
heart without Paul. But the Ministry of the Word is that means which the wisdom
of God has chosen and sanctified for this great work. This is the sum of the
Apostles Climax, Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him on whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard, and
how shall they hear without a Preacher? And at last determines the Question
with this conclusion, That faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God.

To prevent any curious questions, why it is this: The Apostle resolved all into
the good pleasure of God, 1 Cor. 1.21. For seeing the world by wisdom knew not
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that do
believe.

Q. But some may wonder how so weak a means should work so great effects?

A. All is from the Spirit of Christ; for it is the office of Christ not only to
open the will of his Father, and to reveal the mysteries of Salvation (which he
does by his Prophetical Office) but also to be present when the Word is
preached, and by his Spirit to teach the heart inwardly what it is taught
outwardly by the Word. And now also he exercises his Kingly Office in making
his enemies become his subjects; here he lays us at his feet, whilst his Word
like a sword pierces our hearts, making us throw down our arms, those weapons
of sin wherewith we have opposed him; here Christ gets a glorious, and yet an
easy conquest; for against his power there is none stands. As Soon as they hear
they shall obey, Psalm. 18.44. Now that the efficacy of the Word depends on the
operation of the Spirit is evident from Act. 2. before those Converts were
pricked at the heart, etc. we read that the Spirit fell on them like a mighty
rushing wind, v. 2. cease then to wonder when we see such mighty effects
wrought by the Gospel, since it is not we that speak but the Spirit of our Father
which speaks in us, Mat. 10.20.

Use 1. Woe then to all opposers and contemners of Preaching and Preachers. Alas
who are those that are now accounted the troublers of Israel but such as are
guilty of Elijah's crime, that indeed are zealous for the Lord God of host,
etc. who deny themselves to oppose that torrent of sin and corruption that like
another deluge is like to overrun the Nation, and for this they must be fed
with Michajah's hard Commons even with bread and water of affliction.

Another generation of profane and profligate Professors swarm every where in
the World, who nauseate this Heavenly Manna, and contemn sound Doctrine,
because it is common. Ah we live in a Gospel-glutted-Age wherein wickedness and
wantonness are the best requital wherewith we requite the Lord for his choicest
Mercies. Thus with Jeshurun we are grown fat and kick.

Oh that a people so choicely taught and instructed from Heaven should at last
scorn the counsels of their Heavenly Father! That our Religion should be lost
in Atheism, and that the preaching of Christ crucified should become a reproach
among us. There is one Scripture that I would fasten on your thoughts to
prevent this sin in some, which deserves to be repented in others, so Heb. 2.2,
3. If the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast and every Transgression deserved a
just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation? Our guilt and ingratitude increases with our injoymeats: view the
comparison in a few particulars.

1. We have a more excellent Ministry than they under the Law, Angels were
Ministers of the Law, but Christ of the Gospel; now the threatenings of Angels,
if despised, were severely punished; and shall not the threatenings of the Son
of God? For that God who in former Ages spoke unto us by his Prophets, has in
these last times spoken to us by his own Son, Heb. 1.2. Well, let us hear
Christ arguing himself from this very Topic. The Queen of the South shall rise
in judgment against the men of this generation, for she came from the uttermost
parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater than
Solomon is here.

And again, the men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment, etc. Mat. 12.41, 42. Oh
what will be our case, who set not so high a price on Christ as that Queen did
on Solomon! when Christ and his Gospel come home to our door and beg
entertainment: It Is the Language of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.20. We pray you in
Christ's stead that you be reconciled to God.

2. The very matter of preaching excels that which was of old, for such
mysteries are revealed by the Gospel, as in other Ages were not known, Ephesians.
3.5. The Law made nothing perfect but the bringing in a better hope did, Heb.
4.7. in this respect the Gospel is rather called Salvation than the Law; How
shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?

3. The manner of revealing the Gospel is far more clear and effectual, the
Types, Prophesies, and Promises under the Law, were dark and obscure; now Moses
face is unveiled, and Salvation by Christ clearly revealed; so that a clearer
Manifestation can never be expected while the World lasts. Those dark and
enigmatical Mediums through which the Jews looked to see a Savior, are now
taken away, and we behold as in a glass the glory of God etc. 2 Cor. 3.18, 19.

4. The Ratification of the Gospel was stronger: Their's indeed was Thunder and
Lightning, Burning and Blackness, with other great signs to confirm it is
Authority, Exodus 16.19. But yet the Gospel was confirmed by more and greater
miracles. One instance shall be instead of many, for never was there any that
restored sight to the blind (at least by his own Power,) but only Christ: see
the Testimony of the blind man cured, Joh. 9.32. Since the World began was it
not heard, that any one opened the eye of one that was born blind. Nay, Christ
cured Souls as well as Bodies; this is evident by that gracious pardon which he
gave to him that was cured of the Palsy, Mat. 9.2. Be of good cheer, thy sins
be forgiven thee: Oh yet that that Christ whom we preach should be a stone of
stumbling and a rock of Offense to disobedient and unbelieving ones! who yet to
them which believe is the only Foundation, that rock of Ages, the wisdom of God
and the Power of God! how many have their faces tanned and sullied only under
the bright beams of the Sun of Righteousness; who was given as to enlighten
every one that comes into the World?

Secondly, let us all learn our duty, which we shall comprize in these two
things.

1. To prize the Word preached, and acknowledge it to be that Manna upon which
God intends to keep us, while (with Israel) we are in the wilderness till we
come to that Celestial Canaan. We read in Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, etc. He when he
ascended, gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and Teachers; etc. For the repairing of the Saints, for the Work of
the Ministry, till we all meet in a perfect man, etc. Two circumstances are
here especially considerable.

1. When Christ gave us this divine gift of preaching the Gospel: 'Twas when he
ascended to Heaven, as Kings when they are crowned give rich gifts to their
favorites; So did Christ, when he was crowned in Heaven, he gave this rich
invaluable gift to the Sons of men.

2. Let us consider why he gave it, 'twas for the repairing of the Saints; The
Gospel was never intended to save all, but the Saints only: As many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed. Now even the Saints have their Spiritual
ruins and decays; their minds are clouded with darkness; their Wills are
crooked, and their Affections unsatisfied. These are the ruins which God
repairs by the Gospel, when he renews us by Grace, and restores his own Image
in us; submit we then to the ordinance of the great God of Heaven. Though God
create man at first without the help of Angels, yet he does not recreate or
renew his Image in us, without the Ministry of men, Act. 26.18. we read Paul
was sent by preaching to open blind eyes, that they might turn from darkness
unto light, and from the Power of Satan unto God.

2. Improve the preaching of the Gospel; and know that as the body cannot live
without Bread, no more can the Soul without the Word; obey it in all things, as
well it is precepts as it is promises: 'twas given to be a directory to our
lives, a light to our minds, life to our Souls. Oh buy the truth and never sell
it, study to be cast into a Gospel-mould! Oh that the Word preached to you
might be a Word implanted in you! that we could say of you all, as Paul of his
Romans, So we preach and so you believe. This would fill our hearts with
comfort, and make us confess as he of his Thessalonians; Though we preach the
Gospel in much affliction, yet with much joy. O give us a share in his
glorying, that we may say, Thanks be to God that you were once the Servants of
sin, but you have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine that was
delivered to you. But we come to the next Conclusion.

Doct. 2. That a serious firm and fixed applying our hearts and minds to the
Word preached, is required by God of all that hear it; or shorter, thus, It Is
the attention of the heart to the Word of God that is only saving. This is that
duty which is so often pressed and inculcated in the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 6.6. And
these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart; and again,
Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your hearts to all the Words which I testify against you, set
your hearts; that is says A Lap. mentem apponite et attendite, apply your
heart and hear, etc. bodily Service is but the body of our Service, it is the
Service of the Soul, that is the Soul of our Service. This was Lydia's
attention, which has made her name smell like a sweet perfume in Scripture, a
rare compound which consists of these several ingredients.

1.This saving attention to the Word implies a serious consideration of the
things spoken, 2 Timothy 2.7. Consider what I say, etc. It Is a rule, litterae
Principum ter legendae: Kings letters ought to be read threetimes-over. Gods
Messages must not be slighted, for his Word is no vain Word, as many did by the
Angels Messages. It Is said, having heard the Messages, she pondered all these
things in her heart, etc. So should we, Gods Word must not be born and die the
same hour; no, it must be a living and an abiding Word: God spoke once, but the
Psalmist heard it twice, Psalm. 67.11. Physic can never work, nor meat nourish
unless it abides sometime in the body, nor can the Word which is both meat and
medicine to our Souls.

2. The next thing required to this saving attention is a right understanding
of the Word: these two Christ joins together, Mat. 15.10. hear and understand.
It Is the mind and meaning of God that we must chiefly attend; Christ's own
disciples oftimes took offense at his Words, when upon better information they
found them to be Words of truth and life. This was the sad effect of that
precious doctrine, Joh. 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drinks his blood, you have no life in you. Carnal reason knew not how to
understand this Mystery, and therefore presently suggests this incredulous
question, how can this man give us his flesh to eat: and what a sad effect
followed on this mistake, we read v. 66. From that time, many of his disciples
went back, and walked no more with Jesus.

3. There must be a faithful retaining or remembrance of it; our memories are
false and slippery like hour-glasses, no sooner filled at one end, but they run
out at the other; riven, and chinky vessels that leake out the Water of life,
strive we all we can to make them Treasuries of Divine Truth, and lay up the
Word of God in them as in a storehouse: Thy word have I hid in my heart, (says
the Psalmist) that I might not sin against thee. To promote this Work we should
do as a man that has hid a treasure, he goes often and sees whether it be
safe; so should we often turn in upon our memories, and ask them as Christ the
disciples, do you not remember the five Loaves, etc. and the rather because we
have a dangerous and subtle enemy, who watches where we keep our treasures,
and unless we watch it narrowly will steal it from us.

4. We must entertain it with love, 2 These. 2.10. Because they received not the
truth in the Love thereof, therefore God shall give them up to suffer strong
delusions; want of Love to the Word is the first step to Apostasy. See a Soul
seasoned with this Grace of Love, in Jeremy, Chap. 15.16. Thy words were found
and I did eat them, and they were unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart.
God makes his appear to the Conscience of the experienced Christian, Mic. 2.7.
Are not my words good to him that walks uprightly? Yes Lord, so good that the
Soul that tastes and digests them, confesses they are sweeter than honey or the
honeycomb. If the mysteries of the Gospel are so sweet and sacred, that the
Angels themselves desire to pry into them, how dearly then should dust and
ashes love them! Oh that we could say as the Psalmist; How do I love thy Law?
all the day long is my study in it.

5. The Word must be heard with Faith; every hearer is not a profitable hearer.
As hearing distinguishes Professors from the Profane, so believing
distinguishes the upright from hypocrites. Heb. 4.2. The word preached did not
profit them that heard it, because it was not mixed with faith: and again, It Is
the Power of God to salvation, but to them that do believe, Romans 1.16. Though
it be true, that without the Word there can be no Faith, ( for Faith comes by
hearing); yet withal without Faith the Word has no power. As the Brazen
Serpent was of no use to them that did not look on it; so it is in this case,
Look therefore unto me and be you saved: when we come to hear, we should all
think that we hear God speaking to us as he did to Ezekiel, Son of man eat that
thou find, Ezekiel. 3.1. Faith is the life of the Soul: As there heat in a
dead-mans mouth never does good, no more does the Word in a faithless hearer.
It Is Faith that makes every part thereof powerful and effectual, its precepts
to direct us, its threatenings to terrify us, its promises to comfort us. Take
but one instance in Jonah, 3.5. we read that the men of Nineveh believed God,
(1) upon hearing Jonah his sermon, and then they proclaimed a fast and put on
sackcloth. Faith is that living womb into which when the seed of the Word
falls, it becomes a fruitful mother of all spiritual Graces.

6. Lastly, to a saving attention there is required a universal obedience, and
a hearty resignation of our selves. This was the Apostles Crown and Joy, that
his Romans had obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine that they had
received, Romans 6.17. and this is Gods end in giving you his Word, that it
should bring every thought into the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. We should
take heed of hearing with uncircumcised ears and stubborn hearts. The sense of
Gods mercy in revealing his Will, and the Conscience of our duty to obey it,
should make us so ready to every thing that he commands, that a little child
should lead us, Isa. 11.6.

Use 1. Hence first is condemned that visible listlessness and supine
negligence that many discover in this duty of hearing. Can we choose but tremble
to hear that curse that is threatened against every one that does Gods work
negligently, Isa. 48.10. and yet alas, how many of us hear as if we did not
hear, and mind no more the word of life, than if we were hearing art Idle tale!
The Church has ever been pestered with such professors. God complains of them,
Ezekiel. 33.32. Son of man, this People come and sit before thee, as my People use
to do, etc. Oh hear once more and tremble at that dreadful sentence which
Christ breathed against incredulous and refractory hearers, in Joh. 12.48. He
that refuses me and hears not my words, has one that judges, even the word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him. Sure it will be a double damnation
to be condemned by the Gospel, yet thus it will be, if it be not the savior of
life to life, it will be the Savior of death to death. And what greater equity
than this do not such judge themselves unworthy everlasting life, that leave
their hearts behind them when they come to hear it? does not that malefactor
deserve to dye, when his pardon is sent him freely, that has it read as if he
were a-sleep? These messengers that were sent by Benhadad to make peace with
Ahab (when distressed by him) will rise in judgment against such drousy
hearers. We read the men took diligent heed if they could catch any word of him
that they might take hold of for their hope; and they did so, for when they
arrested him thus; Thy servant Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live, the
King of Israel answered, is he yet alive? he is my brother: and they took hold
of that word, and ecchoed it back to him, saying, thy brother Benhadad.

Use 2. Attend then as Lydia did, that you may be saved as Lydia was,
whatsoever you do (says the Preacher) do it with all thy might, Eccles. 9.10.
Judge of the importance of the duty by the earnest injunction of the great God
of heaven: settle it in your hearts, Luke 21.14. and why? for the water of life
will run out or run besides us, if we do not hear with a holy heedfulness, Heb.
2.1. Wherefore we ought to give diligent heed to the things which we have
heard, lest at any time we let them slip. The Greek Word (...) signifies either
to run besides, as water that flows besides a place; or else it signifies to
run thorough a thing as water through a sieve: well, the word preached, if it be
not heedfully heard will never stay in us, but be lost and run out. This is
damage sufficient, a loss that is irreparable, none indeed like this loss when
we receive the Grace of God in vain. For directions I shall refer you to what
has bin already said, a word or two by way of motive.

1. To encourage us to this heedful hearing of the Word, consider that it is a
complexive duty, a duty which is so acceptable to God, that under it are
comprehended all duties of Religion, Isa. 55.3. Hear and your Souls shall live,
life and death enter in the same way: As death entered into the world by the
ear, by our first Parents listening to that old Manslaier; so God has ordained
that life should enter by the same door: The dead shall hear the voice of the
son of God, and they that hear shall live, Joh. 5.25. Oh you that love heaven,
love hearing too!

2. The most eminent Saints of God have ever bin observed to be the most
diligent and attentive hearers, Luk 4.20. We read while Christ Jesus war
preaching, the eyes of all his hearers were fastened on him; a good way, not
only to prevent distractions but also to raise our affections; our hearts are
wily, and will give us the slip. It is our wisdom by all ways imaginable to
engage our hearts in hearing, and lay bonds upon them to hold them to such an
attention as becomes us. It Is storied of Englands second Josiah, that peerless
Prince Edward the sixth, that he usually stood at sermon and took notice all
the while he was a-hearing.

3. Consider, that we never read of more bitter complaints from God, than when
he complained of heartless hearers in Psalm. 81.13. O that my People would have
hearkened to me, etc. but my People would not hear my voice, and Israel would
none of me; and in Psalm. 95.10. Forty years long was I grieved with this
generation and said; It is a People that err in heart, for they have not known
my ways: they knew, but not practically, their ears were uncircumcised, and
their hearts unsanctified. O fearful judgment to have ears that we should not
hear, etc. Thus God punishes one sin with another, Rom, 11.8. who can read
without astonishment, Jer. 7. from the 13. v. to the 17. I arose up early and
spoke unto you, but you would not hear, therefore I will do unto you as unto
Shilo, etc. Read it through, I forbear the application, desiring if ever you
remembered a lesson, you would remember this, and never give your Teachers
cause to complain. Oh we have labored in vain, and spent our strength for
nothing!

4. Lastly, To close all carry with you St. James caution, be not forgetful
hearers of the Word, but doers also: he hears aright (says one) that does not
contradict his hearing by his life; otherwise you will be as a man that sees
his face in a glass and turns away, and forgets what manner of man he was. O
wash off those spots which this glass discovers! so hear the Word of Christ,
that you may conform to the will of Christ, Lydia's attention was the first
step to Salvation. Hear as she did, and you will be happy as she was.

So much Briefly of this Work of Grace which God wrought in opening the heart
of Lydia. Reader, let me carry thee one step farther, and show thee Gods end in
this Work, or why he thus opens the heart. And that is, that himself may enter,
and dwell in it, Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts.

Ephesians. 3.17. the former part of the Verse. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by faith.
THese words are part of a zealous prayer which the Apostle puts up to God in
the behalf of his dear Ephesians.

The prayer begins in the 14th. ver. where we find Paul upon his knees, begging
Grace for them of the Father of Mercies: For this cause I bow my knees to the
Father of mercies, etc.

The blessings that he begs for them, are especially two.

1. He begs the gift of spiritual strength, that as they had begun well, and
laid a good foundation by believing in Christ, so they might be constant in
holding out that profession against all the enemies and oppositions which they
met with, and were like to turn them out of the way of righteousness. Thus he
prays ver. the 16. That he would give you according to the riches of his glory,
to be strengthened with might by the spirit in the inner man.

Those that are wholly under the power of corruption are not so much troubled
with persecution and temptation: Satan like a Pyrate seldom sets upon a soul
unless like a Ship it be laden with the merchandise of Grace. This was the case
with these Ephesians. By Paul's preaching they had begun well, building on that
rock of Ages, and venturing their Immortal Souls on Christ and his
Righteousness. But Paul now being in prison, false Teachers were among them,
vexing the Church, and were like to turn them from the way of truth: God had
smitten the shepherd, and the sheep were like to be scattered. Now then is a
time to press the duty of perseverance, that as they had begun well, so they
might so run that they might obtain.

2. He begs that sovereign means that was only able to confirm and strengthen
them in the Service of Christ, and that is Christ himself. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by Faith.

I shall a little explain the words:

That Christ, that is, whole Christ in both his natures, God and Man.

May dwell, that is, spiritually possess, live and work.

In your hearts, that is, in the inner man, consisting of the Understanding,
Will and Affections, which are the principal and chief place of Christ's
residence, the fort Royal, or Castle which Christ chooses, and above all
delights in.

By faith, that is, as the means and instrument whereby we receive and
entertain him

There are as many Doctrines offer themselves to us as there are words in this
Scripture. And we might note first.

Doct. 1. That the heart is the place of Christ's residence.

Doct. 2. Christ is no stranger to Believers, but an in-dweller with them.

Doct. 3. That Faith makes a union between Christ and the Soul.

But I shall wave prolixity, and bring my Discourse into a narrower model,
casting all into this one Conclusion.

Doct. That no blessing whatsoever (on this side heaven) can be imagined, that
we should more desire than this; That Christ should dwell in our hearts by
Faith.

We find the Apostles affections all in a flame, and he burns with zeal to
promote the happiness of his dear Ephesians; he bends his knees, and casts
himself down at Gods feet, and among all blessings in Heaven and Earth, he can
find none better to beg for his young Converts than this.

What the strength of his affections was to them you may see Chap. 1.16. where
we read, that he ceased not to give thanks for them, making mention of them
always in his prayers.

Had Paul known any blessing better than this, sure he whose heart was so set
upon them, would have begged it for them.

But further, to prove the greatness of this inestimable blessing, read 2 Cor.
6.16. where the Apostle enjoins his Corinthians the highest pitch of holiness
upon this ground: For what agreement has the temple of God with idols? for ye
are the temple of the living God; as he has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk among them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

In this Scripture we have a double argument to prove the greatness of this
blessing, (1) Christ's dwelling in his people.

1. The greatness of the duty that is urged from it, v. 17. Come forth from
among them, and be ye separate, etc. Now for weighty services, God usually
furnishes his people with strongest arguments; as is evident in Abraham's case,
Genesis 17.1. 'twas high service that God enjoined him, Walk, before me, and be
thou perfect. And high encouragements God gave him, I am God all-sufficient,
etc. Deus jubet and juvat; God's Commands carry strength with them, whatever
Abraham's weakness be; yet this supports him, that the everlasting arms are
under him, God is all-sufficient both for the work and reward.

'Twas hard work too on which God set Moses when he sent him with a commission
to deliver Israel from Egypt, and suitable encouragements God gives him; God
finds his heart low, and raises it to a height suiting his service, by working
no less than three several Miracles to strengthen him; his Rod is turned into a
Serpent, his hand is leprous; and the river is turned into blood, Exodus 4.

2. A second argument which this Scripture yields us to prove the greatness of
this blessing is this, That Christ's dwelling in us is but a short abridgment of
the Covenant of Grace, for that is presently added, I will be your God, and you
shall be my people. When we have summed up all those invaluable blessings that
are treasured up in the Covenant, we have all in a little, ( viz.) in Christ
dwelling in us, peace, pardon, grace, glory, all is virtually comprehended in
this.

2ly. Again, it is the very blessing God promises the Saints in Heaven, Rev.
21.3. where S. John saw the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven,
etc. He heard a voice from heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, etc. Christ's
dwelling in us is but Heaven aforehand, or Heaven upon Earth; if God dwell in
us here by his Grace, he will dwell with us in glory.

But for our more Methodical prosecution of the point, I shall confine my self
to this method.

1. I shall explain it. 2. Confirm; and, 3. Apply it.
For the Explication, I shall do that by answering several Queries in which the
sum of the Conclusion lies.

Q. 1. The first is what we are to understand by the heart?

A. Not to trouble our selves with the various acceptations of the word [
heart] in Scripture, (many of which are impertinent to our purpose) we are to
understand (by heart) the Will and the Affections especially, as in the former
Discourse; these are the spring out of which are the issues of life, Prove.
4.22. and that good treasure mentioned Mat. 12.24. But a good man out of the
good treasure of his heart, etc.

Q. The next thing to be enquired, is, what we are to understand by Christ's
dwelling in us?

A. It Is a Metaphorical or figurative speech, to show that intimacy and holy
acquaintance that is between Christ and Believers, Christ is not in the heart
as a stranger in an Inn, where he tarries but a night, but as a man dwelling in
his own house where he lives, and works, and rules, etc. More particularly,
this dwelling of Christ implys these several things.

1. It implys propriety, Christ will never usurp where he has no right; no, he
never dwells but in his own; his own he will never lose, and more than his own
he will never take; All that the Father has given me shall come to me, Job.
6.37. Satan shall never sit quiet for ever in a soul that belongs to Christ;
though the strong man armed keeps the house, yet a stronger than himself will
come and bind him, not one of those that are heirs of the promises shall
miscarry; no, I will ransom them from the Power of the grave, I will redeem
them from death, Hos. 13.14.

4. Christ's dwelling in believers implies actual possession, a man may have a
just right or claim where yet he may not dwell; Christ does not content himself
with a bare right to his redeemed, but he takes actual possession of them; he
keeps house in theirs hearts, Joh. 14.20. At that day, you shall know that I am
in my Father, and you in me and I in you.

Furthermore Christ Jesus may be said to possess believers two ways.

1. By assuming our nature, When the Word was made flesh, he dwelt among us,
Joh. 1.14. (1) lived and conversed awhile with the sons of men; yea he dwelt in
us in as much as he was partaker of flesh and blood with us. And as the fullness
of the Godhead dwelt in Christ, so Christ too dwells in us.

2. By communicating to us his Spirit. The Spirit of Christ is the Fountain of
all Grace and comfort, and by this Spirit of Christ we have both union and
communion with him, Gal. 2.20. Christ lives in me, Christ is in us as a
Principle of life and Grace, active and operative; he is not in the Soul as
once he was in the ship asleep, but always inciting, quickening and enlivening
his elect who would again become dead in sin, but he acts and excites his own
Grace in them.

3. Christ's dwelling in us, means the nearest intimacy that is imaginable;
(...) so it is in the original, I will indwell in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. As if
Christ could never have communion enough with his People. Now this sweet and
saving intimacy will appear in those things.

1. His People shall know his secrets, Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. The saints are all
Gods secretaries; when God intended that fearful overthrow of Sodom, shall I
hide from Abraham (says God) the thing that I do? No, Abraham was his friend,
and as a bosom-friend; He shall know his Council, such honor have all his
saints.

2. He will speak to their hearts, Hos. 2.14. When the hearts of Gods People
are so overwhelmed with grief; that men and Angels prove miserable comforters.
They may speak to the ear but cannot reach the heart; then Christ alone does
this; I, even I, am he that does comfort thee, etc. Isa. 51.12. Christ speaks
such things as make our hearts leap. Thus he spoke to the sick-man, Mat. 9.2.
^on be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee. Christ can speak such Words as
never man spoke, the Words which he speaks are Spirit and life. It Is storied of
a Peer of this Kingdom that he dyed with joy of an unexpected pardon; how great
then is the joy that possesses a Soul that receives a pardon from God! Such
pardoned ones are bid to be glad and shout for joy, Psalm. 32.11. And all others
flatly forbid to meddle with this joy, Hos. 9.1. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy
as other People, for thou have gone a-whoring from thy God.

3. The sweetness and closness of that intimacy which we have with Christ, by
virtue of his dwelling in us, appears by this, that we have all things common
with Christ. Christ calls nothing his own that may do us good: all lour fresh
Springs are in him, if we are Christ's, all is ours, Paul, Apollo, Cephas, life
and death, etc. All Christ's offices and efficacies, his life, death, blood,
merit, Spirit; all his advantage to us, yea death it self is gain to believers,
Phil. 1.21. For me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. The Church keeps all
her choice presents for Christ, Cant. 7. vlt. And Christ bestows all his
rarities on his Church.

3. Christ dwelling in us implies his abiding or continual residing in us, in
Isa. the 57.15. God is said to inhabit eternity, (1) who only is eternal;
wherever Christ dwells he takes up his residence for ever; he says, this is my
rest for ever, here will I dwell etc. Though men may be weary of their dwelling
how-ever accommodated both for necessity and delight; yet Christ is never:
That Is the promise he makes his People, 1 Kings 6.13. I will dwell among the
children of Israel, and will not forsake my People Israel.

5. Christ's dwelling in us implies his preservation of us, every man is bound
to repair and preserve his own house where he dwells, so is Christ: Christ's
dwelling does not look like the house of the sluggard that drops through; no,
whatever storms beat on it it stands, and is impregnable. That Is remarkable in
Psalm. 6.7.2.3. At Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling at Sion; There
brake he the arrows of the bow, etc. That place is sure of safety and
protection where God dwells; as on the contrary, Gods departing makes way for
destruction. We read that the Heathens have placed their Security in the
presence of their idol-Gods. Tacitus reports of the Tyrians, when they were
besieged by Alexander, bound Hercules with a golden chain that he should not
depart. And the Romans were wont by some verses to call off the Tutelary gods
out of the Cities which they did besiege. God has bound himself to us by a
Covenant better than a golden chain, that he will never leave us nor forsake us.

Q. 3. The third Query is how Christ dwells in the heart by faith?

A. The answer is this, It Is the office of Faith to receive Christ Jesus.
Christ knocks by his Word and Spirit, and Faith makes haste to open and let him
in; it gives Christ the free and full possession of the Soul, and delivers up
all into his hand, and to his use. For can two walk together unless they are
agreed? We read in Genesis 30.6. When Lot and Abraham had multiplied their
substance, they could not dwell together, and there was strife between their
herdsmen; Christ and we could never have dwelt together; had there been any
strife between us; there is no agreement between Christ and Belial. But when
Christ comes and dwells in us, he comes like Noah's Dove, he brings us news of
peace purchased by the blood of his Cross. The Psalmist admires the happiness
of such as dwell together in unity, though but natural brethren, Psalm. 133.1.
Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, etc. How good then and pleasant
must it be for Christ and us to dwell together! This is our happiness, Christ
says of every believing soul as of Sion, This is my rest for ever, here will I
dwell, etc. Psalm.132.14.

Res. 2. Such in whom Christ dwells, shall never lose their interest in God by
sin or backsliding, for Christ himself will be a continual spring or fountain
of life and grace within us, Joh. 4.14. The water that I shall give you shall
be in you a well of living water. Can we ever die with thirst when we have a
fountain within us? no fear of forfeiting our title to that great and glorious
inheritance if Christ be in us, he will keep both it for us, and us for it, he
will preserve us by his grace unto his heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18.

Res. 3. If Christ dwell in us, he will defend and protect us from all dangers;
death and hell have nothing to do where Christ the Lord of life dwells. When
Lazarus was dead, his sister told Christ, Lord, if thou had been here my
brother had not died, Joh. 11.21. Christ's presence is his peoples security from
hat second death. Satan may bring up his black Legions, and storm the Castle,
but shall never take it. Hear ye whose hearts are habitations for the Lord
Christ what your Redeemer says, Joh. 14.30. The Prince of this world comes
and has nothing in me, (that is) in me mystical, neither id head nor members.

Res. 4. If Christ dwell in us, we shall never want either counsel or comfort,
his Spirit shall supply us with both. If we want counsel we shall hear a voice
behind us, saying, this is the way walk in it. He whose name is Counselor,
has not his name for nothing; in our greatest perplexities, this great
Counselor will advise and direct us, for he is made of God to be wisdom to his
redeemed. Again, if we want comfort, he will revive the drooping spirits of his
contrite ones, Isa. 57.15. The Church out of her experience cries but, that his
mouth is as sweet things, Cant. 5.16. And the words that he speaks are as life
to despondent and dying souls.

Reas. 5. But one thing more: Christ will never leave his dwelling till he
bring us to a dewlling place with himself in glory. This was purchased to us by
his death, and prepared for us by his Ascension, Joh. 14.2. I go to prepare a
place for you. No sooner shall these earthly houses be dissolved, but Christ is
presently ready to receive us into everlasting habitations.

Use 1. The Application follows, and let the first Use be of Information. And,

1. It discovers the vain delusion of all hypocrites and formalists, who admit
Christ into their mouths, but shut him out of their hearts; this was the
Religion of the Pharisees, whose falsity in matters of Gods Worship, Christ
Jesus reprehends, Mat. 15.8. Well did Isaias prophecy of you, saying, this
people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips,
but have removed their hearts far from me. It Is sad when Christ is near in our
mouths, but far from our reins.

2. Learn hence next, That there is nothing lost by giving Christ
entertainment. No, it is the gain of a Christian; as God blessed Obed-edom for
entertaining the Ark, so does he much more bless Believers for entertaining his
Son Christ. What glorious guests had just Lot when he entertained two Angels! a
much more glorious guest has every one that entertains Christ Jesus; he brings
Salvation with him, and so salutes the heart that receives him as he did
Zachens, This day is salvation come to thy house.

3. Learn next what a mystery, or rather miracle there is in the actings of
saving Faith, in that it unites Christ and the soul, and brings them to dwell
together. Wonder we may, that though Christ, in regard of his humane nature be
in Heaven, and we on Earth; yet Faith easily narrows this wide distance and in
an instant possesses the soul with its beloved Jesus. As the soul by virtue of
sight enlightened with the Sun, does join it self with the body of the Sun, and
touch it (after a manner); so the eye of Faith enlightened with the beams of the
Spirit which come from the Sun of righteousness, does join and unite it self
with Christ Jesus.

Use 2. The next is a use of Trial. If it be so great a blessing to have Christ
Jesus dwelling in our hearts, it concerns us all to try whether he dwell in our
hearts or no.

Now the tokens of his presence, or evidences of his co-habitation with us, may
be these:

1. The heart in which Christ dwells is an humble heart, Isa. 57.15. Christ was
a pattern of Humility himself, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of spirit.
And Christ delights to be nowhere but in a heart that is like himself. The
richer the Ship is laden, the more water it draws, and the lower it sails; so
it is here: that heart that carries Christ, is laden with more than a golden
mine, it carries him in whom are hid all spiritual treasures, and all such
souls sail low. Abraham calls himself dust and ashes; David, a worm and no man;
great Paul, the chiefest of sinners; though every Saint that is his successor,
contend still for that title, The most hard-hearted sinner; so Mr. Bradford
subscribed his Letter.

2. The heart where Christ dwells, is inflamed with the love of God. In cold
frozen spirits, or hearts that are lukewarm like Laodicea, Christ likes not to
be; as the Sun begets heat on inferior bodies by shining, on them, so does
Christ the Sun of Righteousness when he arises on a soul; though he find our
hearts cold, yet he makes them by his spiritual presence burn within us; as it
fared with them with whom he journeyed to Emaus, Luke 24.32. The soul burns
with love, and burns with desire to Christ Jesus, that is once united to him,
Read Joh. 14.23. If any man love me he will keep my word, and my Father will
love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him. As when Christ
comes, he comes willing; so where he comes he comes welcome. Mary entertained
Christ, and she loved him much, and this love discovered it self in spending
that costly Ointment on his sacred body. There Is nothing too dear for Christ in
his account where Christ dwells, but such a one says with the Martyr, He is
glad he has any thing to lose for Christ; or with the Church, whatever good
thing he has, he keeps it only for him, Cant. 7.13.

2ly; With love to our Brethren, If we love one another, God dwells in us, 1 John 4.12. God loves to be where love is. One observes, That where the Devil
dwells all is in peace, much more where God dwells who is the God of peace. If
then we find our hearts filled with malice and hatred toward our brethren, we
may confidently conclude God is not in this place; the Lamb of God will never
lie in a Lions den. We read in Judge. 9.23. God sent an evil spirit between the
house of Abijam and the men of Shechem, a spirit of hatred, enmity and
division: This is an evil Spirit from the Devil, not from God; where Satan
dwells he sets all on fire, not with fire that warms, but consumes. And when we
give place to wrath we give place to the Devil, Ephesians 4.27.

3. The heart wherein Christ dwells, is a holy heart; as no unholy thing shall
for ever dwell with him, so neither will Christ dwell with it.

The heart is a Temple, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the; Temples of the holy Ghost; now
we know Temples are holy consecrated things: That which is lawful to be done in
another place is not lawful to be done in a Temple: we read, Mark 11.16. Christ
would not suffer a vessel to be carried through the Temple. Neither will he have
the hearts of believers made a rode for sin; no, If any man defiles the Temple
of God, him will God destroy, 1 Cor. 3.17.

4. The heart where Christ dwells lives in a sweet subjection to Christ and his
Laws. His commands are not grievous, but his yoke is easy and his burden light;
Christ dwells nowhere, but where he is acknowledged and serves as a King; for
God has appointed him both for a Prince and a Savior, Act. 5.31. The
Government is laid by God upon his shoulders, and he makes every thought to
stoop and come into subjection to himself. Well then, where men serve not the
Lord but their lusts, set up their corruptions, and cry down Christ; in such
hearts Christ never dwells. But a Soul possessed by Christ, sets Christ in the
Throne, and cries up Christ, as the Jews did Caesar; We have no King but him.

5. The heart in which Christ dwells is a tender heart. Such as tremble at Gods
Word, Isa. 57.15. A hard senseless heart is a dead heart. And as the Angels to
the Women that sought Christ in the sepulcher; So we may say in this case, Why
seek ye the living among the dead?; Christ is a Spring and a Fountain of life
to every believing Soul: Because I live ye shall live also. Now where there is
life there is sense; dead men nor fear any thing nor feel it, but living men do
both; they feel the least guilt, and fear the wrath and anger of God; they are
sensible of every miscarriage, and their heart smites them on the commission of
the least sin, as David did when he cut off but the lap of Saul's, garment. Such
a heart shows who is in it (to wit) that Christ dwells in it: such a heart we
read was in good Josiah, whose heart was so tender that he wept but at the
reading of the Law, 2 Kings 22.19.

Use 3. This should cheer the hearts of all believers: what unspeakable comfort
does this bring to every one whose heart is a habitation for Christ Jesus! how
does Christ honor you, that when the World scorns you, Christ crowns you; when
men shun you, the Son of God dwells in you. Surely this blessing affords matter
of Spiritual ravishment to every Soul that has given Christ Jesus
entertainment. Wise Solomon admired both Gods mercy and his Peoples happiness
at once, upon this very reason, 2 Chronicles. 6.18. Is it true indeed that God will
dwell with man on earth! what infinite Majesty fall in love with misery! God
dwell with man! heaven and earth meet in one Person! ye righteous, let it not
deject you, that your excellency is not conspicuous in the Worlds eye. The
Churches beauty is within; and herein she is like her beloved. Christ himself
to outward appearance was but a root out of a dry ground; no form or comeliness
was in him; therefore he was despised and rejected of men. Your life is a
hidden life, like in this to the Ark, that without was covered with skins,
sullied and weather-beaten with storms and tempests; but within, was stored
with gold and rich rarities. God sees not as man sees, there is a time at hand
when God will turn your inside out; and though now you ly among the pots, yet
shall ye be covered with silver-Wings and your feathers like gold.

Use 4. Lastly, Be exorted to the Apostles Prayer, to add your own practice.
This is the one thing necessary, with what holy zeal and diligence should we do
this work, and drive this great design! how restless should we be in this
pursuit, to get Christ to dwell in us!

Q. But how?

A. I shall only Answer this query and conclude.

And here several things must be done both for the getting Christ into the
heart, and the keeping of him there.

1. The heart must be prepared for ChristW, Mal. 2.1. The Prophet speaking of
John Baptist, says, that he should prepare the way for him. And Isa. speaking
of the same Messenger adds; Every mountain shall he brought low, and every
valley be filled up, and every crooked thing shall be made plain, Isa. 43.4. All
this must be done as a preparation for Christ.

As where Princes are expected, the highways are cleared, and all passages are
facilitated that they may pass both with ease and honor: so we must prepare
for Christ Jesus.

1. Mountains must be brought low; (that is) the lofty heart must be abased,
and every high thought must stoop and be made subject to the scepter of Christ:
we must be vile in our own eyes, learn to abhor out selves with Job, loath our
own sins and our own righteousness also, and count it dung and loss to win
Christ. Christ designs his own Glory in condescending to dwell with sinful men;
and Christ's Glory and the creature's cannot be set up together.

2 Valleys must be filled; some hearts are too low for Christ, they mind
earthly things, and therefore are unfit for the receiving of so glorious a
guest: Lift up therefore your heads, O ye gates, and then the King of Glory
shall come in, Psalm. 24. as the Church is described in Rev. 12. with the moon
under her feet, and then she is clothed with the Sun and has a Crown of
twelve Stars on her head; so must every member of the Church trample upon all
earthly and sublunary vanities; and set our hearts on heaven, where our true
Treasure is. It were a disparagement to divine blessings, should they be
bestowed on them that prize nothing but earthly trifles; such pearls do not use
to be cast before swine.

3. Crooked things must be made straight, we must have no crooked aims nor
close designs in the Service of God. The sons of Jacob must be all like their
Father, plain-hearted men, our studies, strength, time, and state, must be all
dedicated to the Lord; Such as turn aside to crooked ways, the Lord threatens
to lead them out with the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.5.

4. Lastly, rough ways must be made plain, the oil of Grace must supple the
rough and rugged temper of our Spirits. It Is said of Nabal, he was so churlish
a man could not speak to him; such hearts are not fit for Christ. Christ by
Grace sweetens the Temper of out Souls, takes off that fierceness and austerity
that is in them by nature. The Lion and the Lamb ly down together, and there is
nothing shall destroy or hurt in all his holy mountain If we would have Christ
dwell in our hearts, we must keep our hearts pure; for a nasty lodging is
loathsome to him. With what care do we keep our Temples, cleansing them
continually that there be no filth found in them! These Spiritual Temples must
never be sullied with sin, nor defiled with iniquity. This is the condition
upon which Christ promises to dwell in us, 2 Cor. 6.17. Touch no unclean thing,
and then I will dwell in you.

3. Take heed of grieving the Spirit of God, by resisting it is motions, or
crossing the sweet and saving operations thereof. There Is a sad Scripture in
Mat. 12.44. When the unclean Spirit is cast out and returns, etc. He brings
with him seven other Spirits worse than himself and they enter in and dwell
there. Oh deal courteously with Christ, offend your own Souls rather than
offend him! study we must to comply with his commands; and carry our selves so
exactly, that in nothing we grieve his Spirit, nor make him weary of his
habitation.

4. Lastly, since Christ dwells in the heart by Faith, labor to prize this
precious Grace, for the procuring of which these several rules should

1. Acquaint your selves with your own hearts, and you will find such a stock
of infidelity in them, as may for ever confound us. Though God who is
faithfulness it self has infinitely stoopt to lost man, and for his security
has ratified the Covenant by his Word, his Oath, and Seals: yet alas there is
in us all by nature a heart of unbelief, Heb. 3.12. So that upon experience we
shall find we are no more able by nature to believe the Gospel than to obey the
Law: Alas, we fear no more than we feel, and believe no more than we see, when
we come to seize on Christ, and take hold of the promise, Oh with what a faint
and trembling hand do we receive them!

2. Labor to see the rare excellency and efficacy of Faith, what is it, but a
Christians life while he is below? without it we cannot move one foot heaven
ward; whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. This is that which brings in Christ
into the Soul, it makes us one with Christ now, and the union that is made by
Faith between Christ and the Soul now shall never be dissolved till we enjoy
him in glory. For the end of our Faith is the Salvation of our souls, 1 Pet.
1.9.

3. Bind your selves to a constant and conscionable attendance to the Word and
Ordinances of God, For Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. As death first
entered by this door, so does life; hear and your Soul shall live, this is that
Manna on which we must live till we come to Canaan: As Gideons Fleece was wet
when the ground about it was dry, so God usually waters the Souls of them both
with grace and comfort that wait on his Ordinances, when others that condemn
them are strangers to both. We read in Act. 13.48. When the Apostles preached,
as many of the Gentiles as were ordained to eternal life believed.

4. Be convinced of the admirable and infinite. Excellencies that are in God,
as his Power whereby he is able to save, Mercy whereby he is willing to save,
and Faithfulness whereby he is bound to save all them that come to him by
Christ Jesus. Now as ignorance is the mother of Unbelief, so knowledge is the
foundation of Faith; he that will come to God must first know that God is, and
that he is a faithful rewarder of all that come him. And they that know thy
name will put their trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10.

5. Under all assaults and temptations use your selves to look up unto Christ,
who is the author and finisher of Faith; whatever Grace we want fetch it of
him, who has in him all treasures, and can give us Grace for Grace. Whatever,
weight either of sin or suffering we are oppressed with, look we up to Jesus,
Heb. 12.2. And it is no more bat look to him and we shall be saved.

6 Lie at Gods feet, and be instant in prayer with the Father of Mercies, and
never give him rest till he create the saving Grace in you; that God that heats
the Ravens when they cry will hear you. O could we bemoan our dead-Heartedness
to believe and rest in his all sufficiency, whose power is not limited, but can
as well give the life of Grace, as the life of Nature, we should not for ever
be denied, but should at last feel this heavenly birth spring within us.

And to close all, if the work be difficult, the fruit will be an abundant
recompense, our labor will not be in vain in the Lord. Christ will never be in
debt to any for his entertainment, his presence will quiet our hearts, purge
our Consciences, subdue our corruptions, fortify us against all evils, guide
us by his grace, till he bring us to glory. What do we mean then that we do not
stir up our selves to take hold of him; while Christ knocks let us set open the
everlasting door, etc. Invite him as David, Psalm. 132.8. Arise O Lord, and come
into thy Sanctuary. If Christ seem strange, constrain him, and say as they in
Luke 24.29. Abide with us, feast him with the best as Levi did, Lev. 5.29. Say
as the Church, all our choice-services we have kept only for thee. In short,
set up the Psalmists resolution, to give your eyes no rest, nor suffer the
temples of your heads to have any quiet till you have found a place in your
hearts of the Lord, and an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Edw. Brewster, at the Sign of the Crane in
Paul's-Church-yard, 1675.
1. THe Apostolical History, containing the Acts, Labors, Travels, Sermons,
Discourses, Miracles, Successes, and Sufferings of the Holy Apostles, from
Christ's Ascension to the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, etc. By Samuel
Cradock, B. D. fol.

Mr. Henry Smiths Sermons. 4to.

2. A Prospect of Divine Providence. By T. C. M.A. 8vo.

3. Cases of Conscience Practically Resolved. By the Reverend and Learned J.
Norman, late Minister of Bridgwater in Sommerset. 8vo.

4. The Sinner Condemned of himself: being a Plea for God against all the
Ungodly, proving them alone guilty of their own Destruction, etc. 8vo.

5. Scriptures Self-Evidence, to prove its Existence, Authority in it self, and
sufficiency (in its kind) to ascertain others that it is inspired of God to be
the only Rule of Faith. Both by Thomas Ford, late Minister in Exon. 8vo.

6. Mr. John Ball his large and small Catechism. 8vo.

7. A most familiar Exposition of the Assemblies shorter Catechism. By Joseph
Allen, late Minister in Taunton in Sommerset. 8vo.

8. Christian Advice both to Young and Old, Rich and Poor, which may serve as a
Directory at hand, ready to direct all persons almost in every estate and
condition under 17 general useful Heads. By Thomas Mocket A.M.

9. The Doctrine of the Bible, 120.

10. Natural and Artificial Conclusions. 8vo.

11. Moses Revived: A Treatise proving that it is not lawful (and therefore
sinful) for any man or woman to eat blood, viz. the lifeblood of any Creature.
8vo.

12. The Righteous Man's Evidence for Heaven. By Timothy Rogers. 120.

13. Basilius Valentinus B his last Will and Testament which was found hid
under a Table of Marble behind the high Altar in the Cathedral Church of the
Imperial City of Erford; leaving it there to be found by him whom Gods
Providence should make worthy of it* octav.

14. The Royal Pay and Play Master. A Sermon preached before the Military
Company: By William Sclater, D* D. Minister of St. James Clarkenwell. 4to.

15. A Useful Table of Expenses.

16. Clendon on the Sabbath. 4to. Histories.

The History of Guy Earl of Warwick. quarto.

The most delectable History of Reynard the Fox, the first and second part.

Friar and the Boy: both Parts.


