Strange News FROM VIRGINIA, BEING A true Relation of a Great Tempest in
Virginia, by which many people lost their Lives, great numbers of Cattle
destroyed, Houses, and in many places whole Plantations overturned, and whole
Woods torn up by the Roots.

As a further addition to this calamity, the Sea exceeded its usual height
above twelve Foot, overflowing all the Plain Country, carrying away much Corn
and Tobacco, with many Cattle, forcing the Inhabitants into the Mountains for
the security of their Lives.

London, Printed for W. Thackeray next door to the Dolphin in Smithfield. 1667.

The Copy of a Letter from Virginia, Containing the Relation of a Violent
Hurricane, which happened the 27th of August and continued (without intermission)
twelve days together.
SIR,
HAving this opportunity, I cannot but acquaint you with the Relation of a very
strange Tempest which has been in these parts (with us called a Hurricane)
which began Aug. 27. and continued with such Violence, that it overturned many
Houses, burying in the Ruins much Goods and many people, beating to the ground
such as were any ways employed in the Fields, blowing many Cattle that were
near the Sea or Rivers, into them, whereby unknown numbers have perished, to
the great affliction of all people, few having escaped who have not suffered in
their persons or Estates, much Corn was blown away, and great quantities of
Tobacco have been lost, to the great damage of many, and utter undoing of
others. Neither did it end here, but the Trees were torn up by the roots, and
in many places whole Woods blown down, so that they cannot go from Plantation
to Plantation. The Sea (by the violence of the winds) swelled twelve Foot above
its usual height, drowning the whole Country before it, with many of the
Inhabitants, their Cattle and Goods, the rest being forced to save themselves
in the Mountains nearest adjoining, where they were forced to remain many days
together in great want, till the Violence of the Tempest was over, which while
it continued, was accompanied with a very violent rain that continued twelve
days and nights together without ceasing, with that fury, that none were able
to stir from their shelters, though almost famished for want of Provisions. The
ships that were in the Rivers have sustained great damage, but we hope there is
none of them lost. This Tempest, for the time, was so furious, that it has
made a general Desolation, overturning many Plantations, so that there was
nothing that could stand its fury. We are now with all the industry imaginable,
repairing our shattered houses, and gathering together what the Tempest has
left us. Although it was not alike Violent in all places, yet there is scarce
any place in the whole Country where there is not left sufficient marks of its
ruins. By the next ships you will hear a particular of all our losses.

Such Hurricanes on the Land are seldom heard of, but Hurricanes upon the Sea
are common in those parts, which are many times very prejudicial and dangerous
to the ships Trading there. It was by a Hurricane that excellent Commander the
Lord Willoughby perished, with diverse others in his Company: By these kind of
Tempests the King of Spain has lost at several times near 1000 sail of ships.

Neither are we without Presidents of great Ruins and Desolations which have
been made in other places upon the Land. In the City of Ragusa belonging to the
Venetians, happened so violent an Earthquake, that the City was in a manner
buried in its own ruins, with many hundreds of its Inhabitants: And at the
same time many places belonging to the Turks were visited with as great
Desolation. In England there have been very great Land-Tempests; on the third
of September One thousand six hundred fifty eight, there was so great a
Tempest, that many houses were blown down in several parts of England, Trees
torn up by the Roots and laid cross many Roads, in such great numbers, that
Travelers could not pass till they were removed. And such like Tempests have
since happened in diverse places in England, whereby people have been much
damnified, but so great a one as this which has now happened, we have not
heard of amongst us.

The Judgments of God are not always alike, God does not for every small sin
send a great Judgment, but like a loving Father, First he admonishes and
warns us of our sins, and if that will not do, he Corrects us mildly, but
then, if we still persist in our evil way, and sin as it were in despite of
God, in despite of his warnings and Corrections, then he powers in his
Judgments upon us, if one Judgment will not do, he has still a greater
Judgment in store for us; if we still persist in our evil way, and turn not
from our sins, He will utterly destroy us.

FINIS.

