Secret Reasons OF STATE In Reference To the Affairs of these Nations, At the
Interruption of this present PARLIAMENT: Anno 1653. Discovered.

ALSO, The Power of PARLIAMENTS, touching Imprisonment, Debated.

With other Matters worthy of Observation, in JO: STREATER's Case: This being a
Narrative of His two Years Troubles at the beginning of the late Monarchy,
erected by General CROMWELL.

LONDON: Printed MDCLIX.

A Narrative of the Case of John Streater, sometime Quartermaster-General of
the Foot-forces of this Commonwealth in I^eland.
THe said J. S. having for three years, from 1650, to 1653, served the
Commonwealth in the aforesaid Capacity, and also as Engineer did considerable
Service at the taking in of Towns, Forts, and Castles, as well as fortifying
for defense; The War being ended, he obtained Leave of his Excellency the then
Lord Deputy Fleetwood to come into England, where he arrived about the
beginning of April, 1653: On the 20th following, the Lord General Cromwell did
interrupt this present Parliament in the discharge of their Duty in their
Supreme Trust: The which Action of his did much astonish and amaze J. S. so
that he concluded from the action it self, it being of so high a nature,
together with many other circumstances he had observed, That the General
intended nothing less then making himself absolute Lord of his Country,
contrary to his Promises, Duty, and Trust. In the morning before he went to the
House to act that Tragedy, he made a Speech at the Cockpit to all the
Officers, in substance thus, That the hand of God had Eminently gone along with
the Amy in various and Improbable Successes; that now they had no in visible
Enemies in Arms, Therefore it did behove them to persevere in the Work of
Reformation; that Reformation could not be expected from the present
Parliament: and that if they should put the People to Elect a New Parliament,
it would but tempt God. Therefore his Opinion was, That God did intend to save
and deliver this Nation by Few; and that Five or Six men, or few more, setting
themselves to the Work, might do more in one day, then the Parliament had or
would do in one hundred days, for ought he could perceive: For (says, he) the
burdens are continued still on the People, Injustice abounds, the Law is not
Regulated; they intend nothing but to seek themselves, and to perpetuate
themselves to the great hurt and danger of the Nation: therefore he thought
that the Nation might be better settled by a Certain Number of unbiassed men,
who should give more Content to the Nation and the People of God, then the
present Parliament. After he had ended his Speech, he went immediately to the
House, and Interrupted their Sitting: He Returns back, acquainted the Officers
what he had done; That he had turned our the Members out of the House: and
withal told them, Now they must go hand in hand with him, and justify what
was done to the utmost hazard of all. He also told them, That when he went into
the House, he intended not to do it; but the Spirit was so upon him, that he
was over ruled by it: and he consulted not with Flesh and blood at all, nor did
premeditate the doing thereof; he seeing the Parliament designing to spin an
Everlasting Thread.

Upon, the Consideration of all which, together with the Credible Information
that the said J. S. received, that the Parliament was at that time in
Consultation about the putting a period to their sitting; and also providing
for a Succession of Parliaments, with such qualifications as might be the best
means to preserve the Interest of the Nation, by Governing it as a Commonwealth
or Free State; he did thereupon conclude, that Genesis Cromwell saw he should be
thereby prevented to attempt the Supremacy, and also be reduced to a private
capacity, unto the which he could not with safety Return: for it were not to be
Imagined, that they would Dissolve, and leave the sole Command of the Arms of
the Commonwealth in his hands; a Trust too great for any Mortal: This J. S.
did apprehend was the principal Reason why he interrupted their Sitting; if
this was not the Reason: But on the contrary he did do it, with an Intention to
redeem the Nation out of their hands, they Intending to make their Government
perpetual: Can any man conceive, that he could with safety suffer any to be
above him? or that he would not be necessitated to preserve himself by keeping
uppermost; when he judged the People not fit to be Trusted with their own
Liberty? Who should he Trust then? Did not he Intend, what at last did
notoriously appear in his making himself a Monarch, Exercising a more absolute
power then any Kings that went before; nay more then the late King, whom he,
amongst diverse, Condemned to be beheaded for a Tyrant.

The which J. S. did foresee would come to pass; for as much as he assumed
Absolute power to dis-invest the People of their Liberties. Upon the
Consideration of All which, on the same day, the General being present, J. S,
published and dispersed amongst the Officers of the Army Ten Queries, which
partly respected his Speech aforementioned, as well as his Fears of future
Events. Which Queries are here recited, they being the First Ground of his
deplorable Troubles.

Ten Queries.
1. WHether or no, God will not be more tempted by Illegal changing, and
forcing a People to submit to an unknown Government, (in which they can have no
security) than He would be, if that the Commonwealth be engaged to elect a new
Representative according to their undeniable Rights?

2. Whether there be not as much Safety by choosing a Representative, as
committing the Supreme Authority to five, six, or more; when it is visible,
that the Army must stand by to poize the affairs of the whole Nation? It is to
be granted, that the Army may with more case and safety change a new-elected
Parliament, then dissolve this, in regard they are wound into an Interest.

3. Whether that the faith of any four or five, or more, be a sufficient
security to the interest of the Public?

4. Whether or no, that constituting of a Supreme Authority by an Army, be not
the converting of the Authority into the hands of one person, in as much as all
are under a Discipline? Whether this be not next door to Monarchy?

5. Whether or no it does behove such as must own so high proceedings as the
Change of Government, to endeavor to see into the bottom, lest there should be
a preparation to Absoluteness and Tyranny?

6. Whether it be fit to trust a number, of men because so and so qualified to
appearance; when it has been frequently known that many have pretended much to
Virtue and Unbyass'dness, but when they have once obtained Government, they
have proved wicked Tyrants?

7. What is to be understood by the People of God, since there is of the people
of God amongst Anabaptists, Independents* Presbyterians, and others? And all of
these being Judges of their own causes, judge themselves to be the people of
God: Whether then it be not a Faction to side with any one Society in
opposition of another?

8. Whether that a new Parliament called to sit six monet hs would not be
greater security to the Public interest, then a number of men that either have
no limitation as to time, nor otherwise, but what they receive from an Army; by
consequence, from one Person? And there is no one person under Heaven, but is
swayed by Affection.

9. Whether or no, is the giving of the Supreim Power into the hands of five,
or six, or more, such a thing as the Government of a Common Wealth, when the
Commonwealth is excluded from the liberty of making a choice of persons to
govern?

10. Whether it be not a cursed Principle, to side with a Party in a Change of
Government, to no other end then in having a share of it, or to obtain a share
of their favor that shall govern?

These Queries J. S. did not publish to any but the Officers, who in the late
Change did acknowledge themselves concerned in a great measure to respect the
Particulars therein contained: and (under correction) J. S. thought it had been
their Duty to have minded it upon the delivery of them: but it was not the Will
of God they should: (but now it is demonstrable, that it was for good that then
they should not; for thereby they have been taught an excellent Lesson, Not to
trust to Men, but rather to good Constitutions, and good Laws;) This is
mentioned, to Evince, That J.S. did not write or publish them out of a Factious
or Turbulent mind, but as his Duty, as a Member of the Army, unto whose
Consideration he nnely Referred them: For the which he was committed to the
Marshall-General, and was brought before a Court Martial; they pass this
Sentence, That they judged him not fit to bear Office in the Army of England,
Ireland, or Scotland; and immediately discharged him. After about the space of
six weeks, he was apprehended for writing, printing, and publishing of a Book
entitled, The Grand Politic Informer, the substance thereof was to this
purpose, viz. the setting forth the danger of Trusting the Arms of a
Commonwealth in the hands of a single Person; the best means to prevent a
Tyranny, and to preserve a people free; as also the Asserting the Political
Rules, for gaining the Arms out of the hands of a Tyrant, by which he aweth a
People: also Rules to hold the People to obedience by Justice, without the use
of Arms, and the like. For this was J. S. by an Order of the Council of the
Little Assembly committed first six weeks to the Custody of Humphrey Holding
then a Messenger: afterward on the 12th ^ay of September, 1653, he was
committed to the Gate House by virtue of this Warrant.

These are to will and require you to take the body of John Streater, and him
you shall safely keep prisoner in your Prison of the Gatehouse; he being
committed for pdblishing of Seditious Pamphlets against the State. Of which you
are not to fail. And for so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given at the Council of State, sitting at Whitehall, the 12th day of September.
1653. Chapter Howard, S. Mover, Rob. Titchburn Presid. R. Lawrence, J. Hewson.

To the Keeper of the Gatehouse.
In which prison he lay until the beginning of Michaelmas Term: at which time,
by Council, he moved Judge Roles by a Habeas Corpus; it being granted, he was
brought before the Judges on the 23 of November. 1653. being brought to the Bar,
and turned over to the Uppet Bench prison, he had 5 Counselors at Law
attending the Cause, upon which there was learned Arguments urged for the
deliverance of the Prisoner, who was detained contrary to Law, for that the
Warrant did nor show cause, but in general terms, which was not good in Law;
but the enemies of Justice procured an Order of the then setting little
Cconvention as follows.

By virtue of an Order of Parliament, bearing date this present 21 day of
November, These are to will and require you, to receive and take into your
custody the body of John Streater, and him to keep and retain in safe custody,
until he shall be delivered by Order of Parliament. Whereof you are not to
fail, as you will answer the contrary at your peril.

Given under my hand this 21 of November. 1653. Francis Rous Speaker.

To the Keeeper of the Gatehouse Westminster.
Whose Authority was alleged to be superior to the Judges: therefore after 7
times appearing at the Bar, he was remanded to the Gate House: at which time
the high Court of Justice was set up to try the prisoner; but it fell, by the
late Protectors dissoliving the said little Assembly.

Now for that the Argument of the prisoner is of so great use, it being
delivered by him with an Audible voice at the Bar, it shall be here inserted as
it was taken in short hand, and after printed in his Trial at large.

Mr. John Streater's Argument to the second part of the Return.
My Lord,
AS to the second part of the Return, that mentions an Order of Parliament; I
make this Exception, That it does not mention any cause at all of my
imprisonment. And seeing it does not show cause, it is of less strength then
the former part of the Return; wherein is cause shown, though not a lawful
cause.

And therefore there may be no more, but only the bare reading of it, to show
the insufficiency of that part of the Return.

But here, if it should be objected that it is grounded upon an Order of
Parliament, and that the Parliament are not bound to show a cause:

Truly I am of opinion, that the Parl. would not own any one that should so
argue; it being so perfectly repugnant to their Honor, it being condemned in
Parl. within our memory, as unjust, illegal, unreasonable, and perfectly
contrary to Law: and Law is the only Scepter of Senates, Parliaments, Councels,
Empires, Kings, Princes, Governors and Magistrates.

The late Parliament in their Declaration constituting England a Free State, (
March 1648.) say, that their only Authority is by the Law.

Again, they say, that they are sersible of the excellenty and equality of the
Law of England. Also, that they shall uphold true approved Rules of the Law of
England. And that the good old Laws and Courts of Justice, and the custom of
England, are the badges of our Freedom, Rights, and Privileges.

And this Parliament has declared, that they will be tender of our Rights and
Privileges. The which we enjoy by our Laws.

29 Chap. Magna Charta. None shall be taken or imprisoned but by a legal
proceeding according to the old Law of the Land.

The words None shall be taken, imply, that none shall take or imprison any
contrary to Law.

And it cannot be denied, but the Law intends the protection of innocent
persons in freedom: And there being no cause shown in the Return, let the
command come from whence it will, the Law will warrant a discharge.

If it be by an Order of Parl. if the Order show not cause of imprisonment, not
a cause only, but a lawful cause.

Parliaments ever made Laws, but the Judges of the Law judged by those Law.

Who will question, but that the Warrant of a Justice of Peace, showing lawful
cause of imprisonment, is of greater force in Law, then an Order of Parl.
showing no cause of imprisonment?

But, my Lord, the Parl. is here; it is their Authority that I apply, my self
unto: there is nothing can be done her e but by their Authority, that is to
say, the Law.

And therefore the Law, and several Acts of Parl. as that of the 17th of the
late King, and diverse others, say that I shall be discharged.

Shall an Order of Parl. over rule Laws, Statutes, Customs, Usages, and Reason?

No, my Lord, doubtless the Parliaments intention in ordering that I shall not
be delivered but by Order of Parl. is, that I should be delivered by order of
Law, as I here expect now, and do not question in the least

Order of Law may be reckoned as the comliest of all the Parliaments Orders.

Surely none will allege that the Parl. intends to stop the proceedings of
Law that may relieve me, or that this Order of Parl. is superior to Authority
of Parl. that is judicially in this Court.

My Lord, the inferior must give way to the superior. The same reason that
the Commons in Parl. of the 4th of the late King, judged of the invalidity of
the Record in James Domestris and Caesar's Case, for that it was not argued or
debated, it was not of weight to be a sufficient Record; the same reason, I
say, may be given for an Order of Parl. not to be in force against an Act of
Parliament.

An Order of Parl. has but the same proportion with an Act of Parl. that a
Verbal command has with a command by Record; for that there are not the
debates, deliberations and three times of reading of an Order of Parliament, as
is at the establishing an Act of Parliament.

My Lord, besides any rational man will think that the wisdom and prudence of
the Parl. is such, that they will not lay up such a portion for their
successors and children, as a Record that shall be a Law or President to
after-ages shat shall be in effect, That J. S. was remanded to prison, by the
virtue of an Order of Parl. when no cause is shown in the one part of the
Return, nor lawful cause in the other.

When the Supreme Authority of Parl. the Law, and Acts of Parl. that contain
Law, say expressly, that if no cause (or lawful cause) be shown in the Return
for imprisonment, that thou the prisoner shall be set at liberty.

And Anno 20. Edw. 3. chap. 1. That if Commands come to the contrary, the
Judges shall not cease to do even Law and Right.

Besides, Sir Edw. Cook 4 part Instit. chap. 10. High Court of Parliament,
intimates, that an Act of Parl. is not pleadable in a Court of Record, but by
Record, or under the Seal. And M. Sadler in his Book entitled, The Rights of
the Kingdom, and Customs of our Ancestors, says as much. Then much less an
Order of Parl. that is not recorded upon the Parl. Rolls it self.

My Lord, it is not to be imagined, neither do I think, that the Parl.
expects that their Order (the inferior part of their power, the Law, and
Acts of Parl. that command Law; which is judicially here, as I said before.

My Lord, all Acts of Parl. that are unrepealed, are their own: they are not
theirs, when they disown them by repealing; until then, they are with not
otherwise in force, and are Law.

My Lord, A Parl. as they command Law, may be called the Wisdom and Reason of
the Nation.

Anno 4. Hen. 7, chap. 12. the Law is called, The policy of the Nation. Indeed
it is so: Justice is the best policy, as I said before. None can demonstrate
what Justice is, without the Law be as the golden Mete-wand, that Sir Edw. Cook
cautions Parliaments to leave all Causes to be measured by. 4 part. Instit.
fol. 41.

Upon the question of H. 8. to the Judges, Whether a man might be attainted of
High Treason in Parliaments, and not to call him to his Answer; the Judges
answer was, That an inferior Court could not in Law or Justice do so: and
their opinion was, That the higher the Court is, the more just they ought to be.

It is not to be supposed, that a Parliament will act contrary to their wisdom
and policy, which is the Law; or that they would have their inferior power
take place of their superior power.

Neither will the Parliament plead against me with their Power, no surely, but
by Law, legally; else they would have nailed up my prison-doors with armed men,
and never have suffered me to come to this Bar. And if that they bad not
intended that I should have been acquitted, they doubtless would have shown
cause. I know there can be no lawful cause of imprisonment shown against me.

My Lord, Job's friends they tell Job that because he was guilty in their
opinion in the sight of God, of sin, Job. 22.4. Will he (meaning God) reprove
thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into Judgment? As much as to
say, That God would cut him off from amongst men, because he was sinful, and
God powerful. But (says Job, chap. 23.3.) O that I knew where I might find
him! that I might come to his seat! I would order my cause before him, and fill
my mouth with arguments. I would know the words which he would answer me, and
understand what he would say unto me. WILL HE PLEAD AGAINST ME WITH HIS GREAT
POWER? NO; but he would put strength in me. There the righteous might dispute
with him, etc. And Chap. 38. ver. 32. God says, Gird up thy loins like a man,
for I will demand of thee, etc. And herethat God that declared his power and
wisdom visibly in the creation of creatures great in magnitude, as the
Leviathan; sweet in influence, as the Pleiades; swiftness and courage of the
horse in the day of battle; and so of the whole creation: That this great and
glorious eternal God, that gave a being to all beings by one only conception
of his mind; he willed them to be, and they were; this God, pleaded with Job by
and by, in Chap. 42. verse. 4. Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will
demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.

My Lord, will the Parliament plead against me with their power. that is to
say, what they may do? Surely they will not, but rather strengthen me, by
affording me the benefit of Law at this time and place: which is the utmost of
what I do expect, and the which they ought to do: by which I shall arrive at my
liberty, which is my right by Law, in regard there appears no cause in the
one part of the Return, nor lawful cause in the other.

My Lord, I have seen the copy of an Order of Parliament bearing date the 21 of
November present, that says, That John Streater be and do stand committed to
the Prison of the Gate House Westminster, in order to a trial: and that Mr.
Speaker do issue a Warrant accordingly.

Without doubt this is the Trial intended by the Parliament here at this place,
To try whether there be cause of imprisonment or not.

The innocent need no other Trial.

The cause that is already shown in the first part of the Return, is to be
supposed true: And all the cause that was to be shown, and none other, for that
the second part mentions no cause at all. And if there had been lawful cause
shown, it is not to be denied but it had bin of force.

By all which appears, that they intended me the benefit of the Law; which
speaks this language, That the innocent shall be acquitted.

My Lord, an Order of Parliament is but as the first thoughts of a man, by
which he intends this or that.

"An Act of Parliament, and the Law, is like the second, third, and fourth
thoughts of a man, wherein he alters his first resolutions formed by his
first thoughts, unto more safe and better resolutions.

And it is not contradictory to himself at all, nor never a whit below him.

My Lord, Here are the Parliaments second, third, and fourth thoughts
judicially in this Court, it is Law digested by Councels, debates, time, and
practice, into safety and convenience. The which is for their honor to act by:
The benfiet thereof I pray.

My Lord, The Rerum says, I shall not be delivered but by Order of Parliament.
The Order of Parliament says not such a word: But to be committed in order to
a Trial; at which I am.

My Lord, The Return says, I shall be committed Prisoner to the Ghte-house by
Order of Parliament.

The Authority of Parliament, the Law judicially in this Court, has committed
me Prisoner to the Marshal of this Court: Shall this be called a contradiction
to the Order of Parliament? no, surely it will not stand so in the opinion of
this Court.

Neither can it be called a contradiction to the Order of Parliament, if I
should be discharged of my Imprisonment; because the Authority of Parliament,
the Law, says, If there be no cause of Imprisonment I shall be discharged.

The Law intends the defense of three things, in which all else is
comprehended. They are Life, Liberty, and Estate.

Liberty is the chief: not a Liberty to do what one lists, either in obeying or
in commanding; but a just preserving Liberty that shall be for the good of
society.

It was this that our Forefathers and we have contended for by Arms; and being
victorious, will the Parliament deprive us of the benefit of the Law, which is
the Ornament of our triumph?

No, my Lord, they have declared to the contrary that they will not.

My Lord chief Justice Hide is not on this Bench, who once was, and to his
shame did deliver in effect this judgment, That for several reasons of State,
the King may do or act contrary to Law.

My Lord, I have power to kill this Gentleman next me, but not by Law. So the
Parliament has power to deliver me to prison without showing cause, but no
legal power.

It did better become Mr. Atturney-General Heath, that in his pleading for a
corrupt interest (in the cause of Sir John Heningham and others) at this Bar to
allege, That the King may act above and contrary to the Law; then Mr.
Atturney-General Prideaux, that is to plead in the behalf of a State, that some
suppose are laying a foundation of the Kingdom of Christ. If he should, it
would be the grandest inconsistency that possible could be, to what they have
declared, namely, Tenderness of our just Rights and privileges.

The which Declaration has invited a National expectation thereof; the which
should be a sufficient Law to them to do nothing that might deprive any
individual, though the most inferior and inconsiderable part or person of the
whose, unto which these promi^es were made.

My Lord, Upon the agreement of sharing the Roman Empire, made be^ween Octavius
Antonius, and Pompeius Sextus, it fell out, that they agreed to feast aboard of
Pompeius his Admiral-Gally lying at an Anchor off, of the head of Mount Misena;
and when they were all aboard and merry, Menas the Pyrate came and whispered
Pompeius in the ear, Come, says he, shall I cut Cable, weigh Anchor, and set
sail, and not only make thee Lord of Sicile and Sardinia, but of the whose
Empire also? No, says noble Pompeius, I have not learned to break faith,
although it were to the gaining of an Empire. When he had invited them to a
Banquet, they should not be deprived of what they expected by imprisonment or
loss of their shares of the Empire. Such advice, and such practices, do better
become Pirates and Theives, then persons of virtue and honor: the which was in
his power to have done.

My Lord, Seeing as I say, that the Parl. did at the first declare that they
would be tender of our Rights and Privileges; and seeing it is our privilege
to have the benefit of the Law: and seeing the Law says. That if there shall
be no cause, there shall be no imprisonment: and in regard there is no cause
shown why I should be a prisoner; I do aver, that the Parliament cannot have
greater dishonor put upon them, then for any one to allege that they
intended imprisonment to me, if there should no cause in Law appear.

My Lord, If there be any thing else alleged to be against me, then what
appears upon the Return and the Record, the Law requires you not to take
notice of it.

And seeing there is no cause, there ought to be no imprisonment: if it should,
it would be injustice.

Justice is one of the attributes of God, that by his dispensations he would
have administered to men.

The administration of injustice, is a perfect fighting against God.

I believe the Parliament would not be found fighters against God.

My Lord, The Philosopher says, Where just Law rules, there God may be said
to rule.

If you judge justly, you have no cause to fear. I expect it, as you will
answer the contrary at the dreadful day of judgment.

The Reader is to take notice, that the Prisoner acknowledged their power as a
Parliament, elfe his Plea had not bin allowed.

Notwithstanding this which the prisoner urged, and his Council, he was again
committed prisoner to the Gate House: after which, as was said before, the
Little Assembly being dissolved, the prisoner brought his Habeas Corpus again
in Hillary Term; at which time he appeared at the Bar eleven times himself, and
Council pleading, too large here to be recited; only the passages of the last
day as follows:

Mr. Attorney General Prideaux began thus:

My Lord, This Gentleman the prisoner, stands committed by Order of Parliament;
And whereas he himself and the Counsel assigned for him have alleged, That the
Order of Parliament is void, by reason (as they say) the Parliament is
dissolved:

My Lord, Parliaments cannot be dissolved: the Parliament or the same power is
in being now. And Parliaments were to be once a year, as by the Statute of the
4 of Ed. 3. at which time he may be relieved. In the North parts, the Assizes
can be held but once ayear.

But grant that the meaning of the Parliament was to deliver him themselves,
and not that they meant the Parliament to be on the 3 of September 1654. yet
for that they ordered that he should not be delivered but by Order of
Parliament, I conceive he can be delivered no otherwise then by an Order of
Parliament, nor by any other but a Parliament.

Possibly when that the Parliament consisted of King, Lords, and Commons, an
Order of one or two Houses, without a threefold consent, had not been binding:
but now the power that was in the Lords and King, are joined in the Commons,
and therefore is of greater force.

And it is not material whether they show cause, or not: there may be good
cause: And it cannot be presumed that the Parliament would commit a man, and
have no cause at all for so doing. But without question, a Parliament may
commit men, and show no cause.

But suppose his Commitment be in order to a Trial in Parliament; will this
Court take upon them to judge in the cause? or can they by Habeas Corpus bring
the body of the prisoner and the cause before them, out of Parliament?

The Lord of Strafford was tried in Parliament: I believe this Court would not
in such a Case remove the Trial before them, nor indeed can they. Upon the
Return it appears, he is committed by Order of Parliament, and to be
delivered by Order of Parliament: if they had intended he should have been
delivered otherwise, they would have either said nothing, or have Ordered his
delivery according to Law.

When Kings die, it is true, that Commissions do cease: but when Parliaments do
dissolve, their Acts do not cease. Besides, a Parliament is the Supreme Court,
and they do constitute other Courts; and therefore it is not for other Courts
to question the proceedings of a Parliament.

It will not be expected of me to show that the Parliament had sufficient
matter or cause of imprisonment.

To this the Judges answered, No, no: if he had any thing more to speak to the
Order of Parliament, that was it that was to be spoken unto.

Mr. Attor. My Lord, this Gentleman might make his application for his liberty
to the present Authority elsewhere; and I doubt not but it would be granted
him; for now Parliamentary authority is in one person.

My Lord, I doubt not but the Court will be cautious in meddling in this case,
but it will rather remand him to prison; first, for that it may be that the
proceedings against him are not yet ripe: it may be yet under examination.
Secondly, for that this is the first president of the like nature, and it being
of so great and high concernment.

After a little space of time, Mr. Attorney comes into the Court.

Lord chief Justice Roll. Mr. Attorney, here is Mr. Streater again by Rule of
Court; he has been a long time in prison, and I see here is nothing come
against him that is mate^ial,

Mr. Serj. Twisden, of counsel for the prisoner. My Lord, we desire that he may
be bayled.

Lord chief Justice Roll. What have you any thing more to say, Mr. Attorney?

Mr. Attur. My Lord, I thought I should have heard of him, but I did not: the
Court must do justice. He is committed by order of Parliament.

My Lord, if you will undo an Order of Parliament, he is to be delivered: but I
hope the Court will not.

M^. Windham. The Order of Parliament is undone by the Parliaments being
dissolved.

Mr. Attur. Commissioners of Sewers are granted by Parliament, and they do
continue after the Parliament is dissolved, Iayl-delivery is but once a year in
the North parts; and I suppose the next Parliament will be sitting, before he
has been a year in prison at which time he may be tried or delivered. And
although this be called an Order of Parliament, yet it was acted by Parliament.

Lord chief Justice Roll. But all that the Parliament acts, are not Acts of
Parliament.

The first part of the Return is too general, it mentions norwhat Books, nor
whose Books, or where they were, or when published.

The second part of the Return is grounded upon an Order of Parliament: we are
to take notice when a Parliament sits, and also when it is dissolved; or
when it ends, or determines. Discontinuance is a determination.

A Writ of Error many times is made Returnable in the next Parliament; but that
lies after Trial at Law. The word Order is a proper phrase to that which is
not an Act. An Order of Parliament is not binding in Succession: How shall the
next Parliament take notice of a former Parliaments Order? Committees that are
appointed by Order of Parliament do cease upon the dissolving of the
Parliament. I have been of the Parliament; I ever found Parliaments of the same
Opinion. We must look to the first Imprisonment, and no farther: if you had
Returned other Cause, we should have taken notice of it. We do not reverse the
Order of Parliament; that is reversed by the Parliaments being dissolved; and
it being dissolved, there is no visible way how the prisoner shall be relieved:
though there may be a probable way.

Judge Ask. I am of the same Opinion, and that it could not be, that the Order
of Parliament, by saying he should not be delivered but by Order of Parliament,
but that they meant by the same Parliament, and not by a Successive Parliament.
If it should be taken to be by Order of the next Parliament, where shall be the
Liberty of the Subjects? or how they shall be relieved in long interval of
parliaments? as in the Reign of K. James, and the Reign of King Charles, we had
not parliaments in many years together: and although it be so that the
parliament by the Statute of the 4. of Ed. 3. should be once a year, or oftener,
if need be: besides, here is no Succession of parliament, but a Dissolution.
Another parliament must be another Session, and therefore an Order cannot be in
force until another Session. If they had made an Act of parliament, or passed a
judgment of parliament, it had been another Case.

Upon the consideration of the whole matter, the Judges opinion was, that the
prisoner ought to be discharged, and this Rule entered.

Saturday next after 8 days of the Purif. 1653.
The Lord Protector against Io. Streater, Gent. The Defendant was brought into
Court by the Marshal upon Habeas Corpus, and by the Court discharged of his
imprisonment by the motion of Mr. Sergeant Twisden.

By the Court. As may be seen, Styles Reports, fol. 415.

Lord chief Justice Roll. Sir, you will do well to carry your self conformably
to the present Power, and walk inoffensively.

Mr. Streater. My Lord, I ever have been, and I hope shall be, a Subject to
Government, so as the Law requires me to be: It is not my duty to be otherwise
subject.

In Easter Term following, the Prisoner was discharged of his Bail. About six
weeks after, the Late Protector sent six files of Musketeers, they in
compassed his house near High-gate; but he having notice of it by one of the
Protector's Councel's Letter to him, did escape and hid himself for 4 Months in
private, in which time he sent a Letter to the Protector, wherein he desired to
know, what was the reason of his so violent prosecuting of him: no answer could
be obtained. In the Interim of which time, a Minister of London, a friend to J.
S. and one intimate with the Protector, repayreth to him, to mediate for J. S.
who knew nothing at all of his proceedings herein: He desired the Protector to
desist from prosecuting of him; Told him that he was but a dissatisfied friend,
and that he was confident that nothing was in his designs but public good,
and that such dealings would but make him stand at a greater distance: To which
the Protector answered, that he would have him dead or alive, unless he would
come and submit himself to him, or else that he would go in the West Indies
Expedition; the which if he would, he should be well provided for. J. S. his
friend acquainted him with what passed, and pressed him to comply in both of
the aforementioned particulars; but could not prevail, for that J. S. in the
first place was resolved not to trust to his Mercy; nor, in the second place to
go into his Sink, Jamaica; where he would have been glad to send all Assertors
of the Good Old Cause, that he might never have had his Conscience grated with
the reading of such pieces as his piece of the Observations upon Aristotle's
Politics, for which J. S. was this time prosecuted vigorously: In which
discourse, the Excellency of a free State was maintained, and the
Inconveniences of a Tyranny, or Single Person, were fully demonstrated. At the
end of the aforementioned 4. Months private and voluntary Imprisonment, for the
security of his Person, he bethought of writing to General Disborow; who with
much Civility and Courtesy answered, his Letters prevailed so with the
Protector, that if J. S. would promise not to write or publish any more books,
to the prejudice of the then Government, he should live quietly and
undisturbed: General Disborow sent to him notice hereof, withal desiring that
he would come to speak with him; promising by the Messenger he should come and
go safely. Accordingly at Kensington J. S. waited upon him, where he promised
not to write any more against that power; (his private Reason was, because he
saw all people sit quiet under the Power, not resisting, and therefore it was
in vain to continue writing, or further opposing the Corruptions of those
Times,) and General Disborow promised he should be prosecuted no more: But so
it was, that one month after in November 1654, again the second time the
Protector sent a Squadron of Horse to his House near High-gate, by them he was
taken out of his bed at one of the clock in the morning, and brought to the
White-Hart at Chering-Crosse: At day break, J. S. sent to Genesis Disborow, and
acquainted him, That contrary to his promise, he was taken prisoner again.
Immediately the General went to the Protector, to know the reason thereof,
being confident that J. S. would not break his word. The Protector told him,
That he had been discoursing with some Parliament Men of matters of dangerous
Consequence at such a time and place. Worthy Genesis Disborow did acquaint Mr.
Streater of all that he could learn touching that matter; and sent a command to
the Guard that was over him, to bring him to Suffolk* house, where the General
discoursed the whole matter to him; and withal told him, That Mr. Thurlow the
Secretary was the Instrument of his Trouble. To which J. S. replied, That he
did remember the Discourse every word, and repeated the substance thereof to
him; withal told him, He would write it down, and leave it to any to judge,
whether it would amount to the desert of a Restraint. General Disborow approved
of so doing; and accordingly he did it, being to this purpose, viz. That being
asked, Whether one might lawfully sign the Recognition before he Entered the
House, and afterward oppose the same thing? J. S. Returned answer, One might:
And gave first this for a Reason, That it did contain these words, To be true
to the lawful power of the Protector: of the which he knew not any that he
had; and therefore the Obligation was void, because that unto which he engaged
had no being. He further Illustrated it, both by the Opinion of diverse
Casuists, and Civilians.

A Second Reason was, That if he could dispense with it in point of Conscience,
it would consist well with Prudence, for good minded men Not to scruple the
signing thereof; for that thereby they were kept or sifted out, from whom good
was to be expected; and though they could not do the Good they ought, yet they
might prevent much Evil, and be in a readiness to attend the opportunity that
providence might offer, to accomplish the Good they ought to do.

A Third Reason was, from the Example of our forefathers, who did swear to be
true to the King, and subject to the known Laws; yet so soon as they came into
the House, they Treated of the Alteration of several Laws: the which they
could not do, if they took the Oath in any other capacity then as private men:
For an Oath is not lawful to be taken, that should bind private persons in any
thing that is contrary to the Judgment and Opinion of a Council of Legislators.

Another Question was asked J. S. What were the signs of a weak State? He
answered, That they were purblind in their Counsels, that they could not see,
one year to an end, what the Effects of their Resolutions would be; which begot
uncertainty, and Changes in Government. The Remainder of the dangerous
discourse before mentioned, was about what Opinions in Religion were fittest to
be promoted, and will best suit with Monarchies or Tyrannies? and what with
Aristocracies? and what with Oligarchies? and what with Democracies? Together
with the Necessity of promoting and encouraging Religion, if it were for no
other End, (the which God forbid) than to make people easy to be governed: If
it be taken away, they cannot be Governed. Therefore the Heathens Institute
Religion, and give Divine Honor to Stocks and Stones. This being the substance
of what J. S. writ at large, and sent it to General Disborow, who immediately
procured his Enlargement, and stood between him and his Enemies, prevented all
future Trouble coming upon him, with much Care and Readiness. These troubles
continuing two Years after the day of the Interruption of this Session of
Parliament, to his Damage and Expense many Hundred pound.

FINIS.

