STRANGE PREDICTIONS: OR, A Prophesy foretelling what Alteration shall be, In
the year One thousand six hundred fifty three.
The Tune is, Packingtons Pound.
WIll. Lilly being taken as Prisoner of late,
Most strange alterations does Prognosticate,
How things shall be carried in Fifty and three,
And how they shall happen in every degree:
So you need not doubt, this Year will bring out,
All things in an excellent manner about;
One thousand Six hundred fifty and three,
Will produce what we hoped this long time to see.
The Land shall be freed from all kind of Taxations,
And men in their minds shall be eased of vexations;
Sorrow and care shall torment us no more,
Some men shall grow rich, whilst others grow poor;
You need not to fear, you shall see the next year,
All things in an excellent shape to appear.
One thousand Six hundred, etc.
The Countryman may his Commodities bring
Up to London to sell it is an excellent thing;
His Customers flock both before and behind him,
He needs not to fear there is no man shall mind him:
And there he may stand with his Cap in his hand,
And may carry his ware home again his mand:
One thousand Six hundred, etc.
Brabbles and Quarrels shall all be quite ended,
All things in a very good time shall be mended;
There shall be such love betwtxt brother and brother,
They will do all they can to cheat one another:
But yet all this while I cannot but smile,
To think how the times men's fancies beguile.
One thousand Six hundred, etc.
If you go but next Term unto Westminster Hall,
You may see the brave Judges and Gentlemen all;
The Lawer so neatly trickt up in his Gown,
Will not be ashamed to wait on a Clown;
The Lawyers shall be so frank and so free,
They Will be ready to plead a man's cause for a Fee.
Poverty now shall be banished the Land,
And he that has got an Estate in his hand,
Shall unto the Poor be librall grown,
He will strive for to save all he can that is his own:
Thus in my mind, a poor man shall find,
The rich to themselves evermore shall be kind.
One thousand Siz hundred, etc.
Men shall the next year be so kind to their wives,
That women shall live most excellent lives;
In bed and at board they still shall agree,
This would be an excellent thing for to see,
That a man and his wife should live such a life,
An excellent thing to prevent future strife.
One thousand Six hundred, etc.
If a Traveller chance to be weary, he may
Call at the first Alehouse he finds in his way,
And there for his money he welcome may be,
All this the next year you are certain to see:
Then tell me kind friend, are not Times like to mend,
When a man shall be welcome his money to spend.
One thousand Six hundred, etc.
Bakers shall now be so free to the poor,
They will give them whole six-penny loavs at their door
And all men in general shall be so kind,
If a poor man wants money no comfort he will find:
Is not this a brave thing such tidings to bring,
It would make a whole Kingdom with joy for to ring.
One thousand Six hundred, etc.
Thus we that have lived in sorrow and care,
Shall now be released we need not to fear;
And men such a strange alteration shall find,
It Is enough for to comfort a dying man's mind:
And thus you shall see how all things shall be,
In one thousand six hundred fifty and three.
For all that is spoken is certain and true,
Come buy my new Almanacks, new, new, new.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for R. E^l^s.


