STRANGE NEVVES FROM CAMPANIA A Province in ITALY: BEING A true Relation of one
who slept at noontime of day, how his spirit was transported into the Province
of Campania in Italy, by chance, near unto the Lake Avernus, also his discourse
with an old man of that Province, concerning the present distempers in those
parts, not unlike these in England, who after his recovery out of an ecstasy
(by reason of the Cruelties, and bloud-sucking oppressions in that Province)
writ these ensuing Lines:

Psalm. 1.1. Faelix ille animum qu^m non de Tramite recte,
Impia sacrilega flexit contagio turba.
Imprinted at ATTALIA, in the Year MDCXLVII.

Plutoes dark Dungeon, Dedalus Labyrinth,
Great Lucifers night-star, and the Berecinth,
Which these three-headed Hydraes worship more
Then Christ their Savior; and that Devil adore,
Because of Profit it on them bestows,
Greater then horn mad Votes, and forsworn Vows.
It is bewitching to their ears that itch
For Reformation, it goes through stitch:
The devils Plot, for sure in hell 'twas hatched,
And some Scotch Calvin thence this Monster fetched;
Whereby the Devils agents work their feat,
And cast Campania in a bloody sweat.
Cerberus strong Collar for it does tie men fast,
If once they take it, they never more can gasp
One blast of Loyal breath; it suffocates
The widest Winde-pipe, and consumes their pates.
Its Charons Moat indeed, no bottom's found
Of its illegal, impious, wicked ground.
Its Plutoes Dungeon; for who enters there,
Before his eyes has never set Gods fear.
It Is Dedalus Labyrinth guided by a Thread,
(And fitter it is to barn then for to read)
Who enters into it, he perhaps may prov't
Worse then that Labyrinth; e're he can remov't
He must lie with the Minotaure, and beget
A monstrous birth withal, and worship it.
Its Lucifers night-star, that great Devils guide,
Which does a theeving through the Kingdom ride,
And both the King and People has undone,
Clad with false colored Reformation.
Its Sybills Image; they so much adore't,
Becaus't has bettered down the Royal Fort.
Excise, Sequestration, Plunder, Loanes,
It gained, to gnaw our flesh, and bruise our bones.
So all old things are grown to a new fashion,
By Covenant-ingaging Reformation.
And yet this Hell-Hound hunting up and down,
Pursues each loyal heart from Town to Town,
With yelping, yelling, and a hideous roar,
Till it have left them never a Mite in store.
Whilst yet he spoke, behold another sight
(With great amazement) did my ghost afright:
Whole multitudes were gathered on a knot,
And close unto a stately Palace got,
Near to the Luke Avernus situated,
Where (he told me) their business was stated:
If you be pleased (quoth he) we will go along,
And hear what is to be done in yonder throng:
Agreed (queth I) and thence we went away,
To see what would betide the State that day.
When to the Palace we approached near,
The groans and cries of widows we did hear,
Lamenting for their husbands who were slain
The Causes of the wicked to maintain.
Sighing says one, let us go to the State,
And know if they our sorrows will abate;
Agreed, said all, and straight they thither went,
And how they sped, to you I Will represent.
What is the matter here (quoth L.) with these
Perverse ungodly women? seek to please
A woman's mind? let us rather seek to sell
Or half sequester all the devils in hell.
Quoth H. that suits well with a new translation,
And balances our blessed Reformation:
If we should give the Public coin away,
Our Soldiers (as they do) would want their pay.
Its well (quoth S.) O it is a curious Plot,
If we should do it, how should we pay the Scot,
For if he be not paid, an alteration
May hinder our unheard of Reformation;
And on a sudden sink that in a stream,
Which for this six years space has swom in the Maine.
Be cautious then (quoth V) what you do spare,
Our Grand-Committees must be paid their share;
And let our Sub-Committees have their due,
Because they faithful were to us, and true;
And added to each private Pocket more
Then ever our great Grandsires had in store.
What must the Excise men do, said P. must they
(For all the pains the have taken) want their pay?
They have themselves like honest men demeaned,
And much oth' Kingdoms Treasure they have gained
For thee and me: The hungry they Excis'd,
And like the Devil himself have tyrannized.
A Member must not be forgotten says M:
For if we Members want, we are not men,
Our Sequestrators must rewarded be,
And every Petty-fogger have his fee:
Then when to thee, and me all is paid that is due,
We will again begin our Trades anew.
Like Tytius Vulture we will know the hearts
Of The Common People; we will act our parts
In highest nature, and in every thing
That may our profit, and our pleasure bring.
We Will heap up Treasure, we will enrich our store,
We Will serve the devil for wealth (that) if not more.
They all agreed with acclamation, vowed
What M. had spoke they every one allowed.
so every one shat'd of the Public Coin,
And sent their servants out more to purloyne:
But all this while the harmless women gained
No restitution for their slain or main'd.
Forth with I ask't my guide what all this meant;
It is (quoth he) our blessed Parliament,
Which has slain guiltless blood, and murdered many,
And never pitied the complaints of any:
The Widows tears, and eke the Fatherless
Could never find of them a just redress.
Let him declare (if there be any one)
To whom one act of justice they have done;
Survey the Land (who will) from East to West,
From North to South, and let him do his best,
For all his travel he shall never find
A grain of mercy in their perverse mind:
One drop of Balsom will not be applied
By our grave Senate to the putrifi'd.
O God (quoth I) what wretched men are ye,
Tied with a boundless chain of slavery!
Have you no way your selves for to redress?
Have you no means th'oppressors to suppress?
Seek all the world throughout; never be tied
To a perpetual bondage, by their pride;
Whose thoughts are never fixed on that is good,
Whose feet are swift to shed the guiltless blood;
Their tongues speak lies, their lips are full of guile,
Their Councels Treason hatch, by ever wile.
Let all your Conscript Fathers be transformed,
And let them be by every Peasant scorned*
Let all your Deeij Christian Persecutors
Be rendered to the Sessions Executors.
Then shall your ancient Liberties be shown,
And every honest man enjoy his own.
The good old Man deep sighing thus replied,
I Am fraid (quoth he) this will not soon betide,
My heart could wish to morrow was the day
They were all hid, or else would run away;
If it should happen so (even for their sake)
I Will drink their health of strong Avernus Lake;
I would (in memory of them) keep that day
A joyful feast; and will for ever pray
That all those Traitors who their King withstood,
May dye (like Pilate) voyding guts, and blood;
And after that, they Ixions pains may feel,
By turning a perpetual burning wheel;
Or keep a Senate with their Grandsire Nick,
And in his Kingdom play him such a trick
(As they have lately in Campania done)
And become heirs of his eternal throne;
There Is work enough for them, and all their rabble,
Their Clearks may be made Knights of his round table.
His Kingdom's large, employments they may have,
And every thing he gives, if they can crave.
Whilst yet he spoke, behold within our view
Came trooping over the bank another crew
Of warlike Soldiers; but their clothes were thin,
The State turned Shearemen, and had pincht their ^kin.
What mean these men (quoth I) that they repair
Unto this place? what business have they here?
These are the States old beaten Soldiers, who
Want their Arrears, dew many months ago:
They come to ask them; I am full persuaded,
With States high looks, they scarce will be out-Jaded.
They are stout men, they have a resolution
To bring to try all each States man's transgression,
And in a week redress our grievance more
Than our brave State has done sixty before.
Well then (quoth I) let us hear their full discourse,
And see which of them's Master of the Purse.
Out comes the Speaker with his hat in hand,
And briefly thus begins; What Is your demands?
What service have you done for what you crave?
Or how can you account for what you have?
Your service must unto the world be known,
And what you have had must unto us be shown,
Before we can dispense upon Areares,
Or any thing be done, but what appears
For the public good, and not for private ends:
I am in have, adieu my honest friends.
Well said brave Speaker, thou have uttered more
Then all thy fellow Senators before
Have ever done; when thou do us confound,
Thy Pay shall be one hundred thousand Pound.
First we demand all our Arreares that is due,
For what we crave our service is in view
To all the world: we ventured have our selves
TO enrich a crew of all devouring Elves.
We have been Traitors. Tyrants to maintain;
And still we Traytored are if we do claim
That is our due from you; O blessed State!
Yet to your Country most inveterate.
Forty Millions you have already had
Of The Public stock: must not account be made?
You have disposed of it amongst your friends,
Not for the Public, but to private ends.
Thousands of harmless men for you have died.
Maintained your Treason, Tyranny, and Pride.
But now your cheating is found out and crossed,
And if you look not to it all will be lost.
As we are Soldiers, we will be very fair,
You shall not what is our due amongst you share.
Be wise in time, consider what you do,
Beware your after-wits prove not your woe.
So we departed and the State adjourned
Until the morning, and my Spirit returned
Unto its former Pristine habitation
When it had viewed Campanias desolation.
Quis talia fando temperat a Lacrymis*
FINIS.
(...) in the Nation ought to preserve the Nation as much as in him lies; It is
a universal principle, non nobis solum nati sumus, etc. We are not born for
our selves alone; but the Country in which we live challenges an interest in
us, this principle made many rejoice in dying, esteeming it, dulce and decorum
pro patria mori.

3. The Law of this Kingdom (by which we may expect to stand or fall) secures
us in this Kingdom, we have this Maxim, that solus populi is suprema lex, The
safety of the people is the supremest law; this was the hinge we moved upon,
the Kingdoms safety was endangered, and withent a speedy application of a
timely preservative was likely to be consumed: the best preservative we could
see, was the security of his Majesty's person, which our act has effected.
Whose enemies are so dull, and whose understanding is so stupefied and
sottishly blind, but may remember and know what a sad disaster has befallen
the Kingdom, in the expense of so much blood and treasure, by the surprising
of his Majesty's Person in the late wars* who can but know, had they not had
his person for their designs had proved abortive: We well know there was a
design to seize on his Majesty, to raise a new Army, and unnaturally to
involve this Kingdom in its own blood, and so to render our latter end
miserably worse then our beginning, but this we thought our selves bound to
prevent if possible, which we still judge and doubt not to prove it, and is yet
lawful for us to do. As the King is by the law of this Kindome bound to
govern and secure us according to the Law, so are we engaged to secure his
Person against the violaters of the Law, which we have, through the blessing of
God accomplished, Our end was not his enthrallment, bondage and ruin, as by
our actions may appear, but his safety, and the Kingdoms preservation, which
otherwi^e we justly fear, had both been endange^ed; suppose the King through
ignorance of traitors intention to destroy His Person or His Kingdom should
expose himself to the mercy of him that sought his life, do you imagine it
would be treasonable for any one to remove his Majesty though without hi^
consent from the place the traitor sought his life in, and to preserve him? but
the case is yet more fair for us, His judgment being satisfied, his will w^^
likewise concurring to his remove, we hope this our action will be recented in
good part by all the Nation for whose good it was effected. Had the King been
surprised, another army been under his name raised, the Nation once more
wallowed in its own blood; then surely but too late, would the people have
cried out, oh that some had been stirred up to have stood in this breach.

IIII. The Commission from the Parliament (whom some say though with more
boldness then judgment, more malice then wisdom, and more envy then prudence
or honesty, we have rebelled against and acted contrary to in this action)
acquits us, for by our Commission we are bound to seek the preservation of the
Kings person, whether we have not so done let all the Kingdom judge: what hurt
to his person have we done? what hurt to the Kingdom have we done? we are not
conscions to our selves that we have in this done amiss, who has cause to
complain, surely none can nor will, except those who had thought to have made
all men dance after their pipes, kiss their hands, and resign up their
birthrights, liberties and lives to their arbitrary and tyrannical, lawless,
boundless wills, these H^man-like are mad to think a poor Mordecai will not
stand cap in hand, bow his knee, and bend unto them.

FINIS.

