The Strong CASTLE OF GOTHRIDGE Taken by Colonel BIRCH: Sir Henry Lingen, and
fifty Gentlemen taken Prisoners, All the Officers and Soldiers at mercy, And
all the Arms and Ammunition, Bagg and Baggage taken by the said Colonel
BIRCH, on Friday last, July 31. 1646.

Monday the 3d. of August, 1646.
This Letter of Colonel Birches, with the two other Letters, are examined, and
printed, and published according to Order of Parliament.



London, Printed by Jane Coe, 1646.

The taking of GOTHRIDGE CASTLE By Colonel Birch, with all the Arms, and
Ammunition, and all Prisoners at mercy, certified by a Letter from Colonel
Birch Himself.
Honored SIR,
NO time has been neglected by me in the prosecution of this service, but as
the ground would admit I have carried on my Approches, Batteries, and Mines;
And after I had very much torn the Castle with my Mortarpiece, that no whole
room was left in it (that not doing the work) I resolved to go on with the
mines, and Battery (where I could not mine) both of which went on so
succesfully, that in a few hours I intended to enter by Storm.

And to that end drew my horse and foot together, which the Enemy perceiving,
rather then they would run the hazard, took down their Cullers, and put up
white (without which I denied them any Treaty) their desires were honorable
terms, which I thought not fit to grant, neither to give them any thing beyond
mercy for their lives, their persons to be wholly at my dispose; upon which
terms, I have this day received possession of this Castle. And when the
Parliament shall please to command Sir Henry Lingen to wait upon them, I shall
carefully bring him up to attend their pleasure. In the meantime I desire that
the Parliament will be pleased to signify their pleasure concerning the
demolishing or keeping this Castle; The condition of which, and of all other
passages here, this Bearer Major Blackmore will give a perfect account, who
has been very active and helpful in this service, together with the condition
of the Horse and Foot under my command, how much they have been discouraged by
those who with earnestness seek their own ends, notwithstanding all which, no
duty has been omitted, nor any means left unattempted which might forward the
Public Service.

Your must humble and real Servant, JOHN BIRCH.
Gotheridge the 31 of July 1646.
The Copy of another Letter from Colonel Birches Leagure.
SIR,
I Know not how enough to commmend the gallantry of Col. Birch, in his
deportment before Gotheridge Castle, a Nest of Papists, and rigid Malignants,
that were very desperate in their resolutions, which the more encensed our
Soldiers, Sir Henry Lingen would fain have had another Summons to begot a
parley; but the former offers refused, made our Colonel look upon that as
incapable of so much favor. It is a place very strong, and Mining has proved
very hard work, yet Col. Birch has used all possible means, and lost no
opportunity in the speeding of the reducing thereof, to the best advantage of
the Kingdom, which I believe the surrender of Worcester has something hastened.

But the Colonel made his approches, and mined with all the speed that the
cragginesse of the place would permit, and not only plied them with his
Batteries, but had done very good execution upon the castle with the Granados
shot from our Mortarpeece. And all things were in so fair a way, that we were
almost ready to storm; then which the Soldiers desired nothing more, so that
all, both Colonel, Officers and Soldiers, should not have needed to have been
hastened, had not the work been shortened another way. We were so near the
storm, that Colonel Birch had drawn up the Horse and Foot, and was ordering
them into a posture for falling on. But the enemy in Gotheridge Castle
perceiving in what posture we were in, and seeing how they were on all sides
surprised, their hearts began to fail them, so that they took a most fearful
Alarm; and (whether by Counsel of War, or otherwise) they speedily took
their condition into consideration, and (perceiving that we would not balk
with them) being unwilling to endure a storm (which was much the more terrible
to them, because of diverse Gentry amongst them) they desired a parley, but my
Colonel would not grant that, though much importuned for it: insomuch that
when they saw we would not admit of any delay, they took in their Standerd
Colors, and held out their white Flagge of Truce, and begged that they might
but march out Honorably to their own homes, and some to Garrisons. But
nothing would be granted more then quarter for their lives. And in short it
was agreed to thus:

First, that Sir Henry Lingen the Governor of Gotheridge Castle, with all the
Officers and Soldiers therein, shall have mercy for their lives.

Secondly, that the said Sir Henry Lingen the Governor, with all the Officers
and Soldiers, shall surrender up themselves prisoners to be at Colonel Birch
his disposing.

Thirdly, that all the Arms and Ammunition, provision, and whatsoever else is
in Gotheridge Castle, shall be delivered up to Colonel Birch for the service
of the Parliament.

Fourthly, that the same be performed presently the same day, (viz. July 31.
1646.

All which was done accordingly, this present day. and Colonel Birch is now in
possession of the Castle, wherein besides the Governor, were about 50.
Gentlemen, and others of quality, and 120. Soldiers, of whom I will give you a
List of their Names, with all convenient speed.

My Colonel has this day received a letter from Hereford, dated yesterday, of
which I have sent you a Copy. I hope care will be taken to make all lovers and
frinds, and that we that have fought together in one cause, and been ready to
shed our blood one for another, shall not now spill one another blood, but
live in unity, and enjoy peace through all the Kingdom, which is the prayers of

Your most humble servant. N. H
Gotheridge July 31. 1646.
The Copy of a Letter sent to Colonel Birch from Hereford, then before
Gotheridge Castle.
For the honorable Colonel Birch, Governor of Hereford, at his quarters
before Gotheridge Castle.
SIR,
HEre is given out by some, That as soon as Gotheridge Castle is reduced, you
are to march away from this City, and another Colonel to possess your place.
And truly I think the design is working: wherefore, if you may use all the
means you can to prevent it, that your Brother, or some other friends may
command the Castle and Forces which shall be left here, if you do not your
self. Sir, your business for the County Voices may hold if managed wisely. I
have writ to Sir Richard Hopton again in the business, A copy of which you
shall see at your return, and am now writing to Sir John Binges, but I hear of
none that stirs in it but my self. They have several in most parts of the
County. We earnestly desire you here. I pray you haste, I conclude, and
subscribe my self

MILES HILL.
Hereford July 29. 1646. I pray you set business in agitation in those parts,
where your Commands are by your Assignation Officers.



FINIS.

