A SHIELD Against the Parthian Dart, OR, A WORD to the Purpose, SHOT INTO
Wallingford-House.

Answered in Defense of the present ACTIONS of STATE here in England, that
produced the late Change of GOVERNMENT.

By J. S.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

A Shield against the Parthian Dart.
PAge the 10th, the Author has this Quaere, upon which he raises his Ensuing
Discourse, viz. Whether the Men met together at Westminster, (where the Commons
use to meet) be at this day a Lawful Parliament, according to the Fundamental
Laws of this Nation, to bind the People to obey their Commands?

He admits, That power derived from the People, creates a Supremacy; and
that it is fixed somewhere there, in one or more; and that the Commons did, and
had power to, Elect a Representative; though they were formerly known by no
other names then Petitioners. I shall briefly answer every particular; and then
Assert a general defense of the now-Sitting of the Parliament at Westminster;
whom God direct, and preserve.

That the Commons were sometimes Petitioners to the Kings of this Nation, I
grant; but from thence it is not to be inferred, That what they petitioned for,
if it were refused by the King, that they could not command it: they never
petitioned the King but in case of obstinacy; as in the case of the Petition of
Right: the Parliament when they could not draw the King to consent to the thing
propounded by Argument, they did by Prayer entreat or Petition. Although they
did so, it does not therefore argue, That the King's power was superior to the
Parliament; for that the Kings power of Consenting to the Passing of Acts of
Parliament, was no other than as if A. should make a Letter of Attorney to B:
B. refuses to Act by that Authority A. gives him by virtue of that Letter of
Attorney: therefore he entreats and prays B. to accept of the Letter of
Attorney, and to act by it: B. consulteth his own Interest, and says, If it be
made in such and such a manner and form, I will act by it. A. finding that B.
is the fittest person either living upon the place where it is to be put in
Execution, or for some other Reasons, condescendeth to B. Even so, has it been
in times past between the King and the people. The People Represented in
Parliament, make Laws or Letters of Attorney to their standing Officer, the
King, for which he received his Fees, the Revenues of the Crown, and was their
Attorney: He having by several descents gained footing upon the Interest of the
People, stands upon his Terms, and will not accept of Laws made in this
manner, or in that manner, but consulteth his own Interest: the Parliament
seeing that it is convenient to have their Atturney's Consent or Opinion, do
apply themselves to him by Petition or Entreaty. This does not argue, but that
the power is in those who Grant or Appoint; and, that he that is to put it in
Execution, is any other but the Inferior to that power: the Petition or
Entreaty does not make him Superior. To this purpose, see Sir Ed Coke, chap.
High-Courts of Parliament, folto 14. The Lords and Commons in Parliament, upon
demand of Aid in the behalf of the King by any new Device; answered, That they
tendered the King's Estate, but they could not consent to this new device,
without Conference with their Counties, for which they served; This (says he)
is the ancient Custom of Parliaments, and it is according to Law.

That the Great Council of the Commons is much more Ancient than these
Petitions spoken of by the Author, is evident by Tacitus in the Life of
Agricola; speaking how easily the British Princes were overcome by the Romans;
says he, It was because they did not consult with their Common Counsel. Time
by the Events has Reproved that mode of Petitioning; for it was the occasion
of the claiming of a Negative Voice, unto which the Kings had no Right at all.
But it may be Objected, That an Attorney has a Negative Voice, Why should not
the King also have the same? To which I answer, That one that is not bound by
his Office, it is true, may refuse to accept of that Authority, and omit the
Execution thereof: In this case, you may Elect another Attorney. The King was
bound by his Office to execute the Laws; it was below the Commons to pray any
thing of him; they did but betray themselves in so doing. The words of the Oath
of the Coronation are expressly these; I do swear to Govern according to such
Laws as the People shall choose to be Governed by: And therefore when he
refused so to do, the Commons might have laid him aside, and elected another;
for either his doing more, or for his doing less, then he ought to do. To prove
this, I shall give an Instance out of what has been written by Mr. Will.
Prynne, (one that the Author has a very high Esteem of; bu^ it is for his
last depraved writings, in which he has laid aside his Reason, and only
exercises his Passion, as may soon be discerned by comparing his late Railing,
wording, and unreasonable works, with his former Laborious and praiseworthy
writings) in his Sovereign Power of Parliaments, as in the 4th Part. page 201.
Kings (says he) are of no more Divine Institution, then any other Inferior
Magistrates, Officers, or Princes whatsoever; the Scriptures do abundantly
evidence, that they are questionable and Censurable, and deposable for their
Tyranny and wickedness. Also a little farther, from a Case stated touching the
Clergy, he does infer, That the King may be executed also. Other proofs to this
Assertion I could produce, but I suppose he will take it better from his hand
then any other.

Page the 2d. This Author describes the power of Parliaments to consist, 1.
In making Laws for the good of the people. 2. According to the Ancient Custom.


First, from hence he concludes, That the Parliament are not to make Laws to
undo the People, nor perpetuate Heavy bu^dens: There is no man that is in his
Wits will say otherwise; and no doubt but the Parliament will do otherwise;
this Author cannot charge them as yet with that. It Is true, that the charge of
the late War has been heavy; that the Care of the management of the War
prevented them of settling the Government of the Nation; that they should
dissolve before, is unreasonable to expect: besides, their own Vote has
decided that Controversy, viz. That this Session shall determine, May, 1660.

Secondly, he says, That they are to Govern according to the Ancient Customs
of this Realm, that is, to join with their Fellows, not to Govern Peremptorily
and Sawcily. What those Fellows are, the Author mentions not: that their
Fellows ought not to submit to Acts against Reason, that is true; it is the
Reasonableness of a Command, that carries the Authority along with it, and
produces obedience; it is for that, for the which it is to be given obedience
unto: those Commands that are unreasonable, are to be resisted. The Author here
does seem to conclude, That the Expelling of some of the Members is
unreasonable; the taking the King away, is unreasonable; the changing of
Government, is unreasonable, and the like. He further says in the Sect. That
the People did Entrust the Parliament only with Advising with the other
Estates; and that the said Trust did not Empower them to lay aside the other
Estates: That may be easily answered by this known Maxim, Salus Populi Suprema
Lex. When that the other Estates by their corrupt Interest did become a bar to
the Peoples safety, they might be laid aside by the Trustees of the People, and
those Trustees may exercise the Supreme Authority, as in the Case
aforementioned, made use of by Mr. Prynne, in his Asserting the Sovereign Power
of Parliaments; That the King may be deposed by Authority of Parliament. Edward
the second, of England, was deposed by Parliament; and Edward the third Elected
in his room. Our Author cites the Case of the Abbots being Expelled their
sitting in Parliament, and slightly mentions the Expulsion of the Bishops
late being expelled their sitting in Parliament: this was done by the three
Estates. They were Members of the Parliament, it cannot be denied, according to
ancient Custom, and of a distinct qualification from the other Estates, they
being the Head of the Clergy: Now if that the Clergy may be expelled and
excluded from having a share of Supreme Authority, why may not the Nobility
also, as well as the King and the Clergy, when any or all of their Interests
shall be found inconsistent with the Interest of the Public? and more
especially when their Interest is grown to that height, that the preservation
of it must be the destruction of the public.

He further puts a Case of a Bailiff; The which case would hold, if it were
only in behalf of private Interest; but where there is public Interest on
foot, it will not hold. Rules of Law can live only in time of Peace; but, upon
War and Change of Government, Necessities of State must and ever did overruled.
If the Bailiff takes other men's goods, and keeps them for his own, he erreth:
Yet notwithstanding the unsuitableness of the Case, it serves thus far, viz.
If the Parliament being entrusted with the Supreme Power, shall take upon them
that power to their own profit, and not Communicate it for defense of public
good, then they do that which is besides the intent of their Trust: But on the
contrary, if they do otherwise, they do according to their Trust; for they have
no other Rule to walk by, nor limitation, than The preservation of the People.
And the same may be said to that which he reckons up amongst the
Transgressions of the Times (The Parliaments Turning out of one half of
themselves) that, as for several Just Reasons of State, and good preserving
policy, Abbots, Priors, Bishops, Lords, nay Kings, may be expelled the Councels
of Legislators, when their Interest does not consist with public Interest,
which is the end for which they received their being: So when the one half of a
Council shall conspire against the other, either to overthrow the Interest of
the public, or to obstruct the settlement of Affairs, they may be lawfully
Expelled. There is none are so absurd to think, That if one or two of the
Members should consult or conspire against the Common good, but that they may
be expelled, nay further prosecuted: If so, it will hold good also in a greater
Number: Is it not lawful for the lesser part of the power to oppose the greater
in that which is evil? It has been known, that the greatest part of a Council
has promoted wicked Counsel? Is it not then lawful for the lesser and better
part to betake themselves to such means, as may prevent the putting in
execution of such wicked Counsel, and vanquish them if they can? The Law is
made only to Rule people in their distinct and private Capacities; and not in
the Capacity of them all together, considered as one; In this case, what shall
be a Law unto them? That is not a Law, that cannot be administered in such kind
of Emergencies of State; Laws and Prescriptions cannot be Rules to act by; nay
in several private small petty Contracts, Title, and the like, there does (
every Term) arise so many Intricacies and Riddles, that all the Gentlemen of
the Long Robe cannot determine ( but hab Nab, as my Lord Richardson once said)
by all the Records, Statutes and Cases, that are Extant. Would our Author then
have so high proceedings as these so many vast Interests to be considered as in
this case, to be made parallel and determined by the Example of a Case of
Thomas Mouse, and William Frog, as he does of a Case between J. S. and J. N.
nothing to the purpose in hand.

He brings in another Case, viz. the Judgment of Judge Ro^s, and Judge Ask,
in Mr. Streater's Case, that discontinuance of a Parliament is a dissolution;
also he further urges his Assertion, That the Parliament is no Legal
Parliament, because it determined by the death of the King; and because that
Oliver Cromwell did summon other Parliaments, the People did thereby Reassume
their authority, and withdrew it from the present Parliament. To this I answer,
That it was no discontinuance at all; For suppose that the Parliament were
Sitting, and by reason of Fire or other Accident, they should be disturbed and
Interrupted, that they should all fly the House without Adjourning, until the
next day; would this be a Dissolution to that Session? No verily; for although
it be a Custom for them to continue their Session by adjourning; in such a
case, the Necessity of Affairs requiring their present service, they may Sit
and Execute their power; and it will be as good as if they had adjourned: for
adjourning is but a Circumstance; and if the not performing of a Circumstance,
should be a forfeiture of the power, when it is occasioned by some force or
accident, it would be monstrous strange, and not in the least to consist with
Reason: besides, the Kings death cannot occasion the Dissolution of this
Parliament, because of that Act which the Author ingenuously mentions; which
is, That they shall not be dissolved without their own Consents. That
Parliament of Edward the second, did depose him; after which there was an
Interregnum; he was dead in Law, yet the Parliament during that Interregnum do
Invest Edward the third with the Kingly Office; which was an Exercise of the
Supreme Authority in them in that Interval. I grant, that when there was no
pressing Reasons of State for so doing, Parliaments did look upon their
determination, at the death of the King.

King Henry the sixth was not crowned until the eighth year of his Reign, yet
in the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6th years of his Reign, diverse Parliaments were
holden: the Judges of the Land did then Resolve, That formalities must be
dispensed with in great Actions that are above the Law; Provided, That it be
for the good of the People, and not to their Hurt: Punctilio's of Law are to be
duly observed in Meum and Tuum, and for preservation of Public peace; but they
cannot in great Actions of State be always observed, because New matter and
Occasions arise daily, for which there is no Rule or President to act by. As to
the Peoples Re-assuming their Authority, by Electing Other Representatives, and
granting their Authority to them; in this case, the Argument is not of Force:
For that all the Conventions that General Cromwell called, were filled with
Factions, by which means the Work of Settlement was obstructed, as was evident;
and a private secret Game a playing, to Reestablish the Stuarts Family: To
prevent which, and for obtaining Settlement, there was no means left, but the
again-Sitting of This Parliament, who were the only Council fit to go on with
the work of Settlement; for that they were best acquainted with the Reasons of
State which was the ground of all the Changes. And all other Assemblies drove
at a Single Person's Interest: A Constitution (considering the present
Condition of the Nation) altogether tending to the Ruin, the disturbance and
unquiet thereof:

First, for that the War, lately made in defense of the People against the
King, did occasion so great an alteration, as the taking off of the King, and
diverse of his Friends; therefore it was not safe to call that Family again to
the Supreme Trust, because it naturally would wait for opportunity to Revenge;
and cast about to hold the People in more servitude than ever they were in. If
those who had the power in their hands had done so, the Author would have
taken occasion to have laughed at them; whereas now he raileth. It Is natural
for all, to study their own preservation; and when they endeavor the
preservation of others also, they do their Duties.

Secondly, It was not safe to Entrust the Supreme power in the hands of any
other person of another Family; for that would but Assert the Stuarts Title,
and make his work more easy for to attempt the Supremacy; It would be m^re
easy for him to claim against another Single Person, than to claim against the
whole People.

Besides, England is so divided by Factions, and has been prevented in its
Expectation, that if any one Interest should get uppermost, and be able to
promote any other Government then a Free State, the several Interests cannot
be so Equally respected and preserved: There is no Government else that is
adorned with Impartiality besides this.

If it were so, that there had not been those Regularities observed, and those
Circumstances performed, that in a time of orderly peace is used and observed,
and that their power be not according to the Exactness of Rules; yet if they do
the good pretended, and we attain to a settled Government, our Author says
himself, he will give his Vote for them: in which he shows a generous mind;
and had been worthy of praise, had he not immediately before those lines, page
11. imitated Mr. Prynne in his Language. I will take notice of one of the
modestest of his Expressions; These things ( says he) are done by
Un-authorized and Inferior spirits, such whose whole practices have been no
other but Contradictions. Our Author should here consider, That the End
Crowns all Noble Actions, and that he cannot yet make a Judgment of the Event
of Affairs.

Our Author's second Quaere is, Whether as things now stand, it is likely we
shall compass the design of setting up of a Free State?

He says, That the grounds and Inducements to this Quaere, are, 1. In respect
of these that are to do it. 2. As to those that would do it. 3. In respect of
the thing it self to be done.


As to the Persons that are to do it, he says, meaning the Parliament, he will
warrant they shall not stand. His reason is, That they do not understand what a
Free State is; and that they are like a Ship under sail without a Pilot. By his
favor, he is not a little mistaken in that Observation. A Free State had been
settled long before their Interruption, but for the Care of the War, the
striving against Factions in the House that were corrupted, and bribed, to
betray the Nation into the hands of the Stuarts. They do understand what a
Free State is; and a Free State might now be speedily settled, but that they
must Consult all Interests, and equally preserve all parties; which is a Work
worthy of their Care and Wisdoms, and will take up time: The Especial good
over ruling Providence of the Almighty must be their Pilot; their Wisdom must
be the Helm; and their Counsels must be their Sails; their Deliberations must
be their Anchors; the several Interests of the Nation they are to Respect as
Landmarks: They have showed themselves able in the service of the
Commonwealth; they managed the late War with as much Wisdom as ever any
Council did manage a War. They, by their wisdom, attained to a considerable
Reputation abroad amongst other Nations; and therefore they are the only
persons that are fit, and that ought to settle the Nation.

2. As to the persons that would do it, our Author says, It is the Army. And
(says he) was there ever a durable Government established by an Army? And do
not the M^n at Westminster serve the Army, as the men on the Clock in
Westminster. Abbey serve the motions in the Clock to strike, when they direct?

That Governments have bin first Instituted by Armies, is evident; nothing of
so great concernment has bin more frequent then that has bin; all Governments
just and unjust are defended by Armies: such Armies have not bin of use to a
Public, that rely not upon Council; That the Army takes upon them the
Mastery over the Parliament, there is nothing more evident than the contrary:
True it is, that the Army has at several times made use of their Authority to
poyze the Affairs of the Nation; the which if they had not done, all things had
bin now running in the old Channel of the Stuarts Interest: such a thing no
doubt but our Author would have. But the Army have that wisdom, that they will
not render the so many years of Wars abortive, to bring forth nothing but a
return to the misery and bondage we were like to be under: but on the contrary
make good their footing, now obtained, against all Absoluteness, Arbitrariness,
and Tyranny. If he means that the Parliament serves the Army in hearing of
their Addresses or Petitions: surely the Army have a right in petitioning for
those things that shall tend to Settlement and quiet. The Army took up arms not
as Mercenaries, but as members of the Public, having an equal share in the
Interest of the Nation. They had be^^ayed the Nation if they had laid down
their Arms, and let all have fallen into the hands of the late King, who was
not render of his people's good and quie^, but for the advancement of his own
Interest, making War, and is overcome, and in hold: out of which condition he
is to be re-invested without being brought to account for any one irregular
Action of his in Government, and resusing to Govern the Nation according to the
advice of his great Council the Parliament. The War being ended, the King being
still obstinate, the Parliament are to seek a way and means how and where to
secure the Interest of the Public, otherwise then by or with the King; they
cannot do it without an Army standing by them. They the better or the greatest
part of them have from time to time had occasion to call to the Army for help
against the enemies of Settlement within the House: as at that time when the
Speaker did fly the House, one part of the House invited down the Reformado
Officers and rude Rabble about the City of London, who did lock up the House,
and forced them to vote what they pleased; the other part of the house fly to
the Army, from whom was to be expected more good then could be from a
multitude, in regard they were under Authority moved by Order and Council; who
did march to London, guarded the forced Members to the House, and excluded the
others that countenanced this popular faction, against the Interest, peace, and
quiet of the People. Our Author is to understand, that disturbances boyled-up
by Factions in a Commonwealth, is like to a Storm at Sea: in which the skilful
Seaman must furle his sails lower, lour his masts, lash his helm, close
aboard, and lie at Try: He cannot sail by his Compass, nor keep account what
way his Ship makes. So even it is with a Parliament or Army; they cannot,
until the distempers of factions be allayed, and designs cease, which cause
Storms, Harracanes and Concussions by War. The Sails, Formalities, and
prescriptions must be taken in; the Masts, the Laws, Loured; in such times,
formalities and order, and Law, must be dispensed with. Will you bring an
action of Trespass against an Army of horse for entering upon such a Meadow, and
feeding, trampling down and destroying your Grass? Was it an orderly thing
according to Law, that David did in sending command to Nabal for provisions for
his Forces? I mention this only to evince what is before asserted, that Law is
fited for time of peace and quiet: and that such actions that are and may be
necessary and tending to preservation in time of War, may be against Law made
and fitted only for peace: And therefore though it be not so Regular, it may
very well become the Army to declare in what case they will stand by the
Parliament. It cannot be accounted to be an appointing or a cutting out of work
for the Parliament by the Army, but on the contrary their duty. An Army is not
above Law, because that the necessary execution of things relating to the duty
of an Army, is of that high nature that it cannot come under the execution of
the Laws of a Nation; therefore in such cases where the necessities of their
affairs of trust require them to in^rench upon that Law, they usually are
Indempnisied and pardoned, as in that of Indempnifying of the Army of Henry the
7th, in the War against Richard the 3d (cited by Mr. W^lliam Prynne, who is an
Author much in credit amongst the dissatisfied) in these words: In which battle
though it was just, and no Treason nor R^bellion in point of Law in those that
assisted Henry the 7th against the Usurper, yet because the killing of Men, and
the s^izing of Goo^s in the time of War, is against the fundamental Laws of the
Realm, there needed an Act of Parliament to discharge them from Suits and
Prosecutions for the same. 3. part. Sovereign Power of Parliaments, page 45. By
all which it appears that an Army though they are not fit I^struments to
settle the Government, yet they are fit Instruments to aid the settlement of
Government. And to this end and purpose, Princes and Councels, nay all
Legislators ever did make use of them? What the Army has done in this
particular, is no more then their duty; they do not take upon them the
settlement of Government, but dutifully do adhere to the Supreme Authority of
the people assembled in Parliament; unto whose Judgment, Wisdom, and Authority,
the Army submits.

Again, says our Author, Durst they do any thing contrary to the mind of the
Army?

Have they not answered that Quaere, in their taking upon them to give
Commissions; the which is a thing of no small Magnanimity. Our Author is not
acquainted with Politics, he has read Cook on Littleton, a good Author, (I
do not mention him for any disrespect) he describes very Judiciously, the
Common Law upon several Tenures; which is a thing certain. For these kind of
Cases, our Author should read Grotius and other such like, who will tell him,
That a Supreme Power is Imprudent, if they Impose or Command any thing that
will not be Obeyed; or that which with difficulty they shall obtain to be
obeyed: also that they should diligently observe what a People or an Army would
have, that, if possible, they may grant or give before it be asked. A Supreme
Power loses much of their authority, if the Good which they ought to do, be
forced from them. It was in such like points of the Politics, that the late
King lost himself, contrary to the advice of his best Council, who advised him
to grant what ever the People or Parliament desired.

Lastly, our Author has put his third Quaere thus, Whether in respect of the
thing it self we are likely to attain to a Free State? He says himself, That
if by a Free State, be meant the enjoying of Liberty according to Magna Charta,
chap. 29. to preserve Interest, Property, and Liberty, he himself will be for
that sort of Government.

Our Author here has betrayed his Ignorance, and want of knowledge of a
Free State. For his better Information, A Free State is the Ruling of the
People (by Turns) by Laws that are Superior to private Interest, that may
preserve all; it is the very thing that he desires. These things are with
great difficulty and danger obtained, defended or preserved in a Monarchical
Government, or in any other than in the Government of a Free State. For those
Princes and Senates that are standing and perpetual, govern well no longer then
they see it is for their Interest so to do; The Republic is not one jot
beholding to them for it. When they mistake themselves in their principles of
Policy, and do that which is to the detriment of the People, it is then
apparent; As when a wicked Prince, or a wicked Council and a foolish Prince is
in power, they do much Hurt to the People; when you have good from them, it is
but for their own sakes: Therefore some Princes and standing Senates are good,
not naturally or willingly, but prudentially; they see it is best to be good. A
Free State, governed by Annual Representatives, is Naturally good, it cannot be
bad; for that no one can obtain in such a Government opportunity to do Hurt:
and it behooves every one of them to do all the good they can, in regard they
must Return to a private state and Condition, in which they shall participate
and be sharers of the good they have procured, or been parties in ordaining. So
that whereas it indeed is the Interest of other Governments to procure or
permit some good to the People, not for the sake of the People, but for their
own sakes; as is demonstrated by that Aphorism of Machiavel in his Prince, viz.
Deal out the good thou intendest to the People but by morsels, to keep their
mouths in taste the better. This does procure to the People all the good that
can be procured, and preventeth all the Evil that can be prevented: and always
when it fails, it is because that some aim at Supremacy, and perpetuating
themselves, who corrupt and poison Councels; which may be discerned several
ways.

Our Author toward the End, makes himself merry with Mr. Harrington; says
he, Mr. Harrington speaking well of a Commonwealth, would sit and Calculate it
for our Horizon, because it suiteth with other Nations. In answer to this, he
says, That the Government and Laws are suited to the Constitution of the
People. Then which, nothing is a greater Error; for that the Government and
Laws are not fitted to the nature of a People; but on the contrary, they are
fitted to the Interest of the People, if they be powerful; and to the Interest
of the Prince or Governors, if they are more powerful and ambitious. As for
Example; Our S^a^u^e Law of England, it participateth and savoureth of the
Interest by which it was Instituted: Even as water retains a Tincture of the
Minerals they pass through: So that what was Enacted in one Prince's Reign, was
Repealed in his Successors. If you let Private Interest grow, it will
endeavor to have share in the Government, and fit and sort things for its
Consistency; and this our Author calls Nature; when it is no other than
Interest, begotten by Opportunity and other Accidents. That a Commonwealth may
be Governed as Mr. Harrington describes, is certain; nay, England it self: But
the Interests on foot in the Nation makes it Incapable: Therefore such a
Government must be made choice of, that may best fit the Interests. Some
Legislators have been so subtle, at this Work, that they can Incorporate (like
good Alchymists) several Mettles into one body. If a People were to leave their
own Habitation, and seek another Country, as the People of Israel; then it is
easy to Institute the purest Constitutions of Government, because their
Interest bears all one Date, and they receive their Stations by Let. There is
no people in the World, but are apt and sit to receive any sort of Government,
until Interest has unfitted them.

That the People of Englands Constitution is fitted for Kingly Government, it
is Ridiculous to allege. If our Author had said, That the Long Continuation
of Kingly Government in this Nation had created so many Corrupt Props and
Pillars to support its dignity, that were like so many Sores and Phistula's to
the Nation: the taking away of which on a sudden, would be something against
Nature; though it was a burden to Nature, and a Disease; as of Phistula's to be
cut out of a man's Arm, or other part on a sudden, it does endanger the
Patient; but apply to it Medicines to roll and disperse the contagious Humors,
then cut off the head of it, or make an Incision into it, you cure the Wound,
and save the Patient. The like operation has been followed here, our Author
well knows: and it is a Cure according to Art, if our Surgeon do cleanse
and fortify the part so, as that no one Humor do predominate, but that all
may equally perform their several Offices: The predominancy of one Humor over
another, is the cause of Diseases; and the Diseases participate of the Causes,
and are of that Triplicity.

Our Author is much heightened in his Expectation of the Fruits of an
Oligarchy or standing Senate; he is of Opinion, That it is the readiest way to
bring about the Reestablishing of the Interest of the Stuarts. Here he
discovers his secret Reasons of State, as he does in his Conclusion; Where he
advises all that are for Charles Stuart, to be quiet, and make no resistance:
For, (says he) (If you find them an Enemy, you give them occasion to Unite;
but to let them be Idle, they will disunite and break; nay fight one with
another. For this Discovery, I would have the Author made a Privy Counselor,
when Charles Stuart attaineth the Supremacy; but not till then. Now for
preventing of this subtle Stratagem, it is not according to good Rules to
discover, and therefore it shall be waved.

Appendix.
I Shall here add one word or two to answer a ridiculous Pamphlet Entitled
Englands Confusion, in which the Author ex^rciseth the Art of defamation
against the worthy Patriots of our Country, and since he only does it by
Canting Language; it is below any sober pen to take notice of it, only one,
viz. the Lord Fleetwood, who the Author says that goodly man, who so smoothly
supplanted the Protector, and persuades him that three Crowns were not worry
a drawn Sword. Grant what the Author says, and it shall-affoard sufficient
matter of defense to that Noble Person who has given ample Testimony of the
love he bears to his Country: Augustus Caesar who had the Art of
well-Governing (which is s^ld^m attained to by Princes) once upon meditating of
the corrupt and depraved condition of mankind, the abominable abuse of
flatter^rs in the ears of Princes, the inclinableness of Princes to hearken to
them, to the detriment of a People; says Suetonius, he fearing future evil,
intended to resign his absolute Power, and free his Country: but says Tacitus
I know not why he did not do it, unless it were out of an ambitious mind,
foreseeing who should be his successor; to wit, Tiberius; perceiving his wicked
nature, it would beget a higher opinion of his virtues and worth, Augustus
miscarryed in this point, if he had delivered his Country it had bin much more
honorable in him, then to leave for his Successors, such abominable Tyranny as
after him attained to the Empire: The Lord Fieetwood, although he had the same
opportunity that General Cromwell made use of to another end and purpose, makes
no use of it, to set up himself, but to restore the detained Liberty of his
Country: for which, who can complain, unless it be such as designed a continued
Tyranny, and to have share of it as to Power, or at least to be respected as
principal props to it: I mean as to Religion if that kind of Monarchy had bin
continued, it must have fallen in with some persuasion or other, it would not
have long continued without: then all Honors, Profits, Power and Trusts must
have run in that Channel; which would have produced persecution and changes of
the Government, and much detriment to those persuasions who had refused:
Liberty of conscience is defended and secured better in the Government as a
Commonwealth, then in a Monarch. Liberty of conscience is a thing desired by
all Episcopals, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, and others, they
desire it to themselves, but are not willing to part with the like to others:
observe the rise of any opinion at first, It will cry and plead for Liberty of
conscience: but when it is grown to number, strength and power sufficient to
preserve it self, it then thinks it self not safe, but in the
discountenancing, contending against, endeavoring the suppression and ruin of
all other persuasions: it is neither salvation nor damnation to be of this
form, or that of any of the aforementioned persuasions; Salvation comes by
the free grace of God in Jesus Christ, adorning the Subjects of that mercy with
the Ornaments of Repentance, to newness of life, and holy and obedient walking.

The Professors of Religion of late have lost much of the power of godliness,
by pu^^i^g so much stresse upon the forms in which more are busied, in
desending and asserting them, in putting in practice the duty of a holy life,
which shall affoard more comfort at the last day, then the defending or being
of this or that opinion.

Now if the Lord Fleetwood and the Army did wrest the Authority out of his
hands (of whose right I here shall say nothing), as would have made use of it
by promoting one persuasion against another, in opposition of all other; since
it is our unhappiness to be divided, did they not do their duty, and perform
a kindness to the rest, and to the whole Nation, doing of that, together with
restoring of the Nation, and making of it a free People. If it were so, that
the Lord Fleetwood did persuade the Protector Richard to Resign, he did but
his duty in so doing as to Richard himself: for that the constitution of his
Government could not long consist; it was loaded with so much absoluteness, and
contradictions all that could be expected from it, was the making way for the
coming in of the Stuarts Family; by increasing the absoluteness of the
Protectors power, above whatever any Kings of England were invested with, to
the insupportable detriment of the People, who would have received the Stuarts
upon the first offer, on the terms that Kings formerly held their Crowns in
this Nation; and that all the Royalists knew well enough; and therefore most of
them were Promoters of this design, which was the only effectual way, nay
more effectual and certain then by Armies; the which by preventing, has
secured Richard from those dangers that would have unavoidably fallen upon him
by continuing in the Power, or upon any such Change.

As to the Lord Fleetwood's telling Richard, that, Three Crowns was not worthy
a drawn Sword; Charles the Fifth, after he had worn the Emperial Diadem many
years, gave Laws to the greatest part of Europe; left his Power, as not worthy
his holding of it longer. So did several other Kings and Princes, and betook
themselves to a Monastical life, and despised and scorned their Dignity.

Our Author would have had the Lord Fleetwood given him such Advice, as
Philistus gave Dionysius the Elder, Tyrant of Syracuse, he being in extreme
danger by reason of the Peoples Discontents; says he, Dominion is a thing
worthy of a man's running all Hazards to attain; and if he attaineth it, let
him hold it: and if he perish, let the Ruins of his Country be his Tomb.
Which advice Dionysius followed, and brought great Waste upon his Country. If
the Lord Richard had continued his T^^le, and the Stuarts could have at any
time by power of Arms been able to claim his pretended Right, what Waste and
Ruin would it have brought upon England All that have read History are able to
judge, by the distinct Claims and Titles of the Houses of York and Lancaster:
This would have been Englands Confusion indeed; what else that the Author of
this Englands Confusion treats of, is not worth the taking notice of; they
are fully answered in the Continuation of this Session of Parliament Justified,
to wit, That the present Parliament are disobliged of all their Declarations
and Covenants, and Engagements, in as much as he refused to submit to those
Rules of Government as the Parliament propounded for His and the Nations
safety: and that in his taking up of Arms, and being vanquished, he forseited
his Right of Government, and thereby put himself into a private Capacity: unto
which I refer the Reader; where satisfaction will be given in the
aforementioned Particulars.

FINIS.

