A VINDICATION OF That Prudent and Honorable Knight, Sir Henry Vane, From the
LIES and CALUMNIES OF Mr. Richard Baxter, Minister of Kidderminster.

In a MONITORY LETTER to the said Mr. Baxter.

By a True Friend and Servant of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, etc.

He that is slow to wrath, is of great understanding: but a man of a hasty
spirit, exalts folly, Prove. 14. 29.

LONDON: Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley. 1659.

A Vindication of that Prudent and Honorable Knight, Sir HENRY VANE, etc.
Mr. Baxter,
AS in the multitude of Words there wants not sin, Prove. 10* 19. so in the
multiplicity of Books and Writings, there are commonly many gross mistakes,
calumnies, unworthy and unchristian reflections upon the persons and actions of
other men, perhaps altogether unknown to the Authors of such books. I cannot
but admire the wise providence of God, in suffering you to be whipped and lashed
(not without just cause) by diverse godly learned men, in their Writings, by
whom you are rendered to be one of an Heterodox Judgment, levened with Popish,
Socinian and Arminian Errors* of a bold, inconsiderate and rash spirit,
transported with a preposterous Zeal* and a busy intermedler with persons and
things, whereof you have but little judgment or experience: So true are these
words of Solomon, In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride, Prove. 4* 3*
wherewith they whip and wound themselves: (I say) I cannot but admire the wise
providence of God in this, when I consider how apt you are to calumniate and
de^ract from your Countrymen, who desire to serve the Lord in sincerity,
according to their light and knowledge; and in their places and stations to
promote the Good of all men. I hope that worthy Knight, Sir Henry Vane, (whom
you have grossly belied in a book of yours, lately printed K^y of catholics.
) is of such a spirit and temper, and would not willingly do wrong to you nor
any other man, of what Judgment soever.

Turn, wherein much of the power and wisdom of God has appeared, our Enemies
themselves being Judges, (and you your self have taken notice of the providence
of God toward the late Protector, and therefore may well take notice of this)
I doubt not, Sir, but you love and tender your self, and your own credit and
reputation so much, that you would have been silent touching Sir Henry Vane,
and the Vanists, (as you most vainly and foolishly call them) and not have
rendered your self (by your ^^shness and folly) obnoxious to the Law and
Justice. Was it not possible for you Mr. Baxter to flatter and fawn upon Mr.
Richard Cromwell (whom you in your wisdom have compared to wise Solomon, as you
did his Father to faithful and upright David) but you must also asperse and
belly your Countrymen, who would not, nor could not sacrifice the Liberties of
their dear Native Country to the ambi^ious lusts of men, and bow down before
that Court-Idol (which was erected by a few factious self-interessed persons)
as you and others have done? I dare not say (with some of your friends) that
you have done this according to the true sense and meaning of the Solemn League
and Covenant, and other Oaths by you taken, but rather according to your own
foolish humors, and those private, factious, and selfish ends, which you and
they proposed to your selves in the late Transactions, as hoping to supplant
all those that obstructed your ambi^ious designs. As for that honorable
Person (whose prudence and parts in the management of State Affairs you are not
able to judge of, by your Pedantick Syllogisms, though you think it worth your
time to revile him) I presume he looks upon it as below him, and his great and
weighty employments, to write any thing in his own Vindication: he has other
business to look after, and not to spend his time about the passionate and rash
Scriblings of every byass^d and engaged person: and therefore I think it not
amiss (having more leisure and opportunity) not so much from any private or
personal respect which I bear to him, as my love to the Common wealth and
Public Interest of these Nations (which is owned and asserted by him upon just
and honest principles) to clear up the Innocence of that worthy Knight, and to
vindic^te him (though without his privity and knowledge) from your lies and
aspersions; that if it be the will of God, you may learn Wisdom for time to
come, and make a publi^k Recanta^ion of that wrong and injury which you have
d^ne him; and be more advised and prudent in your words and writings:
Remembering what the Scripture says -- Whosoever keeps his mouth and his tongue,
keeps his soul from troubles Prove. 21. 23. Prove. 29. 20. Jam. 1. 26.
See thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope of a fool then
of him. And if a man seem to be religious, and b^idleth not his tongue, this
man's religion is in vain. Doubtless great care and circumspection is to be
used in writing Books; for thereby the Authors expose themselves to the
censures of all men, whether they be wise or foolish, rash or considerate,
learned or ignorant, of sound or of corrupt judgment; whether they be of a
virtuous or vicious disposition. He that commits any thing to writing (says
Seneca) gives men a bill of his manners; which every Reader may put in suit
against him, if there be cause for it.

It is Kingly (says one Antisthenes.
) I may add, that it is Christian-like, well* and to be ill spoken of: To do
good to all men, and to be ill spoken of by most men. Who among the people of
God was a greater lover of his Country, a more valiant Captain, or a more
faithful Governor then Moses; yet how was he censured, reviled and reproached
by the people, who continually murmured* against him? Among the heathens,
Socrates, Photion, Aristides, Epaminondas, and Cato, were excellent men, famous
for their love to their Country; yet how ungratefully and unworthily were they
used? And why should we think it strange that this honorable Knight, with
other worthy Patriots, who have appeared against Tyranny, both in matters Civil
and Religious, are reviled by you and your Associates; who under pretense of
Religion, and the Interest of Christ, would set up a faction, and enslave the
Nation! It seems you have learned that Machiavilian lesson, Calumniate lustily;
something will ever stick behind. If he be a Slanderer, who Exodus 23. 2.
wrongs his neighbors credit, either by unjust raising or upholding an evil
report against him; Surely you have cause to lay your hand upon your heart, and
to take shame to your self: and if this be the mark of those that shall dwell
in the Lords Tabernacle, that they are such as neither raise not take up a
reproach against their neighbor, Psalm. 15. 3. what will*become of you (Mr.
Baxter) and where and with whom must you dwell to eternity, if God do not
humble you for your slanderous and lying tongue and pen? What was your design
(I pray you) in reproaching this Gentleman? was it to render your self famous,
in rendering his person and parts infamous to posterity? nay, was it not to
curry favor with Mr. Cromwell, that so you and your Accomplices might ride him
at your pleasure, and accomplish your selfish ends, by the pliablenesse of the
young Gentleman, to the enslaving of your native Country? hence it was that
(by you and your friends instigation) so many flattering Addresses were
presented to him from the several Counties and Cities, whereby the young man
was puffed up, and made believe, that all the people in the three Nations were
at his command; and yet not a man of you would courageously stand up for him
and his declining Protectorship, when he had most need of you.

Book K^y of Cathol. page 312* 313. 3^^ 331, 335, 391
That Sir Henry Vane and the Vanists put the King to death: that he was the
Master of the Game: That he and his fo lowers are no better then Papists,
Jesuits, etc. That the Papists are strong in England under the m^sk of the
Vanists, whereof you make him the Ringleader: That he was in Italy, and brought
from thence most wicked and corrupt opinions: And having thus vented your self
in a vain and frothy discourse, wherein perhaps you think you have sufficiently
answered the Papists, and vindicated the Protestant party touching the Kings
death, by these manifest and gross untruths, as if it were lawful for you to
to speak wickedly for God, and to lie for his glory. (b) Give me leave in a
friendly way to (c) Job 13. 7. Romans 3. 7.
Expostulate a little with you: Did you ever see the face of this Gentleman whom
you have so frequently reproached (neither Minister nor Man-like) or at least,
did you ever speak a word with him, either to know his judgment concerning the
proceedings against the late King, or his principles in matters of Religion? I
am confident you do not know him, neither had you ever any conference with him:
but you may have in time: for though these Injuries, (if they were done only
to a private man) might be passed by and remitted (without exemplary
punishment) yet being done to one in a Publ^que capacity, the Authority of the
Nation may in due time take Cognizance thereof. Now as touching the death of
the late King, will you say that all those Gentlemen that sat in the High
Court of Justice (by Authority of Parliament) upon his Trial (and yet Sir
Henry Vane was none, but I am sure some of your good Lords and masters were of
the number of his Judges) were Popish and Jesuiticall, and that therein they
carried on a Popish design against the Protestant party and Interest? Can you
put no difference between the Clandestine Assasination of a Prince to serve the
Jesuits turn, and the public execution of Justice upon a King (for levying
War against the two houses of Parliament coordinate in power with him, and
shedding the blood of his Su^j^cts upon that account) who was not put to death
to gratify the Jesuits, but to free the Nation from Tyranny and Slavery, and
from the luxury and unnecessary charge of the Court Vide Declar. of Parliam.
(...) Fr^e State, March 17. 1648.
! Woe be to us and the Protestant Interest, if we had ^one that could or would
plead out Cause better then you have done: for it is well known that you
Symbolize with the Papists in many material points, See Mr. Tho. Barlowe. Mr.
Owen. Mr. Kendall Mr. Ly^^r^. Mr. Burgess. Mr. Air. Mr. Crandon. Mr. Warner,
their Books against Mr. Baxter.
and have given no small advant^ge to the Popish party, by your calumnies and
Invectives, against the most eminent Protestan's both on this side, and beyond
the Seas.

Vanists and Levellers were the chief Agents in the death of the King, and
these men are no K^y. p^g. 312, 313.
better then Papists, and Sir Henry Vane was the master of the Game. This is a
manifest u^truth, re^lecting no small disparagement upon the Ministry, which
(for my part) I honor and reverence, as a precious Ordinance of Christ, and am
hear^ily sorry that you and others should bring the same into contempt, by your
bitterness, factiousness, and ambitious designs and practices. That Honorable
Gentleman (whom you calumniate, and from whom (I believe) you never received
the least injury) was not free to act in Parliament, not in the high Court of
Justice upon the garbling of the House by the Army, and the Trial of the King
by the Commissioners; but did there upon (as I remember) retire, and ^equester
himself from public Employment, being not fully satisfied (at that time) with
the procedings of the Parliament and Army: And therefore how co^^d this
Gentleman have a chief hand in the death of the King! It concerns every man
(and much more a Minister of the Gospel) to write the truth, both in a Log^call
and moral consideration* and to speak no otherwise then (he knows) the thing
is, and not to utter an untruth, though he be ignorant of it. Whosoever loves
and mak^th a lie, shall not inherit the kingd^me of heaven, Rev. 22. 15. And
the Apostle exhorts us to put away lying, and every man to speak truth to his
neighbor, Ephesians. 4. 25. The truth is, this honorable Gentleman (of whom I
have often made mention) having absented himself from the Parliament, upon that
great change and alteration of affairs in the year 1648. Lieutenant General
Cromwell (who sat upon the trial of the King, and encouraged the
commissioners of the High Court of Justice to proceed to ^entence, it being the
general vote and desire of the Army, that the King should be put to death) was
importunate with this Gentleman, and ^sed many arguments to persuade him to sit
again in Parliament, and in the Council of State; and did at length prevail
with him to come in. Now Mr. Baxter, (the truth of the matter of fact being
thus stated) if you would have been impartial, you should rather have said
that your Lord Protector and his followers had a chief hand in the death of the
King (whether upon a public or private account, I leave it to the Lord) then
that Sir Henry Vane and the Vanists were the chief Actors in it: But you were
resolved to cast dirt in the face of this Gentleman, and so to ingratiate your
self with the new Court, the glory whereof is now laid in the dust, together
with all your flattering Addresses.

Key page 331.
You have another fling at Sir Henry Vane (who it Italy, and from thence
brought over dangerous opinions: a palpable untruth (which a mere moral man,
much more a true Christian, would be ash^med of:) he never sojourned in Italy
in all his life, and therefore could bring from thence neither sound nor
corrupt Doctrines: nor is he willing that his eldest Son (that proper young
Gentleman) should travel beyond the Seas, lest his youth should be leavened
with the corrupt opinions* Customs, and practices of foreign Popish
Countries, so much is he in love with them. Judge now, Mr. Baxter, whether you
have in this passage of your Book faithfully discharged your Duty toward your
neighbor; and do^e the same to him, which you would have had another to have
done to you. I take not upon me to apologize for any extravagant or heterodox
opinions, by whomsoever maintained; in doct^inalls I do agree (for substance)
with most of our godly Protestant Writers; Though it must be granted, that
there are several degrees of Light; and the great mysteries of the Gospel are
more clearly revealed to one then to another, yet so that the most
quick*sighted Christian knows but in part, and therefore is apt to mistake in
many things by reason of his ignorance and darkness. I wish with all my heart
that all those Patriots, who stand up and appear for common right and Justice,
and the public Interest and weal of these Nations, were both Orth^dox and
sound in their judgments, and also holy in their lives and conversations; but
we must look more at things then at persons: Justice and honesty even in our
E^emies, and those that differ from us (though but in one action) should be
acceptable to us. I have often discoursed with this honorable Gentleman (whom
you endeavor to blast and render odious by your unbridled tongue) and have
heard him interpret the Scriptures: what his judgment and apprehensions have
been formerly I know not; but of late (in my hearing) h^ has expressed himself
clearly and faithfully in the great point of Just^fication by the
righteousness and obedience of Christ as Mediator, in opposition to the
principles of the Quakers, who (together with the Papists) plead for
justification by an inherent righteousness, or g^acious qualifications under
the notion of Christ or the Spirit in them; whereby the bloodshed and
obedience of our High Priest the Lord Jesus, is rendered invalid and of no
effect Now as Luther says well, If a man be ^ound in this one Article of free
Justification by the righteousness of Christ, it will minister light and
direction to him in points of an inferior and lesser consequence. We cannot
but know that many precious godly Ministers and Christians (since the beginning
of the late Wars) have been shaken and unsettled in their Judgments, as to
some of the main Articles of the Christian faith; but after some trialls,
temptations, and a^flictions, and after seeking the face of God, and consulting
his word and his people, they have been (by the blessing of God) rooted and
stablished in the truth. Certainly a man may be Orthodox and sound in Judgment
(as to the principles of Religion) and yet wanting sincere love to Christ and
his people, may fall shor^ of heaven; and on the contrary, another Christian
may err and mistake in many points, and yet having ^incere love to the Truths
of Christ, according to that meas^re of light (which God has vouchsafed unto
him) he may be saved* Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his
own master he st^^deth ^r fall^th. And le^ him who thinks that he stands,
take heed that he fall not.

I cannot but wonder at your exceeding great confidence Jesuitisme (who I hope
are not ^ainted therewith.) But Mr. Baxter, are not you guilty of the same
evils whereof you accuse them? and should not you (according to our Saviors
direction) First pluck the beam out of your Matthew. 7. 5.
own eye, that you may the better pluck out the mote which is in your brothers
eye? Physician, heal thy self; first reform thine own Judgment, and reli^quish
thine own errors, and then reprove others. Not to insi^t upon your
Sophisticating and darkning the main points and principles of Divinity, by your
exotic Aristotelian learning, superficial Syllogismes, and puzzling
Distinctions: Sure I am, you have in your Writings boldly avouched for Truths,
such Principles as (bordering too near upon the Jesuits and Socinians) will
not be owned by sober pious Protestants; wherein you do not correspond with
Luther, Calvin, Beza, Martyr, and other Re^orm^sts* but rather with Bellarmine,
Socinus, Arminius, as has been sufficiently demonstrated by others. I might
write largely of your corrupt and unsound tenets, touching Justification,
Conversion, the Nature of Special Grace, Assurance, Perseverance, the extent
and e^fects of the death of Christ; which you have not yet rec^^ted that I know
of: But I will only at present recite some passages out of your books, and
leave it to the Impartial Reader, whether these bold Assertions of yours be
suitable to the Protestant Doctrine, and the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ.

You say, Aphoris. of Justif. p. 70. 78. 82, 83. 91. 45.
That Christ has not taken away the whole curse of the Law from Believers, by
bearing it himself; and that the afflictions of Believers are in execution of
the threatening and Curse of the Law.

That Christ has not repealed the Old Covenant, nor freed Believers wholly
from it, but superadded the new Law or Covenant to it, as the only possible
way of life.

That an absolute discharge from the execution of the threatening of the Law is
granted to none in this life; and that when we believe and perform the
condition, yet still the discharge remains conditional, till we have finished
our performance.

That the Law of God is not only relaxed as to the person suffering, but partly
as to the penalty suffered: That Christ paid not the idem or same thing in the
obligation; and that even in his sufferings the threatening was partly dispensed
with or relaxed.

That Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10. do not contain the full tenor of the
Covenant of Grace. The holy Ghost says, this is the Covenant; but you tell us
that it is but a part of the Covenant.

You call them ordinary, Vulgar, unstudied Divines, who hold the Imputation of
Christ's active obedience, to be the form of our Justi^ication. And thus Calvin,
Beza, Chamier, Perkins, Whitaker, Davenant, Twisse, Ames, Cotton, Bayn, etc.
are but ordinary Vulgar Divines when they come in competition with incomparable
Mr. Baxter.

You tell us boldly, That good works in a proper sense do justify us before
God: That faith and faithful actions are our Evangelicall righteousness* and
that faith as a complicate act, accepting Christ as Lord and King, is the
condition of our Justification: And so (according to this Popish Doctrine) we
are partly justified by Grace, and partly by Works: But the Apostle Paul and
the Protestants are not of your mind.

That the suspending the rigorous execution of the Law (which in a sense is
common to the elect and reprobate) is the immediate noble issue, and fruit of
Christ's death.

That Christ died to satisfy Divine Justice for the sins of all men, elect and
reprobate.

That we are but conditionally, and not absolutely delivered from eternal
death by the death of Christ; nor have we right to life without the
intervention of a condition to be performed on our part, to qualify us morally
for it.

That our love is the cause o^ condition of our adoption, for which you quote,
Matthew. 5. 44. Luke 6. 27. 45. And so (according to your opinion) we must first
love God, before he communicate his love to us.

That final impenitency and unbelief is properly the sin against the holy
Ghost.

That no man is perfectly justified, nor has perfect remission of sins till
the day of judgment. If this Doctrine be true, we must all go to Purgatory.

Direction for Comfort. afflict. Cons^. page 34, 37, 38, 45, 39, 42, 44, 45,
47, 49, 51, etc.
That though a Christian may be assured of his election and justification, yet
not of his perseverance, of which he has only strong probability; and yet in
another place you say, if a man be sure that he truly believes, he may be sure
of his salvation: and thus you contradict your self, and say and unsay.

That general Grace affords true consolation, and that special Grace is built
upon it; and that we may gather a world of comfort from general grace.

That believing is easy; the conditions of the new Covenant being more facile
then those of the old.

That God is the father of the graceless, though not in so strict a sense as of
the gracious.

That doubts and fears must be removed by considering the universality of
Christ's ransom for the whole world: and that this is the foundation of all
solid peace and comfort.

That unbelievers may have some good desires, which God will accept: and though
they be not yet come to saving faith, yet they may have many good prayers which
God will hear.

That none ever missed of grace and eternal life, that improved their
naturalls to the utmost, as a natural man may do. What is this but downright
Pelagianisme!

That seeing our acts are cur Evangelicall righteousness (without which we
^^ve no part in Christ's righteousness) we may safely build our peace and
comfort upon them*

That Salvation is promised as the crown and reward to our duties.

That Grace in the spiritual man Saints ^^^rlasting Rest.
differs not specifically, but only gradually from that which is in the
natu^all man: and that a Christian must gather his assurance from the degree,
and not from the kind of grace. This is but cold comfort for a weak Believer.

I know none of them that you call Vanists so vain, corrupt, and rotten in
their principles, as you are in these, or some of these positions, besides
others that might be mentioned, wherewith (under pretense of Piety and
Practical Divinity) you have infected and poisoned many young Scholars in the
Universities, and Ministers in the Land, who wanting experience, and being not
able spir^tually to judge of things that differ, have your person and gifts in
admiration: So that (truly Mr. Baxter, all things considered) you have already
done more mischief by your writings, then you will be able to do good if you
should repent and live an hundred years: for, since your books were published,
many Ministers and Professors have sadly departed from the simplicity and
plainness of the Scriptures and Truths of Christ; giving ear to your vain
Philosophical Distinctions, and thereby ingendring strife, and puzzling both
themselves and their hearers.

Henry Vane, and cry out against him for holding an universal Liberty and
Toleration in matters of Religion; and yet you do not take upon you to answer
those Scriptures, ar^uments, and reasons of State, which are alleged for an
universal Liberty. For my part, I am not fully acquainted with his judgment
touching this point (which has been so much controverted in our time) but if
he ^e for such a Liberty, without exception or restraint, why should you
quarrel with him (specially considering how the case stands with us in these
Nations, both as to the Parliament, Army, Navy, Ministry and Churches) more
then with Luther, Austin, and other Fathers! Admit their opinion (that are for
an universal Liberty) be a mistake, yet it is far less dangerous then theirs,
that would have few or none tolerated, but such as concur with them in every
thing; as if they only had monopolized to themselves a spirit of
infallibility. The weapons of your warfare should be spiritual and heavenly,
not carnal and worldly. Nor is the Gospel, in the power of it, planted or
propagated by the Civil or Martial Sword; but by the Spirit of God, in
preaching, prayer, Christian conference, and a holy conversation: This is the
best way to convince opposers and gainsayers, instructing them in meekn^sse and
in a spirit of love: whereas, if you take violent courses, and fignt against
the errors of the times, with prisons, dungeons, fetters; this will but make
men the greater hypocrites, and even times more the children of the devil ^hen
they were before; nay, they will glory in their sufferings, and by this means
their number will daily increase in the Land; as the Quakers have done of late
years, for which we may thank such as you are, who by your passionate and
violent actings, have made them the more confide^t of their d^ngerous and
wicked opinions. Would to God, the Ministers of the Gospel would not only
preach well out of a pulpit; but also express more self denial, wisdom,
meekness, charity, and mortification in their actions, and live up to the
rules of the Gospel; and then I doubt not but the Ministry would be more
reverenced, and Errors would vanish and disappear, as the clouds do at the
bright shining of the Sun. Most men that now plead against Toleration of
diversity of R^ligions (their own being most countenanced by the Civil power)
would plead as much for a general Toleration, if they were once under hatches,
and their Religion discountenanced by the Magistrate. Herein commonl^
Christians are disposed and affected, according to the practice of that
Country or Kingdom where they live: If a Protestant, yea a Calvinist, live in
a Pop^sh Country, he will plead for Toleration; so will a Papist living in a
Protestant Country, where diversity of Religions is not Tolerated. The Ancient
fathers that lived in times of persecution, the first three hundred years
after Christ, pleaded against all kind of violence for Religion; as appears by
the sayings of Lactantius, Tertullian and others: But on the contrary, the
latter Fathers (having the Emperors Christian, and on their side) pleaded
against Toleration, and incited the Magistrate to violent courses, against such
as were of a different persuasion.

Civil Magistrate is not to intermeddle at all in matters of Religion; for it
is his duty to provide for, and encourage all the faithful Preachers and
Professors of the Gospel, and to be a nursing Father to the Churches of
Christ: but how far the Magistrate is to proceed in suppressing erroneous
Doctrines, and where the bounds are to be set, beyond which he is not to go, I
suppose a wiser man then Master Baxter cannot easily determine. Ke^kerman (a
learned Writer) says, that the bond between the Magistrate and his Subjects,
is essentially Civil: It seems he was not of your opinion, that Magistracy is
from Christ as Mediator: for if this were true, then every Magistrate that does
not submit to the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ, is a mee^ Usurper, and may be
lawfully deposed; and so whilst you seem to attribute much to the Christian
Magistrate, you destroy Magistracy in most Nations and Countries in the world,
where neither Magistrate nor people acknowledge the Lord Jesus.

Concerning this point of Toleration, let it be considered,

1. That Christ commands, that both the tares and the wheat should remain
together in the world; and not be plucked up till the day of harvest, which is
the end of the world, Matthew. 13. 30, 38.

2. He reproved his Disciples, who would have had fire come down from heaven to
destroy the Samar^tans that would not entertain him, in these words; You know
not what spirit you are of: for the Son of man came not to destroy men's lives,
but to save them, Luke 9. 54, 55.

3. The Apostle Paul would not have the servant of God to strive, but to be
gentle toward all men; in meekness in^tructing those that are contrary minded,
if peradventure God will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the
truth, 2 ^im. 2* ^4, 25. and it is prophesied of Gospel times, Isa. 11. 9. that
none shall hurt or destroy in the mountain of Gods holiness, i. e. in his
Churches and the assemblies of his people.

4. The weapons wherewith the Ministers of the Gospel should fight, are not
carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4. And Christ's Disciples should be so far from persecuting
those that are not of their Religion, that when they themselves are persecuted,
they should pray: when they are cursed they should bless, Mat. 5. 44. outward
violence and rigor is so far from being the Character of the Christian Church,
that it is the undoubted mark of the An^ichristian Synagogue.

5. They who now are tares, may hereafter become wheat; they that are now
blind, may hereafter see; they that are now Blasphemers, may obtain mercy, as
Paul did, 1 Timothy 1. 13. Some there are that come not in till the eleventh hour,
Mat. 20. 6. if you destroy them that come not in till ^he last hour, because
they come not at the first, then they are never like to come.

6. We know that God is not pleased with hypocritical unwilling worshippers,
forced thereunto by outward violence; nor are Christian Societies bettered, no,
nor the persons themselves, by such outw^rd force, but the plain contrary: God
alone being Lord over the conscience; for (as Solomon says) There is no man
that has power over the spirit, to retain the spirit, Eccles. 8. 8.

7. It Is hard for the most judicious and learned men to give a right Judgment
of many points now in Controversy, and yet not withstanding, many engaged
persons are ready to force dissenters in such Controversies, by the coercive
power of the Magistrate; if the Magistrate were as forward to execute, as they
are to propose.

8. Persecution for Religion has caused, or at least occasioned most of the
Wars, Devastations and Bloodshed in Christendom; whilst Princes would force
their Subjects to be of their Religion, against the light of their own
consciences: witness the Wars in G^rmany, the Low Countries, France, Poland,
England, Scotland, etc. nor does it agree well with a Free State or
Commonwealth, to exercise outward force, in matters of Religion, there being
various apprehensions and diversity of opinions among all sorts and ranks of
men: and perhaps if Mr. Baxter were called to consult about the weighty affairs
of the State, as you may be in due time; for you pretend to some skill in the
Politics, (as appears by your most judicious censure on the Commonwealth of
Oceana, and its Author, in your political Epistle to the Nobility and Gentry of
England) you may after some grave debates, be more for Toleration then now you
are. It Is far more easy for you to write Syllogisms in your study, suitable to
your own private and narrow apprehensions, then to ke^p three Nations in peace,
and hinder godly men of different Judgments from supplanting one another by
force and violence, and putting an opportunity into the hand of the common
Enemy, to destroy them all.

9. Outward violence in the cause of Religion is condemned by diverse ancient
and modern VVriters of the best note. No man is forced by the Christians
against his will (says Lactantius) seeing he that wants faith and devotion, is
unserviceable to God; and God not being contentious, would not be worshipped of
the unwilling. Tertullian says, Ad Scapulam.
That it is of humane right and of natural liberty, that every man worship God
uncompelled, and believe what he will: Nor does it beseem any Religion to
compel another to be of their Religion, which willingly and freely should be
embraced, and not by constraint; forasmuch as God requires a free will
offering. The Christian Church (says Hillary) Hillary. Contra Aux^nt.
does not persecute, but is persecuted: It Is lamentable to see the great folly
of these times, in that men think by humane aid to help God, and by worldly
pomp and power to defend the Christian Church. And Hi^rom says, Jerome. in
poenit. lib 4. in Jerem.
That heresy must be cut off by the sword of the spirit; and that we should
strike all misled heretics thorough with the sharp arrows of the Spirit, that
is, with the T^stimonies of the Scriptures: the slaughter of heretics being by
the word of God. Luther in his book of the civil Magistrate, says, That the
Laws of the civil Magistrate extend no farther then the body and go^ds, and
that which is external: for over the conscience God alone rules; therefore
whosoever undertakes to give Laws to the conscience* he usurpeth the Government
that appertains only to God. In the building of the Temple (says he) there
was no sound of Iron heard, to signify that Christ will have in his Church a
free and willing people, not compelled by humane Laws and Statutes. And upon
Luke 22. It is not the true Catholic Church which is defended by the secular
arm, or humane power, but the false and fa^ned Church. And again, upon Psalm.
17. he says, That the true Church of Christ knows not Brachium Seculare,
which the Bishops now adays chiefly use. And in his other books Luth. postil.
Dom. 1. post. Epiph Comment. in 1 Pet. 3.
he says: Let no Christian be commanded, but exhorted; for he that willingly
will will not do that whereunto he is friendly exhorted, is no Christian;
wherefore they that compel those that are not willing, show thereby that they
are not Christian preachers, but worldly beadles. If the Civil Magistrate shall
command me thus and thus (says he) I would answer him after this manner: Sir,
look you to your worldly or civil government; your power extends not so far as
to command any thing in Gods Kingdom; therefore herein I may not hear you: for
if you cannot bear it, that any should usurp authority where you are to
command, how should you think that God will suffer you to usurp that government
that belongs to him? I might here mention the sayings of Brentius, and other
for^aign Writers upon this subject, and also diverse of our English M^rtyrs; but
their sayings are recorded by Mr. Fox, in his Acts and Monuments.

10. This practice of Persecution merely for Religion, has been likewise
disavowed by some of the most learned and famous Princes of Christend^m. King
James in his Speech in Parliament says, That it is a sure Rule in Divinity,
That God never leves to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed: and in his
Apology, page 4. and 60. I have good proof that I intended no persecution
against the Papists for conscience sake; but only desired to be secured for
civil obedience; which for conscience sake they are bound to perform. And
speaking of the Archpriest Blackwel, he faith, It was never his intention to
lay any thing to the Arch-priests charge (as he never did to any) for the cause
of conscience. The saying of Stephen that wise King of Poland, is observable,
That he was King of men, not of consciences; a Commander of Bodies, not of
Souls: and that it is one of the three things which God has kept in his own
hands, to urge the conscience this or that way, and to cause a man to profess a
Religion, by working it first in his heart. And the King of Bohemia writes
thus: That the success of latter Times (wherein sundry opinions have been
hatched about the subject of Religion) may make one clearly discern with his
eye, and as it were touch with his finger, That according to the verity of holy
Scripture, and a Maxim heretofore maintained by the ancient Doctors of the
Church, That men's consciences ought in no sort to be violated, urged, or
constrained: And whenever men have attempted any thing by this violent course
(whether openly or by secret means) the issue has been pernicious, and the
cause of great and wonderful innovation in the migh^iest Kingdoms and
Countries of CHRISTENDOM. I might also reci^e the sayings of those potent and
famous Princes, CHARLES the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, Henry the Third, and
Henry the Fourth, Kings of France, with other Christian Princes, who after many
Trials, and much experience of men and times, grew weary of the practice of
Persecution for the cause of Religion, as having seen the sad and dreadful
effects of it in Christendom. And if this practice should be again reassumed
in these poor distracted Nations, what can we expect therefrom (as the
condition of our affairs stands) but greater troubles, wars and bloodshed then
yet we have seen?

Whereas you Mr. Bax^er and other Minister^ (who I ^dium upon the present
Government and Gove^nour^, a^ i^ ^hey (who have such considerable Estates and
inte^est in the Land) had a desi^n to pull down the Ministry, level me^^
E^^^^es and proprie^y, and reduce all to ^n An^^chy and confusion* because
forsooth they think it not meet to fulfill your ambitious lusts and desires* I
would ^aine know of you whether ever the Godly Ministry of this N^^ion had ^o
much encouragement and maintenance allowed ^h^m by any power or authority, as
they had and may have from the long Parliament? Ungrateful men! what would you
have them do for you? will nothing content you, unless you may Exercise a
Lordly and Tyrannical Domination over the consciences of your Brethren, and
bring the civil Magistrate under your Girdle, to be at your Beck, and Command,
that you may dispose of civil ^ffairs as you please in ordine ad spiritualia?
Are there not many precious Godly Ministers now with the Lord (no whit inferior
to you) that would have blessed God for, and rejoiced in tha^ liberty,
freedom, and encouragement which you enjoy (or may enjoy, if you will ca^ry
your selves as you ought to do) under this ^overnment? They [good men] prized
their condition (though they had but for^y or fifty pounds per annum;) But many
of our Ministers are so peevish and unthankful, That they grow weary of, and
mourn under their mercies, and inveigh most bitterly against the famous long
Parliament; by whose means they have obtained greater incoura^ements and
revenues, then ever was enjo^ed by men of their parts and principles. Is this
your kindness to your Ben^factors? and do you thus requi^e them for all their
good offices? Surely it is high time for them to look about them, and to have a
watchful eye over such men as you are: And when it shall please God* to bring
the^e Nations to a better consistency, and to establish an equal and righteous
Government, by just and good laws, ^or the benefit of the whole Community* If
you or any other party shall go about (by promo^i^g a faction) to disturb the
peace and orders of the Commonwealth, by your words or actions, under what
p^etence soever; Truly Mr Baxter, in such a case you will have but little
comfort if you be exposed to sufferings for your miscarriages: Let no man
suffer (says the Apostle) as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters; but he that suffers, let him suffer as a Christian, 1 Pet. 4. 15,
16. Is it your desire that Church Government should be established in this
Land? why then, If it be such a Government as is ^ure Divino, you may set it up
by the spiritual Sword, though you have no assistance from the civil
Magistrate. The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world; and we know that when
the Churches of Christ had least countenance from Earthly powers, they were
best governed, and had most beauty, unity, and order among themselves. You and
we have the like liberty and opportunity, to improve our spiritual weapons and
skill: But if one party will impose upon another, and go about to supplant
those that conscientiously differ from them, doubtless the Lord (who loves and
tenders his people under many weaknesses and mistakes) will still witness
against such an unchristi^n practice. That Counsel which is of God shall stand,
but that which is not shall be brought to nothing.

To conclude, give me leave Sir to propound something to you by way of advise:
It Is true, you have (to give you your due) a pregnant wit, and many commendable
natural parts, and you are fluent in your words and writings; But I beseech
you, be earnest with the Lord to give you true humility and self-denial, and
that wisdom which is from above, and which is pure and peaceable, and easy to
be entreated. Lean not too much to your own understanding and reasonings: Be
not high in your own conceit: you know who says, that there is more hope of a
fool, then of a man that is wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26. 12. Hence it is,
that you are so apt to slight and undervalue others (as deserving as your
self) which your best friends have noted in you, and do much complain of.
Consider and digest your thoughts well before you speak or write. Remember what
a wise man says, Prove. 15. 24. Prove. 16. 23. Prove. 29. 11.
That the heart of the Righteous studieth to answer: and the heart of the wise
Teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips. A fool utters all his
mind, but a wise man keeps it in till afterward. Look up to God for
spiritual strength, that you may be crucified to the fame and praise of men;
upon which Rock many have split themselves, who have had as excellent parts,
and as much seeming piety as Mr. Baxter. He that thinks, he knows any
thing, let him know that he knows nothing as he ought to know. I write this
in true love to you, and I wish you may accept it accordingly: For better are
the wounds of a true friend, then the kisses of an Enemy.

FINIS.

