A CALL Into the Way to the KINGDOM. This is written to go abroad into the
World, for the good of poor souls, that they may know the Way to their Souls
rest.

Written by Thomas Stubbs, one whom the people of the World scornfully calls
Quakers; which word Quaking I willingly own, else I should deny the Scriptures:
for Moses and the holy Men of God quaked and trembled at the presence of the
Lord, Heb. 12, etc.

Jesus says unto him, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man comes to
the Father but by me,

John 14.5, 6, 7. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that hears my words, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life,

John 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live,

John 5.25, 28. Marvail not that I say unto you, Ye must be born again.

Joh. 3. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, 1655.

A CALL into the WAY, AND Into the Kingdom.
MAny there are seeking rest to their souls and finds it not, Rev. 17. Romans
10.6, 7, 8.
but are deceived by the aspiring wisdom of the Whore, and the Merchants of
Babylon, which draw out of the Way, and to look for the coming of Jesus Christ
only without, putting the day of the Lord afar off, and looking for the Kingdom
of God in outward observations, still putting the day afar off; but therein
they are deceived, being led out of the way from their guide and resting place:
for that which draws out must be judged, John 1.9. Acts 4.11, 12. Luke 17.20,
21, 22, 23. Heb. 4.15.
and Babylons building must fall; for the Way is within, which is that of Jesus
Christ in the conscience, which convinces of sin, and lights every one that
comes into the world, which is the alone way to the Kingdom; and the Kingdom
of God comes not by observation, for the Kingdom of God is within you; and as
the lightening comes from the East, and shines to the West, so is the
appearing of the Son of Man in his day: and this is the day to them who hear
his voice and enter into rest; but this is witnessed through death in following
Jesus Christ through the regeneration, John 5.24, 25, 38.

And likewise many there be that say they, shall be saved by Christ when they
die, and live in vanity, sin and uncleanness, fulfilling the lust of the
flesh, and of the vain mind, running on the broad way that leads to
destruction, and never come into the narrow Way which leads to life eternal;
but these are deceived: for who live in the first nature in their vain and
lustful minds, hoping therein to be saved, Job 8.13.
that is the hope of the hypocrites and of vain persons which will perish; for
except ye be regenerate and born again ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but perish; therefore every one in particular, search and examine your
conditions within, what assurance you have of your calling and election; Romans
8.5, 6, 7, 8.
there is that in your conscience if you will hearken to it, that will tell you
truly, that if you be not guided by the Spirit of Christ, ye are none of his,
but are out of the Way, in the world, in the first nature, in the lust of the
flesh, and vain and carnally minded, which is death, ye need no further
witness, but the light of Jesus Christ in the conscience; therefore let none
deceive you with vain words, in telling you that ye shall be saved by Christ,
while ye are here living in the lust of the flesh, in sin and uncleanness;
therein they deceive you, and daub up with untempered mortar; for God will not
be mocked, Ephesians. 5.6.1 Cor, 6.9.
for such as you sow, such shall ye reap, and if ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, strife, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, Envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like, Gal. 5.19, 20.21. and no
whoremonger nor unclean person, nor covetous man who is an Idolater has any
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God; for because of these things
the wrath of God is for the children of disobedience; and all such are out of
the Way: thou that art covetous, being carnally minded, thou art out of the way
in the world, thou can not hide thy self with all thy profession in words,
that in thy conscience finds thee out to be a worldling and a hypocrite, thou
that lives in pride, worldly pleasures, and vainglory, Isa. 5.11, 22, 23.
seeking honor and preferment of men, thou art out of the way; drunkard* thou
art out of the way, there is that in thy conscience that tells thee Thou should
not be drunk: 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. Joel 1.5.
Thou that lives in whoring or theeving in the night, thou art out of the way,
though thou lie and deny it in words to hide it from men, that in thy
conscience reproves thee and finds thee out, and bears witness against thee,
and tells thee both time when, and place where thou did commit such things,
either commit adultery, or steal from any: swearer; liar, and filthy speaker,
and who delight in filthy talking, Prove. 19, 5.
and foolish jesting, and who delight in vanity, ye forget God, and ye are out
of the Way; and the wicked must be turned into hell who forget God. And false
accuser thou art out of the way, thou that lives in crossenesse, peevishness,
perverseness, hastiness, and passionatenesse through thy own will, thou art out
of the way; thou that art guided by thy own will, not being guided by that in
the conscience which would submit to the Will of God, thou art out of the way:
thou quarreller and envious person, thou runs before thy guide, thou art out of
the way: Thou great and fat one, Luke 12.15, 16, etc.
who fares deliciously every day, pleasing thy vain and lustful mind Dives
like, thou can not hide thyself with a profession in words, thou art found
out of the way: Psalm. 49.11.
thou that pulls down thy houses to build faiter and greater, and thereto
adding field to field in oppressing the poor, striving to make thy name great
upon the earth, thinking these things will never fail thee, Oh thou fool, thou
art out of the way and deceived, thou can not hide thy self with a vain
profession in words, thou art found to be out of the way, and a worldling, whom
the god of this world has blinded, one whose mind runs after covetousness and
vain desires of things which perishes: Jude 16. Isa. 10.1, 2, 3.
Thou that art in office and does not Justice, seeking self ends, and
respecting persons of men because of advantage, thou can not hide thy self,
thou art found to be out of the way, Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19.
and one that pervert; Justice and true Judgment, seeking after gifts and
rewards which the Lord hates, thou needs no further witness but that in thy
conscience, which bears witness against all thy unjust doings: all worldling,
vain and profane persons, all your profession in words is nothing worth, it is
but like Esau and Cains sacrifice which is not accepted: Oh ye earthly ones,
and corrupt trees, woe is unto you, ye are to be cut down,; Isa. 2, 11, 12.
why cumber ye the ground, ye proud and losty ones, who oppress the poor
through your stout and stubborn wills; Luke 11.18, 19, etc.
ye are out of the way, ye cumber the ground, ye must be cut down, ye cruel
oppressors and corrupt cursed Lawyers, who care not how ye get money and other
carnal things, nor from whom, if ye can but get it, ye count it your gain, ye
are as corrupt trees which are to be cut down; ye are out of the way, ye cumber
the ground, ye cannot hide yourselves, woe. woe is unto you, ye sill up the
measure of your fathers iniquities, being in the way of Cain, and running
greedily after dishonest gain: and ye who are as proud Hamman, who strive to
make all people bow to your wills, because ye are in office; Esther. 3.5.
and are counted great ones, because ye have abundance of the earth: and who
will not bow to your wills, ye oppress them, or put them in prison: Oh ye of a
crooked and perversege neration, how can ye escape the damnation of hell, woe
is unto you, ye cannot hide your selves, though you think none sees you; but
you will do what ye will do because ye are in office, Psalm. 94.1, 2, 3, etc.
Luke 18.7, 8.
and no man there above you, nor dare reprove you; but the light of Jesus
Christ in the conscience does find ye out, and it will be a swift witness
against you, though ye now hate it, when every one has his reward, and the
Lord will plead the cause of his people, and avenge his own Elect: And all ye
great and lofty ones who act unrighteously through your wills, shall be
overturned; for now is every Mountain and high hill to be thrown down, and the
crooked ways to be made straight, and the rough ways to be made smooth;
therefore repent, repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand, which cries, Return
from the evil of your doings, ye proud and lofty ones, and who live in sin and
unrighteousness, the witness is nigh unto you, which is the light of Jesus
Christ in the conscience, though ye hate it, no doubt the Kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you; Mat. 3.7.8, 9, 10.
Oh ye generation of vipers, Pharisees and hypocrites, whither can ye flee from
the wrath to come! ye are found to be out of the way, that in the conscience ye
cannot run from, nor do any wickedness but it finds ye out, and reproves you,
and will be your condemnation, hating it; therefore amend your ways and your
doings, and now bring forth fruit meet for repentance: and think not to say
within your selves ye are Christians, when ye walk contrary to Christ's
doctrine; though ye can talk of Christ and the Scriptures in your worldly
wisdom, living in sin and uncleanness, and in hating the light of Jesus Christ,
ye are found to be out of the way, and not yet come into the Way which leads to
Christ's Kingdom: Oh ye generation of vipers, ye must first come to the light
before ye be Christians, and know Christ in the Kingdom. Ezekiel. 22.12.
So cease from all your profession of God and Christ in words, while ye live in
cover ousness, running greedily after dishonest gain, and in pride and
oppression, and in all manner of unrighteousness, you are out of the way in the
world, while ye live in the first nature and act such things; Joh. 8.44. Romans
6.16. Jer. 5.21, 22. Micah 6.8.
ye are of your father the Devil while ye do his works, therefore fear and
tremble ye workers of iniquity, and seed of evil doers; and cease ye hypocrites
from a vain profession in words, and deal justly with your souls, every one in
particular: now see how thou walk humbly with God in obedience to the light
of Jesus Christ in the conscience, which bears witness against all vain and
carnal delights and unrighteousness: So see what thou do possess of union
with God in Romans 3.9.
Christ, and profess no more then thou do possess; so will all flesh be
silent, and every mouth stopped who live in the first nature; for all vain
profession is but as dust: and what abundance of vain professors there are?
carnal covetous men will profess much, Isa. 29.13, 14, 15.
and proud men will profess; cruel oppressors and corrupt cursed Lawyers will
talk of the Scriptures, and profess much before men; envious persecuting ones
will profess, Pharisees and hypocrites will profess much; vain and profane
persons will profess and talk of the Scriptures in their vain and carnal minds:
all these sorts of men will profess, who are all out of the way, and hating the
light of Jesus Christ, they are not come into the way, nor into the first
principle of Religion: Oh will not the Lord be avenged on such a people as
this, who make a profession of God and Christ, but are all out of the way that
leads to Christ's Kingdom, acting unrighteously, and living in sin and
uncleanness: now Broad is the way that leads to destruction, PLACE="marg"
Matthew. 7.13, 14. Romans 2.16.
and many there be that go on it; because narrow is the way that leads unto
life, and the gate strait, and few there be that find it: Now there are many
corrupt, carnal, covetous worldly ones, and vain profane wanton ones, who run
on the broad way; there are many drunkards, swearers, liars, thieves,
whoremongers, vain and profane persons, and who live in filthiness and
foolish Jesting, who run on the broad way to destruction; but all are left
without excuse, and none can hide themselves, that light of Jesus Christ in the
conscience of every one does find them out; though they hate it, it reproves
them secretly, John 4.29.
and bears witness against them for the evil of their doings. Surely this
light is of Christ, that rells every one what they have done, that tells the
whoremonger, and the thief, and the liar of their deeds, and all who live in
sin and wickedness, and who act unrighteously, it reproves them; this light
has enlightened every one that comes into the world, Joh. 3.19, 20, 21.
though the one love it, and the other hate it; but by it every one is left
without excuse, and he that hates it, it bears witness against the evil of his
doings, and it will make him confess of his evil deeds, when he has his
reward: this light of Jesus Christ in the Conscience of every one, Mat. 6.33.
judges the world in righteousness, and the wicked who hate the light, cannot
stand in judgment: this cries in the Conscience secretly within, First seek
the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, before all things. Now all
covetous worldlings, and who live in unrighteousness, this reproves them, Mat.
5.28.
and there is their condemnation hating ill, and this searches the secrets of
the heart, and reproves for disobedience: this witnesses against the
Adulterer: if thou looks upon a woman, and lust after her, this bears
witness, thou have committed adultery with her in the he art: this in the
Conscience says, Thou should love the living Lord God, with all thy heart, and
with all thy mind. Now who are in the first Nature, who delight in vain things
of the world: there is that in the Conscience which witnesses against them, 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.
that the love of the Father is not in them: this light of Jesus Christ in the
Conscience, is the alone way to the Kingdom, where no unclean thing can enter;
for no unclean person can enter into the Kingdom of God, and who live in the
lust of the flesh, and of the mind, in sin and uncleanness, is as in Egypt,
out of the Kingdom; and flesh and blood must not enter into the Kingdom of God.
2 Cor. 13.5, 6.
So let none deceive you any longer with vain words; for the light of Jesus
Christ in the Conscience, is the alone way; and who are not guided by the
Spirit of Christ are none of his, but are out of the way, who hate it: so
search and examine how it is with you: And furthermore this is witnessed, that
who draws you from watching, and taking heed to that of Jesus Christ in you,
they shut the way of the Kingdom of God against you, and draws you from your
guide and strength, and resting place: therefore all mind the Call of the
Lord, which is the light of Jesus Christ in you that convinces, which is the
alone way to the Kingdom, that which convinces you of sin, Isa. 30.15
and bears witness against the evil of your doings, Acts 4.11, 12.
either when you lie, or swear, or use any deceit in your Callings, or do any
unrighteousness, though ye do it never so secretly from the sight of men: there
is that in the Conscience that checks and reproves you, and tells you that ye
should not do so: so ye cannot flee from that in the Conscience, nor do any
wickedness, but that in the Conscience reproves you: and is your condemnation
disobeying it: so by it you are left without excuse, and that is their teacher
and guide, who love it, and they who hate it, and live in sin, run out to men
for teaching, and to such as are called of men Master, who has the chief place
in the Assemblies, stands praying therein, devoures Widows Houses, who shut
the Kingdom of Heaven against men. Such Christ forbad, and cried woe against,
therefore now cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, and every one in
particular, now mind the call of the Lord, which is the light of Jesus Christ
in the conscience. Loving this, it will lead thee out of the ways and works of
darkness, and it will show thee the vanities of the world: now what will it
profit any, to gain the whole world, Mat. 23.8.13, 14, etc. Isa. 2.22.
and loving this light of Jesus Christ, it will teach you to deny your selves,
and take up the Cross daily, and follow the Lord Jesus Christ through the
regeneration and watching to be guided by it, the pure Law of God will be set
up in thee, and judgment will pass upon the vain, earthly, carnal part in
thee, and thou must give an account for every evil deed done in the body, Mat.
12.36, 37. 1 Psalm. 39.
and as the book of thy conscience is opened, thou must give an account for
every idle word, and that will cause thee to set a watch before thy mouth, that
thou offend not with thy tongue, and if thou do offend either in words or
actions, there is a witness in thee that bears witness against thee: Isa.
30.20, 21.
so thou needs not run out for men's teaching without thee; for thy teacher
shall no more be removed into a corner, but watching and waiting within to be
guided by it, thou shall heat a voice behind thee, saying, when thou turns to
the right hand, or to the left, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
this is the way, walk in it; here is death and life set before thee, choose
whether: and loving this light in thee, in thy measure, being guided by it, it
will keep thee in the way of peace, to have peace with the Lord walking with
it, being obedient to it, and it will call you out of Egypt, toward the Land
of Canaan, PLACE="marg" Exodus 7.3.13, 14.
out of all carnal desires, and fleshly lusts, and thou will come to see the
hardness of Pharaohs heart, that does oppress the righteous seed; and waiting
within to be led, and guided by it, Romans 9.18 Exo. 13, 14
the light of Jesus Christ alone thou will come to see the narrow way, and it
will lead thee through the sufferings and death of Christ, Isa. 25.8, 9. Isa:
26.1.8.
and to the judging and crucifying of the old man with his deeds, and bring the
carnal man to judgment. O the first born in Egypt must be slain, and passing
forward at Moses call, thou will see Pharaoh with his Host pursuing; but
waiting within in the way of the judgments of the Lord, till judgment be
brought forth unto victory, Exodus 15.1, 2, 3, etc.
So shall Pharaoh with his Host be overthrown and destroyed, then thou may
sing the Song of Moses, the Servant of the Lord seeing his salvation appeared,
and the righteous seed being raised up; and delivered by the manifestation of
the mighty power of the spirit of God, then thou will find some Scriptures
fulfilled in thee, Joh. 4.23, 24.
and see that God is a spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and in truth;
and as many as are led by the spirit of God, are the Sons and Daughters of the
living God: this is known in the confirmation of the new Covenant, in the new
Creature, and that will make thee to rejoice. Now all who read these things,
take heed of getting them into comprehensions, and the light mind speak of
them, Dan. 9.27. Isa. 30.1.2 Mat. 5.13.
therein is danger; but all examine how it is with you, and where you are in
the way, and what ye can witness fulfilled in you; and you who are so far, come
on your journey, as out of Egypt to rejoice; Now take heed lest your wills get
into liberty, in thinking all is done, and then high thoughts of self get up,
that leads thee above the Cross, and draws from the fear, and the carnal part
gets strength again, and thou losest the Savior, and would look back at what
thou formerly have enjoyed, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4.
thinking to fetch something back from thence; but there is danger while the
will has its liberty: therefore watch and wait low daily in thy measure, to be
guided by that which is pure and eternal, which keeps in the fear of God, and
in the Savior: so mind the warfare; for there are many enemies to be fought
with after ye come out of Egypt: there is the uncircumcised Philistines, and
trials in the Wilderness, where there is much drought, and the Countries of the
Amalekites, and many more, to be passed through, before ye come to Canaan,
PLACE="marg" Deuteronomy. 8.11.14.
the land of rest; and who are thither come take heed, least thou forget the
living Lord God, who has done these things for thee; but daily be watchful to
dwell in that which is pure and eternal, to serve the only true and living God,
and walk in his fear, and sing Halelujah to the highest in the beauty of
holiness, because the Lord God omnipotent reigns: that which we have heard
and seen, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and
truly our fellowship is with the Father and the Son Jesus Christ; and these
things write we unto you, that your joy might be full. Now all who desire the
welfare of your souls, prize your time, and mind where you are, and cease from
all your outward teachers, who are deceivers, which leads you out of the way,
and to look for the Kingdom of God in outward observations; and they tell you,
1 John 1.3, 4.
ye cannot find it, till you depart out of this world; but they are liers and
deceives you, they are not in the Kingdom of God themselves, and they shut the
way to them that would enter, who follow them, by drawing them from taking heed
to the light of Jesus Christ within, which is the alone way to the Kingdom; and
so they keep people always learning, that they never come to the knowledge of
the truth, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
leading them from Mountain to Hill, and from their resting place; but cease
from them, for this is witnessed, that the Kingdom of God is found within: Jer.
50.6.
now of all the Children of the Lord, who are new Creatures, being born again,
and taught of the Lord: So all you dear hearts, Joh. 6.45.
who are weary and heavy laden, seeking rest to your souls, to you this is the
word of the Lord: now return, 2 Cor. 5.17
return within unto the Lord, where a fountain of living love and life is
found. Oh every one that thirsts, Mat. 11.28, 29, 30.
come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come buy and eat, yea come
buy wine and milk without money, and without price; Isa. 55.1.2, 3.
wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor
for that which satisfies not. Hearken diligently unto me, says the Lord, and
eat you that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness,
incline your ear, and come unto me, hear and your souls shall live, Joh.
10.4.9, 27, 28.
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David, while ye run to men without, which are broken Cisterns, which led you
out of the way, Heb. 4.15.
and from the Fountain, ye were not satisfied; for within it is found of all
who hear his voice, and they find pasture and refreshment in the fountain of
his free love, Jer. 12.16
My sheep hear my voice, says Jesus Christ, and they know it, and I give unto
them eternal life; and to you weary ones, this is the day, if you will hear his
voice, so will you enter into rest; and let the wicked forsake his way, and the
ungodly man his thoughts, Isa. 55.7, 8, etc.
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon; for my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor
your ways my ways, says the Lord; but if ye be wicked and rebel, ye shall
not have peace, and be consumed. This then is the Message that we have heard of
him, 1 Ioh. 1.5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 4.2.
and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, all
praises, praises everlasting, praise, honor, and glory be unto the Lord God
Almighty, 1 Ioh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.
to him it belongs now and evermore, and if we walk in the light as he is in
the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son, cleanses us from all sin: therefore mind the seed of God, and the
light in you, this is no other truth, but that which was from the beginning,
and which the Scripture and the Apostles testified of, and which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life; for the life was manifest, and we have seen it,
and bearwitness, and show to you eternal life, which was with the Father, and
was manifested unto us; So, all friends, mind the light in you, in the
Conscience every one in your measure, to be guided and led by it, and see where
you are in your journey, and what ye can witness fulfilled in you: loving this
light of Christ, it will keep you in the way of peace, and in following him to
have life eternal; but hating it, you run out of the way from God, and the
light is the condemnation: So be watchful, and God Almighty be with you, Ioh.
8.12. Ioh. 3.19, 20.
and preserve you in the way, and and into his heavenly Kingdom: so I rest, a
lover of your souls, called

Thomas Stubs, a prisoner of the Lord at Carlisle, for witnessing the truth.
As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another,
as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.

If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, if any man minister,
let him do it as of the ability which God gives him, that God in all things
may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praises and dominion, for
ever and ever, Amen.

To those who are called Justices, Rulers and Magistrates, within the County of
Cumberland, and elsewhere, to whom this may come, the word of the Lord which
came to me in prison at Carlisle, concerning you, and moved of the Lord to give
it forth for the good of your souls, with a word of warning to the wicked, and
joy to the righteous.

Friends, Beware that ye do not act according to your own wills, contrary to
the Law of God, either in respecting persons in judgment, or in taking a gift,
and turning Justice and true judgment backward: if ye do these things, then
you are called such men as you are not; for such men as were set to rule over
the people by the Law of God, they were to judge the people at all seasons,
they were not to respect persons in judgment, they were to be men of truth
fearing God, and hating covetousness, they were to judge the cause of the poor,
as well as the rich, they were not to take a gift; for a gift does blind the
eyes of the wise: herein I have showed you your duty, what ye ought to do; and
if ye be not such men, and do these things, then you judge not for the Lord,
and are not for his people, and the Law of God is against you: to you this is
the word of the Lord: and ye that are corrupt Lawyers and Magistrates, which
act according to your own wills, contrary to the Law of God, in doing
unjustice, and persecute the innocent, and let the offenders go free, ye that
do so, ye shall be hewed down and cut in pieces; ye hypocrites, who pret end to
do justice and do not, ye shall be over turned as your forefathers were, which
were corrupt; for the Law of God respects no man's person, and it is not for the
righteous, but it is against all transgressors: so you that act contrary to the
Law of God, them who witness the Law of God, and suffer by your wills, they for
conscience sake suffers and submits to God, who is the righteous Law giver, and
thereby did the righteous seed ever suffer, by that which was not subject to
the Law of God; and he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the spirit, even so it is now.

T. S.



THE END.

