The Vengeance of the Temple: DISCOVERED IN A SERMON Preached before the Right
Honorable the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen of the City of London, in Paul's
Church, May 17. 1648.

Being the day of Public Thanksgiving for a Victory obtained by the Forces
under the Command of Colonel Horton, at St. Faggons, near Cardiffe in Wales.

By William Strong Pastor of Dunstans in the West, and a Member of the Assembly
of Divines.

LONDON, Printed for John Benson, and are to be sold at his shop in Dunstans
Churchyard, 1648.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen, of the famous
City of London.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful:
A Word spoken in season, (...).
is a word upon the wheels Solomon tells us. Prove. 25.11. both grateful and
successful, which is the blessing that I beg of God upon these poor and
mean endeavors, which in obedience to your command I humbly present unto you.

It was the fittest subject that in this juncture of time I could fix my
thoughts upon, when men's hearts are too generally turned to hate Gods people,
and to deal deceitfully with his servants; thereby (I fear) to prepare
instruments in judgment for that last act of the tragedy upon the Saints in
the Reformed Churches, the killing of the witnesses, which I conceive, as the
bitterest affliction, and the sharpest persecution is yet to come.

God has put great opportunity into your bands, and it may be has raised you
to honor for such a time as this: do you countenance, and act for the Lords
holy ones, and it shall be accepted as a service by him who is King of Saints:
do you become as a correcting Cherube unto this Ark of God among you: for
next to the honorable title of Defender of the Faith, is that of Protector of
the faithful: for God and his people are engaged in the same cause and quarrel
and all opposition shall end in the destruction of the opposers, and they shall
perish by their hands whom they oppose, even by the vengeance of the Temple.

But no man will ever be faithful to the Saints, but he that is himself a
Saint, in whom the spirit of God dwells as a man, and acts as a Magistrate; all
other men though they may give good words for a time, yet they will meet with a
(...), an opportunity of temptation, and they will fall off, Pelago se non ita
commissurus esset, quin quando liberet, pedem refer posset.
engaging themselves in the cause of the Saints no further, then may stand with
their present purposes, and designs: As the King of Navarre told. Bez. he
would lanch no further into the Protestant cause, then he might see which way
to put into a safe harbor.

There is nothing that concerns Magistrates more then to gain the hearts, and
keep the prayers of these beloved ones, and they must be faithful to God that
shall expect it; for God and his Saints are in a League offensive and
defensive, Simulatque faedus cum Romany percusseris; noli expectare alium de
me calumniatorem, sed statim veluti hosti populi Romani cavendum puta. Polyb.
hist. l. 3.
and the Saints are ready to say to men as Hanniball did to King Antiochus,
while he continued an enemy to the Romans, so long he should be sure of him as
a friend; but if once he made a League with them, he should immediately look
upon him as his enemy; so do the Saints say, while faithful to God; they are
firm to you; but if you be false to God, it will not be long ere you will be
cast out of the hearts of his people also.

And that you may cleave close to the people of God, there is a great deal of
courage required in these dangerous and doubtful times; in which mercies are
accounted injuries, and to give thanks for them is set upon men as a brand of
cruelty and infamy, when so many forsake their first Principles, and labor to
build again that which hitherto they have destroyed. At this time I say, men
have need of courage, or else they will fear and faint, and fly when danger
presents it self.

Truly duty is better then safety, and suffering is better then sinning or
shifting; crooked ways will never bring a man to right ends; there is too much
of the Serpent in them; a lying tongue is but for a moment, Perde te, (...)
pereas. Salv.
and he that will save his life shall lose it.

Satan has an especial design upon men of eminency and authority in such
times as these, that he may carry them in Triumph, and act by them to the
corrupting of many. As the Romans having an evil eye upon Ptolomy King of
Egypt for his wealth, which they resolved to seize upon, but knew not how to
pick an occasion, he being in League with them; therefore they appointed Cato a
man in high esteem for justice and uprightness, as Publicus Praedo, ut summa
turpitudo facti authoritate tanti viri aliquantulum tegeretur, by the name of
the man to color over the baseness of the act; so Satan's great design of
late has been upon the Stars in our Horizon, and we may with fear remember
how many are fallen.

Engage ye therefore with and for the Saints, and let the present dangers
raise your resolutions: a great mind does rise by difficulties, and true
courage is heightened by oppositions. Let the birelings fly, let meteours fall,
and those that have cleaved to the Church of God by flattery be detected; yet
is the righteous an everlasting foundation. Let the blessing of Joseph be on
your heads whom God has separated from your brethren: let your bow abide in
strength, and the arms of your hands be made strong by the hands of the mighty
God of Jacob, which shall be the constant and daily prayer of

Your Servant in the Gospel, William Strong.

A Sermon Preached in Paul's Church London, before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, and Aldermen, the 17. of May 1648.
Being the day of public Thansgiving for a Victory obtained by the Forces
under the Command of Col. Horton, at St. Faggons near Cardiffe in Wales.
JUDGES Chap. 5. verse. So let all thine enemies perish, o Lord.


(...) etc. Resp. ad Orthod q. 71. and in dial. cum Tryph. p. 307. Necesse est
ut in fine sexti millesimi anni malicia omnis aboleatur e terra, and regnet per
mill annos justitia, fitque tranquilitas and requies a laboribus quos mundus
jamdiu perpessus est. de divin. imperio l. 7. c. 14. Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 20.
c. 7. Rev. 10.2.3.4. Pedem ponere est possessonem sibi and dominium vindicare.
Par. Dan. 7. c. 27.
THE condition of the Church in this world, is twofold, Militant and Triumphant.
The warfare of the Church, according to the Divinity of the Ancients, is to
last till toward the end of the first 6000. years of the World, as Justine
Martyr, and after him Lactantius, and others have observed. And then shall be
another condition of the Church, which shall be even in this life, and compared
with the former, may well be styled Triumphant and glorious. When Christ, that
great and mighty Angel shall come down from Heaven clothed with a Cloud, and
a Rainbow upon his head, and shall set his right foot upon the Sea, and his
left foot upon the Earth, and thereby take to himself the dominion of both,
Revel. 10.5.6. which is called taking to himself his great power and reigning,
Revel. 11.17. when he shall give the kingdom and dominion under the whole
heaven, which was before in the enemies hand unto the Saints of the most High,
and they shall possess it for ever and ever. When their enemies shall bow down
before them, and lick the dust under their feet.

In this militant condition has the Church of God been ever since the fall,
and how long it shall so continue, no man can certainly determine. But it is
the concurrent judgment of our Divines, that it draws near an end. While
this estate of the Church lasts, their condition will be like that, described
by the Prophet, A day wherein the light shall neither be clear nor dark,
Zach. 14.6. full of uncertainties, and subject to continual changes and
vicissitudes, not so light that they shall say there is an end of our fears,
nor so dark that they shall say there is an end of our hopes. Sometimes they
may be under the power of the Enemy, as prisoners in a pit wherein there is no
water; and by and by God will raise up a deliverer for them that shall
proclaim their liberty, and be as a covering Cherub to the Ark of God, for
their defense. A resemblance of this condition of the Church, we have in the
Jewish State, which therefore is made the prototype of all the Gentile Churches
thorowout the whole Book of the Revelation, the Prophecy of the last times.

An emblem whereof you have in the former Chapters. First, the children of
Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and he gave them into the hand of
Cushan Rishathaim the king of Mesopotamia, and he ruled over them eight
years. Then the Lord raised up a deliverer to them, Oihoniel the son of
Kenaz Calebs younger brother, and the Land had rest forty years. Then the
chilren of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord and he strengthened
against them Eglon the king of Moab: and they served him eighteen years, and
then the Lord raised up a deliverer for them, Ehud the son of Gera, and the
Land had rest fowrescore years. Afterward they were oppressed by the
Philistines, and the Lord delivered them by Shamgar the son of Anath. And
they did evil again in the sight of the Lord, and he sold them into the hand
of Iabin king of Canaan, the most potent of all these enemies; for he had nine
hundred Chariots of iron, and twenty years he mightily oppressed Israel. And
then the Lord raised for their deliverance Deborah the wife of Lapidoth, and
Barach the son of Abinoham, and gave the enemy into their hands. Thus God never
leaves his people in affliction, but provides Saviors as well as Persecutors,
not only horns, but Carpenters also to beat them to pieces, Zach. 1.21. A
song of thanksgiving for this last victory and deliverance, is the contents of
this Chapter. In which, by way of context, we may observe these six
particulars, all which will help us in the duty of the present day.

1 First, the heart that shall be thankful for a mercy must be gracious: the
song must be sung by a Deborah and a Barak, they must have golden vials, hearts
refined and not drossie, that shall have the harpes of God in their hands,
Revel. 5.8. And they that shall sing the Lords song, must be redeemed from the
Earth, being the first fruits to God and to the Lamb, in whose mouth is found
no guile, Revel. 14.4.5. An earthy spirit may put a man upon a prayer, his own
necessity will therein carry him on, to howl upon his bed for his corn, and
wine, and oil, but it is a heart only redeemed from the earth, that will
enable a man to return praise; so that if there be ten cleansed, we may say
with our Savior, Where are the nine?

2. Secondly, whosoever shall be thankful for a mercy must prize it and rejoice
in it. Gaudentis est gratias agere. Levit. 3.1.
Peace offerings are called in the Hebrew (...) Retributions, and they that
think they have received little, will make little conscience of returning.
There is an evil generation among the sons of men, that undervalue mercies
and despise them, saying, Would God we had died in Egypt: Canaan is a L^nd that
eats up his inhabitants. These men are so far from accepting the punishment in
an affliction, that they accept not the mercy in their redemption. Mercies will
distinguish men as well as Judgments. Some are delivered to everlasting life,
some to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2. O poor murmuring souls, to
whom mercies are a burden!

3. Thirdly, a thankful heart must stir up it self unto praise. Awake
Deborah, awake, awake utter a song, arise Barak and let captivity captive, Ephesians.
5.19.
thou son of Abinoam. Thanksgiving is melody in the heart of the Lord: and
before you can make melody, your Instrument must be in tune. Awake my glory,
awake lute and harp, I my self will awake right early. Ye profane and
unthankful spirits (ingratus est qui injuriam voc at finem voluptatis) that
repine at blessings, Sen. ad Polyb. ^.20.
and look upon your mercies as your injuries, incredulous men, that are scarce
willing to believe the things you see, that endeavor to bring up an evil
report upon all the goodness of God, procul hinc, here is no place for you in
the work of this day. The garment of praise is comely, only for the upright:
ye wayward spirits that slight the gift, because your selves did not choose the
messenger; and because you like not the hand that brings it. And ye seemingly
compassionate, that say, shall we give thanks for the killing of men, and that
of our own Nation, in a Civil War. In this case the Heathen man did
forbear his Triumph, and therefore such Thansgivings, seem not only
unchristian, but inhumane. To such I answer: The War, in which at first, ye of
this City, were eminently engaged, and by you the Kingdom, was either just or
unjust: if it were unjust, then hide your Tropheyes, and be ashamed of your
victories; for he that gives thanks to God because he prospers in a sin,
makes God a patron thereof. But if it were just, you ought to rejoice in the
success, being the public execution of divine justice, and to glorify God in
those things wherein he has glorified himself. It Is far from us to rejoice
in the blood of men, much less of our brethren; but yet if Christ will set up
his Throne upon the carkases of the slain, herein we may and will rejoice.

4. Fourthly, he that will be thankful, must enlarge his thoughts by the
remembrance of former mercies, and all the circumstances of mercies present. So
does Deborah, verse. 4.5. Lord when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou
marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled and the heavens dropped,
the clouds also dropped waters, the mountains melted from before the Lord,
even that Sinai from before the Lord God of Israel. You must praise God from
the fountain of Israel, and sing both the song of Moses and of the Lamb.

And you must enlarge your thoughts in all the circumstances of the present
mercies; so does Deborah, by the violence of the enemy, the kings came and
sought then fought the kings of Canaan in Tanach, by the waters of Megiddo,
they took no gain of money. By their confident expectations and their hopes.
Why is his chariot so long a coming, why tarry the wheels of his chariot?
have they not sped? have they not divided the prey to every man a damsel or
two? to Sisera a prey of diverse colors, a prey of diverse colors of needle
work of diverse colors of needle work of both sides, meet for the necks of
them that take the spoil. By the falsehood and desertion of their friends. Why
abodest thou among the sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of the flock? for the
divisions of Ruben were great thoughts of heart. Gilead abode beyond Jordan,
and why did Dan remain in ships? Ashur continued on the sea shore and abode in
his breaches. Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof,
because they came not out to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. By the immediate hand of God in the deliverance: his arm
was made bare. They fought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought
against Sisera, the River Kishon swept them away, that ancient River, the River
Kishon.

5. Fifthly, a heart truly thankful gives the instruments their due honor:
those that God has honored in the work, do you honor also, and God in
them. Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek, after Benjamin
among the people, Zebulon and Nephthali were a people that jeoparded their
lives unto the death, in the high places of the field Blessed above women shall
Iahel the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in the
Tent. It is the property of a beast to crop the Tree that shelters it, and of
an unskilful soldier to dismantle that Town that must defend him. Israel was
never in a worse condition, then when all their business was to murmur under
their present sufferings, and to quarrel with the Instruments of their
deliverances.

6. Sixthly, mercies received with praises, must be followed with prayers. As
prayer should engage the heart to praise, so praises should encourage the heart
to prayer; and those praises are heartlesse and faithles, that do not end in
prayers; for when God is giving, is our fittest season to be asking. So here
praise for a deliverance from one enemy, draws out the hearts in prayer
against all Gods enemies; So let all thine enemies perish o Lord.

Thus we are come home to the Text. The particuculars thereof are three.

1. The persons prayed against, Gods enemies, with their note of universality,
All thine enemies.

2. Secondly, the end of these men, Let them perish, with that particle which,
directs us to the manner, with an eminent utter and final overthrow, So let
them perish.

3. Thirdly, the means, which is by the power, the praises and the prayers of
the Saints. Hence the points are also three

1. First, All the Churches enemies, are Gods enemies.

2. Secondly. That perishing is their portion.

3. Thirdly, That they shall perish under the power, by the prayers and praises
of the Saints.

All the Churches enemies Gods enemies.

It is a question the Schoolmen usually put, Number Deus possit odio haberi?
Whether it be possible for the creature to be an enemy to God, who is goodness
it self, seeing evil only is the object of hatred, which is not to be found
in him? It is answered, That as God is bonum universale, he cannot be hated
by the creature; but inparticulari, being a good, that is contrary to us, so
men do hate the Lord. For Men and Angels in their fall, as some Schoolmen
observe, lost three things in respect of God; Delectationem pulchritudinis,
adorationem Majestatis, imitationem bonitatis, They neither delight in his
beauty, nor adore his glory, nor imitate his goodness. Thus all men by nature
are Gods enemies. But the enemies here spoken of, are Isreal's enemies, enemies
to God in his Church, as Psalm. 78.1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be
scattered. Isay 57.23. I know they going forth and coming in, and thy rage
against me. Yea even all their neglects and omissions toward the Church,
refer to God, and he will judge them accordingly at the last day. I was
hungry, and ye gave me no meat, inasmuch as ye did it not to the least of
these, ye did it not to me. Therefore Gods enemies here spoken of are his
Churches enemies.

In the opening of this point there are three things to be explayned.

First, the Church of God in all ages and places has met with enemies.

Secondly, that these enemies are not only theirs, but Gods.

Thirdly, some short discoveries who these enemies are.

First, the Church of God has from the beginning met with enemies. For the
nature of Christ's kingdom in this world, is to rule in the midst of his
enemies; in the world to come, he shall rule over them. The Apostle says.
There is a schema, a fashion of the world that passes away: 1 Cor. 7.31.
it continues not always in one fashion; but yet cast it into what shape you
will, and the Church of God has always found enemies in it, and usually they
have been the greatest persons, and the most prevayling party.

These enemies are of two sorts; from without, or from within. While the Church
was wandering among the Heathen, as sheep among wolves, what else could be
expected? When Israel went down into Egypt, they met with a Leviathan, who by
cruelty and subtilty sought to destroy them: Ps. 74.14.
and when they came into the Land of Canaan, they were as a speckled bird, all
the bordering Nations hated them. Jer. 12.9.
There arose four great Monarchies, or principal kingdoms in the world,
called Beasts, Dan. 7.1.2. chiefly for their cruelty to the Saints. Under the
Chaldean Monarchy, Israel is as a scattered sheep; the Lions have driven him
away: the former Kings of Assyria, Tiglath Pileser and Salmanaser have devoured
him: and Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon has broken his bones, Jer. 50.17. In
the Persian Monarchy, there was an Haman and a Cambises, who with a Samaritan
faction of their neighbors, that were neither Heathens by profession, nor
Jews by Religion, these raised a great mountain against them, Zach. 4.7.
even the power of the whole Empire. In the Grecian Monarchy, there arose
Antiochus, that little horn, a King of a fierce countenance, who did destroy
wonderful, and prospered and practiced against the holy people, waxed great
even to the host of heaven, and cast down some of the host and of the stars
to the ground and stamped on them, Dan. 8.9.10.

And in the fourth Monarchy as Pagan, there was a great red Dragon, that made
war against Michael and his Angels. Thus the Church of God has always met
with enemies round about. But yet she might expect friends within, that those
borne in her bosom and brought up upon her knee, that they should be true and
faithful to her. But here is the misery, that she has always found the
worst enemies to proceed out of her own bowels. Toads, they say are most
poisonous in the wineseller, and the tares most destructive that grow among the
wheat.

If an open enemy besiege Jerusalem, Zach. 12.2. Judah erit in obsidione contra
Jerusalem. Jerome. and Montan.
some of Judah will join with them in the siege. When Jerusalem is taken by
the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty Nation, yet they feared more then they do
the enemy, the Renegado Jews that fell off to the Chaldeans. And in their
return out of the captivity, their greatest enemies were the Samaritans, Jer.
38.19.
that professed to worship the same God with them, and would join with them in
building a Temple to him, that by their compliance they might hinder the work.
Joseph. antiq. l. 11. c. 8.
And when the Temple was built, Manasses the brother of Jaddaeus the high
Priest, having married a strange wi^e. sc. the daughter of S^nballet, and being
therefore by his own brother put out of the Priesthood, he with his father in
law did by a Petition to Alexander, obtain leave to build a Temple upon mount
Gerazim, in hope thereby to destroy the worship of God at Jerusalem, and to
draw away the hearts of the people from it. And the Church of God is never in
so much danger, as when a S^nballet and a Manasse meet in the conspiracy.

And when they were settled in their own land, Act. 4.11.
Christ is rejected of the builders; Esaias. 8.14.
he is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to both the houses of
Israel. And for the Saints, Math. 23.34.35.
I send to you Prophets and wise men and Scribes, and not one of these can
perish out of Jerusalem: they that did profess with them the same God, and to
join in the same worship, sought to destroy them.

Let us now come from the Jewish to the Christian Church, and we shall see the
enmity remain, as soon as the Roman Empire embraced Christianity, Satan
immediately casts (...) a flood after the woman, the flood of Arian heresy, and
the Arian Christian persecutes the Orthodoxe, as much or more then the Pagans
had done before. But this flood was soon dried up, the earth helping the woman
against the Arian persecution. Now co^^es in a third state of the Empire, which
is Antichristian there does arise a beast out of the earth, Rev. 13.11.
that has two horns like a Lamb. Surely now nothing is to be expected bu^
meekness and innocence; but this Lamb speaks like the Dragon and the design
of this beast is to wear out the Saints of the most High, Dan. 7.25.
and to make war upon them, and that with greater cruelty then the Heathens
and Arians had done before. For Rome trades in the souls of men: but many
Nations have made defection from Antichrist, have come out of Babylon. Rev.
18.13.
There are ten kingdoms that the Lamb will overcome, by their conversion, and
they shall hate the whore and make her desolate. Surely the Saints find no
enemies there: there is in the Reformed Churches a sea of glass mingled with
fire both of contention, Rev. 15.2.
and persecution among themselves. And they that slay the witnesses dwell in
the same street where their dead bodies he, Rev. 11.7.8. So that cast the world
into what frame and fashion you will, while the term of the Churches militant
condition lasts, there will be always found a prevayling party, whose design
is to wear out the Saints of the most High.

2. Secondly, They that are the Churches enemies are Gods enemies, whether they
be within or without the Church. This will appear upon these four grounds.

1. First, they are Gods enemies, because God and his people are in Covenant;
there is a league offensive and defensive between them. You have a full
expression of such a league, in the words of Iehosephat, I am as thou art, my
servants as thy servants, my horses as thy horses; that is, they shall be as
truly thine to use, as if the necessity were mine own. So Genesis 12.3. the Lord
Covenants with Abraham, I will bless them that bless thee and I will curse
them that curse thee; I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an adversary to
thy adversaries, Exodus 23.2. And therefore they that oppose them are said to
fight against God. And if the people of God be worsted at any time, they can
call to him as their Confederate. Arise Lord fight against them that fight
against one, take hold of the shield and buckler, and stand up for my help;
draw out the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me, etc. 35.
Psa. 2.3.

2. Secondly, because their cause is Gods cause, therefore their enemies must
needs be Gods enemies. They entitle God to it, Psalm. 74.22. Arise Lord,
maintain thine own cause. And God by his Propht ownes it, the battle is not
yours but Gods, 2. Cron. 20.12. It is for Gods sake that all opposition lights
upon them; for thy sake are we killed all the day long; the reproaches of them
that reproched thee are fallen upon me, and they choose it rather then God
should be dishonored: Malo in nos murmur hominum quam in Deum: Bern. de confid.
bonumest mihi si Deus d^gnetur me uti pro clypeo.

3. Thirdly, because all Gods enemies be their enemies, and all opposition that
is made against God in the ways of his Truth or Worship, they take as done to
themselves; Do not I hate them that hate thee? yea I hate them with a perfect
hatred as if they were mine enemies. As Gods friends be their friends, so all
Gods enemies are their enemies. And if they answer to their part of the
Covenant, surely God will not fail in his.

4. Fourthly, they are a people very dear to God, and this makes the Lord to
look upon every thing that concerns them, as being interessed in it. They are
dear to him, Zach. 2.5.
as the apple of his own eye. The sons of his bosom, and the Father takes
himself concerned in all the wrong offered to his children. And as grace,
though it be in it self but an accident, is dearer to God, then the souls of
all men without it: so his people, though they be but few, and as an accident
to the world, yet are they dearer unto God, then all the Kings and Kingdoms of
the Earth besides; they being the first fruits to God and to the Lamb; Esaias.
43.3.4. Ps. 105.14.
and therefore he gives Kingdoms for their Ransom, and reproves Kings for
their sakes.

3. Thirdly, Who are these enemies? We are the Church of God, even this whole
Nation, therefore none of these are to be found amongst us.

These enemies are of several sorts.

1. First, all profane men that are enemies to holiness, they are the
Churches enemies, whose God is their belly, who glory in their shame, who are
enemies to the Cross of Christ. These are spots in our feasts, a blemish and a
dishonor to all our Churches. We labor at present under a double evil of
damnable doctrines: on the one side, and divelish practices on the other: and
both these think to justify themselves, by objecting one against another. The
Heretic declaimes much against Prophanenes, and thinks that he has well
acquitted himself; and the profane man on the other side cries out heresy,
heresy; but these are both enemies unto Christ, and to the Church of Christ.
Profaneness has gotten so much ground, there being no Magistrate (as it is
said of Laish) or master of restraint to put them to shame, that they declare
their sins as Sodom^; Judge. 18.7.
and it is with us as Salvian in his days found it. De Gubern. Deid 3.
Genus quodammodo sanctitatis est minus esse vitiosum. He is a holy man that is
not extremely wicked, and he little less then a Saint who is not a very Devil.

2. Secondly, Heretics in Opinion, and Idolaters in Worship. They be the
enemies to the Witnesses, Revel. 11.5. men that speak (...), perverse things,
Act 20.30.
turning all upside down, Ephesians 4.14.
denying principles, overthrowing foundations: affirming horribilia de Deo, 2
Pet. 2.3. 2 Pet. 3.16. (...). Ep^st. Polycarp. ad Philip.
terribilia de fide: men that use a (...) and a (...), a great deal of
artifice and skill to deceive: there are (...), new coined words, and canting
language to corrupt the minds of the Saints, who set the Scripture upon the
Rack (...) and make it speak that which the Holy Ghost never intended, wresting
it to their own destruction, and the subversion of others. Such the people of
God should look upon as enemies, and avoid their communion, 2. John 10. If
there come any to you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your
house, nor bid him God speed, for he that bids him God speed, is pertaker of
his evil deeds. If a man be once taken with an itch of novelty, as to defire
to hear what every man says, he is near to be seduced, and it is a great
judgment of God to be given over to believe a lie. Vincentius Lirinensis has
this observation of the ancient Saints, Advers. haereses. cap. 9.
it may serve for our direction: Quo quis foret religiosior eo promptius
novellis adinventionibus contrairet.

3. Thirdly, all those that rejoice in the low condition of the Church of God,
and deride them when they are down, these the Church calls enemies. Mica. 7.8.
yet such there are in the Church, sons of the bondwoman that will be scoffing,
who with Haman can sit down to drink, when the people of God are in
perplexity; men that rage and rail, and only expect a day when with a
despitefull heart they may revenge themselves, Ezekiel. 25.8. This was Moabs
enmity they said, Behold the house of Judah is like unto all the Heathen: for
all their boasting of their God, they are laid waste as other Nations, there is
no difference. Therefore thus says the Lord, I will open the side of Moab,
take away her strong frontier Cities, an enemy shall enter into her bowels, and
she shall be no more remembered among the Nations.

4. Fourthly, all men that reserve themselves, and affect a detestable
neutrality in these active times, that lie at a close guard till they see which
is like to be the stronger side, and come not forth to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. Meroz is as truly an enemy, as Iabin the king of Canaan:
for in this case Christ says, He that is not with me is against me, and he
that gathers not with me scatters. These consult not their present duty, but
their future safety, how they may so demean themselves that they may ingratiate
with this or that party that does prevayle. Therefore sail by a side wind and
live upon futura contingentia all their days. To such a one I say, thou art an
enemy to the Church of God, and God is an enemy to thee.

5. Fifthly, they that cleave to the Church of God by flattery, and proffer to
build with them that they may destroy them: whose hearts are truly set against
that work of Reformation they profess to further, for in their persons they
hate to be reformed. Who court the Saints of God, and salute them, but it is to
betray them with a kiss, and with Ioab to stab them in a complement, Ezekiel.
29.6.7. The Lord says of Egypt, Thou have been a staff of Reed to the house
of Israel: they had encouraged the Jews to rebel against the King of Babylon,
and had promised to assist them; they were in promissione baculus, but in
solutione arundineus, A Lap. in loc.
and so became an occasion of all the misery that befell Israel in this
design. When Israel came out of Egypt, there was a mixed multitude, who did
cleave to them by flattery, and murmured and deserted them when trialls came.
It may be said of many a man as Ruoeus of the Carbuncle, translucit in modum
ardentis prunae, Lib de Gemmis.
if you hear their words and look upon them at a distance, you would think
them to be as hot as a fiery coal, but come near to them and observe their
actions, and you shall find them to be key cold.

6. Sixthly, all Apostates that fall from their former principles, that now
plead for that which not many years, it may be not many days since, they were
violent against. The greatest enemy that ever God had, was an apostate Angel.
The greatest enemy that ever Christ had, an apostate Church and the greatest
enemies to the Saints are Renegado professors. Take heed of an Alexander, a
Demas, a Julian. There was a time not long since, when you all said, we will
admit no heresy in doctrine, no super stition in worship, no tyranny in
government, no man shall have dominion over our Laws, or domination over our
consciences; but many have met with a (...) an opportunity of temptation, are
fallen away, and are become actors and advocates for those things and persons
which before they were resolute against, and all their former deliverances are
but a Resurrection to shame, Dan. 12.2. The Jews in their first deliverance
are to meet with such trouble as they had not since they became a Nation, which
is to last five and forty years: in which time, many that had a share in the
first deliverance, shall be discovered to be unsound, and false hearted, and
their former deliverance shall be to their eternal shame and dishonor before
the Saints. Surely, there are trying times coming, when no house will stand,
but that which is built upon the Rock. Its the righteous only that is an
everlasting Foundation.

There are three observations which I desire to add to the explication, before
I come to the reasons and grounds of this emnity.

First, when men's hearts are once in judgment turned to hate the Saints, the
maine pleasure of their lives comes in by their opposition to them, and they
take very much delight in it. As Satan not having yet his full torment, the
maine pleasure that he takes is in opposition against God, and to see his plots
to take in a way of revenge; so it is with the enemies who are acted in a high
degree by the spirit of Satan in their opposition against the Saints.

A man's meat and drink in the Scripture, Fruitionem denotat and delectationem.
Glass. Rhetor. sacr. p. 373.
is that by which the pleasure and the comfort of his life comes in; It is my
meat to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work, Jo. 4.34.
And to note that the main pleasure of the enemies lies in their opposition, it
is said to be their meat and drink. It is their meat, Psalm. 14.4. They eat up
my people as they would eat bread, they are the food that their malice feeds
upon; Mos est in urbibus Palestinae, and usque hod ie peromnem Judaeam vetus
consuetudo servatur, ut in vicculis oppidis and castellis rotundi ponantur
lapides gravissimi ponderis, ad quos juvenes exercere se soleant, and eos pro
varietate virium sublevare; alii ad genua, alii ad umbilicum, alii ad humeros
and capur nonnulli super verticem erectis junctisque manibus, pondus extollunt.
and this is their drink also, Rev. 17.6. I saw the woman drunken with the
blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Though it
prove a cup of poison and of trembling in the end, yet they drink if down as
sweet wine, Zach. 12.2. This is their recreation also, and that wherein they
show forth their strength and activity; which Hierome conceives to be intended
by the Holy Ghost, in that expression of a burdensome stone, Zach. 12.3.
alluding therein to the custom of the Jews, and of all those Eastern
Countries, where in every town and village were great round stones, which the
young men for recreation, and to show forth their strength, did use to lift pro
virium varietate, some to their knees, some to the loins, some to the head,
etc. And thus as matter of recreation, are the enemies lifting at the Church,
every man according to his ability, and as any one dare do more then other
this way, he accounts himself the more valiant and gallant man; which made
Saul in this zeal this way (which he after saw to be madness) to go beyond
his fellows.

The last enemies of the Church shall surely be the worst. and exceeding
dreadful, whose teeth were of brass, Dan. 7.19. (...). Sept.
But upon the last head of the fourth beast there arise ten horns (for the
Roman Empire is broken into ten Kingdoms) and after them, o behind them,
there does arise a little horn, that speaks great words against the most
High, and whose design is to we are out the Saints, (...) Dicitur de
calceamentis inveteratis, Josh. 6.13, and de pannis affritis. Jer. 38.11.
Dan. 7.24.25. The Original word does sign^fi^ to wear out a thing with long
and continued use, or as a Garment is worn out by degrees, with long and
constant wearing, so under this little Horn, which must be Antichrist, because
he rises with the ten horns upon the last head of the fourth beast; and in
whose judgment the beast is slain, and his body destroyed, given to the
burning flame, ver. 11.) the witnesses prophecy in sackcloth and ashes 1260
days; in a persecuted, mournful and afflicted condition; that by a long and
continual oppression, they may be worn out even as a garment.

Thirdly, the last acts of these enemies shall be filled with the greatest
cruelty, and with a rage that shall reach to heaven: Antichrist shall make it
his business during all the time of his reign to wear out the Saints, but at
last they shall be killed, Rev. 11.7.8.
and that in the most inhumane manner, their dead bodies shall be cast out into
the street, and they shall rejoice in their death, and deny them a burial: in
the last attempts they shall express more cruelty and bitterness, Rev. 16.16.
then in many hundred years before. And after the resurrection of the
witnesses, and Romes downfall, they shall attempt with greater violence, when
the Kings of the earth and of the whole world, shall be gathered together to
the battle Armageddon. Rev. 20.8.9.
And lastly, when Gog and M^gog shall gather the Nations together to battle
from the four quarters of the earth, in number as the sands of the sea and
they shall go upon the breadth of the earth and compass the camp of the Saints
round about, and the beloved City. Satan shall have great indignation, seeing
his time is short: For in the last days shall be the most glorious
Reformation, the greatest refinements shall pass upon the world by him, who
sits as a refiner, answerable to the degrees of reformation, Mal. 3.3.
such shall the degrees of opposition be, when there shall be the perfectest
reformation, there shall then be the highest opposition and the bitterest
persecution. 2 Timothy 3.5.
In the last days the opposition to Godliness in the power of it, shall be by
them that have a form, and the persecution of Religion shall in a great
measure be under a profession thereof, men sinning against greater light and
higher works, whose hearts the Devil has touched, 1 Jo. 5.18.
and left a special impression of divellishnesse upon, and who are thereby
qualified for a higher way of sinning. In the last days shall the great and
glorious deliverances of the Churches be, when all the persecu^ing Monarchies
shall be destroyed, Esaias. 2.2^.
and the mountain of the Lords house be exalted on the top of the mountains,
that all Nations may flow to it, Zach. 14, 4. Ut Jerosolyma non fit in umbrosa
valle quemadmodum prius: sed pateat long and late ejus prospectus; ita ut
gentes omnes eam scypiciant, Calv. Rev. 11, 7, 8, 9. Ezech. 37, 11.12.
when the Mount of Olives shall cleave asunder in the midst, toward the East
and toward the West: That is, whatsoever does now overshadow and hide the
Churches glory, and hinder her prospect shall be removed. And God does not use
to afford his people great and eminent deliverances, till they are deeply
humbled and brought low: the slaying of the witnesses, does precede their
resurrection, and they must be dry bones first, and then the Lord says, I will
open your graves. Upon these grounds I do conclude, that the last at empts of
the enemies shall be the fiercest, and that the bitterest afflictions and the
sh^rpest persecutions of the Church of God, are reserved for these l^st times.

And that this enmity may not seem strange to you, the grounds of it, and all
the persecution that flows from it, are principally these two.

1. First, the contrariety and antipathy that is in their natures, there being
an enmity in judgment, put between the seed of the woman, and the feed of
the Serpent. It is part of the Devils curse, Genesis 3.15. and it is the curse of
all those that are of their father the Devil. This enmity being founded in
nature, must needs be aniversall and indefatigable. Universal for hatred
carries a man against all the kind; (...), Arist.
as grace carries a man's love sincerely to all the Saints, so this enmity
founded in nature and in judgment, carries with it a contrariety unto all the
Saints. And though some ungodly men may pretend fair, and may with their
mouths show much love, and this enmity may be hid, yet are they only wolves in
sheep clothing; and whenever occasion and opportunity is offered will
appear so to be; for that Rule will hold to the end of the world, Tertul. Apol.
Tot hosts quot extranei, they that be strangers to godliness, are all of
them enemies to it. And indefatig able it must needs be. A man would sometime
think that Satan and wicked men, having their plots so often defeated and
brought to naught, and all the mischief of them turned upon their heads,
should at last sit down discouraged and give over, but they cannot do it,
because it is founded in nature and judgment: and when the five shall cease to
burn, and the stone to move toward its center, then shall their attempts and
acts of hostility cease, and never till then.

2. Secondly, this enmity is exceedingly acted in them by the spirit of the
Devil, whose name is in regard of his opposition to the Saints, Rev. 9.11.
called Abaddon and Apollyon, the Destroyer. All sins indeed are from the
Devil, Ephesians. 2.2.
and all sinners are acted by the Devil, he rules in all the children of
disobedience: but yet some sins are from him per modum servitutis, as a man
serves Satan in them; but some sins are from him, per modum imaginis, as a
man resembles Satan in them; and such is this of enmity against the Saints, and
in these sins in which a man in an especial manner becomes the seed of the
Serpent, Satan does more directly and immediately act men then he does in other
sins: and therefore Rev. 3.10. he is said to cast the Saints into prison, it
being done by his special instigation and command. And therefore its noted as
a special misery that shall befall the Devil after all the persecuting
Monarchies shall be destroyed, that Dragon the old Serpent the Devil and
Satan, Rev. 20.2.3.
shall be bound for a thousand years, and shut up in the bottomless pit, that
he may not deceive the Nations, sc. to draw out the rage of their spirits in a
way of persecution as he did in times past, no more. And there is no sacrifice
that the Devil is so well pleased with, as he is the God of this world, as
when there is offered to him the blood of the Saints; and therefore men that
are more immediately ruled by him, this he does put them upon, as that with
which he is chiefly delighted. Its said of Julian the Apostate, that he had two
great designs; one, the subduing of the Persians, and the other, the rooting
out of the Christians: (...), Nazian. Orat. 2. Cont. Julian.
and when he went in that Persian expedition in which he perished, he vowed if
he had succes in that enterprise, he would at his return sacrifice to his
Idols, sc. to the Devil in them, the blood of all the Christians that were in
the whole Empire; which had been a sacrifice with which Satan would have been
well pleased.

And as Satan loves to stir up the rage and enmity of wicked men to destroy the
saints, so he does very much delight to make them instruments in their own
destruction, and that temporal as well as eternal; and he knows there is no
speedier way to destroy a person or people, then for men to rall upon the reere
of the Lords host. This is the ready way to take away their own defense, and
put themselves out of the protection of God; Esaias. 49, 8.
for it is for the Saints sake, and by their Covenant, that the world is
continued, and the earth established: it would soon sink under your feet
else, they bear up the pillars of it; they are the rock upon which your City
and safety is built: and had the Lord once disposed of his sons and daughters
in their great marriage with the Lamb, he would quickly dissolve this frame of
heaven and earth, and break up the house keeping of the world; and Satan does
set men in a way of persecution to this end that they may thereby take away
their own defense.

And the Devil knows there is no speedier way to set God in vengeance against
a person or a Nation then this is, because the heart of the Lord is exceeding
tender toward his holy ones, he that touches them touches the apple of his
eye, Zach 2, 8.
which no man shall do impune or unrevenged.

I now come to the second branch in the Text, which is the portion of these
enemies, they shall perish.

All the Churches enemies shall assuredly perish in their own opposition:
perishing is their portion.

For explication I shall lay down these positions. The destruction of the
Churches enemies shall be effected by their opposition against the Church,
Mich. 4.11.12.13. There are many Nations gathered together against Zion, and
their purposes are that she may be defiled and destroyed; but Gods purposes are
not so, they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his
counsel: for his intention is, that they should perish in their opposition:
associate themselves that they may be broken in pieces, Esaias. 8, 9.
that they may be gathered together as sheaves in a floor; that they may be
threshed by the daughter of Zion, and where they seek the Churches
destruction, they may there be sure to find their own: and in the same floor
where they did intend to thresh the Church, there they themselves shall be
threshed. Its therefore drinking a cup of poison. Zach. 12, 2, 3. Venemum
mortiferum, appellatio forte a tremendo: Nam quaedam venena frigida sunt.
So Mercer does conceive the word (...) to signify, and to be no other way a
cup of trembling, but from the effect of this poison, there being some poisons
cold in so high a degree, that they will cast a man into a trembling till he
die; and he that drinks poison has a hand in his own destruction. Its
lifting at a burdensome stone, and men burden themselves with it, and are
broken to pieces by their own attempts. Math. 21, 44.
Its falling upon a stone, and dashing at it, as a ship against a rock, and
thereby sinking it self. Act. 9, 5.
Its kicking against the pricks; the iron would hurt no man of it self,
neither would the Saints, but men rush against it and are wounded thereby.
Lucun.
Nec vulnus adactis debetur gladiis percussum est pectore ferrum. As the Lord
says of himself, Jer. 25, 6, 7.
Provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands, and I will do you no
hurt: so he says of his Church also, if they be kindly entreated, they are to
the Nations where they live as dew from the Lord, Mich. 5, 2.
and as showers upon the grass: but if men exalt themselves against them, and
seek to cast down the host of heaven, they become like a hearth of fire among
the wood, Zach. 12, 6.
and like a torch of fire in a sheafe, and they devour the people round about,
on the right hand and on the left, so that the cause of their destruction by
them is their opposition against them.

Secondly, it will be an universal destruction of all those that persicute and
persevere in their opposition against the Saints, whether they be enemies
without or within the Church: and the great overthrowes that have been in the
world upon the enemies, have been brought about by their opposition against
the holy ones. We may observe it:

1. In all the enemies from without, Genesis 14. There is a famous example in one
particular Saint: four kings were confederate for enlarging their dominions,
and they conquered and subdued all the neighboring Nations, took the spoil
and carried it away safely, that I may say as the Prophet does of the conquest
of the King of Babylon, Esaias. 10.14.
They gathered the riches of the Nations as one gathers eggs, there was none
that moved the wing or opened the mouth or peeped. They came at last to Sodom,
a people that for their wickedness, were even humani generis opprobrium, whom
God had appointed unto the greatest judgment that we read of, rayning upon
them brimstone and fire (gehennam e coelo) from the Lord out of heaven: this
City they took, plundered, carried away many prisoners, and departed. But
among these was righteous Lot Abraham's brothers son, and in taking him they
drank poison, and they must vomit him up again, to their own destruction:
for God stirred up the spirit of Abraham to pursue them, and he gave them as
the dust to his sword, Esaias. 41.2.
and as driven stubble to his bow. When Israel sojourned in the Land of Egypt,
Psalm. 105.25. Psalm. 74.14. Dan. 7.2. Jer. 50.28. Vindicta Dei active sumitur
pro vindicta Deus qua^ exer cebit, vindicta Templi passi, ve ponitur pro
vindicta qua Deus ulciscitur contumeliam Templo suo illatam, Calv.
while they dealt well with them they prospered for their sakes; but when the
Lord in judgment turned their heart to hate his people and deal subtly with
his servants, he brake the head of Leviathan in the waters, in the pursuit of
Israel, and they perish in their own opposition. Afterward there were to arise
four beasts, or great Monarchies successively in the world, and they all
perish in their opposition against the Church of God: the Chaldean perishes,
but it is by the vengeance of the Temple: the inhabitants of Zion shall say,
the daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor, its time to thresh her, for
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Baabylon has devoured me, he has crushed me, he
has made me an empty vessel, he has swallowed me up like a Dragon, he has
filled his belly with my delicates, be has cast me out: the violence done to
me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, and my blood upon the Inhabitants of
Chaldea.

The Persian Monarchy ended also by the same means; for the Lord of hosts by
reason of their cruelty against the Saints, Zach. 1.14.15.
is jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy, and is sore
d^spleased with these heathen, because when he was but a little displeased they
helped forward the affliction. God did intend to correct them, and the enemies
intention was to destroy them; and for this their cruelty, wrath arose against
them, even hot displeasure: and hence the angel from the Lord went forth to
fight against the King of Persia in the Churches quarrel, Dan. 10.20.
and he stirs up the spirit of the King of Grecia, and gives him a success
in his enterprise, because the Angel went out before him. Thus also the
Grecian Empire came to an end: for in the latter times thereof when the
transgressors were come to the full, and they had filled up the measure of
their impiety, there came forth a little horn which waxed exceeding great,
Dan. 8.9.11.23.24.25.
even to the host of heaven, and cast down some of the host, and of the
stars to the ground and stamped upon them: That is, as it is expounded
afterward, there stood up Antiochus Epiphanes, a King of a fierce
countenance, understanding dark sentences, and he did destroy the mighty and
the holy people, the mai^e of his rage did break forth against the Saints, yea
he did stand up against the Prince of Princes, and perished in his own
opposition, for he was taken away without hand.

The Roman Empire also as Pagan, must come to destruction this same way by
their opposition against the Saints, Rev. 12 7.8.
for as a great Red Dragon they made war with the Saints, fought against
Michael and his Angels, and prevayled not, but in their very persecution they
were destoyed; for it proved the ruin of all their Idolworship, and all the
Princes that did endeavor to uphold it.

The Turkish Empire, now the terror of the world, Rev. 16.12.
must be destroyed also in this very way: Euphrates must be dried up that the
way of the Kings of the East may be prepared, Dan. 11.40. At the time of the
end sc. toward the end of the Roman Empire, the King of the south, the
Saracen, and the King of the north, the Turk, shall come against the Roman as
a whirlwinde, and shall overflow, and he shall wax great, and shall subdue all
the neighboring nations, and they shall be all at his steps, sc. at his
devotion and at his command: And toward the end of his Empire he shall set
himself against the Saints, and he shall plant the Tabernacle of his Palace
between the seas, in the glorious holy mountain; and then he shall come to an
end irrecoverably none shall help him.

And in the end of the world, though in respect of the former persecutions
Satan shall be bound up, that he shall not stir up men to rage and cruelty
against the Saints, as he had done during all the time of the four Monarchies,
Rev. 20.7,
yet when the thousand years of the Churches Peace and glory are expired,
Satan shall be losed again, and having but once liberty granted, he will betake
himself unto the same course that he had used in former times, to stir up the
wicked of the world in a way of persecution of the Saints, Rev. 20.9.
and Gog and Magog shall be gathered together to battle, and they encompasse the
Camp of the Saints and the beloved City, and in this their opposition they
perish, now fire shall come down from God out of Heaven and deveure them; thus
all the Churches enemies without, do perish in their own opposition.

Its true also of all enemies within, some there are that fight against Christ
under his own banner, and persecute the Saints under the name of Saints, Cant.
5.7.
sometimes the watch men that go about the City smite the Church and wound
her, and the keepers of the wall take away her Veil; yet even these enemies,
their opposition will prove their destruction, as we may observe both in the
Jewish and in the Gentile Churches.

In the Church of the Jews Numb. 16. there were a company of men rose up
against Moses and Aaron 250 Princes famous in the Congregation, men of renown,
but they did it against their own lives (as they are called sinners against
their own souls) for the Lord created a new Creation, the earth opened her
mouth and swallowed them up: and when the Lord came in judgment to destroy
that Church and Sat; this is the sin that has especial influence into their
destruction, Mat. 23.34.35. Behold I send unto you Prophets, and wisemen, and
Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye
scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City; that upon you
may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth; therefore they that are
enemies to the Saints among themselves shall not escape.

In the Gentile Churches also all that ever had their hearts turned against the
Saints, it proved the forerunner of their destruction. The Church of God had
been in hard travail 300. years, and at last brought forth a man child,
Rev. 12.5.
and he was taken up to the throne of God, that is, they obtained of God a
Christian Emperor: this wrought a great change in the Empire, and they became
in show many of them Christians; but then arose among them a generation of
persecutors the flood powered out after the Woman, which had swallowed them up,
had not the earth succored the Woman, and God given her the wings of a great
Eagle to fly into the wilderness: now the Lord will not suffer the persecutor
even by them that live in the Church to go unrevenged; therefore he does in
judgment devide the Empire; the eastern parts he gives to the Saracens and
Turks, and the western part to the Goths and Vandalls, those barbarous Nations
brake in upon them as a flood and did overflow all. The Western part of the
Empire being broken by the Goths, there arise in it ten Kings, Rev. 17.12.
and they contribute all their power to set up Antichrist, Rev. 17.13.17.
they give their Kingdoms to the Beast to this end, and this Beast persecutes
the Saints more then all the former persecutors had done, and in their
persecution they perish; Rev. 18.8.21.
for her plagues shall come in one day, death and mourning and famine, and she
shall be cast into the Sea as a Millstone, and shall be found no more at all:
and the cause of all this shall be that God may recompense upon them the
controversies of Zion, that he may avenge the blood of his servants at her
hands because in her was found the blood of the Prophets, Rev. 18.20, 24. and
19.2.
and of the Saints, Rev. 18.16.
and of all that have been slain upon the earth. And in the reformed
Churches, in the ten Kingdoms, whom God will reserve for the ruin of
Antichrist, and will use them in this great work; yet there shall arise a
persecution among themselves also, and in them shall the Witnesses be slain
(for their enemies shall dwell in the same street where their deads bodies
shall lie unburied) this persecution shall end in their destruction; Rev.
11.7.8.
for when the witnesses shall rise from the dead, and ascend to Heaven in a
cloud their enemies beholding them, the same hour there shall be a great
Earthquake, and not only the tenth part of the City shall fall, but in this
Earthquake shall be slain seven thousand of these men; Rev. 11.12.13.
there shall a very great destruction come upon the enemies to the Saints in
the Reformed Churches, Reliqui pontificiae prius religionis agnoscentes in
Istorum Ecclesiasticorum excidio and calamitate justam Dei ultionem, tribuebant
gloriam Deo caeli, id est, ad verum creatorem conversi sunt, Brightm. Esaias.
34.5.6.7.8. Ad contendendum pro Ziona and ejus causam vindicandam, Forer. Annus
quo rependet Deus talionem Idumaeis, qui jugiter ^ixati sunt and belli gerarunt
cum Iudaeis, a L^p. Et quod de Idumais dictum est, ad universos Ecclesiae
hosts extendi certum est, Calv. Ad excidium Sodomae and Gomorthae alludit, in
quo perpetuam ^^ae Dei imaginem habemus.
they pertaking with Rome in the sin, shall be made pertakers of her plagues;
and the remnant shall be affrighted and converted by this destruction upon
others, and shall give glory to the God of heaven. Thus it will be an
universal ruin, no enemies either within or without the Church, if they
persist in their opposition, ever did or ever shall escape.

3. Thirdly, that the enemies shall be sure to meet with in their opposition
to the people of God shall be an utter destruction, and exceeding fearful;
they shall not perish in an ordinary way, nor by the common death of other
sorts of sinners, but there is a high degree of vengeance prepared for them.
There is a fearful wrath coming upon Idumea, The sword is bathed in heaven,
it shall come down upon Idumea, the people of my curse to judgment, the sword
of the Lord is filled with blood, and made fat with fatnes, for the Lord has a
sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea; the Unicorns
shall come down with them and the bullockes with the bulls, and their land
shall be drunken with blood, and their dust made fat with faines. What is the
ground of all this fierce wrath? its only God does visit upon them their
cruelty to the Saints, It is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year for
the recompenses of the controversy of Zion: Therefore the streams thereof
shall be turned into pitch, and the dust into brimstone, and the land thereof
shall become burning pitch, it shall not be quenched night nor day, the smoke
thereof shall go up for ever from generation to generation, it shall be waste,
none shall pass through it for ever and ever, Zach. 12.3. The Church is
compared to a burdensome stone, which yet would be a burden to none and would
hurt no man, if they did not burden themselves with it; but if they will, their
judgment is, cutting they shall be cut in pieces. The expression in the Hebrew
notes two things; certainty and extremity: certainty, Genesis 2.17. Dying thou
shall die: that is, thou shall surely die. Extremity and perfection, Genesis 22
17. In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed
as the stars of heaven, and as the sand upon the sea shore; that is, I will
eminently bless thee, etc. It notes excellency and certainty, so here to be
cut in pieces notes great destruction: and yet to raise the judgment, the Lord
does heighten the expression, cutting they shall be cut in pieces: that is,
they shall certainly perish, and that not in an ordinary way, but by an eminent
and utter destruction, Jer. 51.11. Make bright the arrows, gather the shields;
the Lord has raised up the spirit of the Kings of the Medes, for his device is
against Babylon to destroy it, because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the
vengeance of his Temple. And therefore is Romes ruin utter and final; she
shallbe utterly consumed with fire, and the light of a candle shall be seen
no more in her at all, and the voice of the bridegroom and the bride shall be
heard no more in her at all, because in her will be found the blood of all the
Saints that have been slain upon the earth, and this blood God does visit and
avenge upon her.

4. Fourthly, It shall be such a destruction as all the power of the earth
shall not be able to prevent or resist, Zac. 12.3. All that burden themselves
with the Church, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be
gathered against it. The world glory in their multitudes and their
confederacies, as if they should be able by their own strength to deliver
themselves; but the greatest mountain shall become a plain before the Church,
not by power nor by might, but by the spirit of the Lord, they shall come to an
end, and none shall help them: when Assyriah is in her greatest glory, Dan.
11.45.
a mountain; then must the worm Jacob arise and thresh it, and God will raise
up seven shepherds, Mich 5.5.6.
and eight principal men, and they shall distress Nimrod in the entrances
thereof: a small party shall prevayle against all the strength of the enemy.
When the Grecian Monarchy is in its strength, the Lord will then bend Judah for
him, and fill the bow with Ephraim, and raise up the sons of Zion against the
sons of Greece, Zach. 9.13.
and make them as the sword of a mighty man, and as his goodly horse for the
battle, and they shall be broken even without hand, Dan. 8.25. When the
Turkish Empire shall be at its height, then shall the River Euphrates be dried
up, Rev. 16.12.
before the Saints; to make way for the Kings of the East. And in that last and
the greatest opposition of Gog and Magog, where their number shall be as the
sand upon the sea shore, yet then their multitude and their strength shall not
preserve them, they shall perish not by the sword of a mighty man, nor the
sword of a mean man shall devour them, Rev. 29.8.9.
but a fire shall come down from God out of heaven. There is surely no
escaping for those that persevere in the opposition and persecution of the
Saints.

I come now to the last Doctrine, so let them perish: Apostrophe ad Deum
interposit^, nos excitat ut singulari affectu Deum tantorum facinorum authorem
susprciamus, Pet. Martyr.
that is, as these have done in their opposition, by the prayers, by the power,
and by the praises of thy people. Some express it as a prayer, so let them
perish, by the same means, and in the same manner, that do rise up against the
Saints. As Ps. 83.9.10. Do unto them as unto Sisera, as to Iabin at the brook
of Kison who perished at Endor, they became as the dung of the earth: with such
a destruction, let all thine enemies perish. Others looking upon Deborah as one
that spoke by a prophetical spirit, Non tam notandi modo, quam predicendi;
tempore futuro haec Hebraice enunciantur. Qui sic optant and agunt, atque Deo
bellum ita infer parant, si^ et^am per^bun^, Montan. Doct. Dan 8.24. Esaias.
41.14.15.16. Zach. 4 6. Esaias. 59, 19. (...) significat flumen angustum and
rapidum sc. magna celeritate and magno impetu, and ad Dominum resertur non ad
hostem, ab Arnoldo Bo^tio. Animadv. sacr. cap. 2. Zach. 9.13.14. and 10.3.
conceive it to be a prophecy and prediction of the overthrow of all the
Churches enemies: and they render it, so shall all thine enemies perish, in the
same manner, and by the same means that these have done.

The Churches enemies shall perish in their opposition, by the power, prayers
and praises of the Saints. The branches of the point are three.

1. By their power. A weak people they usually are if ye look upon them in
themselves; but yet mighty through God, and terrible as an Army with banners:
In the lowest condition of the Church, and when the enemy prevayles over them,
they ^r^ the mighty and the holy people. When Jacob is but a worm, then he
shall rise and thresh the mountains: for God will ray^e up their spirits,
fight their battles, gird their loins, and strengthen their hands, not by
power nor by might, but by his spirit; and when the enemy shall break in as a
flood, the spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him, by raising
the spirits of his people, by assisting them mightily, and making them
victorious against all opposition: for the Lord himself does fight against all
the enemies, and his people are but the weapons that he does use in the
expedition; Judah is his bow, and Ehraim his arrow, and his goodly horse for
the battle. And when the Lord will use an ungodly people as weapons in his
hand, they shall mightily prevayle. If he will use Babylon as his battle axe,
Jer 51.20.
he will with him break in pieces the Nations, and destroy the Kingdoms: how
much more when he will make Judah his battle axe, and his weapons of war,
Joannes Fox in Comment. suis.
whom he does much more delight to use and honor? some do conceive that in
reference to this victory here by the waters of Megiddo, that last great
battle has its name, which shall be between Christ and Antichrist, called
therefore the battle Armageddon, Brightm.
Rev. 16.16. which some render mons deliciarum, the mountain of delights unto
God and his people: and others render it mons excidii, Par.
the mountain of slaughter and destruction to the Churches enemies. The
Churches enemies have commonly fallen by their hand in the end, Esa. 31.8.9. The
Assyrian shall fall by the sword, not of a mighty man, and the sword not of a
mean man shall devour him. Whence then shall his destruction come? Not so
much from any instrument, but from the hand of God made bare therein: Ignem
hanc accendi and foveri dicit in medio populi sui, ut significet impios non
impune Ecclesiam persequi, etc. Calv. in loc.
and the Lords fire is in Zion and his furnace in Jerusalem; it is out of Zion
that the fire comes that consumes the enemies, and it is into this fiery
furnace they are cast when they are destroyed, Ezech. 24.14. I will lay my
vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel, and they shall do in Edom
according to mine anger and according to my fury, says the Lord God. They that
are with the Lamb, called and chosen and faithful, Rev. 17, 14, and 18, 6.
they shall burn Rome with fire, and reward her according as she has rewarded
them, and shall double to her double according to her works, in the cup that
she filled to them, they shall fill unto her double.

2. By their prayers. Romans 4, 13.
The Lord Jesus having made the Saints together with himself Heirs of the
world, he has also given them a great hand in the Government of the world,
as they shall have in the Judgment of it at the last and great day: 1 Cor. 6,
1, 2.
therefore their prayers are Decrees as well as the prayers of the Angels, and
are called by the same name, Job. 22.28. Dan. 4.17. (...)
And the great executions and transactions of things in the world do pass
through their hands; Psalm. 49, 8, 9.
they bind Kings in chains, and Nobles with fetters of iron, this honor have
all his Saints. Its observable that in all the great turnings of the world, the
prayers of the Saints have had the great hand. Exodus 14, 15, 16, 17. Exodus 17,
11, 12. Psalm. 76, 2.
Egypt is destroyed in the red sea, but it is by the prayer of Moses. Amaleck
is routed by prayer. Thereby armies discomfited, victories won, in Salem God
breaks the arrows of the bow, the shield, the sword, and the battle. And
they that escape the fiercest pursuers among men, prayer will overtake them: he
that escapes the sword of Hazael and Iehu shall Elisha slay: 1 King, 19, 17.
Gladionon corporali sed spirituali, A Lap. Ad horribilem famem sub Joram
refertur; quia Deo impe travit Elisaeus cum ab idololatria Israelitae nollent
discedere, Pet. Martyr. in loc. Rev. 4, 5. Rev. 6, 10.
and yet we know he was not a man of war, one that did handle the sword, only
the word did go out of his mouth and took effect upon them. And all the great
turnings in the Christian world since Christ's time have been no other then the
fruit of the prayers of the Saints. The Seals in the book of the Revelation,
set forth the judgment of God upon Pagan Rome; and they are all in answer to
prayers, for out of the throne sc. the presence of the Lord in the midst of his
people, proceeded lightnings and thunderings and voices. And in answer to the
cry of the souls under the Altar, who cried with a loud voice, How long Lord
holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth.

The Trumpets set forth the judgments executed upon Rome Christian; and these
also proceed from the prayers of the Saints, for the fire cast upon the earth
in those plagues was taken off the Altar, Rev. 8, 5.
and there were voices and thundrings and lightnings and an earthquake etc. The
Trumpets sounded but it was in answer to prayer, after there had been silence
in heaven for the space of half an hour, sc. during the time of the incense
offering.

The Vialls set forth the judgments of God upon Rome Antichristian; and the
great voice that commanded these Angels to power out their Vials upon the earth
came out of the Temple: that is, Rev. 16, 1. De Templo venit quando precibus
sanctorum aliquid impetratur, quibus mandandi parts hic tribuntur ut sciamus
quantam vim habent fideles precationes, Brightm. Rev. 11, 5, 6.
from the prayers of the Saints; and whosoever shall observe the great changes
in the world that all these set forth, will be forced to acknowledge what a
mighty power there is in the prayers of the Saints. And that it may appear it
was not only so in ancient times, he says the witnesses even in these latter
days shall have a power to shut heaven that it shall not rain, to turn
waters into blood, and to smite the earth with plagues as often as they will.
And that this is the misery of all the Churches enemies, If any man will hurt
them, fire shall proceed out of their mouths, and devour them, and who ever he
be, he must in this manner be killed.

3. By their praises: for out of the mouths of babes the Lord has ordained
them, Psalm. 8, 2.
that he should still the enemy and the avenger: when Iehosophat, and all the
people promised God in the beauty of holiness, the Lord set ambushments
against the children of Ammon, Moab, 2 Chronicles. 20, 22, 23.
and Mount Sei^, which were come against Judah, and they smote one another.
When Paul and Silas sung in the prison, the earth did quake; and so it commonly
does at the praises of the Saints. The enemies of the Church do fall before
their praises as well as their prayers.

Let us now come to the Application of these three points for a conclusion.

They serve for Admonition, for consolation and direction.

First, Admonition unto all the enemies of the Church: cease your rage against
them, your plots, your hopes; refrain from them, let them alone, they are but
passengers and Pilgrims, they are going unto Canaan; if the world be your
country, let them quietly and peaceably pass through it, without opposition,
or persecution, or else ye will be found fighters against God, and ye will but
meet with your own destruction in the end.

To enforce this Admonition, let these considerations be duly weighed.

First, for God to give a man up to a spirit of emnity, and opposition to his
people, is the greatest spiritual judgment that can befall a man in this
life: it is the Devils curse to be the envious man, the accuser and the
persecutor of the brethren: and the more a man's heart is turned against the
Saints the more fully does this curse take place upon him. It was the great
spiritual judgment upon Egypt, and a most dangerous forerunner of their
utter destruction, Psalm. 105.25. It is commonly demanded by Interpreters on
that place, how God is said to turn the hearts of men to hate his people? and
it is commonly answered, as in the case of hardening Pharoahs heart: men turn
their own heerts against Gods people sinfully, and God turns them judicially,
diserved, by forsaking them, leaving them to the power of Satan, and the rage
of their own spirits, and media disponendo, so ordering and disposing objects
and occasions, as to draw out their rage, and malice against his people. The
greatest spiritual judgment is a hard heart, and of this hardness there are
several degrees; but of them all two are the highest, to sit down in the
chair of the scorner, and in the throne of the persecutor. This did fill up
the measure of Pharoahs hardness, Exodus 10 28. Take heed to thy self, see my
face no more; for in the day thou see my face thou shall dye: how would it
make a man's heart tremble, to consider how far, at this time, this judgment is
powered out upon this Nation?

Secondly, whatsoever any man does in opposition to the Saints, he is a vessel
of dishonor in all those works: it is the same service in which the Devils
are imployd, and God hates them when he does employ them: The Assyrian the rod
of mine anger, Esaias. 10, 5, 12 24.
and the staff of mine indignation: I send him against an hypocritical
Nation, against the people of my wrath; and I give him a charge to take the
spoil, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets: and this charge
of God he does execute to the utmost; but was the Lord well pleased therewith?
he says when he had performed his whole work upon Zion, the indignation
should cease, and his anger in his destruction: and it is a hard service to be
employed in that which brings forth neither acceptance nor reward, but
indignation and destruction in the end.

Thirdly, your very opposition will prove your destruction; the pit that you
dig for the Saints ye shall surely fall into, it is a work that ever ended in
the ruin of the Actors, Esaias. 59.5. It Is said of wicked men, that they hatch
cockatrice eggs, and they weave a spiders web, the web never becomes a
garment, and the eggs cursed breaks into a Viper: it sets forth two
properties, and fruits of all the labors of the workers of iniquity; they are
unprofitable, they attain not their end in them, and they are destructive,
they bring forth a Viper that stings him to death that hatched it, and the
wrath of God will never be pacified, being once provoked, till it end in their
utter overthrow, Zach. 6.8. when the Angels as instruments of vengeance went
into the north Country sc. into Persia and Chaldea; and they have quieted my
spirit, says the Lord; that is they pacified my wrath by executing vengeance
upon the persecutors, the people of my wrath: let me reason with you a little,
was there no other way of sinning that could bring vengeance enough upon you,
and sink you deep enough into perdition but ye must touch the apple of the
Lords eye. May not I say with Moses, Was not the iniquity of Peor enough, from
which ye are not cleansed unto this day? Was not your drunkenness, swearing,
uncleanness, hatred of godliness, superstition, enough, but that you must
break forth into persecution also?

4. Fourthly, your destruction is nearest when ye are highest, when your
confederacy is strongest, and your hopes raised to the greatest perfection:
when the enemy is as smoke out of a chimney and does threaten even to darken
the Sun, then shall they be scattered, Hose 12.3. When they associate
themselves, and have the greatest combination of parties and counsels, then
they shall be broken in pieces. Esaias. 8, 9, 10.
When they are folded together as thorns, and drunken with confidence as the
drunkards, then shall they be consumed as stubble fully dry. The Lord does many
times lay the Church low in a design, that the enemy may put forth their power
and show forth their malice to the utmost against it; therefore he is said to
make Jerusalem a cup of poison: no man attempts to drink wine while it is in
the pipe or in the vessel: the Church of God is always poison to the enemies,
but not always put into a cup and made ready and fit for their mouths: but when
the Church of God is brought into a low condition, its then prepared to invite
the enemy as it were to attempt some thing upon it; partly from the
pleasantness of such a draught, and partly from the ease of it, its as easy
as to drink, and they can make no resistance. The Church is sometimes a great
stone, Zach. 12, 2, 3. (...)
even as a mountain, and it fills the earth; and then the enemies dare not
attempt to burden themselves therewith, but sometimes it is a stone of a lesser
size, and then they are ready to think they may carry it away with case;
whereas though it be not always so great, yet it is as heavy, and they find
it so, for it breaks them to pieces. Whenever the Church of God is brought
low it is in design, that their enemies may be ensnared and taken.

5. Fifthly, by these means ye shall bring upon your selves the guilt of all the
blood of the Saints that has been shed in former ages. To read of the
cruelty of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus, the Jews in crucifying the Lord
of Life, and of the ten bloody Persecutors, and the rage of Antichrist
surpassing all these; and to have all this blood lie upon one generation, who
would not tremble at it? But yet all the blood of former times will come upon
the persecutors of this last age of the world. Matthew. 23.34.35. That upon you
may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of
righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias. It is much
questioned how this is to be understood, that the blood shed in one age should
in the guilt of it come upon another, and how the blood of all former ages
should come upon this last?

To understand it rightly, these two things are to be considered.

1. First, that it is to be understood only in respect of temporal punishments
and not of eternal; for as no man ever went to heaven by the righteousness of
another mere man, so no man shall ever go to hell for the wickedness of
another. Here the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, but the
soul that sins shall die. Yet in things temporal, as children may have many
blessings, as a reward of their fathers graces and obedience (as God brought
Israel into Canaan, 2. Cron. 20.7.
although they were a very disobedient and stiffenecked people, because it was
the Land which he had promised to Abraham his friend: and he delivered them in
the days of Hezekiah for his servant David's sake) so they may be under many
temporal judgments, Esaias. 37.35.
as a punishment of their fathers disobedience: the Lord herein using his
sovereignty and prerogative to punish a man either in his person or his
posterity, Genesis 9, 25. 2 King 5, 27.
as he did Cham in Canaan his son, and Gehesie both in his person and in his
seed also.

2. Secondly, God looks upon a generation or succession of men as a body, and
in the punishment of their sins he does show both justice and providence. As
there is a measure of iniquity in particular men to be filled up before
eternal wrath shall take hold of them, Jer. 51, 13. Dan. 8, 23. Zach. 5.6.
Joel. 3, 13. Rev. 14, 15.
so is there a measure appointed also to a State, or a generation of men, which
must be filled up before Temporal wrath shall come upon them. We see the
Temporal judgment upon the Amorites is deferred, because their iniquity was
not yet full, and the time to fill it up was 400 years, Genesis 15.16. The Lords
Decree is gone forth to blot out the remembrance, of Amalecke from under
heaven, Exodus 17.14. and yet this people do not come up into remembrance
before the Lord to their utter destruction till the days of Saul, 1 Samuel 15.2.
and then the Lord sits upon their posterity their fathers sins, because they
laid wayt for Israel in the way when they came out of Egypt. So Christ says to
the Pharisees; ye are the children of them that killed the Prophets, fill ye up
the measure of your fathers, Matthew. 23.31.32. So that when children walk on in
their fathers ways, and fill up their measure, though in respect of eternal
wrath inflicted upon their persons, they were in hell many years ago, and
received a just recompense of reward, yet the temporal punishment may be
reserved for after ages, and visited upon the posterity when transgression is
come to the full. Thus all the cruelty executed upon the Saints from the blood
of Abel was visited upon the Jews in the destruction of Jerusalem, and all the
blood shed upon the earth shall be visited upon Babylon the great the mother of
harlots, when she shall come up into remembrance before God, with all those
that have receyved her mark, or borne her image, or acted with her in a way of
blood.

6. Sixthly, there are no sort of sinners in whose destruction the Lord does so
much delight; it is unto him a sacrifice of a sweet savor, Esa. 34.6. Jer.
46.10. Z^ph. 1.7.8. And as Satan the nearer his kingdom is to end, the greater
is his rage, great wrath because his time is short, so the nearer Christ comes
to the perfect possession of his Kingdom (for when the enemies are subdued,
all the Kingdoms of the earth shall be the Lords and his Christ's) the more
will he put on zeal as a garment, and the more he will hasten the enemies
overthrow: he will do more in a short time at last, then he has in many ages
in times past. If it be but a slanderer, Quid tandem Deus Opt. Max. in te
decernet? Sagittas suas desuper; nec non carbones seu primas Juniperorum in
Gehenna. Mi^s. in loc.
or one that persecutes with a despitefull heart and a false tongue, he shall
not lose his labor: therefore the question is put, Psalm. 121.3.4. What shall
be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee thou falls tongue? Thy reward
from the Lord shall be, mighty and sharp arrows with coals of Juniper, which as
they burn hottest and continue the longest, so they do in the burning yield a
sweet savor.

The second use is for consolation to all the Saints, Esaias. 40.1.
says your God: and when the Lord Christ drew near his suffering, when a man
would have expected all his thoughts should have been taken up about himself,
yet now he takes care to bear up the spirits of his people that they might not
be overwhelmed with overmuch sorrow, Io. 14.1. Let not your hearts be
troubled etc. Truly we had need of great supports, because the enemies are many
and enraged, men's spirits are in judgment turned to hate the Saints, and it is
to be feared, if a man rightly discernes the signs of the times, that the
killing of the witnesses draws near, which will surely be the bitterest and
bloudiest persecution that ever befell the Christian Churches.

My purpose is not to give you those ordinary supports which are common to all
afflictions, as that they come from a fathers hand, from a heart full of love,
that they shall be in measure, and make a man partaker of the holiness of God in
the end, for this is all the fruit to take away the sin etc. though these are
great grounds to stay a man's faith upon. But I would rather pitch upon those
that might be more proper and peculiar to the enemies and sufferings of the
last times, the cup that God has reserved for you.

1. These shall be the last great sufferings of the saints, and they shall be but
short; for as all the former beasts are destroyed, so there now remains only
the seventh head of the fourth beast, which is as the eight and must go into
perdition, Rev. 17.11. and then all the eminent persecutions of the Church
shall cease, and there shall be no more a pricking briar, and a grieving thorn
in the Lords holy Mountain: the Lord shall then wipe away all tears from your
eyes, there shall be no more sorrow, nor crying, the witnesses shall die but
once, and it shall be the sharpest but yet the shortest of the Churches
sufferings. To all you that have been with the Lamb called and chosen and
faithful, I say as the Martyr did, Hold out faith and patience, your work is
almost at an end. It was a great comfort to Hierome of Prague, that he could
say to his persecutors at his death, Centum revolutis annis Deo respondebitis
and mihi: after an hundred years God would call them to an account in avenging
his blood; but you may summon your persecutors before God to answer in a far
less time.

2. Secondly, these last sufferings shall be an inlet to the most glorious
deliverances that ever the Church of God had: for the killing of the witnesses
shall make way for their resurrection, Rev. 11.12.15.
when they shall ascend to heaven in a cloud, their enemies beholding them. And
then shall the Kingdoms of the earth become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and the
dominion under the whole heaven shall be given to the Saints of the most High,
Dan 7.27.
and they shall possess it for ever and ever.

3. Thirdly, all your sinfulness and unworthines, shall not hinder your
redemption: though the people of God fall, yet they shall rise, and though they
may sit in darkness, the Lord will be light about them. Indeed the great
discouragements to the Saints are their sins, and their unanswerable walking
unto means and mercies, but yet the Lord cannot alter the word gone out of his
lips, nor suffer his faythfulnesse to fail, Esaias 10.27. The burden shall be
taken away from off thy shoulder, and the yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke
shall be destroyed, because of the anointing. Glass. Rhetor sacr. Calv. in
loc.
Some take the anointing for Christ the anointed of the Lord, and others for
the Kingdom of Christ, which by an unction the Lord had established, whether
Christ or the Kingdom of Christ be understood, yet there is an anointing that
will break every yoke. Their sins may procure their affliction, but they
shall never hinder their redemption.

4. Fourthly, The enemies shall never be able to set up Popery in this
kingdom again, and to establish any of those things that relate to it; that
the Lord has removed in these late years, they shall never be able to root
out the Saints out of the Reformed Churches, but they shall grow by their
opposition. Christ will surely keep the ground that he has won in a way of
Reformation; and what the former vialls have destroyed shall never be made up
again, for he will not lose the fruit of his conquest in any one of them. His
shakings of heaven and earth are to this end, that he may remove the things
that are shaken as of things that are made, that those things that cannot be
shaken may remain Heb. 12.27. There is nothing that is made by man in the
things concerning God, but he will have a shaking time for it, and his end in
shaking it is, that he may remove it, and he does not so remove it, that the
enemies should again establish it. And therefore what ever of Popery the Lord
has shaken and removed, I do conclude, that all the power of the enemy shall
never set up again. I do not doubt but there will be many and desperate
attempts for it, but they shall never be able to prevayle, as when the
Heathenish way of worship was destroyed, there were many endeavored to set it
up again.

Fifthly, God will in an especial manner own you in all your sufferings, as he
calls you forth for him, so will he assuredly appear for you; and therefore
he says when men reject them and cast them out, Rev. 11.3.
they are my two witnesses, and they shall have the same power with him that
any of the ancient Saints have had in times past, they shall turn water into
blood with Moses and Aaron, they shall shut Heaven that it shall not rain,
with Elijah, they shall be two Olive trees standing before the God of the
earth: with Joshua and Zorobabel, if any man hurt them fire shall come out of
their mouths and devour them, and they shall smite the earth with plagues as
often as they will; so that the greater persecution they shall meet with all
from men the nearer access they shall have to God and the greater acceptance
with him, and as the affliction shall abound, so shall also the consolation,
and to be owned eminently by God, and to be looked upon as those of whom the
world is not worthy, when they are disowned by men and accounted not worthy to
live in the world, is a great means to bear up men's spirits in the greatest
sufferings.

Sixthly, It shall end in their final and utter destruction; for there shall
follow an earthquake, Rev. 11.13.
in which the tenth part of the City shall fall: Christ shall be clothed with a
vesture dipped in blood, Rev. 19.13.15.
and he shall tread the wine press and fierceness of the wrath of Almighty
God, and all those ancient Prophesies, as well for the enemies destruction as
for the Saints redemption shall be fullfilled; for time or delay shall be no more,
Rev. 10.6.7.
the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to his servants the
Prophets; and then shall that ancient prediction of Lactantius be fullfilled,
De divino praemio lib. 7. c. 15.
Romanum nomen quo nunc regitur ab orbis (horret animus dicere, sedd came quia
futurum est,) tolletur de terra. All that power of Rome which has for many
hundred years, as the fourth Beast tyrannized over the Churches, all this
shall be destroyed in the little horn, Dan. 7.11.26.
and the Beast given to the burning flame, to be consumed and destroyed unto
the end.

But especially by Julian, who did in dispight to Christ and Christianity use
all means to bring in Pagan Idolatry again, and to build the Temple at
Jerusalem, and to set up again the Jewish worship; and to this end set a great
multitude of poor deluded Jews about this work; but when they had gotten
materials together, and thought to set about the building: that night the Lord
sent a whirl-winde, and scatered all the materials; but they were not thus
discouraged from the work, but they sought out the ancient foundation of the
Temple to build upon it, and having found it, the Lord sent an earthquake,
which cast up all the former foundation; and then that Prophecy was full
filled, there was not a stone left upon a stone not thrown down; Ecce globus
igneus e fundamentis Templi erumpeus laborantibus occur tens, operarios multos
ambussit, incendio illo per totum diem durante. Ea miracula quosdam Iudaeos ita
permoverunt ut Christum Deum agnoscerent. Religio vero indurati cum
indignatione opus caeptum dereliquerunt. Osiander Epitom. hist. Ecclesiast.
Cent. 4 l. 3. c. 34.
but such was their blindness and desperate madness, that they would not
desist from the enterprise; therefore the Lord sent a fire out of the
foundations of the Temple, which consumed many of the workmen, their materials
and instruments for the building, and then at last they began with shame and
indignation to give it over. The like endeavors we may expect for Rome
Antichristian, and with greater violence, but they shall be always so crossed
that they shall at last perish in their own opposition: what ground the Lord
has won upon Rome he will maintain, for he will by degrees destroy her.

Neither shall they ever prevayle to root out godliness, or a godly party out
of this Kingdom, but they shall increase by persecution raised against them:
for as the ten Kingdoms did at first give their power to the Beast to set him
up, so he will turn their hearts to hate the whore, and they shall pluck her
down, for the Lamb shall overcome the ten kingdoms, not in a way of
destruction but in a way of conversion, and he will win ground upon them
daily, and will have a prevayling party in them, who shall be the more stirred
up against her for her last cruelty, and they shall hate her, eat her flesh and
burn her with fire.

The last use is for direction to those that fear the Lord;

First, let this present mercy raise your hopes, and revive your now drooping
and sinking spirits: truly had you no pledge given, (...) Suff^^tum corejus
Montan.
yet there is ground enough of encouragement in the Lord, Ps. 112.7.8. Trusting
in the Lord his heart is established: the word signifies underpropped, which of
it self would fall and sincke. But much more when God gives in mercy for an
earnest, Romans 5.4.
experience should bring forth hope. This shows that God has not yet sold us
into the hands of our enemies, that he will yet go forth with our armies: let
this be added to the former manifold experiments that you have had, and let it
be as the head of Leviathan, Psalm. 74.1^.
food for your faith to feed upon in the wilderness, which as yet ye are to
pass through before ye enter into rest.

2. Secondly, though your power be small and your party few and weak, that by
power you have little hope to prevable, yet by the means you have, prayers and
praises, and by them God has ordained that ye shall still the enemy and the
avenger: Psalm. 8.2. Rev. 11.5.
the fire with which they must be killed, must proceed out of your mouths.
Fly to the old refuge of fasting and prayer in a communion of Saints, formerly
practiced when persecuted, but now wholly neglected, when it may with liberty
be enjoyed: truly in these your strength lies; and prayer never comes too
late. In the time of Eliah when it rained not upon the earth in three years
and fix months, one would have thought now the roots of all herbs and trees
were withered in the grownd, and prayer now could do little good; but Eliah
prays, and God sends rain, and the earth yield; her fruit as in times past.
Prayer in the most desperate state of things comes not too late, because God
can never come too late.

3. Thirdly, that you may unite your prayers, labor to unite your hearts, and
if you desire that God should show himself against your enemies, Prima iratum
tela sunt maledicta and quicquid non possumus imbccilli optamus irati. Salv. de
gub. l. 3. Dr. Reynoldes selfe-denyall.
be not ye enemies one to another, let all jealousies, evil surmisings, all
bitterness, slanders, and reproaches be laid aside as becomes persons
professing Godliness, speak not evil one of another the judge stands before
the door. It is well observed by a learned Divine of our own, that the former
division of Conformists and non-Conformists in this Kingdom was cherished, and
fomented by an Episcopal interest, that they might spend themselves one
against another, Ez^ch. 37.19. Rev. 22.1. Homines docti and Ecclesiarum
Ministri pace ingrati ac busi sunt ac multas contentiones and rix^s simplici
doctrinae immiscuerunt acmutuo intercedi gladiantes simplicem populum ab
unitate Ecclesiae in varias sectas adduxere. Castigavit igitur Deus Ecclesiam
suam propter contentiones, ^ixas and scismata non tantum Ariana persecutione
sed and nova ethnica. etc. Bulling. de persecutionibus Eccles. Christian.
and the other might have objects for their favors and their frowns to work
upon in them both. Some such principle evidently works in our present
divisions, that both parties spending their strength, and being so zealously
busied one against another. A third party being neglected (if I may not say
courted) by both, may secretly, and insensibly grow up, and come in to deside
the controversy, which I assure my self they at this day confidently expect;
there is a glorious union promised to be between the people of God in the
latter days, the long breach between the ten and two Tribes among the Jews
shall be made up, and the two sticks became one in the Prophets hand, and the
fi^e that is in the Sea of glass in the reformed Churches shall be put out,
and shall again become clear as Crystal; but it will be some great
affliction that must make up this union, being melted they will soder, but not
else. It is observed that after the reformation in Constantines time there
arose great divisions, and contentions amongst themselves, especially in the
Ministry, and therefore God gave them up in Iulians time, into the hand of the
Heathen; so Rome Pagan had for three years and half a reviving: so shall Rome
Antichristian have three years and half, and the growned of it I fear will be
our own divisions also. This Parents use to do if children cannot agree among
themselves; they whip them both. And every man knows that no man gains by the
differences between brethren, but he that is an enemy to both.

I think every one that is wise hearted, does more fear our own divisions
then all the enemies combinations; for what is said of England, may be as
truly said of those that fear God in it. It is a mighty creature that can
never dye unless it kill it self. My humble request is that of Nazian. to
Theodosius, (...).
that you would use all your Authority and interest to put an end to the
differences between these that are godly, and act upon conscientious principles.

Our differences are not so great, Nos quantum in nobis est, propter haereticos
cum collegis and coepiscopis nostris non contendimus; cum quibus divinam
concordiam and dominicam pacem tenemus: Servatur a nobis patienter and firmiter
collegii honor, vinculum fidei and concordia Sacerdotii, Cyprian. ad Jubaian.
Epist. 73. Zach. 12.3.
that we stand at such a distance, that to hold an opinion a man should hazard
his destruction. In Cyprians time they could keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace, with those that did not only think, but teach that which
was contrary to what was received, in things of lesser concernment: and surely
we might in our differences at least so far agree as to act together, if pride
and party were laid aside, and we acted by the same spirit of humility and
brotherly love, that the ancient Saints and Churches were.

And if this design of union might take place, though the enemy threaten and
the clouds gather and grow black every day more and more; yet I should assure
my self that all that burden themselves with the Saints, should be cut in
pieces, though all the people of the earth should be gathered together against
them.

FINIS.

