A SERMON Preached at a VISITATION Held at Lin in Norfolk, June the 24th Anno
1633.

Being an Admonition to the Clergy to remember and keep those several Oaths,
Promises, and Subscriptions, which they solemnly have made at the taking of
their Degrees, their Ordinations, and Institutions to their Benefices.

By WILLIAM STRODE D. D.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Samuel Brown, living in Well-yard in Little
St. Bartholomews, near the Lame-Hospitall. 1660.

A VISITATION SERMON, Preached at Lin in Norfolk, June 24. Anno 1633.
Psalm. 76. verse. 11. Promise to the Lord, and keep it, all ye that be round
about him.
FOR my present Argument, of Promise and Oath; What Place more fit than This,
where some private Innovators have lately conspired against our sworn form of
Religion? And what Time more seasonable, than the time of this Meeting, called
to give an account of sundry public Promises, Ecclesiastic and Sacerdotall,
freely made by deliberate choice, confirmed by Oath and Subscription? And what
Persons more apposite Hearers than your selves, especially bound to make and to
perform them, by your high Office, your near attendance on the Lord your God?
Place, Time, and Persons so well agreeing, harken to the charge of my Text: You
emphatically, whom it so closely concerns, you of all men. Promise to the Lord,
and keep it, all ye that be round about him.

The Parts are three: 1. A Counsel commended, Promise. 2. An Obligation
thereof begotten, Keep it. 3. The Parties betwixt whom it passes, You, and the
Lord. Which may be reduced to three Propositions.

1. Holy Promises are laudably made. 2. Being once made, they must be
necessarily kept. 3. Especially kept between such Parties. The Bond is
straightened because assigned to the Lord, assigned by them that be round about
him.
First, Holy Promises are laudably made: else Baptism it self is blameable,
whose covenant binds us to forsake the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. I need
not over-urge this truth, if only I forbear the name of a Vow, which carries
an odious sound of some Jewish or Popish Relick. As in manners, we may safely
equivocate, but not lie; falsely accuse, but not slander; take away, not rob nor
steal: So in Religion, promise we may, so we do not vow; protest, not swear.
Nay, Religion is grown so verbal, that many Earnest Points, consisting in mere
words, have quite thrust out all consideration of much pious matter. Because we
will not hear of Justification but only by Faith (for Faith is the radical
virtue) we abhor the concomitant works of Charity as mortal sins, scarce to be
named, never committed amongst us. Because Confirmation has been ranck'd
amongst Sacraments, (for, as Baptism is our birth in Christ, so Confirmation is
our growth, and fits us for man's estate in the Eucharist;) it is now scarce
thought a godly Ordinance. Because Confession has sometimes given a name to
the Rood, (for Confession is the reading of faults) away with the Apostle's
Precept, we may not confess our sins one to another. Because Penance,
thereafter enjoined, has been held another Sacrament, (for it is a holy and
cleansing Discipline) it is now scarce allowed for an honest chastisement.
Because the Liturgy and Communion has sometimes been called Mass, (for there
is Christus missus) the only service of God i^ now to hear him serve us: we
come to as little of Prayers, as without danger of losing Sermon precisely we
can, and seldom Receive without compulsion. Because the Table has sometimes
been called the Altar, (though Christ and St. Paul have called it so too,
that is all one) yet, for the word's sake, it is humbled to a lower place, to
another posture, to filth and rottenness, till it be scarce known for a Table.
Because the Minister has been called Priest, (for Christ is our High Priest)
therefore he is now thoroughly be-ministred, made our Minister, not God's, and
must pipe what we bid him. Because some Churches have harbored Superstition,
(though Superstition be ill reformed with Sacrilege; selling of Doves, with
plucking down of Walls) yet the word Superstition being given, they, and many a
Parish Church besides, at once fell to ground, and the word Congregation is
built in their steed. Ju^^ so, because some Vows were made superstitiously to
the blessed Virgin, in hope of Mediation; or presumptuously to Christ, with
opinion of Merit; therefore all Vows must be rejected, all censured unlawful
in themselves. Brethren, you may remember, that the covetous fury of
Church-Reformation, like that which was wrought on Benjamin, did almost proceed
to the ruin of a Tribe, the rooting out of the Clergy: that as Israel was
driven to repair the loss, by granting them wives of rapine; so this Land, by
admitting ignorant Priests, snatched from their Shops and Trades. How taught
they their Hearers in public? but as their Hearers taught them in private. And
what Doctrine could prove the spoil of the Church lawful, but the
unlawfulness of Vows? And what could totally discountenance the thing, but
reprobation of the near common Name, including Superstition together with
Devotion. Words are deputed for Things; and change of words made the business
of Reformation to seem more numerous and weighty, as indeed it ought to seem.
For as the Church had great need to be reformed, so the Spoilers had much more
need to reform her, and their heirs have still the same need. Wherefore if you
dedicate your selves or any thing else unto God, remove it further from the
special name, and favor it with a style more general; call it a Promise, no
Vow; no Vow, I beseech you.

If I spoke to unlettered people, I would forbear; but before you that can well
discern substance from shadow, I dare present the truth naked. The Greek and
Latin Translations are, (...), Vovete, Vow unto the Lord. The Acts which I
shall inculcate are properly Vows; and therefore I plainly pronounce, That Vows
are also laudable.

In strict Language, Vows are holy Promises of a more special kind. We may
sometimes promise a matter necessary, as Jacob his Tithe, Naaman his sole
Worship of God; such an Act is barely a Promise. And sometimes a matter
Voluntary, as David his provision for a Temple, Hanna her son for a Priest;
such an Act is both a Promise and a Vow. As he that denies all promises,
condemns Baptism; so he that denies all vows, condemns all Ecclesiastical
Offices, and chiefly the Order of Priesthood: which Order is ever freely taken;
but when it is taken, draws with it these inseparable vows, Attendance over
the Flock, many rare Virtues, practick Obedience to the form of Liturgy, to the
Book of Articles, to Ecclesiastical Canons, to the Injunctions of the Diocesan.

Examine, Compare a true Vow and the office of Priesthood: Is the one, by its
nature, a voluntary Promise made unto God? so is the other. Are these the
Conditions of the one, Deliberation of mind, Purpose of will, Pronunciation of
mouth? the same are Ingredients in the other. No man is surprised ignorantly,
or forced unwillingly, or admitted silently: not without Age and Trial, not
without humble suite, not without solemn protestation made to several
Proposalls, irrevocably uttered, and openly testified before God, whom we fear;
before men, whom we reverence; his own Ears pressing to his Conscience what
his Mouth has spoken. And what is the matter of a Vow? Some over passing good,
placed within our Power. Why good? not indifferent, lest, instead of a Promise,
we seem to offer a threat. Why over-passing? lest for a singular praesent, we
offer a new Bond of an old vulgar debt. Why within our Power? lest we offer the
Sacrifice of fools, which vanishes with their breath. Such it must be, some
Excellent piece of Virtue, without Gods precept, but within His Counsel;
without the common path, but within some private reach; not binding our
necessary and absolute duty by an Epidemicall Command, but inclining our free
respective Devotion, through personal grounds. Is not the business of
Priesthood the very same? Good, no doubt, for it is God's Ordinance; and
evidently surmounting man's common duty, else all the Sheep are bound to be
Shepherds, yet surely manageable by some particular Abilities, raised by the
Spirit of God, and singled out by his attractive Motion: for some must needs
bear the heat of the Day; and, whether ye be the men or no, whether inwardly
called, is the Bishop's question, when he outwardly ordains. Lastly, what is the
end of a Vow, or what of Priesthood? the same of both. For whether we dedicate
our Goods, our Bodies, our Souls, or our Service, still we aim at a nearer
Union of the Creatures with God, whereby the Glory of the one is exalted, the
Happiness of the other increased. And now, what think you? you have seen a
severe search, you find a perfect agreement in their Nature, Conditions,
Matter, End.

I may seem to decoy your favorable Opinion, toward Vows by this engagement
of your Office; but I hope to excite a reciprocal zeal toward your Office, by
the Commendation of Vows. There are two Grounds, whereon all possible vows
are safely built. The one is Baptism, in which a general promise to forsake
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; all Negative vows of Mortification, and
Abstinence, are super-induc'd on this Foundation, and raised by particular
Motives of the Person vowing, able at a farther distance to chase away these
deceivers. The second Ground is that general Precept, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thy Heart; all positive vows of free Devotion, or Alms,
spring from this Root. Where God has placed an Extraordinary gift, serviceable
for eminent Acts and Offices, he loves not his Lord with all his heart, who
refuses to take a burden answerable to his shoulders.

When St. Paul commends Virginity, he does not commend it to all, he does not
impose it on any: True; yet whatsoever is not necessary for all, is not
therefore unlawful for some; but rather laudable, for such as can and will.
Betwixt Must and must not, there is May and may not: As a contingent may be
truly affirmed or denied; so it may be honestly done, or not done, as Occasion
or Circumstance shall sway the Subject; be the matter Virginity, or any other
unusual Abstinence, or work of Excellence. So it stands: God could have
multiplied his Law into so many particular branches, as might have expressly
determined all variety of persons to their several duties; but, out of his
great bounty, he has left us an occasion to be bountiful toward Him; he has
not in plain terms challenged all our just debt, that we by a Voluntary Offer
might more ingratiate our selves into his Favor; he has left his Rule under a
seeming imperfection, that we might appear before him the more perfect, and
receive the reward of diligent servants, apt to understand his silent
intimation, and doing things reducible to his Command, though not commanded.
Under the Law, where he exercised the place of a Judge, the vow which he would
not directly injoyne, he plainly supposed, and punctually prescribed set forms
unto it: Under the Gospel where he personates a Gracious Father, he leaves it
more to the Love of his Children. Though the form be now antiquated with the
Ceremonial Law, the Moral substance does yet remain: instead of a sacrifice,
we may vow our goods; instead of a Carcass, we may offer Our-selves, a
reasonable and living sacrifice, with willingness, and cleanness of heart,
out-passing all former Ceremony. And we find in the 18 of the Acts, that St.
Paul, an exemplary Minister of the Gospel, yoked himself under a vow; though
what it was, I leave to Conjecture.

Sorry I am, that any Extraordinary Virtue is as odious here, as Extraordinary
Vice; as dangerous now as in the days of Aristides, and must forthwith be
banished the Land. To man, we may be as good as we list, not to God by any
means; we must be sure to keep him ever short in our service, for him we cannot
serve sufficiently; we must beware of Liberality to Him, for He gives us all
things. O the Logic of a corrupted Christian! should we not so much the rather
stretch our weakness to make up in Will what is wanting in Power, and at
least, strain our Poverty to a show of thankfulness?

Many ways a Man may vow to man; his Goods by Reversion, his Body by Wedlock,
his Service by Indenture, and there is good Law for this: Is there no Gospel
to secure a Conveyance to God, to encourage the spiritual wedlock of vowed
Chastity, to countenance the vow of our Ministry, and show that God is a Master
fit to be dealt with? We may all vow one to another, no man excepted; and
behold, God himself has freely vowed himself to us all. He sent his only
begotten Son to pay the vows which he often made to Abraham, and to his Seed,
and to all Nations; shall only a Reciprocal relation of man to God, be totally
defective in all? When his turn comes, shall we pretend an utter disability of
performing any promise? Let not a Neighbor hear us, none then will take our
words for a Groat.

Why are we only there tenacious, where it is greatest gain to be Liberal? A
promise past to thy Neighbor, tends to his good: When God receives a Promise,
he is gracious to thee, not needy in himself; Qui non crescit ex redditis, sed
in se crescere facit redditores, (says St. Austin, Ep. 45.) who cannot grow by
thy Addition, but will make thee grow by Diminution, adding and bettering thy
Payments into thine own bosom; as he makes thy grass to flourish, by the
vapor sent up to himward, and thence distilled back again. Thus he answers
thee, not only at the time of Payment, but at the time of Promise. As Solomon
was the richer for finishing the Temple, so was David the abler for promising:
Will thou build a house for me (says God)? behold, I have built thee a house
for ever. A willing heart is blessed with a large hand; but coldness of will is
also punished with shrinking of Power.

May we not do liberally (will some reply) without promise? Not so well. A good
Act ingrafted into one or more virtues of higher strayn, is much ennobled:
Moral Excellence, by respect to God, is turned to Religion; by Promise, to
Devotion: it is now become both Obedience and Sacrifice. Fair Buildings, after
Dedication, are much more reverend; so, much more holy are our Souls and
Bodies, when they are vowed the Temples of the Holy Ghost.

There is no such Discipline to train up a Christian in the way of Perfection,
as that of Confession, (which is now also disused) and this other of Vowing;
whereof the one makes us ashamed of doing amiss, the other prevents it, and
further emboldens us to do good: That serves to mortify sin, and This not
only so, but to quicken Virtue: for the tying up the Soul from wonted
loosnesse to some retired purpose, or holy work, both cuts off many occasions,
many objects of sin, and sets the Votary to his course and task without
interruption. It Is a great conquest which it brings unto us, of mastering our
selves: for hereby our hearts are fixed, our wi^ls confirmed, which adds as
much perfection to virtue, as Obstinacy adds evil to Vice. It Is a gladsome
hearing, when Righteousness in her turn is drawn with cart-ropes; when the
Treasure of Heaven is kept safe under many locks; good Intentions seconded with
Vowing. But that which most commend it, is the near and absolute subjection of
the Soul to God, wholly surrendered up unto his service, for he that subjects
himself by promise unto him, yields up both his actions, and also the power of
working; and (as Anselm compares it) he bequeathes the Fruit together with the
Tree also; Fruit, leaves, branches, body, root, and All: a Condition, This,
most like to that in Heaven, the very next step to true Blessedness, which
chiefly consists in a perfect union with God most blessed. So that the
difference is but this, A Vow betrothes, and Heaven wedds.

Pardon me this commendation of Vows, because they are usually wronged by
discommendation; and the cold frost of men's hearts is over-bound with chiller
wind of Disswasion.

But do I now entice you to Will Worship, to a human fancy, such as the
Adoration of Angels? God forbid: if it be such, it is repugnant to God's will.
But that which I preach, though not by him commanded, is by him commended; no
Precept to all his Servants, and yet a Counsel to certain friends; Counsel
that will make us men, not only according to his Word, but according to his
Heart. Men like the Apostles, who left all to be followers of Christ. Again do
I toll you on into needless danger, the danger of breaking an unmasterable
Vow. That which thou can not master, do not promise: for (as St. Austin
instructs thee) Si non vovisses minor esses, non pejor: Less thou may be
without Vowing, not worse; but less howsoever. Would thou be great, and
never expose thy self to hazardous difficulty? Danger is ever the Porter to
Greatness. He that considers the wind shall not sow, and he that fears rain
shall not reap, Ecclus. 11. No proceeding in the way of Man, or of Christian,
without peril. And for what should we ever venture, if not for a mass of
Glory? Know also, that the danger lies not in the nature of a Vow, but in the
weakness of the Vower: So excuse thine own Weakness, that thou do not slander
the strength of others Excellence; though thou want Power thy self, be not
guilty of wanting Will by condemning others: if Power be present, be also an
Actor, lest by resolving to stand unbound where thou may, thou stand more
rigorously bound where thou must; and in no less danger of nonperformance:
For he that factiously denies to go farther than he needs must, shows, that he
would not go so far; whereby he remains a debtor even of that which he pays,
because he pays unwillingly. Whether thou vow, or vow not, God exacts nothing
but true endeavor, which is more wanting to the wilful Refuser, than to the
unwilling Breaker. Do I seek to abridge your liberty? No, rather to enlarge it.
Are the Angels in Prison because they are confined to goodness? then is God
the closest prisoner. No, no; the nearer our service to God, the more perfect
our freedom. To range after the creature is to be turned loose to Slavery; to
be tied up unto God, is to be bound to Liberty. In the one is all sadness, as
in losing our way through a wilderness; in the other all content, as in
passing a pleasant walk. Non te vovisse poeniteat, imo jam gaude jam tibi non
licere quod cum tuo detrimento licuisset, (says St. Austin;) He that has
bound himself to God by a Vow has no more cause to be sad, than she that has
wedded her self to a man, whom deservedly she best loves.

Why then, how differ I from the Romanists? Take heed of that; there is more
care of differing from Them, than to stand right in Our-selves. Thus: I do not
think that Vows for their own part are Meritorious, but in Us Serviceable, to
God Acceptable, such as may rather find than earn a Reward; for though they
surpass the general Precept, they do not exceed our personal Talents, and
those we ought to employ with all our might. If any Might do lie in promising,
we ought to engage our Hands with our Tongues, our Actions with Words. Besides,
no extraordinary service in this or that point can quit our scores with God, or
suffice to cross out those other Items of our manifold offenses. Though some
of God's servants be more willing, all come short; and should any come home,
they would yet be unprofitable; to Him unprofitable, though not to Themselves.
Now since there is no Preaching without Opposing, let me Oppose for the other
part too, and so brandish on both sides. The Superstition of Papists is cried
down with a worse crime of others, the Subterstition of Anti-papists. Vows are
Meritorious, say they; Damnable, cry these; and thou shall neither add nor
detract, says God: Add they so much as these detract? an unpleasing
Circumstance add they; but these destroy the whole Substance. Nay, the Accuser
is many times the worser Thief, more guilty of the self-same crime; so is the
unsatiable Reformer. The humble Votaries he accuses of superstition, even his
own superstition is also greater; greater is this of not-vowing, than that of
vowing, and produer thereof is he. They stood on points of deep-dejected
Service, he on points of arrogant Adoption; they on much painful Praying, he
on much easy Hearing: The retired Moncks he accuses of Idleness, his
Idleness is far more scandalous; For they, though many, performed their
frequent Orisons together, and fed their Neighbors; he on the same revenue
contracted to one grasp, curses God, and grindes the face of the poor. The
blindly devoted Pilgrims he accuses of Idolatry, his own Idolatry is far
grosser: for they gave worship to blessed Saints, he to every creature, every
Picture and Fancy which the Idolatry of Covetousness has set up in his heart.
Rome he accuses for her swarm of Priests, and sundry kinds of Locusts; himself
by taking away all distinction of holy Orders and Vows, would make far more,
all in a like manner, one unholy Priesthood.

And thus to make all men Priests, is to unmake those that are. But you, my
fellow servants, stand up for your Calling, and rejoice in the vow of your
Profession, whereby ye are separate from the world to Christ; a Vow
superlative, not only sanctifying your own Persons, but giving you in charge
all the Vows of the People sanctified under you. Other men's Vows admit them
nearer into God's Household, yours into his Closet. And next under you are the
Church-Guardians, preferred on their holy Promises to be Stewards and Officers
of God's House; you his Eyes, and they his Hands; you his Tongue, and they his
two rows of Teeth; you to direct, and they to execute. All that are drawn and
lug'd to these places, do not remember, that it was the ambition of the best
King to be God's Dorekeeper. My heart is on those who offer themselves
willingly. When God cried out, Who is on my side? out stepped Levi, a whole Tribe
at once; And God had no better reward for their good service, than to make them
his Houshold-Chaplains and Servants.

Now as none can be admitted into a Prince's Attendance without an Oath, so
neither into an Office under the King of Heaven. The height of their Royalty
requires the best assurance of our Loyalty. Duty is not so firm as Promise, nor
Promise as an Oath; wherefore all sacred Contracts with God are tied with this
knot: Baptism, Confirmation, Marriage, Consecration, are all celebrated in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, a Clause equivalent with an
Oath: But Ordination more expressly and solemnly, with a Head submitted to
Imprecation, with a Mouth kissing and swearing, with a Hand subscribing, and a
knee bowing. For Swearing, I could call a Jury of Examples, but let one stand
for all: If God himself confirmed his Promise with an Oath when he made his Son
a Priest, Shall thy word be taken before his? or will thou, that make a
scruple of all swearing, appear more holy than God? No. Thou shall swear, The
Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, in Righteousness, Jer. 4. 13. No doubt of
the Oath, but be sure of the Adjuncts; of Truth, that thou know the matter
fully, and deliver it unfainedly; of Judgment, that thou consider it
deliberately with thy self, and deliver it judicially before the Magistrate; of
Righteousness, that thou weigh both the Possibility and Honesty. Wherefore
thus Promise, Vow, Swear to the Lord; and when thy hands are so tied to the
Plow, that thou can not let them go, do not look back with thine eyes, as
wishing to be loose; let these Bonds be thy Triumph.

The Promissory Oath, leads me aside to the Assertory; and it is but a little
aside. For, as the one obliges to a profession of future Offices, so the other
to a confession of past Offenses: the one freely taken by our selves, the other
judicially exacted, ex Officio Judicis, by the Officious inquiry of the
Ecclesiastical Judge. Some Innovators would fain purge the Consistory of this
purging Oath: but how unworthily, you may easily see by the Matter, the
Proceeding, the End. For in what Matter is this Oath administered? in such as
may overtempt weak flesh to Perjury? The matter is indeed Criminal, but not
Capital: Some, perchance for the present Life of the Body, may hazard the
Life of the Soul; few (I hope) for inferior Motives: A little mere shame is an
evil, not comparable to the double guilt of sin and perjury. For these are
ever to be loaded with fear or punishment, the other quickly sets you free and
vanishes: especially, being such as it is, a shame that makes not to be
ashamed; the Pillory may be objected, Penance cannot, it is like a Cure without
any sensible Scar. Think rightly of Deponents, and (as the Law does) humanely
and religiously, then is the clamorous doubt of Perjury sufficiently prevented.
But how proceeds this Oath? Violently, as it is objected? with intrenching on
God's hidden Prerogative, with forcing of Nature, with wresting of judicial
Order? Nothing less: here is no Tyrannical search of hearts, no breach into
God's Peculiar secrets utterly concealed; but only a nearer inquiry into
scandalous and infectious deeds, partly broken out all ready, and further
suspected: nor is it true, that the Defendant is unnaturally forced to stand a
party against himself; nor true, that the Judge is irregularly become a party
against the Defendant: The Adversary which troubles all, and yet seems loath to
be found, is the Traitor Sin, a loud Inmate, whose foul clamor betrays the
Entertainer. Though sin hide its Head, yet the Footsteps, the Sent, and Cry is
commonly left behind; Effects are the Footsteps, Probabilities the Sent,
Report the Cry: All which supply the place of open Accusers, and hunt out the
Malefactors; they hunt them out, as Adam's flight pursued him at his back, as
Cain's face accused him to his face, as Sodoms cry called for a storm on their
heads. Any of these tokens may startle a vigilant Over-seer, as well as an
express Information, any hint may suffice to stir a Question, though not to
clear the Decision. Wherefore, if sin lie cunningly concealed, Justice must be
wisely Inquisitive: so long as the Thorn sticks in the sides of the Church,
partly discerned, and partly hid; that which appears, must cause a search of
that which appears not: whether it be the Matter, as Achans theft; Person, as
the unknown Murderer; Circumstance, as the place in Susanna's slander; no
proceeding till those be drawn forth, which sometimes cannot be without
swearing the D^ponent, to discover the whole and simple Truth. Some kind of
sin, being ever done in darkness, and in no other Court punishable, cannot
else be punished: And no way more honorable for the party, then to be tried by
his own word: And nothing more worthy of the Judges favor, then the Partie's
own confession.

Then what is the end? crooked, as it is noys'd? that the Deponent may become a
prey? No, that Truth may be gained. What? that by speaking Truth he may accuse
himself? No, that either he may quit his Innocence, or confess his guilt;
which Confession differs from accusing, as Tenting from Wounding. And what
next? to be then punished with shame and ruin? No, to be amended by a fatherly
and saving correction, such as in other Churches, the humble Soul will
ingenuously seek by voluntary Confession; a practice rather smothered than ever
condemned, even with us (Brethren) who live so Anti-popishly undisciplined,

What strength have now those wonted Objections, which are still repeated, as
if they had never been answered; Fear of Perjury in the matter questioned,
violence in the Proceeding, insnaring of Brethren touching the End? What fear
of perjury, when shame is a lesser Evil then that? What violence in the Judge,
when the clamor of Sin will not let him rest? What insnaring of Brethren, when
their health is mainly intended? If every wholesome Ordinance, should be
straightway rejected for the accidental Evil, which some particulars from
thence may gather, stop your Ears at the Word, fly the Sacrament; in the one ye
may suck the savor of Death, in the other ye may eat your own Damnation. Yet,
as none but a Judas will abhor the bread, lest a Devil should enter into him;
so none but the wicked-minded, such a one as may pass, pro Confesso and
Convicto, will mutter against this Oath, lest it should turn to his poison. He
that spites the Gallows, though it be the Engine of Death, is, or would be, a
Malefactor; but this Ordinance is a provision for Life, whose direct and proper
consequents are, the opening of Truth, the rooting out of Exemplary sin, the
Reformation and Peace of sinners: and, besides the good intended to the party
sworn, it works also many public Ends, not deer even with the loss of some
particular persons, Scandal removed, Justice maintained, the Church Edified,
God glorified.

This policy of the Church, being never Thundered down by any plain prohibition
of Scripture, is strongly buttressed up by its general precept of Obedience:
as in the first of Saint Pet. chapter 2. v. 13. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man, even of man, for the Lords sake; The Magistrate when he
crosses not the supreme Master, does ever bear his Person. Submit your selves
to Him, therefore, as to God, even with your souls; Let every soul be subject
to higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God, Romans 13. 1. Though an Oath
be vinculum Animae, Number. 30. a chain laid on the Soul; yet ought it no more to
be refused, than a chain laid on the Body, in like case of a suspected crime.
The Gospel being sent to all Nations, governed by different Laws, has
prescribed no set form, but only Obedience to that, which is any where
established. By which implied Warrant, each particular Church is authorized to
constitute her National Orders; but in this Order, all Churches consent, (a
great sign that it is very Natural:) and further, if God's peculiar Policy
may bear any sway with your Imitation, know that in his judicial Ordinances
over Jewry, himself did immediately, and expressly enjoin this form: and in
matters, both Capital and less Criminal, in case of Theft, Exodus 22. 11.
When goods entrusted mis-carry, an Oath of the Lord shall be between them, that
he has not put his hands to his Neighbor's goods: in case of Adultery, Number.
5. 19. If the spirit of jealousy come upon a Man, the Priest shall charge the
Woman with an Oath; in case of Murder, Deuteronomy. 21. v. 6. When a man is slain, all
the Elders of the City, that is next unto the slain man, shall wash their hands
over the heifer that is beheaded in the Valley; And they shall testify and
say, Our hands have not shed this Blood, neither have our eyes seen it; Be
Merciful, O Lord. If in the weightiest Matters, surreption of Goods,
desilement of Body, spoil of Life, an Oath might be exacted; and from persons,
happily unblameable, an honest Man, a civil Woman, a whole City; and on slight
grounds, power of the House or Field, jealousy of an ill Husband, Vicinity of
place, and all to satisfy particular losses; why, not then an Oath with us, in
less matters, from scandalous persons, on greater suspicions, for public good?

Would you see the practice of this precept, how Gods rule has been followed
by the example of Men? this form has been anciently obeyed, when the Oath was
dangerous to the Person sworn; So did Achan answer to Joshuah, Michaiah to
Ahab, Jeremy to Zedekiah, all Israel to Esdras: so did Peter to the Jewish
Council, Stephen to the high Priest, Paul to the Captain: so did one Neighbor
to another, as from Solomon's supposition you may gather, 2 Chro. 6. 22. Yea, so
should every one confess his theft, only upon general Cursing, without a
particular Inquiry, Pro. 29. v. 24. Much more his fault, being questioned, and
on the public behalf, and before the Judge, and on his Oath. Before the
Magistrate, who sustains Gods Person, a mere Interrogatory is little less
constringent than the Oath added; for as the perjured man, calls God a witness
to a Lie, so the false answerer lies to God's face: so that from some persons,
an answer may be, and is well taken without it; Nevertheless, God in his
wisdom has abundantly provided against the dull inconsiderance of the vulgar
people, by prescribing to the Jews, and every where by permitting an Oath. Good
reason for it you ^ave seen, you have seen God's Law, and the Interpreter
thereof, the Saints Practice; and how far, or in what cases, Obedience thereto
has been commanded and yielded: for proof whereof, I have turned my Bible in
the Church; do not you at Home turn yours for Objections, lest unhappily the
Devil interpret; to some he has don't already, as appears by their cunning
malice against the Church in this particular. For though the same Oath be
practiced in Temporal Courts, in the Chancery, Exchequer, Common Pleas, and be
there put to the Defendant, Witness, or Jury; though the Body elsewhere be
sometimes Racked to draw out confession, they do not gainsay: Only they grudge
against this Rack of the Soul in the Examination of the Church; that which
only troubles them, is the Power of the Church. All Courts of Judicature
partake the same reason, the same ground of their power, for All derive it from
Christ. Yet because the Church is less armed with external might to redress
her wrongs, they first assay the weaker Fort, that when they find the same flaw
in a stronger, their malignity may grow more confident, and successively batter
down all Authority.

But you, my Brethren, who have sworn to obey your Ordinary in all things
lawful, have made this Assertory Oath a part of your Promissory; you have
taken an Oath that you will take this Oath, which you cannot refuse nor
disgrace without breaking the other. Concerning this and other Injunctions,
since you have past a promise to God, it must be your necessary Care, and my
next Argument, that you keep it. Promise to the Lord, and keep it.

This is the Second main Proposition, Holy Promises once made must be
necessarily kept. When thou abstainest from vowing, it shall be no sin unto
thee, Deuteronomy. 23. 22. The not-doing may or may not be sin, according as the case
stands; howsoever, the not-Vowing shall not be sin, for where no Law has
commanded the form of Obligation, there the omission can be no transgression.
Less righteous thou might have been, not more sinful; but having once
undertaken to shine, thou must continue a Star, or go out a Snuff; after thou
have once betrothed thy Liberty to God, a strong Necessity is laid upon thee;
that which is gone out of thy lips, God will surely require at thy hand, not
now as thine own, but as truly his; for Promise gives over to another the
praepossession of Right, in earnest of future performance. And therefore, as to
violate a betrothed Virgin is reckoned for Adultery, Deuteronomy. 25. 24. so the
breach of holy Promise is no less than Sacrilege.

For prevention whereof, God, who has given no Law that thou should
Promise, has given a Law that thou should Perform; and he has very
cautiously prescribed the manner. Be it done Entirely, Willingly, and
Diligently. Entirely, Levit. 22. v. 23. A bullock or a sheep that has a member
superfluous or lacking, thou may present for a Free-offering; but for a Vow
it shall not be accepted. A free gift is not examined; but in payment of debt
due upon Bond, the Seals are called for. The performance of that holy Office
which thou have vowed, as it may not be extravagant by adding newfangled
conceits of thine own; so it must not be one grain too light, by subtracting
the least circumstance, not by omitting a Ring in Marriage, a Cross in
Baptism, a Knee in the Eucharist; not by leaving out or changing one Collect in
the form of Liturgy. It Is not with Thee, as with those Forrainers with whom
thou trad'st in Ware and Religion; those Alexanders, those Copper-smiths, who
in every Port-Town may do us much harm, and by way of the Church may also mine
a passage into the State: They are free, but thou have sworn; thy performance
is Monstrous, if not Entire. And Willing it must be too; thou shall keep as
thou hast-vow'd it, Willingly unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23. 23. Thou that at once
usest and confutest the Church Ceremonies, with froward signs, and unseemly
tokens; with a screwed face, and a warpt shoulder: do thou think that thou
have performed thy Vow? No, not the Law. Thy Faith to God? No, not thy
Obedience to Man. But, God requires more yet; Diligence in Performance; When
thou vowest a vow to the Lord, thou shall not be slack to pay it, Deuteronomy. 23. 21.
He that searches not beforehand the Rubric and Rules of the Church, to know
his duty; he that afterward conforms in Judgment only, not in Practice; or in
Practice not yet, or not at all times, not without Omission and Intermission,
not without Complaining and Citing, not without Suspension, Deprivation,
Excommunication; doubtless he would not at all. Should thy covenant-servant
thus serve thee, with wilful ignorance, neglect, and contempt; deliver thy cup
without reverence, with Cain's face, and scarce so, but slowly and by fits; How
would thou serve him? and yet perchance thou have need of his Attendance. God
requires observance, not for his own, but for your want; He has not need to
receive, but you to pay; nor is he so exacting of his own dues, as careful for
your discharge.

Which that you may obtain, by making true payment in manner answerable, give
me leave to join my Advice. First, Make trial of matters more Easy, and those
for a certain Time; that by habitual Discipline, you may prepare and harden
your selves for Vows more difficult: This is to reckon the cost before you
build, and to make provision before you war. As it argues Diffidence to
venture nothing on Grace and humble Endeavor; so to attempt the highest reach
of Perfection at first leap, and to bind over your selves wholly before you
have gotten experienced Masterdome in any part, this is a rash Undertaking. The
way to keep a Vow, is to Vow that which we well hope to keep.

But, O the perjured condition of many an hasty Prophet, and outwardly demure
Saint! who without any preparative consideration, having solemnly plighted his
Faith, having done it with Mouth, Hand, and Knee, twice or thrice in
Academicall Degrees, twice in Ordinations, and as often in his Institutions as he
can, does presently go forth with resolution to break it; charges his wit to
invent fallacy against his Duty, and to Preach against that Vow which enables
him to Preach. Can there be any Atheism more hideously contemptuous! Hand and
Seal given to man, will tie us to our Word, or to the Jayl; only God can have
no fair dealing, no sufficient redress. In point of holy Promise, (God be
merciful to us) we have lost all conscience, the conscience that is, runs
clean contrary to our promise, whereby if we stand bound, we think our selves
bound to break it; the faster tied, the looser we play; and that which was Duty
before it was vowed, is by vowing esteemed unlawful. If God make a Promise to
Us, though it be but Conditional, we claim it as Absolute; no disobedience of
ours can set Him free, we allow not his Majesty so much Mutability, as on our
change to be constant to Justice: But when our selves have dedicated a Promise
to him, whether by our Governors, or also in our own persons, be it never so
full and absolute, any or no condition shall suffice to cancel it; and we that
deny our selves the liberty of Vowing, will take an unmeasured liberty of
Disannulling, or perchance feign a Necessity of Undoing what indeed we would
not do. And to cure this Evil, what remedy? For since all the Land has out
off God's inviolable Tenure, formerly confirmed by the whole Land; since all
are involved in one common Sacrilege, What man with effectual courage can do
him right? or with what face control a Vow-breaker? Injusta vincula rumpat
Justitia, ('it is, I confess, St. Austin's rule.) Bad Promises are well broken,
for such are Threatenings rather than Promises, and Threatenings are recalled
without Injury; whereas to second bad words with like performance, is double
wrong. The mis-applying of this Rule, when men are bent to transpose the name
of Good and Evil, is exceeding mischievous; for under this pretext, some have
recanted or neglected their own duty, and some have nullified the piety of
others. False Brethren that crept into the Church, by swearing Obedience, have
basely betrayed her to her enemies for a piece of bread, absurdly supposing,
that any Rites, in themselves indifferent, may as easily be made Antichristian
by censure of private Rebellion, as they were made necessary by sworn Covenant
under public Authority. Some disesteeming the Churchwardens Oath, as a mere
formal Engine to get Fees, esteem it their Office not to discharge their
Office at all, lest they be counted Medlers and Busybodies; from whence
ungodly Neglect grows into Custom, and Sin prescribes against Duty. Here
Churches drop down unspied, there Souls hang desperately ruinous; and all for
want of 6d Reparation, or 12d Presentation in due season. Other ungracious
children blasting the works of Charity with the name of Superstition, and
coloring their rude Sacrilege with the name of Zeal, make it their gainful
Godliness to raze out the yet-unraz'd Godliness of their Predecessors. The
old Romans shall judge these Novell Christians; they, after ten years omission,
paid the Vows of Camillus with their own Jewels; these, after long possession
of Consecration, would wring from God all the Vows of their Fathers into their
own hands, and again rake over the poor gleanings which the Robbers have left.
But let not Sacrilege in the People hire the Priest to Disobedience and
Treachery; let not a few Crumbs bribe you from barking against the Thief, and
guarding the House of the Lord; to which Care you especially are bound, by my
third and last Proposition, directed to Those that be round about him.

Promises made to God by them which be round about him, are in respect of the
Parties most constringent: And first, because they are made to God. If a
promise, past to our Neighbor, ought to be kept, though it be to our loss;
much more to God, when it also tends to our good. Will not his goodness hold
thee firm? let his Fear chain thee. That Name which begets Awe and Trust in
Human Contracts, is much more Awful in Religious Vows. There he is called
only for a Witness, here he is also a Party: thou swearest now both By Him,
and To Him. Did men seriously consider to whom they stand engaged, they would
be more heedfull of their Observance. It Is the King to whom thou swearest
Loyalty, though a Justice take thy Oath; it is God to whom thou make thy Vow,
though the Bishop receive it. His Receiver thou may sometimes delude, Him
thou can not. Words and Thoughts are to him more legible, than Actions to us,
for God is Light; whosoever seeks to rob Him does less lie hid, than a Thief
in a Candle.

Again, as the Majesty of your Lord God obliges you, to more awful Reverence;
so in respect of your selves, does the near dependence of your Office, to a
greater fidelity. Persuasions and Arguments may be needfully urged to Laymen;
nothing to Ecclesiastical Officers but promise: Others are only bound by
order of their Praedecessors, you by Personal dedication; they to naked
Assent, you to Action; they by Obedience, you by voluntary and deliberate Oath.
Say not before the Angel, (or thy Bishop) says Ecclesiastes, that thy promise
was out of Ignorance: Thou a seer, before thy eyes were open? thou blind, and
presume to be a guide? thou a Messenger of Truth, and yet perjured? thou
perjured, and yet so nearly tied to fidelity! Want of breeding, Ignorance,
Blind zeal, Company, Profit, less Obligation may in some part excuse a
Layman; it is impossible for an unconform'd Minister, to be tolerably
dishonest. Nothing so much aggravates the Defection of Solomon, as his two
Antecedent Visions and Dialogues with God: how frequent yours have been, you
well know; how many public Vowings, so many Dialogues with the Most High.
Through such nearness of Relation, we behold Treachery as through a
multiplying Glass, far greater than otherwise it would appear; and we do not
only apprehend, but find it so indeed. To poison a King is not murder, but
Treason; but for a Wife or Servant to do it, is double Treason: And breach of
Vow to God, is not Treason, but Sacrilege; in a Priest sacro-Sacrilegium, the
most execrable kind of Sacrilege, doubled by the condition of the Person:
Which being considered, nothing can be more injurious to God, more dangerous to
Himself, more exemplary and pernicious to Others.

First, a Kissing Judas, a Thievish Treasurer, a Familiar Devil, what more
injurious to God? for besides, the unkind requital of much Infidelity, for
much Love and Trust; the treacherous defailance brings with it a scandalous
Repute on God's service, who will not be thought a good Master, so long as his
nearest Servants Revolt from their Station. As in Heaven, there is most Joy for
a Converted sinner, who comes from far; so there is most grief for a perverted
Servant, who goes off so near.

But secondly, The Evil falls the heavier on himself; the more Immediate he
was before, the less Mediation to reunite him: If the Man and Wife be two,
who shall intercede? perchance some friend, as deer as a Wife, else none. But
if God and the Priest be two, who shall there Officiate an Atonement? The fall
of an Angel, makes him Devil; no space for him betwixt Heaven and Hell. The
sin of a common Priest, cost as much Sacrifice as the sin of the whole people;
but the sin of Eli, the High Priest was not to be purged away by any Sacrifice
whatsoever. The nearer to God you are by Office, so much the farther off by
neglect. What can wash Water, or season Salt, or sanctify the Priest! if these
have lost their Purity, Savor, and Holiness, what can do on them their
Office? We may write up the forlorn Sentence of the Plague, Domine miserere,
Lord have Mercy upon them! no Physician but the God offended.

Lastly, because the Priest is an Angel, he seldom falls without a Train; the
height of his Dependence, enlarges the contagious Power of deriving his
disorder: Well might his sin be rated aequivalent to that of the whole people,
for the defection which to day is His, to morrow will be Theirs: If he renounce
the Vows of a Priest, why not they the Vows of Christians? Prone they are of
themselves, to that form of Religion, which is most easy and less chargeable:
if he by neglect of Duty and Ceremony, by Encouragement of unyoak't Liberty,
shall push forward this Inclination, great must the fall of the Church be. For
Churchwardens, the next Pillars, being men chosen out of the People, they also
will alternately slacken their Office, and prove as careless of the Material
Temple, as the Priest of the Spiritual. O what shall become of the
Congregation, when their Guides come in or go out, the worst of men? what shall
become of the Church, when Officers are chosen to look to its decay? An Officer
more neglectfull of Order, than the Common Laity, is much like his Chancell;
that Thetcht while the Body of the Church is Leaded: or like his Table; that
foul and moth-eaten, while the Pewes are fair and garnish't: or like his
Surplesse; that coorse and ragged, while the Women's Aprons are fine and sound:
Wherefore, He and his Church, just as they proceed, so they will end, both in a
like ruin. Necessity will at length cause us to be all Brownists, left without
Churches, and the stream of depraved Custom, carry us into Libertinism, from
thence into Fanaticall madness, Misery, and Death: at length, God himself will
add ruin, and call for Zim and Ohim to be his Priests: for so he has done
already to many dead Carcass'd, and wasted Churches. Those places which our
Fathers vowed to Gods perpetual Service, are impropriated by a degenerate
Posterity, to their own abuses: the sacred wills of devout Testators, confirmed
by General Parliament, awfully fenced with solemn Execrations of the Priest,
strongly tied by God's express Inhibition, Lev. 27. 28. Whatsoever is
consecrated to me, shall not be taken away, are now quite frustrated: the Holy
Sanctuaries are reformed, from Dens of Idleness, to Dens of Rapine; from
Babels of pride, to Sties of Luxury: where once God's Altar stood, there is the
Glutton's Table, perchance the Bed of the Adulterer? the Sculls of Holy Fathers
are dug up, to make spacions Cellarage for Hogs-heads and Drunkards; the very
Chalices which held the Blood of Christ, are reformed into Bowls; and it is
hoped, that by demolishing the Walls, all handwriting like that against
Belshazzar, is sufficiently prevented. But whence all this, the sound whereof
makes both the ears of them that hear to Tingle? even from the defection of
Priests, careless of their Vows, short of their pretended Holiness. No great
evil has ever befaln the Church, but by this way: by Persecution it ever
prosper'd, and only decayed by the Treachery of her Officers. Israel fell to
Idolatry, but who made the Calf? Aaron. The Ark was taken and profaned, but
through whose fault? the Sons of Ely. Israel forsook the Divine Worship at
Jerusalem, and built them high Places, but who served thereon? Jereboams
Priests: How fell the Temple at Jerusalem so often, why so many of ours at
once, and why are the rest yet-standing in so much danger? through the Default,
the Corruption, the Tergiversation, and perjury of Priests, and Officers.

And in this particular Place I cannot imagine, that simple Women (zealously,
though blindly, affected) would so quickly re-iterate their Rebellious
Conventicles, contrary to Oath and Subscription, if some traitorous Guide did
not secretly underbear and encourage them with pestilent Instructions. But know
this, you of the Laity, that whenever ye hearken to such depravers of Form
and Discipline, critically bent for Innovation, sacred pretenders of a most
tender Conscience, and yet unsensible of solemn Oaths; you choose for your
Leaders perjured Hirelings, wicked Vow-breakers; and what can you expect of the
Building but Ruin, when the first stone of the Foundation is Perjury? In all
this I speak the Truth, I lie not: So help me God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord; To Whom, etc. AMEN.

Delivered at Lin, at a Visitation, June the 24. 1633.
FINIS.

