Die lovis 25. Febr. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Strong, one of the
Assembly of Divines, is heerby thanked for his great pains taken in his Sermon
Preached yesterday before their Lordships, in the Abbey Church Westminster, it
being the Monthly Fast Day: And he is hereby desired to cause the same to be
Printed and published: And that no person whatsoever, do presume to Print or
reprint the same, but by warrant under his own hand.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliament.

I appoint John Saywell to Print my Sermon.

William Strong.

THE WAY TO THE HIGHEST HONOR. Presented in a Sermon Preached before the Right
Honorable House of Peers, in the Abbey Church at Westminster, at their late
solemn Monthly Fast. Feb. 24. 1646.

By William Strong, one of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order of the House of Peers.

Transit honor hujus seculi, transit ambitio. In futuro Christi judicio, nec
absidae gradatae, nec cathedrae velatae, nec sanctimonialium occursantium atque
cantantium greges adhibebantur ad defensionem, ubi caeperit accusare
conscientia: and conscientiarum arbiter judicare. Quae hic honorant, ibi
onerant, quae hic relevant, ibi gravant. Aug. Maxim. Episcop. Epist. 23.
LONDON, Printed by T.H. for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Little Britain, at the sign of the Star. 1647.

To the Right Honorable the House of Peers assembled in Parliament.
Right Honorable:
IT is an argument that God has advanced a man in mercy, when he gives him a
spirit suitable to his honor, when his disposition is noble according to his
condition: Otherwise Dignitas in indigno est ornamentum in luto, Bern l. de
consid.
and but as beauty in a fair woman without understanding.

A Princely spirit is mainely seen in two things: In great services, and great
satisfactions.

1. Inter initiae principatus, quotidie secretum sibi horarium sumere selebat;
nec quicquam ampliu, quam muscas captare. ^, 8.
All delight arising from suitableness between the mind and the object; a
mind that is truly great cannot please it self in these low things that
others do: To eat and drink, gather riches, build houses, and delight
themselves in these contentments of the flesh. As Sueton reports of Domitian:
Who had the great affairs of the Empire to busy himself in; yet he did
constantly spend some time every day in catching of flies: But a truly noble
spirit is with David considering how he may lay out himself in some great
service for the glory of God, the advancement of his Ordinances, and the
enlargement of the Kingdom of his dear Son. As for other things he looks
upon Them as beneath him, Hister. Ammian Charceil^a l. ^0.
As Themistocles after a great victory won against the Persians, walked up and
down among the slain, and saw here and there some great and rich spoils,
which he disdained to stoop for, but said to one that stood by him, Recte
recusat conditionem banerut omnibus liqu^dum sit quiequid postea Abrabae
contigit, contingere tantum (...) ^enedictionem Domini, ^en ex homin^^m savore.
Lu be^ sin Genesis 14.
Toll haec, tu qui Themistocles non es. Let such take care of these things
that have spirits fit for no higher things.

2. Such as a man's spirit is, such will his satisfactions be. A noble spirit as
he does all unto God, so he exspects to receive all from God; and he admires
nothing but God, and the things of God. He cannot be content only to be rich in
this world, but he must be rich toward God; or to be honorable among men, he
must have the honor that comes from God only. He says with Abraham, Valde
prerestatus sum me nolle sic satia^i. Melch. Adam. (...) vita Luth.
it shall never be said that the King of Sodom made Abraham rich. And with
Luther when a great gift was sent him, that God should not put him off with
outward mercies, he would not be satisfied with any thing here below.

God has highly advanced your Lordships above your Brethren; let it appear by
your Princely spirits, in laying out your honor, yea and laying it down also
for God. He has raised you to great honor, and given you such opportunities
as your ancestors never had: See that you answer the price put into your
hands. Let his glory be precious to you, if you do expect that yours shall be
precious unto him: And know if it be not, (...). Nazian. oret. 20.
all the outward embalmings of men will never be able to keep your names from
stinking and rotting: For the word is gone forth of his mouth; they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

I shall only commend to your Honors that two fold study of Basil and Nazian.
As worthy of your Noble spirits. 1. Esteem this to be a great thing: to be, as
well as to be called Christians; to have it in truth, as well as in name. 2. So
to live here with hopes of Heaven, having your hearts, affections, and
conversations there, that you may as it were prevent your departure, and seem
to be stolen thither before hand.

That the Lord would thus enoble and raise your spirits, set you upon the
highest services, with the greatest successes, and give unto you the fullest
satisfactions; himself, and the honor that comes from him alone: That your
glory here may be but the pledge and the first fruits of that crown of glory
which he has prepared for them that love him. This is, and shall be the humble
and constant prayer of

Your Lordships servant in the Gospel, WILLIAM STRONG.

A SERMON PREACHED in the Abbey Church of Westminster before the House of
Peers, on the 24. day of February, 1646.
1. SAM. 2.30. For them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise
me, shall be lightly esteemed.


GOD has made of one blood, all Nations, that dwell upon the face of the whole
earth: All men are equal in their original, in their creation, Adam, and in
their fall Enosh: there was in neither, (...), the great, eminent, and
honorable man. Only God makes the difference, and appoints one vessest to
honor, and another to dishonor, here as well as hereafter. Ps. 75.6.7.
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South, Psalm 82 6. Jo. 10 35. Omnis potestas est a sumena potestate. Aug.
Principis solius jus est minuere vel augere valorem monetae. Gr. Tholossan.
Syntag Iur is. l. 36. c. 2. S. 26. and de repub. l. 9. S. 31.
he pulls down one, and sets up another. It is because he has said, Ye
are Gods, and his word of Command and Commission comes to you. To set the value
upon Coin is reckoned inter Regalia, to cause money to rise or fall at
pleasure: it is Gods prerogative royal to exalt the value of one man above
another: to honor some, as gold amongst the dust of the earth: or as diamonds
amongst the stones of the field: not for any thing in themselves, but through
the excellency that he puts upon them: the rainebow for the matter of it is but
a common vapor, Arist. l. 3. Met^^ l. cap. 3.
an ordinary cloud, only it has its excellency from the Sun which enamels it.

This difference put by God between man and man, is but for the time of this
life at farthest: at death all these relations shall cease, Job 3.19. Angustus
emicos pereuxct at us est. Eequid iis videret mimum vitae commode transegisse.
Sugton. in August. Gataker, Gods parley with Princes, p. 90.
Death levels all: the small and the great are there, and the servan^ is free
from his master: There the scepter and the spade are equal: the nobles robes,
and the beggars rags, are laid down together. This life is fitly compared to
a Play, a well acted fable, where one acts the part of a Prince, another of a
peasant. Or to Counters, where while the account lasts, one stands for a pound,
another for a penny: but the Play ended, and the account past, there remains no
difference nor impression of any of their former honors. A Dee sunt omnes
patestates, quamvis ^b illo enim sind omnes voluntates. Aug. de civd. 5. c. 8.


This honor is conferred upon some by providence, and some by promise; all
have a Commission from God, but some an approbation: some are exalted in mercy,
some in wrath: some in mercy to themselves and the Kingdom where they live: so
was Joseph advanced in Egypt, and David to rule over the Common wealth of
Israel, when Saul had almost ruined the Kingdom: for David after he came to
the Crown says; The land is weak, Psalm. 75.3. Moller. in loc.
and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I bear up the pillars thereof.
Some in wrath, to themselves and the Nation: so God raised up Pharaoh in
Egypt, that he might show his power in him, and his honor proved a plague to
himself, and a scourge to the Kingdom: so God also advanced Saul in Israel,
Exodus 9.16. Hose 13.11.
gave them a King in his wrath, and took him away in his anger.

But when men are thus advanced by God, he has in this life reserved to
himself a power of degradation; Aust. homil. 14 Deponit Reges, disponit regna.
Dan. 2.21.
that no man can say he shall die in honor: Quod illo dante fit nostrum nobis
superbientibus fit alienum. He changes times and seasons: he removes Kings,
and sets up Kings. Remove the Diadem and take away the Crown, this shall
not be the same: exalt him that is low and abase him that is high, Ezech.
21.26. Magnus est Caesar sed Deo minor. Tertul. apol. c. 30.
To the intent that the living may know, that the most high rules in the
Kingdoms of mortal men, and gives them to whomsoever he will.

Now that your Honors may know the way to attain true honor, (which is a
great part of the study of those that live in the upper end of the world) and
that you may know how to preserve it without blemish; Eccles. 10.^.
for honor above all things is quickly tainted, (as dead flies make the
Apothecaries ointment to send forth a stinking savor, so does a little folly
him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor:) And that ye may know
whether God has exalted you in mercy or in wrath to your selves and the
Nation, the Text gives you a sure rule and direction in them all; They that
honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed: for
men can no more keep their names, then they can keep their souls.

In this whole verse there are three things.

1. The Repetition of an ancient promise. 2. The Revocation of this promise. 3.
The Reason thereof.
1. The promise (which God is never unmindfull of) I said indeed that thy house
and the house of thy Father should walk before me for ever. This Interpreters
conceive to refer to that ancient promise made unto the house of Aaron; Trmel.
A Lap.
upon whom the Lord did settle the Office of the Priesthood, by a perpetual
Statute, Exodus 29.9. for we read of no particular promise made unto the
Family of Ely. This promise of God was after this manner administered and
dispensed. Aron had four sons, two of them Nadab and Abihu dyed before their
Father, by an immediate stroke of Gods hand. Lev 10.2.3. So when Aron dyed,
the Priesthood descended upon Eleazar the first borne, 1 Chronicles. 24.2. in his
Family it continued for five successions, 1 Chronicles. 6.4.5. and though it be not
set down in Scripture; Cur id factum suerit non satis ex Scripturis liquet.
(...). Mart. Joseph. An^^q. l. 5. c. 12.
yet doubtless not without great and weighty cause the Lord did for a time lay
this Family aside. And he translated the Priesthood to the Family of Ithamar
the younger son; Ely was the first of that Family that did wear the Ephod
before the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 24.3. Torniellus anno mundi 2940 Pet. Mart. in 1.
Sam. 14.3. and 21.2. Cornel. a Lap. in Numb. 25.13 and 1. Sam. 1.3. Sir W.
Rawley hist. of the world, part. 1. l. 2. c. 15. S. 2
in this Family it continued also for five successions; till Abiathar, the last
of that House; Whom Solomon thrust out from being a Priest unto the Lord, that
he might fulfill the word of the Lord, which he spoke concerning the House of
Ely in Shiloh. 1 Kin. 2.27. And Zadock was put into the Priesthood in his
room, and so the honor returned again to the Family of Eleazar. 1 Chro. 6.8.
Thus when the Priesthood had continued in the Family of Ely, (as is conceived)
120 years; it was afterward remooved in judgment, because his sons made
themselves vile; and he restrained them not.

2. The Revocation of this promise; But now the Lord says be it far from me;
and this he does with detestation and abhorring, as the word (...) does
signify. But does the Lord call back his words? Is there with the Holy One of
Israel yea and nay? No surely, his counsel shall stand, and he will do all
his pleasure; nothing can add either Wisdom or Power unto him, and therefore
nothing can arise de novo to make him at different terms with himself, he is
without variableness, and shadow of turning.

We are to consider that the promises of God are of two sorts, some absolute,
others conditional: Absolute promises are those that the Lord has undertaken
to perform of his own free grace, not only citra meritum, but also citra
conditionem, without allsupposed or prerequired conditions in us; of this kind
are all those great promises of the new Covenant; I will be thy God, I will
give my Son, Genesis 17.7. and 3.15. Joel 2.28. Esaias 43.25.
I will pour out my spirit. I, even I am he, who blotteth out your iniquities
for my name sake; Ezech. 11.19.
I will take away the heart of stone and I will give a heart of flesh; Jer.
31.33.
I will put my Law in your inward parts, and write it in your hearts; Hose.
14.4.
I will heal your backslidings, and love you freely, for mine anger is turned
away etc. Conditional promises, only show what God will do upon the
performance of such duties and conditions by the creature, which conditions
without Gods grace he is never able to perform. And these are made for the
encouragement of the creature in the ways of obedience, Pet. Mar. in loc. Deus
immut^bi^is non muratur, sed res ipsa immutabili praescientia manente divina.
T^rnov. in Joel. 2.13. Non est m^tatio consilii and decreti divini, sed operum:
attamen hujusmodi mutatio a D^o ab aeterno est decreta. Glass. Rhet. sacr.
tract. ^. c. 7 p. 119.
and to show a man's inability that he may fly to Christ for strength; but they
do not always show the purpose of God to give the condition or the reward. As
in judgments there are conditional threatenings, which upon a change in the
creature never come to pass: So are there conditional promises, which through
the sin of the creature may never be accomplished. Jer. 18.7.8.9.10. At what
instant I speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up,
and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have
pronounced turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to
do unto them. And at what instant I speak concerning a Nation, and concerning
a Kingdom to build and to plant it: If it do evil in my sight, that it obey
not my voice, then will I repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit
them. So that the change is in the thing, and not in the Lord; and if he make a
promise upon the performance of such a condition, and a man walk contrary
thereunto, he may reap a curse instead of a blessing. Novit Deus mutare
promissum, si tu non noveris emendare delictum.

3. The reason given of the revocation is in the words of the Text; for they
that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed. Glass. Gram. sacr. l. 4 tract. 2. obser. 15 p. 731
This is after the manner of the Hebrews propounded both affirmatively and
negatively, and when they will express any thing to the full, they do it by a
pleonasme in this manner: Exodus 12.20. Ye shall eat nothing leavened: In all
your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread. Jo. 1.3. All things were made
by him, and without him was nothing made that was made. Jo. 1.20. He confessed,
and denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ.

And quia aeque confusa est, divisio and nimia and nulla; Sin. ep. 89.
my purpose is to consider the reason only affirmative and negative as it lies
in the Text, and so it affords us these two Points. 1. They that honor God
shall be honored by him. 2. They that dishonor and despise God, shall be
lightly esteemed.
To begin with the first: They that honor God shall be honored by him.

Here are two things to be opened and explained. 1. What it is to honor God,
and how the creature may be said to honor him. 2. How God does honor those
that honor him.

1 What it is to honor God. Honor is nothing else but the reflection of an
excellency. And to make it up, three things must concur.

1. An excellency, the word in the original does signify something that is
heavy and ponderous, and a thing of weight and worth, according to that
Hebraisme used by the Apostle (...), (...) 2. Cor. 4.17.
a weight of glory, and it stands in opposition unto another word (...) which
signifies a light thing, nullius ponderis: And if honor be given where there
is not an excellency answerable, Gal. 5.26.
it is but (...) an empty and vain glory because there is nothing within, that
answers the Title without: (...). Act. 25.23. Psa. 62.9. (...) par^^^r.
Hence it is that all honor amongst men is in a great measure but (...), an
outside only, a fancy and no more: For men of low degree are vanity, and men of
high degree are a lie, and lest it may be thought there is no such worth in
them apart indeed: yet if ye put them together they weigh much: Job. 31.6.
Dan. 5.27.
he adds, put them altogether into the balance and weigh them, and they will
appear to be lighter then vanity it self. But in the Lord, there is all
manner of excellency, and therefore as he is the Father of Lights, Jam. 2.1.
so is he also the Lord of Glory.

2. A manifestation of this excellency, or else we can never honor him, never
ascribe glory to him; If he will hide his face, Job 34.29.
who can behold him? There is not only in God, gloria essentialis, but also
manifestativa. The great ground of the dishonor of God in the world is because
men know him not; they that know his name will trust in him, Psa. 9.10.
fear him, love him, have high thoughts of him etc: The low and base
apprehensions that men have of God, (wherein the maine of a man's ungodliness
lies, Jude 19. Non a^^ secundum improbos sed secundum heminem: taentum baber
audaciae ratio humanc, ut contra insurgere non dubit^t etc. Call.
as Romans 1.23. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image
made like to corruptible man. Romans 3.5. Is God unrighteous who takes
vengeance? I speak as a man. Psalm. 51.21. Thou thoughtest wickedly that I was
altogether such an one as thy self, Ezekiel. 18.25. Ye say the way of the Lord is
not equal etc.) they all proceed from their ignorance of him, want of the
manifestation of his excellency to them.

3. A reflection of this excellency, when we behold it in him, be rapt up into
admiration of him, and ascribe all unto him; when his glory shines upon us as
the Sun shines upon the Moon, and we reflect it, casting down our crowns
and saying, Mat. 6.13. Rev. 4.11.
thou art worthy to receive glory, and honor, and power, all greatness and
excellency is thine, and to thee only it does belong. In these apprehensions
and reflections of the excellencies that be in God, does our honoring of God
properly consist.

Before we come to the particulars wherein this honoring of God consists, I
desire to premise this General.

There is no way of honoring God, but in his Son; he that honors not the
Son, honors not the Father, Jo. 5.23. Psa. 102.18 Ephesians. 2.10.
And this cannot be without a new Creation, a mighty work of regeneration
passing upon a man; a people created for his praise. God receives no honor by
any of the most curious works of unregenerate men; They are all turned into
sin, Psa. 109.7. Esa. 65.5.
they are to him as smoke in his nose, and he abhors them, because though they
seem to honor God in his Law; yet they honor him not in his Son, and he
will be honored no other way, and these works he sets a very high price upon.
Luther propounds this query why the Lord in Scripture has recorded so many
ordinary and common things of the Saints, and yet the Virtues of Socrates, and
the famous acts of Hannibal, Caesar, Alexander and Scipio, which to humane view
were greater then any in the Church ever performed, Comment in Genesis 29 1.2.3.
Si dareru^ m^hi optio; eligero^ unius Christiani rustici aut ancillae
sordidissi number and maxim agreste opus prae omnibus vic^otiis and triu^^ phis
Alexandri magni, Iulii Caesaris etc. Quere? quia hic est Deus. illi^^st
Diabolus, quae est differentia essentialis. Hoc non omnes possunt cerwere, ne
Erasmus qui them vidit: soli credentes cernunt precium and pondus operum
Christianorum. pondus aute^ and pretium maximum operum est sides and verium.
^bi enim Deus ipse est and spiri^us in operante. Non sorde^^ insima and
carnaliaopera sanctorum, nec vilia and abjecta fiunt, quia fiunt a parsona
credente, accepta san^^a and divina quae quicquid fecerit, scit Deo placere.
of whom it is hard to find a parallel even in David himself or any of the
Christian Worthies? He answers, the first thing to be looked unto, is, whether
the person be accepted, or else the works cannot please God; si vel Cicero vel
Socrates sanguinem sudasset, tamen propterea non placeret Deo. And therefore he
professes, that if God would grant him his desire, he should choose rather to
be the Author of the meanest work of the lowest of the Saints, then of all the
Victories of Alexander, or the Triumphs of Caesar, because God is honored in
his Son in the one, and not in the other. God may use Cyrus to deliver his
people; to say to Jerusalem thou shall be built, and to the Temple thy
Foundations shall be laid. God may make the King of Tire as a covering Cherub
unto the Arc, he may cause the earth to succor the woman, and appoint Badgers
skins and Rams skins for to cover the Tabernacle. And he may get himself
honor by them, but they do not honor him, because all they do is not in his
Son, which is the high and only way in which he will be glorified.

There is a double Principle from whence all the actions of unregenerate men
toward God do flow, either a principle of open enmity or of secret flattery;
all their gross sins proceed from the first, and all their religious duties
from the latter, Psalm. 78.36. they did but flatter him with their lips, and
lied to him with their tongues, for their heart was not right with him, etc.
And the latter in some respect is most abominable, as Judas his betraying
Christ with a kiss, is more hateful then that of the Soldiers who came with
swords and staves to take him. Mark. 1.24.34. Christ suffered not the Devils
to speak because they knew him. Luc. 4.41. Non decet immundum do mundo
pronunciare, and a De^ refugum de sancto Dei. Brug.
He will not suffer Satan to give a testimony of him, to be the Son of God,
(though it were truth, and the same testimony that he commends in Peter, Math.
16.16.) from an inward detestation, that any truth of him should be witnessed
by the Father of lies. If our persons do not please God, our works cannot
honor God.

This being laid for a ground, we now come to show how God is said to be
honored by us, and that is principally in these six particulars.

1. When the thoughts of God are sweet to a man, and he has high and ravishing
apprehensions of him from day to day, Math. 15.8. there is a distinction made
by Christ himself, this people honor me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me; there is therefore an honoring God with the heart, as well as
with the mouth, and if ever our Odors be sweet to God, they must proceed out of
Golden Vials, Rev. 5.8. Pineda. Sanctim.
In opposition hereunto we have cursing God in the heart, Job 1.5. which is
not to be understood of violent and malicious blaspheming of God; but a
forgetfulness of God, or any irreverent and unholy thought of God, unbecomming
his Matie and glory. And this is I conceive, Medes Diatr. upon the
sanctification of Gods name, p. 28.
to sanctify the Lord in our hearts, Esaias 8.13. noting that immediate duty
which we owe to him, in acknowledging and meditating of that peerless
excellency that is in him, as the highest, the most delightsome and
satisfactory object of the soul. Thus do the Angels honor him, when they
always say in their hearts, Esa. 6.3.
holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of Hosts, the whole earth is full of thy
glory. So does Solomon teach us, Eccles. 5.2.
by considering the Lord is in heaven, and we are upon earth. So does Moses,
when he is rapt into admiration of him, Exodus 15.11.
who is like unto thee Oh Lord, who is like unto thee? Glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, 1. Sam. 2 2.
doing wonders. So Hannah, there is none holy as the Lord for there is none
besides thee, neither is there any rock like unto our God. Ps. 139.17.18.
And David, how precious are thy thoughts unto me Oh God, how great is the
sum of them? If I should count them they are more in number then the sand,
when I awake I am still with thee, etc. And thus Micayah honored God: 1. Kin.
22.19
when he saw two Kings sit upon Thrones, and yet the apprehension of the Glory
and Majesty of God did swallow up all the thoughts of the glory of the
creature, and it becomes as nothing before him. Jer. 2.32. Psa. 10.4.
But when we forget Gods days without number, he is not in all our thoughts,
and when the glory of other things, darkens the glory of God in our hearts, and
thoughts of other things does drown the thoughts of God in us; as those
things, that are to us more excellent and more delightsome, this is to
dishonor God in a man's heart, and to live without God in the world.

2. We then honor God, when the honor of God is precious in our eyes, when
whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do else, 1. Cor. 10.31.
we do all to the glory of God. When a man's own honor is not dear to him
in comparison of Gods; but he casts down his crown and falls upon his face,
Rev. 4.11.
and he that so does, abaseth his glory, that the Lord alone may be exalted.
When a man can venture great things in himself, rather then dishonor God in
the smallest; Dan. 6.10.
Daniell will put his life in his hands rather then omit one duty. And Mordecai
would venture his own life, Hester. 13.8. Brisson. de regno Pers. l. 1.
Honorem supra humanum ei deferebant ex mandato regis: qualis Regi Persarum
hab^batur. Trem. in Hest. 3. Oh militem in Deo gloriosum: Inter tot fratres
commilitone^ solus Christia^^s. De coron. milit. c. 1. Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
Anathema cupit fieri, non a Christi charitate, sed tantum a Christi
foelicitate. Per.
and hazard the safety of the whole nation, rather then give the glory of God
unto any other, for it was divine honor Human expected of him. The Christian
Soldier in Tertullian would venture his life, liberty and all, rather then he
would wear his Laurel upon his head as the Heathen Soldiers did, and being
demanded the reason, why he did differ in habit from the rest, he answered,
Christianus sum, etc. He would lay down his life rather then in habit come
near unto the customs of Idolaters. Anselm judged hell for sin to be a good
exchange. Moses in a thing that concerned Gods glory, desired that God would
blot his name out of his book. And Paul that he might be accursed from Christ,
which is not to be understood of a separation from Christ in grace, for so he
loved Christ doubtless above his Brethren, and such a wish had been sinful,
but of a separation from Christ in respect of his own glory and happiness, if
God may have glory, and the souls of men advantage. And it is to be understood
as spoken, not deliberative, but hyperbolice, etc. they well knew it could not
be; River. in Exodus 32. Gloss. Rhet. sacr. p. 477.
But as Luther has excellently hinted, Affectus amantium cum inardescit,
procedit etiam ad impossibilia. Love to the glory of God, and the good of his
people, puts the soul into such an ecstasy, that it is carried out even to
known impossibilities for God. Nay Austin in his Resolution rises unto this
height in reference to the glory of God, that if the salvation of all mankind
were to be accomplished by one officiously; Ad se^^^^ernam salate opitulante
mendacio nullus ducendus est etc. lib. ad consent. de men^acio. ^op. ult.
yet the glory of God should be so precious, that he should let all mankind to
perish, rather then their salvation should be procured by his dishonor. He
that does in this manner honor God, can never plead a necessity of sinning in
any kind, whether to obtain the greatest good, or to avoid the greatest
evil, because he says there is but one thing necessary, that God only be
exalted. Non admittit status fidei allegationem necessitatis. Tertul. de corona
militis, c. 11.
Nulla est necessitas delinquendi, quibus una tantum est necessitas non
delinquendi.

3. We then honor God, when we think our selves honored by the service of
God: So did the Apostle honor God, Honores alii municipaler, alii regii seu ab
Imperatore concessi, qui petiores in dignitate sunt. Tholoss. Symtag. juris. l.
18. c. 12. S. 12. Psalm. 84.10. Gratius est nomen pietatis quam pot estatis,
Tert. Apol. c. 34. (...). Epist. ad Romanos. S. 3.
Romans 15.20. 2 Cor. 5.9. (...), the word signifies, to labor with ambition; so
to look upon a duty as matter of Labor, as to esteem it also matter of
Honor. Thus we do in services that belong to the Kings of the earth, even
the meanest, to be Steward of the house, Master of the horse: or Groom of the
stool, we account great honor. And should we not esteem it much more so, in
the service that is done to God, cui servire, regnare est? To be a door keeper
in the house of the Lord, is a greater honor then to be a Prince in the Tents
of wickedness: to be the servant of Christ, is Paul's Title of Honor, which in
all his Epistles he holds forth, and to be the servant of God, is the honor of
the Saints, which is far greater then to be the Prince of the Air, or this God
of the World. Ignatius professes he had rather be a Martyr then a Monarch. The
Saints find their wages in their work, it is their meat and drink to do the
will of God, and to finish his work; nay, they prize their work above their
wages, their duties above their comforts, as one of the Martyrs said when he
was dying, that he was even sorry that he was now going to a place, where he
should for ever receive wages and never do any more work, his duty seemed
more to him then his glory. Indeed the highest honor of the creature is to be
used, and to be a vessel of honor fitted for the Masters use, and the
greatest reproach to a man that can be, is to be laid aside, as a vessel
wherein there is no pleasure.

4. A man then honors God, when he lays out himself in his service to the
uttermost, and yet acknowledges when he has done all, he is an unprofitable
servant, and whatsoever he has done is unworthy of God. Honor the Lord with
thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thy increase, Prove. 3.9.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, Eccles. 9.10.
Simplicissime videtur tota officiae Christi administratione, accipi. Glass.
Rhit. sacr. tract. 1. c. 12 Mundani Monarchae non gestant principatum super
humerossuos, sed re^iciunt onus gubernandi in humeros servoru^ consiliariorum
etc. Christus autem talis Rex est, quod principat^^ impositus sit, super ipsius
solius humeros etc. Brentius in loc.
So do the Angels the living creatures mentioned Ezech. 1.14. (expounded to be
the Cherubins, Ezech. 10.20.) they ran and returned in all their services as
the appearance of a flash of lightning. Thus does Christ himself lay out
himself to the utmost in the service of God and of the Church, Esaias 9.6. The
government is upon his shoulders; the Princes of the earth take the honor to
themselves, but the burden they cast upon others, withdraw the shoulder, and
will not put their necks to the work of the Lord, Neh. 3.5. But Christ does
not so, as he expects all the honor, so he takes upon him all the work and
lays out himself to the utmost therein, Esaias. 49.4. Christ's labor in the
Lords work is expressed by three words, which are very significant: The first
is (...) which signifies, His preparations amounted to three thousand, three
hundred thirty and three cartload of silver; allowing two thousand weight of
filver, or six thousand pounds sterling to every cartload; besides of our
money twenty three millious and a thousand pound, which was more then any King
in the world possessed besides himselfe^ and a matter, but for the testimony of
Scriptures exceeding all belief. Sir W. Rawley hist. of the world part. 1. l.
2. Cap. 1. S. 9. Ego homo tibi nihil boni dedi, nihil beneficii contuli,
quicquid feci aut laboravi tempore exinanitionit ^eae, sed quicquid sacis in
hominum utilitat^m and commodum cedit, sanctis in^^ declaro be^e^olentiam meam,
etc. Luther in Com. Drusii quest. and resp. l. 3. q. 72. Tarnor. ^n Psalm.
passionales. Moller. in loc.
cum anhelatione and defatigatione laborare, rendered by the Sept. (...) which
signifies, wearisome, wasting, and even fainting labor, Math. 11.28. The next
word is (...) it signifies humidum radicale (Ps. 22.16. my strength is dried up
like a potsheard, Psalm. 71.9.) a labor even to the wasting and drying up of a
man's natural strength and radical moister etc. And the other word (...)
signifies, not a small and a moderate wasting, but a total, a perfect and an
utter consuming; thus did the Lord Christ, (to us a pattern as well as a
principle of holiness) lay out himself in the service of God and his Church.

And that wherein the maine honor lies, is this, they are humbled for what
ever they do and acknowledge it to be a thing wholly unworthy of God: David did
prepare with all his might for the building of the Temple, and that even to the
wealth of a Kingdom, and yet he says of it, 1 Cron. 22.14. he had done this,
in or according to his poverty, as a thing every way unworthy of so glorious a
Majesty, and so great a work. Especially to be observed to this purpose is
that acknowledgement of Christ himself, Psalm. 16.2.3. Oh my soul thou have
said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord, my goodness extends not to thee, but
to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my
delight. This some learned Interpreters take to be the speech of Christ, as
that is, which follows in the Psalm, wherein speaking as Mediator, as the
Fathers servant, of all the great things that he both did and suffered in our
nature, he acknowledges that God is not profited by them they add no
perfection to him, it was merely his free will to appoint them, and merely his
free grace to accept them; the Saints they had indeed much benefit by them,
have redemption and adoption; but it was no advantage to God at all, added
nothing unto him, he could have gotten glory out of the destruction of the
creatures, if they had perished in their sins, as well as in their salvation by
a Savior; nothing of the happiness or glory of God had been diminished by
it, it was not for Gods need that Christ died and suffered, but for ours, and
therefore the Sept. renders the words, (...), Of my goodness thou have no
need. Thus Christ glorifies his Father upon earth, he lays out himself to the
utmost in service, and when he has done all, he acknowledges, he had not
profited God by any thing; my goodness extends unto thee.

5. A man honors God by ascribing all unto him, when he has labored in his
service with all his might. We are to attribute to God the work and the fruit
or success of the work. Though the service be great, yet not done of our
selves, 2 Cor. 3.2.5.
we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God: Ye are the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, we
had no other influence into the work, but as the pen, in the hand of Christ a
ready writer: I labored more abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15.10.
yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me: Who am I, and what is this
people that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For
all-things are of thee, and of thine own hand have we given thee. And as the
work so the success of it, Psalm. 11 5.1.
not unto us Oh Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory. Paul is
nothing, 1 Cor. 3.4 5. Esaias. 26.18. Hose. 14.^.
Apollo nothing, but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as God gave unto
every man. We have wrought no deliverance in the earth, neither have the
Inhabitants of the earth fallen, from him is our fruit found. Our happiness and
honor is to be Workers with God in the work; but our sin and snare is to be
sharers with God in the honor. Luther says, no man can truly say
sanctificetur nomen tuum, Quicquid ^^cquiritur, acquiritur Do^ino, mom solum
preprietas sed esiam possessio. Minsing. im instir. p. 3.
but he must also say, profanetur nomen meum. The Civil Law says of a
servant, that as he is not his own, nor in his own power, so all the fruits of
his labor is not to turn to his own, but his Masters advantage. Men employed
in the highest works upon earth, are but instruments and weapons in the Lords
hand; he bends Judah for him, Zach. 9.13. and 10.3.
and fills the bow with Ephraim, and makes them as his goodly horse in the
battle: And as to be used in service is a man's highest honor, so to take to
himself the glory, will be a man's shame and dishonor for ever.

6. Minor erat Caesar, si Deus cli^^retur; quia non were diceresur. Tertul.
Apol. c. 33. ^say. 49 4. 2 Cor 4.18.
A man honors God when he seeks the honor that comes from God only in all
his service, and from him alone expects his reward. Thus did Christ honor the
Father: Though Israel be not gathered, surely my judgment is with the Lord, and
my reward with my God. So do the Saints, while they look not at things that
are seen, but at things that are not seen, and make these their aim in
whatsoever they do. We know what rewards men use to give for services: (...).
If a man serve a King, and that in the highest kind, even in the preservation
of his life, as Mordecai did Ahasuerus, if the question be, Hester 6.3.
what honor and dignity has been done to him, for this? the same answer may
be returned, there is nothing done for him. It may be he may be rewarded as
Justinian the Emperor did his victorious General Bellizarius, who after all
his great services, paid him his arreares with putting out of his eyes, and
turning him to beg by the ways side, date obulum Bellizario. If he serve a
City, we see their pay also, Eccles. 9.15. There was a little City, and few
men within it, and there came a great King against it, and beseiged it, and
built great bulworkes against it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man,
and he by his wisdom delivered that City; yet no man remembered that same poor
man. But if a man serve a State, surely they give better pay. See it in Moses,
Number. 11.12.
as faithful a servant to the State of Israel as ever any people had: Who
carried them in his bosom, as a nursing father does a sucking child, for forty
years. Yet what murmurings at him? What jealousies of him? What parties made
against him upon every slight occasion? And if any cross accident fell out,
as a punishment of their own sin; yet by and by they must stone Moses, he had
undone them, and had a plot upon them in their deliverance out of Egypt, to
destroy them in the Wilderness.

I know men in all their services love something in hand, and cannot be easily
drawn to undertake any thing which does not carry its reward with it, and in
such things they are very forward. Hose. 3.1. Its noted of the people of
Israel, they loved Flagons of Wine. This is spoken of their Idolatrous worship,
which was done by feastings in the house of their Gods, Judge. 9.27. 1 Cor.
10.21. this service which they thought would bring them in a reward hereafter,
and yet suited with the present sensuality of their spirits here, this they
loved and much delighted in. Hosc. Propter voluptates colu^^ idola, magis de
victu quem de cultu solliciti. Tarn. Drusius in loc.
8.13. They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine offerings, and they eat
it. The sacrifices of God were of two sorts, expiatory or gratulatory, the one
in the burnt offering, and the other in the peace offering, and this last some
conceive to be here meant, the burnt offering was wholly to be consumed, Weemse.
vol. 3. cap. 13.
except the skin and the intrals; therefore nothing of this did remain to be
eaten. Populus volu^rit cutem suom cutare, and habere pingue convi^ium, cum
Dominus postularet offerri sibi ^o^otausta. Call.
But in the peace offering, only the fat was the Lords, the rest was divided
between the Priest and the Sacrificer, and to these sacrifices there was a
Feast adjoined of great joy and gladness. Deuteronomy. 16.15. 1 Samuel 20.6. Prove.
7.14. In these sacrifices they did seem much to delight; but in burnt
offerings in which God must have all, they took no such pleasure. But we then
honor God indeed when we shut our eyes against all honor and reward from
men, and can be content to plow in hope, knowing that light is sown for the
righteous, and they must from God expect the harvest. Thus we see the first
branch opened, how we may be said to honor God.

We now come to the second thing propounded in the opening of the point, which
is, how God does honor those, that honor him, which also is seen in these
six particulars.

1. God does honor men, by giving them honorable employments. The Angels have
an order among themselves, and some are conceived to be exalted above others in
honor; Zanth. de eperibus Dei, l 2. c. 14. These. 5.
but this is not a dignitate na turali, for so they are all equal, but a
diversitate of ficiorum, from the different employments that the Lord is
pleased to exercise them in. Even Christ himself, though he be the Churches
Lord; yet he is God the Fathers Servant, and his service is his honor; now he
is in heaven, for he wears his Priestly garments there, being clothed with a
garment down to the feet, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle, Rev.
1.13. Surely they that are most serviceable, are most honorable. Those
honorable titles carry in them great services, Psalm. 82.5. Psalm 47.9. Hose.
4.8. Esaias. 32.2. Sam 4.20. Job 34.17. Esaias. 19.13.
to be the foundations and the shield of the earth, the hiding places from the
wind, and refuge from the storm, the breath of our nostrils, the healers of
our breaches, the stay of our Tribes, and whatsoever may set forth a man
useful in Church or Commonwealth. That any of you, (right Honorable) should
be so far used and honored, as with Moses, to deliver an enslaved people, with
Joshah to fight the Lords battles, and to give them possession of the promised
Land, Esaias 14.12. and 34.4. Stellae de ceela cadentes de principum and summatum
ruina intelliguntur. Cauda potestatis comites and pedissequos significat. In
terram abjicer^ est, p^incipes and Dynastas imperio suo subjeicere. Mede in
Apoc.
which Elijah to restore the worship of God decayed, and with Zorobabel to cast
out the rubbish, and to build the Temple, these are the greatest and the most
honorable services that any men in the world can be employed in.

2 God honors men by keeping them unblemished, that they retain their
integrity, and do not warpe in the most trying times; whether the trials be by
prosperity or adversity. In the time of adversity, the Stars do often fall,
there is a Cauda Draconis, which sweepes down the third part of the Stars of
Heaven, and casts them unto the earth, Rev. 12.4. And all the world wonders
after the beast, and receive his mark in their forehead, a token of their
subjection, because they say who is able to make war with the beast? Rev. 13.4.
Then shall those that God will honor be preserved as a morning without a
cloud: And they shall stand with the Lamb upon Mount Zion, having his Fathers
name written in their foreheads. And of them it shall be said, these are they
who were not defiled with women, for they are Virgins, these are they, who
follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, these were redeemed from among men,
being the first fruits unto God, (...) etc. Naz^an. orat. 1.9.
and to the Lamb. Rev. 14.3. They shall not appear to be chafe in winnowing
times, though they be emptied from vessel to vessel, God does honor them by
not suffering their lees to arise: But they are resolute for God, and bear
witness to the truth, and do not carry themselves in a reserved middle way,
(which is the policy of the world) that they may preserve a favorable esteem
with both parties, though they be loved and trusted of neither.

And in trials also in the times of prosperity, which commonly prove the most
dangerous snares: Austin. deverb. Dom. ser. 13.
Magna est faelicitas, non a faelicitate vinci. Joseph is the same in Prison,
as a slave: in Potiphars house, as a servant, and in Pharaohs Court as a
Prince, the second in the Kingdom. A godly man is resembled to a Rock, Ezech.
3.9. Licet m^^tor frangit ^^versitaes mu^^o ^^^res ex^o^^r prosper^^as. Be^n.
de temp s^r. 52
in a storm the Rock shakes not, shrinkes not, and if the Sun shine, the Rock
melts not. Prove. 27 21. As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold:
So is a man to his praise: There is not a surer and more effectual trial in
the fining pot, to discover the dross of silver, and the furnace for gold,
then there is in praise, honor and advancement to discover the dross and
vanity that is in the spirits of men. And in that particle in the original
(...) there is an especial emphases, it signifies, Exodus 16.18. Leu. 27.16.
ad modum and mensuram; according to the proportion of the thing; so here it is
according to the measure and proportion of a man's praise: a small preferment
may draw out but a little, and a great honor will manifest a great deal of
dross to be in a man. And many a man observing which way the tide of honor,
preferment, and advantage runs, resolves to cast himself into that way,
Salvian. de guber. D^i. l. 4. p. 113.
and swim down the stream, how evil soever, and per hoc omnes quodammodo
coguntur esse male ne viles habeantur. Now those that God will honor he
carries upon Eagles wings in these trials, and they are with Noah kept upright
in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation.

3. God honors men by giving them an high esteem in the hearts of the
faithful: So God honored David, 2. Sam. 3.36.
what soever he did pleased all the people. Those that are precious in Gods
eyes, Esaias 43.3.
he will visit the heart of his people for them, and make them honorable in
their eyes also. And to have an interest in the hearts of the faithful is
more, then to have the favor of all the Princes of the earth. And therefore
Theodofius rejoiced more se membrum esse Ecclesiae quam in terris regnare.
Austin de civit Dei. l. 5. c. 26.
The special blessing upon every service that a man does next unto the
acceptance of God; is, that it may be accepted of the Saints, Romans 15.31.
that they shall say, our hearts are toward the Governors of Israel, Judge.
5.9.
that willingly offered themselves to the work of the Lord. It may be the
generality of the world is against them, and they look upon them as vile men,
and the of scouring of all things; but honor in the hearts of the excellent
ones of the earth, Cyp^ian Epist. 3.
is more then the honor of all the vile men of the world. Ne attendas numerum
illorum, melior est unus timens quam mill filii impii. See how highly this was
in esteem with the ancient Saints: Rom 1^.30. Act. 12.
if Paul go forth to preach, the people of God must strive with him in their
prayers: if Joshuah go forth to war, unless Moses hold up his hands upon the
hill, he can avail little by fighting in the valley; if Peter go to Prison,
the prayers of the Saints must release him; its a great matter to go forth
either in doing or suffering laden with prayers, Hose. 12.3.4. 1 Cor. 6.2.
for we know they have power with God, and that the Saints shall judge the
world. When therefore God will honor men indeed, as he does set his own eyes
upon them; so the eyes and hearts of Gods people shall be toward them.

4. God honors men when he does appear for them in the dishonours cast upon
them: So God honored Moses, Numb. 12.8. Though it be Aron and Miriam; yet he
will not suffer them to pass unpunished, if they dare speak against his
servant Moses. Men may fasten reproaches upon the Saints, cast out their names
as evil, but their light shall break forth in obscurity, and he that will one
day wipe all tears from their eyes, will also wipe away all blots from their
names. Therefore whereas other men in slanders commonly justify themselves
with boisterousnesse and clamor, he conscious of his own uprightness, and
sweetly enjoying inward peace, only says, My witness is in heaven, and my
record is on high, Job. 14.19. and 58.
and unto him, I will wholly commit my cause. And surely the less they appear
to justify themselves, the more gloriously will the Lord delight to show
himself, to plead the causes of their souls. The testimony given to Moses by
God himself upon this occasion, was, that the man Moses was the meekest man
that was upon the face of the earth: And had he not been thus meek in his own
cause, we may question whether God would have so suddenly spoken for Moses
his justification: When Gods people leave their cause with him; he that has
said he will be a swift witness against his enemies, will also be as swift a
witness for his people.

5. After this life God does honor them with a sweet and a precious name,
which shall be as an olutment poured out, and their memory shall be blessed
among the posterities to come: So God honored Moses after his death, by giving
a testimony to his syncerity, Moses my servant is dead. So God honored Elish
1, Josh. 1.2.
that at his death the King wept over him, and said, my father, my father, 2.
Kin. 13.14. 2. Chro. 32.33.
the Chariot of Israel and the horse men thereof. So Hezekiah, all Judah did
him honor at his death. And Jehojada God honored in his Funeral; 2. Chro.
24.16.
they buried him in the City of David among the Kings, because he had done good
in Israel both toward God, and toward his house: And God honored Josiah by a
public mourning after his death, all Judah and Iersualem mourned for Josiah,
and Jeremiah lamented, and all the singing men, 2. Chro. 35.25.
and the singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and
they made it an ordinance in Israel: This at last grew into a Proverb among
them, Hie planger publicus fuit, and progressu temporis in Proverbium abiit.
Drus. in loc. Brisson. de regn. Persar. l. 1. p. 36.
for a great lamentation, which I conceive to be meant by that expression,
Zach. 12.11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo. Thus did the Persians honor
their Princes at their birth, publica laetitia and anniversariis sacris, with a
general rejoicing, so their death, luctu publico, with a public and
universal mourning. Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labor,
and their works follow them, and as they have been in this life, pedessequi
fidei, so after this life they shall be pedessequi gloriae.

6. God does honor men in their posterity, and therefore children are called
the parents glory. Hose. 9.11. (...) Ps. 72.17.
His name shall endure for ever, the word is rendered by Montan: Filiabitur
nomen ejus, his name shall be continued in his posterity, by a lineall descent,
as long as the Sun and the Moon endures; Esaias. 38.
and they that come of them shall be called the repairers of the breach, and
restorers of Cities to dwell in. Whereas many a man is but exhaled as a Meteour
for a time, and he falls down again and none of his posterity remain, but his
lamp is put out in obscure darkness, Nah. 1.14.
and no more of the name shall be sown. His arm shall be cut off, and none of
his house shall remain; but to consume his eyes, and to grieve his heart, and
to be the reproach of their fathers house for ever.

We come now unto the second part of the Text, they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed; which does afford us this point.

They that dishonor and despise God, become vile, and be lightly esteemed.

The word which we render despise, is (...), Aliquid ex fastu spernere. Av^nar.

Tanquam turp^ and indecorum contemnere. Schindl.


which is sometimes referred to the person, and sometimes to the thing, and
signifies vileness or meanness, in the esteem of the one, and pride and
contempt in the other.

This word is used, 1 Samuel 10.27. some men of Belial, looking upon the meanness
of Saul his condition, though God had made him King over Israel, yet they said
how can this man save us, and they despised him in their hearts as a man
unworthy of such an honor? It signifies all sorts of contempt cast upon one,
(...). Conrad. Kicher. in (...) and (...).
either in a man's heart or his ways, and is therefore rendered by the Sept. in
different words which may fully express the pride of the person, and his low
and undervaluing apprehensions of the thing. Thus do wicked men contemn God.
And their reward shall be to become vile, and of no esteem. The word (...)
signifies alleviari vel pondere vel honor: to make a thing light, either in
weight of estimation, and is sometimes translated (...), to be nothing,
sometimes it is opposed unto (...), and is rendered by (...), which signifies
to curse and to speak of a thing with execration and detestation: But in this
place the Sept. renders it (...), which is to dishonor or disgrace a man, all
may fitly be taken in, he that has no esteem of Gods honor, shall himself
(whatsoever his place and parts be, and whatever ornaments and excellencies he
has to set him off before men) be dishonored, accounted a man of no worth;
here his name shall be cast out as evil, and be separated with a curse, and
unto detestation before all men.

Here we have two things to consider. 1. How men do dishonor God. 2. How God
dishonours them.

Men dishonor God in an especial manner these five ways.

1. When they slight the offers of Christ which God makes to them, and thus men
that live in the Church, profess to receive the Gospel, and be called by the
name of Christ, Mar. 9.12. Act. 4.11. (...) Math. 22.5. 2. Cor. 6.1.
do despise him, and set him at naught, yea even the builders, those of
highest place, and seeming eminency in the Church. Men being invited to the
wedding, they make light of it and will not come, every small occasion shall be
a diversion: The Gospel of grace is offered to them, and they receive the grace
of God in vain; they know that they are without Christ, and know upon what
terms God offers ( sc. a consent to the Covenant, the answer of a good
conscience, Esaias. 1.29. 1. Pet. 3.21. 2 Cron. 30.8. 2. Cor. 8.5. Cant. 2.16.
and 6.3.
the giving of a man's self unto the Lord, that he may say I am my beloved, and
my beloved is mine) and yet with the young man in the Gospel, they go away from
Christ, and resolve not to come up to the terms of Gods offer, but out of the
profaneness of their hearts, prefer other things to Christ, and with Esau
despise their birthright. This is the highest way of dishonouring of God: To
honor God in his Law (which was the way of the first Covenant) is very
acceptable to him; but to honor God in his Son, is much more, (which is the
way of the Gospel) and therefore faith brings more glory to God then works can
do to eternity, because it honors God in an higher way. Now if this be the
highest way of honoring God, then the contrary must needs be the greatest
dishonor that a man can cast upon him.

And this is the highest way of sinning against knowledge. Sins against
knowledge are of two sorts. 1. In a particular act, when a man knows a thing
to be evil, and his knowledge does rise against it, and yet he is transported
and commits it. 2. In a man's estate, when a man knows that he comes not up
unto Gods terms, upon which he offers Christ, and that the offers of Christ
will not last always, that God makes a quick dispatch with many men in the
days of the Gospel; that the day of restraining grace may last, when the day
of converting grace is past, and yet puts off Christ from day to day, and is
content to be without him: This is the highest degree of sinning against
knowledge, and therefore the highest way of dishonouring of God, next to the
sin against the holy Ghost. Potest hom^ invitus amittere bona temp^ralia,
nunquam vero nisi volen^ perdit aeterna. Prosper. p. 441.
There is this difference between temporal and spiritual blessings, no man
willingly partswith the one, and no man but he that is willing shall lose the
other. I would have gathered you but ye would not. Math. 23.37.

2. When they live without God, and are content so to do. This is the
condition of every man by nature, Ephesians 2.12.
Ephesians. 2.12. and this is the complaint of God, concerning those that professed
themselves to be his people, and made their boast of God, Jer. 2.32.
that they forgot him days without number. When men can live without the
knowledge of God, without communion with him, without interest in him; take no
care to please him, and the comforts of their lives come not in by him: This is
to dishonor God in an high degree, and as much as if men did say, we are
Lords, we will come no more at thee. A gracious heart can take contentment in
nothing without God, in the midst of all his enjoyments, J^r. 2.31.
he says my soul is a thirst for God: Whom have I in heaven but thee, and
there is none upon earth that I desire in comparison of thee? He discernes his
presence, Cant. 5.6. Psalm. 28.1.
he is affected with his absence, if he withdraw himself, his heart fails,
and if he hide his face, and be silent to him, he is like unto one that goes
down to the pit. His care is to please him, and to approove himself unto him
in all things. The hearts of men commonly are carried after self pleasing,
Romans 15 3. 1. These. ^.15. Gal. 1 10. 2 Cor. 5 9. Col. 1.10.
(so it is with many a proud and sullen spirit, self-conceit, and self-will,
will carry a man to selfe-pleasing, though he displease all the world beside)
and men pleasing: but grace carries a man's heart to desire to please God in all
things, and to walk before him unto all well-pleasing.

3. When men fear not his wrath, tremble not at his presence, have no dread of
his great and terrible name, slight his threatenings, and disregard his
alseeing eye, then men are said to despise God, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Psalm. 10.13. When they do wickedly, and say in their hearts, I shall have
peace though I walk after the imaginations of mine own heart, surely God will
not require it; when they say, Jer. 5.13. Zach. 1.6.
the words of the Prophets are but wind, and the word of the Lord is not in
them: (though when they fly, the threatening will certainly overtake the^.) When
men fly to the creatures to uphold them against the wrath of God; Dan. 11.38.
Jer. 2.18. Hose. 5.13. ^say. 30.12.
honor Mahuzim or the God of forces, drink the waters of the river, trust in
oppression, and lean upon it, to be protected against the displeasure of God:
Send to King Jareb to be healed of wounds from God: And with Saul to comfort
himself in any creature-respect in the consideration of the loss of Gods
everlasting love, it is a despising of God in an high degree. (...). Plutarch
de regno. Interitum paratum illi civitati video, in qua non lex Magistratibus;
sed legi Magistratus presunt. Tholos. de repub. l. 7. e. 20. Ps. 119.126. Math.
15.6, (...).


4. When men set up their wisdoms or wills against the Law of God, and the
Ordinances of God. The highest power of a Prince is legislative, and he rules
only in his Law; and the highest contempt of him is to despise him in this his
highest power. Yet thus men despise God daily: Sometimes they exalt their
wisdom against it, by the oppositions of science falsely so called, by the
curiosities, contradictions, or the superinducements of fleshly imaginations
upon truths of God, and by this means they enervate, unlord and make void the
Law of God. And sometimes men set up their wills against the Law, cast it
behind their backs, withdraw the shoulder, resolve not to be subject: But what
thou speak to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: but
we will certainly do whatsoever goes out of our own mouth, etc. Jer.
44.16.17.

5. When men set light by the things which tend unto Gods dishonor, and do
not testify their zeal against them as becomes the Majesty of God: So did Ely
here despise God in that he did not show that zeal against his Sons in the
cause of God, Jo. 2 17. Authoritat Iohannis allegantis hunc locum de Christo
major est quam ut ullis verbis nos ind^ abduti patiamur. Tarnov. in loc.
as he ought to have done, and is therefore charged to honor his sons more
then God. Christ was zealous in all things that tended to Gods dishonor, Psalm.
69.9. thereproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me: The
wrongs done to God did affect him, as if they had been injuries against
himself; yea they drowned and swallowed up all personal wrongs whatsoever,
and he that is in his own wrong dumb as a Lamb before the sheerer, he is
transported exceedingly in the cause of God, with how much zeal did he assert
the truth of God against the false Doctrines of the Pharisees, In parts
divisere variarum homines ^eale cariosi; arque uno ex en are infiniti, diversi
omnes and contrariinaci funt. Cunaeus l. 2. c. 17. Math. 16.23. Jo. 2.4. Jo.
2.15.
Sadduces, and Herodians, the Heretics of those times? How sharply did he
reproove sin, not only in the Pharisees, a generation of vipers; but also in a
Disciple, get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me? And in his
mother, woman what have I to do with thee? How much zeal did he manifest for
the worship of God, in purging the Temple, and whipping out the buyers and
sellers, who turned the house of prayer, into a den of thieves? And so
fullfilled that Prophecy of him, the zeal of thy house has eaten me up, it
swallowed up all other affections in him, as if he had been transformed into
burning zeal. So it was with the Saints of old, they did contend earnestly for
the faith once given to the Churches, they could not bear them that were
evil, under what show or pretense soever, though they said they were Jews,
yet were found upon trial to be of the Synagogue of Satan. The rule given, 2
Jo. 10. is much to be considered in these days, If any man come unto you, and
bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, nor bid him God
speed, for he that bids him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds. He
speaks it of those Deceivers and false Teachers, which were then entered into
the world, and he says not only that they should not favor them, and plead
for them; but also that they should neither out of love to the error, or an
affectation of novelty, countenance, entertain them, or converse with them:
But in testimony of their zeal for God, (...). l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. Hist. l. 4.
c. 14.
and their constancy in the truth, reject them, avoid them, that they be not
encouraged in their sin, nor they partakers thereof as abettors of their evil
deeds. Irenaeus has a story of Polycarpus, how when Marcion the Heretic came
to see him, and desired him, to know him, he answered him, I know thee to be
the first begotten of the Devil: So zealous and fervent in spirit were the
Apostles, and their Disciples against those that corrupted the truth or worship
of God. This would be accounted bitterness of spirit in our days; that
ancient zeal for God, being in a great measure cooled amongst us, and many men
who pretend great zeal, who (as its said of the Carbuncle, Rueus de G^mmis.
translucet ad modum ardentis prunae) if ye look upon them a far off, ye
would think them to be all fire; yet if ye touch them, will be found key
cold. Spiritus diffunditur, profunditur contemptus. Ps. 107.40. Jer. 22.28.
Quia suis adorabatur quasi Idolum; jam in captivitate, vilis, abj^ctus, and
contritus est. Notent principe^ nisi opes, gloriam fundent in timore Dei, non
fore ea stabilia^, sed se cum iis, quasi vilia and inutilia vasa abjiciend^s
esse. A L^p.


The second branch for explication, is, how God dishonours men. And this he can
do upon the greatest. Kings are the fountain of honor upon earth, and by
them it is dispensed; but yet he poures contempt upon Princes: It notes
abundance the highest measure of dishonor: They that convey honor unto
others, cannot preserve their own honor. And this the Lord does ordinarily,
these five ways.

1. He will not use them in high and honorable employments, cast them out as
an abominable or unfruitful branch. Conia is a despised broken Idol, a vessel
wherein there is no pleasure. It is spoken of Jechoniah the King of Judah; the
first disgrace that the Lord puts upon him, is by taking away the first letter
of his name, per contemptum, as Abraham had a letter added to his name, as a
special honor; so from this Prince a letter is detracted as an especial
reproach. And he is called an Idol, but despised and broken: he was formerly
honored and adored by his Subjects as an Idol; but as his honor before was
above a man; so God would pour upon him the greatest contempt, sc. of an Idol
which has been worshipped as a God, and is now discovered not to be so: It is
of all things else most unprofitable and most abominable. Hose. 8.8 Luther.
Tarnor. Est perip^^r a^sis matu^^; esse in sum conte^ tu signifi. at. Drus.
Zanch. ^ar.
And he shall be as a vessel, in which there is no pleasure; (...) so the
Sept. cujus nullus est usus, so the Chalde Paraph. Its taken ab ollis rimosis,
say some, that because they are riven and unfit for service, are cast away, as
good for nothing: But others raise the sense higher, and say it is a modest
expression, not only of a thing unusefull, but a thing filthy and vile, as a
vessel for the most unclean uses; thus God poures the highest contempt upon
persons that he has raised to the highest honor. Yea he does sometimes raise
men up for a particular service (as he did Jehu to destroy the house of Ahab,
and the house of Baal) and lay them aside afterward for ever, as a vessel in
which there is no pleasure, never to employ them in any honorable service more.

2. God will give men up unto base and dishonorable lusts; all sins are
abominable before God, and damnable in themselves; but yet all are not alike
dishonorable before men: Romans 1.26.
There are some (...) vile affections, which make men hateful amongst all men.
By restraining grace lusts may be kept in a long time, and men may have Neronis
quinquennium, and yet afterward prove humani generis opprobrium, the shame of
mankind, as he did. Men may stand for stars a great while, looked on as lights,
and admired by all, yet afterward be swept down by the Dragons tail, and
appear to be but Meteors; the matter being spent by which they were fed, they
fall down to the earth, and appear no more. Paraphrest. Chald. Muis. Moller.
Psalm. 55.13.
Achitophel was faithful to David, it seems in his former time, of whom it is
conceived by some, that he speaks when he calls him, his guide and his familiar
friend, with whom he took sweet counsel, and yet he was afterward given over
to dishonor himself, and his hand was found to be with Absalon in that
unnatural rebellion. And Abiathar was faithful to David against Saul (being
it may be engaged by a particular displeasure; the cruel murder of his Fathers
house, by the hand of Doeg at Saul's command) and yet he afterward prooved false
to Solomon in the conspiracy of Adonijah. There is unto every false heart a
(...). Luc. 8.13.
an opportunity of temptation, and then he falls at the stumbling block of his
iniquity.

3. God will cast them out of the hearts, and out of the prayers of his people.
Its threatened against the Idol Shepherd, Zach. 11.17. Brachium pro potentia
and forti auxilia accipitur. Glass. Rhetor. sacr. p. 343.
(the title belongs both to Magistrates and Ministers; though the scope here
carries it rather to the former) his arm withering shall wither, and his right
eye shall be put out. By the arm is meant that ruling power and authority that
he as a Governor had among the people; and all that strength and assistance in
government that he received thereby; and this shall utterly decay, his ruling
power in the hearts of the people shall utterly perish, and they that did
formerly cleave to him, shall fall from him; and his wisdom also shall
perish, and he shall be given up to foolish and hurtful lusts, unto his own
destruction, and the scourge of the Nation. So the ten Kings that were as it
were the right hand unto the beast, Reu. 17.16.17.
giving their power and their Kingdoms to him, for his advancement, this arm
of his shall wither, they shall withdraw themselves, hate the whore, make her
desolate, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. So Jo. 15.6. If a man
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and is withered. There are
several ejections here intended (as Interpreters observe) but these two are
the chief. Separatio ab interiori cum Christo and Ecclesia communione ordine
naturae precedit separationem ab exteriori cum E^ clesia communione. Gerhard.
Har^.
1. Ab interiori sanctorum communione per seperationem spiritualem. 2 Ab
exteriori communione per publicam Apostasian. A separation in the hearts of
Gods people, by a secret and spiritual alienation; and then an outward
separation by manifest Apostasy; an inward excommunication commonly goes before
an outward: Men are first cast out of the hearts and prayers of the Saints: God
takes off the edge of their spirits from them in a secret way, and then there
is nothing that they do is accepted of the Saints, but a spirit of jealousy
and suspicion attends them, and nothing is well taken or well interpreted of
them.

4. After this life their names shall rot, they shall go out in a snuff, and
their memory shall not be blessed. They shall have a note of infamy mentioned
with them, and how ever they have carried it fair here, yet shall be known to
be as they are. This is Jeroboam the Son of Nebat that made Israel to sin. This
is that Ahaz who sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord.
This is Judas Iscariot who also was the traitor. Here fear or flattery may
keep men's names from stinking publicly for a while: But after this life, when
these shall be remooved, a note of disgrace and public infamy shall be spread
upon their names for ever.

5. God will dishonor them in their seed, and cast them out as evil, that
they shall be to the shame of their Fathers house. This was the judgment
threatened upon Elyes family: The man of thine house that shall not be cut off
from mine Altar shall be to consume thine eyes, and to greive thine heart: And
every one that is left in thine house shall come and crouch for a piece of
silver, and a morsel of bread; and shall say, put me into one of the Priests
Offices, that I may eat a piece of bread. For the Lord has said, the seed of
evil doers shall not be renowned, Esaias. 14.20.

Having thus finished the explication of the Text; only the Application
remains, which I shall cast into one use of exhortation, to you Right
Honorable, whom God has exalted in this Nation.

If ye desire to be truly honorable, let Gods honor be precious in your
eyes: If you fear a blot in your name, a stain in your coat, do not set
light by the things of God, Esaias. 5.13. (...) Gloria^^ Mont. Qui vult ess^ sibi
and non ti^^ nihil esse intipit inter omnia, Ber.
for they that despise him shall be lightly esteemed. The Nobility is the glory
of a Nation, we desire that no shame may be be cast upon our glory, that our
silver become not dross, nor our wine be mixed with water. Herein true honor
and greatness lies, when the things of God are great in our esteem, and Gods
honor is exalted by us, and when a man falls from this he begins to be nothing,
though he be the greatest Monarch of the earth.

To enforce this exhortation, I shall only add these considerations, and
conclude.

1. A man may have the highest honor upon earth, yet he may be before God, and
all the Saints a vile person: (...) despectu^.
So is Antiochus, though a Prince, called Dan. 11.21. Its an especial
manifestation of the sovereignty of God, that he rules in the Kingdoms of
mortal men and gives them to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.17.
and sets over them the basest of men. If a man exalt not God, he has nothing
in him that is honorable, and all the honor that he has is but vain glory,
Act. 25.23. (...) Eccles. 10.6.7.
a fancy, and no more. It was one of the vanities that Solomon saw under the
Sun: Folly is set in great dignity, and servants are on horseback, when
Princes walk as servants on the earth. Men of servile spirits, and servile
lusts are advanced, and men of Princely spirits remain in low place: This
outward honor will never set a man up with God, and his Saints; they only that
are precious in his sight, may be called honorable. And this is a sure rule,
Tantus quisque est, quantus est apud Deum, all true honor is that which comes
from God only.

2. A man may be honorable in this life, and miserable in the life to come.
Prove. 21.16. A man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain
in the congregation of the dead. (...) Medes Diatrib. In Pro. 21.16. of the
ancient name of Hell. p. 136.
The word is rendered by a learned Critic of our own, in Catu Gigantum,
referring us unto, Genesis 6.4. where those ancient Rebels against God are
mentioned, whose wickedness was so great upon the earth, that the Lord
repented that he had made man, and to take vengeance upon them, he brought the
flood upon the world of the ungodly; they perishing in their wickedness, and
going down to the place of the damned; Hell received it ancient denomination
from these ancient Inhabitants, and it is called the place of the Giants, and
all that ever perish since are to go down to them to the same place: Now
these were in the earth, men of renown, men of honor, and of name; and yet
they are gone unto that place of torment. And of all men in the world, none
will perish with so much scorn and derision as they. As mean men may creep
out of the world to their graves with less noise; so they go to hell with
less observation. Esaias. 14 9. When the King of Babylon dies, Hell from beneath
is moved for thee, to met thee at thy coming; it stirs up the dead (or the
Giants) for thee even all the chief ones of the earth. (...)
And they all say unto him with scorn and derision, How art thou fallen from
Heaven, Oh great Lucifer Son of the morning? etc.

3. Lay these conclusions firmly in your spirits. 1. By strength shall no man
prevail. 1 Samuel 2.9. The word (...) which we translate strength, Prove. 5.10.
Hose. 7.9. Adsumenta omnia and adminicula, quibus pollere fibi videtur Call.
signifies not only strength and vigor of body, but also of mind, in wisdom,
learning, policy, or outwardly in honor or estate, and the Lord has laid
down this for a Decree, let a man be never so great in all these, yet he shall
not be strong or prevail in any of his enterprises by them. For God has no
pleasure in the legs of a man, Psalm. 147.10. where by legs is meant any thing
in which a man is strong, Qu^ suis viribus nittunur. Mins.
and that wherein he may put his trust, whether strength of body or abilities
of mind, riches or honors or any outward excellency whatsoever, God has no
pleasure in them, nor in the man because of them.

2 By iniquity shall no man be established. Prove. 12.3. A man may exalt
himself, and mount up unto the highest step of all worldly honor and
greatness by ways of bribery and blood; he may build his house by
unrighteousness, Jer. 22.13.14. Metaphora ducta est ab arb^ribus, quae alte
and profunde in terram demersae non facite moventur. Car t^.
and his chambers by wrongs, enclose himself in Cedar, painted with vermilion,
and think his posterity shall endure for ever, and call the Land after his
own name; but they shall not be established, that is, as the opposition
shows, not take root as the righteous do, their root shall be rottenness;
a worm and a curse is at the root: God brings Princes to nothing, Esaias.
40.24.
he makes the Judges of the earth as vanity, they shall not be planted, yea
they shall not be sown; yea their stock shall not take root in the earth. As
the pleasure of sin is but for a season; so the profit of it is not lasting: A
lying tongue is but for a moment. Prove. 12.19.

3. Those that walk in pride he is able to abase, Dan. 4.37. he delights to
do it. And we have cause to fear, that the Lord of Hosts has purposed to
stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honor able
of the earth, Esaias. 23.8.

4. No man knows how soon ye may lay down your honor. All things here
below are compared unto wheels Ezech. 1.16. in perpetuo motu, full of turnings
and changes. The story of Sesostris the King of Egypt related by Polanus upon
this place is famous, who rode in a triumphant chariot drawn by four captive
Kings; of whom one was observed always to look back upon the wheel that
followed him, and being asked the reason why he looked behind him? He answered
to observe, quam cito summa fiunt ima; how soon that which is highest becomes
the lowest: A meditation which would be as fit a corrective to men in great
places. We have lived to see great changes; Zach. 4 7. Esaias. 30.25. Hose.
10.7. Esaias. 5.9.
Mountains made Plains, Towers fall, Princes cut off as the foame upon the
waters, many houses made desolate, even great and fair without an Inhabitant.
2. Kings 27.26.27. Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of
his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all
the provocations that Manasseth had provoked him withal. Zeph. 1.2.3. Scimus
tunc purgetam suisse terram superstitionibus etc. Sed notandum est, etiamsi ex
animo Josias Deum coleret tamen populum non fu^sse conversum, quemadmodum saepe
comigit, ut Deus excitet optimos, antesignanos, sed pauci aut fere nulli eos
sequantur, quin potius omnes detrectent obsequium. Call.
And the Lord said I will remoove Judah also out of my sight as I have remooved
Israel. And I will cut off this City Jerusalem, which I have chosen, and the
house of which I said my name shall be there.

If we look into the Prophecy of Zephany (the Title of which refers us unto
the days of Josiah) and compare it with this Scripture forementioned, we
shall see several causes why notwithstanding the reformation, the Lord turned
not from the fierceness of his wrath against Judah; but says I will utterly
consume all things from off the Land. I will consume man and beast: I will
consume the fowls of heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumbling
blocks with the wicked; I will cut off man from off the land, says the Lord.
Here is the greatest desolation threatened after the greatest reformation. 1. It
was compulsory, and not voluntary; though the Kings heart was right with God,
and some happily of them that acted under him, yet it was forced upon the
generallity of the people, who hated it, and did in heart cleave to their old
way of Idolatry still, a remnant of Baal there was among them, and Chemarims
also, them that worshipped the host of heaven, that swear by the Lord, and by
Malcham etc. The reformation was such, that openly no remnants of Baal did
remain, Reliquiae (...) non conspici^bantur in Temple, neque in sacellis, sed
cl^^^^estina impietas bic detegitur. Videntur by 70 ^uisse Senatores Concili^
Sanbedrim. etc. A. L^p. in Ezech.
but the Lord saw them to be in the hearts of the people, they were still
carried after that way of worship: And not the ordinary sort of people only,
but many of the Ancients (or Senators and Princes) of the house of Israel, and
this not openly, but in the dark, in the setret chambers of their imagery,
Ezech. 8.11.12. for this cause the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his
wrath against Judah.

2. Their reformation was but outward and Ecclesiastical not person all, of
the Church in some outward things, not of the State or the men. Their Princes
were roaring Lions, Zeph. 1.8. and 3, 3.4.
and the Judges evening Wolves: Their Prophets light and treacherous persons,
that polluted the Sanctuary, and did violence to the Law. The Princes, the
Kings children, were clothed in strange apparel: And the servants did leap
upon the threshold, filling their Masters house with violence and deceit.

3. Their were old sins that kept the wrath of God on fire against the^, which
though now reformed, yet never publicly repented of: the sins of Manassch;
sins of Rulers may be pardoned to the men, and yet visited upon the Land, and
these old sins past, long ago. For these causes the Lord turned not from the
fierceness of his anger against Judah, and all their reformation was but a
lightning before their utter destruction. And when we find the same things
among us; An outward reformation by the strength of Authority carried on, but
hated by the people generally, and their hearts turning back into Egypt: and
to this add the fearful and Manassch-like old abominations, that yet remain
upon our score, and we have cause to fear that God for all our reformation,
(which we bless him for, and acknowledge for the time to be very great) has
a Notwithstanding for England, as he had for Judah.

Which is the more to be considered, if we observe in what juncture of time
we live. We read Rev. 11.3. of witnesses, sc. those that have given
testimony for Christ against Antichrist ever since that great Apostasy. Called
two, partly for their paucity, and partly in allusion unto the Prophecy, Zach.
4.11. from whence the expression is taken; these are the two olive trees, the
two anointed ones standing before the God of the earth. And yet they are two
for the sufficiency of their testimony: for by the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall be established. And these are to Prophecy (in their
several times and ages successively) in sackcloath a thousand two hundred and
threescore days: Which is the same proportion of time that the outward Court
(...) given to the Gentiles ( sc. these Christians in profession, but Gentiles
in religion) to be trodden under foots, ver. 2. and therefore they are made
Contemporaryes: For as soon as Antichrist arose, persecution began, and so
much of Antichrist as remains among any people, so much persecution there will
sutely be; for the woman rides upon a scarlet colored beast. And after this
long and afflicted condition shall be the saddest persecution of the Church,
and the highest hopes, and the greatest expectations of the enemy that ever
they had: And then cum duplicantur lateres, veniet Moses, then shall the great
deliverance be.

And there are four Reasons which cause me to conceive, (yet withal humility
and submission) that this time of killing the witnesses is yet to come.

1. They must Prophecy in sackcloath a thousand two hundred and threscore
days before they be slain, and I cannot yet be satisfied that this time of
their Prophecy is accomplished, and therefore their killing is yet to come.
The Rule that we have to guide us herein, is, that Antichrists forty and two
months do synchronize with this time of the Prophecy of the witnesses, and
therefore when Antichrist began to reign, they began to prophecy. Now the
Apostle Paul, 2. These. 2.7.8. speaking of the rising of Antichrist, says, he
that now lets will let till he be taken out of the way, and then shall that
wicked be revealed.

This (...) is commonly expounded by Ancient and Modern Divines to be the
Roman Empire, Irenaeus.
and as soon as that Imperial Sovereignty of Rome was taken out of the way;
Tertul^de res^r. tarn. c. 24.
then that wicked one was revealed. Ambros^n 2. These. 2.
This also is confessed by the Papists themselves, that he that lets, is the
Roman Empire, therefore together with his taking out of the way, then did
Antichrist rise, Chrysostom.
and that lawless person, (...) (as Justin Martyr calls him) was revealed and
did appear to the world, Whitaker, de Antichrist.
which is fully explaned, Rev. 17.12. Downham of Antichrist. l. 1. c. 3.
Bellarm. de Romans Pont. capt. 13. A Lap. in loc.
The ten horns are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet; but
receive power as Kings one hour with the beast. At the same time when the
Empire was broken, and those that were only Viceroyes under it, did begin to
take to themselves the Power and the Title of Kings, and to reign absolutely
and independently upon the Empire: Now did the beast receive his power, now he
that let was taken out of the way, and now the wicked one was revealed. If
therefore we can learn when the Empire was divided, and the ten Kings arose,
Mede in Apot. c. 8 p. 78.
from that time we are to begin the forty and two months. There were indeed
several degrees of the Empyres downfall: Attalus a Gothis Imperator effectus
est. Paul. Viacon. c. 14.
Some refer it to the time when Alaricus the Goth first took Rome, and sacked
it, and they created a new Emperor therein, which was about the year 410. or
as some 412. This indeed made way for the coming of Antichrist, and therefore
Jerome hearing of this taking of Rome, Praefat. l. 1 commentan Ezech. Ita
Romanorum apud Romam Imperium toto terrarum orb venerabile and Augustalis illa
sublimitas, quae ab Augusto quondam Octaviano erecta est, cum hoc Augustulo
periit. Paul. Diacon. l. 16.
did presently expect that Antichrist should arise. Postqua^ clarissimu^
terrarum omnium lumen extinctum est, imo Romani Imperij truncatum caput, and in
una urbe totus orbis interiit. But this never came to perfection to take him
that let out of the way till Gensericus the Vandall took Rome the second
time and plundered it utterly, and then fired it, this was about the year 455.
and then the ten Kings arose. If we add thereunto a thousand two hundred and
60 days, it will appear that the time of the prophesying of the witnesses, in
sackcloth is not yet expired, and therefore the time of their killing yet to
come.

2. When the witnesses are slain, Antichrists party ly shall come to a great
height of security, Cessante jain Romana Vrius Imperio etc. l. 17.
and they shall glory in their death, rejoice over them, make merry, and send
gifts one to another, becauve these two Prophets tormented them that dwell on
the earth, Rev. 11.10. Consitetur se Apostatam esse sed beatum and sanctum, qui
fidem Diabolo dutam non servav^t. Luth.
But since the Angel did fly in the midst of heaven with the everlasting
Gospel in his hand, since that glorious departure, and blessed Apostasy (as he
himself calls it) that Luther made from the Church of Rome, we read of no
such perfect victory that ever they had over the reformed Christians, that they
thought all safe, and therefore did send gifts one to another as perfectly
secure.

3. When the witnesses shall arise from the dead, then the tenth part of the
City shall fall: Which cannot be meant as some have thought, of the fall of the
power of Antichrist in some one of the ten Kingdoms: But is spoken of Romes
last and utter destruction speedily to follow, called (...) the tenth part,
Mede. Clav. Apoc. in cap. 11. v. 13.
because that which now remains, is but decima pars Civitatis antiquae, the
tenth part of what the ancient City was. For the fall of Antichrist ends with
the sixth Trumpet, Mede. Syncro^. p. 18.
or the second woe: And as soon as the tenth part of the City is fallen, it is
said the second we is past: Rev. 11.14.
And immediately the seventh Trumpet sounded, and then all the enemies being
subdued, the Kingdoms of the world become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his
Christ's, Rev. 10.7.
and then the mystery of God is finished. Now because we see not the City to
fall; but yet expect by faith, Babylon to be cast as a Millstone into the sea;
therefore the slaying of the witnesses, with their resurrection is not past,
but to come.

4. If we look to the Text, it is then to be expected or feared, when the
Church of God does flourish most, and has gotten the greatest victory over the
Antichristian party that ever; that as the destruction of the one is nearest
when they are most secure; so is the slaying of the other when they have the
greatest expectations of a full deliverance. Therefore (...) when they had
finished, is not to be rendered cum finierint, but cum finituri sint, Mede.
Clav. p. 136.
when they were about to finish their testimony: sc. when they had got great
ground against Antichrist, and men began to repent of their drinking of the
wine of her fornication, and to hate the whore: And the Temple of God was
purged, and a great Reformation was begun; now had the witnesses peace and
enlargement in some measure, and they began gratulabundi saccum exuere, to cast
off their sackcloth, and expect on the enemy an utter ruin; thinking he had
received a deadly wound that could never more be healed. Yet at this time shall
Antichrist gather all his scattered and broken forces, and shall with greater
fury make war upon the Saints and overcome them, and kill them, exercise
greater cruelty over them then ever, he did in times past; but it shall be
short, though it be sharp.

I could be glad to tell you that this sad calamity is past, that our iniquity
is pardoned, and our warfare accomplished, for Lord thou know I have not
desired the woeful day. But these considerations make me to conclude with that
learned Interpreter so often quoted, cladem istam novissimam adhuc metuendam,
that we have cause to fear that this last and great affliction of the Church
in the killing of the witnesses, is yet to come. And if it be, what a comfort
will it be to a man when he shall lay down his honor, and when they that
formerly honored him outwardly, shall despise him, then to be able to reflect
upon his former ways, and say, Lord I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, and I laid out mine honor for thee while I did enjoy it?

5. The last direction that I shall humbly commend to you in the conclusion,
is. Take heed of those sins especially, that will set God against you, to cause
you to be lightly esteemed, and will surely lay your honor in the dust.

1. Take heed of self exaltation, self adoration, and standing too much upon
self Interest; for the hautinesse of man shall be bowed down, and the
loftines of man shall be laid low, that God alone may be exalted. This honors
Moses to posterity, that though he was a Prince in Israel; Ante occupationem
Hierosolymorum a Davide factam Arauna Iebusitarum Rex fuerar. Postea vero regno
se abdicans religionem Israe. i. came fuerat amplexus. Irea nomen Regis ipsi
remansit. Grass. Gram. sacr. p. 8.
yet his Family was laid aside, and Joshua his servant exalted, and yet Moses
must put his honor upon him, that all the Congregation of Israel may be
obedient to him. Numb. 27.20. And this is recorded to the honor of Araunah, 2.
Sam. 24.23. though it is conceived he was anciently King in Jerusalem over the
Jebusites, whom David subdued and cast out; yet being now converted, and become
a Proselyte to the Jews, he did so far cast away all his former interest, and
the thoughts of it, that in the public calamity he received David with a
great deal of love and enlargement of spirit, manifesting that though he had
lost the title, Esaias. 14.19.20. Rex habet in potestare liget and constitutiones
and assisas in Regno suo provisas and approbatas and juratas; ipse in propria
persona sua observet, and a subditis suis faciat observari. Et est Corona Regis
facere justitiam and judicium, and tenere pacem sine quibus Corona consistere
non potest nec tenere. Bracton de leg. and consuetud. Angl. l. 2. c. 24. Quod
Reges Angliae aegre ferentes, putantes se non libere dominari in subditos;
moliti sunt ipse Progenitores tui hoc jugum politicum abjicere ut ipsi in
subjectum populum regaliter tantum dominari, sed potius debacchari queant.
Fortesc. de Cand. leg. Angl. c. 34. p. 78.
yet he had received a Princely spirit, and retained that still.

2. Take heed of Oppression, this brought the great dishonor upon the King of
Babylon, that he should be cast out of his grave as an abominable branch, and
not be joined with the Kings of the Nations in burial, because he had
destroyed his Land, and slain his people. Therefore see that ye break every
yoke, and untie every burden, that the Subjects may have no cause to complain
that their yoakes are only changed. We are told, that in England our Rulers
are not above our Laws, but bound to rule by them, as well as the Subject to
obey them; and in this their strength, glory, and authority consists.

And we find it taxed as a common evil design, that has been long on foot
in the Government of this Nation, that the Kings did desire to cast off the
Rule of Law, and to govern by Prerogative in an Arbitrary way, that in the end
their wills might become Laws, and they might command and require what they
list. This I say has been condemned as an evil in former ages, and this will
be found as an evil in Government in all those that succeed, under what name
or title soever it be; for surely God did not make men to be like the fishes of
the Sea that have no King: Let every one of you (Right Honorable) but upon
higher, even Gospel Principles, say as Tiberius did, Aurum illud adulterinum
est, quod cum subditorum lachrimis collectum est. That will never prove current
coin to the Ruler, that is gathered with the tears, much less when it is
with the blood of the Subjects.

3 Do not set your selves against the power of godliness, but countenance and
advance it. Let not circumstantiall differences cause substantial divisions.
Mar. 9.18.
It was a sinful humor in the Disciples, we saw one casting out Devils in
thy name, and we forbad him, because he followed not us. Surely Gods people
wheresoever they come, they are either as Dew upon the grass, Mich. 5.7. Zach.
12.6.
or as a Torch in a sheafe: Either to make them fruitful or consume them. Let
nothing be done by you (I beseech you) that may prove a seed of persecution,
beyond your intentions in after times. You know not into what hands the actings
of those things may come which you shall enact, how far against godliness in
the power of it they may be stretched, and what use may be made of them in time
to come. We read Rev. 8.11. of a great star that fell from heaven, and the
name of that star was called Wormwood. The fall of great persons is in
Scripture commonly expressed by the falling of a Star, as Esaias. 14 12. the fall
of the King of Babylon is. And to be called in Scripture is to be, and to be
publicly known to be: As they shall call his name Immanuel; Math. 1.2 3. ^er.
23.6.
This is the name whereby he shall be called Jehovah our righteousness, sc.
this he shall be, and this he shall be commonly known to be. This Prince his
name shall be called wormwood, Princeps amaritudinum, one bitter in his spirit;
unhappy and unsuccesfull in his Government, both to himself and his Subjects.
And be sure of this: If any Star be it of never so great a magnitude, and never
so high an elevation, if it be called wormwood, it will fall.

FINIS.

