Strange News from Staffordshire; OR, A Dreadful Example of Divine Justice.
Shown upon a young man in that County, who having stolen a Bible, and being
taxed therewith, fell to imprecating Gods Judgments upon himself, wishing that
his hands might rot off, and that he might rot alive if he touched it; which
heavy judgment in a short time fell upon him, his hands and his arms rotting
away, and his legs from his body, he being not sick, yet appearing to all that
see him the saddest spectacle that ever eyes beheld. This may warn others from
wishing for judgments to fall upon them, when they know themselves guilty.
This Relation was given and attested by Mr. Vincent, Minister of Bednal, who
discoursed with this miserable young man,

Tune of, My Bleeding heart, etc.




GOod people all come cast an eye,
Upon a doleful Tragedy;
For this relation here is penned,
That sinners may their lives amend.
We never strive for to prevent
Our just deserved punishment;
Nor to appease an angry God,
Until we feel his heavy rod.
Those that the Devil does possess,
He leads them on to wickedness,
From Sin to Sin they post it fast,
Until destruction come at last.
This sad example makes appear,
The true event for to be clear;
Where Justice here is plainly shown,
That scarce the like was ever known.
A wicked wretch in Staffordshire,
Who of the Lord had little sear,
A Bible chanc`t to steal away,
For which he now may rue the day.
The Bible being mist and gone,
They did inquire of each one,
And this young man among the rest,
They taxed, but he ne'c confessed.
The same he stiffly did deny,
Although he gave himself the lie;
And like a villain bold and stout,
These imprecations did belch out.
He wished if he the Book did take,
The Lord would him example make;
And so that he alive might rot,
Which came to pass too true God wot.
The Bible containing the word of God.

The Decrees and Decretals containing M^ns traditions.





FOr in a very little space,
He found himself in a sad case;
His hand which did commit the fact,
Did first rot off, for that same act.
Likewise the flesh we may presume,
Up to his elbow does consume;
So that he is in woeful plight,
Exposed to all peoples sight.
His other hand shrunk up and dry`d
Like a Beasts Hoof, lies by his side;
His knees do rot, and legs decay,
And from his body fall away.
It is a dreadful sight to see
A person in such misery,
Upon a pad of Straw to lie,
And so consume insensibly.
A Minister in Stafford shi^e,
Who of this spectacle did hear;
Unto the place he did repair,
The truth thereof for to declare.
When as he came unto the place,
And see him in that woeful case;
Yet sensible he did remain,
As if that he had felt no pain.
The Minister admonisht him,
By all means to confess his sin:
That so he might redeem his Soul;
Though his offenses were so foul.
To which he did confess in brief,
That like a wretch he played the Thief,
And had the Bible stole a way,
Which brought his body to decay.
And that he did the same deny,
For which he`s now in misery,
Repeating of his wishes o^re,
As he had done the same before.
Good peoples prayers he did desire,
To mittigate Gods wrath and ire;
Acknowledging his punishment,
For his offense was justly sent.
A keeper constantly does stay
For to attend him night and day,
Until the Lord shall see it fit,
For to release him out of it.
Let his example warn us all,
Least we into such sins may fall,
For bear such wishes too which may
Bring soul and body to decay.
Printed for, F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clark.


