A PLOT DISCOVERED, In which, diverse Cavaliers of Scotland, should have
surprised Barwick. ALSO How the Marquess of Arguile, the Earl of Crawford
Linsey, Earl of Lanerick, and Major Innis, met in the field upon a challenge to
fight, and the proceedings of the Parliament therein.

WITH Five PROPOSITIONS concerning the King, the Amity of the kingdoms,
Reformation in Religion, and the keeping of the COVENANT.

Agreed on by the General Assembly of the Kirk, and presented to the
Parliament of Scotland, March 1. 1647. And published for the Members of that
Church and Kingdom, and Brethren of the Ministry.

LONDON, Printed for H. Beck, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.

Right Honorable.
UPon Monday last, the Marquess of Arguile, and Earl of Crayford and Lindsey
fell out, and challenging each other to a combat, Leeth Lincke, was the place
appointed, the Earl of Lanerick was second to Crayford, and Major Innis to
Arguile, it should seem that Innis was ignorant of it, until that both the
Noblemen stripped themselves to their shirts, then Major Innis told them, that he
did not know their intentions, and that he was ready to hazard his life for
Arguile, but against the Earl of Crayford he would in no wise engage, and kept
them in some discourse to that effect, until such time that some others came to
them, and hindered their purpose: notice being given thereof to the Parliament,
the whole house rose, and diverse of them went to them, to pacify them, but are
not as yet reconciled.

Intimation being given that this Town should be seized on yesterday by the
Scots and Cavaliers: (a Horsecourse being intended upon our bounds,) The Mayor
and Aldermen summoned a general meeting, of all the Burgers, where it was
Ordered that the Horsecourse should be dismissed by Proclamation, which was
accordingly done, and a strong guard of Townsmen continually to be kept
during these doubtful times. I have sent your honor here enclosed the Copy of
five Propositions from the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, delivered
by them to the Parliament, with their Declaration: My Lord, I must conclude,
being in heart.

Your loving Friend, George Stuart.
Berwick 15 March. 1647.
Five Propositions from the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, and to
all Members of that Church and Kingdom, and to the Brethren of the Ministry.
FIrst of all, we exhort all and every one to make more conscience of
indevouring are all Reformation of themselves and their Families, and of the
places in which they live, then ever yet they have don; to be more serious in
searching their hearts, considering their ways, and purging themselves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, to perfect holiness in the fear of
God; to oppose wickedness and profanenes, promote the power and practice of
godliness, and to be deeply humbled before the Lord, for neglecting these things
so much and so long; withal employing and improving Christ's all sufficiency,
and striving to exercise faith in him, for the grace of mortification and
sanctification, as well as for remission of sins and peace with God; that being
implanted and rooted in him, we may grow up as trees of Righteousness, the
planting of the Lord that he may be glorified; for without amendment of life,
and bringing forth of better fruit, the fierce wrath of the Lord cannot turn
away from us.

2. As men desire they may not be led into temptation, but may be guided in
safe and right paths, in the midst of so great difficulties, Let them avoid the
company and counsel of the ungodly, whereby even good men have been often times
most dangerously ensnared; Let all that fear God, choose the Testimonies of the
Lord for their Counselors, be much in prayer and searching the mind of God in
his Word, without leaning to their own understanding, or consulting with flesh
and blood in cases of Conscience.

3. seeing it is no act of wisdom but of folly, so to shun one danger as to
run upon another as bad or worse; let us therefore avoid enemies and beware
of dangers on al hands: We cannot see but the Cause of God, true Religion, the
Covenant, Presbyteriall Government, this Church and Kingdom, and whatsoever is
dearest unto us will be in as great danger, if the Prelaticall party prevail,
as now they are in, by the power and prevalency of Sectaries in England, who
have made the Covenant and begun reformation to be laid aside, and hindered the
promoting thereof. So that there is a necessity to be apprehensive of dangers,
and attentive to remedies on both sides, and to beware of compliance with, and
connivance at Sectaries upon the one hand, and Malignants on the other.

4. when we speak of Malignants, we desire that the distinction may be
remembered, which was made in the solemn Warning to the Kingdom from the
Assembly in Feb. 1647. viz. That the cause is in very great danger from two
sorts of Malignant Enemies: 1. From such as have openly displayed a Banner, or
joined in Arms and profess Hostility against the cause, and such as adhere
thereunto: 2. From secret Malignants, Dis-covenanters, and bosom Enemies. This
second sort may be still known some Characters, given both at that time and
before that time, As by their slandering or censuring the Covenant of the three
Kingdoms and expedition into England, in the year 1643. as not necessary for
the good of Religion, or safety of this kingdom, or as tending to the
diminution of the Kings just power and greatness, by their confounding of the
Kings power and just Authority, with the pretense and abuse thereof by
Commissions, Warrants, or Letters procured from His Majesty by the Enemies of
this Cause and Covenant. As if none were faithful and loyal to the King, who
oppose such men and their ways; By their Spleen, Malice, and Calumnies against
such as God has made eminently isntrumental in this cause, and who resolve to
be constant to the end in their first Principles, as if such men were the Kings
Enemies who are most zealous for the good and safety of Religion; by their
commending, justifying, or excusing other known Malignants, and by their
conversing or intercommuning with excommunicate Delinquents. Unto which
Characters time and experience give us occasion to add some others, as namely,
their unwillingnes and declining to reckon Malignants among the Enemies of this
cause from whom danger is to be apprehended; their disjoyning and dividing the
duty of endeavoring the Kings Majesty's preservation and restitution, from the
duty of preserving, defending, settling and securing religion; As if we might
and ought to pursue the former without the latter while both are in danger;
their maligning of, and uttering malicious words against faithful and Zealous
Ministers, and against this meeting and Judicatory, appointed by the General
Assembly. Lastly, their crying up or down of parties or persons and even of
the Sectaries themselves according as they have more or less hopes of
advantage from them to their own designs. For its no long since such men made
light account of any dangers, which were apprehended from the prevalent faction
of the Sectaries in England; There being then some hopes of a compliance and
combination between them and the Malignants: Which is an infallible
demonstration that such men's pretended zeal against those Sectaries now, is
not from the right principle. Wherefore let all such dangerous persons as have
here been deciphered and described, be carefully observed and avoided, as men
would keep themselves pure, and free of snares: And let Presbyteries be
diligent to discover, try, and censure any of this kind in their bounds, that
they may be able herein to give a good account of their diligence; As also,
that they be careful to discover, try, and censure any trafficking Sectaries,
and all such as favor their opinions and ways.

Fifthly, Though we esteem that prevalent faction of Sectaries with their
abetters and adherents, presumptuous and malicious Enemies to Religion, King,
and Government: Yet we hold it is our duty to labor to remove and prevent all
occasions of jealousies and suspicions betwixt the Kingdoms; and to do or say
nothing that may breed mis-understandings, break off correspondence, weaken the
confidence or infringe the Union and peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, so
happily established in his Majesty's presence, and with his Royal consent in
both Parliaments: A caution as necessary now, as when it was given above five
years ago in a Warning from the Commissioners of the General Assembly, met in
this same place, January the fourth, 1643 And generally we desire that all the
Articles and clauses of the Solemn. League and Covenant may be kept inseparably
and inviolably linked together, and that there may be great tenderness and
care to avoid every thing which may be interpreted as a contradicting and
abandoning of the former principles, Proceedings, Petitions, Protestations,
Remonstrances, and Declarations of this Kirk and Kingdom in the pursuance of
this cause; and more especially to take good heed that Scotlands desires, do
not mount higher for the King, and fall lower in the point of Religion, then
they were at our first undertaking, and engagement in this cause.

Finally, we do most seriously obtest all the people of God in this nation,
and especially the Estates of Parliament by their love to the cause of God, by
their solemn Vows and Covenants, by their first principles and professions,
by their former zeal and sincerity, by the many blessings of God, and great
works done for us when our zeal and integrity was greatest in this cause, and
by all the curses and judgments of God which his word denounces against
backe-sliders and Covenant-breakers, that they may all the days of their lives
continue firm, steadfast and faithful in their Covenant with God, and one with
another, and make good their former professions in a time of tentation and
difficulty, without wavering or falling off to the right hand, or to the left,
and as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

A. KER.

FINIS,

