A strange Encounter of two Lovers? OR, The Dying Maid Revived.
To the Tune of, On the Bank of a Brook, etc.
With Allowance.





DOwn in a Cypress Grove as I was lying,
to hear the Nightingals innocent song;
I saw a beauteous Nymph weeping and crying,
and beating her breast as she walked along:
She made such complaints that would soften a stone,
She made the Grove ring with her pitiful moan.
In this condition a Gallant youth spied her,
as like to her he was walking alone;
He so astonished was when that he eyed her,
that he did stand like a stoek or a stone:
But at last he drew nigh, and he asked what did grieve her,
And proffered his sword and his life to relieve her.
Kind stranger, said she, O there is no redressing
of my misfortunes but only by death,
O! if the Heavens would grant me that blessing,
how willingly would I resign up my breath?
But since I must live I will weep till I dye,
And from all joy, and all comfort will fly.
Then, said the noble youth, i will sit down by you,
and keep you company in your sad grief:
I Will sigh when you do weep, and never fly you,
till you can find to your sadness relief:
Tell me the cause of your sad discontent,
I Will help you for to weep, grieve, and lament.
O then, said she, give ear to my sad story,
I was beloved, and beloved much too well
By a most beauteous youth, he was the glory
of all mankind, for he did so excel
In valor and wisdom, and virtues of mind,
That the whole world his like could not find.
He did love faithfully, for he did languish,
he grieved and he pined, consumed with loves flame,
And I loved him as well, and had great anguish,
to see him suffer, but I was to blame;
For I was ^oy, forsooth, and for to try him,
I seemed for to scorn him to slight him and fly him.


HE came one day, and he told how he loved me,
he threw himself down at my feet all in tears;
He asked if his constancy had not yet moved me,
at which I seemed for to stop my false ears:
O then, said he, since I no longer can live,
I Will dye by your hand if my deaths wound you will give.
And so he gave me his sword for to strike him,
but I had ^ather have stabbed my own heart;
When I would neither strike, nor seem to like him,
he spoke these sad words as from me he did part:
Since by the hand that I love I cannot dye,
I Will fall by the hand of some brave enemy.
I Will to the wars go, and in bloody battle,
teach the world how a scorned lover can fight;
With Lance and with sword will I thunder and rattle,
he fears no death whom his Mistress does slight:
In the midst of my foes will I yield up my breath,
And end my sad life by a nobler death.
And so he parted, and I seemed to leave him,
with great content, but when that he was gone;
I sent to call him back, and undeceive him,
and for to tell him I had loved him long:
But he to Sea was got, for he did hate
The Country that gave him so cruel a fate.
I run down to the Shore weeping and wailing,
and to the waves and the winds I did cry;
Bring back my love again, for he is sailing
from a poor Maid that does languish and dye:
But the Ship soon was got out of my sight,
And then I fainted and swouned outright.
I saw my folly, and cursed my madness,
for which I ever will sit down and cry;
And until death i will persever in sadness,
my mournful eyes they shall never be dry:
O hold, said the stranger, give me but one kiss,
I Will bring back your dear, for I know where he is.


I Would give the world, said she, were in my power,
but since it is not, i will give what I can:
You Will have him for less, said he, this very hour,
and so here take him for I am the Man:
So into her arms the youth presently flue,
She looked upon him, and found he said true.
The Nymph she wept for joy, fainted and swouned,
and felt those joys which can never be expressed;
Her Lover felt as great, for his heart bounded,
it leapt and it caper'd almost out of's breast:
She wept, and he kissed, and then he did tell
How he came thither, and what him befell.
We scarce were got to Sea, when we discover
six Turkish Ships, said he, all under sail;
At which we startled were, but your sad lover
persuaded them for to fight without fail:
And so I shot off the challenging Gun,
And then we all unto battle did run.
I fought like one that all life had despized,
I leapt into one of their Ships all alone;
I only fought to dye, 'twas death I prized,
I stood them though they were hundreds to one:
Then our Ships were soon severed by wind and by wave
And I was carried away for a slave.
Then for to work like a beast I was forced,
heavily loaded with an iron chain:
But my great torment was to be divorsed
from my beloved, O that was a pain,
Much greater than stripes, than fetters, or gives,
Than being a slave, or losing of lives.
But when that I could no longer endure it,
away one night from the Turks I did fly;
Here in your sight by my death for to cure it,
fully resolved at your feet for to dye:
But here I find my grief turned into joy,
And into pleasutes that never shall cloy.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


