royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

THE Kings Entertainment at York: As it was related by John Strickland, the 22.
of March, 1641. who came out of York, on Saturday last at nine of the Clock.
THat his Majesty came into York upon Friday, March the eighteenth, between
four and five of the Clock in the afternoon, with the Prince his Highness,
and two other young tall Noblemen in the Coach with him; whom upon inquiry, the
said John Strickland was informed to be the Palsgrave, and the Duke of Lenox:
That the Lord Mayor of York with the Aldermen, and Sir Thomas Widrington,
Recorder, met with his Majesty, some mile and half out of Town; where His
Majesty was received with all cheerfulness and hearty Welcome of all the
City, by the expression of the said Recorder: Who in the Name of the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of York, made a very Patheticall Oration to His
Majesty: Assuring him that the City was at his Arrival, transported with two
great and contrary Passions, Joy and Sorrow.

Joy, For His Majesty's happy Arivall, and luster amongst them, whose presence,
with the approach of the Sun, made a double Spring in York: As the Sun in
Plants, So His Majesty in the hearts of all his loyal Subjects.

Sorrow, For that his Majesty had removed so far from his Parliament, and
Grand Counsel (as they had just cause to fear) in some discontent. He farther
with great boldness and vehemency of Speech, desired his Majesty to hearken
unto, and condescend unto his Peers and Commons now Assembled in Parliament:
Adventuring plainly to tell His Majesty, that he thought in his Conscience,
That they would resolve upon nothing, but what should be to the good of His
Majesty, and the Commonwealth, and dropped some tears in the delivery of
those words.

His Majesty was observed by the beholders, to show no pleasing Countenance at
those words, nor gave no answer at all.

The Lord Mayor by Order, bare the Sword before his Majesty, through the
City, unto his Palace; But a very small company were with His Majesty, as
the said John affirms: he telling but some nine and thirty Gentlemen, and
seventeene of his Guard in Coats.

About eight or nine of the Clock that very night, came in my Lord of
Newcastle with two Coaches more: Which Lord, the morrow after, being Saturday,
went out of this City again, between five and six of the Clock in the
morning: It was in York reported toward Hull; but whether it be so for
certain, John Strickland cannot, nor dares not affirm.

Thursday before His Majesty came in, and that it was known for certain,
that He was coming, Sir John Haughtham, Governor of Hull, sent a servant of
his, one Master Edward Adkins, unto the Lord Mayor with this Message: Viz: That
he was given to understand, that His Majesty was either there, or would be
there very shortly, viz. at York: but if His Majesty had any intent to pass
further, and come to Hull, which he hoped that His Majesty would not (the
world in these distracted times being very apt unto Iealousies and suspicions)
he desired the Lord Major to inform His Majesty, how that he had a very
special Charge sent to him from both Houses, on Monday, March the fourteenth,
not to suffer His Majesty to enter, but with a small Company, some thirty at
most; And that the very same Command was directed unto the high Sheriff of the
County.

The said John Strickland further affirms, that at his coming out of York;
Upon the way he met great concourse of Gentlemen, very well habited, all on
Horseback, and most of them young Gallants, repairing toward York: And that
there was very great talk, and some fears about my Lord of Newcastle, and
that one of his Footmen, had like to have been imprisoned, for speaking
strange words in the behalf of the Irish, he himself being an Irishman.

John Strickland his mark X.

London, Printed for Nath: Butter, 1641:


