Study to be quiet: Or, a short VIEW Of the Miseries of WAR, With the
Necessity of PEACE.

ALSO, The Character of a Peaceable Man: whose Motto is,

I am for Peace, Psalm. 120. verse. 7. By a DYER.

LONDON:

Printed for B. Als^^, 1647.

A short view of the Miseries of War, and the necessity of Peace.
O England! thou have need to study to be quiet; truly this work is a very
seasonable work, especial in these times of distraction; but if not
considered it will prove thy utter ruin, whereof in some part thou have
already felt: Let all therefore as one man, from the greatest from the greatest
to the least, both Prince and Subjects, Noble and simple, Church, and State,
Judges and Counselors, Lawyers and Clients, City and Country. Ministers, and
people, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants Rich and poor, (let all I
say) learn this lesson, to study to be quiet; and not only learn it, but put
it in practice, Nature teaches us, especially holy writ commands us this duty:
of studyng to be quiet: in which there are such infinite Exhortations, and
Incitations, to this work, of quietness. Peace, Love, Unity, that had I the
tongue of men and Angels, it were imposible for me to declare or set forth the
worth of it: and that I may spur you on to this duty; of studying to be quiet:
let me give you a little instance of the miseries of War; that you may with a
more ready and willing mind, sue for Peace and study to be quiet. What
desolations has War brought in other places, Countries and Kingdoms: we our
selves are sensible in some measure of it, for have we not heard the murdering
Cannons about our ears, have not our houses bin burnt, and Churches spoiled,
the worship of God neglected, have there not bin Rapes and outrageous violences
committed upon our Wives and Daughters; and had we not need to study to be
quiet; have we not seen our goods taken from us and our houses ryfled by
unruly soldiers? Have we not heard the cries of the wounded, the fields and
the high ways scatred dead carkasies, have we not heard despeiate soldiers
cry kill, kill; was not the young in^ant snatched from the Mothers breast and
throne against the stones, or tossed on the top of pikes? have we not seen men
and horses wallow in their blood: and had not we need study to be p^^et: could
the Country man follow the plow where an Army was, did they not leave soing;
was not the standing corn burnt down, or trodden under feet, or eaten up by
horses, was not the cattle destroyed, and wast made of that which was killed and
of all other things, a way to bring in a famine; and had we not need to study
to be quiet: what profit is got by Wars, the Laws are silent, outrages are
committed, trading ceaceth, want increases, learning abolished and almost all
manner of sin perpetrated; the son fears not his Father, nor the servant his
Master and should we not study to be quiet again? here cries the Wife for her
dead husband, here a child laments for his Father, and a Father for his child,
for how many are the Fatherless and the widows: here is one lies killed, another
has his brains shot out, a third lost his arm, a fourth has lost a leg and
a fifth has a bullet shot in his body and cannot be got out and indures a world
of misery; some can neither die nor live, with an infinite other calamities that
follow, and whose heart would not lament and mourn to see and hear these
things, and to behold such sad spectacles: and had we not need to study to be
quiet: and find out a way that our miseries may be put to a period, that every
one may sit under his own Vine, and eat of the labor of his hands in peace and
quiet, with giving thanks to God: for which peace and quietness let us all
pray: In the mean time, although I cannot find out a way to end our troubles,
yet I will describe to you the character of a quiet man, by whose example every
man may study to be quiet.

The Character of a peaceable and quiet man.
THis Study to be quiet, is a theme
That all should learn, it is so sweet a stream,
And where this peace and love goes hand in hand,
All things are there, and what you can d^mand:
But where ruff waters, troubled Seas do rore,
There quietness is shut clean out of door:
Then study to be quiet, I you w^sh
Or else twill prove a vety unkind dish;
And that I may describe to you the man
That studies to be quiet, lo here than
He is portrayed to you here in brief
Of mortal men we may esteem him chief,
First, it is he that twixt God and his soul,
Has made his peace, and does upon him roll,
That hates all sin, and wickedness, and why?
Because that God is much displeasd thereby.
Next loves his Neighbor even as himself,
And cares not for the world, and all its pelf,
That at Gods glory chiefly he does aim,
That's no self-seeker, such let no man blame,
That is content with raiment or with diet,
That is that man, that studies to be quier,
That speaks truth, and of a christian temper,
That's slow to wrath, and is eadem semper,
Whose eyes not wanton, nor whose ears are itching
For novelties, whose heart is never wishing
For others wealth; nor yet is ever idle,
But well employed, and does always bridle
His mouth and tongue, that they do not offend,
That never swears, though it were for his end.
That bears all things with great patience,
Within whose breast remains innocence;
That gives no ear to every idle talk,
And in his Calling consciously does walk,
Whose Natures mild, and loves no division,
That ^s no scoffer, hates all ambition,
That puts up wrongs, and gives to all men right,
Seeks no revenge, though others seek to fight,
That does not covet, is no Hypocrite,
That bears no malice, anger, nor yet spite,
That is not curious, jealous, or unkind,
That is not proud, but of a loving mind,
That is no Swearer, nor no drunken man,
Nor unclean person, say the worst who can,
That fears God, and does obey the King,
Loves truth, and peace, more then an Earthly thing;
At such a man I never will invie at
That daily thus does study to be quiet.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace.
The peaceable man's Motto.
I am for peace.
WElcome sweet peace, our second sister, that
Has nourisht us with her sweets and her fat,
Her plenty and prosperity, and wealth,
Her choycest riches, to preserve our health,
By whose blessed means, each one so fruitful grows,
What it is to want (where peace is) none scarce knows.
Why should we kick at her whose breasts we sucked,
Why should we fight against her, who has us plucked
From violence, and us preserved from Fees,
From the rage and malice of all those
That seeks our ruin; oh let love increase,
For where it is wanting no man is at ease:
Come peace, let us embrace thee in our arms,
Where thou do dwell, there is no thought of harms,
For love is with thee, thou to all good will
Do bear, and thou to no man think ill:
Why should thou be a stranger to us now,
Of stay we pray, and we will make a vow
To be at one with thee, weel have no thought
Of rancker, hate, or any thing that's naught:
Well! she will stay, I Am glad we shall have peace,
Make much on ^ now, it is time that wars should cease,
We have enough on it; peace is earthly bliss,
For truth and peace shall one another kiss:
Lo then here is peace, the mistress with her maiden,
Love, Unity, and Concord richly laden,
With all good things, behold the Earth is full,
And we our laps full here and there may cull,
Of her attendants, that peace with her brings
In such abundance, as is fit for Kings.
Thrice blessed art thou, peace, that sweetly crowns
Our Land, our Cities, Villages and towns,
That fil'st our barnes with corn, our stalls with hay.
Our Orehards, Gardens, Clothes with flowers gay,
Our sheep with wool, our Oxen stout and strong,
Our Ponds, our Rivers, sweetly rune along
Where Fishes sport themselves, yea in the fields,
The Birds do sing and pleasure much it yields:
There be trees laden with all manner of fruit,
There is no person that has any suit
At Law, but all desire to live at ease,
Our Corn and Cattle brings us great increase,
A hundred fold, for here is no complaining
We are all in love, not one sin now is reigning:
With these, and thousands more, men may delight
Themselves, and sollace with the ear and sight:
Here the brave Courtier, and the mighty men
For recreation may come now and then,
And take their fill of what sweet peace does yield
Ith Air, ith waters, or within the field;
The meaner sort with those of low degree,
May come and share with these we daily see,
They have as great an intetest as any,
Provided always that they have but money.
Peace is not partial freely she imparts
Of her abundance, comforting men's hearts:
Where peace does dwell, and where the land has rest,
There is no fear or sorrow to molest,
Or vex or fright us, there is no hideous cries
Of wounded men, or dead before our eyes,
Where peace is queen, no Drums nor Canons rore,
No sword is drawn, that kills both rich and poor,
Here Is no destroying corn, or grass, or hay,
Here is no firing houses all the way,
But all is quiet, each man in his calling
Does follow closely, neighbors are not brawling
With one another, but do live in love,
This is that blessing that comes from above,
And that we may thus live in joy and peace,
Pray ^ur Peacemaker that our wars may cease:
But ^f that any herein I displease,
Le^ whose will be for war, I am for peace.
FINIS.

