A DISCOVERY OF PEACE: OR, The thoughts of the ALMIGHTY For the ending of his
Peoples CALAMITIES.

Intimated in a Sermon at Christ-Church London, before the Right Honorable,
the Lord Mayor, the Right worshipful the Aldermen; together with the
worshipful Companies of the said City, upon the 24th of April, 1644.

Being the solemn day of their public Humiliation and monthly Fast.

By JOHN STRICKLAND, B. D. Pastor of the Church at St. Edmunds, in the City of
New Sarum; A Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Isaiah 27. Verse. 5. Let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace
with me, and he shall make peace with me. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for
Henry Overton and are to be sold at his Shop entering into Pope's Head Alley, out
of Lumbard-street, 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, John VVollaston, Lord Mayor of the famous City of
LONDON, Together with the Right Worshipful the ALDERMEN his Brethren.
Right Honorable and Worshipful,
AS it was your request, that occasioned me to offer these my Meditations to
your ears in the Pulpit: So is it nothing else that brings them forth (such as
they are) from the Press to be thus presented to your view, and under your
names, that so they might have a pass into the world: they have been already
in your ears, they are now before your eyes, the Lord write them in all our
hearts, that we may be doers of the word, and not hearers only, lest we
deceive our own selves! When I stood upon my watch to see what the Lord would
say unto me, that I might speak unto you, he directed me to make this
Discovery of Peace before you, when you sat in the dust before him, humbling
your souls, and crying mightily unto God, to turn from his fierce anger that
we perish not: and indeed God is never more ready to give out himself, and to
communicate his thoughts unto men in a spiritual way, then at such a time; nor
is the soul so capable of divine Discoveries from God at any time, as when it
is in such a posture of humiliation: which gives me hope that God intended to
send home into your hearts some light and influence from this truth, to
encourage and keep up your spirits against all the opposition which you find
in the cause of God and the Kingdom, and to maintain your zeal and
forwardness therein, for which your ever-to-be-renowned City is now so much
and so justly honored. For though the vision be yet for an appointed time, and
in the mean time the sword devoureth on the right hand and on the left, yet we
may well wait for it, because it will surely come, and will not tarry, and when
it comes it will be a tree of life. Now that God has revealed unto you his
gracious thoughts for the ending of his peoples calamities, (even such as you
could expect) he lookethth at you should do somewhat for the furtherance
thereof, that may be worthy of your place and eminency whereunto the Lord has
advanced you: To help forward an expected end is a work worthy the hand of a
Prince. Numa built a Temple, (...).
which he dedicated to Faith and Peace, because he desired that they might dwell
together under one roof: the work that I lay before you, (honored Gentlemen)
is altogether as honorable as Numa's: I need not now show you how to do it,
you are partly directed in the Sermon, but you have given the world full proof
that you know how to do it, in that you have done it, and do it at this day,
so effectually with your Armies, with your Estates, with your prayers, every
way: Go on and do still like the Citizens of London: and if God bless your
endeavors, we may yet hope to see what Numa never saw, Truth and Peace dwell
together under one roof in this Kingdom. Be pleased yet to entertain a word
or two, to expedite your willing endeavors in bringing our Churches calamities
to an expected end: you know there are a generation of Ambo-dexters among us,
that do pretend to seek the same God, and to build in the work of the Lord with
us, as the Jews adversaries did in the building of the Temple, Ezra 4.2. But
as Zerubbabel and the chief of the Fathers were aware of them then: so our
Zerubbabels (I hope) and you the chief of our Fathers, are also aware of these
now: Are they not even such as the Psalmist describes? They put forth their
hands against such as be at peace with them, they break their covenant; the
words of their mouth are smoother then butter, but war is in their hearts;
their words are softer then oil, yet are they drawn swords? Psa 55.20.21.
Their words are peace, peace, and pacem poscimus omnes, but they love not truth
and peace, they broak for treaties of peace, under which they would now betray
us. For in truth their design is to hinder your endeavors in bringing on this
expected end: it will not be unnecessary that you have an eye upon them. Next,
let me prevail with you to be tender of Gods honor, in what peculiarly
belongs unto him, as you expect God should be tender of us in bringing the
Calamities of our Church unto this desirable end. Our Worthies in Parliament
have piously provided for the sanctifying of our Christian Sabbath, improve
your Authorities for the executing of such wholesome laws, so much concerning the
Lord our God, especially reform, I beseech you, all Exchange-meetings that
day, unless you could be sure that men would come thither with a desire of no
other news then what they might hear from heaven that day: if any thing,
surely this is a blemish, and that in the face of your beautisul City; you
have worthily cleared your streets of the notorious occasions of Idolatry, let
not anyplace be left (especially such a public place) in the midst of you, an
occasion of profaneness. And go on, as I hear you have piously resolved, to
take inn God more solemnly, into your public consultations, then formerly, by
beginning and ending such your meetings, A^^^^^^us N. A^^^^. l. 7. c. 10
with prayer, like Pub. Scipio a famous Roman (of whom it was said, Ejus vita
erat diis dedita) who was wont to go to the Capitol before he went to the
Senate, to his prayers before his public business. And I doubt not but the
Lord will continue to protect and honor this your famous City, in delighting
to use it as a choice and eminent instrument in his hand, to bring the present
and pressing calamities of our dear country, to an expected end, and to
continue you in a peaceable and quiet habitation. For which purpose I commend
this whole City, together with your government, Counsels, persons and
employments to the blessing and care of the most high God. And this shall be
the prayer of

Your willing servant in the Gospel of Christ, JOHN STRICKLAND.

A Discovery of PEACE, or the thoughts of the Almighty for the ending of his
peoples Calamities.
JEREM. 29.11. For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the
Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.


THE Jewish Church was now in a sad condition, ^od was provoked against her for
the sins of K. Manasseh, especially for that innocent blood which he shed, and
with which he filled Jerusalem; and for which the Lord protested he would not
be pacified, 2 King 24 3.4.
2 King. 24.3, 4. therefore Jehoiachim, with the greatest part of the Jews,
were now carried away captive into Babylon, there to remain in slaverie for
threescore and ten years: And now because the people could not bear the
thoughts of so long a bondage, there arose up among them false prophets (which
are always ready to feed the peoples humors) and put them in hope that their
slavery should be of a far shorter continuance, and that they should very
suddenly return into their own Land again; namely, that they should not
continue in bondage above two years, as you have it, Jerem. 28.3, 4. Jer.
28.3, 4.
To prevent the mischief that this doctrine might bring upon the people (namely
the peoples impenitencie and carnal security, by being misled into such
deceitful expectations) the Prophet Jeremie writes a letter from Jerusalem
unto the people of the captivity, in this chapter; and therein, to undeceive
the people, he advises them that they should (for all that the false Prophets
had said) make provision for a longer stay in Jerusalem then for two years,
that they should marry wives, and build houses, and plant Orchards; he presses
on them that counsel from the 4. verse of this Chapter, Verse 4-15.
unto the 15.

Next, forasmuch as he saw their hearts hancred after Jerusalem, that they
might return to their own Land again, he acquaints them in the second place,
that the remnant of the people, that were not yet carried away from Jerusalem,
should be very shortly led into a like captivity, and the City of Jerusalem
(on which their eye was fixed so much) turned into a shes and destroyed; so
that their hopes in that particular were dashed. This argument he presses on
them from the 15, verse to 20. So you shall find it in the History, 2 Kings
25. Verse. 15-20. 2 Kings 25.
In the former branch of the Prophets Letter, (wherein he does endeavor to take
up the peoples thoughts about longer stay in Babylon) be pleased to mark two
considerable things, that are distinctly delivered.

First, he labors to confute the error of those false prophets, that told
them they should stay no longer in Babylon then two years, and he lets them
know that these are but dreams of their own, they had no such warrant for any
thing from the word of God; Verse. 8.9.
this at the 8. and 9. verse, whereby he bridles their confidence, that they
should not be too hasty in expectation of their return so suddenly.

Secondly, lest they should cast off all hope and confidence of deliverance, in
the next place he labors to maintain their hope, and strengthen their faith
to wait on God: for though he would not bring deliverance in such a time as
the false prophets had foretold, (in the compass of two years) yet he would
not fail to bring them deliverance in due time; he would deliver them, but not
then; he would deliver them, but he would take his own time for it: And in the
mean time God would not forget their captivity, and his thoughts concerning
them, were thoughts of peace, as in the words of my Text. For I know my
thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not
of evil, to give you an expected end,

Before I come to the words of the Text, give me leave a little to insist upon
the design and scope of the holy Ghost in this letter of the Prophet Jeremie;
wherein, as he did intend to check them in their groundless expectations of a
sudden deliverance, so he labors to bring them to, and support them in a
patient waiting on God for deliverance in his own time. The point from hence is
this.



You may observe that the Prophet Habakkuk (who is conceived to be contemporary
with the Prophet Jeremie, and therefore to speak of the same thing) gives the
very same advice or command concerning this very business of the Babylonish
captivity. The vision, says he in 2. Hab. 3, 4. is yet for an appointed time,
Hab. ^.3, 4.
but at the end it shall speak and not lie, though it tarry, wait for it: for
it shall come, and it shall not tarry. Behold his soul which is lifted up, is
not upright in him. Mark, he would have men to be of that frame and temper of
heart, that they should patiently and calmly possess their souls in waiting
on God, though the vision for their deliverance be somewhat long, and it be not
yet come. It is the observation of Mr. Calvin, that the Prophet in commanding a
waiting temper of spirit, Coarguit fervorem immodicum qui nos abripit. Calv. in
locum.
checks that common hastiness, or hotnesse of spirit, wherein men are too much
carried away with longing after deliverance, and therefore he would have men to
possess themselves with more patience: For he says, Though deliverance tarry,
it shall not tarry. It may tarry in respect of our desires, Etiam celeritas in
desiderio mora est. Paraeus.
Let deliverance be never so swift, it cannot come so soon as it is looked for,
men's hearts are so up in expectations of blessings in that kind; but it shall
not tarry in respect of Gods own determination, Qui in ipsa tarditate
semperaccelerat, it shall never stay beyond his counsel and appointment. His
soul that is lifted up in pride of heart therefore, and cannot humbly submit
unto the Lords pleasure, but in stead of waiting upon God, will seek a Tower of
refuge elsewhere, and impatiently withdraw his heart, or draw back, as the
Apostle renders the word, Heb. 10.38. his soul is not upright in him. Heb.
10.38.


Deuteronomy. 39. See now, that I, even I am be, and there is no God with me; I kill,
Deuteronomy. 32.39.
and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver
out of my hand. It is as it were a thing hereditarie to the Godhead, if as I
may so say, a thing peculiar to him, to lay on, and to take off afflictions at
his own appointment; He it is that commands deliverance, and therefore it is
he alone that we should ascribe all our deliverance to, and upon whom we
should wait for all our deliverance. It is reported of Domitian, that when he
escaped from Vitellius seeking to destroy him, he resolved that in the place
where he lay hid, he would build a Temple, and he would dedicate it Jovi
Custodi, seque in sinu Dei s^cravit, says the Historian. Tacitus.
And had a heathen so much zeal for the honor of an Idoll-god, that he would
ascribe it all to him? How much more should we ascribe the honor of our
deliverances to the true God, and write upon our Temples and monuments of
praise, not Jovi, but Deo custodi, to our God our great deliverer.

1. Pet. 5.6, 7.
in 1 Pet. 5.6, 7. Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you; he takes
to heart your condition, he is sensible of all your misery. For a man to go
any other way, it will be in vain, it will add to his misery, rather then
deliver him. You have an excellent and a clear example in Ephraim, Hosea 5.13,
14. When Ephraim saw his sickness, Hos. 5.13, 14.
and Judah saw his wound, Ephraim took another course then this in the
Doctrine, he did not wait on God, but he went to King Jareb, yet could not he
help you, nor cure you of your wound. And whereas before the Lord had been but
unto them as a moth, and as rottenness, in his judgments, now he was resolved
to become as a Lion, he would tear them, and there should none be able to
deliver them, Verse. 14.
verse. 14. And (which is most of all considerable to the point) Ephraim that
went another way, was feign to return to God at last, and seek help from him.
Come, let us return to the Lord, Hosea 6.1.
for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us
up.

our hands, whereby he might have occasion given to deliver us. Levit. 26.40,
41, 42.
26. Levit. 40, 41, 42. verse, when the people of Israel were in their
affliction, If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then
accept of the punishment of their iniquities, then will I remember my covenant
with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham
will I remember, and I will remember the Land. Mark! If when we have walked
contrary to God, and we find that God has walked contrary to us, as at the
40. verse, if then we will accept of our punishment, that is to say, if we will
kindly take it, humbly submit to it, patiently go under it; then with God
remember his covenant, then will God remember our Land, then will God be
favorable to us. It much concerns us to be humbled, and ashamed this day,
that there is such a frame of heart within us, so far discordant and
unsuteable to these times of calamity that are now on us. Alas, my brethren,
we are rather desperately sick of David's disease, sometimes we are too high,
sometimes we are too low; he was so set on the top of his strong mountain, as
if he should never be removed, and so are we. And sometimes he was too low, so
dejected that he concluded it was ion vain that ever he served God, that ever
he looked for any hope from God, that ever he waited on God, as he complained
in the 73. Psalm., 13, 14. So is it with us, my brethren, Psalm. 73.13, 14.
we reel to and fro in our passions, from one extreme to another, as if so be
we were drunk with impatiencie and with presumption by turns. Beloved, how
should this affect us, and make us ashamed, while we look up in the presence of
God this day, Evils of imtiencie in trouble.
to think that we are of such a distempered frame of heart? The better to move
us to be humble and ashamed for it, consider what inconveniences follow hereon.

Isaiah 3, 4. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee,
Isai. 26.3, 4.
because he trusts ion thee. Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah is eve^lasting strength. God himself, who is the God of peace, will
undertake to keep those in perfect peace, or (as the word imports by the
repetition of it, peace, peace) in peace assuredly, whose minds are staid on
him, as Junius, cogitationi in^itenti; whom our last translation follows; and
though Calvin renders the words a little differently, cogitatio fixa, as
relating unto Gods counsels, which are fixedly set from everlasting to give
peace unto his Church, Non apponitur nota dativicas^s; expend at lectores annon
magu conveniat refer ad Deum, C^lvin on Isai. 26.
(of which reading he gives an * account, and wherein he leaves the reader
free to his own judgenent) yet both Junius and Calvin conclude, that God will
not fail to give his Church and people peace, that patiently wait upon him,
peace with God, which is of all other the most perfect and fundamental peace;
peace in their own souls in the midst of their troubles and distresses; and
this, according to their trusting in him, shall be a continual peace, seeing
their God is of an Rupes saeculorum.
everlasting power and strength to defend and keep it for them: But through
this want of trust in God, it is that we are so unsettled in these times of
trouble, that we are sometimes carried too high by carnal confidence, into
provoking presumption; and sometimes cast down too low by carnal fears into
dejection of spirit. The believing heart of the righteous, shall be brought
into a more excellent frame, as is promised, Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be
afraid of evil tidings, Psalm. 112.6.
his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; neither good nor bad news shall move
it inordinatly: he shall be in the midst of all storms, like a Ship that lies
safe at Anchor in a good Haven; whereas a man that is without faith in God, is
even as a Ship on the waves without Rudder, and without Anchor, either to guide,
or stay her; she is tossed sometimes up, and sometimes down, and carried
sometimes forward, sometimes backward, sometimes as high as heaven, and
sometimes almost as long as hell. So that his soul, Psalm. 107. 27, 27.
like their souls, Psalm 107.26, 27. reeles and melts in him because of the
trouble. A disquieted and impatient temper of heart in trouble, brings the
loss of all the comfort, peace, and enjoyment of God, that a man might
otherwise have even in the midst of trouble.

Psalm. 46.10.
46. Psalm. 10. Be still, and know that I am God. As if he should say, If you
will acknowledge me to be God, then wait on me, and that quietly and be you not
transported with this or that passion: He chargeh it on them there especially,
because they had seen so much of God as they had, verse 8, 9. Verse. 8.9.
Come see the works of the Lord, what destruction and desolation he has made
in the earth, I have destroyed your enemies, and laid wast Countries for your
sakes, and now therefore be quiet, wait on the Lord, and acknowledge that I am
God. So if we should be spoken to, to see what God has done, and how he has
delivered us of late, and what desolations he has made among the enemies: And
if after all this, we cannot yet wait on the Lord and be still, we acknowledge
not Gods power to have done it. Nay, if we cannot wait on the Lord in a holy
dependence for the Churches deliverance in due time, we shall in effect say
little less of God, then the Prince did at the siege of Samaria, when the
Prophet foretold that a great plenty should succeed the famine, 2 King. 7.19.
2 King. 7.19. If God should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be? The
thing is even impossible: And if we should speak so like an Infidel of the
Lord, we might justly look to be punished like him. God sent a plenty in
Samaria, but he did not eat of it: So God may send his Church deliverance, and
we, with ours, be justly deprived of any comfort therein.

Hab. 2.3, 4.
as is intimated Hab. 2.3, 4. the Prophet says, If any man's heart be lifted up
in him, signifying that if any man will go to any other Tower or Sanctuary
beside the Lord. The Apostle he renders it, a withdrawing his heart from the
Lord, and he shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38, 39. Heb. 1038.39.
So that such as have once lost their patience, and cannot bear those troubles
that befall the Church, will fall from less to more, and will become at length
an Apostates. And alas, are we without experience this day, of the sad fruits
of discontent? How many has it brought to an utter forsaking of Gods cause,
and his truth? Like the Smith in the time of King Edward the sixth; Fox in Acts
and Mon.
that sometimes had been very forward in matters of Religion, and had been a
happy instrument, as it should seem, for the conversion of a young man, and
setting him forward in the ways and profession of Religion, so far that at
length the young man was taken hold of, and imprisoned for the Gospels sake:
this young man in prison bethinking and remembering his old friend that had been
so good to him, to whom he always carried a reverent respect, he laid out to
know whether or not this Smith that had been an instrument of so much good to
him, was no taken hold of, and laid in prison as himself; but finding he was
not, he took occasion to expostulate with him, and so to feel his disposition,
and to know whether he did think it comfortable for him to continue in prison,
and whether he would encourage him to burn at the stake for religion. He
returns this answer to him, says he, your cause is good, and you do well to
suffer for it. But for my part, I cannot bring my heart to burn for Religion.
But it seems by the event, that he that could not burn for Religion, he did
burn for his Apostasy: For within a little time after, he that could not burn
for Religion, had his shop and his house on fire, and was burnt in the midst of
it. Beloved, I produce it to this end, that we may see when men cannot bring
their hearts patiently and meekly to submit to the suffering of what God shall
lay upon his Church for the testimony of the Gospel, it is too too likely they
will fall to flat Apostasy, and utterly turn from the Lord, and then he will
surely meet with them: so that first or last they shall not escape.



Luthers spirit, Luther.
Mallem ruere cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare, I had rather I were ruined
with Christ, then that I should reign as a King without him; we should labor
to be of that spirit, that though we suffer never so much, yet having the
cause of Christ, and partaking of the sufferings of Christ, is better then all
the jollitie and security we can have without him, and therefore Moses was of
that Heroic spirit, he would rather choose to suffer affliction with the people
of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.25.
11. Heb. 25. And, beloved, me thinks we should learn to make a virtue of
necessity; there is a fatal necessity of suffering on the one hand, or the
other, with or against Christ. I may then expostulate with you, as Chrysostom
sometime did excellently with some others, Seeing we must all suffer, and
seeing we must bear afflictions, why do we not rather choose to suffer for the
Gospels sake, that brings with it so many Crowns and Laurels, so many comforts
and consolations above all other sufferings in the world? You see then that
this patience in suffering for the Gospels sake, is a very needful grace: So
the Apostle, We have need of patience, that when we have done the will of God,
we may enjoy the promises, 10. Heb. 36. Heb. 10.36.
I might here relate unto you the grave counsel of Judith; and though the
History be Apocryphal, I am sure the counsel is Canonical, the counsel, I
say, which Judith gave to the men of Bethulia, in Judith 8.14, 15, 16. verses,
when the men of Bethulia being besieged by the enemy, had taken up a rash
resolution, that if God did not come and deliver them within 5 days, they
would deliver up the City to the enemy that lay before them; Judith gravely
thus bespeaks them, Nay, my brethren, let us not provoke the Lord our God to
anger: for if he come not within five days, he is able to defend us when he
will, even every day, or to destroy us before our enemies, therefore let us
wait for salvation of him, and call upon him, and he will hear us if it please
him. So may I say to you all this day, Far be it from us, that we should
yield up the cause, and all we have, if God should not at such a time, or such
a time, deliver us; let us not speak so to provoke the Lord: Let us wait on the
Lord, and call upon him, and he will help us, if it please him.

To stir up our hearts thus meekly and cheerfully to submit to the disposal
of Gods hand in our sufferings. Motives


First consider, though God afflict us never so much, yet be well persuaded and
assured, he will not lay on afflictions more on us then needs must. If Gods
people be in a sad condition, or a sorrowful estate, it is but if need be we
are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1.6. 1. Pet. 1.6.
God does never afflict his people merely out of sovereignty, because he will
do it; that is far from him, 3. Lament. Lam. 3.33.
I do not tread upon men, says God, as if I would crush them, or show my
power over them; no, that is far from God. For he does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the children of men, to crush under his feet the prisoners of the
earth. But when he afflicts his people the most severely, he does it as a
Refiner, as a Goldsmith does put his metal into the fire, because he would
separate the dross from it, and purify it; so God puts his people in the fire
of affliction, with some purpose or other, for their benefit and advantage. The
Physician, though after long evacuations and purgings, he continue the same
course, and bring the Patient yet lower, it is still with a purpose to take
away the peccant humor, and to cleanse him. So God in afflicting his people,
27. Isaiah 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all
the fruit, Isai. 27.9.
the taking away of his sin. God will not lay one affliction on his people
more, nor continue it an hour longer then he knows it needful.

Phil. 29. Phil. 1.29.
To you it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer for the name of
Christ. And the Apostles took it for a dignity that they might suffer for the
name of God, rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer for his Name,
Acts 5.41.
5. Acts 41. And therefore the Primitive Martyrs suffered the spoiling of their
goods with joy, Heb. 10.34.
Heb. 10.34. We do it with fretting and murmuring, and that must be taken from
us which we should contribute unto the cause of God, we count it our
punishment, they counted it their crown and glory. It is reported of Hooper,
Fox his Acts and Monum.
that when he was Bishop of Worcester, his Arms were a Lamb in a flaming
bush, incircled with the rays of the Sun beams, not under the notion of an
Agnus Dei. But if it was, as it is observed by those that read the story, under
another intimation, and thus we may undertake to emblazon them. The Lamb
signifies an innocent Christian, and the burning bush the fire of persecution;
and the Sun beams the beauty and glory of the innocent Christian in those
sufferings.

James 2, 3. James 1.2.3.
Count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations, knowing that the
trial of your faith works patience, that ye may be perfect. Indeed it is a
child's portion, a thing that God will give to all his own children; and
therefore the Apostle argues, that God deals with his people like children,
when they suffer for him, 12. Heb. 7. Heb. 12.7. (...).
If you endure chastening, God deals with you as sons. If you suffer with
patience, says the original: But if you suffer frettingly, or with
impatience, that is not the sign of a child, nor the badge of a sufferer for
God. The sufferings that are laid on his people by the hand of God, they are
not grievous merely because they are sufferings, Non sunt omnibus onerosa
tolerantibus, sed tol^rare nolen^ ib^n. Salvian.
but because of men's impatience they become grievous. This has been spoken by
way of encouragement, to lay down our selves patiently and meekly under the
hand of God in the time of tribulation, and to bear the sufferings that God
shall lay on his Church.

Let me next point at the means how we may bring our hearts into such a frame,
that we may with meekness and calmnesse of spirit, under go the hand of God,
he lays on us, how heavy soever it may seem at present. There are three
directions. Directions.


Why does the living man complain, says the Prophet, a man for the punishment
of his sins? 3. Lam. 39. As if he should say, Lam. 3.39.
It is right that a man should suffer for his sin. With this it is that the
Church stops her own mouth in 7. Micah 9. I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, Micha. 7.9.
because I have sinned: And for our parts we have nothing to say, God is so
righteous in all he has brought upon us, though our calamities be grievous, we
may see as in a glass set before us, both the provocations and the calamities
of our dear country, in what God most justly threatened against Israel, Deuteronomy.
28.47. to 52.
if we read 28. Deuteronomy. from the 47. verse to the 52. verse; Because thou
servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse, and with gladness of heart,
for the abundance of all things, therefore shall thou serve thy enemy, which the
Lord thy God shall send against thee, in hunger and in thirst, and in nakedness,
in want of all things; and he shall put a yoke of Iron on thy neck, till he
have destroyed thee: the Lord shall bring a Nation against thee from far,
from the end of the earth, as swift as the Eagle flies, a Nation whose tongues
thou shall not understand, a Nation of fierce countenance, which shall not
regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the young: And he shall eat
the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy Land until thou be destroyed.
And he also shall not leave thee either corn, or wine, or oil, or the increase
of thy kine, or fl^ckes of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee. I may say
this day is this Scripture fulfilled not in our ears only, but in our
experience, and in our fears also.

Romans 18. Romans 8.18.
I reckon that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy of the glory
that shall be revealed. And you may see more clearly in 2 Co^. 4 16 2 Cor. 4,
16.
to the end of the chapter, how excellently this prestle, Why? Because we
looked not upon things temporal, we looked on things eternal. What is it to
lose a house, an estate, or case, or pleasure, or fine cloathe^? What is it to
lose all these? If we look on things eternal, an inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven, if we look upon things
far more excellent and that eternal weight of glory.

Heb. 11.1.
11. Heb. 1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen. This is an excellency of faith, That it brings all things to the
present enjoyment of a believer, even things that are past many years ago,
and all forgotten; Faith, I say, is able to bring them back again to a
Christians present use and comfort. And things that are on the other side far
off to come; Faith can foresee, and as by a perspective present them to the
soul as if in being. We should therefore labor to live by faith, as it is
promised. Heb. 10.38.
The just live by faith, Heb. 10.38. And as we see the Martyrs did, Heb. 11.13.
Heb. 11.13. They looked on the promises afar off, and were persuaded of them
before they came unto them. And as Abraham who enjoyed Christ in a promise,
Joh. 8.56.
Joh. 8.56. He saw my day and rejoiced, he saw it by faith, and rejoiced in
heart, as if he had seen it with the eyes of his body. So that there is an
excellent Art in Faith (if I may so call it) to support the heart of man in
time trouble, that if we would make use of it, we should be so strengthened in
the day of our calamity, that we should not sink. Come we now to the words of
the Text, wherein the Prophet, having bridled their too hasty expectation of
deliverance in so short a time as the false Prophets pretended, he goes about
to uphold their faith, that they may wait for deliverance till the appointed
time; to which purpose,

verse 11.

verse 12.13.

I shall undertake only the former, The ground.
the groond whereupon the Prophet builds their expectation, Gods thoughts,
concerning which the Prophet holds out two things.

I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord.

To give them an expected end.

Before I speak of the manner of the carriage of them, I shall show you what
these thoughts are, then how these thoughts of God are carried. Gods thoughts
in Scripture principally signify two things. Sometimes they are taken for Gods
everlasting counsels and determinations, that are secret. So 33. Psalm. The
counsel of the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to
generations. Psalm. 33.11.
Eo sua consiliaretulerat: I know my thoughts, that is to say, I know that in
my counsels and secret determinations, Non prius de illorum ^xilio, quam de
illoram l^bertate cogitavit. Sanctius.
I am resolved for your deliverance in due time. And Sanctius observes and
resolves upon these words, that God did no sooner think of, or purpose their
bondage in Babylon, then he did purpose their deliverance and freedom from
that captivity.

Sometimes Gods thoughts are taken for his word, his revealed will or promises,
Gods thoughts concerning the Babylonish captivity, were here as much as Gods
will revealed in his word, or Gods promises that he had made to his people,
concerning their deliverance, and you shall see, that the promise which God
calls here his thoughts, J^^em. 25 12.
is recorded, 25. Jer. 12. And it shall come to pass when seventie years are
^ccomplished, that I will punish the King of Babylon, and that Nation, says
the Lord, for their iniquity, and the Land of the Ch^ldeans, and will make it
perpetual desolations. And I will bring you back again to your own Land. This
was the promise and the word that God here calls his thoughts, I know my
thoughts. In the mean time these thoughts are carried somewhat secretly,
mysteriously, and in a hidden way, and therefore though be mean his promises
and will concerning this matter which are revealed, yet are they called
thoughts, which you know are most out of sight: yea, they are called the
thoughts of God, the more unsearchable and less to be known: they are thoughts
known to God. You know something of God, it may be, but his ways, much more
his thoughts, are past finding out, that is to say, in what manner or when he
will perform his promise, though the promise it self may perhaps be known. So
that here is the first thing intended in the secret carriage of his thoughts,
Opposition to your thoughts.
I know them, that is to say, they are things known to me, but they are not
known to you; My thoughts concerning your deliverance, are unlike your
thoughts, you think of your deliverance two years hence; but I have no such
thoughts, says God, my thoughts are otherwise, and therefore be says, I know
my thoughts, your thoughts are, that you shall suddenly be brought out of
bondage, and back to Jerusalem: but, says God, my thoughts are otherwise:
whereby he intends to set forth a secret Antithesis, or opposition between
Gods thoughts, and the thoughts of the Jews in this time of their captivity
and bondage. From whence the point is.



I shall not follow this point in the full extent and latitude of it; but only
as it is before you in the Text, concerning the Churches afflictions and
deliverance out of trouble.

God has other thoughts then man has concerning her afflictions and
deliverances. A Patient, you know, under the hand of a Physician, when he has
suffered a great deal of Physic, and is much weakened in body, cries out, Oh
I have Physic enough, it is high time I were comforted up again by cordialls,
but the wise Phisician may be, has other thoughts that he must yet evacuate
more, and bring him lower before he can recover him.

God is the Phisician, and the Church is his patient, and she is apt to think,
Oh, now we are weak enough, and brought very low; now it is time for God to
deliver: yet it may be God may determine, and that not without cause, that the
Church shall be brought lower yet: the Church has such thoughts as th^se, if
you observe, Psalm. 74. wherein she complains, as if God had forgotten her,
Psalm. 74.1.
and his covenant, and his enemies, as if God had over-slipped the time of her
deliverance; the like we find of men's thoughts, when God is begun to proceed
against sinners in his wrath, they think he will never be reconciled more, he
will utterly consume and cast off, his covenant shall be broken, and there
shall be an end of all. To such thoughts God answers: 55. Isaiah 7.8, 9. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, Isay 57.7.8, 9
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to God,
for he will abundantly pardon: as if God had said, a corrupt man thinks thus
of God, because his corrupt heart has not bowels to pardon another man, if he
shall so provoke him; so measuring God by himself, but he incourageth them
notwithstanding, to come unto him for pardon, after they have so provoked him;
for my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor my ways your ways; for as the
heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways highter then your ways, and
my thoughts then your thoughts. Alas, man's thoughts are led by outward
probability, judging of things according to the event of things; Gods thoughts
are antecedent to all things, his counsels are from everlasting; our thoughts
and desires are many times after a carnal deliverance of the Church, that we
might have peace and plenty again, but Gods thoughts are more taken up with the
spiritual deliverance of his Church and people; he cares not though he leave
his people afflicted and poor, so that he leave them faithful that will trust
in the name of the Lord, and a holy people that will do no iniquity, 3 Zeph.
12. In the 3. of Ezra 12. compared with 2. of Hag. 7, 8, 9. verses, Zeph. 3 12,
13. Ezra 3.12.
there is an observeable passage concerning the building, when the foundation
of the later Temple was laid, there was a great deal of shouting and joy, but
the old Levits, that had seen the former Temple, the largeness and greatness of
that Edifice fell a weeping, because they saw, that the Temple that was then in
building (the second Temple) was not like to be so great and so glorious as the
former Temple had been; this was man's thought, but God says, Hag. 2.7, 8 9,.
2. Hagai 7, 8, 9 v. I will fill this house with glory, and the later house
shall be greater then the glory of the former house; as if he should have said,
you think that I am wanting to my house, because I build not so great and
outwardly glorious a Temple as I did before, that's nothing says God, my
thoughts are not on the outward Temple, but I mean to make this later Temple a
great deal more glorious and honorable then the former, because I will make it
glorious with a spiritual glory, the former Temple, how goodly soever it was
in building, never had Christ in it; but this later Temple shall have Christ in
it, that shall make it more honorable and more glorious then the other Temple
was; even so it is here: many times our thoughts are carnal thoughts,
concerning the Churches deliverance and affliction, they are carried to outward
things, we would feign be as we were, trading as it was, plenty as it was,
these are the things we look on: whereas God has other thoughts, it may be he
would have us a more honorable people another way, he would have us more
zealous and holy then ever we were, to honor us with more of the Kingdom of
Christ then before, to make us richer in the work of Reformation and in
spirtuall things then we were before in temporal things.

Judges 20. the Lord had by providence put into the hands of Gideon a
considerable army against the Midianites, they were thirty two thousand, Judge.
7.20.
but God comes to him and tells him, these are too many for me to deliver the
Midianites into thy hands, for if I deliver the Midianites into the hands of so
many, they will say, Israel saved themselves, and these men did the work, and
these shall carry away all the glory of the day; and therefore, says God, I
cannot with safety of my own honor deliver into their hands the Midianites,
God could with more safety deliver them into the hands of three hundred, then
into the hands of thirty two thousand, for then all the world must needs be
convinced, and say, This was the very finger of God, and a special work of the
Almighty; And indeed, my Brethren, we are never brought thoroughly to give God
his honor in such things as these, while we are in ways of probability,
while we are in hope through humane strength. The Prophet observing such a
disposition in the Jews; namely, that they would not acknowledge Gods hand,
unless they were reduced into straits that should make them hopeless, tells
them, 37. Ezech. 12, 13. They should be as good as dead in Babylon, Ezech
37.12, 13.
wel-nigh buried in that captivity, but God would deliver them thence, and,
when I have opened your graves, said God, and brought you back out of your
graves again, then shall ye know that I am the Lord; you would not know
before, but then shall you know that I am the Lord.

Oh, how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out? 11.
Romans 33. Romans 11.33. Est in rebus, nec tamen est inclusus, est extra res, nec
tamen est exclusus, August.


It is like God, when we say of him, he is incomprehensible, God is in things,
yet not included, and he is without things, yet not excluded; so it is done
like the Almighty, when he does not according to humane rules of policy and
prudence, but when he does things beyond all grounds of expectation, of wisdom
and reason, therefore the Lord is said to have his way in the whirlwind, Nah.
1.3. Psalm. 77.19.
1. Nah. 3. and his footsteps are not known, 77. Psalm. 19.

My thoughts are not as your thoughts, and therefore saucily talk no more of
your thoughts in the ways of God, Gods ways are above your ways, his thoughts
above your thoughts. God has clearly given our thoughts the check in four Four
things wherein God has checked our presumptuous thoghts touching our present
troubles.
things concerning these troubles, which we ought to receive and take notice
of, as so many convictions of this truth and occasions of reflecting upon our
selves with shame and sorrow this day.

Amaleck, the worst of all the enemies that Israel had, a people as much
abhorred of God as any, yet if Israel shall transgress, Amaleck shall
prevail, if Israel will not pray, not seek unto God, not humble themselves,
all the wickedness of the Amaleckites shall not destroy them, Exodus 17.11.
17. Exodus 11. The proud Assyrian, that boasting wicked enemy, God had j^stice
and wrath enough in store for them, yet God will not meddle with, then they
shall go on and oppress Israel, till Israel be reformed, till the work be done
upon mount Sion, and on Jerusalem, God will not strike a stroke against Assyria
for their ruin, but will suffer them to prevail, 10. Isaiah 12. Nay, if Gods
people continue impenitent, and remain in their wickedness, God will then
strengthen the hands of their enemies, Isai. 10.12.
3. Judge. 12. When Israel had sinned, says the Text, the Lord strengthened the
hands of Eglon against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of the
Lord. We should not run too much on that strain. Our enemies are wicked and
profane enemies, (its true) and God will plague and punish them: But let us
not make that a ground of our too much confidence and boldness. God may both
suffer and strengthen them against us, if we remain an unreformed and a
rebellious people; we have hitherto felt and found them as goads in our sides,
and thorns in our eyes. Our thoughts have therein deceived us.

A good cause may miscarry ^d tempus.
I grant, in the issue it shall prevail, and finally, and we may conclude as
much in the general. But take heed of concluding peremptorily for particular
times, as that we should conclude so of this time, and of these enemies; that
we shall overcome at this day, or in this generation; who can say so? A good
cause may yet have a prevailing enemy a l^ng time; and the people of God may
have a good cause, and yet fly before their enemies. Observe a clear instance
in the people of Israel they went against the children of Benjamin, Judge. 20.18.
Judge. 20.18. A good cause they had, and they were so bold thereon, that when
they came to go against the Benjamites, they did not so much as ask the Lord,
whether they should go or no. But the first question they make, is, Which of
us shall go up first, as taking it for granted, their cause was so good, they
must needs prevail, only they would be ma^tialled by the Lord: But yet for
all their good cause they fly before their enemies, Verse. 21.25.
you may see once at the 21. verse, and again, at verse 25. Therefore build not
too much upon the cause, as if the present issue of things did depend barely on
that: Deliverance in time shall come, which may be a comfortable encouragement
to go on in a good cause. But let us not limit the holy One of Israel, the
cause in which we suffer, is as sure to conquer, as the light is to shine,
being Gods, and therefore shall prevail at length. But a good cause may be ill
managed, and suffer for the sins of those that undertake it, and in this also
we have had experience of the vanity of our thoughts, we are not yet
delivered, though our cause be good.

Sam. 4.3.5. 1. Sam. 4.3, 5
And when the people of God were come into the Camp, the Elders of Israel said,
Wherefore has the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistines? Let us f^tch
the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that when it comes
among us, it may save us out of the hand of our enemies. And when the Ark of
the Covenant of the Lord came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great
shout, so that the earth rang again. At the 10. and 11 verse. And the
Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every man to his
tent: and there was a very great slaughter, for there fell of Israel thirty
thousand footmen. And the Ark of God was taken, and the two Sons of Eli,
Hophni and Phinehas were slain.

The Ark, though it was the outward Testimony of Gods presence, it would not
bear them out they were slain before the enemy with a great slaughter, and the
Ark of God was taken. I speak not this, that this should any way weaken our
love, or our thankfulness to God for those outward Privileges we enjoy, or
that we should any way lessen our esteem and reverence of Gods ordinances, but
that we should not make them, nor any thing else a ground of carnal
confidence, that we should build our selves up in vain hope, and set our
selves upon a deceitful expectation, That the very outward ordinances should
deliver us from outward afflictions and temporal punishments that may be on
us by the hand of God. In this also we have found that God has checked our
thoughts, and brought us low before our enemies, that would captivate our
religion, as the Philistines did the Ark.

The L: Brook, M. Hambden, M. Pym, etc.
Fourthly, in our thoughts touching those worthy and precious instruments whom
God had raised up to carry on his work among 01 us: we thought it had been they
that should have delivered us, some by their counsels, and others by their
valor, being so choicely fitted instruments, that we looked upon each of them
as an Atlas to our cause and Kingdom, and such pillars of the reformation, as
that without them it could not have been supported or carried on: Yet all this
while that we were idolizing his servants, God intended to do his work by other
hands then we looked on, and that Moses should not bring the Israelites into
the land of Canaan (though he was a man called and excellently fitted to lead
them thitherward) but when Moses was dead, he was able, and so raised up
Joshua, with whom he would be, and was as effectually to all purposes, as he
was wi^h Moses And I may appeal unto you all, whether God has been wanting to
his cause, through or since the taking away of such famous men as have appeared
for us; or whether he has not carried on the work more strenously since: he
that had spirit to make such instruments, has spirit enough to raise up more,
as we have seen so that in this also we have seen God checking our thoughts:
And as it is a check, it should be looked upon likewise as a remedy, i^ should
be enough to cure our presumption, to think on this Doctrine, Gods thoughts are
not as our thoughts.

A check to carnal fears in times of trouble.
It may as well afford us a check and a cure to our carnal fears: for as we
are too bold on the one hand, we are too weak spirited on the other in times of
afflictions, and when Gods hand is yet out against us, we are as full of
desperate fears, as before we were full of saucie presumptions. And in our
jealousies conclude, there is no recovery, no hope, or expectation left for the
people of God; whereas Gods thoughts (may be) are otherwise, even to carry on
his ends by weak means, and when his people are lowest to raise them, when
things are desperate and all past cure, then God thinks to work: for he
works not by power, nor by might, but by my spirit, says God, 4. Zach. 6. He
gives not the battle to the strong, Z^ch. 4.6. Ezekiel. 9.11.
nor the race to the swift, but to whom he pleases, 9. Eccles. 11. God many
times lays the foundation of some great deliverance very low, out of sight,
and (as it were) under ground: The foundation that God laid for the deliverance
and preservation of the Church of Israel in Egypt, (you may observe) was the
selling of Jos^ph by his brethren. A strange foundation. So likewise, Gods
providence had a hand in turning away David from the Philistines Army; wherein
God beyond all imagination intended to prevent David, lest he should have his
hand in the blood of Saul, who was slain by the Philistines shortly after David
was gone from them, as is obserable, 1 Samuel 29, 30, and 31. chapters. Yea, we
find God had another reach in bringing away David from the Philistines Army:
for there was need of David's service at Ziglag, because that was taken shortly
after, and therefore David was come away by the hand of Providence, to serve
for the rescue of that town, and of his wives, that were taken prisoners there.
We should therefore in times of danger, when there is the least likelihood of
safety or deliverance, we should stay our hearts against all carnal fears,
by casting our selves upon God, who works in unknown ways, even as we see by
those stories, beyond all imagination.

Remedies aganst carnal fears.
Give me leave to propose unto you these 3 remarkable things, to carry up the
souls of men from being transported with carnal fears in times of danger.

I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction, 48. Isa. 9, 10. That may bear
us up against fear that God is always unchangeable in his love to his Church.

Psalm. 46.^.
46. Psalm. 5. God is in the midst of her, therefore she shall not be moved,
God shall help her, and that right early; though it should be in a time when
the Sea roared, and the earth should be moved, and the mountains should be
c^rried into the midst of the Sea, Verse 2. 3.
Verse. 2.3.

Romans 28. So I pass from the former branch in the manner of the carriage of
Gods thoughts, Romans 8.38.
that they were carried in a secret way, unlike, yea, opposite to the thoughts
of the Jews, Your thoughts are to be delivered after two years captivity, or
shortly, but I know my thoughts.

Another branch, of the manner of the carriage of these thoughts, they were
carried, so as that they were unlike to his own carriage toward them, which
did speak nothing but misery and desolation; he had clad himself with
vengeance as with a garment, he had put on zeal as a cloak, he had taken the
sword into his hand, he had given them up into the hands of his enemies, and he
tells of a bondage and slavery in which they should lie threescore and ten
years; here was nothing but severity and wrath, to be seen or heard from God;
his ways toward his people at this time, gave so little encouragement to hope
that he had any good purposes toward them at present, that the Septuagint
translate these thoughts of peace in the future, not in the present Tense,
C^gitabo super vos cogitationem pacis. And yet, even now (says God) for all
that, My thoughts toward you are thoughts of peace, I know my thoughts that I
think toward you, though my carriage be thus, hard, punishing, and wrathful;
whence the next point for observation is this:

Deus it^ punit rebellem populum, ut illius non adjiciat curam; Before we come
to confirm the point, give me leave to premise some Propositions by way of
Caution or Concession. C^nc^ssions.


Psalm. ^^ 1.
60. Psalm. 1.

quite extinguished toward them, and that all is shut up in displeasure; you
see it was so with Christ, Mat. 27.46. My God, my God, Mat. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? and therefore much more may it be with any other
man: and David cries out, Psalm. 77.7.
77. Psalm. 7. That God was gone, and he would never return, he had shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure for ever, though he was mistaken.

Jerem. 12.7.
12. Jerem. 7. I have delivered the dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of
her enemies: though Gods people, and the dearly beloved of his soul, and unto
him as a Jewel of great price, he suffered them to be trampled under the
uncircumcised feet of the Moabites and Idumeans for a time. Anger in God is not
a passion, as it is in man, that it should overwhelm all his love, and cast out
all his bowels toward them; no, it does so indeed with us, and that is our
corruption, our sin, we cannot be angry but we weaken our love, but it is not
so with God; for his love is as essential to him as other attributes, and
therefore being of Gods essence, they are continued still in act, as I may say,
and must needs be consistent; nay, further, the love of God toward his Church,
is the supreme attribute of God toward his Church, and all Gods dispensations
and carriages in the attributes shall be subordinate to his love which he
bears to his Church; if he plague them, if he punish them, if he give them
into the hands of their enemies, if he bring famine or the plague,
Demonstrations of Gods love to his people, even in his punishing of them.
or the sword upon them, he can, and will do all these things in subordination
to his love, which shall be the sovereign a^tribute that shall steer all these,
and bring them to a conclusion of mercy and loving kindness at last, whereof
there are three demonstrations.

Heb. 12.7, 8.11.
but they proceed fromk Gods love and fatherly care of his people, 12. Heb.
6.7, 8, 11. verses, in all the sufferings that he brought on them, God dealt
with them as with children, says the Apostle, Whom the Lord l^veth he
chasteneth, and scourges every one wh^m he receives; if ye endure
obastening, God deals with you as with sons. And as they come from an
Evangelical ground, so all Gods judgments do aim at an Evangelical end, even
the benefit of his people; they aim not at the destruction of any, but at the
humbling, sanctifying, and saving of his people, that is, at least, finis
operantis, 27. Isa. 9. The Lord in afflicting the Church, is as a Physician,
Isa. 27.9.
all that he looks for, is a purging of them from their uncleanness, from
their sins and corruptions, and if that be taken away, he looks for no more,
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, the
taking away of his sin; and he clearly tells you, his end is their salvation,
that they might not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32.
1 Cor. 11.32. Moreover, they are dispensed Euangelically, as appears in the
measure of their afflictions, and from the manner of the carriage of them, when
they are at the worst, when Gods hand is severest on his people, yet see at
that very time, God he does differ in the manner and in the measure of
punishing them and his enemies: For thus God appeals (and it was in an
affliction that was very heavy on his people) 27. Isa. 7, 8. says God, Isa.
27.7, 8.
It is true, your afflictions are very grievous, so that they were to be left
desolate, yet I appeal to your selves (though you might in this case be
partial) Have I corrected you, as I have corrected your enemies? Have I smitten
you, as I have smitten them? Can you say, I have not made a difference between
the Rods that I have laid on you, and the Rods I brought on them?

Jacob, he incourageth her, 43. Isaiah, from the 1. to the 7th verse, Isa.
34.1.7.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: and he calls on
the Church, that she should believe and depend on God, and in the time of her
troubles he had a love to her therefore, which he would have the Church rely
upon; and indeed the Church could not rely on him, nor believe in him, if so be
there were not such an attribute in God, as love, and tender bowels of
compassion toward her actually at that time; for pure wrath and displeasure in
God would dutterly destroy faith, and not exercise it, for there can be no
believing in God by any, where there is not some love in God toward them; but
faith is exercised by the Church in the times of her sorest calamity, as is
observable, Isai. 63.15, 16. Isai. 63.10, 10, 15, 16.
though God was now afflicting them heavily: For he was turned to be their
enemy, and he fought against them; yet the Church, even then, strongly
apprehended his love and relation toward them, as appears in their
expostulation with God. Where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of
thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me? Are they restrained? Doubtless thou
art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us
not, thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer, thy name is from everlasting.

He is afflicted in all their afflictions, Isai. 63.9. though he afflict, Isa.
63.9.
he feels (as it were) every stroke that is laid on them: And on may observe in
this kind, a strange declaration of Gods bowels, Jer. 31.20. Ier. 31.20.
When Ephraim had been smitten by God, and God had seen Ephraim repenting, and
smiting on his thigh, humbling and bemoaning himself, Gods bowels were turned
in him for Ephraim: For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon
him, says the Lord. As if a mother should stand in a corner for a while, and
hide herself from her child, and hear the child weeping and bemoaning
himself, O my mother, my mother is gone, she cannot withhold long, but must
come in, and show her self unto the child. And if natural parents that are
evil, can be so tender over their children in their misery, how much more are
there infinite bowels in God toward his people, even when he afflicts them?

when he conceives that the Almighty, our God before whom we lie this day, is
thus big with mercy, and as I may say, in pain till he be delivered; he
would fain be merciful to England, he would fain be merciful to his people. O
then my brethren! give God way, humble your souls before the Lord, cast down
your selves. Levit. 26.40, 41, and 42.
You heard ere-while, Levit. 26.40, 41, and 42. ver. That the Lord did but look
for a time that his people would accept of their punishment, and lie low before
him, that he might remember his covenant with Abraham, and his covenant with
Isaac, and his covenant with Jacob our Fathers. O therefore shrink not up the
bowels of the Lord this day. If we shall not humble our souls before him, upon
so sweet and Evangelicall a motive as this is, I testify to you this day, that
we are guilty of shrinking up the Lords bowels toward us, we are guilty of
shutting up his compassions when he would be merciful to us, we are guilty of
our own destruction, as God said to Israel, Hosea 13.9. O Israel thy
destruction is from thy self, says God, Hosea 13.9.
but in me is thine help. I would have helped thee, but thou would not come
unto me, thou would not labor to be prepared for my help, to be capable of
my love, so may God say to us, if when he has offered us so many tenders of
salvation, and given us so many experiences of his goodness, love and power to
us, and to his cause: if after all this, we will not humble our souls, and
labor to draw out these bowels more and more to carry on this deliverance, to
finish what he has begun, we shall certainly, I say, be guilty of all our own
woe and misery; there is great need now of every man's improving himself as
far as he can, to draw out these tender bowels of the Almighty toward this
poor kingdom: Ireland is already overrun and laid wast; and the poor remnant
there, are designed as sheep to the slaughter. Behold the bleeding condition of
England, bleeding (alas) to death if it be not prevented Do you not look on the
desolations made in many parts of the Kingdom already? And which is yet a
greater misery, Is not England a divided Kingdom? a divided City? how can it
stand? how can it con inue? Therefore if you have any pity toward a dying
kingdom, if any comp^ssion to your dear Country; if you have any love to
God, any to the Religion we profess, and to the cause of Christ, labor to
draw out these divine bowels. God would readily open his bowels toward England,
Oh shrink them not up, let us not harden Gods heart against us, by hardening
ours against him, and against his judgments now abroad in the world.

Directions to draw forth Gods bowels toward us.
The better to instruct us how to draw out these bowels toward us, and to
prepare us, that God may extend and exercise his compassions toward us in our
present affliction, which he carries toward his people when his hand is upon
them, I shall present you three Directions, viz.

Isai. 31.1. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses,
and trust in Chariots, because they are many, and in Horsemen, because they are
very strong. And Isai. 30.2, 3. That walk to go down into Egypt (and have
not asked at my mouth) to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and
to trust in the shadow of Egypt. Isaiah 31.1.
Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the
shadow of Egypt, your confusion. The Lord withdrew himself from his peoples
help, even for their trusting in lying vanities, and turned that which they
trusted in, into their shame, and protested he would deliver them no more, if
they should continue to withdraw their trust from him, as he had delivered
Israel when oppressed by the Zidonians, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites,
Judge. 10.13, 14. Ye have forsaken me, Judge. 10.13, 14.
and served other Gods, wherefore I will deliver you no more, go and cry unto
the Gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your
trouble. We have been going down to Egypt also too much, riding on horses, and
trusting in the strength of men, we have had our confidences in our Armies, and
wise men, and gallant spirits, and the Lord has hardened his heart against us
hitherto. But if we place our whole affiance in the Lord, renouncing all
creature-confidence, his heart will melt toward us, and his bowels yearn upon
us, as they did upon Israel when they renounced Ashur, Hos. 14.3, 4.
Hosea 14.3, 4. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses: he
answers, I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely: for mine
anger is turned away.

Zachariah 3. nor let any persuade you, that this duty of confession, and godly
sorrow for sin is an antiquated duty, or now out of date, since Christ came
in the flesh, it is a duty continued still; It is a Gospelduty, and not only
required under the Law, Jame^ 4.10. 1 Pet. 5.6.
see 4. James, 10. and in 1 Peter 5.6. it is required of Believers, and charged
upon them that are in Christ, as having still need to humble themselves under
the mighty hand of God, that he may raise them up: Hold on therefore to seek
the Lord while he may be found, to call upon him while he is near: Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for be
will abundantly pardon, Isaiah 55.6, 7. Isa. 55.6.


If they humble themselves and pray, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
2 Chronicles. 7.14. Then I will hear in heaven, forgive their sins, and heal their
land, if they humble themselves and pray; prayer in this posture, is that that
will provoke the Lord to return and be merciful, when otherwise he is resolved
to sit still: Hos. 5.15.
As you see, Hosea 5.15. I will go and return to my place, till they
acknowledge their offense, and seek my face.

Zech. 8.19. Zech. 8.19.
Thus says the Lord of Host, The fast of the fourth Month, and the fast of
the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, Days of
public thanksgiving appointed for victories God had given the Parliament
forces in Hampshire, Yorkshire, and Wales.
shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts;
therefore love the truth and peace. The fastings of our former months have
they not of late been, if not turned into, yet at least mingled with feastings
of joy, and days of Thanksgiving? Since we have such experience, not only that
there are such bowels of love in God, but also that they yearn toward us in our
misery, let us endeavor to improve them, so as that Gods thoughts of peace may
be carried on toward that expected end which God has purposed concerning his
peoples calamities; and the rather, seeing God is now going out before us, and
has put himself into a posture of deliverance; let us go about to improve our
deliverances, that God has been pleased to bestow upon us.

It is said of Hanibal, that he knew how to conquer, but he knew not how to
improve his victories: in like manner, Hannibal.
God is pleased to give us victories, but we know not how to improve them as we
might. We love to hear the good news of successes against the enemies of God
and his Cause; we delight to hear of deliverance, but when through Gods
goodness we hear thereof, we sit still, and deliverance leaves us where it
finds us, we are never the more improved, nor a whit enlarged toward God, nor
more capable of a final deliverance thereby; let us learn at length, how we
may carry on our deliverance, Directions to improve particular deliverances.
and improve every victory toward the full deliverance of the Church of God;
for which purpose I shall set before you some few following directions.

Israel out of their bondage, they did not slack, but improve their duty of
prayer, the more he delivered, the more they prayed, Psalm. 126.1.
Psalm. 126.1. the Lord had begun to turn the captivity of Babylon, When the
Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, then were we like unto them that
dream, the deliverance was so great, as that they durst hardly believe their
own sense and experience thereof, but were as in a dream; Verse 4.
yet verse 4. they make it matter of their farther prayer, Turn again our
captivity as the rivers in the South, as thou have begun to turn the stream of
our captivity, turn it as the streams in the South, which do satisfy the dry
and thirsty land in those parts, so turn thou our captivity, till thou have
fully accomplished the work of our deliverance: Especially when God gives us
deliverances as the fruit of our prayer, we have great cause then to prosecute
and pursue our victories by our prayers; and for our late successes, God has
given them as the fruit of prayer, and in them God has visibly returned an
answer to all the cries and armies of supplications that have been sent up on
our fasting days to the throne of Grace, and therefore you should follow it,
as you know the holy Ghost directs us, Psalm. 65.2. O thou that hear
prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come; when God manifests himself to his
peoples experience, that he is a prayer-hearing God, he does in effect
encourage all men to wait upon him in prayer.

Themisteeles complained the people used him) like a Plane tree, which people
run unto for a shelter in a storm, but at another time neglect it, pluck off
her leaves; or as some men use Physicians, only while they are sick, but when
they are recovered and in health, look not after them: thus are we also apt to
deal with God when he has delivered us from some particular distress, we let
go our hold on God, and abate our zeal in following him by prayers and
supplications, as if we needed him not now as before, and were resolved not to
seek him any more, till a new distress should drive us to him, and so to seek
him, not out of any love to him, or desire of his honor, but merely out of
concupiscence and self-love, whereby to serve our own turns upon him. Oh!
consider of such a cursed disposition, and for time to come, the more God
delivers, let us be the more careful to depend on him still. I wonder,
beloved, which of you, that having received any deliverance from a disease, by
the hand of a wise Physician, will be any whit the less regardfull of the
Physician, because he has cured him, will he not the rather know him against
another time, and keep correspondence and acquaintance with him, because he
knows not how soon he may have need of him? So when God has delivered us, let
us not a whit slack our dependence, nay, depend on him the more; now we have
known and felt him by experience, therefore we should the more take notice of
him and his faithfulness, and cleave unto him. It was an excellent conclusion
which the Church made, Psalm. 124.8.
Psalm. 124.8. upon her miraculous deliverance from wrathfully enraged enemies,
by the evident hand of God, which when she has affectionately set forth in the
body of the Psalm with praises that were due unto God for it: (Blessed be the
Lord, who has not given us over for a prey unto their teeth) she concludes,
that her help stands only in the name of the Lord, as intimating a resolution
to depend upon no other help but his for the time to come; and what the Church
did then, let the Church do now. The Church now has been parallel to the
Church then in dangers, the wrath of wicked men has been kindled against us in
our days, as it was against Israel, and they have desired to swallow us up
alive: And the Church now has been parallel to the Church then in
deliverances, and those wrought as evidently by the hand of God as theirs, If
it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may England say as Israel, If
it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, then
they had swallowed us up; And why then should not the Church now be also
parallel to the Church then in duty? upon the like experience to take up the
like resolution, even to trust in the name of the Lord: and say, Our help is
and shall be in the name of the Lord; Thus should we make use or former
deliverances, and experiences to increase our trust and dependancie upon the
Lord; And as this is our duty, so would it be very pleasing to the Lord, who
otherwise will be displeased with us, as he was with his people Israel, in so
much that he takes up a great complaint against them, Numb. 14.11.
Numb. 14.11. that for all the wonders he had done among them, they did not
believe; How long will this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere they
believe me, for all the signs which I have showed among them? I list not to
compare any more, but I know not whether God has not equally showed his power
and love, and faithfulness toward us in signs and wonderful works, even at
this day; not to speak of those never to be forgotten wonders, the Armado in
88. and the Powder Treason, what heaven-born discoveries have we lately seen,
and had experience of in this kingdom? what dangers God has prevented, what
deliverances he has brought to you in the City, to the Parliament, and to the
whole kingdom? Oh, let it not be said after all this, God cannot get us to
believe in him, the more God delivers, the more let us depend on him.

2 Samuel 5.24, 25.
That was Gods charge to David when he was to go against the Philistims, 2 S^m.
5.24.25. When thou hear the sound of a going in the tops of the Mulbury
trees, then thou shall b^stirre thy self, for then shall the Lord go out before
thee to smite the bost of the Philistims; and David did so, as the Lord
commanded him, and smote the Philistims; we can never more seasonably
contribute our endeavors, and bestir our selves, then when God goes out
before us. We see how it crowned David's undertakings with success; and David's
spirit elsewhere was raised and enlarged to more eminent enterprises when he
found Gods hand going along with him, Psalm. 60.6.10.
Psalm. 60.6.10. When the Lord had given him victory over his enemies in the
field, he goes about to beat them out of their garrison also: I will divide
Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth: Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is
mine, Ephraim also is the strength of my head, etc. not content with these, he
thinks of entering their garrison, Who will bring me into the strong City, etc.

We should likewise be encouraged to lay out our selves freely now when the
Almighty stands up, nay, when the Lord of hosts is pleased to become the God of
our armies, and to fight for us against our enemies: Oh! that we could now join
hearts and hands, and stand up as one man in the common cause of the Church and
State; Now, I say, that God has displaied a banner for them that fear him,
and for the truth; now that God has given out a Commission of deliverance for
Jacob; now that deliverance begins to come, we might pull it home to us by our
wrestings with God in prayer, and by going out unto battle, to help the Lord
against the mighty: when a Bell is rising, one pull will do more to set it up
then three pulls will when it is fallen.

Thus may we happily improve the tender bowels which we see God carries
toward us in our miseries, to a full deliverance, that he may give us rest
from all our enemies round about, and establish truth and peace together, in
the midst of us, from generation to generation, which is, and leads me to
open, the expected end which the Lord intends to give his Church, even the last
branch of the Text, the matter and result of Gods thoughts toward his people in
distress, to give you an expected end.

The matter or the result of his thoughts, are peace and an expected end of
their long and tedious captivity; and though their hope deferred has made them
heart-sick, Prove. 13.12.
yet when he desire shall come, it will be a tree of life. (You see) even the
thing that they can wish or expect; so that their desire and Gods thoughts
agree in the event, only they differ in the point of time; it is in Gods
thoughts to give them what they desire, but not when they desire it. The words
which our translation renders an expected end, are disjunctively rendered by the
most: finem and expectationem, so some; finem and spem, so others; finem and
patienti^m, so a third sort of interpreters: I will not trouble you with the
superficial descants of any that would severally apply these words, as that
end should relate unto their captivity, God promises them an end of that, and
expectation should relate unto their return into their own land, God should
give them their expectation in bringing them back into their own country
again: the sense and meaning of the words more solidly, is, that Gods purpos^
was to give them such an end of their captivity, as that therein they should
also receive the end of their hopes and expectations: the yoke of their bondage
should be taken off, and their eyes again behold dear Judea, and Jerusalem,
which lay so near their hearts, and all this in a time fore-appointed by Gods
counsels, though far off, even threescore and ten years. The point hence is:

Particular churches may be, like those seven famous churches in the
Revelation, now laid waste and desolate; and the Church general (as she is
visible) may be brought low, inter suspiria and lachrymas, her calamities may
be so destructive and lasting, that she may seem to have lost her visibility
for a time, as the Prophet Elijah complained, when he fled from Jezabels fury,
1 King. 19.10.
1 King. 19.10. I, even I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away:
and according as the Lord often threatens his own people, that he will destroy
them, yet still there is a remnant saved, to return to be as a seed for a
flourishing posterity, that after the Church have lain for a while among the
pots, sullied and all becolled with persecution, she may be as beautiful as
the wings of a Dove, that is covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow
gold. God intended deliverance and freedom to Abraham's seed after four hundred
years affliction, Act. 7.6.7.
Act. 7.6.7. and though he led Israel a crooked way through the wilderness, to
humble them, yet was it still with an intent to do his people good in the
latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.16. So that as by the course of nature, Deu. 8.16.
the trees and plants that in Winter are dry and sapless, and seem to be
little better then dead, yet at the Spring recover, grow green again, and bear
fruit according to their kind, as being appointed thereto by the God of
nature: so the Church, though she seem to be an outcast in the Winter of
affliction, and even swallowed up of misery, never to be healed, so long, says
the Prophet, as until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses
without man, and the land be utterly d^solate, and the Lord have removed men
far aw^y, Isa. 6.11.12.13.
and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land (speaking of Judea,
and his own people) Isaiah 6. verse. 11, 12, 13. (...) vigor^^^ (...), Calvin.
yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teyl
tree, and as an Oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves:
so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof; God will not only reserve a
remnant in the Church which shall outlive the Winter-like troubles which
befall her, but that remnant shall be as seed, which, though it lie under the
earth, and die, shall revive and bear fruit; Gods promise unto them shall be as
effectual to recover and settle them in a peaceable and desired condition
(which is, to gi^e them an expected end) as the Spring is, by her vigorous
influence, to make seeds and plants after the dead time of the year to be
flourishi^g and fruitful: And such thoughts there are in the Almighty his
heart, and such promises to the Church in his Word.

For he has made a covenant with his people which he will remember, Re^^^n. 1.
even in their afflictions, and whereby he has graciously tied himself, that
he will not cast them away, but recover them, how severely soever he deal
with them for a time in punishing their sins: Admit he should (as here in the
Text he did) cast them ou^ of their own into their enemies land, ^^v. ^^.44, ^^.
yet then, Lev. 26.44, 45. When they he in the land of their enemies, I will
not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and
to break my covenant with them: for I am the Lord their God; but I will for
their sakes remember the c^venant of their Ancestors. This proviso was expressly
put in, when God renewed his Covenant unto David and his seed, that as he
would be careful on the one hand to punish the sins of his people, in case
they did transgress; so on the other hand, he would continue his love to them,
and be mindful of his covenant, Psalm. 89.32, 33. I will visit their
transgression with the rod, P^^^. ^^.^2, 33, ^4.
and their iniquity with stripes, nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my truth to fail, my covenant will I not
break: His truth should fail, and his covenant should be broken, if his
Churches calamities should not be brought unto a good end at last; if her
temporal afflictions should be endless, or swallowed up in eternal misery;
but the people of God in former times have confessedly found his promise made
good in this particular also, as we find in the confessions of Nehemiah, N^h 9
31
Neh. 9.31. Having set forth how the Lord was driven by their sins to punish
his people, by giving them up into the hand of the people of the lands, he
shows us, that he did not continue their miseries upon them. Nevertheless for
thy great mercies sake thou did not utterly consume them, nor forsake them,
for thou art a gracious and merciful God. Yea, it concerns the Lord to make
good this covenant visibly before the world, that he may be justified, even in
the sight of men, concerning his faithfulness to the Church in her deliverance.

Vessels of Wrath, as his people are called Vessels of Mercy. In all which
dispensations he so carries intervenient occurrencies, that at length they
shall serve to further the glorifying of that attribute mainly intended,
whatsoever they may seem to do in our apprehensions for the present: as
Parcendo malis ita justus es secundum t^ and non secundum nos, si^ut mis^rtus
es s^cundum n^^ and non s^cund^m (...). Anselm.
an Ancient speaks of God sparing the wicked though he seem to be merciful to
them in our sense, he is not so to them in his own intentions therein. But that
sparing them, shall further glorify his justice upon them at length. The like
we may speak of his afflicting of his beloved people, it shall turn in the end
to the advancing of his mercy, as it did in David, by his 01 own confession,
It is good for me that I have been afflicted.

So then we may be confident upon this ground, that the end of the Churches
troubles shall be such, as mercy may rejoice in, and be magnified by, and such
as we may mark for good as assuredly as the Prophet does the end of the perfect
and upright man, Psalm. 37 37.
Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is peace: His life may be troublesome, but his death shall be comfortable;
as the Israelites through a crooked and tedious wilderness, came to the promised
land at last: Moses said of their journey, in that wilderness, it was to try
them. As the Goldsmiths puts his metal into the Furnace, that it may come out
the purer; so the Lord dealt with his Church therein, that he might bring her
forth of trouble to his mind, and set her according to her desire at last; so
says the Prophet, Psalm. 60.10, 11, 12. Thou, O God, have proved us, thou have
tried us as silver is tried: thou broughtest us into the ne^, Psalm. 60.10, 11,
12.
thou laidest affliction upon our loins, thou causedst men to ride over our
heads, we went through fire and through water: but thou broughtest us out into
a wealthy place: where we have the Church raising up her apprehensions of Gods
present mercies to a highher pitch, by reflecting upon the dangers through
which she came to enjoy them; however she was near shipwreck, she is now not
only as a ship in safe harbor, but as on shore in a pleasant country.

Some special benefits in which the Churches troubles shall end, etc.
We see then in the general, the Churches troubles shall end well, but what
kinds of good may be expected or hoped for as the fruit of them, we have not
seen; I shall therefore in the next place briefly point at some particular good
ends which we may hope and expect God will bring his Church unto by her
afflictions.

Mal. 3.17, 18.
Mal. 3.17. And they shall be mine in that day when I make up my Jewels, then
shall ye disc^rne between the righteous and the wicked. The Lord had been
working upon them as a Refiners fire, and Full^rs soap in the former part of
the chapter, by afflicting his people he had been cutting and polishing his
jewels, that he might render them Oriently beautiful, and at last he strings
them, and makes them up to preserve them as his peculiar Treasure, in his
Cabinet, wherein he places nothing but things of price: Reformation then of
the Church, whereby the holy seed shall be the substance thereof, Isai. 6.12.
Isai. 6.12. is one great good may be expected as the end of the Churches
miseries and afflictions.

Ph^raoh; for which Moses indicted a God-exalting song, and God himself is
pleased to hold out this, as an encouragement to his people, to be patient in
their afflictions; that when God has done his work upon his people by the
Assyrian, Isai. 10.12.
he will punish him, Isa. 10.12. Nay, he will destroy him, Verse 25. Yet a very
little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their
destruction: for the encouragement of a reforming child, the father will throw
the rod wherewith he was corrected into the fire; and this shall be so expected
an end of the Churches calamities, that the people of God shall rejoice to see
the Lord so jealous for them, to avenge the innocent blood of his servants: so
the Lord calls upon them, Deuteronomy. 32.43. Rejoice, Deuteronomy. 32.43.
O ye nations, with his people, for he will avenge he blood of his servants,
and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful to his land
and to his people: and so the Lords people shall, as is promised, Act. 58.10,
11.
Psalm. 58.10, 11. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance; so
that a man shall say, there is a God that judges the earth, they shall
rejoice, not in the destruction of the creature, but in the execution of
righteous judgment.

Hag. 2.7.
Hag. 2.7. When Christ first came, it was as a refreshing after t e distresses
of Gods people: so also the oppressions of Antichrist, and the stirs that shall
be in the world thereby, shall end in Christ's next coming, when he shall
confu^e the man of sin with the spirit of his mouth, and with the brightness of
his coming shall dest oy him. The tumults that are in the world, shall raise up
Christ unto his throne, though it be contrary to the purpose of those that
ra^se them: The Prophet observably points at t^is in Nebuchadnezzars Image,
Dan. 2.34, 35.
Dan. 2. that when the sword shall have carried the government from one
Monarchy to another, the Kingdom of Christ (shadowed out by the stone out out
without hands, which when it had smitt^n the Image, became a great mountain,
and filled the whole earth, Verse 34, 35.) shall put an end to the quarrels
that are among the kingdoms of the earth, by taking down them, and s^tting up
his own, that so all the kingdoms of the earth may become the kingdoms of the
Lords Christ. This, I say, is another special expected end of the Churches
calamities, which will bring with it a fullness of all kinds of blessings
desirable; all hurtful things shall be removed out of the Church, Isa. 11.9.
Isa. 11.9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: there
shall be also a confluence of all temporal mercies comprised in the word
peace, Isa. 32.17. The work of righteousness shall be peace, Isa. 32.17, 18.
and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever, and my
people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in
quiet resting places; and it is not unworthy our best observation, how
gloriously the Church is set forth in this kingdom of Christ, as she shall be
when it is come, Isa. 60.
Isa. 60.

hope unto the people of God this day, when the ark or ship of the Church is
even covered with waves, and when other foundations are cast down, that Gods
counsels have determined, and he passed his word that there shall be a good end
at last of his Churches calamities; If Gods people be in bondage under
affliction for the present, Zach. 9.12.
yet they are prisoners of hope, Zach. 9.12. For the word is gone out of the
mouth of the Lord, It shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before
him, Eccles. 8.12. Or what if we live not to see an end of these heavy
troubles? may it not much stay our hearts, that we know it shall go well with
Gods Church at length: If it was Eli's greater grief that the Ark of God was
taken, then that his own sons were slain (so that he could hear of their
death, and live, but the news of the Ark being taken kills him presently, 1 Samuel 4.17, 18.) it would have been, doubtless, so great a comfort to him if it
had been well with the Ark of God, that he would have cheerfully born the loss
of his children; we should likewise receive so much comfort in this good news
concerning the Church, that we should rejoice in it, though we should never
live to see it otherwise then by the eye of Faith, as Abraham saw Christ's day
and rejoiced.

Daniel even in the business of our Text, when he understood that there was a
time appointed for the redemption of the Jews out of their captivity, he sets
himself to do what in him lies to further it, Dan. 9.23.
Dan. 9.23. We should also lay out our selves freely in the Churches cause,
what way soever we may be improved, whether in our counsels, or in our estates,
What we should do to further this good end, viz.
or in our persons, we cannot be laid out in a better cause, wherein God
himself will be (nay is) engaged for the event. For the furtherance of it,

Moses commanded the people of Israel to take heed of every wicked thing when
the Host went forth to battle, Deuteronomy. 23.9.
Deuteronomy. 23.9. Let not the lust of thy pride lie in the way of our public
deliverance, to make thee contend for a degree of Honor, while the kingdom
lies a bleeding: Let not thy lust of covetousness carry on a private design
of gathering by the ruins of the State: Let not thy lust of envy or revenge
lead thee to hazard the Kingdom for thy will upon thine adversary, etc.

Chron. 7.14. This is that which will procure us peace, 2 Cor. 7.14.
not meritoriously, but conditionally, and by way of covenant, Isa. 32.17, 18
Isai. 32.17, 18. we find usually that Righteousness is the mother of all
comfortable and happy Peace.

Daniel did above mentioned, and as the Lord himself prescribes in the very
next verse to the text, and promises also it shall take effect. The Lord
enable us to do our duty, and of his own free grace perform his promise of
delivering the Church, and accomplish the thoughts of his heart toward her in
due time. Amen.

FINIS.
Reader be pleased to read Babylon for Jerusalem, page 2. line 2.


