Die Mercurii 31. December. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Wheeler, and Mr.
Hill, do give thanks from this House to Mr. Strong, for the great pains he
took in the Sermon he preached this day, at the entreaty of this House, at S.
Margarets Westminster, (it being the day of public humiliation) and to desire
him to print his Sermon. And it is Ordered, that none shall presume to print
his Sermon, not being authorized under his hand writing.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint John Benson and John Saywell Stationers, to print my Sermon.

W. STRONG.

(...).

The day of Revelation of the righteous Judgment of GOD.

DELIVERED IN A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS, at Margarets
Westminster, at their late solemn Fast, December 31. 1645.

BY WILLIAM STRONG, sometime Fellow of Katherine Hall in Cambridge; now
Minister of More-Crichel in Dorcetshire.

Jude 14.15. Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

Bern. in Ep. ad Romans Mona. Veniet (inquam) veniet dies judicii ubi plus
valebunt pura corda, quam astuta verba, and conscientia bona, quam marsupia
plenae.

Printed at London by T. H. and are to be sold by I. Benson, at his shop in
Dunstant Churchyard, and I. Saywell, at his shop in little Britain, at the
sign of the Star. 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE, THE House of COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHen I first heard that I was designed unto this solemn service, I could not
entertain the motion without fear, and many mis giving thoughts, both of mine
own unworthiness of so great an honor, and unfitness for so public a
work, being both by parts and place, rather destined to privacy and obscurity.
But, your command put me upon it, and some experience that I have had of God in
other kinds did strengthen me in it, who does not usually deny unto his, an
assistance proportionable to the service which he employes them in.

Your diligent attention, and gracious acceptance of these my mean
endeavors, manifested not only in the thanks returned, but also in an
extraordinary favor, and undeserved honor the same day conferred, is ground
enough of dedicating these my first frutis unto you with all thankfulness, and
of taking it both as matter of encouragement, and also as matter of engagement,
so far as there may be any possibility of service unto you, in so low a sphere
as mine; unto whose service, I call God to witness in that day of Revelation,
as far as I know mine own heart or ways, I have bin from the beginning
devoted, in this great Cause of God and his Church.

I hope nothing will be found in this Discourse upon its review, that will be
offensive to any, because, I hope none will be offended at truth; but, if every
thing be not so proper^y and clearly expressed as it ought to be; I humbly
beg this further favor, sc. a favorable and candid interpretation, professing
my self to be far from the study of parties, in any thing that is here
represented to your view, and the worlds.

The subject, I know, you cannot but judge necessary, whether you consider your
selves as men, or Magistrates. And that of Solomon, sc. Remember, for all this
God will bring thee to judgment: A more weighty admonition then that of the
Roman Monitour to the Triumpher, Tertul. Apol. cap 33.
Suggeritur ei a tergo. Respice post te, and hominem memento te.

Its reported of Zeuxes that famous Painter, being asked why he was so exact in
all things, and did them tam lento penicillo; Drexell. de aternitate.
his answer was. Diu pingo, quia aeternitati pingo. Had we this consideration
always before our eyes, and did live under the command of it; that what ever we
do has influence into eternity, stands upon an eternal record, and shall be
brought forth to an account in the dreadful day of the Lord, it would make us
act and walk with much more exactness then we do.

Assuredly (Right honorable) when a man upon his deathbed, shall begin to
look over to the shore of another world, and all his former comforts, honors,
pleasures shall leave him, as a brook that passes by, and his soul shall have
the dreadful thoughts of Judgment to conflict with, it must needs fill him
with horror and amazement, who has not a judgment of absolution passed in
his own heart by the blood of sprinkling before. And that prayer which is
recorded of Lipsius at his death will be ours, B^rn. super qui^^^a. bitat, etc.
Se^. 8.
Adsis Domine famulo tuo cum tota aeternitate decertanti. How dreadful must it
needs be, judicandum astare illi tam terrifico tribunali, and incertam adhuc
expectare sententiam?

With these thoughts, I humbly desire you to attend your great works; with
these debate, and with these Judge: And it shall be my daily prayer that God
will use you, honor you, and when any of you shall be gathered to your
Fathers, bind up your souls in the bundle of life, because you have done good
toward God, and toward his house, and when you shall awake out of the grave,
may find mercy with the Lord in that day; and that all the service you do
toward this shattered kingdom may be fruit abounding to your account.

Your thankful, and who desires to be your faithful servant in the Gospel,
W. STRONG.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, in Margarets Church
Westminster, the 31. of December, 1645. being the day of Public Humiliation
and Fasting.
2 COR, 5.10. We must all appear, etc.


MY purpose is not to engage my self or weary this Honorable Assembly with any
of the busy and perplex controversies about Church Government on foot among
us; wherein its not easy for a man not biassed to satisfy either his own
Conscience or his Auditory: ^ Tim. 6.4.^. (...): circa questiones La^g^^^.
Questions they are which if men once dote upon them, or be sick of them, will
occasion envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings and perverse disputings:
Concerning which, Luthers advice to a Synod of Divines assembled at No^imberg
and engaged in a hot contention, is not to be despised. Meum confilium fuerit
cum nullum sit Ecclesiae periculum, ut hanc causam sinatis vel ad tempus
sopitam (utinam extinctam) jacere. However I conceive it most unfit at this
time 1 for, to turn a day of humiliation into a day of disputation; and that
which should be a day of reconciliation with God, to make it a day of division
among our selves; and by the performance of a present duty to engage a man's
self (as some have done) in a future and may be fruitless Controversy; I
fear would be judged by the Lord fasting for strife.

I shall only crave leave to present my thoughts to you out of Rev. 15.2.3. and
so pass to the Text. Mr Mars^als Sermon. in ^x.
The Doctrine and Ordinances of the Reformed Churches coming out of Popery are
said to be [a sea of glass mingled with fire.] If glass, they are not
Crystal, as those in the Primitive times were chap. 4.6. yet not [as the
blood of a dead man] as those under Popery cap. 16.3. And this sea is mingled
with fire, Absum^s a Chrystall^^a puritate, quam deb^ret: ga^dea^us tamen hoc
quo fruim^r bon^, c^ntendentes a De^ut ad^ciat q^od de^st: Brightm, in loc.
of persecution from without, and of contention from within: yet it is the duty
of them that have gotten victory over the beast to stand upon this sea, make
use of these Ordinances, and rejoice in them, with the harpes of God in their
hand.

I should be glad if our glass were Crystal: I bless God our sea runs not
blood; and I shall earnestly beg of God to quench this fire: yet I hope it
shall never so far scorch me as to cause me not to bless God for what we
have already attained; though we cannnot say that we have attained: I would
praise God at the foot, if I cannot get to the height of Zion, and comfort my
self in those purest times, Ier. 31.12.
when new Jerusalem shall come down from God out of heaven, and a pure river
of water clear as Crystal shall proceed out of the throne of God and of the
Lamb, cap. 22.1.2.

But I wave these things at present, and come to the Text, which I conceive
more suitable to the time.

The maine business of this day is humiliation, which is so charged upon us;
Lev. 2^ 2^.
that the soul that is not afflicted this day shall be cut off from among the
people. Now a man cannot humble himself but he must also judge himself: which
a man will never do aright unless he set himself before God sitting upon his
Throne of judgment: That as he sits with you in your judgment (for he judges
in the assembly of the Gods) so you shall stand before him in his judgment
also; Ps. 82 ^. Eccles 58.
for there is an higher then the highest; before whom you that now judge others
shall be judged your selves; which is necessary for you in authority to have
always before your eyes, but specially upon this day of your solemn humiliation.

In the words read to you are these 6 branches.

1. Jesus Christ shall judge the world: The Kingdom ever since the fall has
bin in the hand of Christ as Mediator, Io. 5.22. Heb. 1.3.
the Father has commined all judgment to the Son; that as he bears up all
things by the word of his power; so he might also rule all things by the same
word: And the last act of his Kingly office shall be to judge the world, to
settle the eternal estates of men and Angels, and then he shall give up his
Kingdom to the Father, that God may be all in all.

Nemo tam magnus qui ^ffigia^ a^^ tam pusillas qui excludatur.
2. All men shall be judged; all that were, are, or shall be, the dead both
small and great; all, with a particular application. we all, we with the rest
shall stand up in our lot at that day. I who speak, and you that hear; you
that now judge, and they also that are judged, no man so great that shall
escape it, or so small that shall be overpassed in that day.

3. All shall so appear as to be made manifest in that day: Altius spectaris
Taul^^, me^ ju^^ciase nos in lucem pro^^tu^o^. Call. Estius.
so much the word (...) points us to; which though some Interpreters render
apparere and astare and make it all one with that Romans 14.10. we shall all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ: yet some conceive, and that justly,
that the Apostle had a farther intention in using this word, sc. that all shall
so stand as that they shall be laid open and made fully manifest in that day:
and so in the next verse the same word is twice rendered by our own
Translators, We are made manifest unto God, and I hope we are also made
manifest unto your consciences.

Romans 24 12.
4. The end of this manifestation; is that every man may give an account and
receive a reward. Every man shall give an account of himself to God. Every man
shall receive according to what he has done whether good or bad.

Now men and Angels were not able to take the accounts of one man; there be so
many additions and deductions and defalcations in them. Such an evil done, and
so much ungodliness in the committing of it, so much lewdness in your
filthiness. Such a good duty done, but with so much self love and self ends.
Such a service the act was but small indeed, as the widows mite, but with so
much love to God, so much singleness of heart, etc. this would pose the
wisdom of men and Angels. But Jesus Christ shall give every man his debentur
at last, how much glory is due or how much wrath, and he will balance the
Accounts of the world. (...).


5. The things to be accounted for in that day are the things done in the
body, and none else, for so much in the original the words import. Man is
confidered either in statu conjuncto, as the soul acts in the body, or in statu
separato, as it acts apart from the body. After death the soul lives and acts;
the law of God is eternal, and the creature is bound to it jure creationis,
which is an eternal obligation: 2^. q. 13 4. Abinitio peccat diabolus, quasi
semper in act^ peccati p^rsev^re^ idem qu^ ^st de cat^^^ da^^a (...); damna^i
indes^^e^tur p^^ca^t. Molina p. 1 q 64 2.2 disp. 2. Capel. de tentat. p. 146.
and therefore Aquin. says truly, Damnati blasphemant Deum and in hoc peccant:
yet the Schoolmen generally conclude that the demerit of sin cease after
this life, because then there would be processus in infinitum in the intention
of torment, which the creature could not bear. Therefore sins on earth
demerit, but sins in hell do not, because the soul is in actual possession
of eternal torment rather; In beatis bona non sunt meritoria; sed pertinentia
ad eorum beatitudinis pr^mium: Et similiter mala in damnatis non sun^
demeritoria sed pertinent ad damnationis paenam. Aquin 22. q. 13.^4. ad. 2.
Supplem. tert (...) partis. q 98.2.6.
as in heaven the souls of the Saints being in possession of glory, their
obedience is part of their reward; so in hell their sin, is a great part of
their torment, the demerit of sin, being limited by God to the time of this
life; the judgment of Christ shall proceed only concerning the things done in
the body whether good or bad.

Lastly, the inference of the Apostle upon the consideration of his appearing
in the first particle of the text, which is set down v. 9. We labor whether
present or absent to be accepted of him. The word (...) signifies to labor,
not only with the lifting up of the hand but the heart also; so to make a thing
matter of duty, as also to esteem it matter of glory; so a man's labor that it
shall be always a man's honor: we ambitiously labor, whether in this life
present in the body, or after this life, when we shall lay down our bodies to
be accepted before him: Habet and sapientia sui generis superbiam.

I shall only pitch upon the third, sc. the manifestation in that day, which I
shall present to you in this short Observation:

There shall be at the day of judgment a clear and full manifestation of
every man, what manner of man he is.

The Apostle calls it for this cause a day of revelation: Romans 25. ^ Cor. 4.5.
And that when the Lord comes (...) he will inlighten the hidden things of
darkness, etc. Now there is many a grave that appears not* many a wolf in
sheeps clothing, and men have their cloaks of covetousness and dishonesty:
But then the graves shall be opened, the wolf uncased, the cloaks plucked off
before men and Angels. Now things hid as colors in the dark; but when the
light comes they will appear: and this seems to be the great work of this
great and terrible day of the Lord.

In the opening of this truth, it will be necessary to enquire into these three
things:

1. What shall be manifested? 2. How can such a manifestation be? 3. Why will
the Lord have every man laid open in that day?
1. What shall be manifested in that day?

The Text says, we all; and that not in a crowd and in the general judgment
to receive a general sentence; Romans 14.12.
but (...) every particular person shall give a particular account of himself,
and receive a particular sentence concerning himself at that day.

But more particularly in every man there are three things to be distinctly
considered: 1. His state. 2. His heart. 3. His life: and in the discovery of
the man all these shall be made manifest in that day.

1. Men's states shall then be made manifest in two things. 1. What they are?
2. Upon what grounds they are built?

1. What men's estates are? There are two Covenants that God has made with man
under two common heads, public persons, the first with the first Adam and all
in him; the second with the second Adam and all in him; therefore the Lord
looks upon the world as if there were but two men in it, the first man was of
the earth earthy, 1 Cor. 15 47.
and the second man the Lord from heaven heavenly. These two Covenants are the
two mothers, Gal. 4.24. and the condition and state of the Son is according to
the condition of the Mother, partus sequitar ventrem: therefore in conversion
there is required a double change; moral, which is the change of a man's
Covenant. 2. Physical, the change of a man's image. So that as a man's Covenant
is, such is his state; if under the first Covenant, he is in a state of
nature, a state of sin, of bondage and of death: if under the second Covenant,
a state of grace, of liberty and of life, because no longer a son of the bond
woman, but of the free.

Now as it is an act of sovereignty in God, to appoint every creature to their
ends and eternal estates, whether vessels to honor or dishonor; So it is
also in Christ an act of Sovereignty to judge of their estates and to discover
them what they are: men in their judgments can look no further then the
action, and as it discovers the heart; but to judge of men's eternal estates is
a secret which the Lord has reserved as a royalty to himself. And at the laft
day this seems to be the great business that shall be done; the discovery of
men's estates what they are. Here wise and foolish virgins live together, Matthew.
25.
and together go forth to meet the bridegroom with oil in their lamps and
seem all to be wise alike; but there will be made manifest who is wise and
who is foolish. Here the tares and wheat grow together in the same field: sheep
and goats feed together in the same pasture, but then comes the harvest and the
time of separation at that day: when the goats shall be set by themselves, and
the ^ares bound up in bundles by themselves to burn, Ps. 125.5. At that day he
will sort the world and lead every man forth with those of his own kind:
though in this world they be all mixed one with another.

2. Upon what grounds men do build their estates.

Christ, Matthew. 7. tells us, that every man is a builder, and his hope and
confidence of the goodness of his condition is his house, Job 8.15. the hope
of hypocrites shall be as the spiders web; be shall lean upon his house, but
it shall not stand; be shall hold it f^st, but it shall not endure. One builds
his hope only upon the self flattery of his own heart, and says, I shall
have peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Another upon outward blessings, and Gods prospering
him in things of this life, therefore while be lives he blesses his soul.
Psalm 49.1^.
Another upon an outward profession of Religion, a form of duties, oil in his
vessels to make a blaze before men, and to these men cleave; this house they
hold fast, and that with all their (...) Fi^miter apprehe^dere mordi^us tenere.
might; for, if men will hold fast a corrupt opinion, and a sinful practice as
they do, how much more will they a corrupt estate; this is the general
delusion of the world, Videas ^os tenentes tenere, ^es ulla ratione discrere
quod primum occurr^^t manibus, licet tale sit ^^iquod quod own no prodesse non
possit, Bern. De adventu Domini. Sermon. 1.
Sic pereunt miseri dum peritura sectantes mittunt solida.

But in that day these grounds shall be discovered, there shall be manifested
who do build upon the Rock, and who upon the sand; who upon Christ alone,
received aright in a work of faith, and who upon outward blessings; a form of
godliness, some common work of the Spirit, a vain hope of mercy, a general
notion of the death of Christ for sinners, and hope of a late repentance, etc.

2. Men's hearts shall be made manifest, 1 Cor. 4.5. He will make manifest the
counsels of the heart, and herein these three things, 1. Principles. 2.
Projects. 3. Ends.

1. All the principles, which are the grounds of men's actions, and by which
they are acted in their whole course. Ephesians. 4.18. the Apostle speaks of the
vanity of the mind, (...) Est habitus principiorum, those principles,
according to which men discourse, and are as the great wheels that act them,
and yet seldom or never come into thought, the depth of a man's uncleanness,
and the height of his holiness lies in these. What is the cause of all the
wickedness in men's lives? they are corrupt, and become abominable; the
principle is, they say in their heart there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. What is the
cause of all the covetousnes among men and oppression, grinding the faces of
the poor, and treading down others that we may be exalted? the principle is,
Psalm. 49.11. Their inward thought is, their houses shall continue for ever. How
can men be so cheerful in an evil estate, a rotten and false peace? It is
because they say, I shall have peace, though I walk on in the ways of my
heart, adding drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. And what is the ground of
all the secret ways of sinning that be in the world? They say, the Lord sees
not, he has forsaken the earth, Ezekiel 8.12. So that whatever sinfulness is in
the action, there is much more in the principle from whence it flows.

To instance in some principles, which if they be engrafted, will raise a man
to a great height of holiness, and the contrary, to a great height of
wickedness.

1. Communion with God is the only happiness of the creature, and conformity
to God, the greatest beauty of the creature: and therefore such a man says,
Whom have I in heaven but thee? My soul is athirst for God, even for the
living God. Another says, there is no happiness in communion with God, and
therefore, if he may enjoy the creature, and the incomes thereof, he can live
without God in the world; forget God days without number, and say to the
Almighty, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

2. Its better to suffer then to sin: therefore Moses did choose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, Heb. 11.25. Another man says, better sin then suffer, and therefore he
chooses iniquity rather then affliction, Job 16.22.

3. Work is better then wages: opportunity of service the greatest mercy in
this life; 2 Timothy 2.2^.
the more useful any man is, the more honorable. Another faith, the honor
lies in the wages, and not in the work, therefore let me have as much wages as
you will, and as little work, Isaiah 45.10, 11. They are greedy dogs, that can
never have enough, and ye^ sleep, and delight in sleeping.

4. Piety is the only policy: All wisdom without it, is but the subtlety of
the Serpent. Another man makes his policy to be the rule to form his piety by;
for, his God is his belly, Romans 16.18. therefore in all things concerning
Religion, his first consultation is with flesh and blood: As the King of
Navarre told Beza, concerning his favor to the Protestants, that he would
launch out no farther into this Sea, then he might know how to put into a safe
harbor, if a tempest should arise; no farther engage then he might make an
honorable retreat, etc. And this making Policy the rule of piety, Luther
feared would undo the Reformed Churches, as appears by a Prophecy of his
found in his study after his Nostri cum a legibus Papae liberi sint; etiam a
lege D^^ liberi esse volunt, nihil n^si politica sequi; sed sio, ut sub illis
quoque Prolibito sint. In Calce T^mi. 1.
death.

5. A good conscience is better then a good name, or a good estate; therefore
such a man, says Job 27.6. My heart shall not reproach (...) Non prob^^s
affici^t Arias Mont. Non exprobrabit. Shindler. Mal^ famam boni vi^i perd^re
quam conscientjam. Sen.
me for my days; the world may, and mine enemy may, but I can better bear
the scorns and contumelies of any of these, then I can the upbraidings of mine
own spirit. Another man says, preserve thy estate, and save thy credit,
whatever becomes of thy conscience, this is the one necessary thing.

6. He that walks plainly, walks safely: He that does the truth comes to
the light, John 3.21. (...), says the Philosopher, to lurk is a token of a low
and a guilty spirit. Another says, there is no safety without policy, and
therefore, though things may be attained in the plain road way, yet he must
accomplish it by a design, or it will do him no good; for he says, Stolen
waters are sweet, and bread gotten by deceit is pleasant.

Its a hard matter to find any where a well principled Christian, that has
these engrafted, and walks under the command of them. Now, the more holy any
man is, the higher his principles are; and the more wicked any man is, the
worse and the more divellish are his principles: these shall all be made
manifest in that day, by what principles men have been acted in their whole
course.

(...) Possessiones cordis ^e^. Montan. Job 17.1^.
2. All the projects, promises and purposes of the heart, called the possessions
of the heart, because by them the heart possesses the things before hand.
These projects many of them are never brought forth into action, but are
blasted in the bud, wither in the blade, as Esaus project was, the days of
mourning for my father are at hand, and then I will stay my brother Jacob, Genesis
27.41. and theirs Jam. 4.13. We will go to such a City and buy and sell and
get gain, and yet know not what shall be on the morrow, Hos. 7.4. Jeroboam in
establishing an Idolatrous worship, (that by it he might stablish the Kingdom
on his family) his desires and purposes, were as hot as an oven; but the people
were not as yet prepared, wholly to desert the worship of God at Jerusalem; and
therefore seeing the people to be a lump fit for any leven; he sends forth some
to leven them first, and he like the baker did cease from raising till the
whole were leavened. Tarno. in loc.
There is a great deal of plotted wickedness in the world; much of it has bin
of late years by an extraordinary hand discovered: I wish it were with a
thankful heart (for a memorial to this Nation) recorded. And there is ground
enough to fear, that all the vipers have not as yet eaten themselves out of our
bowels; but that there are as yet fine designs undetected, though I hope they
that travel with mischief will bring forth a lie. But in that day all these
projects of the heart shall be opened: who do plot to exalt God, and who to set
up themselves; who to publish the truth of God, and who to draw disciples after
them, that they may glory in their flesh, who to discharge their consciences,
who to maintain their party, etc.

3. The ends and intents of the heart shall be made manifest in that day.
Grace is properly the change of a man's utmost ends; and this is to have a
single eye, Matthew. 6.22. sin advances it self, as the chief good and
utmost end, Hos. 10.1. Israel an empty vine he brings forth fruit to himself:
grace exalts God as the chief good and utmost end; brings forth fruit to God,
Romans 7.4. None of us lives to himself, no man dies to himself; God is his
utmost end in life and death. Romans 14 7.


Now all these ends of the heart, ultimate, and intermediate, shall all be
discovered in that day: and here it will be necessary to consider these three
things.

1. That in obedience it is not enough to do Gods work, but you must aim at
Gods ends. The Pharisees in fasting, prayers, alms, did the duty God required;
but the end being self, made the work their own. He that will be a servant
unto God, must be wholly to him. As the Philosopher describes a servant, (...).
2. Gods eye in all your works is chiefly upon your ends, 2 King. 5.26. Is this
a time to receive money, to receive garments, and olive yards and vineyards, and
sheep and oxen, and men servants and maid servants, etc. The Lord speaks
according to the intent of his Spirit in the action; when men make authority
and places of justice, profession of Religion, pretense of tenderness of
conscience, etc. to become subordinate to self ends; the Lords eye is upon it,
and abhors them. 3. A man may by his end destroy that, which he does by his
action most pretend to build; and by his end he may establish that, which by
his act he seems to endeavor to destroy: Iehu in his act seemed a great
reformer, but though he proved Ahabs executioner, yet by reason of his corrupt
end, in his Idolatry he proved his successor. A man may love the tyranny when
he hates the tyrant: oppose the oppressor and yet love the oppression: A man
may endeavor to cast out Episcopacy, root and branch, and yet love
pre-eminence, desire priority, and affect to be called Rabbi.
Look therefore to your ends, for its easier for a man to deny himself in
acts then in ends; self ends are part of the old man, which is last put off:
These shall all be discovered in that day, for the day shall declare them.

3. Men's lives also shall be made manifest in that day: wherein I shall speak
only of these three things: 1. All men's duties with their several failings. 2.
All their sins with their sins with their several aggravations. 3. All their
talents with their improvements.

1. All your dute is: Ecclus 12.14. Phil. 4 17.
for he will bring every work to judgment with every secret thing whether good
or evil. If a man do but give an alms in uprightnes of heart, it will be
fruit which shall abound to his account. Then will be manifested in hearing:
what you went forth to see, a man clothed in soft raiment: Matthew. 11.7.8.
how many Sermons you have heard for no other end then children turn over
books, to behold the gayes in them: when you went to hear men, and when to
hear him that speaks from heaven; Heb. 12.25.
when you did in heating stoop to the Majesty of God, and when to the authority
of a man; when you did receive the truth only in the light, and when also in
the love of it.

So for fasting, God will then say when you fasted, did you at all fast to me,
Zach 7 5.
even to me? you rent your garments indeed, but not your hearts, you have been
much in outward humiliation, but your souls are lifted up in you: or you rest
in humiliation without reformation, or if reformation, yet merely
Ecclefiasticall, and not personal. Is not this the fast that I have chosen to
loose the bands of wickedness, to untye the heavy burdens, to let the
oppressed go free, and that you break every yoke? Esaias 58 6.

So in all other religious duties, then the Lord will say to men, (...)
I have not found your works full before me, Rev. 3.2. I have indeed seen a
great outside, but there was an emptiness within, it was not filled up with
the exercise of graces, and holy affections, answerable to the great show that
was made without, etc.

Male in no^ mur^^ur ^ominum quam in Deum: bonum est ^^hi si Deus dignetur me
^^i pro cl^peo Ber. de consider.
2. All Sins with their several aggravations: 1. Of omission or commission. 1
Omission, Matthew. 25.42 I was hungry and ye gave me no meat. Such a time you
had a price in your hand to get wisdom, but you had no heart to it: you had an
opportunity to appear for God, to justify wisdom, and you did decline it,
and let the reproaches fall upon God and Religion, so you might be free: you
had power in your hand to have executed justice, and to have delivered the
oppressed out of the hand of him that spoiled him: Hab. 1.13.
but you were not valiant for the truth upon earth, but suffered men to be as
the fishes of the sea that have no King ^ver them; but the great ones prey upon
the little ones without control.

2. Of commission, and these either gross or secret.

1. Gross and open finnes; lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revell
ngs, banquetings and abominable Ido^atry of which men shall give an account to
him who is ready to judge quick and dead, 1 Pet. 4.4.5.

2. Secret sins, he will bring every work to judgment with every secret
thing, Eccles. 10.14.

3. Sins of youth or age, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice oh young man in thy youth,
and let thy heart cheer thee and walk in the way of thy heart: but remember
for all this God will bring thee to judgment.

4. Sins of words or deeds; for of every idle word that men shall speak they
shall give an account thereof in the day of judgment Matthew. 12.36.

5. Of all these with their several aggravations; for Jude 15. the Lord
comes to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all, not only of their
ungodly deeds, but of their ungodliness in committing of them, and of their
hard speches and their w^ckednesse in speaking of them against him.

3. Talents with their improvements; for in that day he comes to reckon with
his servants, Mat. 25.19. And in particular of these three.

1. Of all the means of grace that they have enjoyed, and the days of the son
of man that they have seen: Woe to thee Capernaum, for I say unto you, it shall
be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment then for thee,
Mat. 11.24. 2. Of all the honor, authority, estates and friends, which in this
life God has entrusted you with; for every one shall give an account of his
stewardship: he that has received five talents must account for five, and he
that has but two shall account for no more, Luc. 16.2.
to whom much is given, of him much shall be required, and to whom men have
committed much of him they will ask the more, Luc. 12.48. 3. Of all the souls
committed to them in their several places and relations: husbands for the
souls of their wives: parents for the souls of their children: Magistrates
for the souls of those under their charge, so far as that relation extends
(for he is the Minister of God for thy good; Romans 13.4.
thy spiritual as well as thy temporal good.) And Ministers also for the
souls of their people: We watch for your souls as those that must give an
account, Heb. 13.17. and the account of souls will be dreadful. Its part of
Romes trading indeed, but let it not be ours, to make merchandise of the souls
of men, Rev. 18.14.
And in all these, God will manifest not only their doings, (...) op^^, ^ud^^
(...), ^on^^um.
but also the fruit of their doings: for he will reward every man according to
the fruit of his doings, Jer. 17.10. the word signifies, doings, studies and
endeavors. The personal acts both of wicked and godly men are transient, and
quickly dye; but often times the fruit remains. Jeroboam dyed, but his Idolatry
dyed not with him, the poison of his example remained, that to this day his
title is: Ierobo^m the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin; so that the
sins that other men in successive ages are drawn to by an evil example,
shall be all numbered to him as the fruit of his doings in that day: And the
good deeds and examples of Gods people which prove a seed to the Church for
many generations, these shall be brought forth not only according to their
acts, but also according to their fruits in that day. And th us much of the
first branch propounded for the explication of the point, sc. what shall be
laid open in that day.

I come now to the second, sc. How can such a manifestation be?

The manner of this manifestation we may gather (as I conceive) out of Rev.
20.12. And I saw the dead small and great, stand before God, and the book was
opened; which is the book of life, and the dead were judged out of those
things, which were written in the book according to their works. Pa^.
Adration^^^ resurrection^^ u^^^mahoc o^^ia accommade ^^^r. Bright.
If we understand this, (as some do) properly of the day of judgment; then it
does directly and expressly serve to our purpose. Or if we understand it (as
others do) to be spoken of the day of judgment, but by way of allusion, yet it
holds forth this to us, that the manner of the revelation of all things, shall
be by opening of those books which are now closed or sealed up against that
last and great day.

There is a five fold book which the Scripture speaks of, all which the Lord
will open in that day, and men shall be judged out of the things written in
them.

1. The book of the Word, of Law and Gospel, with all the sins and duties
contained in them, shall be made manifest before men and Angels in that day.
Io. 12.48.
He that rejects me and receives not my words, has one that judges him;
the word that I have spoken the same shall judge him in the last day. The Law
in the full extent of it (which is exceeding broad) with all the precepts and
prohibitions thereof, shall then be discovered: Io. 5.45.
Do not think that I will accuse you to my Father, there is one that accuses
you, even Moses in whom ye trust. Here men are not able to hide the secrets of
their hearts from the word, its a discerner of the thoughts and the intents of
the heart; Heb. 4.12.
even while its preached by men, how much more when God himself shall open it,
and set it forth in its glory before men and Angels? And the Gospel also,
with all the glory of it; the sins and duties also contained therein, that in
it Gods manifold wisdom may appear, which is now but little understood; for
he will judge the secrets of all men in that day according to my Gospel, Romans
2.16.

2. The book of Gods decree, commonly called the book of life, which is Gods
free and everlasting determination of the eternal estates of men and Angels.
This is a depth here indeed that men cannot fadome, which made the Apostle to
cry out, Romans 11 33.
Oh the depth both of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God; how
unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out? But then these
deeps shall be broken up and discovered: then shall be manifested, whom he
has chosen as vessels of mercy to the praise of the glory of his grace; and
whom he has rejected as vessels of wrath to the glory of his justice: Then it
shall be said of every man plainly, as it is of Jacob and Esau, Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated. To some Christ will say, Come ye blessed of my
Father, receive the Kingdom that was prepared for you from the foundation of
the world, Matthew. 25.34. And to others he will profess, I never knew you,
depart from me ye that work iniquity, Matthew. 7.23.

3. The book of Gods omniscience; David speaks of this book, In thy book were
all my members written, Psalm. 139.16. A book of remembrance, Mal. 3.16. Thou
put my tears in thy bottle; are they not written in thy book? Psalm. 56.8.
Then shall the King say, I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, Mat 24.41.
I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; naked, and ye clothed me not; in as
much as you did it not to the least of these my brethren, ye did it not to me.
Then it will be too late to deny, and in vain to excuse; for he that knows all
things, shall be thy Judge, and he shall produce and publish his knowledge of
thee before men and Angels: For, Amos 8.7.
he has sworn by his holiness, that he will never forget any of your works.

4. The book of conscience, which God maintains as a Register in every man's
breast. The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, Ier. 17.1.
Indelchiliter e^atatum in co^s^ienlia c^rum, Alap.
and the point of a Diamond, it is graven upon the table of their heart, etc.
This book is now sealed up from men and Angels, and in a great measure also
through ignorance and fearednesse from a man self; but it shall then be
opened, and men shall read in it, the hell of their natures, with all those
hidious abominations of their lives, see all former sins which they have
forgotten, to be written in their consciences with indelible characters, never
to be blotted out. And this record, conscience will surely bring forth at that
day, because it is its last act, when it shall give up its viatory office to
the Lord; therefore the maine time of conscience its accusing or excusing shall
be, when God shall judge the secrets of all men, according to my Gospel, Rom
2.16.

5. The book of the consciences of others, 1 Cor 4 5.
good and bad, men and devils: for, God will bring to light the counsels of the
heart, not only of every man concerning himself, but others also, that they
may all justify God in his judgment. Non ora^ pro fratrum salute qua non
^an^i^ur reprob^^, sed pro s^ (...) tormenta ipsi^^ ^x consortie fratru^
^^goantur B^ug (...) loc.
When Dives desired that his brethren might not come into the same place of
torment; it is conceived by Interpreters, not to be spoken out of love to them,
(for the law of Nature, and all natural affections cease in hell, whatever
may endeare the creatures one to another) but it was out of a principle of
self-love, because their presence would tend to his further conviction, and so
be a means to increase his condemnation.

And this shall not only be of the consciences of men, but of devils also:
Satan is a watchful spirit, and knows many things that no man in the world
knows, yea, many things that men know not by themselves: now he shall produce
his knowledge at that day. He is now the Accuser of the brethren, not only to
themselves, and one to another, but even to God also; but this, above all times
he will do at that day: And so much that prayer seems to intimate, Psalm.
109.6. When he is judged let him be condemned, Ad dextram state and a^cusar^
(...). scriptura dicitur, qui causam in jud c^o s^^^t bona (...), Tar^o^ (...)
and let Satan stand at his right hand, sc. to accuse him; for, that was the
manner of accusers, Zach. 3.1. when he accused Ieshuah the high Priest, he is
said to stand at his right hand; it is therefore in judgment that Satan shall
chiefly show himself an accuser of men.

Now if we take but some of these, as if the word of God should in all things
pass sentence upon a man, and the judgment thereof might be discovered; or if
a man's own conscience should give its testimony of him, or one man but declare
what he knows by another, how strangely would such a man be laid open? How much
more when all these shall be joined in their discovery, and Gods omniscience
also shall be brought forth? surely, it must needs be that the hidden things of
darkness must be manifest, and then must be a clear and a full revelation of
all persons and things in that day.

I come now to the third and last head proposed, in the opening of the point,
sc. Why the Lord will make all things manifest in that day.



1. As Christ shall then come in the glory of his Father, so he shall come to
be glorified before men and Angels: He shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, 2 These. 1.10.
and to be admired in them that believe.

Christ will be glorified chiefly in these four things.

1. In his wisdom, which cannot be set forth without a manifestation, whereby
it may appear to men and Angels, what a wise servant he has been, and what a
faithful steward, and has managed all things for his Fathers glory, and the
accomplishment of his ends; then it shall appear that he is Wisdom,
Counselor, (...). Glass. (...). page 159.
Esaias 6.9. The wiser any man is, the more ends he does propose to himself to
accomplish in what ever he goes about: now, when we shall see in every thing
there has been magna conjunctio, and all his ends have met, and he has
ordered all the cross inclinations of the creatures, the lusts of men, the
temptations of Satan, for the accomplishment of his own purpose, and has
brought forth an harmony out of all this discord; this will exceedingly exalt
his manifold wisdom.

2. In his mercy, and the riches of it, both toward the vessels of wrath, and
vessels of mercy. 1. Toward the wicked, when the Lord shall declare the
gracious offers they have had, the heating motions, the importunate entreaties,
the compassionate invitations; how often wisdom has cried in their streets,
and mercy has come upon her knees to their doors, and said, Oh do not that
abominable thing; that I hate; How long will you love simplicity? Why will ye
dye? etc. Yet, when I called they refused, when I stretched out my hands, they
regarded not, but set at naught all my counsel, and would have none of my
reproof. Their destruction is of themselves, they have chosen their own
delusions, and forsaken their own mercy.

2. Toward his own; for their sins shall be brought forth (though as a
cancelled bond) in that day, that he may show, their natures were as sinful,
their lives as abominable, their hearts as corrupt, and their provocations as
many, as in the wicked of the world, but yet grace overcame them all, that they
may say, Who is a Savior like our Savior, pardoning iniquity, transgression
and sin? At such a time mercy prevented, mercy spared, mercy healed, mercy
pardoned, that in all it may appear that he is mighty to save.

3. In his patience; when the scoffers of the world shall say, Where is the
promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 1 1.
and the profane ones say, my Lord delays his coming, Luke 12.4^.
and shall begin to beat their fellow servants, and e^te and drink with the
drunken; then the Lord shall make it appear, that he has not been slack, 2
Pet 1.9.
as men count slacknesse, but only patient to u^-w^rd. Then shall the Lord
say, this thou have done against so much mercy, here is riches of goodness
despised; under so much means, here is much precious opportunity neglected;
this thou have done, with so much pleasure, so much greediness, under such a
form of godliness, such pretenses of Religion, and so much contempt of the
coming of the Lord: yet in all this I held my peace; and because sentence was
not speedily executed, their hearts were desperately set in them to do evil;
here was patience daily abused, and yet continued.

4. In his justice; for, he will in that day, Isaiah 2^.17.
Lay judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, that his justice
may be magnified before men and Angels. If in a particular judgment, (as that
upon Rome, Rev. 19.1.1.
the great whore which did corrupt the earth with her fornications) the Lord
shall be so publicly honored, that much people in heaven shall say
Hallelujah; salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God:
How much more shall this glory be given him at that day, when his judgment
shall pass upon all the wicked of the world at once? Indioa^^nt judici^
approbati^^^, laud^ and gl^rificati^^^^. ALap.
for then 1 Cor. 6.2. The Saints shall judge the world, sc. Assessors,
approvers, and admirers of the infinite justice of the Lord.

John 5.27.
but as man also, For the Father has given him authority to execute judgment,
because he is the Son of man, Acts 17 31.
and that he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world by the man
whom he has ordained. Now, if he shall judge as man, it must be done after the
manner of men, and condiscending to the capacities of men, that they may
understand the reasons of his proceedings, and the justice of judgments;
therefore we read, not only of a sentence in that day, but of a charge laid
upon men, and their pleas for themselves, and the Lords answer, I was hungry,
Matthew 7.23.
and ye gave me no meat, etc. they answer for themselves; Lord, when saw we
thee hungry, and fed thee not, etc. And the Lord shall answer, Matthew. 25.
In as much as ye did it not to the least of these my brethren, ye did it not
to me. For he must so judge, that the offender may be speechless, and the
reason of his judgment manifested before all the world, that they may all
acknowledge the Judge of all the world has done right. Which makes me humbly
to conceive, that the day of Judgment shall not be passed over in an instant,
(as some have thought) but that it shall be of long continuance: for, if Christ
should judge only as God, he could dispatch it in a moment, and send men and
Angels to their own places: but, seeing he shall judge as man, it must be
after the manner of men, that the creature may understand, admire, and approve
this his righteous Judgment.



1. Of instruction. 2. Of exhortation. 3. Of consolation.
1. Of instruction, in these three things.

1. Hence we may learn, what a vain thing it is for a man to encourage
himself in sin, by a hope of secrecy. Men's labeur is to dig deep, Isaiah
29.15.
to hide counsel from the Lord: not that any thing can indeed be hid from
him; for, Heb. 14.13.
All things are naked and open before him. But, it is actus mentalis, non
realis, A Lap. in loc.
this is the inward thought of their hearts, and the principle that acts them,
that God sees not. He that cannot spin a fine thread, carry a design
subtly, speak words smoother then butter, when war is in his heart;
Mariner like, look one way, when he rows another, and pretend to build,
where especially he desires to destroy; is no Politician for these times. This
Luther professes, that he found in his Reformation, A falsis amicis plus est
mihi periculi, quam ab ipso toto Papatu. Now, what a folly is it, to take so
much pains for secrecy, when shortly the day shall declare it, and to be so
industrious, to hide that from a few, which shall be ere long made manifest
before men and Angels, as if it had been written with the brightest Star, or
the most glorious Sun-beame. Oh let this very consideration preserve you from
plotting of evil, and strengthen you against this temptation, when sin is
presented under this notion to you; yea, rather always say in your hearts,
even for this God will bring me to Judgment.

2. Hence, learn what a vain thing it is to bear up a man's self with the
conceit of the good opinions of men, and as the Pharisees did, do all to be
seen of men; A good name indeed is a precious oinement, but I think, it
should rather follow the man, then the man it. And a man's rule should be, if I
take care of my duty, God will surely take care of my credit; for he has said,
Those that honor me, I will honor.

If a man had a testimonial from all the world, what would it profit him in
that day? Shall things be carried by voices then? Or will the Lord judge
according to the hearing of the ear, according to the good opinions of men?
This made Paul to slight the judgment of man's day; Is it to me a very sm^ll
thing, Cor. 4.^, 4. (...) (...).
or the smallest that can be, to be judged of you or of man's day. There are two
great Rate-bookes, wherein all the persons in the world are valued; Gods book,
and the worlds book: and many times where men set down thousands, God sets
but a cipher; (...) ^6.^5.
for, many persons highly esteemed among men, are an abomination in the sight
of the Lord. There is a double balance wherein all persons are weighed, the
balance of the world, and the balance of the Sanctuary, and persons, who in
the worlds balance are great weight, when the Lord shall come to weigh them,
will be found too light, For the first shall be last, and the last shall be
first. My advice therefore is; If thou be well accounted of among men, be sure
to be what thou art esteemed to be, or what ever repute thou have amongst men,
be sure to be, what thou desire to appear to be at the coming of the Lord.

3. What a terror must this needs be unto all men, who shall be found in their
sins at that day? Shame is that which above all things the nature of man
abhorres. Zedekiah will venture his kingdom, and life too, rather then he will
be mocked, Ier. 38.19. Now, when men shall be fully laid open in that
Judgment, whither shall a man cause his shame to go?

(...).
Here men have many cloakes of shame, by which they can hide it from the world.
Here men are not ashamed of many things, because not discovered; the thief is
ashamed when he is found, Ier. 2.26. but this cloak shall be plucked off, for
all shall be laid open. Here men are not ashamed, before children, fools, or
those that cannot judge of their actions; but this shall be a discovery before
men and Angels, and the only wise God also. Here men are not ashamed before
strangers, and those with whom they must not live, and therefore, if men do
evil in one place, they remove, and the change of the place will take away the
sense of the same: but with this God, thou must live in happiness or misery
for ever; for, as heaven is nothing else but God dispensing himself in mercy;
so hell is nothing, but God dispensing himself in wrath; for after this life
God shall be all in all. Here in time the shame of evil wears out, that
scarce a scarre remains; but then thy shame shall be revived, and thou shall
be upbraided with it before men and Angels: and that,

1. By God himself; I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear
comes, Prev. 1.26. 2. By the Saints; Mat. 25.9. Go ye (say the wise
Virgins) to them that sell, and buy for your selves; ^on admonitio est sed
exprobratio, hoc sensu, fuit adhuc eme^di tempus quod a vobis negligi non
^portuit, prostabat enim tunc oleum venale, cujus recuperandi ablata est
facultas. Call.
which is not to be conceived as an admonition, as if now there were hope; but
as an exprobration, that they had formerly neglected the time of buying, and
therefore, now they should see their folly in it when it was too late. So Luke
16.25. when Abraham says to Dives, Son, remember that in thy life time thou
receivedst thy good things. Nomen filii videtur ironice positum, you would
needs call me father, and glory in the title of being a son of Abraham; now see
what ease this privilege can give you in that flame. 3. By the Devils, and the
damned spirits; who, if it may tend to a man's torment, will surely upbraid him
in that day. Isaiah 14.9, 12. The King of Babylon is described, as brought
down to the grave, Hell from beneath is moved to meet thee at thy coming etc.
How art thou fallen from heaven, Lu^ibria haec sunt. Call. Est sarcasmus, sive
bostilis irrisio regis Babyloniorum occisi. A Lap.
Oh great Lucifer, son of the morning, etc. You were a man of high esteem, of
great authority; a zealous professor in your time, and one who was accounted a
Saint in your generation; and yet you hear, How art thou fallen from heaven,
oh great Lucifer? 4. By a man's own spirit; Thy heart will reproach thee for
thy days: for, if a man's spirit fly upon him with such bitterness here; So
foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee: How will men befoole,
and be beast themselves, and what a furious reflection will there be of the
soul upon it self in that day? Therefore, here men have but their faces dyed
with shame, but then they shall lie down in their shame for ever, and a man
shall cover himself with his own confusion, as with a mantle. Psalm. 109.29.

Wherefore we labor, whether present or absent* that we may be accepted of
him. That your persons may be accepted, and your services also. Right
honorable and beloved, you have done much good in the State, bin both the
pillars, and the shields of the earth, and under God the repairers of the
breach, made almost irreparable in this kingdom; these works, and that
worthily, find great acceptance with the Saints; yet, be pleased to consider,
they are not your Judges, but he that judges you is the Lord: Do all things
therefore so, that you may be accepted of him, because ye shall be judged by
him at that day.

Three rules of acceptance with the Lord, I shall crave leave to set before you
at this time.

1. He that will be accepted of God, must do the whole will of God; his
acceptable will, is his perfect will: David was therefore a man after Gods own
heart, because he did (...), all his wills, Acts 13.22. In particular, what
ever is defective in the Civil justice of the kingdom, supply it; Amos 5.24.
Let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. But
especially, perfect what is wanting in the reformation of Religion, the
speediest way unto which (I humbly conceive) will be, the sending forth of a
godly and faithful Ministry throughout the Kingdom, those who shall be both
able and apt to teach, who shall not think they have sufficiently discharged
their duty toward their people, if they have preached to them once or twice in
a week, but also may make conscience of Catechizing, knowing the state of
their flock, reaching publicly, and from house to house. Who ever they be
that shall persuade you, that the principal means to subdue the kingdom unto
God, is by Discipline, unless men be subdued by Doctrine first, will be able
to return but a slender account of all such their endeavor in the end. And I
dare confidently say, that a faithful and painful Ministry, shall by Gods
blessing gain more authority in the consciences of men in a year, then an
Ecclesiastical Consistory shall gain in an age. 2. Be true to your
principles: A godly man in storms should stand like unto a rock, it starts
not, it shrinks not: If a man be off and on, unsteady in himself and
double-minded, he will not long be accepted of men, much less of the Lord,
with whom is no variableness, norshaddow of turning. I know you meet with
trials of all sorts, are gaged on all sides; it has bin thitherto your honor
to be inflexible. Still be strong in the Lord; lay your principles sure, and
adhere to them to the end, for if you start, the kingdom sinks. 3. Do nothing
but that wherein your consciences are first satisfied: without this a man
cannot be accepted with himself, much less with God; 1 John 3.21.
For, if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart. To be led by an
implicit faith is a thing unworthy of a man, much more of a Magistrate. And be
well assured, that if any shall undertake to teach the fear of God by the
precepts of men, for, (as you ought not to blot out the Lords stamp where he
has set it) so if you stamp a jus divinum, where Christ has not; what ever is
not of God will not stand, every plant that my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up.
This Exhortation I desire to press by a double Argument.

1. At that day you shall be stripped of all your honors, titles, and
dignities which are now put upon you, and you shall stand upon even ground with
the rest of the world: for all these offices and relations, are but for the
time of this life; afterward all these differences shall be taken away, and ye
shall stand before God with naked consciences, as others do. 1 Cor. Potestates
legi^^^mas and a Deo ordinatas: tum in coel^ cessabunt principatus Angelica,
tum in Ecclesia cessabunt Ministeri^ and perfectura. Call.
1 Cor. 15.24. Christ at that day shall put down all rule, and all authority,
and power: It is not only to be understood of adverse powers lifted up
against Christ, sc. that he shall make all his enemies his footestoole, but of
all lawful powers, either men or Angels, who are now set up by Christ to rule
for him, and from him. Then shall be no difference between King and people,
Magistrate and vulgar, Master or servant, but every one shall be judged
according to his works.

2. If you be not faithful, you will appear before God in that day, upon
worse terms then other men; For, to whom much is given, of him much shall be
required. And, as it will be a sad thing for us in the Ministry, that we
should preach the Gospel to others, and our selves become cast-awayes; when we
shall say, Mat. 7.22. Lord, we have prophesied in thy Name, etc. ^urgunt
indocti and rapiun^ coelum. Aug.
We having the key of heaven, have opened it to many, shall we our selves be
shut out? We that have been a means to save the souls of many, shall we be
damned our selves? So for the Magistracy; for a man to be taken up to the
Throne of God, (as in Authority a man is said to be, Rev. 12.5. Ad threnum Dei,
^d est, ad solium Romanum subvectus Mede.
Rev. 12.) and yet at last, to be rejected by God as an abominable branch, and
to be cast to the Devil; and ye, who have bin Gods great instruments to save
kingdoms, for you not to be saved your selves: It would be a sad thing, to see
men of mean estate, low and despicable conditions, to enter into the kingdom
of God, and you, with all your honor and authority to be shut out.



1. Here you do many secret duties, which no eye is a witness of but the
Lords; ye pray in secret, labor in secret, etc. but there will come a time,
when he that sees in secret will reward you openly. 2. Here you have many
secret intentions, gracious purposes, blessed ends; some of which it may be you
are never able to accomplish, or bring to pass, (for, the desires of Gods
people are better then their actions, they are willing beyond their ability)
all these shall be manifested, and rewarded in that day. 3. Now, there are many
scandalous imputations cast upon you, and many a wilful mis-interpretation put
upon most of your actions; all is said to be done in Rebellion, humor, for
selfe-ends, and out of a desire to rule, etc. Neither has this bin your
condition from your enemies abroad only, but oftentimes from your friends at
home: And you, like wise Physicians, have many times heard your Patients say,
ye will kill me; when your utmost endeavor has been to cure them. But, in
that day God will clear you from all these, 1 Cor. 4.^
then shall every man (unusquisque fidelium) have praise of God: And then, he
who will wipe away all tears from your eyes, will also wipe off all blots from
your names.
Comfort and encourage one another with these words.

FINIS.

