Government Described: Viz. What Monarchy, Aristocracie, Oligarchie, And
Democracie,
is. TOGETHER With a Brief MODEL OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE Commonwealth, OR,
Free State of RAGOUSE. Fit for View at this present Juncture of Settlement.

By J. S.

London, Printed MDCLIX.

THE GOVERNMENT OF Monarchy, Aristocracie, Oligarchie, and Democracie,
Described.
GOvernment has in it this Order, Commanding and Obeying: The first Government
was paternal, when the Fathers or the Eldest of the Family did command the
rest, which lasted all the time that men lived to a great Age. Whilst this
Government continued, Law was not invented, because that the Father of the
Family, by the Institutions of Nature, could do nothing but what was good for
the whole Family; therefore they were not necessitated to seek for Laws to
secure them. The first, that brake this Order of Government was Nimrod, who
usurpt absolute Power, and held people to servitude by Force and Policy.
Besides, Families did so much increase, they were necessitated to join several
small ones together to oppose more powerful and mighty Families who sought for
Sovereignty and Dominion. In these Confederacies they united themselves; some
Families under one, as their Captain, or Prince, or Monarch: Others, into a
Democracy, or Number of Magistrates, that were to consult the good of that
Confederacy or Society.

It would take up a Volume, to give the several Instances that are in H story,
of this Nature, the which shall be waved; only remember, that Abraham did of
his own Household arm such a number of men, that He gave Battle to the Kings of
the Plain, and recovered Lot from his Captivity. Paternal Government ceasing,
people cast themselves into several Forms of Government, and they received
their Denomination from those that were Chief, and their variety of Forms;
either from their Opinion of such a Form to be best; or, because that, at the
Institutio, none person, or the Nobility, or the eminentest amongst the people,
or the people themselves, had m^st power. Even so upon a Change of Government
it falls out, that the Government receives its Form from them in whom Power
is. The chief of the Forms of Government are, first, Monarchy, that is, by a
single person, who is bound by virtue of his Office, to rule according to the
Laws of the People for the profit of all: But it often falls out, that that
sort of Government degenerateth, and cannot be kept within its Limits and
Bounds: But, on the contrary, conspiring in behalf of its own Interest, against
the Interest of the people, it thereby converteth it self into Tyranny, the
worst of Governments. The Tyrant rules by his Will, and lays aside the Laws,
and consulteth not the Interest of a people. A Monarchy is a dangerous
Government in regard it can so readily make or it self a Tyranny. It is the
desire of Mankind to be absolute, and a Monarch shall never want Flatterers to
prompt and hasten him to a Tyranny; because, under a Tyranny, they can the
better oppress the People, and arrive to Greatness and Wealth by the Peoples
Ruin. They hold the people by their own Arms and Treasure, in Obedience to the
Tyrant, only for his Profit and Commodity, because he only communicates the
benefit of his power to such as conspire and are Confederates with him, in
holding the people to their Servitude.

Aristocratical Government, is when the Noblemen bear sway, or such a number
of men, as at the first founding, or constituting of that Government, were
Chief, and had Presidency of the rest. Such is the State of Venice at this day,
which suiteth well with its Situation, and the distance of the rest of its
Seigniory; but it would scarce serve any either Commonwealth; in regard that
the rest of the Seigniory are Foreigners either under their Protection or
Obedience, they being Subjects to the Government, not Members of it; and there
is but few in the City, but what have share in the Government. This sort of
Government would not be durable in a large Commonwealth, because that the
Policy of this Government naturally must prevent and suppress the increase of
other Noble Family, in order to its own preservation. Thoseh^at are excluded,
when once grown rich, and thereby attained to Education, do desire to have
share in the Government, and shake off Servitude, which causes Changes:
Besides, the great men in this Government do create a distinct Interest from
that of the public, by fortifying the Security of their own Families; and if
once they should fall into Factions, immediately the most powerful Faction
sets up one of their own Faction to be Prince, or at least the Leader
thereof has opportunity, thereby to make himself Prince; as it fell out by the
House of the Medici at Florence; and also at Rome, by Sylla, who was head of
the Faction of the Nobility, against that of Marius, the Head of the popular
Faction.

There are Aristocracies mixed with Democracies; as that of the United
Provinces. The Great men Consult of the Affairs of the Commonwealth with the
Peoples Deputies, who are Annually Chosen.

Oligarchy, is the Government of a Commonwealth by a small Number, who either
hold by Policy or Force, the Supremacy; or who have absolute Authority given to
them. Such were the Triumvirate and the Dec^mviri amongst the Romans; Such also
were the Thirty Tyrants at Athens: this kind of Government was upon special
occasions Erected amongst the Ancients, to carry on some Notable Undertaking,
or to Determine and Arbitrate some difference as was blown big by Factions in
the Commonwealth: the which power proves Immediately dangerous, if not called
in, and Nulled, so soon as the occasion is over, for which it was ordained; No
Government can be more dangerous then this is, where the People are divided
either in Civil or Religious Respects: in such a Case there shall be nothing
but Changes, Murder, Miseries of all kinds, and destruction produced, in the
Commonwealth; it only Respects me good of those that Have the Government,
and those that adhe^e to them: For the rest of the people, they must bereave
them of their Wit, Money, and Arms. That was an Excellent Oligarchy Erected by
John of Leydon at Munster; and was like to have been here in England, by a
ce^tain People* that are unconstant, unlimited, spiritually proud, and
notoriously Ignorant; who think none to have Right in Government, but
themselves.

Democracy is a Government, where the Governors are Elected by the People out
of themselves; sometimes called Free State, or Popular State, or Commonwealth:
This kind of Government by the People, is the most Natural, and best sort of
all Governments; they Elect their Magistrates, which are to continue in power
but one year, or less; they Trust not their Arms in the hands of one Person,
but they are managed by a Council: This is the best sort of Government, because
that the persons do not continue long in Trust: the which is the only means to
keep them from Corruption or Oppression. When they shall be reduced to a
private Capacity, and be subject to give an Account of their Trust, does not
that Commonwealth stand better Assured to be free from Corruption, then that
Constitution that shall secure the persons Governing, and protect them from
Justice: He who does continue always in power, is enabled by virtue of his
power to secure himself from being questioned; and makes use of his Authority
that should be to discourage Evil doers, to defend himself in Evil doing. But
when the Commonwealth is large, and they send their Deputies, and Invest them
with their Legislative power, who meet and Consult about making Laws, Peace
and War, and the management of other State Affairs; it is more orderly and
freer from all manner of Faction, than it would be, if the People should meet
all in one Body, and make Laws as they did at Rome, Athens, Sparta, Corinth,
Thebes, and other Grecian States. Although the People have not an Immediate
hand in the Supreme management of Affairs; yet they have the vertual power in
them by Election, which is the Original of the being of Supreme Authority, and
also a possibility for every one that can arrive to Credit by his Parts, to be
Chosen and Elected for the Next Representative: the which will animate an
hundred in this Government (to one in any other sort of Government) to put
themselves forth to acquire Parts, and to fit themselves with Abilities to
serve the Public, either by Council or Arms.

I will here say nothing at all of the Defects of this Government, and the
Remedies; nor of any other Government: it shall be done shortly in a Volume.
But here I will give you a brief Model of the Government of the Commonwealth
or Free State of Ragouse, situated in Dalmatia, near the Bottom of the
Ad^iatick or Gulf of Venice. Reader, here take notice, That a Commonwealth
thus Constituted, though small, is able to preserve it self against the most
powerful Princes; The Councels proportionably of such a Commonwealth, are more
strong, and their Swords more sharp, then a Prince's. This Commonwealth or
Free State maintains its self by its Just Impartial Policy, in perfect
Freedom and Strength, notwithstanding they border on the Tyrannical Turk's
Dominions.

The Government of the Commonwealth of Ragouse.
RAgouse has nor been always a Commonweal, for that it has obeyed diverse
Lords ac diverse times; sometimes Grecians, sometimes Albanians. But since it
has embraced this kind of Government, they have been in some reputation. The
Ragousans, when as they sought to reduce the Town to a Commonweal, followed
(for the most part) the order of the State of Venice. Being thus resolved, they
first instituted a Great Council, knowing, that it was the foundation of a
Commonweal, and as it were the firm Basis or Groundwork of their City. All
Gentlemen of the City enter into this Council, having attained to the age of
Twenty years, and they are admitted proving their Gentry. In this Council th y
create all the Magistrates of the City, which are such as I will set down.

There are first the Pregadi, or Great Council, which should be commonly Sixty.
There may be many Gentlemen of one Family; for the Families in time are reduced
into a small number. These have charge of the Affairs of the Commonweal, and
do judge of Civil Causes; they also judge of Criminal Causes which are of
Importance in regard of the persons, as if any Gentleman be accused, or has
committed any Crime. They continue a year in this Charge, and are changed, as
they are void, for that they are not all created at one instant, but one after
another, as they end.

The Petty Council (so called in regard of the Great) is the Council of the
Rector, which consists of eleven Persons, all of diverse Families; who assist
the Rector or Head of this Commonweal. They receive and hear the Petitions and
Demands of strangers, and private men, Letters, Ambassadors, and such like
like; and are as a hand that presents the things which come before them, to
other Magistrates, and go afterward to Officers appointed for such matters.
And these decide some of those things which are presented to them, and report
the rest to the Pregadi or Great Council. They continue but one year in this
Charge, and go out together; and the others which are created by the Great
Council, enter into this Office with the new Rector, the first day of January.

This Rector, who is head of all the Councels, is chosen in the Great Council
by three Elections, as they do in all other Offices; and of these Elections,
the one is made by scrutiny by three Counselors of the Rector* and the two
others are made by Lot. The Rector remains but on^ Month in Charge, and he
is bound, during that month, to live in the Palace. He wears the hab^te of a
Duke, tint is, a Robe with open sleeves, different from others by reason of his
Authority. They give seven Ducats a month for his ente^tainment: yet when he
is one of the Pr^gadi, he has a Duckat every day to assist.

This Rector assembles with the Councillors upon working-dayes after d^nner,
and on Festival days on some occasions. But if the Rector be not there, the
most ancient Counselor enters into his place, yet they dispatch not any thing
without his presence. They give this Rector a Lieutenant, who has Jurisdiction
in matters which do not exceed three Ducats of Gold, and he is for Civil
matters only: The Councillors cannot be chosen Rectors the years, that they
are in their Magistracy.

Next, there are five Purveyors, who are fifty years old and upwards, and must
be of diverse Families. They have authority to cause all exped^tions made by any
Magistrate whatsoever, to be received, and they must be present when as the
Councels assemble. These may be made Rectors during their Magistracy, and are
so commonly. They are of the Chief of the Town, of great authority, and in a
manner always of the Council.

After these, are the six Consuls which hear Civil Causes, at first for any sum
whatsoever. They are most commonly men of great authority, and which enter into
Council with the Pregadi, and they frame the process of such things as they
judge. The parties are not accustomed to make allegations; but these Consuls,
hearing the matter in quest^on, determine what Justice requires, and draw from
every Cause two Ducats in the hundred. They cannot be Rectors for the space of
two years, left they should alter their proceedings in Civil Causes, and to the
end the people might be soon dispatched in their Suits; For they do continually
attend them.

There are also five Criminal Judges, and Expeditions go from them, atcording
to the Judgments which they make Gentl^men are excepted; for that in Criminal
Causes they go before the Great Council, and they that have Fees of the
Commonweal answer before the petty Council. Th^se Judges are made Rectors, as
the Purveyors be.

There are moreover three Offices upon the Art of Wool; these do commonly hear
the differences that grow betwixt men which exercise that Trade. They enter
into the Great Council, and may be made Rectors.

This Commonweal has also a College of 30: into which there may enter many
persons of one Family. They take knowledge of Appellations unto the sum of
three hundred Ducats, and every o^e of them has three Ducats yearly for
their Wages; which is done, for that all O ficers are finable, if they attend
not their Charges; for other wife they would not accept them, for they are of
small profit. When any Office is void, it is supplied by one that is in some
other Office. If one of the Pregadi dies, they supply his place by one of the
Purveyors, or of his College.

There are six Captains of the Night, who, one after another, have the Guard of
the City in the Night, with the Ho^garians, who are about one hundred, with
their Captains, and they obey these, who open and shut the Gates of the City.
They remain two months in this Charge, and they observe this order, that They
which shut the City Gates at Night, do not, open them in the Morning, for they
change them at Midnight.

The Captains and Earls, which go into Governments abroad throughout the
Estate of this Commonwealth, are all created by the Great Council, and some of
them remain in charge seven months, and others twelve

By this often changing of Officers, they preserve themselves: This is the true
Emblem of a Free State. The continuation of any Persons, or Councels, or
Senates, are but Defects; unless that the Senate were also to be elected, as
well as the Great Council, or Parliament; it is hard if the people cannot be
trusted with Election. It Is true, the people of England would, if entrusted now
at this Juncture of time, elect such as would deprive than of the blessed
Government of a Free State; but that must not be an Argument to deprive them of
their Right: they must be entrusted with Election with such Qualifications, as
may preserve the Interest of the Commonwealth. Those that allege, that a
Free people ought not to be limited in that Case, may also allege, That a
Physician must not hinder his Patient of such meat or drink as will ruin him,
nor force him to take such medicines, as will cure him. Liberty consists not
in every ones doing what he lists; but true Liberty is such a thing, as a
convenient and necessary Bondage; that is, I ought to be limited in such a
thing: If not, it will be to the detriment of another; this Liberty would not
consist with Society. He that would assassinate himself, must be deprived of
his Liberty to do so horrid an act. England yet was never a Free State; but it
will be, if the L^g^slators can hit upon the Mark of denying themselves, in
perpetuating their Power. No doubt but the People may be trusted with their
Liberty in that point, and that with safety, if they bad tasted once of the
blessed Fruits of the Government intended, and much pretended to.

FINIS.

