AN ESSAY In Defense of the GOOD OLD CAUSE, OR A Discourse concerning the Rise
and Extent of the power of the Civil Magistrate in reference to Spiritual
Affairs. WITH A PRAEFACE Concerning The Name of the Good old Cause. An Equal
Commonwealth. A Coordinate Synod. The Holy Commonwealth published lately by
Mr. Richard Baxter.
AND A VINDICATION OF The Honorable Sir HENRY VANE from the false aspersions
of Mr. BAXTER.

By HENRY STUBBE of Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

Vincat Veritas.

London, Printed in the Year 1659.

A premonition to the Reader.
BEing unexpectedly called to this work by the good providence of God in our
late changes: I must beg thy pardon, of what judgment soever thou art, for
several imperfections that may have happend in the attempt. If thou art a
friend to the Good old cause, I be (...) thee to excuse the defects of a person
whose real inclinations thou can not question without wronging the greatest
innocence in the World: I have hast'ned the work, that so my forwardness might
recompense all other miscarryages, what is now but an Essay, may hereafter grow
up to a just defense: If thou art one who dissentest any way from me, I must
further acquaint thee, that excepting the preface, I never saw three of these
sheets together: they were never transcribed, and in the writing, as new
passages did occur to my memory, so I pasted them on, sometimes not where
they should have come in, but where I could conveniently place the labells: so
that if there be any lapses of Memory, small incoherences, transpositions or
other errors, as are the products of unusual haste, I must either entreat thy
pardon, or submit to what severity thou can make use of, after this
acknowledgment in any part, which is but as it were the fringe of the ensuing
discourse. I assure thee I have not imposed upon thee any citation, but for the
Truth of them thou must have recourse to their originals, and not to versions,
which may deceive my adversary, but have not me. That Mallela, whom I quote, is
a Greek manuscript in Oxford library. I think I have deserved moderation from
all men, unless Mr. Baxter quarrel with me, whom I have dealt more roughly
with, then other wise I should, because he seemed (and I am informed was)
instigated by the Courtiers to revile, in so opprobrous a manner, the abettours
of a Commonwealth: if I am too confident against him and some others, whom I
name not; I throw my self at the feet of the more learned and judicious
Episcoparians: if they convince me, I shall lay my hand upon my mouth, and
willingly become a proselyte to Truth. It is upon this account, that as I
profess my self to publish my own opinions, without interesting any other in
the debate; so I have chosen no dedicitour, being loath to engage any into the
patronage of what upon a sober refutation I my self shall retract as solemnly
as I do now d^vulge it: I aim at nothing but Truth; nor do I write to serve
any party or designs of any men. If any shall think me worthy of being their
convert, they shall not need to print against me; I shall do them as much
justice who (being loath to write against a book with this Title) may advise me
by Letter, as any who shall appear in print: and I only further add, that I
desire they would calmly argue, and not disquiet me (...) ^^opular harangues
and preach^^ such as conclude nothing: and (...) ^nall reflections, since I
know (...) it is for men to say that he, (...) a Toleration of all opinions, is
himself (...); I do declare that there is no necessity of that, and my history
of Toleration will evince it; and moreover I own entirely Perkin's doctrine in
the chain of Salvation; and if I differ from Beza about punishing heretics, I
know not how I am bound up to call any man Master. I must also desire the
errata of the printer may be excused, for I have not had any opportunity to
revise any proofs.

From my Study in Chapter Chapter Oxon. July 4. 1659. Henry Stubbe.

The Preface.
I Am not ignorant with how much hazard any man writes in these days of ours;
but, to write now, and for THE GOOD OLD CAUSE (which, especially where I live,
is often mentioned with detestation, reproach, and scorn) is to contend with
all the discouragements that might terrify one from becoming an Author. Some
there are who (like to Alexander the Copper-smith at Ephesus) decrye the
Goodness of what their interest leads them to condemn: others question the
Antiquity, and doubt whither this Sumpsimus be more old then their Mumpsimus.
To the former I endeavored a reply in the Treatise ensuing. Of the latter sort
of men I desire they would consider, That it is not denied but at the
beginning, and in the carrying on of the late Civil wars there were sundry
causes that engaged several parties into that Quarrel against the King,
particular Animosiities, Scandalls, sense of future Emoluments great or less,
Defense of Liberties and Religion under different garbs and apprehensions.
These, (besides what the public declarations of Parliament held forth, whilst
neither the privileges of Parliament, nor the Liberties of the people on the
one hand, nor the Corruptions of a King (of whom I may say as of Lewis the
Eleventh of France, All his [evill] council did ride upon one horse) were
suffic ently discovered, and the means for establishing the ^^rst, and
redressing such inconveniences a^ the last might create us, unthought on, or at
least such as might not be proposed to a Nation half-prejudiced for an
inveterate Monarchy: These were the incentives which prevailed with men to
contribute to the effecting of such changes as we are witnesses of in England.
Yet had there been ten thousand other motives, I should not count it a
Sole^s^e, but Truth, to say That LIBERTY, civil, and spiritual, were the GOOD
old cause. And however some may say that it was none of The Old cause to assert
any proper Sovereignty in the people: yet I must tell them that the
vindications of the Parliament against the papers of the King then in being
show us, that such a Sovereignety was presupposed, and if it were not the old
cause, it was the foundation thereof, and avowed for such: those rights and
liberties of the people, the maintenance of which occasioned the war, had not
been the voluntary concessions of Kings, but either of Usurpers, or enforced
from such as did not, usurp in person, though in deed their whole succession
was but a continued usurpation. If the Sovereignty were elsewhere stated, it
was only the executive part, which is but an improper Sovereignty, the
Legislative paramount Authourity and concerns of the people had been long
before avowed by Lawyers and Divines of the chiefest rank. If it was none of
the cause of our war to change the Constitution of the Commonwealth into any
other form then we found it in. I answer that that needed not to be, since the
form was not, nor is now changed, The Petition of right and other laws in
being had already deposed Monarchy, and we were only to improve, not create a
Republic. They who manage these objections had reduced us to that posture as a
very little alteration in an invidious name, and some other circumstances,
might secure the people in those Privile^ges and immunities from which they
would not recede. Whereas it is said further That the Sovereignty being mixed
or distributed into the Hands of King, Lords and Commons, no part had Authority
to change the Constitution. I shall not ask these men, How the Commons came to
be admitted to share in that mixture of Government? But to me it is
indubitable, that since the end of the establishing a King and Lords, was the
welfare of the people and Commons, whatever distribution of Government may have
been enacted, yet it is the end that regulates the means, and renders them
useless and rejectaneous upon occasion; and hereof either the Commons must be
Judges, who feel the Pressing inconveniences of the means controverted, or
else they who reap advantages by such deviations and grievances, and who are
too much interessed to determine aright. If Pharaoah may judge, he will say the
Israelites are idle, rather then oppressed with burdens. If there be any yet so
obstinately perverse as to explode the Title upon this account; yet cannot any
deny but that it is an Old (as well as Good) cause in opposition to the
Instrument, and that most non-sensicall paper called the petition and advise of
such a juncto as must never be reputed of hereafter, but with the infamy of
Parlamentum indoctorum, or a Parliament that lacked learning, and wit or
Honesty: and it is so far from impossibility, that it is not abfur'd for the
same thing in a different respect to be New and Old. I shall illustrate this by
something, which if it be in it is own nature less convincing, yet it is not to
be rejected by our most implacable Adversaries. How often have our Parliaments
declared this or that to be a fundamental right, and the birthright of the
subject, which yet is not to be found established or bottomed upon any thing
but that claim, antecedent to our constituted laws, whereunto Nature does
imbolden us. That which the Parliament under the first [acknowledged] cause did
avowe as the fundamental constitution of this Kingdom, that the Soveraignety
thereof was mixed in a King, and two Houses of Lords, and Commons, with
several other things of the like nature, cannot be justified but by such a
defense: since the Monarchy is supposed to be founded at the Conquest, or if we
will rise higher, yet will no enquiry direct us to a mixture of Soveraignety,
such as the Commons fundamentally share in: there being no such order of
Estates (if I may so call it) until Henry the first, and for their power it
may be better disputed then proved by any other way then what will evince Our
Cause to be Old, as well as their privileges etc. Fundamental. I cannot
inform my self of any other manner whereby to justify that Protestation of the
Commons, which is recorded by Dr. H^ylin in his Ad^e^t sement on the History of
the Reign of K. James. And Rushworth in his collections.

The protestation of the Commons. Jac. 19. 1621.
THe Commons now assembled in Parliament, being justly occasioned thereunto,
concerning sundry Liberties, Franchises and Privileges of Parliament, among
others here mentioned, do make this Protestation following: That the Liberties,
Franchises, Privileges, and Jurisdiction of Parliament, are the ancient and
undoubted Birthright, and inheritance of the Subjects of England, and that the
arduous and urgent affairs concerning the King, state, and defense of the
Realm, and of the Church of England, and the maintenance and making of Laws,
and redress of mischief and grievances, which daily happen within this Realm,
are proper subjects and matter of Counsel, and debate in Parliament: And that
in the handling and proceeding of those businesses, every member of Parliament,
has and of right ought to have Freedom of Speech to propound, treat, reason,
and bring to conclusion the same: And that the Commons in Parliament have
likewise Liberty and Freedom to treat of the matters in such order as in their
judgment shall seem fittest: and that every member of the said house has like
Freedom from all impeachment, imprisonment, and molestation (other then by
censure of the House it self) for or concerning any speaking, reasoning, or
declaring any matter, or matters touching the Parliament, or Parliament
business. And that if any, of the said Members be complained of, and
questioned for any thing done or said in Parliament, the same is to be showed
to the King by the Advice and assent of all the Commons assembled in
Parliament, before the King give credence to any priv^te Information.

This and many other Parliamentary expressions, (though True, In the Civil Law,
he wh^ was mode completely fere, and one of the ingenui, though his Mother had
been and were a Servant or bondwoman, and his birth Servile, yet upon such his
enfranchisement he was said natalibus restitui, to be restored to his
BIRTHRIGHT, that is not to such as he was borne to by his immediate parentage,
but such as appertained to him by descendence from Adam. L. 2. D. de natalib.
restituend. as it is cited by Seldom de jur. nature l. 2. c. 4. p. 163.
just and equitable) in former and later days, can, in my judgment, be no
better verifyed then the Old cause, when most disadvantageously looked upon, as
being no otherwise Laws, Privileges, and undoubted Birthrights, then that
they should and ought to be so. But, to proceed: I often, communing with my own
soul in private, use to parallel our bondage under the Norman yoke, and our
deliverance there from, to the continuance of the children of Israel in Egypt,
and their escape at last from that sla^ish condition: and as the several
providence attending them in their journey into the land of promise have
created in me thoughts of resembling mercies and distractions that have
befallen us in our progress to Freedom; so particularly the late dispute about
the Good Old cause did cause in me some reflections upon the course which Moses
took to disengage the people of the Lord in those days from their servitude,
God tells Moses that he would bring the Israelites out of the affliction of
Egypt, unto the land of the Can^anites to dwell there, Exodus 3. v. 10, 16, 17,
18. And this Message he was to impart unto the Elders of Israel. Yet withal
(as Philo Judeus says, and the circumstances of the text render it certain) he
is commanded, he and the Elders of Israel to say unto the King of Egypt, the
Lord God of the Hebrews has met with us: and now let us go (we beseech thee)
three days journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the Lord our
God. Exodus 4. v. 29. So Moses gathered together all the Elders of the children
of Israel, and acquainted them with this Message and intendment; but it scarce
seems probable that he told the generality of the people his main design; for
the Israelitish women manying promiscuously with Egyptians, and all of them
being under such taske-masters as by love or terror might gain an intelligence
of the final departure intended by that Nation, it is unimaginable, how things
should have been, for so long a time as their deliverance was effecting,
concealed from Pharaoh and his intelligencers. And Moses with Aaron went in and
prayed Pharaoh, that he would let the people go three days journey into the
desert, and sacrifice unto the Lord: Exodus 5. v. 3. And this is not only the
pretense of Moses, but he is commanded (chapter 7. v. 16.) to say, The Lord God of
the Hebrews has sent me unto thee saying, Let my people go that they may serve
me in the wilderness. In fine, All the declaration of their intents, which
they made to Pharaoh, was, that they might go and sacrifice in the wilderness.
Exodus 8. v. 27. and chapter 10. v. 24, 25, 26. Yea, it seems by the contest
betwixt Pharaoah and Moses and Aaron (chapter 10, v, 10, 11.) that at first they
desired liberty only for the Men to go; and not that they might go with their
young and with their old, with their sons and with their daughters, with
their flocks and with their herds. It is expressly said by the King, Go now ye
that are Men, and serve the Lord, for that you did desire: It is observed by
Philo that the land of Canaan in the direct road was three days journey from
Egypt: so that if their desire to serve the Lord in the wilderness, and to
sacrifice unto him, was an Expression of their intendments to fix in the
promised land; if all those occasions for a further explanation of their
thoughts, when Phara^ah said he would let them go and sacrifice in the
wi^derness, only they should not go very far away (chapter 8, v. 28.) and when
they desire to carry all their relations and goods with them, for to hold a
feast unto the lord, at which time Pharaoh suspected their contrivances to free
themselves, and said, Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go, and
your little ones, Look to it, for evil is before you, (ch 10. v. 10.) And
when Pharaoh desired only that their flocks and herds might stay; it is then
that they answer, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that
we may sacrifice unto the Lord our God. Our cattle also shall go with us:
there shall not an hoof be left behind, for thereof must we take for to serve
the Lord our God: and we know not with what we mast serve the Lord until we
come thither, (chapter 10. v. 24, 25, 26.) if all those occasions could draw from
them no clearer manifestation of their purposes, (and perhaps the Egyptians
upon a persuasion of no further intent did lend them jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold, and raiment wherein to appear at the feast) Exodus 12. v. 35.
and chapter 3. v. 22. but that even at the last Pharaoh says to them, Rise up, and
get you forth from amongst my people, both you and the children of Israel: and
go serve the Lord, as ye have said. ( c. 12. v. 31.). Truly methinks upon
these circumstances. If Pharaoh did arm to pursue them of whom he did not, nor
we, hear that they went three days journey to sacrifice, or that they
performed any such solemnity, or held on that journey which they made a
semblance at first to take: but turned and encamped before Pi-hariroth between
Migdol and the sea, chapter 14. v. 2, 5. and fled without a thought of returning to
Egypt: nay if he had overtaken them so as to expostulate with them why, and for
what cause they did so deal with him? could he have made use of other words
then we are now upbrayded with? Is this the Old cause that you pretended for
your departure? Is this the Old cause which your God proposed unto you at
first, or was that only a pretense for other designs! did you bring your
children and cattle with you for this, or some other professed end? Is this
your sacrificing? Call you this a going to keep a feast unto your God? Or a
freeing your selves from that subjection you were under? Did we cloth you with
our choice raiment? Did we adorn you with jewels, that you might carry them
quite away? Is this to serve the Lord, or your selves? To sacrifice unto God,
or to your own net? To borrow or to rob? Nor might Pharaoh only have
upbrayded them thus: The murmuring Israelites (having been at first
unacquainted with Mose's design) either did, or might have clamoured in the
like manner, when they were compassed about with Pharaoh's army on the one
side, and the redsea on the other, and said unto Moses, Because there were no
graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? Wherefore
have thou dealt thus with us to carry us forth of Egypt? Exodus 14. v. 11. In
this posture of affairs (wherein, as also in the first attempts of Luther, I
find the like proceduce to what ours are said to have) I observe that Moses is
satisfied in his obeying the call of the Lord, and having freed the Israelites
from an unjust bondage; he trusts in the Lord for a good issue, saying only to
the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord. chapter
14. v. 13. The Lord grant that we may follow his example, and be strengthened to
follow God in his merciful dealings with us, and not murmr and distrust that
arm which has brought us to that Freedom we now are in: we have travailed
thorough a desert, and our God has guided us prosperously, and his Assisting
providence ought to be looked upon by humble and discerning souls as a cloud
going before us daily, to instruct us, who have any apprehensions thereof; but
as removing also behind, and blinding those who oppose and would destroy that
Commonwealth of Israel which the Lord will erect, whose salvation let them
stand still, and see, who are not so resolute as to quit their fears for a
more active temper.

There is one considerable Objection which may, and will be made against what I
have discoursed concerning the rise of Government, that it tends to the
establishing of an Unequal Commonwealth, which is so much decryed and
petitioned against by men of great repute, honesty and faithfulness to the Good
old cause. Hereunto it will not suffice that I profess my self ready to
acquiesce in what shall be the determinate resolutions of the Good people of
this Nation, and that whatsoever my sentiments are, I shall never esloign my
self from the common interest; nor shall I say that it is a very unequal
commonwealth which does regard equally men of different qualifications;
neither will I blame that supererogating tenderness which they express for
the liberty of those who would have deprived them of theirs. But I must declare
it, that I cannot imagine how in equity and reason they can estate their yet
dissenting and repugning adversaries in such Franchisements, which they may
more lawfully wish, then put them in possession of, against their wills, unless
it can be proved that they are either madmen, fools, or children: which will
be more difficult to be justified here, then in the case of the Indians, who
are acquitted by Casuists from such imputations, when charged on them by the
usurping Spaniards. They who have pleaded for an equal Commonwealth, show the
excellency, and the conveniencie thereof, if constituted, but show not how it
can be imposed upon all, nor how a power can be erected over any men which is
not derived from them. It is not Mr. Harrington (by whose industry and learning
I acknowledge my self to have been highly benefitted, in whose works the
judicious may observe with how much difference the Pedanticall part of mankind,
and a Gentleman may discourse upon the same things; for whose Civilities my
resentments are not greater then is the ambition I have to merit the honor I
receive by so illustrious an acquaintance) It is not he that would more promote
an equal commonwealth then my self universally; I admire his model, and am
ready to cry out, as if it were the pattern in the Mount: it is not that which
can be controverted out of any thing I have said, but who the persons are that
shall enjoy the benefit thereof: A plea here for the honest and faithful
souls amongst us, I hope will not argue any dissatisfaction toward them; not
shall I be culpable toward them, if I think the universality of this nation is
not to be trusted with liberty at present, that an equal Commonwealth is that
whereunto we ought and may prudentially grow, but which we cannot at once
abrick, without running an extraordinary hazard of being again enslaved. What
have we effected hitherto by so much jeopardy and bloodshed? is it only that
our enemies being foiled in the field should have an opportunity to dispute the
fruits of our Victories a second time upon more advantageous terms? In
batailes number may be counterpoised by valor, and skill, or the like, but in
an equal Commonwealth, when the swords we have disarmed them of are again put
into their hands, and all hopes of prevailing depend upon a majority, we put
things by such a procedure unto as great danger as is the certainty that
plurality of votes (given out of a sense of revenge, ignorance, or multiplicity
of interests in them who agree only in dividing from us, will sway to the
prejudice of those that established a Commonwealth, and the subversion of all
that God has been thus long a building amongst us. These may be contrivances
for a generous Gallantry, but must not render Oceana amongst the number of
Romans. The people of this nation are not to be looked upon as broken loose
from their ancient and accustomed form, and one^y wild^ and giddy because
unreduced into orders. This may be the condition of our patriots, and the
faithful adherents to the Good old Cause, I confess, but for the others they
are so far from being giddy, that they are determinate for Kingship and an
uniformity? so far from being got loose (which argues a voluntarinesse in
them) that they seem now to be in fetters, forced to a state (which is not
freedom to them that regret it) into which they did not break loose, and to
whom the first blushes of a Commonwealth are as dismal as the appearance of
daylight to Cerberus when Theseus had unchained him, and drawn him out of Hell
up unto the surface of the earth; Cerberus he be held the light, he yelled, and
vomited up a most deadly poison called Aconitum, and returned to his former
Station. A people under orders (and inured to them) convinced of their interest
in this, or ignorant of any other Government, may be serene and prudent, void
of discord as the ( Venetian, who is not of the same temper with us) Switz, and
Hollanders, of the dissensions whereof late years in both can give us a
testimony: But a people unconvinced of their interest, not unanimous in any
common concern, except as Ephraim and Manasseh were to ruin Judah, not
instructed in, yea averse from a Republic, that such a people put into orders
(in which no overruling power must retain them, for they must be their own
Army) should be so serene and calm, it is unimaginable; though they were
better blended and mixed with the interposing numbers of honest men then the
Situation of Estates and fortunes permits us to expect, and lessened in the
infinity of trades and other dependants that subsist by them. These resueries
(if I may use that expression) may then pass for prudence, when for a
weak-limbed infant to go, no more will appear requisite then that it be put
into a standing stool. Amphion might have meted out the platform of Thebes
when he went to build it with his harp, and contrived the City and it is
bulwarks; yet if the stones (supposed to follow his Music, and not repugne)
unpolished and unshapen had only danced after him, not all the Orders in the
world could have effected a well built and lasting structure. A mariner
trusts not unto the Sea, but to this ship. The spirit of the people is in no
wise to be trusted with their liberty, but by Stated laws or Orders, so the
trust is not in the spirit of the people but their Orders, which as they are
leaky or tite are the ship, out of which the people being once embarked cannot
stir, and without which they can have no motion. It is admitted that a
mariner does not only rely upon the calmnesse, or navigableness of the Sea,
but that he puts much of his confidence in his ship: But to make the Similitude
any way to illustrate, and to persuade our Patriots and Legislators to rely on
the spirit of the people, if they be as mariners the Objectour must reduce the
people to such a posture that they be as tractable and manageable as a ship, in
which a prudent Mariner imbarkes; such a ship is not well contrived in black
and white, but well built, and ballasted, and fitted with tackling. A
Commonwealth resembling must have good orders and a prevailing spirit, such as
may comply with those Orders, which temper being wanting in the nation, cannot
be introduced but by an overruling power, if the Republic take in more then
the honest party. A defectivenesse in the Orders (...) not render the people
destitute of motion, (for that can never happen, especially in a N^rt^ern
climate) but depraved and ex^rbitant in their motion: and yet even these
inconveniences are supplied in defective Commonwealths by a gallantry of
spirit, as a vigorous strength of nature overcomes diseases, but a free air
and spirit is not supplyable by good orders in any time of trouble, but it is
as ominous as the succumbency of nature, which phisicians say to be of worse
presage then an acute and violent disease. This is much more illustrated from
the comparison drawn from an Army, disciplined, and drawn up into several
battalias. To make it so that they do not route themselves, notwithstanding
their excellent order, you must make it their interest, not to do so: and you
must also make them apprehensive that such is their interest, (for men do not
pursue what is really their interest, but what seems so to them) or you must
so dispose of the well-affected (which, if a small number, must not scatter,
least they be rendered useless thorough the intermixture of more numerous and
powerful renegados) malcontents as that they may, and that according to
Order, be able to awe the other into what they are not otherwise disposed to in
their minds. Now, it is manifest, that in the present posture of our affairs
it is not the interest of all nor of an infinity (without assuming a new course
of life in their old age) to promote a Republic: nor are all whose interest it
is to promote, sufficiently convinced thereof: It is evident then what course
must be taken, unless we limit our Commonwealth unto the honest and faithful
party, leaving the residue so much liberty as they are now capable of, or may
prove hereafter. That this latter way is not only prudentiall, but just, I do
suppose evident from what I have said concerning the Original of power, and
that all other procedure, however it may terminate in the Good of the people,
is not to be legitimated in it self: And it is further illustrable out of the
Commonwealth of Israel. When the Israelites came out of Egypt, they were not
only six hundred thousand men besides women and children, of one kindred,
parentage and people, but also a very large accessionall of strangers (besides
Servants) who joined with them in that expedition. Philo Jud. de vit. Moses. l.
1. Eusebius hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 7. Nicephorus l. 1. c. 11.
As Philo Judaeus, Eusebius, and Nicephorus tell us: and it is thought how that
Egyptian, husband to Shelomith, whose son blasphemed ( Levit. 24.10.) was
such a one, and no proselite, as Jarchi says he was. These Strangers had a
natural liberty to dispose of, and however they were fewer in number then the
Israelites, yet could not their paucity deprive them of their birthright. They
were going to Canaan together, nor had the Israelites so disposed of (or God by
promise to them) of that land as that none should be proprietors but
themselves. In the wilderness, God being their Lawgiver (whither by an Act of
Soveraingnety, or by that Authority which men sensible of their fallibility
ought to pay, and will pay necessarily to an unerring and omniscient deity,
when they are convinced there is no fraud, I dispute not) they erect a
Commonwealth (for however some are pleased to style it a Theocracy, yet I
apprehend not the truth thereof: for neither does his electing Judges repugne
with the being of a Commonwealth, more then hiselecting Kings destroy a
Monarchy: nor his delivering himself as he was occasionally consulted, for so
he did too under Kings: so that either theirs was no Monarchy at last, or a
Republic at first.) This Commonwealth is made up only of Jews as
proprietours in the land of promise: the strangers must either depart, or
become Proselytes of habitation, [Proselyti domicilii.] and resign themselves
up to an obedience unto seven precepts given to the sons of Noah; they must
live without propriety of land, without any capacity of national employment
civil or military, or share in the legislative power; yea they must also be
under different laws and penalties under Judges to be chosen by themselves (or
imposed upon them) out of their own number, or from amongst the Jews: Or if
they would become proselytes of justice, [proselyti justitiae,] And submit
themselves wholly unto the law of Moses, they did not gain thereby a complete
suffrage in the Congregation of Israel, they were capable of no public command
or trust, (as of the Aqueducts) limited in their marryages, retained a
character of their being only Devisors, (hence Paul said he was an Hebrew of
Hebrews, Philip. 3.5,) and however they gained the appellation of Jews, yet
were they not citisens in Aristotle's judgment, who thinks a principal effect
of such a condition to be a participation of the Magistraticall and judiciary
power, but strangers in the Gates.

It is evident from hence that a Commonwealth need not at first take in all
that come forth with them out of Egypt, as it were much less those that they
should take in the Canaanites that fought against them. An example hereof is
God himself in his immediate Legislation.

It is evident that such a Commonwealth is to be termed a Commonwealth, and
an equal one, otherwise Israel (with the division specified) was none, or else
at least it is not only just but prudentiall (for God perfectly ownes both
those attributes) to establish an unequal one; unequal according to the
several orders of men, equal according to one, the Israelite.

Nor indeed was Israel only such a Commonwealth but Sparta, and Venice, and
Rome after her growth and grandeur. Of the last it is observable, that the
overthrowe thereof was in part caused by the Old citisens becoming idle,
effeminate, debauched, not educated in the principles of a Republic, but
entangled in Rhetorical flourishes, besides their disproportioned conditions
as to Estates: and partly, by the additionall of New citisens, such as were
dependants upon Monarchies, educated under them, or inured to a different
Republic from the Roman constitution (now it is natural for a man to subvert,
or timorously to defend what he thinks not good) thus Julius Caesar made the
Gauls citisens of Rome and Senators, [ Sueton. l. 1. c. 76.] not that he
thought the Orders would restrain them, but that they would (retaining their
inclinations) overthrow the Orders. To make Ordes to secure by it a Minority in
a broken and differently-factions nation, is all one as if one should presume
to say to a distressed Paralytick (in whom they are only so many remaining
spirits as to continue life, not give motion) arise up and walk, showing him
or prescribing withal how he should go. I do verily think it would not be more
Blasphemous for any to speak so to the infirm, the a tempting of God in our
preservation to rely upon Orders in a Commonwealth that by the several
interests, animosities, educations, and conditions of men is as broken as Rome
in it is declination. In Israel the Jews do tell us that they never forced any
to be prosclytes; yea if any did turn prosclyte of justice (and such had a
vote in the great Congregation) out of fear or any secular advantage, they
were admitted to a profession of the religion, but not to emoluments accruing
thereupon: thus, say they, in the days of King David and Solomon, when Israel
flourished above other nations, none were admitted to complete proselytisme,
least the apprehensions of temporal benefies might prevail with multitudes to
come in, and so the Assembly be swayed by the Proselytes, notwithstanding the
Orders and concurrence of the multitude of Israelites in whom was solely the
executive part of Magistracy and more.
Furthermore if Rome, and Israel by accessionall proselytes, and Venice might
grow up to such an inequality as to be an Aristocracy in comparison of some
parties, or provinces: why may not a Commonwealth at first be so erected?
Since Oceana is the first complexive Republic, we have not only the
establishment, but flourishing estate, continuance, and Security of all
Republics almost for to encourage us. And in a diffused Republic at first, if
the Government of one Moses, Lycurgus, or ^imoleon ruling purely for the good
of the people, and with intentions to enstate them in a perfect freedom, does
not create a Tyranny, why should otherwise a coordinate Senate made up of many
Solons, Lycurgus's, and Thrasybulus's be termed an Oligarchy, when acting only
for the same ends? I cannot but declare my judgment for the promoting of Mr.
Harrington's model (in the praises whereof I would enlarge, did I not think my
self too inconsiderable to add any thing to those applauds which the
understanding part of the World must bestow upon him, and which, though
Eloquence itself should turn Panegyrist, he not only merits but transcends)
yet as limited to the good people which have adhered to the Good old canse, and
I suppose the Commonwealth of Israel may herein, as in other causes, become
our pattern. But if we must stretch the cords farther, I see no security but in
some influencing Senate, who may so long continue as the necessity of the
nation shall require it: for to determine them a time of durance, and not to be
able to determine a period to what is the cause of their durance, is not only
presumptuous, but it carries with it this further inconvenience, that the
maligners of a Commonwealth will know how long to cherish their hopes for an
after-game, (and so will not comply) whereas by this indeterminate constitution
of theirs they will be forced to abandon such thoughts, since there will be
state-holders whilst they shall not cease to give occasion for their
continuance. How far this Coordinate Senate may proceed, how it may not
degenerate into an Oligarchy, they which proposed it will doubtless find out:
I think the example of the Decemviri has nothing in it to their prejudice: and
it is so far from being likely, that I think it impossible for any number of
our patriots to erect an Oligarchy by such a Senate, for which I have greater
motives then the confidence of their Goodness, (which yet I have an
extraordinary belief of.)

That other exception made by some against entrusting an equal Commonwealth
(in the sense vulgarly urged) is, that such is the posture of this nation at
present, that if they be universally enstated in a perfect Liberty, they will
invade Liberty of Conscience. That they may do it, notwithstanding established
Orders, is, I think, clear from what I have already said, in case it should be
their will and intent. That there is just cause to fear they will do it, may
appear from these, as well as other considerations. They who are for a free
Toleration are the less numerons, beyond all proportion, and their advantage
is that they are possessed with the Militia of the nation, and under good
commanders, resolute in themselves, and assisted with prudent councillors: On
the other side they which would overthrowe Toleration are the more numerous,
greater-landed men (so that possibly it may be found that in the balance of
land they possess five parts of seven, or the like) the expensivenesse of
their ways renders many as traders or dependants obnoxious to them: if you arm
them they will soon take courage, and renew their interest in their dependants
(which never sinkes but with their estates, though it may be broken thorough
defect of power, which will be taken away by the Equality instituted and what
such dependants may do, you may see in the Commonwealth of Ephesus in the
tumult of Alexander the Copper-smith) especially having these encouragements,
that however it be impossible for the Episcoparians and Presbyterians to
prosper and continue together, yet may they rise together (as did Presbytery
and Independency) and both have hopes of cheating each other into an
uniformity, or out of the profits accruing from a
destroyed-Sectarian-Toleration: the difficulties whereof at long-running are
not so great, but the quick wit and sight of the one party, and the
short-sightednesse of the other may justify any seeming compliance by an event
not much more uncertain (confidering withal the temper of our nation) then it
is certain that the glory and pride, which depends upon a
religious-Soveraignty, will be overthrown by the abettors of a free
Toleration. Their joint grounds of confidence are a Ministry totally
disaffected from such courses, and ready to make Opposition to be the Cause of
God, and possesse-weak spirits with the hopes of prospering here and assurance
of Salvation hereafter: I have read it somewhere how the principal thing which
kept the Spanyard from securing Portugal at first, when he had it in
possession, was the Ministry or Epiests there: at the conclu^on of each mass
they used to desire the people to say one Ave Mary for to ^e delivered from the
Castiltan; whereby the old animosities were still upheld. And now, since the
Pope refuses to confirm the Portugal clergy, whereby vacan^ advantageous
places are unsupplyed, they are inclined to the Spanyard again, and dispose the
people to a revolt, and so are mainly Authors of the present danger of their
Country.
what influence these aprehensions may have upon the minds of men we both
have, and do experience: nor would I have any think the repute of the Ministry
so decayed, as that they are contemptible, or that they ever will be whilst
there is so great a number to be served by their continuance, and yet gain by
their being humbled. Having all these spokesmen scattered over the land, they
have the Universities in their hands, from whence they are Masters of all the
education of the youth in the nation: so that their party is strengthened with
a succession of persons resolute and knowing in their way, and in esteem with
the people, with whom to have been at the University and to be a Scholar, a
wiseman, etc. it is all one: besides the dependances which the gift of
fellowships and other places of emolument does procure them: besides, they do
not only strengthen themselves, by their hold in the Universities, but they
are thereby in a condition to weaken the Good people of this land; for if they
send their sons and relations to the University, they are there partly by
advise (the Tutors being universally disaffected, or such as will not concern
themselves on any side, looking upon all with indifferency) and partly by
example either principled to overthrow the Good old cause, or rendered
indifferent toward it, whereby the present Patriots are in all likelihood so
straightened, that thorough want of Successors the adherents to them are populus
virorum, or men in whose lives the Commonwealth is bound up, and in reference
to the mercies God has effected for us and by us, in which he seems audibly to
tell us, I am your shield, and your exceeding great reward; we on the other
side, as Abraham, may reply, Lord God, what will thou give us, seeing we go
child-lesse? This is such a truth as those faithful ones, who have sent their
children to Oxon. have experienced to their sorrow. Things being in this
posture, I leave any to judge whether the Honest-party ought to put themselves
upon the mercy of the generality of this nation upon Soule-regards: in Holland
at the Synod of Dort Episcopal and Presbyteriall Divines agreed to condemn
the Arminians, yet spared one another, though a good consequence-spinner might
fasten as many absurdities and blasphemies upon the opinion of some that were
Judges, as upon theirs who were sentenced: and since amongst us at present both
parties condemn (but the Episcoparians with a greater tenderness and
compassion) at least the one would exterminate, and the other convince, that so
he may destroy the survivor. If David did trust the Assembly of Israel with a
religious debate; it was of no moment in comparison of our concerns: The
people never used to consult at the mercy seat, but the King, and under Saul
they were not idolaters, but there being no emergencies, or Saul, fearing an
Oracle unsuitable to his aims, did not consult it: the Arc therefore remained
in obscurity: now David he asks the Assembly, not whether he should worship
another God, or entertain some new religion, or religious opinion, but whether
(retaining the same worship or religion they had) he should bring again the Ark
of God? and is it any wonder, if a people sensible of the calamitous reign of
Saul, and assured, that if the Arc were present and consulted, all such
disasters would be prevented, did assent in such circumstances? Ought we to
trust the people with a decision of religious matters of a different nature,
such as not only transcend their, but all humane comprehension?

I shall here conclude a Preface, which I am sensible how long it is, but that
I think it incumbent upon me to take notice of a book lately published by Mr.
Richard Baxter, entitled an Holy Commonwealth. I must profess unto the world
that Mr. Baxter first occasioned my assuming a pen at this time: under the
Government of the late -- he published a book pretendedly against the Papists,
but indeed the bitterest Satyr that ever I think was penned against the Good
people, the falt of this land: there it was that he transcribed Aulicus, and
the Grub-street pamphlets to frame a Legend for the Catholics of Kederminster.
Hereupon my heart burned within me, and I wrote a letter during that upstart
Protectourship in defense of the honest men, partly whom he had aspersed;
partly to undeceive the World; that the man who wrote so many books, who so
superciliously condemned the ignorance of others, who so dogmatically sensed
it, and who was so favored at Court and famed for learning, was no Scholar at
all, not skilled in Latin, Greek or Hebrew, not versed in Ecclesiastical
history, or philosophy, etc. But a mere Glowe-worme in literature, who
borrowed his luster from the darkness of the night, and ignorance of them he
converses with; partly also I was engaged out of a sense of the truchs and
apprehension of those favors I had received from Sr. H. Vane, to vindicate his
repute from the calumnies of this Whifler in Theology: having finished that
letter, and dispatched it away, April. 20. th. 1659. It pleased God by
unexpected means, and a still wind, to work cut Salvation to his people that
waited for it, at what time I considering what it was that the Ministers and
other adversaries did principally clamor at, though Mr. Baxter had produced
nothing of reason but a railing accusation, to set down my thoughts about a
Free Toleration, and the Magistrates power in spiritual matters: and that so,
as to decline all impertinent or remote discourses. It pleased God that at the
same time Mr. Baxter and my self should be occupied in a different way, and I
look upon it as an extraordinary providence that God should so dispose my
writing as it might entirely cross and destroy his. The study of Politics
has not been more my employment then his, nor do I pretend to be versed
therein, and so I think my self to be one of those he intended his book for, as
he tells us; Upon the whole, I must pronounce it, that since printing was used,
I think there was never such a bundle of nonsense published: if he had not
given it so specious a Title, I should have styled it the Commonwealth of --
One would imagine he had forgot who ruled in White Hall, to whom he addressed
his books, and for whom he pleaded, when he blames Mr. Harrington's model,
because thereby my Lord Ale-seller may be Custos rotulorum. Certainly Mr.
Baxter forgets O.P. And he is not now at all in his mind, whom elsewhere he
styles of famous memory. I will not meddle much with particulars therein,
because I find there too long a discourse to be managed in a preliminary, I
reserve it, or remit it to others for a demonstration of the charge of
ignorance which I fasten on him: and for the opinions he charges sometimes with
blasphemy, he cannot be unacquainted with what imputations of that nature may
and have been affixed to his darling fancies: nor is it a part of the Method of
charity which Davenant proposes to the reformed Churches, that blasphemy and
detestable names of heresy be imposed upon men for remote consequences: it is
expressly censured by him. His whole work may be counted good, As he was counted
clean under the law, who was overspread with Leprosy. If a Leprosy break out
abroad in the skin, and the Leprosy cover all the skin of him that has
the plague, from his head even to his foot, wheresoever the Priest looks:
then the priest shall consider: and beheld, if the Leprosy have covered all his
flesh, he shall pronounce him clean that has the plague, it is all turned
white, he is clean. Levit. 13. v. 12, 13. And thus I dismiss him at present,
only wishing him that since he has never yet been an University-man (or not
long) that he would come and spend some time here, not only for his
proficiency in his studies, but that he may practically see the inconveniences
and absurdities of his politics by the Government of his reverend friends the
Visitors of Oxon. and Canons of Christ's Church. If Mr. Baxter think it below
him to go to School again at this age, and after such Elogies bestowed upon
him of the learned, Eagle-eyed and judicious, though Cato in his old age did
learn a language which I have demonstrated elsewhere Mr. Baxter to have need
of: he would do well to repair to Geneva, not only to inform himself that
such consequences as he imagines are not to follow from several positions in
this Book, are not the conclusions of a rational disputant, but an
Hypochondriack, or one who only manageth disputes at Kedermenster, being
himself Respondent, Opponent, and Moderatour: but also to persuade them out of
their Democracy, and the illegality of making, instead of presenting
Magistrates: besides he may inform them that since the Lord Ale-seller is
absurd, The Romans fetched Cincinna^us from the plough to be Dictator.

That this is the practice of Geneva, I have been to d^ by an Honorable eye
witness.


the Magistrates ought not in their applications to the people at their entry
upon and going out of their Offices, to call the Multitude of several pettit
tradesmen, My Lords, nor stand bare before them: he may desire them to remark
it in their notes that God mistook himself when he said Deuteronomy. 17.15. Thou
shall make him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose. For it is God
that makes Kings, it is he that conferrs the power, and, if any thing, the
presentation or choice is in the people. Holy Comm. p. 225.
He would do well however to write a Monitory to them, That their Government is
such as Heathens have been their Examples in. As if the Heathens had done
nothing that were imitable: or Jethro were not of Moses council. The Scripture
does not allow such reasonings, which makes use of the examples of the Heathen
to condemn the Jews and Christians by. It was an Omission in the Apostles to
give the Church the name of a popular Assembly, (...), and also not to tell the
Republics of Ephesus, Athens, etc. That they sinned in the Exercise of a power
that was not vested in them, Pref. to the H. Com.
it was not lawful for them to be a Democracy, each confiscation was robbery
in them, and every act of judicature and usurpation: they should have told
them, and the people of Rome, that there was no Real Majesty in the People,
and made use of those arguments which are now published (yet I think not as an
extraordinary discovery of latter ages) to undeceive them in that point. Holy
Comm. p. 63.
Though Mas^er Baxter confess p. 78. These. 67. The reason why God did not
universally by his law tie all the World to one form of Government, is,
because the difference of persons, times, places, ^^ighbours, etc, may make one
form best to one people, and at one time and place, that is worst to another.
Monarchy is best for some, Aristocracy to others, and Democracy to others. Can
that be best for any, which is never lawful? Or can that be bad which has
God's approbation, as here Master Baxter grants it to have in some cases? I see
we need only dispute the circumstances we are in (and that has been
excellently done by Master Harrington, The Letter from an Officer in Iroland,
and two letters to L. Genesis Fleetwood) to evince a Democracy, and Master Baxtor
did fallaciously dispute in general against it by twenty impertinent
objections, Holy Comm. p. 89, etc.
proving Democracy to be ordinarily the worst in thosi, which is only so in
hypothesi, some circumstances. But this was not the only neglect in the
Apostles, they should have told those Republics, that they did but delude
themselves, Pref. to H. Comm.
and indeed were no Republics: for That the people should (ordinarily)
exercise the Soveraignety is a monstrous confusion, and Morally impossible. Oh!
for Master Baxters considering cap! had the Apostles said so, the people would
have thought stranger of their policy, then God's; and Paul would justly have
been termed a Babbler. They needed but have opened their eyes and seen what
Master Baxter thinks morally impossible, and what he guesses to be monstrous
confusion, to be the greatest Order imaginable. I should tell the world how
far Master Baxter enlarges the number of Romances: Thus Rome, Athens, yea
Israel, etc. become mere fictions: and Geneva, Holland, Switzer land, etc.
Remove into Utopia and New Atlants. All this is as Morally certain upon what
Mr. Baxter lays down, as it is certain that he contradicts himself. p. 87.
These. 78. Democracy is a Commonwealth where the Sovereign power is in all, or
the major vote of the people to be exercised for the common good and to Some
popular forms [are there any popular forms that do not?] admit all the
multitude to vote in Government without distinction. He told us before [yet the
prefate too is his (...)] that the Sovereigne power is not in all; then is
Democracy a vice or defect in Government, not a species thereof, or
Commonwealth: and Ochlocracy is like metal upon metal in Heraldry, Vice
upon vice, or the degeneration of a corruption. It may be that Mr. Baxter does
speak some way or other de facto, as it is clear that he admits de facto Some
popular forms to be made up of the whole multitude, which yet was Morally
impossible. Surely he learned these concessions from Sancho in Don Quixote, who
tells his Master, it may be so, but it is impossible: or does not the
Manchegall divine outdo the Squire, for Mr. Baxter says it is so, and yet it
is morally impossible. I should too much presume upon my Reader to think he
would credit Master Baxter before the experience of several ages, or imagine
that this Clerk could perceive twenty difficulties, which not only Bycurgus,
Solon and Dion, but Moses and Calvim did not apprehend; yet neither shall I
altogether pass by the Reasons which were designed to establish the blood of
the Cromwels, and extirpate a Commonwealth. These. 81. Democracy or Popular
Government is ordinarily the worst, because it comes nearest to the utter
confounding of the Governors and Governed: the ranks that God has separated
by his Institution. I confess Monarchy does confound the governed only, and
yet it is never the better for that. Such a difficulty as this might have been
easily discovered by Moses, or he advised of it by God, when he erected his
Democracy: yet is there any thing more orderly then that? Any thing more remote
from confounding Governors and Governed? did his political Constitution
destroy the fifth Commandment in his Moral Law? It is false that God has
[absolutely] instituted some to be Rulers, a^^ some to be Subjects; yet them
that are Rulers, and them that are Subjects, both their conditions are of God,
and the latter ought to obey the former, since the powers that are are of God,
yet has not God by his institution separated the ranks of men, but by his
providence; how otherwise can a Democracy be from Gods approbation, ( p. 78.
These. 67.) and yet in this Confusion of Orders? Whereas he says that the
founding of a Commonwealth is next to the nullifying of Government, and
therefore it is said four times over in the Judges, chap. 17. v. 6. chap. 18.
v. 1. chap. 19. v. 1. chap. 21. v. 25. That [in those days there was no King
in Israel:] and twice it is added [but every man did what is right in his own
eyes] as if there had been no Government at all. There is no such insinuation
in the Text at all, nor is the Defect of a King in Israel more true where it is
expressed, then where it is not, throughout the Book of Judges. What if it had
been said in the days of Joshuah, there was no King in Israel? Or in the days
of Gideon, when the people desired him to be King over them? Judge. 8.22, 23.
The men of Israel said unto Gideon, rule thou over us, both thou and thy son,
and thy sons son also: for thou have delivered us from the hand of Midian. And
Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over
you; the Lord shall rule over you. Those dull Israelites were not sensible of
the confusion which they did live in: nor did Gideon perceive it: They did
offer him the Kingdom, because he had delivered them out of the hands of the
Midianites: the inducement is Gratitude, and none of Mr. Baxters difficulties:
He refuses the Kingdom, because that in those days when there should be no
King in Israel, and every man should do what was right in his own eyes, then
the Lord should rule over them. This very passage, together with that of God to
Samuel in the like circumstances, 1 Samuel 8.7. They have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. These places are a
sufficient confutation of what Master Baxter adds to the Text. But let any
judge if it be more for the dispraise of a Republike, that (without any further
addition) it is said, in those days there was no King in Israel: then to
Monarchy after, that in those days reigned King David? or in those days there
was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes:
and afterward, there ruled Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin. Another of Master
Baxters arguments is, p. 90. These. 82. Nothing more incident to corrupted
nature than self-love to blind men, and every man to be partial in his own
cause: now it is the people that are to be governed, judged, punished, etc. and
therefore how likely are they by partiality to themselves, to make the
Government next to none? I answer that Mr. Baxter, p. 102. These. 99. objecteth
against a Democracy, that it is the worst, because it will exercise the
greatest cruelties; which though it be false, yet is a charge inconsistent with
that of partiality. Secondly, this objection is either ill framed, or it is
destructive to all Government, for in all Governments some must be Judges in
their own Case, and this Exception is nonsense. The Question is, whether
seeing Arbitrary power, or a power to judge in ones own case must reside
somewhere, where then is it best fixed? I suppose in the people; and that it is
as impossible for a Democracy to be partial, as for one upon a hundred Dice to
cast as many, or fifty one aces, which is a security infinitely greater than
what Mr. Baxters one Die will afford us. And this is security enough against
what Mr. Baxter urges p. 93. That the Laws cannot hold a Democracy from
abrogating Christianity. I answer, no, not if they will: but if it be once
prevalent, you have a pretty good security [a moral Impossibility] that it
should ever be exterminated. What may happen under a Monarchy the narrations of
Japan, besides the actings of Jeroboam, Nebuchadnezzar and others will
testify: but it is evident that no Commonwealth permits the Inquisition, and
Christianity was much more easily planted in Commonwealths (for the Jews
after the Captivity, however they had the name of Kings sometimes among them,
were a kind of one, or an Aristocracy, as Josephus tells us:) and when but a
few made up all Christendom, with how much difficulty was our Savior put to
death. Whereas Mr Baxter says further, p. 93, 94. that he is a Fungus, and not
a man, that knows not by experience how easily bad men can make good Laws to
be a nose of Wax. This saying does not become a Divine, who disavowe it in the
Scripture, which being a law without an Authentical public interpreter, is
avowed to lie under no such inconveniences. In a Republic, where there is an
appeal to the people, it is Morally impossible it should be so: we ought not to
think it so easy to delude a multitude, as a few: nor ought we to vouch the
experience of corrupt Officers under a Monarchy (for other experience no man in
England of his own knowledge can allege) to the like issues under a Republic,
where these and all other difficulties are prevented: neither can the
maleconstitution of Rome, whence proceeded all it is defaults, prejudice Mr.
Harrington's Oceana, where all are remedied: and this is a sufficient reply to
all those arguments from inconveniences which Mr. Baxter brings, they being
all Ignoratio elenchi. But who would not laugh at the following Sophisms in the
Kederminster disputant, such as I have scarce heard from fresh-men here. p. 95.
These. 88. Democracy is furthest from Unity, and therefore furthest from
perfection: and therefore the most imperfect sort of Government, O Malvezzi,
how have thou exploded this argument in thy discourses upon Tacitus? as if it
were an unity of persons, and not unanimity which made a Government perfect.
That unity is the companion of perfection, and division departs from it as it
does from unity, is commonly acknowledged; which caused the Pythagoreans to
curse the number of [Two] because it was the first that presumed to depart from
unity. Is not this a fine argument for a Theologue? Does not it overthrow the
Trinity, as well as a Commonwealth? Was it not a simplicity in the
Pythagoreans (if they were so absurd as Mr. Baxter makes them; which they were
not: but he understands neither them nor Greek) to attribute Presumption to
things destitute of understanding, and to curse Arithmetic, because a man
might mis-tell his Money or the like. This is a sallacy (...). They who cursed
two would not have admitted three to bear witness in Heaven: and if two were
such an execrable division, how is it that God having made one man, did not
think it meet he should be alone? These. 8.9. ' That is the most imperfect
Government which departs farthest from the divine universal Form, but so does
popular Government. For the universal kingdom has but one King. This is a
pretty Topic, and such as Bellarmine and the Papists make use of to prove that
there ought to be one Pope, head of the Church. Let the world judge whose cause
Mr. Baxter pleads, and what contumelies might be fastened on him. It is not the
Unity of a Governor in person that makes a Commonwealth resemble God; for
Aristotle (and he is of more credit than Pythagoras) says, that to be ruled by
Laws is to be ruled by God: but to be ruled by a Man is to be ruled by a
Brute. But further there is as little consequence in the Argument, as distance
betwixt Heaven and Earth. Where there is a disparity in the ruled, there must
be no parity of rulers: but in Mankind there is no disparity, all are equally
free, none are born Subjects or Rulers: and to make a Monarchy best, you must
introduce such a disparity, as that one may transcend as God; for if many
excel an Aristocracy or Democracy is best. His other arguments from Angelical
Natures, and the government used by nature in man are no less ridiculous: I
wonder how he missed that of Crows, Bees, etc. That Government is best which
is most suited to the nature of man: now that varies according to
circumstances, as Mr. Baxter acknowledges: How ignorantly done was it then by
Mr. Baxter to bring such arguments, as either prove Monarchy alwaves best, or
not at all: for it will still be true, that the Universal kingdom has but one
King, without the danger of succession for a worse, and without hazard of
tumults, etc. but it is not so in Mankind. These Objections and the like,
concern not only the Independents to answer, but Presbyterians; for they prove
against an Aristocracie in Church as well as State: though Mr. Baxter cannot
prove that the Government of the Church was, or ought to be Monarchical, but
popular, and if it had only been for the name sake, he should have declined
the mention of the Church, which is Ecclesia: and what nonsense is it for him
to argue, p. 97. As Christ himself is the Monarch, a King of his Church, and
the One head of his body, so did he settle in every particular Church those
Bishops, Presbyters or Pastors, whom he has commanded the people to obey as
Ru^ers. The comparison is naught as Christ is the one head to one body; so he
has subjected the people too in his Church to many heads. I desire that Mr.
Baxter would evince, that Christ did settle, in every particular Church,
Bishops: and that the Order of Grace did so far overthrowe the Order of
Nature, that the people should be the origin of the one power (as I do now
suppose) and not of the other. Sure I am, that Ambassadors to a people are not
thereby rulers over a people. His arguments from the want of Secrecy, etc. have
been refuted by the contrary experience, as well of reason in Malvezzi,
Boccalini, and others; so that I may well think that Mr. Baxter took us for a
Commonwealth of Bees, and therefore instead of solid Reasonings, and a coherent
Republic, he thought to dissipate us by casting dust into the Air. I intended
to have said more against that Book of his, but finding my self now under a
more necessary diversion then that work would be, I hope I may be excused till
another time.

Whether the Civil Magistrate has any power in things of Spiritual concernment?
THough it seem that this Question may be easily decided out of a consideration
of the very Terms themselves; things Civil and Spiritual being of a different
nature, and not subordinate, so as he who is deputed to administer the former,
is not thereby empowered to entermeddle with the latter any way: the
Appellation of Civil Magistrate no less determines the Object and extent of his
power, than the contrary Title of Spiritual Lord would restrain him that should
be so constituted from any jurisdiction in Temporals: or a Commission for N. N.
to be Admiral at Sea, limits his command, so as he has no rule upon Land. But
since the Implication of the Terms is not convincing enough with them who are
either resolved, or interested otherwise: I shall make a brief inquiry into the
rise and original of Magistracy, and the limitation of such power.

Magistracy it is the exercise of a Moral power: one of these is the root and
measure of the other, which if it exceed it becomes exorbitant, and is no
longer Magistracy, but a corruption thereof.

Almighty God has so ordered the affairs of this world, that Man partly
thorough his own inclinations, partly out of a sense of his necessityes not
otherwise relieveable then by mutual assistance, is become naturally Sociable:
and Society (as man is corrupted by Adams fall) cannot be upheld and preserved
but by the deputation of some that may make it their principal business to
attend unto the good of the community, and securing of each individual in such
rights as they respectively shall agree upon toward each other; and for the
executing of which trust they do mutually promise amongst themselves and to
their Governor or Governors that they will be assistant unto him or them with
their utmost power.

From Gods having so disposed of things Magistracy is called Gods ordinance
[(...)] And the Conscience hereof [(...)] or apprehension that man has of such
sociable inclinations in him, as often as he diligently consults his own
thoughts, is the reason of our subjection to Magistracy, as well as that other
of wrath and dangers likely to ensue, upon any disobedience. Romans 13. v. 2.5.

As to the several kinds of Magistracy [no^ Higher and Subordinate, but
Supreme, viz. Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy] they likewise are commonly
Gods ordinance by the former claim of his disposing men's hearts and other
extrinsque and internal circumstances, so as they embrace this or that form.
That the East is generally affected to and ruled by an absolute Monarchy whilst
the West and North admit only of a Republique or such a mixture, as however
their Governors may be called Kings, yet are they not Monarchs. Sometimes God
more immediately constituteth this or that particular form of Government; as
first a Commonwealth in Israel, and after that ( ^s his wrath) a Monarchy. God
has no where in his word determined what is the power of the Magistrate how
far it extends it self: what will be the practice of Kings [and so certainly
their practice, that they challenge it for their right] we may read 1 Samuel 8.
v. 11. etc. But their Duty may equitably be drawn from Deuter. 17.19. He whom
God should choose, and the people set over them, was to rule according to
National Laws; now Laws cannot be universal, but must be through the
prudence of the Legislator accomodated to the particular circumstances in which
any people is.

Where the word of a King is there is power: and who may say unto him what
do thou? These and such like Texts oblige not but such as are under
Monarchs: The justitia of Arragon may, notwithstanding them, resist the King of
Spain and our Parliaments control his Majesty.

The People are the Efficient cause of Magistracy, and from them is all true
power derived: God himself when he gave a King to Israel, he did but propose,
the People did set him over them. Magistracy is not a paternall right, nor
consequent thereof either in Scripture, or Nature. But suppose Adam Monarch of
the whole Earth, and that Monarchy was instituted when yet there were but two
in the world. Genesis 3.16. where God tells the woman that her Husband should rule
over her. I would feign know whither Adam had this Dominion as Father, (which
is not proved from the text) or as being the first man created in a world
devoyd of Landlords, and so falling to the first that should possess it. If the
latter (to wave that question so much debated, whither in New found Lands more
accrue to the first comer and discoverer then he takes Seisin of?) Then we
ought to employ Sr. Tho. Vrchard, to search out one universal Monarch
Successor to Adam, or it must be proved that our present division of Lands and
Kingdoms under Magistrates is of his approbation. But both Adams Successor,
and his will are impossible to be found out; and so that rearch is at an end.
If he had that Dominion as Father, then all Fathers have the like power, so
Adams Monarchy determines with his life, and all Magistracy will be at least
resolved into the People, when many Families and Fatherless Persons unite into
one estate. If he had that Dominion as the first Father from whose Loins all
mankind issued, I would feign know to whom he did bequeath that power? Whither
it did Naturally descend to his Eldest Son? or might be conferred or
communicated to other his Children arbitrarily? But the right of primogeniture
cannot be evinced out of Scripture, whilst the stories of Esau, Reuben,
Manasseth, David Succeeding to the prejudice of Saul's Sons, Adonijahs being
displaced by Solomon, Je^oahas the son Josiah his preceding his Elder Brother
Jehoiakin in the succession, as the Jews note, and out of them Mr. Seldom, are
preserved: nor can it be deduced from the customs of Nations (the only
interpretor of Nature) which vary in that point: and if the claim of the
firstborn does not conclude necessarily, (as it does not, neither in ancient
or modern Practice) the pretenses of other Children are less valid. Aristotle
says that succession in Kings by way of primogeniture, was the custom of
Barbarians: and that in the time of the Heroes men did rule otherwise. Polit.
l. 3.
If all might be conferred or imparted arbitrarily, let such Grantees produce
their title from Seths pillars, or elsewhere, and we shall consider their plea.
In the mean while since neither the descendants of Cain, nor any other appear
to challenge any such rights as mercenary divines and Lawyers have ascribed to
Kings (for no King or Magistrate, I ever read of, avowed such his right, nor
was it thought on either at the founding of the Commonwealth of Israel, or the
Election of Saul, etc.) I cannot find any Magistracy in the world but what is
derived from the People more or less consenting and impowering thereunto. And
thus if one Apostle call Magistracy the ordinance of God (for of that he speaks
abstractively) Romans 13. v. 2. Yet Magistrates (or Magistracy in the concrete)
are of humane constitution, and the creatures of men. 1 Pet. 2. v. 12. (...),
etc. Be thou subject unto every humane creature [or creature of man; for so the
word signifyes, and not Ordinance, no more then Marc. 16.15. preach to every
creature (...)] for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King etc.

To the making a Creature it is necessary that it is production be out of
nothing, or at least out of no matter predisposed for such a form, (thus Adam
was created) and this is the Physical sense of the word: In a Moral sense
then to the Creation of a Magistrate it is to be supposed that he neither is
already vested with such a power, nor in such a capacity as without the
accessional of man's creation to grow up thereunto. And indeed if all men are
equal before they embody by cohabitation, the voisinage gives no man
superiority over another.

There are some which fancy that Power is indeed from the People only as
Electing to it; not as conferring it: that they have only the presentation to
that authority which God immediately gives. This opinion seems to enterfere
with that Text which represents the Magistrate as a creature of man: but
because in Scripture propriety of speech is not too rigorously to be insisted
on, and makes the case only probable, not certain: I further say that this is
but the resuery of men whose imagination rather then judgment is
extraordinary, who must place the strength of their cause in Assertions that
are only so far disproveable in that they cannot be proved. The People never
owned such their suffrage in the most solemn elections of Saul, David, etc. nor
did God declare his power to be such, though both parties did there severally
interpose. It cannot be evidenced out of Gods word; Nature and Reason teach us
no such thing; the Relations of our King (no less then those of other Nations)
hold forth the contrary: and it were absolute folly for us, upon slender
probabilities and no greater evidence then a quick wit may give to the most
despicable untruths, to renounce the professions and practice of all Nations in
all Ages, which render our Opinion more then probable. In fine, it lays us
open to all the whimseys imaginable, that any bold assertour can impose upon
the Almighty in hopes of not being refuted till doomesday. The Papists will
thus defend their Transubstantiation, and prove that to be really the Body and
Blood of Christ, which we see to be Bread. The same persons say that in
Ordination a Character is imprinted upon the soul of the Priest ordained: The
English Bishops breathed upon their Creatures, saying receive the Holy Ghost. A
thousand such cheats may be imposed upon the unwary, if we admit of these
suppositions, and quit our sense for that which is nonsense. I would feign
know, what is the Nature of the power thus invisibly collated? what is the
Tenor of this celestial charter? Is it arbitrary? or Limited? If Limited how
far? These things are necessary for the people to know, that they may not
transgress what they are as yet invincibly ignorant of. This is a course which
renders all Kings Absolute, yea and all inferior Magistrates too, for the text
distinguishes not of the ones being more from God then the other: and it makes
the Peoples misfortunes infinite, and irrelievable, since they are subjected to
one upon they know not what terms, by one to whom they can make no appeal but
by Prayers and Tears. This plea does unsettle all the Governments in the
civilized world, making all Concessions null (or at least in their origin
unlawful) that were extorted from tyrants, or granted by such Magistrates as
are not satisfied with that plenitude of power which God invests them with,
whether they can diminish it: what we say now is their duty will be but an Act
of grace, and all our rights will be changed into privileges.

It is then clear that the People are the Efficient cause of Magistracy, and
that all true power is derived from them. Who those People are, I must referr
you for brevity sake, to a consideration of the Erection of the Commonwealth
in Israel.

There is no Government now but has its original from the consent of some
people: which people if they were before ligued with any other number besides
themselves, are tied by their mutual promises and compacts to them and their
common Magistrate, so as not to erect any new one in opposition to him; unless
there be a violation of fundamental agreements, and all satisfaction for what
is past, together with real security for the future be denied, or to be
despayred of. If the Magistrate alone injure them, they may with the common
(or, in case that cannot be had thorough the circumstances of affairs, which
is the default of the Governors, not governed with an interpretative) Consent
call him to an account. If the others dissent and defend him, then are they
free from all precedent obligations not only toward their Magistrate, but one
another: Since in conditional pacts, if the one party fail, the other is at
liberty.

If their quondam Magistrate with his partisans invade them, then are they free
to defend themselves, or prevent such dangers as are threatened any way from
him, or them; yea and so to manage their own safety (which is the only cause
of a just war, and the End of Government in general) that they may at Length
totally subdue and subject them.

To all that are by conquest thus subjected the new erected Magistrate of the
conquering people is not properly a Magistrate, but a provincial Governor:
And if they gave just cause of fear to the conquerours at first, their Conquest
is just; if otherwise, then not: And so long their subjecting is legitimate,
whilst that security is gained which the conquerours designed in the
beginning, and expect as the product of war.

This Magistrate has no absolute power over the conquered, but such as is
derived from them, in whose strength and for whose safety he does act: and to
them he is accomptable for such his demeanor as is not founded upon the Rule
of Self-preservation.

As in the Commonwealth of Israel, when they were to choose a King, that King
was obliged to have a book of the fundamental laws written in his own hand,
and to read herein all the days of his life, that he might observe the said
statutes and do them, that so his heart might not be lifted up above his
brethren, and that he should not turn from the commandment to the right hand,
or to the left. Deuteronomy. 17. v. 18.20. So it behooves such a people as impowers any
for Magistracy, upon several cases to make them recognize their Authority,
from whom they have it, and for whose sake it is that they rule, not only over
them, but over new accquests: they ought also to be very cautious of mixing
their government with that of the provincials, and such as do not close with
them in their original Constitutions of their Magistrate; for their proper
interest may be eaten out, and their Magistrate become established upon the
base of such articles as the conquered will assent unto for the bettering of
their present condition, no less then ruin of their conquerours. Several
Kingdoms in Spain having permitted their Kings by marryage to unite different
Kingdoms, retaining different loves, and qualified with discrepant principles
of Government, have now lost their privileges and fundamental rights, each
contributing to the others overthrow by the subtle counsels of their
Magistrate.

If the People Are the Authors of Magistracy, and he their creature; Then it
will follow, that He is erected and established for the compassing of their
good: and that this is the End for which he was set up. For since man in his
actings is supposed to act voluntarily, and the object of his will is some good
either real, or apparently so; it must likewise be supposed that in the
constituting of Magistracy all did aim at something that might be an
universal good: it being not imagined how all should conspire for the
procuring of any good of a particular man, or number of men, to their own
detriment and disadvantage: self-love is not only the dictate of Nature, but
recommended by our Savior as the rule and measure of such love as we are to
bear toward our neighbor.

The Ends of Nations in the erecting several fabrics of Government, are as
different as they themselves: there being no thing universally good, or
universally approved of: And as their intendments are discrepant, so they
disagree in the ways for attaining their purposes: which variety arises from
the various prejudices and capacityes they are born and educated to in
different climates, with difference of natural tempers, difference of diet,
and customs etc.

The most obvious and universal end is the upholding society and intercourse
by securing each in their property, and manage of commerce betwixt one another
for mutual supply of things necessary. After that the World grew populous, and
that men began to straiten in their plantations, they formed several petit
Governments, each Town being a principality, upon the end specified That they
did not erect them for, nor empower them to determine of the word or worship of
God seems manifest from Scripture; Before Enos there were Cities and
communityes, for Cain built one Genesis 4. v. 17. yet the Text says positively,
after Enos was born unto Seth; Then began men to call upon the name of the
Lord. Genesis 4. v. 26. After that, when Abraham travailed up and down, into
Egypt, the land of Gerar, etc. he erected an altar at Bethell, and worshipped
his God, who was not the acknowledged God of the nations amongst which he
sojourned, without a plea for toleration: in sum, the whole story of the
Saints under the old Testament seems to evidence this truth, that their
Magistrates were purely civil, and that though they might have a National
religion as in Egypt, and possibly Salem, yet did they not entermeddle with the
particular religion of their subjects, or them that sojourned amongst them. It
was Haman's counsel to King Ahasuerus to destroy the Jews for that their laws
were different from all people, neither kept they the Kings laws viz.
concerning Religion; [for if they had been otherwise criminal, they could not
have escaped unpunished.] Esther 3. v. 8. It is the Opinion of Bellarmine in
his book de Laicis, that the Heathens did grant an universal liberty in the
worship of God; which assertion is for the most part true, for though they had
peculiar Gods for their nations, yet privately and publicly they which
worshipped a God (whosoever, or whatsoever it was) were permitted, though
Diagoras and Protagoras, the one doubting of, the other denying any God, were
not tolerated in Greece. But at Rome I find a law out of the twelve tables,
Separatim nemo habessit deos, neve novos, sed nec advenas, nisi public
adscitos privatim colunto. Let none have any particular Gods to himself, nor
let any worship privately either new or foreign Gods; but upon a public
reception of them. But notwithstanding this law a great latitude of religions
was allowed at Rome, as History tells us; But the religion of these times
consisted rather in outward ceremonies, then inward opinions about God, more
then that he was, and that he was a rewarder of well or ill-doers according to
their demerits: which too was in part denied by Epicurus who had a numerous
company of followers in Greece and Rome. The Jews had a toleration every where
amongst the Heathen, as Mr. Seldom observes, yet were they not idle, but
endeavored to imbue others with their principles, and to draw them over to the
law of Moses, terming such proselitos justitiae. This others, and Rutilius in
his Itinerary takes notice of, wishing Jury had never bin subdued, so many did
they convert to their religion.

Atque utinam nunquam Judaea victa fuisset
Pompeii bellis, imperioque Titi.
Latius excisae pestes contagia Serpunt,
Victoresque suos ratio victa premit.
From whence we may observe that it was the sense of Nations, that is, nature
it self, Humani juris and naturalis potesea it is est unicuique quod putaverit,
colere; nec alii obest, aut prodest alterius religio. Sed nec religionis ese
cogere religionem, quae sponte suscipi debet non vi. Tertullian ad Scapul.
how the civil Magistrate had nothing to do in matters of Religion in those
days; and whatever their laws were upon some occasions in an uncontrolled
practice, they did allow of this principle: It is true there are recorded in
Sacred Writ examples of Kings amongst the Jews and other Nations that did
entermeddle in religious worship; which I shall a little instance in, because,
if what was of old written, was written for our instruction, certainly those
transactions seem registered that we might not be ignorant of the deplorable and
detestable effects of an Absolute Monarchy. I would feign know of Mr. Wren
whether these Monarchs did proceed so deliberately as he imagines they must in
all reason do. Monarch. assert. p. 11. and whether a thousand such like
cappuches may not be instanced in out of absolute Monarchies which may show
that a single person does not put on that excellent temper and frame of spirit
in enacting laws which he talks of?
One day Darius makes a Law, and establishes a royal statute that for thirty
days none should make any request or prayer except to the King, upon penalty
of being cast into the Lions den: and in compliance with this Law [of the
supreme judge of true and false religion!] Daniel is cast into the Lions den:
he being not devoured, his accusers [with their innocent wifes and children!]
are cast in to be devoured: then is a decree made unto all people, Nations and
Languages that dwelled in all the Earth, that they fear the God of Daniel. Dan.
6. The same Daniel had not only felt, but seen before the capricios of an
Absolute Monarch in Nebuchadnessor, who made a Golden Image and ordained that
all people should at the sound of Music fall down and worship it, or be
burned in the fiery furnace. Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego regarded not him,
nor served his Gods, nor worshipped the Image. But they being miraculously
delivered out of the fire; then he blessed the God of Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego, and makes a decree that every Nation, People and Language, which
spoke any thing amiss against their God should be cut in pieces, and their
houses be made a dunghill, because no other God could deliver in that sort.
Dan. 3. These are inconveniences of this Arbitrary Magistrate, visible not
only amongst the Gentiles but people of God, who chose a King to judge them,
like all the Nations. Jeroboam made Israel to sin by an irrevocable idolatry:
Manasseh ensnared High Places; Asa left the latter, and removed only the
former. So did Jehohash in the time of Jehojada, he did what was right in the
sight of the Lord, but the High Places were not taken away, the people still
sacrificed and did burn incense thereon. In the Roman Empire Caligula no sooner
^nacted that himself should be worshipped as God, but as Philo tells us, All the
world [(...)] all adored him, except the Jews. How things stood during
Christian Kings and Emperors. I shall give some account anon: give me leave
now to tell you, that I will not dispute here what power was of old attributed
to Kings, nor of their absolute exemption either from Law or Punishment; nor
will I enlarge upon the power they exercised in matters religious, nor debate
whither they could confer rationally such a power as made their Elect
Emperor possessour of more then their Enemies would take from them: I shall
limit my discourse to the present posture of our affairs, and omitting what
might serve for ostentation, I shall enquire into what is of particular concern
to the good people of our Nation.

I have showed how all power now is from the people as it is efficient: I have
showed that the general end men aim at in the erecting Magistracy is the
preserving Society: and that Magistrates are constituted for their good, and
not they for the advantages of Magistrates. Whether they may give absolutely
themselves up to his Will, upon their own accord, as in Tartary, or upon some
contract, as the Egyptians did to Pharaoh for Victuals, I shall not at present
handle: Where there is no such peremptory resignation, there the People are
Supreme, the Trust is fiduciary, and limited, so as where the Magistrate has
no authority to command, if the circumstances correspond, it is no sin to
disobey. Which saying, I think, will be valid amongst our Northern men, until a
generation arise that shall say it is just and prudential, that those whom God
has made men should render themselves brutes; that God did ill to endow us
with reason, which ought to have no further use in us, than that we quit it in
its principal exercise, and only practice it in purchasing Rattles and
Hobby-Horses.

I am not now to speak of people qualified with resembling endowments, nor
whose Religion is only Nature, without the Accessional of extraordinary
Revelation, who having not the Law were a Law unto themselves; and not to be
judged by that Light in which we walk. I come now to speak of Jacob unto whom
God has showed his word: and of Israel, to whom he has declared his statutes
and his judgments. He has not dealt so with any Nation of those I have
instanced in. We are now as it were come out of Egypt, disfranchised from the
yoke of Pharaoh, delivered from a Government established upon no other right
tha^ Ahabs posterity might have pretended for Naboths Vineyard, their
Ancestors got i^ unjustly, and they had possession thereof Where a Total
Conquest is made by a general subduing of the land to the will of the Victor,
the claim arising thence is no better than that of an Highway man to the purse
of him whom he has robbed: and whatever subjection is paid upon that account,
if it be due out of a Religious, and not Civil conscience on the part of the
vanquished, yet it cannot be received by the Usurper, if a Christian; he being
rather to make a manifold compensation for injuries offered, than to continue
them: If the Conquest be but partial, and an entrance only made by the sword:
But the people either because of the Right claimed by the Invader; or their
unwillingness to suffer the miseries of War; or their apparent inability to
stand out in a way of Besitance, or some other consideration, submit to a
composition, and contract of subjection to the Invader: in this latter it is
evident, the Magistrates power is from the peoples consent; and the Government
is such as the contract and fundamental agreement makes it to be, if it be the
first Agreement, and the Pretender has no former Title which remains in force,
for then this latter is invalid, if it include not, and amount to a
relinquishing and disanulling of the old. Being vindicated to our Natural
Liberty, and acquitted from all Moral subjection that might be due upon such
contracts as the violation whereof on the other side had nullified on ours; It
is the acknowledgment which one of the greatest Patrons of Monarchy does make,
that he who takes an oath unto another (as our Kings did unto the people) is
thereby confessed to be the inferior. Jusiurandum cerie reverent^am, cul^um,
and bonorem prae se sert ejus cui praestatur. Quo fit ut non Clienti Dominus,
sed Domino Cliens (quanquam inter uirumque officiorum mutua quaedam obligatio
est) sac amenti religi^ne fid^m and obsequ^um a ^stringat. Quod si rex populo
jurat in leges and majorum instituta, populum cer^e s^periorem, i^o dominnm
agnoscit, cui non sacienda fugien aeque praes^^bat, sed a quo sure legem
accipiat. Jusiurandum enim auetoramentum est obsequii, quod ab homine tenuioris
fortunae superiori de^etur. Blackvod^us Apolog. pro reg. C. 25.
it being already showed that power, all just power is derived from the assent
of the people, that their safety is the end aimed at in the institution of
Magistracy; and that the Magistrate has no other, nor farther power than the
people do confer upon him; I shall as briefly as I can discuss that Question.

Whether any Magistrate erected and constituted by such as have asserted
themselves into freedom, or such as may be constituted by them, can now or
hereafter, be supposed to have power in spiritual Affairs and Concerns?

For the decision hereof it is necessary you remember, that the case is not now
concerning an outside Religion, as the form of Gods Worship, nor concerning
such a Religion, as the speculative part whereof extends no farther than the
acknowledgement of an Eternal power and Godhead: the latter of which was
clearly manifested unto all, so that they are without excuse; Romans 1. v. 20.
And the former, being not to be deduced from common Principles, nor having been
declared by express Revelation, might vary according to the different reasons,
or fancies of sundry Nations: and there being no infallible rule for to
determine of the right, no worship could be censured as wrong. That which we
are to seek after, is a Religion consisting in a multitude of Propositions
[especially as it is now managed by some, that make the greatest noise in our
age] not to be proved by natural reason and common principles, but pure
Revelation, which is delivered in the Scripture, in Tongues disused, and a
phrase peculiar thereunto, and for the explanation whereof Tradition is no way
conducible; but only the Spirit guiding those that are not reprobate unto all
knowledge. And as to the manner of the worship which we are to use toward God,
the regulation thereof only depends upon universal rules, such as are, Neither
in this mount, nor in Jerusalem, but in Spirit and in Truth: Let all things be
done with order and decency; to the glory of God; to edification, etc. That our
Magistrate should entermeddle authoritatively in such spiritual affairs, by
virtue of any power derived from his creators, the People, is to me morally
impossible, as well as unlawful.

Consider the quality of persons interested in the New Government; they are not
all under one dispensation, nor do they walk all in one light: But with variety
of gifts, sundry divisions of the Spirit, and several Talent-distributions.
Christ in the Gospel-Parable, Matthew. 25. v. 14 says, The kingdom of heaven is
as a man travailing into a far country, who called his own servants, and
delivered them his goods; and unto one he gave five talents, to another two,
and to several ability, and straightway took his journey. Then he that had
received five talents, went and traded with them, and made them other five
talents; and likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two. But
he that received one, went and dug in the earth and hid his Lords money.
This Parable is not to be understood of the Spiritual Kingdom of Heaven, in
which though there be diversity of gifts, yet is there none idle; none that
bury their talent in the earth for ever, until the coming of their Lord and
Master. But it is understood of that Economy whereby God rules the World in
general, and it is that Method of Government, by which the pillars of the earth
are upheld. So that however a Parable may be but an evil ground for a rational
discourse, in it self; yet since the experience of all ages under the Gospel
does attest thereunto, I shall take it for an unquestionable Truth.

That there is not only a great variety amongst the sons of men as to natural
abilities, but also spiritual endowments, and that in such discr pancy as is
the proportion betwixt one, two, and five talents.

That according to these Talents, gifts and endowments men do act: that is, Men
deport themselves according to the understanding [upon which necssarily does
depend the will] which they have and not according to what they have not.

That it is not possible for them of lower gifts and abilities to attain unto
the measure of those perfections which are resplendant in men of greater gifts.
It is with those soul-embellishments as with the eye in seeing, the
short-sighted cannot discern those things which are conspicuous enough to
quicker eyes. The natural [or animall] man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither CAN he know them,
because they are SPIRITV ALLY discerned. But he that is spiritual judges all
things. 1. Cor. 2.14, 15. so it is said of the believers, whom God makes
partakers of an higher dispensation, they were borne, not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Joh. 1.13.

That God requires it not of them that they should all equally advantage
themselves: but that he should gain much who has received much. Thus in the
parable aforesaid, After a long time the Lord of those servants comes, and
reckons with them, And so he that had received five talents, came and trought
other five talents, saying, Lord thou deliveredst unto me five talents, behold
I have gained besides them five talents more. His Lord said unto him, well done,
thou good and faithful servant, thou have been FAITHIVLL over a few things, I
will make the ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, And
he who had received two talents, and therewith gained other two, even he
received the same elogy of a good and faithful servant. But he who had
received only one, when he brought it without usury proportionate, is called
wicked and slothful. and unprofitable Matthew. 2^. v. 19. etc.

These several sorts of men may be differenced into men of a natural, Legal
and evang^licall conscience, or into Carnal, Animal [or natural, as our
English reads it, 1 Cor. 2.14.] and spiritual. To any of which it may be said,
what have thou that thou did not receive? And all these are legitimate
inhabitants of the earth, and have a right to possess it, and to institute
goverments and Magistrates, and so to dispose of their liberty. Not the one,
nor the other is to be extirpated: The earth has he given to the children of
men Ps 125. v. 16. and 1. Cor. 5. v. 9, 10. etc. I wrote unto you in an
Epistle, not to company with fornicators: yet not altogether with the
fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with
idolaters: for then must ye needs go out of the World. But now I have written
unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called a BROTHER be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such a one, no not to eat, For what have I to do to judge
them that are without? do not ye judge them that are within? But them that are
without, God judges. Therefore put away from among YOUR SELVES that wicked
person. For them which are without the Church of God, with them he tells the
Corinthians they are not to keep a perfect society, yet are they not altogether
to decline their company: not that upon this ground Christians might
exterminate them; but because such a subterfuge of their company is not
consistent with the ordinary posture of affairs in the World. To effect that,
the Christians not the Heathens, (though fornicators, extortioners, and
idolaters) must go out of the World. And the reason is added, because
Christians, the most spiritual-minded and discerning Christians, even Paul an
Apostle, not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father who
raised him from the dead, he has nothing to do to judge them that are without.
Put it any man has associated himself unto any particular Church, submitted
himself to Church-walking, such a one may be put out from amongst the
brotherhood, not banished a city or nation, or imprisoned, though he be a
fornicator, covetous, or idolater, etc. for such his deportment not
Christianity, but the light of nature is a rule to condemn him, and the laws
established by consent must punish him. These men thus differenced in
qualifications having all a Right to provide for their own safety, and having
been so far from prejudicing that they have assisted each other in the defense
of their natural liberty, yea, and the two of meaner endowments have promised
and declared to protect the third and highest degree of the Kingdom of Christ
in their spiritual walkings, and faith in our Lord Jesus, can no way be
supposed to forfeit their share in the constituting of our governors, or being
protected by them in those ways unto which the light that enlightneth all that
come into the World in a greater or less measure, shall direct them. Men
embody under Magistrates for upholding civil commerce, but they gather into
Churches to maintain a spiritual communion. These all agreeing in the
one-talent distribution, which leads them to civil government with punishments
for such as offend against it, and to the acknowledgement of one God, that he
is, that that he is a rewarder of such as diligently seek him, may set up a
Magi^irate, to all ends and purposes which have a subserviency to their common
good according to that general way wherein they all agree. But as to their
particular sentiments arising from different illuminations, and prejudices from
education, etc. in reference to them they cannot assent further then a mutual
Toleration. The things agitated are of a spiritual nature, and spiritually to
be discerned; so that the animal or natural man cannot receive them under any
other esteem than that of Folly. 1 Cor. 2.14. what entertainment then will
their proposal find with them who are fleshlyminded? John 3. v. 27. A man can
receive nothing, except it be given him from Heaven, So Matthew. 13. v. 11. To
you it is given to know the mysteryes of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it
is not given. And John 6. v. 65. No man can come to me, except it were given to
him of my Father. If then two parts of three cannot receive, understand, nor
judge of Spiritual things; (or if they do, their judgment is of no more
validity, then what men of distempered organs say about sensual objects) How
is it possible for them to confer a power on their Magistrate, to
countenance, promote and uphold they know not what, or what they (in their
apprehensions) know to be foolishness. How can any such act be expected, or
desired at their hands, since he that has no conscience but to promote an
unknown Truth, will have none to condemn a known one; They who can imagine such
a collated power, must suppose such men to be most of them fools in Actions of
the greatest and most public import.

Nor is it only Morally unpossible, but unlawful for men so qualifyed to
empower any Man or Men unto a Magistracy to judge of Spiritual matters, and
punish those who dissent from him, and such as are not of his mind by death,
banishment, fires, imprisonment, or incapacity for public charges. For such
power cannot be collated in faith; now whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans
14.23. It were ridiculous to think they can ever agree that should be enacted
and pressed as a Savor of life unto life, which is to them hidden, and
unsavory, or a savor of death unto death. How can the practical judgment of
man determine of such a thing that it ought to be done, when in it is previous
acts it looks upon it under all the disobliging circumstances possible? If a
man were short-sighted and another of more piercing eyes should assure him he
did at a distance (which the other could not discover) perceive men, should the
other aver positively that they were men which seemed to him like Trees? Nay
ought he to venture his soul and eternity upon the uncertain and Fallible
experiences of another.

It is then evident that the men of one or two talents cannot consent to the
collation of such a power to their Magistrate, or if they did, it were null,
and to be recalled as being sinful in the first grant. It is no less clear,
that Men of greater illuminations cannot empower any Magistrate unto such an
end. For to commit such a Trust unto a man whose breath is in his nostrills,
whose Election is not in their vote, (they being the little flock and a
minority) and whose heart is deceitful above all things, and not to be known
by them, whither he either be really what he pretends, or whether he will
continue so, is to put either their life and fortunes, or their religion to
such an hazard, as is inconsistent with prudence and common reason. It is to
put all to man's day, which ought to be remitted to the tribunal of God. The
frequent changes in Judah before the captivity, and the vicissitude of Darius
and Nabuchodonosor's actings of old, besides the changes of religion in the
times of Christianity from Heathenisme to the Gospel, and from the Gospel to
Heathenisme, from Arrianisme to what is now Orthodox, and back again. These are
such presidents, and so apt to recurre through the condition of humane frailty,
as may justly deter them from running into such snares, who are taught to
pray that they be not lead into temptation. Themistius [an Heathen] in his
Oration to the Emperor. Jovianus who succeeded Julian the Apostate, tells him
that there had through the example and compulsion of Emperors been such
variableness in point of religion, that mankind was become ridiculous, and
seemed to worship the imperial robe and diadem, rather then any deity.
Alterations in religion had been more frequent then the Ebbing and flowing of
Euripus; the fickleness of one Theramenes formerly occasioned the proverb; but
in his time changeableness was not the weakness of one but the practice of all:
the same persons one while assisted at the sacrifices of the Heathens at their
Altars, and another while participated of the table of the Lord Jesus.

However, if they could better rely upon the understanding and stability of
another in reference to those truths wherewith they experiment themselves to be
no less acquainted, then their elect Magistrate pretends to be: and if that
power were to be derived solely from them, which is the contribution of all in
general; yet could not they lawfully empower him so in order to the
captivating of others unto the profession of such religion, as they themselves
are possessed with, in the spiritual part thereof, and in as high a manner as
themselves. Mr. Baxter pretends to physique; if he deal with his patients in
this sort, that he make not the rule of health he intends, to be the natural
constitution of their bodies, but an ideated exquisite temperament; it is not
to be doubted, but such as are in their original temper phlegmatique,
cholerique, etc. will be destroyed by him, and one indisposition cured by the
introduction of another. It is so in the case of the soul; the Master called
not his servant to an account for five talents, where he gave but two: no, he
was good and faithful who had improved only them, as well as he that had
traded with five. As for those as pretend no higher then a bare steward-ship
not accompanied with omnisciency, I think it very great rashness in them to
call to this or that person for the improvement of two talents, of whom they
are not certain that they have received more then one: so far ought they to
be from punishing all for the nonimprovement of five.

Moreover, it is not lawful for Christians to commit that power to their
Magistrate, which they cannot exercise themselves: But force and compulsion
toward them that are without, are actions so unsuitable to the propagation of
Christianity, so disagreable unto the precepts thereof, as nothing can be more.
It is the way that Mahomet established his fables, and not Christ his truths:
the former having no force raised armies to subdue the souls as well as bodies
of his enemies: but Christ though he could have called down fire from Heaven,
reproved those designs in his Apostles, telling them they knew not of what
spirit they were: (which shows they were not of his) and being able to entreat
Legions of Angels from his Father, Matthew. 25.53.
he chose all the day long to stretch out his hands to a gainsaying generation
rather then employ such means: Means! which God made use of to destroy the
Sodomites or host of Sennacherib (and with which he will destroy at last the
World, and for ever torment the wicked) not convert the Nations to
righteousness, Means! that may reduce men under the Spirit of bondage, to fear
but not endowe them with the spirit of Adoption, whereby they may cry Abba,
Father. Means! that neither being Glory to God in the highest, nor on earth
peace, nor good will toward men: and consequently as unsuitable to the forming
of Christ within us, as they are dissonant from the song of the Angels at the
incarnation of Christ at Bethlehem, Luc. 2. v. 14. Means! that gain Proselytes
with no better success then of old the Pharisees had, who compassed sea and
Land to make a proselyte, and after all rendered him seven times more the child
of wrath then he was before, Matthew. 23.15. Force, and Terror may bring men to
an outward compliance but not alter their judgments: it does not abate their
wickedness, but heighter it with the aggravation of hypocrisy, a sin so odious
as nothing is more detested in Scripture, nothing more abominable unto the
Lord, and for which he will spue them out, who are by those endeavors brought
in. The new-Christians in Spain confirm this truth: had arms, and
discouragements been fit instruments to bring souls to Christ, that land had
not groaned now under an inquisition, erected there for the discovery of such
as dissembled their conversion. The like issue attended Emanuell King of
Portugal, when he enforced the Jews either to become Slaves, or profess
Christianity, and at this day the general opinion is that half that Kingdom
consists of dissembling Jews. I cannot omit the censure which Osorius a Popish
Bishop in that country passed upon that Action: This indeed was done, but
neither according to the laws of God, nor Men, What? will you undertake to
force the stubborn and rebelliously-minded to believe those things which they
hate and reject? will you take upon you to rule in the heart and affections of
man, to infringe the will in it is liberty, and determine of it is choice; This
is an attempt, no less impossible in it self, then displeasing to Christ. For
he desires that the people should be willing in the day of his power, their
hearts must be made a voluntary, and not enforced oblation: nor does he command
that the minds of men should be compelled, but that they should be invited,
persuaded and convicted of the truth. Besides, what flesh and blood dare be so
presumptuous as to attempt that, which only the Spirit of God effects in those
who dye not in final impenitency? He alone it is who enlightens, persuades,
draws, -- yet, says he, the Kings intentions were good, and several men both
religious and learned possessed him with the lawfullnesse of the Act,
representing and recommending unto him the examples of other Christian Princes.
Thus there never have been, nor will be wanting such men as well suite their
discourses to the inclinations of their Kings. Osor. de reb. Eman lib. 1. It
were therefore to be desired from our hasty Zelots, that when they vest any
Magistrate with such a power, they would farther qualify him so, as that as
many as he lays violent hands on may receive the holy Spirit: and that they
would instruct them with the time when the Holy Ghost blows, and the place
where, for otherwise their force will be successe-lesse, they may knock and yet
not their hearts or ears open: yea, they may lay a stumbling block in his way,
and destroy him as much as in them lies, for whom Christ died, and whom he
will bring in in his good time. Is it not lawful to destroy him by meat, for
whom Christ dyed [ Romans 14. v. 15.] which is a sca^^^ taken, not given; and may
we destroy him by violence and forcible means, giving him occasion to speak
evil of the good ways of God, into which he shall at last be brought, when it
shall please him who goes out at several hours of the day to call in the
laborers to his vineyard, and who converts some at one age, and some at
another, and sanctifies those means unto Paul at Damascus, which had been
uneffectuall unto him at Jerusalem, when Stephen was stoned. At the first
Sermon of Peter (Act. 2. v. 41.) about three thousand souls were converted;
after that two thousand more were added Act. 4.4. to which (it is probable) the
former teachings of the Apostles had been uneffectuall upon these
considerations me thinks the decree of Justinian that all should embrace the
Orthodox religion, or go into banishment, was as ridiculous, as if he had
decreed such or such winds determinately should blow at an appointed time, God
at the first creation said, Let there be light, and there was light. So in the
new creature, he but speaks by his Apostle, and as many believe as are ordained
unto everlasting life. God then, and Christ when he bade the lame take up his
bed, and walk, had been ridiculous, unless his word had been powerful to
effect as well as signify his will. I would fain see an Act of Parliament that
the blind should receive sight, that the lame should walk, that the Sun
should arise at midnight, or that darkness should no more overspread the face
of the Earth: such commands would be as effectual, as others more spiritual,
since faith is the gift of God, and no man comes unto the son but whom the
Father draws. If any demoniack or possessed by an unclean spirit, should be
served by such an Arrest, think you the messenger would be better treated then
the sons of Scevas Act. 19.14. And will you think he will be outed from his
spiritual breast-workes and strongholds by some such like Ordinance; you may
as well imagine with King Henry the Eighth's target to quench the fiery darts
of Satan, as by his sword to plant true religion.

As for Gospel-precepts, what can be more remote or inconsistent with them,
than that any Mortal should presume to have dominion over our faith, whereas
the Apostles could only be helpers of our joy? 2 Cor. 2.24. Did Christ give his
Disciples a command, Go and teach, not compel, and if any one receive you not
shake off the dust of your feet? Matthew 10.14. Did Paul and Barnabas shake off
the dust of their feet at Antioch, against the unbelieving Jews, Acts 13. v.
51. That those who are neither Paul nor Barnabas, should now trample upon men
as dust under their feet? It is said, The servant of the Lord must not strive,
but be gentle unto all men; apt to teach, forbearing, in meekness instructing
those that are minded, if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the
acknowledging of the truth, that they may recover themselves out of the snare
of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. v. 24. Are
these instructions personal? or do they not oblige the Ministry (if bottomed
upon their own pretenses) not to deliver men over to the secular Magistrate to
be punished, since thereby they are Authors of all his actions, according to
that old rule, What a man does by another, he does by himself? So 1 Cor. 7.12.
If any brother has a wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with
him, let him not put her away: and the woman that has an husband that
believes not, and he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him, but
if the unbelieving depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not in
bondage in such cases, but God has called us to peace: for what know thou,
O wife, whither thou shall save thy husband? and what know thou, O man,
whether thou shall save thy wife? As GOD HAS DISTRIBVTED to every man, as the
Lord has called every one, so let him walk, and so ordain I in all Churches.
Shall Justinian be empowered to banish all Infidels, and yet hereby be obliged
to retain an Heretical Eutychion for his wife? To send them into exile, and yet
caresse her in his bosom? may one without danger and sin (which are the
motives for suppressing discrepant Religions) hug and embrace a wife of
different principles and persuasion, and yet not allow a neighbor common
civility without hazard? may we not argue, What know thou, O man, whether
thou shall save thy Neighbor? (having the experience of all ages, that the
Gospel has been so propagated.) And, in fine, is it not usual in Scripture,
from particular cases, to make diffuse and general conclusions. AS GOD HAS
DISTRIBUTED TO EVERY MAN, AS THE LORD HAS CALLED EVERY ONE, SO LET HIM WALK,
AND SO ORDAIN I IN ALL CHURCHES. But besides the obligations to Meekness, to
Charity, to become all things to all, that we may gain some to Christ, (Ties
from which no Magistrate can be exempted,) what will become of those other
precepts, To try the Spirits, 1 John 4. v. 1. To prove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
v. 21. Take heed that none deceive you, Matthew. 24. v. 4. What needs all this
trouble and curiosity, if we may not hold fast that which we find to be best?
if after our most serious and deliberate Election, we shall be affrightned out
of our consciences by penalties? Ad vana and inutilia nec lex dei nec hominis
prudentis cogit.
To what purpose is there so much liberty permitted as may beget our torture,
and not permit us to rest where we find satisfaction? Either prohibit to
search at all, or let us be sensible of some benefit by searching; To believe,
what appears untrue, seems to me impossible: To profess, what we believe
untrue, I am sure, is damnable.

Are there not now as many occasions for us to try the Spirits as formerly? Are
there not now as many errors broached, as then? And is the true Doctrine
delivered infallibly by the Apostles, and attested unto by miracles and
wonders, as of old? Nay is it not foretold that the last times shall be more
perilous for seduction, and that the faith of the very elect (if possible)
should be endangered? That many false Christ's should come, and though any [the
Magistrate not excepted] should say, lo here, or lo there is Christ, are we not
forbid to believe them? was that a temporal injunction, That every man should
be persuaded in his own mind? (...). Romans 14.5. Must we under the Reformation
only vary the Object of our implicit Faith, not renounce the thing it self?
Surely Moses who left an High Priest with Vrim and Thummim [light and
perfection] to resolve doubts, and to preserve knowledge, together with
perspicuous Laws for Government Spiritual: Surely, I say, he was more faithful
than Christ and his Apostles, since they left the world no infallible Judge to
expound Scripture, so as men might adhere unto their decisions, because they
were theirs. The Spirit of God in each Saint is the sole Authentic Expositor
of Scripture unto him that has it, the public Spirit of the Church imaginary,
or Catholic has been sufficiently exploded: nor do I doubt but a Believer
may safely acquiesce in his Explications, upon whose Authority alone he
receives the Text, and in whom we all place the sure hopes of our Eternal
welfare, The Spirit bearing witness with our spirits that we are the sons of
God, Romans 8.16. Yet this testimony of the private Spirit in the breast of a
Saint, however it be so clear and convincing, that his Faith becomes the very
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. v.
1. yet is it like unto the white stone, and the new name which no man knows but
he that has it, Revel. 2.17. it obliges not others purely to a belief, who
have not received the like satisfaction: What is Revelation to one, is but
Tradition to another, and he who will believe every man that says he is sent
of Heaven, may himself, (unless chance be as prevalent as choice in soul
concerns) go himself to Hell. Thus Pilates wife was obliged to believe God
speaking to her. He was not bound to believe a woman speaking to him. Have thou
nothing to do with that just man, for I have suffered many things this day in a
dream because of him. He might think, she might be willing to deceive, out of a
natural compassion strong in that Sex; or might be deceived her self, calling
that inspiration, which was fancy.

This unsupplyable defect of common evidence in the delivery of Spiritual
matters, is of that nature, as it alone would suffice to the enforceing a
Toleration. For though it be a confessed principle that whatsoever the prime
verity does say is an uncontrollable truth, yet the course whereby he discovers
himself, in diverse ways, and after diverse manners unto the sons of men, is
followed with so much ambiguity, [waving that Soul-satisfying testimony of the
Spirit,] as inquisitive men, and sober, if destitute of the highest gifts may
upon a rational ground (if that way of arguing unto which we are bred up be
true and sound) suspect the sincerity the Revelation in the word, and if he
assent thereunto strongly and firmly, he is rather to be accounted resolved,
then certain. And it is judiciously said, All voluntary opinion (that is
grounded not in the understanding, but will only) is vicious. A sentence
famous amongst the old philosophers, and confirmed by Austin, that to give a
direct assent to what you know to be uneertain, is Turpe, that is (in our
ordinary locution) Sin in all propositions, where we see no more then
probability, it is our part to withhold our assent, till evidence or certainty
deserve it. The reason is clear, for if a man do strain his stomach with meat
or drink, his arms with pulling, or walks himself off on his feet, we blame
him because he uses his body otherwise then is fitting, or out of proportion to
his dispositions, and therefore wrongs it, disappointing the end and use to
which nature designed it. Since then our understanding is our principal and
most noble part, far less ought it to be strained against it is nature, and
which increases the unworthiness of the Act, this cannot be done to the
understanding, but by an inferior, whose [end is good, not truth and so no fit
motive for faith, and] to obey or be ruled by its dictates. Nor is this any
derogation; to God's word but a charge upon the weakness of man, not being able
to comprehend things certain in themselves, and evident to some, upon other
accounts. I shall not debate this matter any further it having been learnedly
and unanswerably handled by Dr. Tailor in his Liberty of Prophesying. I now
come to show that where there is wanting an infallible Expositor of the mind
of God (which being to be accepted upon Revelation, is not to be discussed by
Reason) there is not only cause for a Toleration, (for why should any be
forced from what he holds to be true, It is not ma^criall but formal certainty
that obliges to belief.
unto that which another can not evidence but it may be false?) but sufficient
ground from former practices and usages to reestablish the like forbearance.
Under the Jewish Kings before the captivity though they had an infallible
direction by Vrim and Thummim for cases emergent, and positive orders to
recurre unto the High Priest for resolution, yet such was the power given, or
arrogated by their Kings, these so intermedled with religion (which then mostly
consisted in outward ceremonies and types, with a very slender explicit faith)
that all the forementioned circumstances were not a sufficient bar to keep
the people from idolatry, who seemed so complyant as if they were absolute
vassalls to their Sovereigns, and only rebellious toward God: so dismal is
that power when entrusted with the Magistrate: and can we think a select Clergy
founded upon Tithes (that have no other right then what the Hands may take away
which gave them) not endowed with any substitute for the Vrim and Thummim, but
dictionary-learned, Pasorians, not assisted with extraordinary prophets, as of
old, should bear up against a corrupt inclination of the Magistrate at any
time, that so the people be not enslaved to delusions? But even that power in
Israel, which rendered the nation a priestly Kingdom, is not granted by the
Rabbines to have been the usage or due prerogative of all the Kings, but a
specialty of them which descended from David. Others say there entrenching upon
the Highpriests power in reforming of religion, was done by them as they were
prophets all: But that being not verifiable in all of them, that I know of, P.
Curens de rep. Hebreor. l. 1. c. 14.
a third opinion says they did it by virtue of a sacred unction which gave them
an extraordinary reverence and authority above others their successors. This
ointment Moses was commanded to make, and the Talmudists say: it was used at
the initiation of their Kings until the time of Josiah, who understanding that
the Assyrians should destroy the Temple, buried that sacred oil, the Ark,
Aaron's rod, the Vrim and Thummim with the remaining Manna in a private place
of the Temple which could never be found again after their return out of
captivity so that they were fain to make others in their stead, not that they
had the former virtue, Id. l. 2. c. 2.
but that the priest might be completely vested. And Maimonides and others
acknowledge that God withdrew his extraordinary presence from the second
Temple, and the High Priest ceased to give oracles. Under the second temple,
when their infallible interpretations failed (so infallibly given out, that
they could not be rejected without rejecting God and falling to Jdolatry, a
thing so frequent before the captivity) then began the law which before was in
a few hands, and read to the people by the Levites only, without
interprerations and commentaries, to be read more frequently, and publicly
expounded in Caldee. Nehem. 8. v. 7, 8. Jeshuah and Bani etc. and the Levites
caused the people to understand the Law, -- so they read in the book of the
law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
reading. From these expositions arose the multiplicity of Sects which are
mentioned in the time of our Savior and neither condemned nor cried out
against by him or his Apostles, as others of the same judgment are now a days
by men of more fervor, and less holiness. Besides there were Herodians, which
believed Herod to have been the Messiah.
The principal sects were the Pharisees, Sadducees and Essenes, whose opinions
I shall instance in briefly to show what Toleration was allowed then, by men of
as great severity, pretending to sanctity and zeal, and such as wanted neither
wanted power to suppess, nor the written word to convince gainsayers.

The Pharisees believed all things to be governed by fate, and absolute
necessity, Drusus advers. Serr.
yet so as that man acted freely, and that he did what he would, though his
will was disposed of by a superior planet. They held the Soul to be immortal,
yet so as that the souls of the wicked should be in perpetual torments, but the
souls of the just should pass from one body into another, by a Pythagorical
Metempsychosis. This last opinion is taken notice of in Scripture, Matthew. 16.
v. 14. Some said of Christ that he was John the Baptist, some Elias, and others
Jeremias, or one of the Prophets. Even the Disciples of Christ seem to have
outgone the Pharisees as holding a transmigration of the souls of the wicked,
when they asked, Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was
borne blind? John 9. v. 2. They admitted of good and bad Angels. As to
Justification, they held no man to be absolutely just before God, but yet that
he would repute them so who brake the fewest of his commandments. And
concerning the Resurrection, they either thought it appertained only to the
just, or that some wicked only should share in it; yet did some extend it
universally. They exalted their traditions to the prejudice of the Scripture:
their fasting, praying, not eating with sinners, exact tithing, elusions of
respect to parents, etc. these are sundry times reflected on in the Gospel. And
yet what elogies are bestowed upon these men in Scripture? are they not so
commendable that he who should afford half so much to one of the like judgment
now, would be deeply censured.

The Sadducees they adhered to the letter of the Text, rejecting all
Traditions. Hence they were called also Caraei, or Caraim, because they
assented to the Scriptures in their own private sense [juxta sensum intellectus
sui] nor did they regard the Traditions of the wise: so the Pharisees were
termed, notwithstanding their opinions aforesaid. They further denied the
Resurrection, existence of Angels or Spirits. So that immortality of the Soul,
rewards and punishments after this Life, etc. were denied in those days by the
Textuaries, Act. 23.6.8. they thought the Soul to be nothing else but the
temperament of heterogeneous parts, constituting the body. They denied that God
exercised his providence or took any knowledge of evil in this world. They
advanced free will to the destruction of antecedent necessity and fate: Nay it
is said they were totally Epicureans, denying all manner of providence, and so
were called in the Jewish writers. The existence of the Holy Ghosts person was
indubitably denied by them, if not by all the Jews under such a notion; as in
the controversy betwixt the Greeks and Latins, the former did avow three
subsistences, tres hypostases, but denied the Trinity of Persons, which the
Latins avow. It is generally taught also, that the received only the books of
Moses and rejected the Prophets, (of which Daniel is at this day not accounted
Canonical, but only as a Sacred writer, I leave it as dubious, whether they
admitted more then the Penta^uch. He that shall with P^tavius upon Epiphanius
(p. 28) prove they rejected the other parts of the B ble will much enlarge
Tolleration.
Hagiographus amongst the Jews) but this is not related of them by the Jewish
writers, nor by Luke in the Acts: Though Jerome, Zacharias, Chrisopolitanus,
and Tertullian record it of them; and that upon this score Christ proved the
Resurrection to them out of the Books of Moses. Scaliger against Serrarius
proves by sundry reasons that they did admit of the other Books besides them of
Moses. And thinks that the High Priest was a Sadducee, Act. 5. v. 17. For they
who were followers of him and about him were Sadducees, which if he had not
been a Sadducee he would not have permitted, such an enmity was betwixt the
Pharisees and Sadducees. Casaubon against Baronius observes out of Josephus
that the Richer sort were Sadducees, and the multitude Pharisees. Casaub.
exercit. 1.. 9. Montague out of the same Author assures us that all the
Highpriests of Assamonaei where Pharisees till Hircanus the Grandchild of
Judas Maccabeus fell off to the Saducees being disobliged thorough the
insolency of Eleazer a Pharisee: after him Alexander Aristobulus, etc. were all
Saducees. Montag. exercit. 3.. 1. The Pharisees and Sadducees both frequented
the same Assemblies, and Synagogues, and offered sacrfiices in the same temple
at Jerusalem.

The Essenes, they admitted providence to govern all things; and professed the
immortality of the Soul. They sent gifts to the temple, but did not Sacrafice
there, but privately amongst themselves, as making use of different Ceremonies
thereat, and so being excluded the public Temple. Their other customs, and
course of life, as well as petite opinions in matters religious, represent them
to have been of unspotted life, grave, reservedly superstitious, and in a word,
the Quakers of their Age.

All these were tolerated in those days, besides the multiplicity of Nations
recounted Act. 2. v. 9. etc. which were neither Jews nor Jewish Proselytes in
any kind viz. who will believe the Romans did not retain their Religion then in
Judea. After the settlement of the Church of Christ by his Apostles, there is
not a word of persecution and suppressing dissenters, Heretics beginning (as
Hegesippus tells us) after the Apostles death; till then the Church was an
immaculate Virgin, whilst infallible expositours of the will of God revealed
in his word were alive: Of this see what I say, and prove in the close of my
discourse of the Toleration under Constantine, following.
After that they lived together, Christianity, being a profession of a compass
much narrower then it is now, even that Creed called the Apostles, being
shorter then it is now represented. They which by a voluntary submission to
Church Discipline democratically administered, were joined unto the people of
God, such upon defaults they excommunicated from their society: over them that
were without they exercised no power: and over them that were within there
highest process was unto an Anathema, which did not signify any curse, but as
(...) signifies a place, so (...) a removal from such a place, Salmas. ad
Solin.
or an excommunication. So that, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let
him be Anathema, Maranatha. 1. Cor. 16.22. denotes only, for the height of
impiety, for the denial of our Lord Jesus (for that I suppose is meant by not
loving him) the Apostles determination is, let him be outed the Church or
assembly of God; and for further punishment, The Lord will come. [Maranatha]
that is, God will punish him, or judge him. For what have I to do to judge them
that are without? Them that are without God shall judge. Therefore put away
from among your selves that wicked person. Here is not a word of the civil
Magistrate, that he should judge them, or punish them. So Matthew. 18. v. 17. if
a brother after sundry private admonitions refuse to hear the Church, let him
be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a publican. So that the highest process in
Church censures does not put a man into a worse condition then Heathens and
publicans, who yet were tolerated amongst the Jews, and it was the Pharisee
that blamed Christ for accompanying with them. The Heathen were not to be
excluded civil society, since to them a Jew might put out money to use, which
he might not do to another Jew: yea, there might be a stranger within their
houses: as I have already said in reference to their proselyti domicilii. How
the Christians were persecuted under Heathen Emperors all our Martyrologyes
tell us; but I know not any that say they did well therein, though if it be his
duty to be a Nursing Father unto Truth, it is meant not of what is materially
and in it self so, but of what is so formally and unto him such: so that they
may be pittyed for their mistakes in judgment, but not blamed for their
miscarryage in such their practice. They punished them not as Christians and
professing a doctrine revealed from Heaven by Christ the Author and finisher of
their Salvation: but as Atheists, downright Atheists, such accusation is laid
to their charge, and even so they are called by Julian the Apostate in his
works: besides, they were punished as factious and seditious, and such as
intended the overthrow of the Roman Empire, by a personal reign of Christ in
an earthly Kingdom and glory, which was the general opinion of the primitive
Christians, in so much as Justin Martyr will not allow him to be orthodox (if
I may so render (...)) who did not embrace that opinion. Yea, in their Acts and
Monuments we find such passages, B. Marcus Evangelista, primus Christi Martyr,
etc. imperante Claudio Nerone Caesare: nobis autem Christianis imperante domino
nostro Jesu Christo. And Martyrio coronatus est S. Christi Sabinus 3. idus
Martii, regnante impio Diocletiano, imo vero domino nostro Jesu Christo: many
more of the like nature might be alleged out of Blondell de formula regnante
Christo. And Eusebius Histor. l. 3. c. 15. cireth it out of Hegesippus that
Domitian ceased his persecution against the Christians, when he heard that the
Kingdom of Christ was to be in Heaven, and not on earth.

I come now to speak of the Christian Emperors, (...) they demeaned themselves
after that the power was come into their hands. Take one proof in general of
what Toleration men had until the middle almost of Justinian's reign; who
ruled about the Year 530. Procopius a diligent writer and observer of
transactions in those times, in which he lived, records it in his secret
History, [p. 51.] That in the Roman empire there were many Heresies and Sects
of Christians; As the Montanists, Sabbatians: and others: And that the Arians
lived in such splendor and pomp, that their temples were so rich, as nothing
in all the Roman Dominions might compare therewith, NO EMPEROR HAVING EVER
MOLESTED THEM [(...)] There were also Samaritans, Jews and Gentiles [(...)] or
Heathens in great numbers: as the same Procopius, Jo. Mallela, etc. And Dr.
Rives writing against Alemannus the publisher of that Procopius, granting that
there were in those days Manichees, Samaritans, Arians, etc. adds, that All
they had public temples every where, and those too richly adorned. erant
quidem, Alemanne, fateor, and illud addo eas fuisse [haereses] quae non in
Ecclesiae ritibus, non in praeceptis hominum, non in decretis Pontificum vel
tollendis, vel minuendis, laborabant: sed quae Jesu Christi personam, hoc est
fidei and salutis nostrae fundamentum, aliae aliis, sed omnes nefandis
rationibus subruere and tollere cogitabant. S^^ tamen TEMPLA and FANA UBIQVE
locorum possidebant: Illa vero, presertim quae Arianorum furori serviebant,
auro and argento gemmisque and pretiosis lapidibus, omni denique Divitiarum and
opum genere abundabant. So Zosimus a learned, but Pagan writer, who in the time
of Honorius the Emperor lived and attained (notwithstanding his religion) to
the dignity of being Comes and Exadvocatus fisci, relates it, how that
Theodosius was the first that put down the public Temples and sacrifices of
the Heathen, which were till then maintained at the public charge of the
Roman Emperors, though Christians: And the Senate (being all Heathens) opposed
him. Zosim. hist. l. 4. Gratian, who shared the Empire with Theodosius, refused
at his inauguration to be created Pontifex max. by the heathen Romish Priests,
it being till his days a constant custom, that however the Emperors were
Christians, yet did they receive the sacerdotall habit and title of Pontifex
maximus from the priests aforesaid, Zosim histor. l. 4. yet even the coins of
Gratian are to be seen (as well as of Constantine the great, Valentinianus,
Valens) with a Pontifical habit, and this inscription Pont. max.

Chrysostom who lived (as himself says, in the time of Julian) until the
time of Honorius; in his book against the Gentiles, and concerning S Babylos;
having contemned the multiplicity of books written by the Heathen Sophisters
and Philosophers against the truth, (which now men are so afraid of, that they
will not venture the Gospel amongst them) as being ridiculous, rather then
dangerous, even to the least child, or woman: He tells the Gentiles further.
(...).
None [of us] ever made war against you; for it is not lawful for Christians
to overthrow error by force and violence, but by persuasion, reason, and
meekness to gain men over to Salvation. Wherefore no Emperor believing in Christ
did ever make such edicts against you, as Pagan-Emperours have done against us.
Yet notwithstanding so much tranquillity, none molesting it at any time, yet
has not the superstition and error of the Heathen been able to subsist, it
fell of it self, and so became extinct; like corrupt bodies after long
putrefaction, they perish of themselves, no outward force contributing
thereunto. These are not hasty words, but spoken in an age, and to Persons
[(...)] that could and would have disproved his assertion, if it had been
false. But to evince it, that this was no empty flourish of his, he repeateth
the same thing in his commendation of the Martyr Drosis. (...).
Since the coming of Christ there have been Infidels Emperors, and there have
been Christians: but of the Infidels most of them did persecute the faithful,
Slaying, Hanging, Burning, Drowning, Tearing with Wild-beasts, and using sundry
other Torments, and Punishments to make them renounce their faith; but they
prevailed not, they were laughed at by the Martyred Christians, who did not
lessen thereby, but augmented their number. As for the Christians, NO GODLY
Emperor ever yet did choose to punish or afflict any infidel that he might
force him to renounce his error, and yet gentilisme of it self decays and
cease; that you may learn the strength of truth, and the weakness of
Error: the last falls away of it self, none molesting it; this infinitely
rises and advances when it is most depressed.

But to come to particulars; Constantine did allow an Universal To ration.
Eusebius de. vit Constant. l 2. c. 55. (...) i. e. Let them that are in an error
enjoy the same peace and tranquillity with the faithful: for a restoration of
commerce may do much to reclaim them unto the right way. Let no man molest
another: but let every one act what his soul lists. Let those that have a
true opinion concerning God be persuaded, that such only as regulate their
lives by the rule of Gods Laws, do lead a most holy and upright life. But those
that will not be conformable thereunto, let them, if they will, erect Temples
and consecrate Groves to vanity. And chap. 59. (...). But let no man in that
which it is clear he is convinced of, give any offense [or damage] to another:
wherein any man has made any discovery, therein, if it be possible, let him
benefit his neighbor; but if he cannot, let him be given over: for it is one
thing for a man willingly to contend for immortality, and another to be
compelled for fear of punishment. These are the words of Constantine, wherein
he professes that he is the larger, because he would give an account and not
conceal the Truth, as also to refute those who should say (and such speeches he
observes to have been then given out) how he had abolished the Heathenish rites
and customs, ibid. chapter 59.

There is another edict of his to the people that were Heathen, Qui v^ro id
vobis existimatis conducere, adite aras publicas, adque delubra: and
consuetudinis v^strae elebrate sollemnia^ n^c enim prohibemus praeteritae
usurpationis officia l^bera luce tractari. Dat: id^ Maii. Constantino A V. and
Licinnio Cons.
enacting free liberty of religion, you that think it best, go to the public
Altars and Temples; and celebrate, your accustomed rites: for we do not forbid
the ancient practice to be continued by daylight. God: Theod. lib. 9. tit 16.
l. 2. ad populum.

Scipio Ammiratus in his politic dissertations against Machiavell, says, It
is most certain that after Constantine had turned Christian, Compertissimum
est, postquam Constantin ^^b^ptismatis lavacro regeneratus ^bristiano^ sovisse^
Eccl^sia, exedific^sset persecutiones sustulisset, privilegia and immunitates
Christianis largitus esset, nihilominus gentilium templ^ ab eo min ne
desiructa, imo permissum fuisse, ut unusquisque suo arbitratu, quam v^llet
religionem co^eret: quod Eusebius clare docet, ad^^ ut nullus dubitationi locus
relinquatur. Quod si in ^hoenicia in civitate Constantiae Deorum statuae
d^rutae fucrunt, tesiatur idem Eusebius hoc ab illis populis, qui verae salutis
cognitionem susceperant, and inania idola rejeccrant, sponte factum fuisse.
Scip. Ammirat. polit. dissert. 1 2 disc. 12.
built their Churches, given them immunities and privileges, yet did not be
destroy the Temples of the Gentiles, nay he permitted, that every one should
live in what religion he pleased: which Eusebius. does so clearly declare, that
none can doubt it, And if in Constantia a City of Phenicia the statues of the
Gods were destroyed, the same Eusebius tells us, that it was done voluntarily
by those people themselves who had renounced Idolatry, and embraced the Truth
in Christ. In Baronius we find a speech made to the Romans, Senate and people.
The words are these: Inter divina and humana servitia h^c interest, quod humana
servitia coacta sint, divina autem voluntaria comprobentur. Deus enim quia
meat colitur, and sincero hominis veneratur affectu, spontanea ejus debet esse
cultura. I ^hoc enim apparet, quia Deus verus est, quod per tanta secula
contemporibus suis non iratus finem imposuit sed propitium se etiam, qui coli
debeat, demonstravit, indulgendo crimina and salutem aminabus and corporibus
conferendo. Sit ergo omnibus notum, non necessitate coactos, sed suo judicio
liberos posse fieri Christianos: nec humanum metuentes impertum, ad Dei
culturam accedere aliquos oportere, sed rationabili consideratione magis
rogare, ut Christianorum numero applicentur ab iis, qui huic sacratissimae legi
deserviunt. Justum enim verumque conspicimus, ut sicut petentibus culpa est si
negetur, ita non petentibus si tradatur iniquum. Sed nec hoc aliqui metuant,
quod a nostra gratia divellantur si Christiani esse noluer int. Nostra enim
clementia talis est, ut a bono opere non mutetur. The sum of which is. That
Christianity is not to be enforced, that God requires the heart, and sincere
affection, not outside worship. And that he should favor the Christians, but
yet not any way disrespect them who should be ^otherwise minded. Baron. annal.
Eccles. ad annum 324. 81. In fine, the Roman Cardinal concludes, that it is
evident how they are deceived who think Constantine did shut up the heathenish
Temples, Eunapius in the life of Edesius says, that when Constantine turned
Christian, and built them Churches, one Sopator a Philosopher went to him, to
reclaim him from those proceedings, and did so far gain upon that Emperor,
that he seated him at his right hand openly in places of solemn appearance:
which was incredible for to be (...), or related. (...) -- (...) Eunap. in vita
Edesii p. 3^, 36.
and prohibited their rites; or made use of force in the propagation of
Christianity. id. ibid 91, 92. And if any allegations to the contrary of what
has been avowed, can be produced, and find credit in an age so convinced of
the many forgeries in cases of antiquity, which have so great a subserviency to
the ambition and interest of a sort of men in our days; I must either say it
was done upon a secular and politic account for preservation of the civil
peace, when men began to opiniate it, and promote faction instead of religion,
as the Jesuits in England now suffer for sedition in owning a foreign power
paramount to what is amongst us, and able lawfully to dispose of our dominions
and lands for dissenting from him, and not for their Religion. Or if it can be
cleared that either the Heathens, or Heretics (which are in the same
condition, and from whom God expects equally a willing heart, and unfeigned
services) did suffer banishment (as four or five together with Arius, did) or
death, or confiscations upon any other score, I think Constantine did not only
swerve from his protestations in the East, and West, but from the truth, as
far as the East is different from the West. However, if Constantine did banish
Arius and a few others (which yet is controverted) the same man did exile
Athanasius, nor need we doubt that the Arians (and Novatians) had a toleration
under him, since under his Son, they overran the whole Empire, and it is
credibly reported how they perverted him too before his Death.

It is very observable which Sozomen relates l. 2. c. 30. That before
Constantines reign, whilst Christianity was under persecution, though there
were a multitude of Sects and Heresies, yet did men of all professions, as they
suffered under one common name, so did they entertain a joint communion. (...)
It is true, some may say that this union of theirs was to be attributed
according to Sozomen, not to any other cause then their common calamity, which
made them unable to molest each other: which I confess is an exception which
the very words seem to suggest, as I have represented them: but it is no less
true, that he calls that molestation wherewith they could not disquiet each
other, a pragmaticalness; and the sense may be, that being all sufferers upon
one cause among the Gentiles, whatever they might otherwise have done upon the
account of different judgments, yet upon the account of common afflictions they
could not be over-busy to disquiet each other: not that they did not know each
others differences, or that they would communicate when communion was sinful,
(for who will ever believe such a thing of the Novatians and Cataphryges) but
because they thought them to be real, which could suffer for the name of
Christ, and agreeing to dye in the profession of the Gospel, could not morally
and in equity (for otherwise they might have been excommunicated) be molested
for curiosities, such as busy-heads might find out. Upon this account it was
that though they had their particular meetings or Churches into which they were
associated, and wherein they did make their special confessions,
notwithstanding those several-tyes of Assemblies, they did occasionally
conserse with each other that owned the name of Christ, nor though they were
never so small a number, did they separate from them, till humane policy began
to mould a Catholic Church, and carnal prudence accomodated all to civil
ends. And after that Constantine had made an Edict against all Heretics that
they should unite to the public Churches, and have no private Assemblyes of
their own, Sozomon. l. 2. c. 30.
yet was not that law observed, or made with an intent that it should be
observed (as I prove elsewhere) but the Novatians (differing from the Orthodox
only as Puritans from Episcoparians as one may say) were tolerated at
Constantinople in their free Assemblies, having their proper Bishops, as also
at Alexandria and Rome, until the time of Honorius and Theodosius the younger,
under them it was that the Novatians were at Rome suppressed, and their
Churches (which were many) taken from them, and their Bishop together with the
great multitude of his adherents forced into corners, But neither this, nor the
like act at Alexandria, was done by Imperial Authority, but by the growing
mystery of iniquity in Pope Celestinus (and Cyrill of Alexandria) who began to
exercise a civil rather then Ecclesiastical power. Socrates is positive in
this (...). But in Constantinople they were not molested. Socrates lib. 7. cap.
7, and 11. Nor were the Novatians only tolerated in their Religion and way of
Worship, but preferred unto Secular Honors. For Chrysanthus the son of
Marcianus a Novatian Bishop, who was himself at last chosen Bishop of the
Novatians, was at first a Commander under Theodosius the great, prefect of
Italy [(...)] and afterward Vicegerent in the British Isles, [(...)] as
Socrates relates it in the same Book, chapter 12. And this Socrates did live in
those times whereof be writes. The Macedonian heretics of a deep dye, for
they admitted not of the Nicene faith, had their Churches in Constantinople,
Cyzicum and other places, under Theodosius II. and Valentinianus III. as
Socrates tells us; l. 7. c. 31. And as for the Arians, their doctrine and
differences were not only looked upon as pettite quarrels, for which the peace
ought not to be broken in the judgment of Constantine: (see the Lord Faulkland
of infalibility). But after the Council of Nice, and that Arius was
anathematised, yea and Athanasius too banished to Triers for being factious,
[(...), as Constantine says, giving a reason why he would not recall him:
Sozomen l. 2. c. 29.] However the Arian tenants were much debated in common
discourse, yet was not the general Church communion disturbed or dissolved
thereby unto the death of Constantine, as Sozomen asserts. (...) (...).
Sozomen. l. 2. c. 30.

Both under Constantine and his Sons Constantius and Constans what toleration
the Heathens had we may guess in that the Heathen-Sophisters and Philosophers
did publicly teach, and Christians sent their Sons to be instructed by them:
If all other proofs were wanting yet would this be evidentally proved out of
Gregory Nazianzons oration containing the life of Bazil, whom the said
Nanzianzen commends for that having learned their Rhetorique he was not
corrupted with their manners. [(...)] There he commends highly the learning of
Athens, and the Ac^demy which was therein; but he further informs you that
when he, Bazil and Julian were there, men did not more advantage themselves in
knowledge, then prejudice in piety and religion? that there was no place in
Greece so addicted to Paganism, so full of Idols, such worshippers of Devils.
(...). -- (...). So Nazianzen speaks of himself and Basil; sundry other
passages thence might be alleged, but that this may suffice even the most
scrupulous.
At Athens there was an University of Heathens whither all had recourse, there
Bazill, and Nazianzen, as well as Libanius and others were educated. Libanius
who under Constantius had the care and tuition of Julian, by Jovinian so made
and by the Code termed Divus, but commonly the Apostate: Libanius who was
invited to teach Rhetorique in sundry great Cities as Nicomedia, etc. whose
panegyric to Constantius and Constans is still to be read, and who received
from the former of those Princes a thousand honorable and advantageous gifts.
All which may be seen in his life, where it is no less evident that the
Sophisters had public Salaries, besides what they received from the Parents,
whose children they instructed; and particularly one Bemarchius who adhered to
Constantius, and prayed him, though himself were an Heathen. [(...) -- (...).
So Maximus Tyrius the Philosopher was one of Julian's Teachers under
Constantius, as Libanius in his Panegyric to Julian (together with his
Scholiast, Sisynnius that learned Novatian was bred up under Maximus Tyrius
too, (...). Socrat. Scholast. l 5. c. 20.
and Eunapius tell us; nor were these instructions of a general and indifferent
nature; no, Julian was by Maximus taught Heathenisme, ((...), says the
Scholiast upon Libanius, and) Libanius himself confesses as much, who when he
had Nazianzen, Basil, Read the lives of Basil and Nazianzen. (...) ^banius was
Chrysostoms teacher too in Rhetoric; Nicephor Calist l 13. c. 2. (as was
Androgatheus in Philosophy) and yet ^ibanius was at that time a known Heathen,
as you ^ay gather out or that saying of his to Chrysostom, related by
Chrysostom in his Homily ad vid. iun. Theodoros and Maximus were
School-fellows with Chrysostom at Libanius's, both which he after gains to
Christianity, as Nicephorns tells us in the place forecited.
and Julian at once in his School, he did exercise the last in prolusions
against Christianity. There did Nazianzen contract his first hatred against
Julian; and there did Julian contract an esteem for Basil, which he always
continued to the last, and wrote to him, and made use of him, (...), says Jo.
Mallela, and Chronicon Alexandrinum. Themistius the Philosopher was highly
magnified by Constantius, and by him made one of the Senators, though an
Heathen: that Emperor has written a long Letter in his behalf, containing an
infinity of his praises, that it was an honor to the Senate, Vid. Themistii
orat. edit. Petavii, p. 417.
and to his Father Constantine to prefer such a worthy member: he says
further that their acquaintance was not newly commenced, (...). The same
Emperor in a Rescript of his, Cod. Theodos. l. 6. tit. 4. extolls Themistius
and entrusts him particularly with the Election of the Praetor. Yea, he erected
unto him a statue of brass. I need not speak of Julian, every one will grant
that he upheld a Toleration, and that so, as not to out the Christians from
places of the greatest trust; Socrat hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 19.
for Jovianus (or Jovinianus) was Comes Domesticorum, as Mallela tells us, and
his whole Army, when they elected Jovianus Emperor, after that Julian was
slain by a Persian, were Christians. Jovianus is acknowledged by Bellarmine to
have granted an universal Toleration, and is commended thereupon by Themistius,
in his Consular Oration. I have before alleged the passage concerning the
changeableness of men in point of Religion, as often as their Emperors should
enact any thing: Themistius having told Iovian this, adds, But you, O most
sacred Prince, being Emperor to all other ends and purposes, have decreed that
each man be free in point of Religion. (...). The same Jovianus did highly
honor and esteem the two Philosophers, Maximus and Priscus, friends of Julian,
as is confessed by Baronius, and declared by Eunapius, who lived in those
times. In sum Socrates plainly tells us of this Emperor, (whom he wishes to
have lived longer for the good of the public) that his resolution was to give
a free Toleration to all of different beliefs, and to work upon them by
persuasions only. Socrat. histor eccles. l. 3. c. 21.
(...). Which words evince as a general sufferance of Heretics (as they are
called) as does that passage of Themistius for all universally.

I come now to the Emperors Valentinian and Valens, whereof the latter is said
to have been an Arian, but the former Orthodox. Yet Valentinian in Ammianus
Marcellinus l. 31. is commended for that he carried himself with a great deal
of moderation toward the people, severally dissenting in Religious affairs:
nor did he make any decrees for the establishing of this or that Religion, he
compelled none to worship as himself did, but left each to his own sentiments.
Postremo, hoc moderamine principatus inclaruit, quod inter Religionum
diversitates medius stetit, nec quenquam inquietavit, neque ut hoc coleretur
imperavit aut illud: nec interdictis minacibus subjectorum cervicem ad id quod
ipse coluit inclinabat, sed intemeratas has parts reliquit, VT REPERIT. This
is the testimony of a man that lived in those days, and was himself an
Heathen, and who had undergone great charges, (which I desire may be remembered
as a farther proof of the Toleration in those times) under Constantius the son
of Constantine, being one of his DOMESTICS. Upon that passage of Ammianus
Marcellinus it is very confiderable which is remarked by Valesius in his
Annotations. When Valentinian and Valens began to reign, Maximus and Priscus,
the two Philosophers, were impeached before them, and the former was fined and
banished into Asia [for a Magician, not Pagan] and the latter was dismissed
honorably. Eunap in vit. Maximi, p. 97. yet Kharchus, an Heathen, being
Governor of Asia after, did free Maximus, and reconcile him to the Emperor,
Ibid. p. 102.
Valentinian in the beginning of this reign being willing to suppress all
Sorcery and Witchcraft, enacted, that no rites of sacred worship should be
performed by night: which Law is recorded in the Code of Theodosius, Tit. de
Malefic. cap. 7. but when Praetextatus Pro-Consul of Achaia had freely
certified Valentinian, how that law would ensnare all of the Greek persuasion,
that is, Pagans, and deprive them of their lives, if they should under so
strict penalty be prohibited the practice of their most chaste rites and
adorations: Valentinian did permit that the Greeks, (which is a common name for
all Heathens) should retain the worship of their Ancestors, as Zosimus
records it in the beginning of his fourth book. Which Decree of his is not
now to be found [which I desire may be observed in opposition to those who
imagine that our Codes and collections of old Laws are more faithful, then the
Volume of Decretals] but mention thereof is made Cod. Th. lege 9. de Malefic.
for so the Emperor Valentinian writes to the Senate. I think [or judge] that
Augury has no affinity with Witchcraft: Haruspicinam ego nullum cum
maleficiorum causis habere commercium iu lico: neque ipsam, aut aliam praeterca
concessam a maioribus RELIGIONEM, genus esse arb^tror CRIMINIS. Testes sunt
leges a me in exordio imperii m^^ datae, quibus VNICUIQVE quod animo imbibisset
colendi libera facultas tributa eft. Cod. Theod. l. 9. tir. 16. l. 9.
nor do I esteem of that, or any other RELIGION tolerated by my Ancestors, as
criminal. Hereunto the Laws bear me witness, which I made in the beginning of
my reign, whereby I gave liberty to every man to worship accordingly as he
thinks meet. The same is recorded by Symmachus ep. l. 10. ep. 54. and Ambrose
in his Oration concerning the death of Valentinian, as also in his 30 Letter to
Valentinian concerning the Altar of Victory. It was to this [Orthodox]
Valentinian [together with Theodosius and Arcadius] that Symmachus did write
the Letter aforesaid in the behalf, if not of all, yet of a great part of the
Roman Senate (as Ambrose confesses in his reply thereto) that they might
continue in Paganism. I shall instance in some passages as show what a
Toleration was then, and had been before allowed to different Religions.
Speaking of the Emperors, he says, Preximus little ceremonias patrum coluit,
recenti^r non removit. -- Merito Divi Constantii factum diu non stetit.
Omniavobis exempla vitanda sunt, quae mox remota didicistis -- Accipiat
aeternitas vestra alia ciusdem princ^pi^ sacta, quae in usum diguius trabat.
Nil ille decerpsit sacrarum Virginum privilegiis, decrevit nob l^bu^
sacerd^tia, Romany ceremoniis non negavit impensas, and per omnes vias
aeternae u^bis laetum secutus Senatum, vidit plac^do ore delubra, legi^ in
cripta fastigns Deum nomina, percunctatus est Templorum origines, mira^us est
conditores. Cumque alias religiones ipse sequeretur, has servavit imperio.
the former professed Heathenism, and the later did not abolish it. And
speaking of the Emperor Constantius, how he removed the Altar of Victory from
the Senate House, he adds, That Act of Constantius was of no long continuance;
such examples are not to be followed, as have been instantly abrogated. --
There are other acts of his more presidential: he did not diminish the
privileges of the Vestals, he preferred the Nobless to the Sacerdotal dignity,
he did not refuse to defray the charges of the Roman solemnities, and going
round the city with the Roman Senate, he was not displeased with the sight of
the Temples and Statues, he read the inscriptions of the gods, enquired about
them, and being himself of one religion, he allowed the Empire another. By the
way I am to observe, that not only Ambrose and Gregory Nazianzen, but the
Orthodox Emperor Valentinian, were not baptized till they were much elder than
is the custom in our time, (to say nothing of Constantine, who whether he were
baptized or not is uncertain: so for Constantius:) the first was not baptized
till he was to be made Bishop of Millain; the second not till he was pretty
aged, Theod^sius was not baptized till after he was Emperor, although he were,
(...). Sozomen. hist. eceles. l. 7. c. 4.
and the last having sent for Ambrose to baptize him, dyed before he received
that Sacrament; as Ambrose relates in his funeral Oration upon Valentinians
death. Nor does Ambrose in his reply deny the truth of such a Toleration being
granted, but adds further, that at that very time in which he writ, That the
Christian Clergy had not the privilege of common inheriting by the Laws in
being, yet did not they complain, they were not capable of Legacies. Quod
sacerdotibus phani legaverit Christiana vidua, valet: quod ministris Dei, non
valet? quod ego non ut querar, sed ut sciant quid non querar, comprehendi. The
same man grants, that though the lands were taken away from the Heathen
Temples, they were still capable of gifts and Legacies. Nemo tamen do^aria
delubris, and legata aruspicibus denegavit: sola sublata sunt praedia, etc. He
grants they had Idols every where, he only desires the Senate, whither
Christians were to resort might be free. Non illis satis sunt lavacra, non
porticus, non plateae occupatae simulacris? So that it is evident in
Valentinians time there was a free Toleration by his means, which extended to
the dissenting Christians, Arians, etc. no less then Heathen. For Suidas tells
us, (...). He himself was a Christian and Orthodox, yet did not injure those
that dissented from him. He made Valens his brother, (an Arian) his Colleague,
and recalled the exiled Arians, as well as Orthodox. Cedren. As for Valens, if
he inclined to the Arians, he tolerated the Heathens. Richemenes was a Pagan
((...)) yet was he likely to be chosen Consul, says Libanius in his own life,
and Ammianas Marcellinus says he, was Comes Domesticorum to Valens, and both
those writers did live in those times: He was also an assured friend of
Theodosius the great. Zozim. lib. 4. It is of Valens that Themistius speaks in
an Oration published in Latin by Dudithus; You have decreed that every one
should follow his own judgment in matters of Religion; Sanxisti ut in colenda
religione suo quisque uteretur judicio: neve vel authoritate cujusquam, vel
minis ad aliam sententiam, quam non probaret, traduceretur. Intelligis enim non
esse in principum potestate, subditos sibi populos ad omnia quae velint cogere:
sed est quaedam, ad quae inviti nulla ratione compelli possint. Quo in genere
tum virtus esse, tum vero de cultu deorum sensus atque judicium. Nam neque
bonum virum per vim queas efficere (est enim virtus habitus voluntarius) neque
cogere possis, ut id ulla de re sentiam, quod sentire nolo. Quae labor vel
ministerio corporis geruntur, ea imperari and per vim administrari possunt:
mentis agitatio, quaeque ex ea pendent notiones and habitus animi, libera and
soluta est. -- An censes cum ad studium tui praesentis and in conspectu orbis
terrarum positi, neminem invitum possis Pertrahere, te pietatem quam velis, and
cultum Dei ab aspectu nostro semper oblitescentis, decretis jus^sque this in
omnium ani^nis posse imprimere?
nor by any authority, or threats be forced to profess an opinion he could nor
allow. You understand that all things are not in the Princes power, but that
there still remains whereto man cannot be compelled: such are virtuous
inclinations and apprehensions concerning God and his worship. For you cannot
make any man really good by force (virtue being a voluntary disposition and
frame) nor can you compel me to think otherwise than I already do concerning
any thing. Outward actions, and such whose effects are visible, they may be
commanded and enforced: The affection, and mental acts, with our notions
depending thereon, these are free and uncontrolled. Think you, that if you
cannot force men to love you whom they daily see, and whom the world reveres,
that you can by any Edicts or Commands make them piously to adore and worship
that God whom they neither do nor can see? After Valens succeeded his son^
Gratianus, of whom how he refused the title of Pontifex Maximus first of all
the Emperors, and yet how his Coins picture him in that habit, and call him
Pont. Max. He as soon as he came to the Empire, considering how his Father had
banished the Orthodox party, and persecuted several of them (for whom
Themistius did often intercede) upon a policical account, I suppose, since he
tolerated others; Gratian is said to have recalled all from banishment that
were exiled by him; and enacted, That every man should be of what religion, The
same thing is recorded by Nicephorus Callistus, l. 12. c. 1. (...).
or Church he pleased, except the Manichees, Photinians and Eunomians. The
Arians had then the most of the Eastern Churches in their possession: The
Macedonian Heretics lived as friendly with them that followed the Nicene
Council, as if they had been of one judgment: yea, says Sozomen, from whom I
have all this, ( histor. Eccles. l. 7. c. 1, 2.) several of those that had been
banished under Valens, being returned upon the law aforesaid, made by Gratian,
did not affect any primacy over others, but preferred Concord before all other
Emoluments; and defired the Arians that they would not foment divisions, nor
create disturbances in a Church, which ought to be but one. Insomuch that
Eulalius Bishop of Amasia in Pontus finding an Arian Bishop in his stead,
desired he would continue the charge over a people, scarce fifty whereof did
adhere unto him. I come now to Theodosius under whom I find Themistius to
flourish no less than before: The temple of Serapis in Alexandrea was not
demol^shed, nor the rites extinct until the days of Theodosius, Theophilus
being Praefectus praetorio, and Eurymedon Governor of Egypt. Eunan in vit.
Aedesti p. 73. And the Eleusinia sacra in Greece were continued with their
solemnities in the time of Eunap us who was initiated therein. p. 87. in vita
Maximi.
By him Themistius was made Praetor of Constantinople; by him he was entrusted
with the education of Arcadius (who succeeded in the Empire) when he went into
the West: as Themistius tells us in his sixth Oration. Under him I find
Symmachus to be in great honor, and Governor of the City of Rome: Symmachus,
who was not only Advocate for them that were Pagans, but drew over Claudian and
Ausonius from Christianity to Paganism, as Giselinus proves out of Austin de
civit. Dei. It will not be amiss to present the world an account of this
Symmachus, who had been praefectus urbis in the time of Valentinian and Valens;
and Consul in the time of Theodosius. Judge what preferments Christian
Emperors granted to Heathens by this inscription.

Lucio. Aurelio. Aviano. Symmacho. V. C. Praefecto. Vrbi. Consuli. Pro.
Praefectis. Praetorio. in. urbe. Roma. finitissimisque. provinciis. Praefecto.
annonae. urbis. Romae. Pontifici. majori. Quindecimviro. S.F. multis.
legationibus. pro. amplissimi. ordinis. desideriis. apud. divos. Principes.
functo. qui. primus. in. Senatu. sententiam. rogari. solitus. authoritate.
prudentia. atque. eloquentia. pro. dignitate. tanti. ordinis, magnitudinem.
loci. ejus. impleverit. auro. illustrem statuam. quam. a. Dominis. Augustisque.
nostris. Senatus. amplissimus. decretis. frequentibus. impetravit. iidem.
triumphatores. principes. nostri. constitui adposita. oratione. jusserunt.
quae. meritorum. ejus. ordinem. ac. seriem. contineret. quorum. perenne.
judicium. tanto. muneri. hoc. quoque. addidit. ut. alteram. statuam. pari.
splendore. etiam. apud. Constantinopolin. collocaret. dedicata. III. Kal.
Maias. D. N. Gratiano. IIII. and. Merobande. Coss.

This Inscription is represented to us both in the passages premised to
Symmachus his Letters, published by Juretus, as out of Muphrius; and by Jo.
Weithrius in his notes upon the second Book of Prudentius against Symmachus. It
is observable that Symmachus in that Inscription is called Pontifex major, and
Quindecimvir, which shows that the Heathen Priesthood was then in being and
repute: as indeed Onuprhius observes, how the Vestal virgins, Poutifices,
Augures, Quindecimviri sacris faciundis, fetiales, Salii, Septemviri Epulonum,
and other priests were continued until Theodosius's time, who refused to defray
their charges out of the Public, not upon a Religious account (for he waved
that, being not able to prevail upon the Roman Senate) but because the
Commonwealth being otherwise exhausted could not bear so great expenses. After
which they began to decline, Onyphrius descr. civit. Romans l. 2.
and at last finally ceased. Under the same, yea to the same Theodosius I find
Libanius (being sent Ambassador to the Antiochians, Under Theodosius upon the
third of January vows (after the usual custom) were made for the Emperors
safety in the Heathen temples with feasts in Asta: which Eunapius saw and was
present at: the temple of Nemesis then standing. Eunap. in vit. Maximi. p. 107.
Sozim. l. 4.) making two Orations; one deprecatory for the Antiochians that
had demolished his Statues in a tumult; and the other gratulatory, for having
pardoned them that miscarriage: both which are exstant. In fine, Prudentius who
lived in those times, says to Symmachus,

Aspice quam pleno subsellia nostra Senatu
Decernant infame Jovis pulvinar, L. 1. Coner. Symmach.
and omne
Idolium long purgata ex urbe fugandum.
Qua voc at egregii sententia principis, illue
Libera cum pedibus, tum cord frequentia transit.
NEC LOCVS invidiae est, NVLLVM vis aspera terret,
Aute oculos sic velle patet; cunctique probatum,
NON JVSSVM, sola capti ratione sequuntur.
Denique pro meritis terrestribus aequa rependens
Munera, SACRICOLIS SVMMOS impertit HONORES
Dux bonus, and CERTARE sinit cum laud suorum;
Nec PAGO implicitos per debita culmina mundi
Ire viros prohibet: quoniam coelestia nunquam
Terrenis solitum per iter gradientibus obstant.
Ipse Magistratum tibi Consulis, About the same time I find one. Iustus of
Rome made Governor for Asia; a Zelot for Paganism, sent from Constantinople
thither, where he found another ruler in Sardes called Hilarious, who did
sacrifice together, and erected as it were an Academy of Heathens, which they
sent for from all parts, and Eunapius was there with them, (...), and
Crysanthius, and Hellespontius Philosophers. Eunap. in vita Chrysanthii, p.
188, etc.
ipse Tribunal
Contulit, auratumque togae donavit amictum,
Cujus Relligio tibi displicet, o pereuntum
Assertor Divum! --
Nor is this true only of the Heathen that he tolerated them: the Sectarians
found the same favor, viz. Arians, Novatians, Macedonians, and Eunomians, none
of which Theodosius molested, Eunomius only excepted; whom the Emperor exiled,
[not his followers, and that upon a breach of Civil obedience, (...).
viz.] because he raised Conventicles at his private house WITHIN
Constantinople, recited such speeches as he had written with a Rhetorical
ostentation, and infected many with his Doctrines. He disquieted not the rest,
neither constrained them to his communion, but licensed every one of them to
frequent several conventicles, (...) -- (...) --
to embrace what opinion liked them best in Christian Religion. And as he gave
leave to all other Sects to erect them Churches WITHOUT the walls in the
Suburbs; so commanded that the Novatians maintaining together with him the
faith of one substance, should freely without disturbance and molestation enjoy
and recover their former Churches within the Cities. Socrat. Scholastic. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 20. And if he made any Laws against them, you may learn
out of Sozomen how to understand them, (...).
Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 12. This Emperor made a law, So Constantine the
great made laws against Heretics rather for show and terror, then that he
ever executed them. So Sozomen tells us how the Novatians suffered little
prejudice by any laws of his, for says he, I think the Emperor willingly did
laxe those decrees, as purposing rather to terrify, then damnify his subjects.
(...) Sozomen l. 2. c. 30. And who were those of his subjects whom he was so
tender of? The Novatians, Cataphryges, Valentians, Marcionists, Paucli^ns, and
all other Heretics. (...). id. ibid.
that the Sectarians should have no Assemblies, nor make any profession of
their faith, nor ordain Bishops and Pastors; and that some of them should be
banished city and country, others should be rendered infamous, and not any way
be publicly preferred, as others were: and this he enacted with severe
penalties, which nevertheless he did never inflict. For he did not ordain these
things with an intention to punish, but to terrify his Subjects that they
might better agree in Religion, and he used to commend those who were
voluntarily converted. The learned Bodin in his book de Repub. lib. 4. gives
the like account of Theodosius, how at the beginning of his reign he found all
the Empire full of Arians, who were grown to that height and power under the
Arian Emperors, that they had strengthened their Doctrines by eight several
Councils assembled at sundry times at Tyrus, Sardis, Sirmium, Millain,
Seleucia, Nice, Tarsus and Arminium: in the last whereof there were assembled
600 Bishops [almost double the number of the first Council at Nice, in which
the Arians were condemned, and the Nicene Creed made; and might as well be
called, in the Language of those times, if not better, Oecumenicall] who all
unanimously avowed the doctrine of the Arians; yea, prosecuted the dissenters
which punishments and proscriptions: yet did not Theodosius suppress the Arians
by punishments, though he did hate them deadlily: he granted to both parties,
Arians and Catholics, their several Churches, and in the Cities each of them
had their Bishops: and though at the earnest solicitation of the Catholics,
he did publish sundry edicts against them, yet did he not put them in
execution; as his letters to Ambrose demonstrate in those words, resign unto
the Arians the Church, for all is in my power.

As for the Jews (to give an account of them once for all) I find them to
have been persecuted under the heathen Emperors of Rome at the same time with
the Cristians, who were by the Heathen too called Judaei: and it has been a
conjecture of mine, that their sufferings had not a greater affinity then
[possibly] the causes inducing the Heathen to such rigor were resembling. I
already told you how the Christians did believe the personal reign of Christ,
their Messiah; The Jews after the destruction of Jerusalem did expect the
coming of their Messiah, and that he should rule the World. Least any danger to
the Empire might arise from these opinions, which were divulged up and down by
both parties, the Romans, I imagine, may [ading other motives and fictions
against them] have persecuted them; especially having fresh in their memories,
how amongst other encouragements that Vespasian had to assume the Empire, it
was none of the meanest, that Josephus the Historian accomodated to him the
Prophecy of the Messiah, telling him, Thou shall be both Caesar, and Emperor,
as also thy Son, thou art not only my Lord, but Lord of the Sea and Land, and
of all Mankind. As he himself relates it, and Suetonius in the life of
Vespasian, and Orosius who further thus words the Oracle given to Vespasian at
mount Carmel, Sorts Carmel. portendisse exortos a Judaea rerum potituros. In
which fullfilling of the prophesy since the Jews did not acquiesce, it was a
remaining pretense for others to make use of, either out of flattery to
strangers again, or out of interest for themselves, as they did under
Barcochebas in the t^me of the Emperor Adrian. Under the Christian Emperors
from the times of Honorius, Arcadius Theodosius Primus and so upwards, Seldom.
de jure naturali and gentium. l. 2. c. 9. p. 243 etc.
though they had lost their City and Temple, yet were they in a very
flourishing condition. They had several famous Academyes, or rather
Commonweals, such as the Soriana, Pombodithana, Nehardacensis, besides their
multitude of Synagogues, and great immunityes thorough the particular
indulgence of Princes. Theodosius, Arcadius and Honorius, A A A. made the
following Bescript unto Addaeus [Comes and Magister utriusque militiae] It is
evident enough that the Sect of the Jews is not prohibited by any Law. C.
Theod. sib. 16. tit. 8. l 9 and vide l. 12.25.
Wherefore we are very angry that their Assemblies should be interdicted any
where. Your Excellency therefore having received these our commands, will
repress with due severity the too great number of those, who under pretense of
Christian religion commit all manner of licentiousness, destroying and robbing
their Synagogues. Given at Constantiple 3o Kal. October. Theod. A. III. and
Abundantio Cons. that is, in the Year of our Lord, 395. Three years after the
former Rescript, Arcadius and Honorius A. A. decreed unto the Jews, ibid. l. 10.
that the Governors of Provinces should not impose upon them any Moderator or
Prefident; and if any should assume or exercise any such power or charge over
them, besides themselves and their Noblesse, then should the Governors of the
Provinces punish him as an usurper, and one who retrenched upon the Rights of
others. Yea, the same Emperors in the same years appointed Claudianus Comes
Orientis, ibid. l. 11.
If any should dare to make contumelious or dishonorable mention openly of the
ILLUSTRIOUS the Patriarchs [o the Jews] he should be punished The year ensuing
the said Emperors declare unto Caesarius Praefectus Praetorio, C. Theod. lib.
16. tit. 8. l. 13.
Let us imitate our predecessors in upholding the privileges of the Jews, by
whose decrees it is enacted that the privileges of such as are under the
illustrious the Patriarchs [of the Jews] the Rulers of their Synagogues,
Patriarchs, Presbyters, and others which are of that Religion, by the consent
of our Royal selves, continue the same, which with Reverence and sanctimony are
paid to the principal of the Christian Clergy. For thus the holy Emperors,
Constantinus, Constantius, Valentinianus and Valens by their Heavenly will and
pleasure have ordained it. ibid. l. 20.
[There are many more Edicts in favor of them, That their Synagogues shall not
be destroyed, or seized upon: and, That they be not obliged to any performances
inconsistent with the observation of their Sabbath: ibid. l. 21.
That none should be any way wronged, or oppressed for being a Jew: and since
many to avoid several accusations, curry favor, or supply their wants, did of
Jews become Christians in pretense; and not effectually, it was ordered by the
same Emperors Honorius and Theodosius, ibid. l. 23.
That if such were not real Converts, they might [without fear of punishment]
return again to their former worship and religion: and this Reason is given,
which shows how different their judgment was from that of men in our days,
who acknowledging that Faith cannot be enforced, yet think an outside
uniformity to be desirable and pious, and the contrary scandalous and
offensive; viz. Quia magis Christianitati consulitur. BECAUSE IT IS FOR THE
ADVANTAGE OF CHRISTIANITY, sc. that they be open Jews, than secretly such, and
only Christians by Profession.] Thus by the great favor of the Emperors did
they enjoy their liberty and freedom, which they were not to make use of to the
injury of the Christians. ibid. l. 15.
Their Patriarchs being called by the titles of Illustres and Spectabiles. Of
all this that has been said there are pretty probable grounds to be fetched
out of Chrysostoms Homilies against the Jews, wherein he does inveigh against
that familiarity which was between the Jews and Christians. In a little time
after the Jews growing proud and insolent by reason of their great privileges
and immunities, became burdensome to the Christians, and declined in the
favor of the Emperors. First therefore Honorius and Theodosius II. being
Emperors, they were excluded from Military employments, whereof they were
formerly capable, and such as enjoyed any were deprived thereof. This happened 20
years after the Rescript unto Cesarius mentioned before, ibid. l. 24.
Honorius being the twelfth time and Theodosius the eighth time Consul. Yet
even in that decree which deprives them of warlike charges, the Emperors seem
tender of that Nation, and by a fair alleviation and temperament to secure
their reputation, and other dignities. The words are these. Let none that
adhere unto the Jewish worship and superstition have henceforward any
opportunity of being a Soldier. inter Palatinos inter agentes in rebus.
Whosoever of them are employed in a military way, either in the Palace, or
elsewhere abroad, we will permit them to finish the time they are to continue
those their charges, rather pardoning their acting, then indulging it. But
hereafter let not that be done, which for the present is an act of our grace.
As for those who following the Jews in their pravity are convict to have
ambition'd the bearing of arms, let them without any doubt, or demurr loose
their cingulum, or badge of the Soldatesque, no regard being had to their
former demerits. We do not intend by this our mandate to exclude such Jews as
being instructed in the liberal arts and Sciences, from being advocates, or
getting other Court-offices, which is a liberty they may challenge by the
prerogative of their birth and splendor of their familyes, L. 17. C.
Justinian. de Judaeis and C. Th. l. 16. tit. 8. l. 29.
wherewith since they ought to be satisfied, they must not think it a disgrace
that they are interdicted military Trust. We are sure they had their
Sanhedrims in Palestine at that time: nor did they absolutely lose their
splendor, dignity and privileges till about forty years after the Consulship
of Eutropius, against whom Claudian wrote so bitterly. Then Theodos. II. C.
Justin. tit de Iudaeis, l. 19.
being Consul with Festus the 17th time, Val ntinian III. and the said
Theodosius did wonderfully abate their privileges, and straighten their
condition.

And now, I think, In the time of Hon^rius lived the Ph^losopher Le^nt^^^ ^t
Athens; he was an Heathen yet made a legacy to his Sons, leaving very little to
his fair daughter Athenais, which thereupon was forced to go and live at
Constantinople with her Aunt; where Theodosius the younger matryed her, and she
became a Christian, was called Eudoxia, and Empress. Mallela. fol 225,
I have given a fair account of what Toleration was allowed to the Gentiles,
Jews and all manner of Heretics: I could enlarge my catalogue under Honorius,
with recounting not only how much he favored the Gentiles, and Donatists;
(with both which he is notwithstanding reported by the instigation of Stilico
to have dealt somewhat severely, so as that they rejoiced at his death) but by
reckoning Eucherius the son of Stilico for one, Vid St. Claverium in m^scell.
ad Claudian. cap. 9.
of whom Orosius tells me, lib. 7. cap. 27. that he intended to gain the favor
of the Pagans by erecting them Temples, and destroying Christian Churches: and
for an Heathen is he reckoned. C. Th. leg. XIX. So his father Stilico (after
whose death the Gentiles rose and murdered sundry Bishops, Stilico made Saul a
Jew [barb^rus and paganus says Orosius l. 7.38.] General of the Christian
Army, which is acknowledged by Baronius.
as also did the Donatists) is by some reputed an Heathen: Orosius says, that
he [a privato pueroque] intended a persecution against the Christians; but
since Baronius and Cleverius will allow neither the one nor the other to have
been a Pagau; I shall so far assent unto the latter, as to think the insertion
of Eucherius's name into the Law aforesaid to be an additional gloss^ma,
foysted in by men of more zeal, then honesty or knowledge: the Emperor Honorius
abrogated a law which had been made, prohibiting any Gentile to bear arms, or
enjoy any preferment, or command [(...)] and made Generidus an Heathen General
of all his forces, granting to all, retaining their own opinions, liberty to
command and serve in the wars: [(...).] So Zosimus lib. 5. Baronius remarks
upon this passage, that Honorius did it out of necessity: but the Author says,
he did not more our of necessity, then respect to Generidus, who was so brave a
captain, and had underwent great dangers for the public, being ashamed that by
such a Law Generidus should not wear a sword. Let it pass for clear which Dr.
Rives avowes in his book against Alemannus. Dixi enim, and saepius fortasse
dicet^^, quo tempore ad im peri^habenas tractandas accissit Justinianus, illud
ge^us [polytheorum] praecipuam quamque ^eipub curationem and dignitatem
occupasse.
That when Justinian came to ruler, the chiefest digniti^^ and employments were
in the possession of the Heathen. Under the Emperor Justinian, I have in the
beginning of this discourse told you what Religions were then in the Empire.
The Samaritans, (who, besides other Tenants, denied all the Scripture, except
the five Books of Moses) had their Synagogues, and were capable of civil
Employments: to what end else was that constitution of Justinians against the
Samaritans? Novel. 129. That there should be no more Synagogues of the
Samaritans, (...). Citante ^lemanno in Procop. p. 57.
and that they should be incapable of public office. So in another place, the
said Justinian being consulted by John, Praefectus Praetoriorum, concerning
some Samaritanes, Jews, and Montanists, or such like, whether they were to
enjoy the dignity of Senators; replies, (...) -- (...).
That they shall not receive any benefit by such their places, but if there be
any burden or trouble therein, that they should be liable to. Novel. 25. As
for the Jews they had their Synagogues and Governors (whether termed (...))
as appears from that Novel of Justinian, concerning such Jews as should use
the Greek Bible in their Synagogues. We enact by our sacred will that those
Jews be without let or molestation, who will in their Synagogues read the Bible
in the Greek tongue. Novel. 146. The Arians and other Heretics [(...)] had
their Churches [(...)] as Procopius in his Secret History tells us. p. 51. The
Heathens or Gentiles had all the great preferments, In^^nt. ad P^ocop. p. 59.
and places of trust or dignity in their possession, and so continued them
long; as Dr. Ryves confesses, whose words I have repeated; and Alemannus
informs us how when he persecuted the Gentiles, the chiefest persons of his
Court were found criminal; in which number, as Hesychius, Procopius,
Theophanes, and Suidas relate, was Tribonianus Quaestor, (...), Suidas. Thomas
Magister officiorum, Johannes Praefectus Praetorio, (to whom he wrote
concerning the Jews, Samaritans and Montanists, as aforesaid) and Phocas
Patricius magister militum, all which were principal men in making of the Code.
Theophanes does add to this number, Asclepiodotus Praefectus Praetorio,
Macedonius Referendarius, [as does Io. Mallela too] and Pegasius Heliopolitanus
Patricius. Yea, Procopius himself was an Heathen, yet was he made by Justinian
one of the Illustres, a Senator, Assessor to the great [Christian] Captain
Belizarius, and after all Prefect of the City, then which charge that Empire
scarce had a greater.

Thus stood the Toleration in the time of Justinian, until he by little and
little overthrew it; not out of any Religious pretense, but mere covetousness,
and to prey upon their Riches, as Procopius who lived in those times leaves us
to conjecture. He commanded they should within three months time relinquish
their opinions, and become orthodox, or forfeit their goods and be banished. So
Mallela, so Theophanes; yet did not his zeal extend to the principal of the
Arians, (...). Theophanes citante Alemanno. p. 26.
called Hexacionitae, those he let alone. As for the Samaritans, whether his
Law occasioned their revolt, or whether that revolt his Law, I know not;
Procopius makes the Law to precede that Tumult; but Mallela speaks not of the
Law, (...). p. 277. This was in the 29 year of Justinian, and so after the Law,
as Cyrillus Scythopolitanus says in Alema^nus.
only how the Samaritans, Jews and Christians fell out and destroyed one
another Temples and Churches, and that the Emperor was angry with the
Governor thereupon, and beheaded him. A^emannus makes out of Theophanes and
the Alexandrian Chronicle two Seditions, the one, possibly, when the Law was
first made, and thereupon remissely executed; the other, when they began to
reinforce it: But what effect had his persecution? Men did not relinquish their
Religion, but the Profession thereof; yea, says the Alexandrian Annals, some
having been Baptized to this day dissemble. (...). ^^ante Ale man^o. p 7

(...). Procop. Hist. Arc. p 5.

V^d Procop Hist. Arc. p. 53. Iusti^^an made a law that no Pagan should b^
capable of public trusts (...). Mall^la. fol. ^ 9 but this was enacted after
the suppression of the Samaritans, 20000 of whom were stain, and as many
children and maids sold by a Saracen commander in the Roman army to the
Persians. id. fol. 288.


So Procopius relates it, how some, seeing death and banishment before their
eyes, counterfeited Christianity, whilst others offended at such a kind of
conversion turned Manichees, and Polytheists. The like he says of the
Heathens, when Justinian be^an to persecute them with Confiscations and
corporal punishments, [yea death, says Jo. Mallela; for Asclepiodotus,
Macedonius, etc. were slain] they renounced Heathenism to avoid the present
danger, but not long after relapsed to their former sacrifices and Paganism.
But if Covetousness, or Reason of State (the Arians in the Empire
corresponding with the enemies thereof the Goths) be grounds for extirpating
different Religions, Justinian may be acquitted, having first given an account
why he lodged in his bosom an Eutychian for his Wife, who headed that party
whilst he countenanced the Orthodox, yea, he himself was in part an Eutychian
of the Aphthartodocitae: Justinian made an edict in the behalf of the Eat^^h
ans a^^^tle before he dyed, (...). Theophanes.
nor can the most favorable Historian tell what to make of him, whether he
were ever real or not in his governing, setting up Anthinius, and then pulling
him down aagin at the instance of Agapetus Bishop of Rome, whom, yet when he
reproved him, he told, He was Emperor and might do what he pleased. All which
is acknowledged by Jos. Simlerus in his Collection of those that wrote against
Eutyches, fol. 8. The same Emperor has abused the World vilely in his
Collections of old Laws, for he left out many good ones, Vide Cont. lect.
suoser. l. 1. c. 9.
inserted many bad, and (notwithstanding Protestations to the contrary) imposed
upon his predecessors such laws as they never made, yea the contrary whereof
they enacted: and then decreed none should quote any of such laws, but out of
his compilations, upon pain of being prosecuted as a falsifier of such
imperial laws, as he had basely miscited, and they might disprove out of the
Codex Gregorianus, Hermogenianus, and Theodosianus, of the two former Codes we
have now so little knowledge, that we ignore whence they had their names; both
are lost together with above half of the Code of Theodosius, none being willing
to transcribe them, which they could not alledg for their adantage, nor so
curious in an age not too inquisitive, as to preserve them for mere
antiquity-sake. And this is the reason why we have no more laws recorded, nor
no better account of things then we have: yea so many falsifications of laws,
(men being as good at that, as at scattering false Creeds and Gospels, and
Epistles) that I shall not value what can be produced in opposition to what I
have laid down, though some should publish more then Pamelius the Papist has
wrote against Toleration. Shall I trust him in the great affairs of
Christianity, and self-interest, who cosens me de stillicidiis, etc. Shall I
suppose him honest where he had the highest motives possible to cheat, and yet
know his forgeries in cases of little or no moment? Ad populum phaleras!
Besides it is considerable that no Emperor can be alleged for persecutions,
who did not make his decrees as Authentic as the word of God, so that their
Laws are called Oracles, Sacred decrees, etc. (...), nostrae majestatis
oracula, divales litterae nostrum numen, perennitas, divinitas, and a thousand
such like elogies do they assume, and Ecclesiastical writers give them: as may
be seen in the Theodosian Code, Mallela, etc. On the other side I hope I shall
not be troubled to give any character of the Emperors I have insisted on, out
of the writers of those days: they areall called Divi or Saints, as you may
see in Onuphrius's fasti. Constantine is called the Divine and Faithful, etc.
Jovianus the most Christian: Valentinian the Orthodox, etc. (...), Mallela.
(...) Mallela. (...) Mallela. (...). Id (...). Id. (...). Id. (...). Id. (...).
Id.
yea the most divine: the most just and most severe. (The latter whereof is his
constant elogie in Mallela) so Valens the most Divine, though my Author
confess him to have been an Arian [(...)] Gratian the most pious; Theodosius
the most Divine, and Religious. I could produce much more full testimonies in
their behalf, if I thought any were so ignorant as to demand it. If any shall
reply that those were but the complyances of Christians in a necessitous
condition, and not being able to suppress the Heathen, they did permit them. I
doubt not but they who are most ready to object thus will be no less forward
to affirm that they ought not to engage into a sinful compliance, and such
must this of theirs have been since the laws made are enforced with reasons,
sundry of them; it was their declared judgment, both under persecution, and
after, when they had gained the Superiority and Empire. I shall once again
repeat the Testimony of Tertullian ad Scapulam. It is our property, humane
equity, and natural right to allow each man to worship what he thinks fit:
Tamen humani ^uris and naturalis potestatis unicuique quod pu^averit colere:
nec al^i obest, aut prodesi alterius religio, sed nec religi^nis est cogere
religionem, quae sp^nte suscipi debeat, non vi; cum and hostiae ab animo
libenti ^ae os^ul^ntur. Ita eis^ nos compul ritis ad secrificandum, nihil
prae^t bi^is diis vest^is: ab invi^ it is enim Sacrificia non desiderabunt, nisi
si contentiosi sunt; contentiosus autem Deus non est.
no man can receive benefit, or prejudice by the religion, of another. Besides,
it is not consistent with Religion, to force men thereunto, since that ought to
be embraced voluntarily, and not by compulsion: even sacrifices are not
acceptable, if not tendered by a willing mind. Thus though you should compel
us to Sacrifice to your Gods, yet will you do them no service, for they will
not require Sacrifices from the unwilling, unless they be contentious, and if
they are contentious, they are no Gods. Is this the language of a man who
intends a bare compliance? Are these reasons suiting with the designs of one
who would suppress the Heathen as soon as he should have power and
opportunity. Were they Pagan-Gods only which required sincerity of heart and
real affections with their oblations? Is it that religion only which excludes
compulsion? Must those Deities only be destroyed, if they are contentious?
Either what Tertullian said is to be understood absolutely and universally, or
he did very ill in refusing to sacrifice to false Gods, and yet violating his
obedience to the true one by such notorious prevarication. After that they came
to the Sovereignty; and that those Christians who before (if we may believe
Tertullians's rant) were in a posture to dispute their sufferings with them
which persecuted them, had now gained Authority on their side, and a fair
accessionall of strength; did they then merely comply when they might, and my
adversaries will say ought to have suppressed the Pagans! surely Lactantius who
lived to see the Christians afflicted under Diocletian, and flourishing under
Constantine, to whose son Crispus he was Tutour, and to which Emperor he
dedicated particularly his Book de justitia, in the twentieth chapter whereof
(after you have observed with Xystus Betullius in his notes, that the Roman
Pont^fices, seu minores, sou maxim flamines, augures, item reges sacrificuli,
Non est opus vi and in^uria, quia religio co^i non potes: v^rb^s poti us qu^m
verberibus res agend^ est ut s^^ luntas.

-- Quid ergo saeviunt, ut stultitiam suam dum minuere velunt, augeant; long
diversa sunt carnificina and p^^^as. nec potest ^ut veritas cum vi, aut
justitia cum crudelitate conjungi. --


quique sunt sacerdotes and antistites religionum, that all these Pagan Priests
were then in being) you may note how he directs his discourse in general
against persecution for Religion. There needs no force, nor injurious
compulsion, because Religion cannot be enforced: to make men willing; you must
use [perswasive] words, and not stripes. -- Why then do they rage and
persecute, that so they may increase instead of lessening their folly? [The
Bible and the Gallowes] Piety and cruelty are things of a quite defferent
nature; nor can truth subsist with force, or justice with oppression. -- Then
he having objected in the behalf of the Heathens, that they ought to defend the
public rites and religious worship: he commends them for their tenderness in
the behalf of Religion, but reproves the ways whereby they would preserve it.
Religion is to be defended not by slaying, but dying, Defendenda religio est
non occidendo, sed moriendo; non saevitia, sed patientia, non scelere, sed
fide. Illa enim malorum sunt, haec bonorum. Et necesse est bonum in rel gione
versari, non malum. Nam si sagnine, si tormentis, si mala religione, defendere
velis, jam non defendetur illa, sed polluetur atque violabitur. Nihil enim est
tam voluntarium, quam religio: in qua si animus sacrificantis aversus est, jam
sublata, iam n^lla est.
not by cruelty but patience, not by wickedness but faith, those are practices
of the bad, but these of the good. -- If you will defend religion with
bloodshed, torments and oppressions, you will rather pollute and defile
Religion thereby, then defend it. Nothing is, or ought to be so voluntary as
Religion, which cease to be such, if the Sacrificer worship with an unwilling
mind.

Many more sayings of the ancients might be produced for the further
illustrating of this point, but in the relations which I have given of the
Toleration allowed of old by the first Christian Emperors, there is so much
intermixed of their Judgment in reference to the case in hand, that I shall
forbear till further opportunity, leaving the Reader to think that those
Emperors had a Clergy living in those days (though not endowed with Titles)
and that it may be presumed they did advise or concur to those decrees which
Justinian did absolutely infringe, together with the Popes of Rome, who in the
declining of the Greek Empire advanced themselves to a secular principality, I
shall not insist upon the Toleration which has been allowed and avowed under
Protestants since the beginning of the Reformation; he must be a great stranger
in the world that knows not with what vehemence they have condemned Popery, and
the Popish inquisition.

It is not to be denied that under Henry the fourth of France (as also now) in
the same camp men of both religions fought for the same person, and that the
Protestants offered the Papists a Toleration; and advised their King to it, and
thought it not only necessary, but lawful, as again their King being turned
Papist they sued for a Toleration and procured that Edict, by the benefit
whereof they enjoy their present Liberty. In the Germane Diet at Spires 1626
the German Princes demanded an universal Toleration for Religion, and that
upon these motives, 1. Because faith must be free and voluntary. 2. Because it
is the gift of God. 3. Because Experience shows how force does nothing avail.
4. Because, the Christians have always tolerated the Jews. I desire the force
and extent of these arguments may be weighed, and see if they will include the
Heretics of our times. Is their Faith to be less free? Or less the gift of
God? Or can they be more compelled to believe, then the Calvinists or
Lutherans? Is that argument a majori ad minus, from the sufferance of the
greater to the sufferance of the less, more invalidated in our days than of
old? viz. If the Jews have always been tolerated, who deny our whole
Religion, the Trinity, the Messiah, Justification, etc. the new Testament, and
Daniel in the old; may we not tolerate such as differ from us in smaller cases?
How far Toleration has been extentended in Transylvania, Poland, Hungary,
Austria, the Hans-towns, France, Holland, etc. I cannot at present enlarge on,
nor recount the sayings of several Kings, or Divines to that purpose: but I
will undertake to evince the Lawfullness, and possibility, and manner of a
firm Toleration out of the principles laid down in the reconciliatory
discourses betwixt the Lutherans and Calvinists. N.B. I am assured by Beza that
the Lutherans are Nestorians and Eutichans; ubiquitatis dogma quod ad Christi
naturas attimet prorsus Nestorianum, quod adearund^m idiomata spectat penitus
E^tychianum est. Bez. ^p. ad Dudith.
And I appeal to all judicious persons whether therebe any greater difference
betwixt the Heretics abroad (till Arminia nisme, Semipeligianisone
Episcopacy, etc. be new-named by Presbytery, I shall so term them) and those in
England, then that the one are removed from the other by the interposition of
the Sea.

But against this Toleration, in the utmost extent of it, it will be objected,
That under the Law of Moses, Idolaters and Blasphemers were put to death. Exodus
22. v. 20. He that sacrifices unto any God, save unto the Lord only, he shall
be utterly destroyed. and Deuteronomy. 13. If there arise among you a prophet, or a
dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder: and the sign or the
wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other
Gods (which thou have not known) and let us serve them: thou shall not hearken
unto the words of that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your
God proves you to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart
and with all your Soul. Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him,
and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and you shall serve him, and
cleave unto him. And that Prophet or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to
death (because he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, which
brought you out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of
bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to
walk in) so shall thou put the evil away from the midst of thee. If thy
Brother, the Son of thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the wife of thy
bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own So^l, entise thee secretly, saying,
let us go and serve other Gods which thou have not known, thou nor thy Fathers,
namely of the Gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or
far off from thee, from the one end of the earth, even unto the other end of
the earth: thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall
thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, nor shall thou conceal him, but
thou shall surely kill him: thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterward the hand of all the people. And thou shall stone him with
stones, that he dye: because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord
thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of
bondage. And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this is among you. If thou shall hear say in one of thy Cities
which the Lord thy God has given thee to dwell there, saying, certain men the
Children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the
inhabitants of their City, saying, let us go, and serve other Gods which you
have not known: then shall thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently,
and behold if it be truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is
wrought among you, thou shall surely smite the inhabitants of that City with
the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the
Cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword, and thou shall gather all the
spoil of it, into the midst of the street thereof, and shall burn with fire
the City, and all the spoil thereof, every whit, for the Lord thy God: and it
shall be an heap for ever, it shall not be built again, and there shall cleave
naught of the accursed thing to thy hand, that the Lord may turn from the
fierceness of his anger, and show thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee,
as he has sworn unto thy Fathers. And again in the same book chapter 17. v. 2.
etc. If there be found among you within any of thy gates which the Lord thy God
gives thee, man or woman that has wrought wickedness in the sight of the
Lord thy God, in transgressing his covenant, and has gone and served other
Gods, and worshipped them, either the Sun or Moon, or any of the host of
heaven, which I have not commanded; and if it be told thee, and thou have heard
of it, and enquired diligently and behold it be true, and the thing certain,
that such abomination is wrought in Israel: then shall thou bring forth that
man, or that woman (which have committed that wicked thing) unto thy gates,
even that man or that woman, and shall stone them with stones till they dye.
Against the Blasphemer there is this law commanded. Levit. 24. v. 15, 16.
Whosoever curses his God shall bear his sin, and he that blasphemeth the name
of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death, and all the congregation shall
certainly stone him: as well the stranger, as he that is borne in the land,
when he blasphemeth the name of the Lord shall be put to death.

For the explanation of these texts I shall observe what is the opinion of the
Jewish Rabbis, and what has been the practice of that Nation. They divide the
world into two parts, the sons of Noah and themselves: to themselves they say
the Law promulgated in the Books of Moses was given; to the residue of mankind
whom they call the sons of Noah, they say that they are not obliged to the law
of Moses, but to seven precepts given to Noah, but whether such precepts were
actually given, or only imprinted in the Souls of all men at their original,
is disputed amongst them: Hereby they are said to have been commanded to have
abstained from Idolatry; from blasphemy, or cursing the holy name [of God] from
murder, from adultery and incest, from theft, and that they should erect a
Polity or Magistracy for the keeping inviolably these precepts. The last (which
they suppose to have been given to Noah, as the former were even to Adam) that
they should not eat the members of any creature which had been cut off from it
whilst it was yet living. These are commandments which they say were given to
all man kind, and to the observation whereof they were so obliged hereunto,
that they could nor without (...) violate them. Yet however the Nations were
obliged hereunto, yet did God establish no paramount judge over them, so that
any true believers, or peculiar Nations or people should have it in charge to
prohibit, or destroy them in their transgressions, or demolish their Idols.
This is clear from the account we have of things from the beginning unto the
erecting of the Israelitish polity: for Abraham in his pilgrimage conversed
with Idolaters, and did not destroy them, or attempt it, or disoblige them in
discourse or deportment; though what he might have done that way (especially in
conjunction with Melchizedech King of Salem) be evident from his achievements
in the behalf of Lot against the four Kings. Genesis 14. and from the respect paid
him by the Sons of Heth (before whom he used much address, bowing himself)
Hear us my Lord; thou art a mighty prince among us. or a Prince of God; things
that excel being in an Hebrars^ said to be of God) Genesis 23.6. So for Lot
dwe^ing in Sodom, however God might destroy them, yet that righteous man
dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day
to day with their unlawful deeds. 2. Pet. 2.7, 8. Yet that he vexed them, or
provoked them by imbittering censures, etc. I find no mention in sacred writ.
So Jacob lived with Laban an Idolater and married his daughter, being then, and
continuing after an Idolatresse; yet did not he molest Laban in his worship; as
may be gathered from the Text, for if Laban so fiercely pursued him for those.
Idols which Rachell had carried away; we may be certain that he would not have
so friendly before agreed with him, if he had gone violently to demolish them.
So the Children of Israel being in Egypt, and multiplying there, in a land full
of Idolatry, I do not find any contest emerging about their different worships.
After that the Israelites were come out of Egypt, and that God modelled that
people into a Commonwealth, they had this law given them Exodus 22.20. He that
sacrifices to any God save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed;
or become an Anathema: of which law the meaning is not universal, but to be
understood of the Jews and amongst the Jews. For it was not ever extended to
the Gentiles living separate from the Jews; for the Israelites were not hereby
obliged to destroy all their Neighbors that were Idolaters, they never
practiced such a thing, nor is the omission thereof laid to their charge: They
were to be left to the judgment of God, who in the event and final issue would
cut them off and destroy them. The Law in it is letter, and as far as man had
power to execute it, was limited to the seven Nations, which God had given to
the Children of Israel for a possession: Deuteronomy. 12.1. These are the statutes
and the judgments which ye shall observe to do, in the land which the Lord thy
God gives thee. So Exodus 34.13.
-- They should destroy all monuments of Idolatry in those dominions: and this
is the judgment of the Jewish Doctors, as Mr. Seldom reports them de jur.
nature. l. 2. c. 2. It is commanded us that we destroy all foreign worship out
of our land; but beyond our precincts it is not commanded us that we should
persecute and destroy it. In case they made any additionall conquest, that law
did not reach them; yet did they by an intervenient right (as Mr. Seldom
phraseth it) abolish and extripate Idolatry in such places, viz. least it
should become a snare unto them. Amongst the Jews there lived sundry other
people called under the general name of Strangers, which as to matters of
common equity, had one and the same law or justice which an Israelite had: such
were the Gibeonites and the relics of the Cananites that were undestroyed:
such were those which joined with them when they came out of Egypt, such were
the Prosclytes or Strangers in the gate who were not Jews, but were all bound
up (say the Jews) to the seven precepts of Noah: in such cases as an Israelite
might be put to death, they also might suffer the like punishment; so that it
being death for an Israelite to worship Idols, or tempt others thereunto, it
was in like manner punishable for any Stranger to attempt the like. But it was
also death for any Stranger, not becoming absolutely a Proselyte to the law of
Moses, for to observe any part thereof as being his law: It is also remarkable,
that the law of Noah regarding Idolatry was Negative, and only told them they
were not to worship Idols, Angels, Sun and Moon, and such Gods as were not the
Lord Jehovah, but as to the positive part we find nothing expressed that they
were to do necessarily, though voluntarily, they might offer whole
burnt-offerings by the Priest in the same Temple with the Jews, and they might
pay their vows, and had a particular place in the Temple to pray in. As for a
City falling into Idolatry it was to be destroyed with the edge of the sword,
the spoil to be burned, and all to be made an heap for ever. But in reference
to this extirpating Idolatrous Cities, I observe that it is not only not
extended beyond the limits of Israel, [if thou shall hear say in one of the
Cities, which Jehovah thy God gives thee to dwell there. -- ] but also that it
does seem not to have extended unto any City that should cast off the yoke of
their government, and separate into a new reiglement: for I do not find any war
made upon Jeroboam and the ten Tribes for their Apostasy and Idolatry, though
they be reproved for the same; nor do I find that the Towns taken at any time
from the ten Tribes by the two, were used according to the law in debate: But
they seem as the Samaritans after them, to be left unto God for to be cut off.
And indeed as to particular Idolatry to be practiced within Judaea by the
Strangers, that none should come thither who should not profess a subjection
to the precepts of Noah, and so relinquish his Religion, or intermit, ^t does
hardly seem credible that it was performed, when Hiram's Servants did work with
Solomon's Servants, or came to congratulate him: 1 Kings 5. or when the Queen of
Shebah came to Jerusalem with a very great train. 1 Kin. 10. Or as often as any
Ambassadors came from foreign countries to the upright Kings of Judah after
the Captivity and their return from thence; will any one think that Alexander
the great, when he and his army came to Jerusalem, that they became Proselytes
to the commandments of Noah? or that the Romans did intermit their worship,
which was to be performed daily, or particularly at the marching of the Army,
all the while they were in Jury? Or that all those Nations recounted in the
Acts 2. v. 9, 10, 11. had renounced their native Religion. Yet is not that
Toleration condemned by the Apostles, as neither had it been by Christ, who was
able by a grant of Angelical legions to effect what possibly it may be replied
the others could not.

As for that other text respecting Blasphemy, Levit. 24. v. 15, 16. Any man,
when be shall curse his God, then he shall bear his sin. And he that
b^asphemeth the name of Jehovah shall surely be put to death; and all the
congregation stoning shall stone him, as well the Stranger as the Home-borne,
when he blasphemeth the name shall be put to death. The Jews observe that it
is not said in the Original he that blasphemeth, From hence the Jews became
so superstitious as not to think it lawful to name the sacred name, therefore
called (...). Philo thus records the law, Ei (...). de vita Mosis. l. 3.
but he that names, and that not generally God, but the name Jehovah (...) and
they further remark that the Son of Selomith did curse the name, (...) and
though they confess that the law against blasphemy comprise both Jews and
Strangers living amongst them (for it is not conceivable how it extended any
further then their particular polity, so as to oblige the Jews at Alexandria
to execute the law upon any gentile there, or in the captivtiy) yet the extent
of the violation thereof was so little, that the blasphemer must have expressed
the name Jehovah. The words of the Thalmudists are (as Mr. Seldom cites them de
jur. nature. l. 2. c. 12.) he is not to dye, if he express not the sacred name:
no not though he blaspheme or curse any sacred attribute. Reus (mortis) non
est, nisi qui expresserit ipsum nomen: neutiquam vevo qui cognomini
maledixerit. But notwithstanding this (and much more to this purpose, which is
to be seen in Mr. Seldom) it seems evident from the condemnation of our Savior
in the Gospel, that in his days blasphemy was extended beyond the mention of
that sacred name (of the true pronunciation whereof we are now totally
ignorant, and so incapable of that blasphemy) unto the attributes of God. For
Caiphas says Matthew. 26.63. etc, I adjure there by the living God, that thou
tell us, whether thou be the Christ the Son of God. Jesus said untohim, thou
have said: nevertheless I say unto you, hereafter shall you see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then
the High Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has spoken blasphemy: what
further need have we of witnesses? behold now ye have heard his blasphemy, what
think ye? They answered and said, he is guilty of death. Or as Mark c. 14. v.
64. has it, And they all condemned him to be guilty of death. In this trial
there is no mention of the Tetragrammaton or sacred name, yet the whole
assembly unanimously condemns our Savior for blasphemy, against one of the
Sacred attributes, which is manifestly expressed in the text in the words,
Sitting at the right hand of power, Vid. Seldom. loco citato.
(...) Power or (...) being by the Jewish Rabbines a thousand times reckoned
amongst the attributes of God. I am further to observe that the Jews did not
reckon material blasphemy, such as is wickedness of life, or the profession of
a religion or way inconsistent with the truth, for to be the blasphemy that was
to be punished with death. Thus the Blind man Ioh. 9. who avowed Christ to be
no sinner, but a Prophet, and of God, was not impleaded or condemned as guilty
of blasphemy, and so to dye; but he was excommunicated, or excluded from the
converse of the Jews. And the Disciples in the Acts. chapter 4. and 5. though they
preached that Jesus was the Christ, and that Salvation was to be had only in
his name, and that God had exalted him with his RIGHT HAND to be a prince and a
Savior, etc. yet were not they charged with blasphemy, or represented as
guilty of death. So Paul in his declaration, whatever he lay down, it was not
imputed to him as blasp^emous: for then the people would have rent their
clothes, instead of casting them off, and have said, he was guilty of death,
and not Away with such a fellow from the earth; it is not fit that he should
live, Acts 22. v. 22, 23. from whence it may be gathered what opinion the Jews
had of the Messiah, that one might avowe himself to be, or that another was
such, yet not be guilty of blasphemy, or death: for such his assertion, yet as
a sower of sedition such might be punished with stripes or imprisonment. Acts
4. v. 3. Acts 24. v. 5. for if they had taught openly that Christ did sit at
the right hand of power, or glory (as Steven Acts 7. v. 55, 56, 57.) or had
said: he was the Son of God, they would not have spared the Disciples who
condemned the Master upon that score, and told Pilate, We have a law, and by
our law he ought to dye, because he made himself the Son of God. Joh. 19.7.

It is very considerable how by the same law, whereby Christ was condemned for
blasphemy by the Jews in asserting his deity: by the same law are the
Socinians condemned now for denying his deity. We ought then to be very tender
in committing the interpretative power of such laws to any sort of men, least
analogicall blasphemy retrench upon the truth.

Formal blasphemy or (...), maledictio, seu execratio ejusdem, reproachful
language or cursing of the Sacred name was counted blasphemy by them, and as
such, prohibited. viz. When the Hol^ness, Power, Verity, Quando sanctitas,
potesias, veritas, unitas, numinis aut convitio ultro ac diserte prosciaditur,
aut ex professione, actuve aliquo palam ac procaciter negari consequenter
deprehendi^ur. Seldom. de jur. nature. l. 2. c. 11.
and Unity of God was either reviled wilfully and expressly, or by some action
or declaration (in a way of consequence) openly and malepertly denied. Of the
former sort was the blasphemy of Rabshekah 2. King. 8.30. Isai. 36.15. And of
Shelomith's Son Levit. 24.13 and that of which Naboth was accused, 2 King. 21.
v. 10.13. the Chaldee having it (...) though the Hebrew (...) (and the Greek
(...)) which signifies to bless or curse according to the foregoing sense.

Of the second sort, or consequentiall blasphemy (which was not to depend upon
subtle consequences deduced from words or actions innocently spoken and
performed, and without any evil intention, or through error; as any man may
prove out of Mr. Seldom de jur. nature. l. 2. c. 11.) it was accounted such, if
any one without lapsing himself into idolatry, or embracing strange worships,
(for that was comprised by the Jews under the precept of Idolatry, and was also
reputed a consequential blasphemy) did persuade others thereunto, or profess
the lawfulness and equity thereof himself, and that (...) with an high hand, Ex
prot^rvia, n^n ex ignor^ntia seu disciplinae errore.
(...), out of malepertnesse, not ignorance, or mistake in judgment. Or if any
Israelite did in such manner violate the Law of Moses, or a son of Noah,
(living among the Jews under an established polity in Judaea) transgress the
precepts of N^ah, not out of weakness, or hasty seductions of natural
concupiscence or error, but because he peevishly and malepertly refuses to
acknowledge his obligation to the contrary, or does not reverence the
Authority: Power, Unity, and Verity of God so commanding or prohibiting; that
is, he denies it all in very deed, willingly, wilfully, and with an high hand,
and despises it. This is the doctrine of the Jews, and to this does that
precept refer Numb. 15.30. The soul that shall do with an high hand, ((...),
proudly and insolently, the Chaldee has it, with an uncovered head, (...))
whether he be home-born, or stranger, the same reproacheth (or blasphemeth)
Jehovah: and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

By all this that has been alleged as the doctrine of the Jews, together
with their practice in our Saviors time, this Law of Blasphemy and Idolatry is
particular to the Jews, living under their proper polity in the land God gave
them, and extends coercively no farther; nor therein to any consequential or
figurative remote Idolatry and blasphemy proceeding from probable reasons, or
weakness of judgment, or the like; so that for ought I can see, since neither
the Scripture nor Jewish Doctors inform us what a Supreme Magistrate over the
sons of Noah ought to do in such cases, and since in dubious matters it is best
to be cautious, I believe, notwithstanding all this Law, a Toleration must
necessarily be granted.

But to give a punctual answer to these Laws: It is evident that they are part
of the Political Law of Moses, and not comprised in the Moral Law, I mean as to
the punishment inflicted upon the Transgressor: for the Moral Law, It is the
opinion of many Jews, and also of Theodoret, that the first part of one text in
controversy, viz. Levi^. 24.15. Whosoever curses his God, shall bear his sin
that by this text even Idolaters were prohibited to blaspheme their gods. Which
interpretation, as it is highly probable, and conformable to reason and usage;
so it shows that there may be a rule to evidence a transgression, yet not
infer a temporal punishment: for none of them prove any punishment to have
been inflicted thereupon, but that the offender should hear his sin. The like
in stances may be brought from several Laws the breach whereof was punished
with excision or cutting off.
or the Law of Nature may lead us to condemn what it does not enjoin us to
punish, at least not this or that particular way. This is evident, as to the
case in hand, from the practice of sundry Nations: and even that commandment
which taught the Jew to keep the Sabbath, and to condemn its breakers, did not
teach them what punishment they should inflict upon them. Thus he that had
gathered sticks upon that day, was put in ward, because it was not declared
what should be done unto him. Philo Judaeus de vita Mosis. lib. 3.
And the Lord said unto Moses, The man shall surely be put to death: all the
Congregation shall stone him. Numb. 15.34, 35. So the Blasphemer, son of
Shelomith, though he had sinned against the Law delivered in the Mount, Exodus
20.7. yet was he put in ward, that the mind of the Lord might be showed them:
and God commanded he should be stoned, Levit. 24.12.16. Nor does the example of
God so punishing infer that we ought to do in the like manner: God by Moses
punished Theft, (which is a breach of the Moral Law) with a fourfold
restitution amongst the Jews, Exodus 22. v. 1. Luc. 19.8. Yet Mr. Seldom shows
how the strangers in Israel were punished for thievery with death; as also
amongst us they are: Nor do I find the usage to be condemned, though every
pettit transgression of the Sabbath we do not punish with death. This then
being a Political Law, it cannot oblige us but upon the account of common
equity, and not as a part of the Jewish Polity, for then all the judicial Law
would be introduced into Christianity: and since common equity, nor the example
of God does not determine necessarily of the greatness and manner of the
punishment, I conceive a moderation requisite, lest for the uncertain
satisfying of one Law we run the certain hazard of breaking another, which is
that of committing no murder.

This will much more appear, if we consider that the prohibition Exodus 22. v.
20. Is directly against Sacrificing, which he that shall expound to be any sort
of worship which is commanded not to be appayed to other Gods but Jehovah, It
is very hard measure, and a Zeal not according to knowledge, that because the
law may without retre^ching upon impossibility, be expounded so, therefore the
man must dye.
speaks more then is in the Text, or can be necessarily deduced from any other
places of Scripture, wherein if it be sometimes used for worship in general,
it does not follow that it is always so used, and consequently that it must,
but that it may be so here. The whole is a fallacious arguing from the
punishment of one determinate species or kind of transgression with death, to
the punishment of all that agree therewith in a more large and genericall
relation. Adultery may be (and is by our laws) punished more severely then
fornication, yet are both forbidden by the same commandment. As for the place
in Deuteronomy. c. 13. it is directed against prophets and dreamers, things not to be
heard of in our days, in which those delusions as well as gifts are ceased,
and that of Deuteronomy 17. v. 2. etc. is a punishment of corporal adorations and
service paid to the Sun, Moon and host of Heaven: of which I know not, nor do I
hear of any among us: However, since this text thus urged makes against
Paganism and its toleration, I desire that not only the practice of the
Jews, but of the primitive Christian Emperors be considered, and it will be
evident how they did not think themselves concluded thereby. It is no good
argument which does not weigh all circumstances; the opponent must prove that
all Commonwealths must be (as to this point) like unto that of Israel, that
their Magistrates have the same duty incumbent upon them (though, by the way,
to destroy Idolaters, and seducers thereunto, Hebraeorum meribus, Hebraeus a
Deo and Dei lege deficiens aut ducem se ad f^lsos cultus praeb^ns ( Deuteronomy 13.^.)
illico a quovis homine poterat interfici. Judicium Z^l^ id vocabant Hebraei
quod a Phinea primo exercitum aiunt, Number. 25. and inde ablisse in morem. Sic
Jud^um quendam Graecis se polluentem ritibus occidit Matthias (2 Maccab. 24.)
Sic trecen^i alii Judaei a p^pularibus suis occisi reseruntur libro qui vulgo
dicitur Maccabaeorum tertius. Nec alio obtentu instituta lapidatio in Stephanum
( Act. 7.57.) and conjuratio in Paulum ( Act. 23.13.) multaque alia exempla
eiusmo^i ex^ant and apud Philonem; and apud I osephum. Grotius de iur. bell. l.
2. c. 20.. 8.
was no Magistraticall act; and what wonder is it if Jehu, Josiah and Elijah do
that which any member of that political constitution might do?) And that the
same power not only ought to be, but is actually enstated in them: And when
they shall have proved this, we shall grant them liberty of extirpating their
Idolatrous subjects. In the mean while I desire it may be observed, that though
it be argued out of the Text Deuteronomy. 13. v. 10, 11. that the precept is urged
with a perpetual reason, therefore its force is everlasting. [ Cur ob eum
finem perlata lex dicitur que perpetuo valere debet? Sic enim scribitur in
extrema lege, Vt omnes Israelitae audiant and timeant, and ne deinceps rem adeo
nefandam designent. Beza de pun. haeret.] Thou shall stone him with stones that
he dye, because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God. --
And all Israel shall hear and fear and shall do no more any such wickedness
as this is among you. The latter part of which words, however Beza would make
them to be a reason for the Action, yet from the words I can gather no more,
then that God, to whom nothing is hid, says that by way of event, it shall
happen that such exemplary punishments shall be attended with the consequent of
Israel's obedience: nor will collation of texts help us to any more full, and
also necessary deduction. And as for the former part, because he has sought to
thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, though I should grant the reason to be
perpetual: yet does not it therefore (in Scripture ratiocination) follow that
the law is to be perpetual: Such is the case of abstaining from blood. Levit.
17. v. 10, 11, 13, 14.
not to instance in other laws, is not that of the Sabbath enforced with a
perpetual reason as to the determinat day?, and yet do not Divines absolve us
from the obligation thereof? Is it not now as true as ever, that in Six days
the Lord made Heaven and Earth and rested the seventh day, wherefore he blessed
the Seventh day and hallowed it.

As for Mystical or Figurative Idolatry I understand not how this text can
with any pretense be urged against it, unless they will find out some
Analogicall punishment: for as such Idolatry is not absolutely Idolatry, but in
some proportion (for the extent whereof we have no warrant either in the
customary interpretation of penal laws, which are not to be extended: nor in
Scripture, which prohibits all addition to the text upon so severe a curse as
one ought not upon probabilityes to run the danger of it) nor they dreamers or
false prophets, The Apostle Peter, Epist. 1. cha. 2. says indeed, That as of
old there were false prophets; so under the Gospel there should be false
teachers, which should deny the Lord that bought them. Of these he says, That
their Judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their Damnation flumbereth
not: ( v. 3.) yet does not be say, they ought to be murdered, or otherwise
afflicted, as of old under the Law; but leaves them to God to be punished, as
were those of Sodom: he reserves the unjust unto the Day of Judgment to be
punished: ( v. 9) and those false teachers bring upon themselves sw^ft
destruction: (va^) which neither was then, nor for some hundreds of years after
inflicted on them by the M^gistrate. In that place of Peter I further observe
in the natural signification of the words, That Heresy (as it is elsewhere
called a work of the flesh) is distinct from their denying of the Lord that
bought them. So that pernicious Heresiae ((...)) is not a spiritual thing, but
a factiou or seditious joining and siding with some Opinionist.
but in some proportion, (the prophet and dreamer being expressly such as shall
give a sign or wonder and seduce them to the worship of strange Gods, or Idols,
of which kind he that would make every discrepant or false notion in Theology,
must have recourse to other Glossaryes then I can admit of) why then is there
no restriction upon the punishment? Or if it must stand for all Analogical
Idolatry, I hope that before they be punished with death who are not termed
Idolaters in Scripture, though they be termed Heretics and Schismatiques;
that they who are positively in Scripture so termed, shall be the first
sufferers, and then the covetous will not escape free, nor they who are most
vehement for persecution, since Covetousness is (a work of the flesh, as
Heresy, It does not appear from the text, Gal. 5.20. that Heresy is a work of
the flesh as we do usually take the word, but it signifies th^re a s^iding or
factious b^andying.
and which the latter is not called but distinct from it, Gal. 5.20.) Idolatry.
Coloss. 3.5. But to show the difference between Heretics and Idolaters? is it
not sufficient that the old Law condemn^s them to death, and yet from Ezras
time, or not long after, Tole^rated these? and that the Apostle bids us only
avoid, whom they say kill, fire, banish? Tit. 3.10* A man that is an Heretic
after the first and second admonition reject [(...) excuse your self unto: so
Luc. 14.18.] knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sins, being
condemned of himself. Concerning Heresy, the word is not always taken in a bad
sense: the Sadduces are called an Heresy Act. 5.17. and the Pharisees, Act.
15.5. and Christianity it self Act. 28.22. and as often as I hear it mentioned
almost, me thinks I hear men speak as of a People that in a time of idleness
and implicit faith dare enquire into the state of things, and employ their
judgment. Surely the case is very hard, if they who having done all that was in
their power to try all things, if they miss of the truth, and hold fast not
which is good, but which seems so, either thorough invincible ignorance, or
such as he that made us knows humane frailty to be liable unto; if they I say,
shall not be in as good a condition as those who received the Truth without
trial, and embraced it upon no better an account then custom, education, or
interest. But however that I have no aversion upon this account for Heresy when
it is named, yet I do not relish accordingly that of Heretic. (...). (...).
For this latter denotes a person given to change, often choosing, or apt to
do so; now I am advised by the wise man, Prove. 24.21. Not to meddle with those
that are given to change: whereunto I may subjoyne the Apostles reason
prealledged, knowing that he, that is such, is subverted, and sins, being
condemned of himself* Questionless the fickle and unstable minded are
subverted in their principle, and when they embraced that which is good, they
do it upon such an account as a Christian has little reason not to reject, or
excuse himself to them: and they having such a sense of their own instability,
that they are clouds carried with a temper, trees whose fr^it withers,
without fruit, mistake or offend, and condemn themselves in such their lapses,
at least of a mutability not becoming the spirit of God. The converse which
such, is like what the Apostle says of Younger widows, refuse them [(...) the
word is the same in both places] For when they begin to wax wanton against
Christ, they will marry: having damnation, because they have cast off their
first faith, 1 Timothy 5.11, 12. But allowing the common notion of the word (if
there be any common notion thereof, or certain definition, which I am ignorant
of, as not knowing in this case what to profess, where the Spirit of God is
silent) let there have been such a thing in Paul's time, when men could join to
the Church of God, and yet condemn themselves in such their practice, whilst
they embraced opinions different from what the Apostles (upon whom the Church
was built, and who were as the Vrim and Thummim under the old Testament before
the Captivity) did reveal and determine of: that such were to be declined after
one or two admonitions, that such were subverted, that such did sin, and were
self condemned, and might be known under the circumstances aforesaid for such,
is to me undoubted. But why did not Paul (having here occasion to speak of
Heresy, and what was to be done thereupon) ordain, or give some item that for
the present they should only avoid them, but in after times, (when they should
have less of the Spirit of God, and more of the arm of flesh to assist them)
then they should hang, burn, imprison, and fine them. No: he was far from
that, as Christ was from saying to his Apostles, Go your ways; behold I send
you forth as lambs among wolves for the present, Luc. 10.3.
but when you shall have got strength [not that strength which I put upon you,
whereby Ananias and Saphira shall fall, and others shall be delivered to Satan,
for the destruction of the flesh, but saving the spirit: but] such strength as
the Kings of this world will contribute unto you, then do you become wolves
also, or if you retain your sheepish-nature, at least put on wolves clothing.
In a word the Heretic here is subverted, is self-condemned, and known for such
by him who is enjoined to avoid him: if there be any such Heretics in our
days, he that can discern them, let him avoid them; but destroy them not till
further orders. Thus I have done with the case of Idolatry, in the disquisition
whereof I am not only at a loss in reference to the nature of Heresy, the
Judge of Heresy, and the power to punish it, together with the punishment it
self; but I am dis-satisfied whether it be not commanded to be tolerated in the
Parable of the Tares, Matthew. 13. v. 24. By the Tares is not meant wicked and
ungodly livers; for then had Christ abolished Magistracy, when he prohibited
the extirpating such ( v. 30.) to whom the Magistrate ought to be a terror, and
not to bear the Sword, (as these their Sickles) in vain: nor is it meant of
Heresies (as they are distinguished from Heathenism) it being no inoculation of
trees, but a sowing of different feeds, which in the conclusion of the Parable
are the Children of the wicked one, opposed to the Children of the Kingdom: in
fine they are burned in the fire; whereas of most Heresies I dare only say that
the professors of them shall escape, but as it were by fire.

I come now to speak of Blasphemy and the Blasphemers, which who they are I see
not how I may well determine. It is the general vogue of the Jews, that it
extends in the penal part of the Law unto a bare pronunciation of the sacred
name Jehovah, or to a reviling insolently the Unity, Verity, or Power of God:
as has been showed. Material blasphemy or the professing a Religion or worship
which in effect repugns to the Truth, Unity, and Power of God, is not the thing
prohibited or punished: hence was the Toleration of old amongst the Jews, and
of Heathens amongst the Christians, as also of Arians, etc. who if they had
been concluded under this Law, should be censured with death, and not slight or
no penalties. To dispute against the greatest truths seems not to have been
accounted condemnable blasphemy; for when Paul was at Ephesus, he disputed with
others, and they with him concerning the things of the kingdom: he said they
were no Gods that were made with hands, yet does the Town Clerk give Paul and
his followers this testimony, that they were neither robbers of Churches, nor
yet blasphemers of the Ephesian goddess, Act. 19.37. This text puts me in mind
of a general opinion which Baronius does avow, [ Tom. 1. ad ann. 57.] that the
Jews and Christians did generally hold, that even the Heathen Gods were not to
be reviled, or contumeliously spoken against. Josephus recounteth it for one of
Moses his Laws, Let none blaspheme such as the other cities shall esteem as
Gods, Antic. l. 4. c. 8. (...).
The same Author in his second Book against Appian having interested the
innocence and integrity of the Jews, declines all bitter discourses and
declamations against the Gods of the Heathen, saying, It is our custom to
observe our own laws, (...).
not to accuse those of others. Our Lawgiver has directly prohibited us to
revile or blaspheme such as are reputed Gods by others, for of much as they
bear the name of God. And Philo says that Moses did not so much as permit the
Proselytes of justice, or such as did entirely profess Judaism to blaspheme the
Gods they had renounced, least it should give occasion to others to blaspheme
the true God. (...). Philo de Monarch, lib. 1. but of this I shall speak more
in my proposals how to manage a Toleration, whereunto, though some light may be
gathered from what I have here laid down, yet if it be found that I have proved
the lawfulness and necessity thereof, I shall, according as God shall enable me
with strength and opportunity, and as the public exigency of affairs
(whereunto I think my self obliged to contribute all that I can) shall call for
it at my hands, I shall endeavor to lay down such a method as thereby we may
have that peace with all men, the possibility whereof I have already evinced by
matter of fact, (and could much more, had I not tied my self to the Roman and
Greek story) and the necessity whereof we may learn from that Apostolical
precept, If it be possible, and as far as lies in you, have peace with all
men Romans 12.18. Hebr. 12.14.

Much more might be said of Heretics, and their punishment out of Austin. and
how it is generally acknowledged how the Orthodox Christians did never implore
the aid of the Magistrate for 400. Years (though the heretics did) and out of
the same Father, I could answer the greatest inconveniences attending this
Toleration; which was denied to the Donatists and Circumcellions, men
outrageous in their ways, and the latter of which did use to kill with swords
and maime the orthodox party, as also to put out their eyes with a mixture of
lime and vinegar? And will any one think this an entermedling of the Magistrate
in Spiritual matters, if he suppress these? Did the Magistrate of old ever
punish or fine the Pelagians and Jovinians, heretics. Quando Pelagianis and
Jovinianis ex Caesarum edictis dicta est mulcta? Erasmus de inquisition. and
Adversus Pelagium nunquam agitatum est de imploranda Caesarum open, quod non
perinde turbaret Reipub. tranquillitatem. id. de haeret. puniend. But I reserve
these things for an Appendix to what has been said, or for a second Edition,
in which I shall faithfully represent all Objections that shall be made against
this Treatise by private Letters, or which I shall find in Books, whom I shall
as much consult then, as I have herein mine own thoughts.

If any shall think it fitting, either by way of Letter privately, or in Print
to oppose what I have said here; I desire he would explain the nature of
Heresy out of Scripture, or else not to think that I will ever grant any
necessary conclusions from thence. And that he would show me why Heretics of a
greater or less allay, and Schismatics, should become of a worse condition
then Pagans: since Dominion is noy founded in Grace? and Excommunication is not
the privation of any proper or peculiar good, whereof the Transgressor of the
Law was formerly possessed; but of those common benefits which he should have
reaped from the Church, as of spiritual communion, and receiving the
Sacraments, Medina in 1. secundae page 5^3. q. 96. art. 4.
as Medina words it out of Seto. Besides, let them show how it is that that we
come to be within their jurisdiction. The Pope and most of the Papists do
profess they have no power over them that are without; they say Moors, Jews,
and Pagans ought not to be extirpated, or forced from their Religion: and that
over them the Church has no power. That her power over Heretics arises from
their being Rebels, and from their deserting that profession which they have
made of faith unto the Church. And their reason is, because every Republic
ought to have power to punish offenders. But as to their argument, it is false
that Christ has any such Church organical, as they mean, and as I shall show
(possibly) in a discourse concerning the personal reign of Christ. And if he
had any such Chimarical Church, yet would not that be destitute of power to
subdue and chastise offenders. For, says the Apostle, though we walk in the
flesh, we do not war after the flesh: (for the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds) casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ: And having in readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your
disobedience is fulfilled. But since it is (or may be stated) that Baptism is
no admission into a particular Church, nor an assent unto the Articles and
Confession of a particular Church, but something else: and Babie-baptisme, as
established upon the resembling practice of the Jews in their Proselytes of
justice, was of no validity (though conferred) unless the child baptized,
being come to years of discretion did own the act of the Church or Council:
which if he did not, he was not looked upon as an Apostate, but as one that had
always been a Gentile:) And I think if we enquire into the usage and judgment
of the Ancients, the said Infant Baptism will amount to no such obligation
without the Additional of Confirmation. But let these things be true or false,
Roffensis in his book against Luther, Art. 33. says, that he denied both That
the Pope could force men to return to the profession of that faith which they
once embraced: or punish them for such their relinquishing thereof. Yet in this
the Papists deal more ingenuously with those they persecute, then others do:
for they show them a Catholic Church to which they have vowed obedience: They
show them a Judge, and that an infallible authoritative one, so as they can
neither dispute the power, nor the equity of the sentence: All which pretenses,
though they be vain and empty cosenages, yet is the procedure more fair and
rational then if without these formalities and circumstances one should suffer.

To conclude, I should here become an humble Supplyant for those of the
Episcopal Divines, who understanding the principles of that Church Way which
they profess, have learned in all conditions to be content: and in their
prosperity were neither rash in defining, nor forward in persecuting
soberly-tender Consciences. It is certain we owe much to their learned defenses
of Protestancy against the Papists, and several other their labors: and may
reap much more benefit thereby, if they may have a greater security (paying
that respect which they ought to their Governors, and praying for them, that
they may live peaceably under them) then at present they enjoy in their
walkings. In like manner I should plead for such Catholics as adhere to the
doctrine of Widdrington, or Preston and Blackwel, etc. denying the Popes power
any way in Temporals, to depose Magistrates, I hope I do not by this
Declaration reflect upon what has been publicly noted concerning Popery and
Prelacy: it being (to me) inconceivable that by those terms any thing should be
meant, but the Popes power in temporals: and the Bishops domineering in
Parliament as Barons and spiritual Lords
to dispose of lands, or the civil obedience of subjects; such being ready to
sacrifice their lives as well as fortunes for the defense of their Heretical
Governors in secular lawful quarrels; since this is their judgment,
(whatsoever Mr. Baxter ignorantly and foolishly charge the Papists in general
with) I DO PROFESS UNTO THE WORLD, AND ACQUIT MY SELF OF ANY WAY CONTRIBUTING
TO THEIR OPPRESSION.

If I have evinced the Lawfulness, and necessity of an universal Toleration,
and if it be the basis upon which our Commonwealth stands, and Principle which
is owned; as neither of the aforesaid can suffer upon a Religious account, so
neither ought they to be damnified upon a Civil.

To vindicate the Widdringtonian Catholics now in England I shall not recite
any particular testimony out of their writings; nor mention Mr. George
Blackwell Arch-Presbyter of the English seminary Priests, nor others who upon
several occasions have declared themselves; I shall only set down the testimony
of thirteen Reverend and learned English Priests (with whom twice thirty others
would have joined, These are all Widd ington: own word in h^^ confutation of
T.F part. 1 cap. 5.
if their protestation had not been made so suddenly) who to give assurance of
their loyalty to the late Queen Elizabeth, did by a public instrument, written
in parchment, thus declare themselves.

WHereas it has pleased our dread Sovereign Lady, to take some notice of the
Faith and Loyalty of us, her natural born subjects, Secular Priests (as it
appears in the late Proclamation) and of her Prince-like Clentency, has
given a sufficient earnest of some merciful savor toward us (being all
subject by the Laws of the Realm to death, by our return into the Country,
after our taking the order of Priesthood since the first year of her Majesty's
reign) and only demands of us a true profession of our allegiance, thereby to
be assured of our fidelity to her Majesty's Person, Crown, Estate and Dignity,
We whose names are underwritten, in most humble wise prostrate at her Majesty's
feet, do acknowledge our selves infinitely bound unto her Majesty therefore,
and are most willing to give such Assurance and satisfaction in this point, as
any Catholic Priests can or ought to give unto their Sovereigns.

First therefore we acknowledge the Queens Majesty to have as full authority,
power and soveraignity over us, and over all the subjects of the Realm, Thus
far in English out of VVidrington against T. F. what follows is translated
out of his Latin copy published in append ad disp. Theolog. part. 2. Sect. 1..
6.
as any her Highness Predecessors ever had: Moreover we do acknowledge and
profess, that we are of our own accord willing and ready in all occasions and
emergencies to obey her commands, as far as any Christian Priests either in
this kingdom, or any other part of the world were ever obliged by the Law of
God and Christianity to obey their temporal Princes, viz. to pay taxes, and
other customs belonging to the Crown; to obey her Majesty's Laws, and
Magistrates in all Civil cases: to pray to God that he would grant in his good
pleasure unto her Majesty a quiet and peaceable reign in this life, and
hereafter eternal happiness. And this our Recognition do we think to be so
firmly grounded upon the word of God, that no Authority, Cause, or pretense of
such can absolve us, more then any Protestant, (or ought to do so) from paying
her Majesty all Civil and Temporal obedience.

Secondly, Seeing that of late years there have been several plots and designs
against her Majesty's Person and Realm, and several hostile attempts have been
made upon new pretenses and purposes for the restoring again of the Catholic
Religion by force of Arms, (a thing promoted in other parts of the World, but
more particularly against the Queens Majesty and her dominions, then any other
Protestant Prince) with which violent undertakings, and practices, her
Majesty, being otherwise gracious and mild in her behavior toward her
Subjects, being grievously provoked against the Catholics [who owning and
obeying the Apostolic Sea in the guidance of their Faith and Religion were
easily suspected to favor such contrivances and invasions) has made more
severe Laws, and executed them more rigorously then She would otherwise, in
case such hostile attempts and wars had not intervened. We, that we may
approve unto her Majesty our fidelity in this particular case, do sincerely
profess, and by this our public deed do notify unto the whole Christian
World, that in case of Conspiracies, and Plots against the life of Her Majesty,
of invasions and hostile attempts made by any Foreign Prelate, Prince, or
Potentate, either jointly, or singly, for the disturbance or destruction of her
Majesty's person, or dominions upon design, or under pretense of restoring the
Roman-Catholique Religion in England or Ireland, that we will defend her
Majesty's Person, Realms, and Dominions from all such hostile attempts and
injuries: And we do further profess that we will discover and reveal, as well
as oppose and resist to our utmost endeavor, all Conspiracies and Designs of
any Prelate, Prince, or Potentate, whatsoever, which shall tend any way to the
destruction of her Majesty's person and subversion of her Dominions: and we
will endeavor, as far as we shall be any way able, to persuade all
Catholics into the like sentiments.

Thirdly, if after any sentence of excommunication pronounced or to be
pronounced against her Majesty, or precedaneously to any conspiracy, invasion
or hostile attempt to be made, the Pope should declare her Majesty's native
subjects to be excommunicated, unless they relinquish their allegiance and the
defense of her; We in these and all such like cases profess that neither we
our selves, nor any Lay-Catholiques borne within her Majesty's dominions,
should be obliged in Conscience by any such censure, so as to obey it. But
notwithstanding any Authority, or sentence of excommunication pronounced or to
be pronounced, as aforesaid, we will adhere unto and defend our Queen and
Native Country, as we are bound in duty, and perform all due obedience unto
her Majesty in Temporalls.

Fourthly, because it is certain, that whilst we by a Christian and sincere
profession, manifest to her Majesty our good affection and fidelity toward
her, others will not be wanting to condemn such our deed, and misinterpret, and
create odium unto us in all places, but especially with his holiness, to the
great prejudice of our good names and persons, unless we timely prevent such
their misreports: We humbly desire that her Majesty would be pleased, that as
in this our recognition we render to her Grace what is due to Caesar, so for
the stopping the mouths of all calumniators, we may have liberty in the like
public manner to declare, that whilst we profess due allegiance to her
Majesty, we do not intend to recede from that duty which we owe our Supreme
Spiritual Pastor.

Wherefore we acknowledge and confess that the Bishop of Rome is the
Successor of S. Peter in that Sea, and that he has not less, nor yet more
Authority and jurisdiction over us, and all other Christians, then the said
Apostle had enstated on him by command and concession of Christ our Savior:
and that we will obey his holiness as far as we are bounden by the Law of
God, which we doubt not but it may consist very well with such our obedience, a
we have above professed toward our Temporal Prince. For as we are ready to
adventure our lives for the defense of her Majesty and our N^ive Country, so we
are resolved to become a sacrifice rather then violate or diminish the lawful
Authority of the Catholic Church of Christ.

William Bishop. John Colleton. John Mush. Robert Charnocke. John Bossevile.
Antony Hebborne. Roger Cadwallador. Robert Drury. Antony Champney. John
sackson, Francis Barneby. Oswald Needham. Richard Button.


I thought fit to publish this their declaration, that so all of that religion
because of some Italianated or Hispaniolized Authors may not suffer: This has
been the general doctrine in France and England heretofore; nor do I doubt but
our State might obtain the like declaration in these days from multitudes of
the Romish Church; who thereupon might enjoy a Toleration moderated according
to the convenience of the Republique. But as for the Jesuits and such as shall
not assent unto some such full, ample, and satisfactory declaration, I think
all means are not only necessary but requisite against them, that may secure
us from the abettours of a foreign power, unto which they would subject us:
let them rejoice in a foolish Canonization at Rome, whilst they are executed
at Tiburne for Traitors. I have been told that the great sufferance of Papists
under the late Archbishop of Canterbury did extend no further then those I
plead for: if so, I must do him the right to lament the condition of great and
invidious favorites, whose best actions are liable to misconstructions, nor
have they any defense against popular prejudices. It has been declared by the
Episcoparians, that they did not suffer for their Religion, Oh! let not us be
inferior to them in goodly professions! Let not us give the one or other cause
of being in a fort Martyrs, whilst we become persecutors.

James 3.17, 18. The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy.

And the Fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace.

FINIS.

