A strange Sight to be seen at Westminster.
Within this House is to be seen
Such a Monster as has not been
At any time in England, nay
In Europe, Afric, Asia:
It Is a round body without a head
Almost these three years, yet not dead.
It Is like that beast I once did see
Whose tail stood where the head should be:
And (which was never known before)
Though It want a head, it has horns good store
It has very little hair, and yet
(You Will say) it has far more hair then wit:
'Thas may eyes and many ears,
It Is full of jealosies and fears;
'Thas many mouths, and many hands,
It Is full of questions and commands;
It Is armed with muskets, pikes, it fears
Naught in the world, but Cavaliers.
'Twas born in England, but begot
Betwix^ the English and the Scot;
Though some are of opinion ^ather
That the Devil was its father;
And the City (which is worse)
Was its mother, and its nurse.
Some say (though perhaps in scorn)
That it was a Cretian borne;
But not unlike, for it has the fashion
Just as may be of that Nation;
For it is a liar, none o'th least,
A slow belly, an evil beast;
Of what Religion none can tell,
It much resembles that in hell:
Some say it is a Jew disguised,
And why? because it is circumcised;
For It was deprived long ago
Of many a Member we all know.
In some points* is a Jesuited Priest,
In some it is a Calvinist;
For it is not justified (it says)
By good works, but Public Faith.
Some c^l't an Anabaptist, some
Think now that Antichrist is come.
It Is a creature of an uncouth kind
Both for its body and its mind;
Make haste to see it, or'twill be gone,
For now it is sick, and drawing on.
The State Mountebanke.
IF any body-politique
Of plenty, or of peace be sick,
There Is a Physician come to Town
Of far stretched fame, and high renown;
Though called a Mountebanke, it is meant
(Both words being French) a Parliament.
Who from Geneva, and Amsterdam,
From Germany and Scotland came;
Now lies in London, but the place
(If men say true) is in his face.
His Scaffold stands on Tower hill,
Where he on Strafford tried his skill;
Off went his head, you will think him slain,
But straight 'twas voted on again.
Diurnals are his weekly bills
Which show how many he cures and kills;
But of th'Errata we will advise,
For cure read kill, for truth read lies.
If any Traitor be diseased
With a sore neck, and would be eased,
Here is a pill he calls a Vote,
Take it extempore, 'twill do it.
If any conscience be too strict,
Here Is several bills from Lectures picked,
Which swallowed down, will stretch it full
As far as it is from hence to Hul.
Is any by Religion bound,
Or Law? and would be looser found,
Here is a Glyster which we call
His privilege over topping all.
Is any money left or plate,
Or goods? bring't in at any rate;
He Will melt three shillings into one,
And in a minute leave you none.
Here Is powder to inspire your lungs,
Here Is water that unties your tongues;
(Spite of he Law) 'twill set you free,
To speak reason only lispingly.
Here Is Leetches, which if well applied,
And fed, stick closely to your side,
Till your superfluous blood de^ay,
Then they will break and drop away.
But here is a sovereign Antidote
(Be sure your Sovereign never know it)
Apply it as your Doctor pleases,
'Twill cure all wounds, and all diseases.
A drug none (but himself e're saw.
It Is called a Fundamental Law.
Here Is glasses to delude the sight,
Dark lanthornes, here bastard light;
This (if you conquer) trebles men,
(If lose* an hundred seems but ten.
Here Is Opium to lull asleep,
And herely dangerous plots in steep.
Here stands the safety of the City,
There hangs the invisible Committee.
Plundring's the new Philosophers stone,
Turns wares to gold, and gold to none.
And here is an Ordinance that shall
At one full shot enrich us all.
He Is skilled in the Mathematics,
And with his circles can do tricks,
By raising spirits that can smell
Plots that are hatched as deep as Hell;
Which only to themselves are known,
(The Divel's ever kind to's own.)
All this he gratis does, and says
He Will only take the Public faith.
Flock to him then, make no delay,
The next fair wind he must away.
Finis.
Oxford, Printed for Will. Web. 1643.


