STRONG MOTIVES, OR LOVING AND MODEST ADVICE, Unto the Petitioners for
Presbiterian GOVERNMENT.
That they endeavor not the compulsion of any in matters of Religion, more
then they wish others should endeavor to compel them.
But with all Love, Lenity, Meekness, Patience, and Long-suffering to do
unto others, as they desire others should do unto them.
Whereunto is annexed the Conclusion of Lieuten. General Cromwells Letter to
the House of Common tending to the same purpose.
2 TIMOTHY 24.25.26. But the servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be
gentle toward all men, apt to teach. Suffering the evil, instructing them
with meekness that are contrary minded, proving if God at any time will give
them repentance, that they may acknowledge the truth, and come to amendiment
out of the snare of the Devil, of whom they are taken Prisoners to do his
will.


Dear Friends, you cannot, nor would not account true Religion the life and
Crown of all your Liberties and Privileges; except you may have free liberty
to exercise the same according to your own understandings and consciences (as
you conceive) to be informed by the word of God; and if so be, then it will be
your part to do, as you would be done unto: You would not be compelled to
worship God contrary to the light of your Consciences, nor be withheld from
worshipping him according to your Consciences, How is it then, that you so
earnestly endeavor for such a Government, as pretends to have a right of
controlling and directing all men in matters of Gods worship: and whereas you
would be understood to have sound out true Religion; if you will ingeniously
consider, you must acknowledge you have no more to prove yours to be so, but
that upon grounds of Scripture, you are fully assured in your own minds of the
truth thereof.

But now I hope neither you, nor Counsels, nor Synods, have any Spirit of
infallibillity, you may mistake and misapply the Scriptures, as well as other
men may do,: What reason is there, (or can there be then,) that you should be
so earnest to enforce all men in this Kingdom, to walk by your uncertain
rule: All other conscientious people of what judgment so ever, are as you are,
in this kind; even fully assured in their own minds upon grounds of Scripture,
rightly understood (as they believe) that they have found out true Religion:
and may upon as good grounds (it may be) as yours, endeavor to compel you as
vehemently to walk by their rules, as you may compel them to walk by yours.
And what though you could prevail with Authority, to second your endeavors?
shame not your selves (and kick not against pricks) by endeavoring a thing so
evidently unjust; nor tempt a just power to do a thing so contrary to their
own Consciences and so prejudicial to the Common Wealth.

And since you labor for a pute and perfect Reformation in all Christ's
Ordinances, it would be happy for the whole Nation, that you would insist
principally upon his greatest undisputable Ordinance, which is LOVE: Love you
know, is the fulfilling of the whole Law, the end of the Commandments is love:
By this shall all men know, that you are my Disciples, if you love one another:
And that you are translated from death to life, if you love the brethren: Yea,
though you speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and pretend never so much
zeal to all Christ's Ordinances, (as indeed you abound in glorious language in
that your Petition): yet without Love, you are all but as sounding Brasses and
unckling Cimballs. So Love is the luster and beauty of Religion: Let your light
therefore (your Love) so shine before men, that they seeing your good works
may glorify your father which is in Heaven: If you have this worlds goods, and
see your Brother lack, how dwells the Love of God in you? Pure Religion and
undefiled before God even the father, is this, to visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their distress, and to keep your selves unspotted of the World.

Will it (think you) be sufficient in the great day of the Lord, to say, Lord
we have preached and heard and prayed and fasted and mourned and received in
thy name, but consider; Though you could say, Lord in thy name, we have cast
out Devils, and done great miracles, you know your answer aforehand, Away from
me I know you not; For when I was an hungered, you fed me not; when I was naked
ye clothed me not, when I was sick and in prison ye visited me not, etc. But
how far short of these rules do those come, that will not allow their brethren
a peaceable life amongst them, if they but differ from them in some points of
judgment? if you do conceive any one to be in an error, break not the bonds
of love to bring him out of his error, for you may easily mistake truth for
error, but love is so well known, that you can no wise excuse the breach
thereof.

If you would have an end of all your troubles, study love, though it be the
only neglected, unpathed and forgotten way, yet is it like the poor wise man
that saved the City by his wisdom, for love is wise, and since the loving way
is the most prevalent way in all things, endeavor therein to be most forward,
in all your purposes, counsels, debatings, or petitions, and let love govern;
and say within your selves in every thing, how does this consist with love?
Love is the form of every sound mind, and uses none but Just means to
obtain his just desires, and cannot but be displeased when Christians do the
contrary.

And truly, Love it self does much dislike, that you should flatter the world
into a high conceit of the Reformation in King Edwards or Queen Elizabeth's
days; when it was but a mere bustling of the Clergy, to get one another out
of their places; by which indeed the people gained some small measure of
knowledge: But yet Penry, Greenwood and Barrow were put to death for knowing
more then the State allowed; And though much better be hoped from the present
Reformers yet if you consider the manyfold miseries and sufferings of Godly
harmless people for Conscience sake, even in these times, and could look
upon the same with an eye of love, it would make you weep and fear the issue,
as well as rejoice in the Parliaments proceedings.

Alas, you little think of the manifold inconveniences, that you desire for
your selves in hastening your Church Government, until you have a Church to be
governed. Do you know what judgment you may be of, before half a year come
to an end? and would you willingly be liable to compulsion or restriction, to
molestation or punishment for, serving God according to your Consciences? You
know not what spirit you are of, nor whose work you are doing: And (did not
the wisdom of Parliament prevent,) you would draw inevitable thraldom upon
your selves, your innocent brethren, the posterity, and the whole Nation: You
are deluded with glofing language, affectation of speech, and holy terms
sophistically framed, whorishly painted, and artificially composed, and you are
causlesly affrighted with old Popish exclamations against Heresy, Schism,
Scandal, Strange Sects, Horrid, blasphemous opinions, Separated Assemblies,
illiterate Pastors, boldness, insolency, contempt of all Authority, Seditious
persons, disturbance of the City, unnatural flames of division, especially
about Church Government, in the same Kingdom, between people and people,
Minister and Minister, Pastor and Flock, Master and Servants, Parents and
Children, Husbands and wives, differences in opinion, breeding alienation in
affection.

It is wonderful, that in our great and victorious Army, differences in
opinion should have no such evil effect but the contrary, as witnesses that
worthy and religious commander Lieutenant General Cromwell, Master John
Rushford in his Relation to master Speaker about taking of Bristoll, certainly
the reason is from the wisdom of his Excellency, our most worthy and
prosperous General, in making no distinction of his Officers or Soldiers, but
as they are virtuous or vicious, perform or neglect their dutys: That true
Christian love is more regarded universally in that army, then any forms of
worship or Church Government at all, Love is the life and soul of Religion,
and the true mother of all unity and peace.

Well, but I pray you observe, what other mischeifes are collected, to animate
you to make your Petition, for your present establishing of Church Government;
Why? here lies the weight of all this agravation, the reason of all the other
exclamations; and the true cause of the haste. Faithful Ministers are despised
and discouraged in their Ministry, Hopeful plants disheartened, and terrified
from the ministry, Public. Assemblyes are forsaken, the pretended Preachers
of new Gospels cried up: Universal toleration of all opinions pleaded for:
believe it, here is matter enough indeed, for if there be once granted a
freedom of speech, an opening of the Presses, and toleration of all Opinions
and immediately down goes the glory of the Clergy.

They will easily be proved to be no other then other men, (if so good,) their
impofition of hands, will not hold up their honor in the least: Jure Divino is
already dashed, and there remains no hope of recovery: Down also falls their
domination, for why should those Clergy men, who are in no more relation to
God then other men, but mere errable men like others, assume unto themselves a
power of judging and censuring of opinions, doctrines and practices in matters
of Religion?

And then also down falls their profit, for no man will henceforth think
himself bound by any law of God, to pay tithes any longer, now under the
Gospel, as of old was due to Gods faithful Ministers under the Law; and so
they will stand only as public men appointed by the State, to an Office of
teaching and instructing the people, and performing other business as the
Parliament shall think meet, who also may appoint to every one a compe^ent
stipend, suitable to his charge and carriage then it may be, they will both live
quietly and let others live quietly too: and so the whole Nation will have rest
from this intolerable oppression of a compulsive Church Government: and the
Parliament be freed from a continual trouble and importunate diversion, from
their more important affairs.

But this doubtless would follow, that the learned Clergy know better them you
do, and they had rather you should know any thing then those things, for you
must observe, that self deny all is more often preached then practiced by
them: Why do you think they are such enemies to the Independents, and all
sort of the Separation? You imagine it is because they run into errors and
damanale opinions to their souls destruction; No, no such thing, it is only
because the true Independents and separation, do all the very Pastors offices
themselves, renounce and disclaim all Glory in distinction, from the greatest
to the meanest of their Flock, and all usurped domination, being but as any
other men, in judging of Doctrines or practices, and but as the mouth or
speaker of the Congregation.

Also, they renounce all right or claim to any pay, and if they want not,
their judgment is, that they ought rather to give then to receive; the
difference is visible enough, You may perceive your Clergy do stand for
Glory, Domination, Profit. Our faithful Officers do renounce them all, both
in name and in deed. And thus you see, the cause of that mass of Clamor and
exclamation and reproach, which they heaped together for you, in your Petition
to blind your eyes: wherein they prevailed to much upon your zeal, to the
great prejudice of your judgments: for it will hardly be credited, that such
an understanding people as you are, should be induced to petition, for the
establishment of any Model of Government, which you had never secne nor
examined, according to the word of God.

And was it not as improper, to urge the victory at Nazeby, the quick recovery
of Liecester, the relief of Taunton, the Surrender of Bridgewater, Shurburne
Bristoll, as an Argument to hasten that Government, which must necessarily
hasten the thraldom of most of those worthy Commanders and Soldiers, whom God
was pleased to honor with so many both unexpected and undeserved blessings?
The same hands have been since laden with more benefits of the samr nature; if
that would any thing avail with you: You once knew an Army or two, that hated
nothing so much as Tub preachers, as you too much have delighted to hear
worthy men so reproached, and all such Roundheads were wearied out, you know
also what followed, certainly God and you have judged differently of that sort
of people.

But you are to be pitied herein, as being not wholly your selves in this
cause, you have too much relied upon some, whose pride and domination must
either fall, or Gods glory, and the good of the Commonwealth, but if you
persist in such fruitless business, after this timely advice, your sin will
be little less then that of wilfulness; In mercy therefore to your selves,
and tender compassion to your yet too much despised brethren of the Separation,
labor (by sound consideration) to amend your judgments; and by some proper
work of love, make some amends for this your hard and unwarrantable intention
against them, and whilst you live, love the Parliament that stopped you in your
too hasty and inconsiderate pursuit thereof: Little do you imagine the
benefits that would accrue to the whole Nation by general liberty, how is it
possible you should judge clearly of a thing, you dare not think of, nothing
so much distracts the understanding as fear does chiefly of your unlimitable
pre-eminence and intolerable maintenance.

There is nothing more certain, then that the State shall thence receive it is
greatest safty, Provided it make good and pertinent Laws against all Treason,
Treachery, Vice, and corruption of manners, and withal, appoint good Officers
for execution of those Laws, if all peaceable people were countenanced alike
by Authority, and all reproach and dispitefull language discountenanced, all
sorts of peaceable People could not choose but love such a Government, and
errors would be convinced, by reason and demonstration in due time, which is
the only just and proper way, for it is a sad thing that any man should suffer
imprisonment, or other violent dealing, or punishment, for error in judgment,
how great so ever, not maintained by any act of violence; you have taken but
too much pleasure in observing some such dealing, even in this time wherein you
boast of being restored to all just liberty.

Make amends also in this, inquire who they are that suffer in this kind, and
use all lawful endeavors for their deliverance, and no longer give countenance
to those that glory in nothing more, then learning and literal abilities, and
yet make use of imprisonments and close imprisonments too; and still labor for
banishments (and death if the Parliament would give ear thereunto) to vanquish
errors: O what is become of love? What is become of that meekness,
plainness, gentleness, and patience that were in our blessed Savior, and his
Messengers that planted and propagated the Gospel, not by violence but by love?
Let us all henceforth abandon all violence and unkindnesse one toward another,
let us not strive about words or things that are needless, disputable, and
obscure, but let all things be done in meekness, and lowliness of mind, and
let us watch all opportunities, how to exceed in love one toward another:
Blessed is he, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find so doing.

Courteous Reader.
SInce nothing is more excellent, nor can be more prevalent, either in Wars, or
any action or interprise; then love, concord, and unity of affection, nor yet
any thing more to be avoided, then needdlesse differences, denominations, and
distinctions, which do arise by diversity of opinions; chiefly in matters of
Religion, because they breed discord, and so tend to confusion. As when one
says, I am Paul's, another Apollos, the third Cephas, and the fourth Christ's,
as if Christ were divided, or Paul crucified, etc. Having yet some convenient
room here remaining, I have thought it expedient, to insert the conclusion of
Lieut. General Cromwells Letter from the Army, because it not only keeps an
excellent Harmony with the former matter, but likewise it manifests to the
world, how the persecuting party, I mean the Presbiterians and the Lawyers,
their Adherents unjust dealing against those whom the Episcopal party called
Roundheads, and they call Independents, and so not doing unto others as they
would be done unto themselves.

THE CONCLUSION OF Lieuten: General Cromwells Letter From the Army, to the
House of Commons, concerning the taking of BRISTOLL.
Which was contained in the Original Letter signed by himself, but omitted in
the Printed Copy, which is Authorized by the House of Commons, though there was
a whole Page left blanke in that sheet.

Whereby the World may know, how both the Truth, the Commonwealth, and that
worthy gentleman are wronged (as well as other men,) either by the Printer or
some others.

PResbiterians, Independents, all had here the same Spirit of Faith and prayer,
the same presence and answer, they agree here, know no names of difference;
pity it is, it should be otherwise any where: All that believe, have the real
Unity which is most glorious, because inward and spiritual in the body and to
the head. As for being united in forms (commonly called uniformity) every
Christian will for Peace sake, study and do as far as Conscience will permit;
And from brethren, in things of the mind, we look for no cumpulsion, but that
of Light and reason.

In other things God has put the sword into the Parliaments hands, for the
terror of Evil dooers, and the praise of them that do well; if any plead
exemption from it, he knows not the Gospel. If any would wring it out of your
hands, or steal it from you, under what pretense so ever. I hope they shall
do it without effect, That God will maintain it in your hands, and direct you
in the use thereof, is the prayer of

Your humble servant, Oliver Cromwell.
From Bristoll, this 14th. of September. 1645.
Printed October. 1645.

FJNJS.

