To the honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
Honorable and worthy Gentlemen,
WHEN you were solemnly met before God, to mourn over your sins, it was my duty
to further, what I could, the melting of your hearts, that you might power them
out before the Lord. I knew not a better argument for such a purpose, then to
set before you, God melting over sinners, his repentings kindled together, and
his bowels turned within him fer them: it cannot but prevail upon an ingenuous
spirit, and make it mourn after the Lord. Qui nolit impendere amorem, Aug.
saltem rependat, says a father.

And the voice of Mercy (after the winds, and earthquakes, and fires of
judgment, that have gone before, and have shaken the mountains, and broken
the rocks in pieces) be but a still small voice, yet it may prevail more then
those, if God be in it; and I hope he is: For, if I mistake not, Mercy is the
present receipt which the great Physician has prescribed to make up the cure
of sick England, a Cordial after blood-letting, and many bitter pills, that
have pulled her down. God is now pouring out one mercy after another upon us,
and (as I may say) rubbing and working in the oil of Mercy, to take away the
stiffnes of our hearts and to make them pliable. Now that the language of
providence herein, might be both more articulate and impressive, I have brought
the Word, to set home upon the heart, Gods own dispensations, God makes the
doctrine, in preaching Mercy, and that in most real demonstrations, I have
endeavored to make the application of Mercy unto our hearts, that by may of
use, it might bring us to repentance, and teach us to fear the Lord and his
goodness. It seems to be a lesson God would fain have us to learn at this
time, I have therefore willingly delivered it unto you from the pulpit, where
you heard it with patience. And likewise (at your appointment) I now deliver it
unto you and the world from the Press, with prayer that by both or either
(hearing or reading) the Spirit of God may bring it in, with a blessing, to
reach the heart.

And whereas, when you had sent up the cry of your souls unto God upon the
fasting day, I presented unto your ears the cry of many thousand souls, out of
the North, where they cry for food, but there is none to break unto them the
bread of life, and you willingly hearkened: give me leave to renew my motion
(as Nehemiah to Artaxerxes) for the place of my fathers Sepulchers, which lies
waste. It is a work of so high importance and difficulty, that none are worthy
to take it hand, but a Parliament, none can bring relief (under God) but you,
who are the repairers of our breaches, and the restorers of paths to dwell in.
The noble and worthy Gentlemen of your honorable Committee for sending
Ministers into the Northern Counties, know, that they have long been in
darkness, even when the light of the Gospel brake forth gloriously over all
other parts of the Kingdom in former times of reformation; and yet, though
that honorable Committee have been zealous and piously diligent in the trust
you have committed to them, (whereby they have procured and sent some laborers
into the Vineyards of York, and Duresme, and Northumberland, as a happy fruit
of reformation by this Parliament) some Westmorland and Cumberland
of those desolate Counties have not so much as tasted of your charity in this
kind, to reap the fruit of your religious Ordinance, wherein you have worthily
provided for the maintenance of some godly Ministers there.

The scarceness of Ministers, the remoteness of those parts, the smalnesse of
Church Livings there, and the general backwardness in Ministers to go into
those cold Countries, are some of the chief obstructions. For the first, I
doubt not but your wisdoms will find out a better Antidote against the scarcity
of Ministers, then liberty of prophesying (which some plead for upon this
ground): if the Ark be shaken, Uzzah may not (under that pretense) put forth
his hand to hold it. Rather your Parliamentary care, to reduce and reform our
Universities, to view all public Schools, whereby children of pregnant
capacities, may be brought up in a way of learning, to encourage the study of
divinity in Colleges, to see that Scholars dwell not too long in Fellowships
when they are fitted for the service of the Church (according to the provisoes
that are made already in the statutes of some Colleges in Oxford): your wise
cosideration (I say) of these and like things, will beget great hopes of a
plentiful harvest (even of laborers) in the next generation. And in the mean
time (as to the want of Ministers in the North) a few bright-shining lights
well disposed of in those dark places, set up (I mean) in the most eminent
towns of Westmorland and Cumberland; by preaching there, and traveling about,
would give great light every one of them severally a great way in the
circumjacent Country.

For the second and third impediments, I need not tell you that their
maintenance had need to be such as may encourage Ministers, against remoteness
and coldness of the country, which may be sufficiently provided for, if it
may please this honorable House, that the Impropriations which are sequestered,
and the small Church Livings in those Counties, be collected and treasured up
in faithful hands, as one public stock for the maintenance of such as
faithfully labor in the harvest there. Touching the backwardness of Ministers
to go into those Countries, since it is God that inclines the hearts of men,
it has been, and is my prayer, that God would stir up the hearts of his
servants to undertake so glorious a work, as the planting of the Gospel in
those barren parts, wherein some faithful Ministers have in former and later
times labored with abundance of blessed success.

In the first reformation of Scotland, when godly Ministers were so few, that,
many places of the Kingdom were like to be unsuppli d, the Ministers advised
the great Council of that Kingdom, to use their authority (with consent of the
Church) for the sending of Ministers of ability to bestow their gifts where was
most need. I presume not hereby to president your godly wisdoms, but in all
that I have said, my desire is to provoke your zealous and mature
consultations, to find out some effectual way, for the setting up of a godly
Ministry in the North: wherein, as also in all other your weighty undertakings
for the Church or Commonwealth, that the blessing of heaven may crown your
unwearied labors, with success, has been, is, and shall be the prayer of

From my study in Broadstreet, Nov. 29. 1645. The meanest of them that serve
you in the Work of the Gospel. John Strickland.

MERCY REJOICING AGAINST JUDGMENT: OR, God waiting to be gracious to a sinful
Nation.
ISAIAH 30.18. And therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious, and
therefore will the Lord be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: for the
Lord is a God of Judgment; Blessed are all they that wait for him.


IN this Chapter, Isaiah prophesies against the sins of Judah, which they
committed in the time of the Babylonish captivity, after the death of Gedaliah
the son of Ahikam, whom Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel had made Governor over
them in Iudae. For when as the Lord had promised them deliveranceat, length,
from the Chaldeans, if in the mean time, they would have sit still in their own
land under the said Governor; and would have provided well for their security,
and subsistence during their captivity. Jer. 42.10.11. Jer. 42.10.11.
If ye will still abide in this Land, then will I build you and not pull you
down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up. Be not afraid of the King of
Babylon of whom you are afraid, be not afraid of him, says the Lord: for I am
with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand. Yet they, (transported
with fear, lest the Babylonians should revenge upon them the blood of Gedaliah,
whom they had treacherously slain) distrust Gods promise, and will needs go
down into Egypt to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, verse 2.
and to trust in the shadow of Egypt; ver. 2. which their sin the Prophet
amplifies, with a double aggravation. First, That they did carry it cunningly,
propriis consilijs addicti, and in their carnal policy would have covered it,
pretending to ask counsel of the Lord, to color their design, when they were
altogether resolved upon their sinful course. Ier. 42.20.
So the Prophet tells them, Jer. 42.20. Ye dissembled in your hearts when you
sent me to the Lord. and so the Prophet, v. 1. They take Counsel, but not of
me, they cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit. Secondly, they did it
rebelliously, For the Lord had cried concerning this, ver. 7.
Your strength is to sit still; ver. 7. Yet when the prophet Jeremiah
effectually laid the Law to them in this point, and admonished them to take
notice thereof, saying, The Lord has said, O ye remnant of Judah, go ye not
into Egypt, know certainly that I have admonished you this day. Ier 42.19.
Ier. 42.19. Notwithstanding they would not hear the Law of the Lord but
rather opposed it; saying to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets, Prophecy
not unto us right things. ver. 9.10.11.
ver. 9.10.11. So they said, and worse unto the Prophet, Ier 2.23.
Ier. 43.2.3. Thou speak falsely, the Lord our God has not sent thee to say,
Go not down into Egypt to sojourne there. But Baruch the son of Neriah
sets thee on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans;
that they might put us to death, and carry us away Captives into Babylon.

Against this their sin thus aggravated, the Prophet sets himself to Denounce
Gods Judgment; wherein he declares both what the Judgment shall be, and how
it shall be inflicted; the matter of the Judgment is, that God will make the
broken reed of Egypt whereon they leaned, to go into their hands and pierce
them, (as of Egypt it is said in another Story Isa. 36.6.) The strength of
Pharaoh shall be your shame, Isa. 36.6.
and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. ver. 3. And for the
manner, ver. 3.
the Judgment shall befall them unexpectedly and on a sudden; as a breach in a
high wall at an instant, against which there can be made neither resistance nor
defense. ver. 13. And it shall fall upon them heavily in Egypt, ver. 13.
so that they shall be broken all to pieces, like the bursting of a Potters
vessel, that affords not a sheard to take fire from the hearth, or water out
of the pit. ver. 14.
And it shall fall up-upon them in a way of Retaliation, wherein God will make
the several parts of their sin to recoile upon them, as several parts of
their Judgment: they make Egypt their hope, God will make Egypt their shame;
they would flee from their enemies in carnal Policy against Gods command,
they shall flee before their enemies for their own necessity: they would be
swift to escape their enemies, God will make their enemies swift to overtake
them: they were afraid of the Babylonians without cause when God would have had
them to be fearlesse; but now they shall have cause to fear, and flee from
their enemies that shall pursue them, till they be left as a Beacon on the top
of a Mountain; Even as one tree left for a Sea-mark in the cuting down of a
Forest, and as an Ensign on a hill, or a forsaken Standard when all the men
that fought under it are cut off. ver. 16.17.
ver. 16.17. But while the Lord was going on so fiercely to Judgment against
them, he stays his hand and forbears; these rebellious Jews near about 150
years, (as Hierom computes) between the denouncing of this Judgment in
Isaiahs, and in the execution of it in Jeremiahs time. If any wonder why our
Prophet gives you an account, that God does it not to countenance or wink at
their wickedness, Alvarez in Isaian.
sed minatur cupidus non exequendi minas, says Alvarez, he threatnes that he
might but threaten, and thereby bring them into a capacity of mercy, that for
the present were fit only for wrath and Judgment. And therefore will the Lord
wait that he may be gracious, etc.

My text is a Sermon, wherein the Prophet gives the Jews an account, why: God
did not forthwith destroy the^, though they were even ripe for Judgment.
Division.
In this Sermon we have set before us, the just lineaments and properties of a
Sermon. viz.

1. A Doctrine, The Lord waits to be gracious. 2. Reasons of it 2. viz. because
1. He will be exalted in his mercy. 2. He is a God of Judgment.
3. An application or use of the Doctrine; Blessed are all they that wait for
him.
Here you see my Sermon cut out, both in parts and method: The words opened.
Ere we come to handle the Doctrine (which is the first branch) the words
thereof are to be explai, ned, and among them particula (...) non est omittenda
says Forerius, Therfore]
the first word [therefore] is to be well observed; This Relative and Illative
paritcle, bids us look for premises whereon to infer the text; but the
difficulty of finding any has troubled expositors. Some do make the inference
from the sin of the people, in refusing to wait upon the Lord when he called
upon them saying, ver. 15.16.
v. 15.16. In returning and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence
shall be your strength, and ye would not, but said no; as if the Prophet should
have said, there must of necessity be a waiting; the vision is for an appointed
time, and seeing you will not wait upon, and be obedient to him, behold (and
be astonished) Therefore the Lord will wait that he may be gracious unto you:
This inference holds out the freeness and riches of divine goodness, because
God is gracious, therefore he will wait that he may be gracious. Some do make
the inference from the Judgment denounced against the sin of the Jews, that
since God had determined to bring evil upon them if they repented not, (for
every threatening carries in it a tacit condition of impenitency) and therefore
till the time that the Decree bring forth, The Lord will wait that he may be
gracious unto you. And this holds out the riches and bountifulness of his
patience and longsufferance-spoken of, Romans 2.4. But I humbly conceive with
others that the word [therefore] looks best inward into the text it self,
where we find the exaltation and glory of his grace and mercy, the spring and
(as I may say) the first mover of God to wait, and the final cause of this
his waiting; he will wait that he may be gracious, and he will wait that he
may be exalted in showing mercy: and this Gods own design of advancing his
goodness and patience, toward these obstinate and sinful Jews, offers the
fairest and most genuine ground of inference: And therefore will the Lord wait
that he may be gracious.

Waite] expectabit, Waite]
which signifies locum paenitendo concedere: others tell us that this does not
sufficiently express the force of the Original word, which signifies as much
as a longing expectation, (...) vehementer expecta vit
in hiare vel anhelare, as a hungry man waits for meat, or as a thief does
wait for a man to rob him. Hos. 6.9. it may denote (...) a looking after with
neck stretched out, rendered the earnest expectation of the creature, waiting
for the manifestation of the sons of God. Romans 8.19.
Romans 8.19. the sum is, huc tendit, in hoc totus est ut misereatur, The Lord
waits as being very desirous to be gracious unto you, though the Jews were
unfit for mercy, and fit for Judgment at the present, the Lord in waiting
suspends his justice, and looks sot a time that he may be merciful.

That be may be gracious] He is so always in himself, Gracious]
but does not always appear such unto his people, they are not always capable
of the sweet aspects of grace, by reason that their sins do sometimes bind them
overto his Justice; so that he cannot be gracious salva justitia, till they
repent and return to him; and then he will be (that is, declare himself to be)
gracious unto you, in pardoning your sin, in taking off your punishment, in
delivering you from the sentence gone out against you, and in setting you at
rest in your own land. And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be thus
gracious unto you. (...) The point.

Sometimes God wonderfully suspends his Judgments, Doct.
and waits upon a provoking people, that he may be merciful to them.

What the Poets feign of their Jupiter, (that he never throws his
Thunderbolts, but when furies wrest them out of his hands) in a sense is true
indeed of God, he never takes his rod in hand unprovoked, nor always when he
is provoked by the sins of a people.

Si quoties peccant homines, sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit.
God is provoked every day, yet is he slow to anger; Yea sometimes when he has
determined to bring evil upon a people, and put himself into a posture of
Judgment, drawn out the sword, and smitten them, though they cease not to
provoke him, he cease to punish them; as a tender Father in correcting a
rebellious and graceless child, holds his hand sometime before the child beg
for mercy, and of mere grace forbears, so God did with Israel. Psa. 78.38.
Psa. 78.38.
Notwithstanding their dissembling, with their flattering tongus, and covenant
breaking hearts, He forgave their iniquity and destroyed them not, yea many a
time turned he his anger away, and would not stir up all his wrath; Multus in
co suit ut averteret iram suam Musc.
The words are, He multiplied to turn away his anger; as they multiplied to
provoke it, he multiplied to turn it away: and so at length overnumbred their
sins with his mercies, that they were not destroyed.

And when the same people of the Jews elsewhere seemed to confront Gods
Judgments with their obstinacy, by persisting in their sins, as if they meant
to contend with God whether he should prevail in punishing, or they in
sinning: yea when in all reason (if we look upon it with humane judgment)
their punishment should have been increased, rather then mercy should have been
extended to them: Behold how admirably the Lord breaks out into a way of mercy
Isa. 57.17 18. Isa. 57.17.18.
For the iniquity of his covetousnes was I wroth and smote him, I bid me and
was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart: I have seen his
ways, and I will heal him: I will lead him also and restore comforts unto him
and to his mourners. What Logic can draw an argument of mercy from this
Topic, I have seen the frowardness of his ways? Their sin was a foul sin,
committed against their experience of the evil of sin, he had made them taste
of the fruit of their doings; and Gods eye is a pure eye and cannot behold
iniquity; so that one would have thought God would have concluded, I have seen
his ways and I will punish him; but that he should conclude I have seen his
ways and I will heal him, is an astonishment.

As it was the commendation of Theodosius his clemency and sweet disposition,
Theodosius.
that it was to him as if he received a benefit, if he might have an
opportunity to forgive an injury: So it is the excellency of divine bowels,
that the Lord is very desirous to forgive be cause mercy pleases him; and will
rather sometimes make an occasion then want one to take up his displeasure, when
it is incensed against his people, and if they be not in themselves yet, in a
capacity of mercy, he will wait til they be, that he may be merciful to them.
It is observable upon what ground the Lord seems to take up a resolution, never
to destroy the world any more by a flood. Ge. 8.21. Genesis 8.21.
I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination
of man's heart is evil from his youth. He drowned the world before, Genesis 6.5.
because the imaginations of man's heart were evil; Genesis 6.5. and will he now
spare it because the imaginations of man's heart are evil? Genesis 8.21.
what riddle is this? is the evil in man's heart any less then it was? or is
it less hateful in Gods eye then it was? neither so nor so, but the Lord
having now smelled a sweet savor in Noah's sacrifice, Genesis 8.21. which was a
type of Christ, in whom God and man were reconciled; God will now magnify his
mercy and patience, so that Multa in scriptura efferantur, (...) quae tamen
oportet intelligi (...) Damasc. lib. 4. de orth. fide cap. 20. Saepe illa
Hebraea particula (...) et graeca (...) in bibliis usurpatur adversative pro
quamuis, licet Tarn. Exer. Bibl in 1 Samuel 2.25.
though man be as sinful as ever he was, and deserves that the ground should
be cursed again with another flood as well as ever he did; yet God to show the
riches of his grace and mercy, will not again curse the ground any more for
man's sake, though the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; which
leads me to the grounds of reason holden out in the next place.

The reasons of such Gods wonderful dispensations sometimes, are given in the
text; And first why he suspends his Judgments so unexpectedly and
extraordinarily sometimes, Reasons
when yet a people do still provoke him; even because he will be exalted in his
mercy; And therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you]
exaltabit, Exalted]
se he shall stir up him self that he may have mercy, as intending to show
mercy with all his might. When the psalmist would have God help the Church to
purpose, he entreats the Lord to stir up his strength and help her; Psa. 80.2.
so when he intends here to be merciful to purpose, he will stir up himself. Or
exaltabitur parcendo vobis, God shall be exalted in pardoning; it shall appear
to be grandis clementia Dei, (as Hierom calls it) when he pardons
unexspectedly; he lifts up his mercy above men's thoughts, as far as the Heavens
are above the Earth. So in the Prophet, God speaks of himself, when he
pardons abundantly, Isa. 55.7.8.9. I will nor trouble you with the many
other interpretations that are made of this phrase, as that it signifies the
exaltatio^ of Gods hand, in fimilitudinem percussuri, as Oecolampadius, or Gods
going up again into Heaven, from whence he was come down out of his place to
punish them, and the like. The two first interpretations give you (as I humbly
conceive) the genuine sense and mind of the words, which holds out the reason
of the point; even that God may be the more exalted, and set up in his mercy.

There is an ordinary course or path holden out in Scripture, wherein divine
justice and mercy, do commonly proceed in punishing or in pardoning: When a
people sin against God, they shall be punished; when a people repent of their
sin, God will repent of their punishment, and they shall be pardoned, thus it
is generally in Gods dispensations; and because God has not tied or limited
himself to walk always (though he has tied us always to wait upon and
expect him) in the way of his word for the dispensation of his justice and
mercy. there is also a way of Prerogative (as I may call it) wherein God may
and sometimes does dispense his mercy, in reserved cases, above the common
rule, Videtur miscricordiae limits transilire, Theodo. Suepsius.
he sometimes repents of punishing a people, before they repent of sinning
against him, as you have heard in the proof of the point; and when he walks in
such untrodden paths, God is singularly exalted in his mercy these four ways.

How God is exaleed in his mercy by such dispensations.
First, In the principle of mercy, I mean the goodness of his nature, whereby
he is so strongly, so invincibly inclined to mercy, that he will not retain
anger; he will not be provoked sometimes, though he be provoked by the sins of
his people, and this sets him up so incomparable high in the admiration of his
people, Mica. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee; that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? Mica. 7.18.
he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. According
to what the Lord declared of himself to Moses, when he made his glory to pass
before him. Exodus 34.6. The Lord God, merciful and gracious, Exodus 24.6.
long suffering and abundant in goodness: what goodness is it that God will
forbear to strike in the midst of provocations? The Prophet wholly ascribes
the praise of our non destruction to that, Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed, Lam. 3.22.
because his compassions fail not. What goodness that the great God (on whom
all the creatures in Heaven and earth should wait) should wait on his poor
creatures!

Secondly, by such extraordinary dispensations God is exalted in the freeness
of his mercy: punishing less then we deserve, is confessedly mercy. Ezra.
9.13. Ezr. 9.13.
pardoning fully where punishment is deserved is yet more, but how is mercy
exalted when blessings are given instead of punishments? I say not praeter
meritum, but contrameritum? when there is not only nothing at all in the people
to help forward, but almost every thing in them that might hinder the exercise
of mercy; when all the arguments and motives to mercy, must be drawn out of
Gods own bowels, God must needs be very glorious in the freeness of it: Thus
God held out the gloriousness of his free mercy toward Israel, when after
their rejection he restores them, what blessings he bestows upon them Ezekiel.
36.11. Ezekiel. 36.11.
I will setle you after your old estates, and will do better to you then at the
beginning. The very materials of the blessings are large demonstrations of
mercy, even that he will do such great things for them; but lest they should
not see the full glory of his mercy toward them therein, he presses them to
take notice that he would do these things freely. ver. 22.
ver. 22. Say unto the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, I do not this
for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for my own holy Names sake which ye have
profaned among the heathen.

Thirdly, God is hereby exalted in the richness of his mercy: when a people
continue in their provocations and rebellions against God, it is not a little
mercy that can stand in the breach. When Israel Number. 14.11.12. had very far
provoked the Lord, number. 14.11.12.
so that he spoke of plaguing and disinheriting them, Moses prays ver. 17.19.
ver. 17.19.
That the Lords power may be great in pardoning and that he will pardon
according to the greatness of his mercy: the Lords great wrath was kindled,
therefore his power had need be great to keep it in. When a man is thoroughly
moved with anger, there is much ado to keep in his passion that it break not
out; now nothing can be so provoking to stir up our anger, as sin is to stir
up Gods displeasure against a people; how great is that mercy then that can
keep in divine wrath? And as he prayed that the power of the Lord might be
great, so he prays that his mercy may not be little; their great sins will
need the greatness of his mercy. Ephesians. 2.4.5.
So the Apostle Ephesians. 2.4.5. when he mentions Gods reconciliation with man, who
was by nature a child of wrath, and had nothing to pacify, but all in him
rather to provoke God farther; he presents God as rich in mercy and of great
love, that could love or think of being reconciled to him while yet he was dead
in sins and trespasses, whereby God may be the more exalted.

Fourthly, God is hereby exalted in his faithfulness, that he does perform his
promises of mercy to his people, even when there lie so many and great
obstructions and impediments in his way, by the greatness of his peoples
sins, as many times there do. This is the exaltatio^ that some Expositors
think is meant in the text, Moller. in locum.
ut fides eius in promissis testatior fiat apud omnes and illustrior, that God
will break through all opposition to relieve his people with mercy, when they
are under the strongest holds of sin: when he has entered a Covenant with his
people once though they be unfalthfull, it is his glory that he abides
faithful, 2. Tim. 2.14. 2 Timothy 2.13.
if they turn aside into spiritual whoredom and Apostasy (and well enough
deserve a bill of divorce) he will not cast them off but recover them by
repentance, and show mercy unto them, according to his promise when he married
them unto himself, Ier. 3.14.15.
Ier. 3.14.15. Turn O backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married
unto you, and (though you have broken Covenant with me, I will make good my
promise unto you) I will take you, and give you Pastors according to my heart.
How glorious is the exercise of mercy when this his faithfulness takes hold of
the Almighty? if his people provoke him, how is mercy exalted in the conflicts
that are between justice and mercy? in the turning of divine bowels? Hos.
11.8.9.
Ho. 11.8.9. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel?
how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together: I will not execute the
fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God
and not man, the holy One in the midst of thee.

The second Reason shows you why God waits upon a provoking people and does
not cut them off in his Justice; [because the Lord is a God of Judgement]

1. Some take Judgment for Justice here, and put the Emphasis upon the word
[God] the God of Judgment; Alvarez in locum.
[Judicii Dominus] says Alvarez, he may remit the punishment of sin without
showing a reason, and spare the guilty if he please without offense to any.
Voluntas divina suprema lex, The Judge of all the earth cannot but do right; he
is judicii Dominus, the God of Judgment; whereas if a man Judge should acquit
the guilty and let them pass unpunished, he should sin against the
Commonwealth, and violate his own duty; quia non est Judicii Dominus, sed
Domini vicarius.

2. Some take Judgment here for moderation, in punishing of sinners in a way
of opposition to severity and wrath, as Ier. 10.24. O Lord correct me, Ier.
10.24.
but with Judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing: God
therefore waits upon sinners not only because he is slow to anger, but also
he moderates the execution of his Judgments; I will correct thee in measure,
and will not leave thee altogether unpunished says God to Jacob, Jer. 30.11.
Ier. 30.11.
that his people may not be consumed under his correcting hand.

Gods wisdom to improve his waiting upon a sinful people.
3. Some take Judgment here for wisdom or spiritual prudence and discretion
in God, he waits upon a provoking people sometimes, because he knows when to
apply mercy, and how to improve all opportunities to the best advantage of his
own glory, in his administrations to a sinful and provoking people.

First, He can discern when a people are fit for mercy, and distinguish
between penitent and impenitent sinners; the deceitful heart, though it be
desperately wicked shall not deceive him, but he will give to every man
according to his ways. Jer. 17.9.10. Ier. 17.9.10.
Like a wise Physician he knows when to purge, and when to give cordials; so
that, as in mercy he looks for an opportunity that he may do good, so he
knows how, to take it and when; and hence it is, that sometimes he waits very
long, till a people be brought into desperate straits, and out of all hopes ere
he deliver them; because the Church was not in tune for mercy till then he
waits. Isa. 33.8.9. The high ways lie wast, the wayfaring man cease, Isa.
33.8, 9.
the earth mourns, Lebanon is ashamed, and hewn down: Sharon is like a
wilderness, etc. and then will he be gracious, ver. 10. Now will I rise, says
the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self. And yet he is not
like Carolus King of Sicily and Jerusalem, who was surnamed Cunctator, because
he was wont to stay til opportunity was lost; but rather like Fabius Cunctator,
so called, because he would always stay till opportunity, and then would be
sure to take it.

2ly, He waits, because he knows how to take his times, and seasons to prevail
upon, and bring in a rebellious people toward mercy, who yet are very far from,
and unfit for it. A man's wisdom shows it self much in discerning seasons; The
Lord spoke unto Manasseh, but he would not hear, and therefore he waits,
because he knew there would come an opportunity when Manasseh would hear, and
hearken after the Lord, 2 Chro. 33.10.12.
in afflictions. 2 Chro. 33.10.12. and he waited not in vain, for so it came
to pass; when he was in afflictions he besought the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the God of his Fathers. So when the Lord had to do with
Israel, he complained of their contumacy, that they were untractable, like a
wild Ass in the Wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure. Ier.
2.24.
Ier. 2.24. In her occasion who can turn her away? as good seek to take a hare
with a Taber, (as we commonly say) yet the Lord knows how to meet with her,
though for the present all that seek her, will not weary themselves: in her
month they shall find her, when this wild creature shall be great with young,
not able thus to run about in the wilderness, then a man may talk with her;
so when Israel has made up their iniquity, a full burden, and that Judgment
begins to take hold of them, then in their month God will find them: and as
God knows his seasons, so he knows by what means to prevail, by Judgments or
by mercies; some must be brought in by an earthquake, others will be brought
in as easily by a still voice.

Thirdly, He waits because he is a God of Judgment, to know when the giving in
of mercies will bring God most honor, and when Gods hand will be most clearly
seen to give in mercies, so that they may be convincing mercies; thus he waited
on his stiff-necked people, that he might be merciful to them, even till
Antiochus had broken all their power, so that there was no help to be expected;
and then the Lord came in with Michaels deliverance, Dan. 12.1.7. when he shall
have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people; Dan. 11.1.7.
for then they could see that their help was from God. Thus he waited upon the
wastful Prodigal till he had spent all, so that he must either have God or
nothing, Luke 15. and then the Fathers embraces are sweet and welcome. Luke 1.


Before I come to the Use of the Prophets doctrine which the text presents you,
let us consider whether this age be not one of these [sometimes] wherein God
wonderfully suspends his Judgments, and waits upon a provoking people; that he
may be merciful to them. Are we not astonished and like unto them that dream
this day? while we look upon the God of our salvation answering us (as he
does) by terrible things in his righteousness, doing terrible things that we
looked not for, whereby the mountains (even the mountains of enemies and
opposition) do flow down and tremble at his presence; he that has formerly
drawn out the sword and bent his bow, and like an enemy fought against us,
giving Jacob to the spoil and Israel to the robbers, has in the midst of wrath
remembered mercy; and when he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there
was no intercessor; his own Arm has brought salvation to him, and his
righteousness it sustained him. Who would have thought in a few months past,
that we should have seen such a change in England, in so short a time? that
our solemn fasts the fast of the 4th monetle, and the fast of the 5th and the
7th and the 10th month should be turned into solemn feasts of joy and gladness?
that our thanksgiving days, should over number our days of humiliation? Yet
am I so far from the opinion of laying aside our humiliations, in these times
of rejoicing, (as if they were inconsistent with our joyful feasts,) that I
conceive the duties of humiliation and rejoicing spiritually performed, very
helpful one to another, and to spiritualize one another; blessings obtained by
prayer and fasting, cannot but affect the soul and raise it unto a greater
pitch of spiritual thankfulness; and when mercies have made the soul to
rejoice in God, it cannot but mourn over sin more ingenuously then before.
If mercies will not work with a people this way, when God gives them in, after
judgments, they will be, but lucida intervalla, presages of greater Judgeme^ts
to follow, Sim.
like the Sunshine between two dread, full storms; or rather like a reviving
between two fits of a fever, when the patient dies of the latter: Chorazin
that had been lift up to heaven by mercies, and the great works that were done
in her, was afterward thrust down to hell in Judgments. Ingentia beneficia,
ingentia flagitia, ingentia supplicia, If great wickedness follow great
benefits, great punishments shall follow great wickedness: as is confessed by
Ezra. 9.13.14. Ezra. 9.13.14.


Repentance and reformation is the point that we must be brought unto, either
by Judgments or mercies; and since former Judgments have not brought us to it;
O that the Lord would melt our hearts this day with his astonishing mercies!
that our hard and frozen Spirits which would not be broken hitherto by the
hammer of his Judgments, might now be softened by the fire of his mercies! And
truly (honorable and beloved) mercies (especially when they are given in to an
undeserving people, as our mercies are) are very proper premises and principles
of godly sorrow and shame for sin, seeing that this is promised as a fruit of
mercy.

I have looked into the Book of God, to see whether God has been wont, in
former times, to bring in his people to repentance and reformation, by
deliverances and mercies. For if God have never gone in such a way with a
people heretofore, I should fear (that notwithstanding our many and wonderful
public mercies wherewith God has at present blessed our Land) we should have
an after-clap, and be brought back again into the refiners fire, and furnace of
affliction, that our dross (which is not yet severed from us) may be purged
out, and our filthiness depart from us, which is the way whereby God
ordinarily prevails with a people in that kind. And of all the hopeful
presidents I could find, wherein God has brought in a people by mercy, this is
the most eminent, Ezekiel. 36.31, 32. Applied.
Ezekiel. 36.31.32. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings
that are not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your
iniquities, and for your abominations. Not for your sakes do I this, says the
Lord God, be it known unto you, be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O
house of Israel. You may look upon Israel in this chapter, as Englands
parallel in our present condition: They had defiled their own land with the
blood that they had shed, and with their Idols: yea, they had profaned the name
of God among the heathen also: and therefore the Lord had powered out his fury
upon them, V. 17-21.
v. 17.-21. but the Lord pitied them, for his own holy Name, which they had
profaned, and he resolved to sanctify his great and holy Name by delivering
them from captivity, and setting them at peace in their own Land, V. 21-25.
v. 21.-25. And further, he would reform them according to his covenant, and
make them a holy people, and their land which had been laid waste, a fruitful
land, v, 25-31. V. 25-31.
And when the Lord shall have done all this, and that without the least desert
of theirs, (as the Lord bids them take notice of it, Be it known unto you) then
shall they repent and be ashamed. He is a stranger to England, that has not
seen England like unto Israel in their sins, it has been defiled with blood
and idols, whereby the Name of our God has been profaned; and like to Israel
in their punishments, the Lord has powered out his fury upon them; and like
unto Israel in their deliverances and mercies, God is now sanctifying his holy
Name, which we had polluted, by delivering us, and making way to settle us at
peace in our own land. The Lord make England like unto Israel in their
repentance and reformation also. Now because the undeservednesse of mercy,
(and that they are given to those that could not expect them) has a great
influence upon the heart, as appears in that God presses it so often, v.
21.22. and 32. I desire to set before your judicious consideration, three
things, How to mourn in the sight of present mercies. Directions.
that may help us to a mourning frame of spirit in the sight of our great
mercies, that we may loath our selves in our own sight this day for our
iniquities, and be confounded for our own ways.

David looks upon both together, while from his mercies he reflects upon
himself, when his people offered so willingly toward building the Temple, 1
Cro. 29.14. Who am I? and what is my people? So we while we look upon the
mercies that God has heaped on us, may sit down astonished, and say, Who are
we, and what is our people? are we not an Apostatizing nation? we werefallen
from our Primitive reformation, and there is yet a spirit of whoredom in the
midst of us to oppose reformation to this day. Let us look upon Jerusalem, how
severely the Lord dealt with her for abusing his love, and turning aside to
spiritual fornication as we have done. Ezekiel. 16.38.40. Ezekiel 13.36.40.
I will judge thee (says God) as women that break wedlock and shed blood are
judged; and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.

We are also a Covenant Breaking people, and having taken the name of God in
vain, how should the Lord hold us guiltless? this brought wrath upon Israel
and Judah unavoidably; the house of Israel and Judah have broken my Covenant,
Isa. 11.11.
Ier. 11.11. Therefore I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be
able to escape. We have been and are apt to say a Confederacy, to such as God
would not have us say a Confederacy to; and to cover with a covering, but not
of Gods Spirit, as our Prophet complains, Isa. 30.1. we subject Religion, and
the things of God, Isa. 30 1.
to carnal ends, being led by carnal policy, in matters of conscience and
highest concernment, too much verifying in that of old; Matter peperit filiam,
et filia devoravit matrem; Policy has always been a clog to Religion, and
would never suffer former ages to adventure upon a through reformation; the
Lord keep our generation that we dash not against the same rock!

Though the Lord has pronounced them cursed that trust in man, Ier. 17.5.
and make flesh their arm, Ier. 17.5. we are full of carnal confidence,
lifted up, or cast down, according as outward means and humane probabilities,
do ebb or flow; like Israel, we seek God when we need him, Psa. 78.
in a low condition, and when we are delivered we forget him. Psalm. 78.

We are guilty of self-seeking, every man looks for his gain from his quarter,
(as Paul complained) all men seek their own, none the things of Jesus Christ:
To be acted by a private Spirit in public undertakings, does not only blemish
the beauty, but alters the nature of the undertaking, and makes that sinful,
which if acted with a public Spirit, had been commendable and glorious. 2
King. 10.30.
Jehu in cuting off the house of Ahab, did according to the word of the Lord;
but because he had ends of his own in doing it, Hos. 1.4.
the blood of Ahab is put upon his account.

We suffer Gods House to lie wast while we dwell in seiled houses; by division
and errors, truth is fallen in the street and confusion hastes, and yet we
look on and lay it not to heart.

We turn head against Jesus Christ, like those that break his bands and cast
away his cords from them; Psa. 1.
we refuse his easy yoke, and cast off his light burden: as if we were of
their mind that said, we will not have this man rule over us. Luc. 19.21. Luc.
19.21.
All this scumme is in the midst of us untaken away, and all this dross and
much more is in us in the very fire of Gods Judgments, so that in our
filthiness is lewdness.

Now consider Gods usual manner of proceeding with such sinners; He will set
his face against them, and they shall be slain before their enemies, etc. Lev.
26.17.
Lev. 26.17. and if they walk contrary, he will punish them seven times more,
and seven times more, and seven times more for their sins; and at last
walk contrary unto them in fury. The like also when Israel grew incorrigable
(as England has been) and would not return to the Lord; what gradations of
Judgment are mustered up against them? Amos 4.6.
Amos 4.6.

2ly, Consider Gods admirable patience toward us above his former dear people;
he bare with their manners in the wilderness 40 years, but what is that to
fourscore years patience wherein he has born with England? and all these
years, what pride, and contempt, what abominations has God put up at the
hands of a foolish Nation? And is not England yet destroyed? She has boiled in
Sodoms lust, but she is not consumed with Sodoms fire: she has committed
Isreal's iniquities, but she has not suffered Isreal's punishments. God did
exalt his mercy in sparing the rebellions of Israel, Ezekiel, 20.14.17.22.
Ezekiel. 20.14.17.22. when it was breaking forth against them three times, yet
still he wrought for his own names sake; but how often he has restrained his
wrath when it was ready to break out against England, and wrought for his own
names sake, to spare us, in turning his wrath away, I appeal unto you. In all
this, if we consider how God has out-gone, I say not our desert, but even our
faith, our prayers, and expectations in the greatness and multitude of his
blessings, giving them in most seasonably, when we were upon the brink of
ruin, by his own hand, so that we may say, If it had not been the Lord who was
on our side, we had been swallowed up. And that he should do all these after
so much patience, wherein he has many a time turned his wrath away,
notwithstanding our many and provoking sins, wherewith we have pressed the
Lord as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, so that he has groaned
under us, (as it were) and complained of our unkindnesse, Micah 6.3.
O my people! what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee?
Testify against me. What hard heart can yet tread upon such bowels? Whose eyes
would not run over in looking upon those divine meltings? and say, It is known
unto us this day, that not for our sakes, but for his own holy names sake which
we had polluted, the Lord has done all this: we are ashamed and confounded for
our own ways.

Blessed are all they that wait for him. Use.
] The use which our Prophet makes of his own Doctrine, is, of Exhortation to a
duty, Wayt upon the Lord, backed with the encouragement of a promise; Blessed
are all they that wait for him. He that of mere goodness turns away his
displeasure from a people while they do sin against him, and waits upon them
for an opportunity to do them good, will much more not disappoint them when
they wait for him: if he wait in mercy, it is fit they should wait in duty:
Waiting for God, what it is.
if he wait to give, and they wait to receive, mercy, the conclusion cannot but
be blessed. Blessed are all they that wait for him.

The duty exhorted to, is to wait, and waiting is to return from sin, to a
diligent attendance upon God in the ways of obedience, joined with a fiduciall
and patient expectation of salvation and mercy according to his will.

It consists sn 4 things. 1.
It is made up of four ingredients, 1. of Repentance; sinning is contrary to
waiting, and therefore there must first be a turning, Hos. 12.6. Turn thou to
thy God, (says he to Ephraim) keep mercy and judgment, Hosea 12.6.
and wait on thy God continually.

Psa. 123.2: Psalm. 123.2.
As the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes
of a maiden to the hand of her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God.

Sions enlargement, the Lord expects help against the mighty, though he needs
it not.

the Husbandman for the precious fruits of the earth, Ja. 5.7.
Ia. 5.7. There must be a space between sowing and reaping time: if we sow in
tears, expect to reap in joy. The Isles shall wait upon me, and in mine arm
shall they trust, Isa. 51.5.
says God, Isa. 51.5. We must not trust in our Bow or Sword: creature
confidence cannot stand with a right waiting upon God. It Is thou that savest us
from our enemies, Psalm. 44. And where our waiting is, there is our hope. What
wait I for? Psalm. 39.7.
says David, my hope is in thee, Psalm. 39.7. And where hope is, Romans 8.25.
there is patience, Romans 8.28. If we hope for that we see not, then do with
patience wait for it. And so we are required, Rest in the Lord and wait
patiently for him, Psalm. 37.7.
Psalm 37.7. How ever the Lord please to dispose of things till his promise be
accomplished, be content, and rest in his work, and wait for his promise. The
Churches estate is couched in promises, and most in reversion, and therefore
will, require to be waited for, Heb. 10.36.
and that with patience. Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done
the will of God, ye may receive the promise, says the Apostle.

They that wait for God shall be blessed 4 ways. Heb. 10.36.
The motive whereby he drives on to the performance of this duty, is the
blessing that attends it, Blessed are all they that wait for him.

Isa. 40.31. They that wait upon the Lord, Isa. 40.31.
shall renew their strength, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk
and not faint. It is a seasonable encouragement unto you (honorable and
beloved) to wait upon God, that he may carry you through the weighty affairs,
of Church and State, that will require renewed strength.

Isa. 26.3. Isa. 26.3.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee. There Is a
sweetness in the very duty of waiting on God.

David's experience, Psalm. 40.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 40.1, 2, 3.
I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my cry,
he brought me up out of a horrible pit, and he has put a new song in my
mouth, even praise unto our God. They shall never be ashamed, but shall say as
Isa. 25.9. Isa. 25.9.
Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, by our multiplied mercies in the
success of our Armies, God has opened a door of hope for us in the valley of
Achor.

wait for, yet they shall have a day wherein they shall receive the waiting
servants blessing of entering into the joy of their Lord, and shall say by
experience, Blessed are all they that wait for him.

FINIS.

