JUSTICE JUSTIFIED; OR THE Judges Commission Opened: IN TWO ASSIZE SERMONS,
Preached before the JUDGES of ASSIZE. The first at Chard, on Prove. 14. 34.
March 12. the other at Taunton, on Romans 13. 4. Aug. 3. 1657.

By James Strong, Master of Arts, and Minister of the Gospel at Illmister in
SOMMERSET.

Justitia immota res publica floret, illa sublata, flaccesset ac deficit.
Casper Sibelius. Tom. 3. page 389. And I will restore thy Judges as at first;
and thy Counselors as at the beginning; afterward shall thou be called a City
of Righteousness, and a faithful City, Isa. 1. 26. LONDON, Printed for John
Stafford, and are to be sold at his house, near the George, at FLEET-BRIDGE,
1658.

To the Right Honorable Robert Nicholas, one of the Barons of the Exchequer,
and Richard Newdigate, one of the Justices of the Upper Bench, Judges of the
Western Circuit: As also to the Right Worshipful William Hillyard, Esquire
High Sheriff of the County of Somerset; together with the Gentlemen of the
Grand Inquest, and others, at whose request these Sermons were made public.
My Lords and Gentlemen;
It Was a sad presage of Isreal's ruin, when the Lord in anger threatened to
break these two Staves of his beauty and bonds: if Religion Zac. 11.
be the one of these two Staves, the Law shall be the other; these are semper
gemella nunquam singula in foetu, two Twins, mercies that live and die
together, Israel at once lost them both, Hos. 3. 4. The Children of Israel
shall be many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without an
offering, and without an Ephod, etc. corruption is the mother of confusion, Dan
and Bethel, the place of Judgment, and the house of God, had been corrupted
together, and therefore 'twas just they should be destroyed together:
wickedness had usurped the seat of Justice at Dan, and Bethel, the house of
God, was become a Bethanes, the house of lies. What violent adventures have
been made by many of this Nations own degenerate Sons to break the staff of
beanty, I need not tell you; I fear the next generation will scarce live to see
Religion healed of some of these scars and wounds she has received in our late
unhappy wars, of which, oh may she not complain in the Prophets words, that she
has been wounded in the house of her friends: The quarrel begun with Religion,
but ended against policy: Zac. 13. 6.
Those that are burdened by the Gospel, can live without the Law; Sine Fide,
sine Rege, sine Lege. The staff of bonds has of late had its turn, and had not
both been held in the hand of a strong God, sure the issue ere this had been
confusion.

My Lords, That both Justice and Religion finds yet the countenance of so
egregious Patrons as your selves, is a Valley of Achor, a door of hope to our
Israel, that we shall once more see Jerusalem in Jerusalem, when truth buds out
of the earth, and righteousness looks down from heaven, then Psa 85. 11, 12.
have we ground to hope that our Land also shall give her increase.

What evidence have you given the world, not only of your integrity in doing
Justice, but also of your zeal to Religion? This makes your name which you have
left behind you, like a sweet perfume. Not to flatter you ('it was but your duty)
how often to provoke others of quality to imitate your Religious practice, have
I mentioned, that joy that possessed me to see a Judge so constant and serious in
writing Sermon notes; like those Noble Berians, Acts 17.

The two short Sermons following, however esteemed by your Honors, and others,
had never seen more light then came into my Study window, had I known how else
to have satisfied the earnest importunities of many Gentlemen, and others, that
were my Auditors; but beyond all, the joint desire of your Lordships, was of
sufficient authority to make me consent; this liberty only I must crave, when
there was one only desired, to present you with two: They are both of the same
mould, and like Ruth and Naomi, they are resolved to go together. What may be
the censure of others (though I am sure to have my back-burden) does very
little trouble me: The Smith's Dog (they say) does not fear the fire; it has
been my lot for some years, beyond many of my place, to be exercised by a
generation, whose inward parts is very wickedness, and their throat an open
Sepulcher; so that experience Anabapt. Quakers. Sensualists.
has sufficiently steeled me against reproaches. What ever be the welcome that
this weak Essay finds among others, yet I am sure wisdom is still justified by
all her children.

To your Honors then, and the rest of the Gentlemen, whose desire I have
gratified by this impression, I humbly inscribe these weak conceptions of mine.
And oh that God would once more make another impression of them upon their
hearts; and as he has honored you among his people, and advanced you above
others in place, so may he make you all more eminent in piety; that having
served your generation in the several trusts committed to you awhile, you may
cheerfully resign your Offices, together with your Souls, and give up your
accounts to him who shall come to judge quick and dead, at that last and great
day. So does he promise to pray, that is

Your most zealous and affectionate Servant in the Gospel, Ja. Strong.

A Sermon Preached at the Assizes held for the County of Somerset, at Chard,
March 12. 1657. Mr. William Hillyard of Sea, Sheriff.
PRO. 14. VER. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a shame to a
people.
TO begin with God (especially when the work has been weighty) has been the
practice of Antiquity among all. Scipio Rosing de Antiquit. Romans lib. 2. page
49.
went first to the Capitol, and then to the Senate; and thither, as the
Historian tells us, the Consuls always went to Sacrifice the day they received
their Authority, a Lesson that Nature has taught even Heathens, and Grace has
much more charged as a duty on Christians. Of the Patriarchs it is observed,
that wherever they pitched their Tent, there also they built an Altar. Thus
did Abraham, Genesis 12. and Isaac, Genesis 16. and Jacob, Genesis 33. And good reason.

It Is that which was their Duty. Glory. Security.


1 Their duty: especially where ever they came to set up God by a public
profession, who had set up them in public places.

2. Their Glory: hereby they read (as it were) their Commission from that great
God, who was pleased to own them in a special relation, and gloried to be
called the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Ex. 3. 6.
Jacob. Moses face was never seen shining, until he conversed with God on the
Mount, then God darted a beam of his own glory on the face of his Magistrate,
so that Israel Ex. 34. 30.
trembled at Moses Majesty.

3. Their Security: Abraham called his Altar Jehovah Nissi: Lord is my Banner,
under which a Christian marches with courage and confidence.

The Ark paid Obid-Edom well for its entertainment, 2 Samuel 6. 11.
and no man sure can be a loser by Religion. The service that those three
Martyrs did to God, made them boldly claim protection from him: thus they
argue, Dan. 3. 17. Our God whom we serve will deliver us out of thy hand, O
King.

The Temple has ever been a good guard to the Town Hall, and better secures
the Ministers of Justice, than swords and halberds* O it is sweet and safe too,
when our earthly affairs have a relish of Religion, when Phil. 3. 20. Regnum
coelorum est civitas nostra and nos gerimus ut municipes coelorum. Cornel. A
Lap. in loc.
we carry our selves on earth as Denisons of heaven, when we can say as Paul,
(...) even our civil conversation is in heaven; non cives respicit, sed
Magistratus (says one) a duty doubtless that beseems none better than those
that are in authority; a mercy yet granted us amidst all those concussions and
confusions, both in Church and State, when Religion is become a byword, and the
Ordinances of God accounted but so many need-nots, since yet those that sit at
Stern keep the Helm in their hand, while our Princes and Rulers are as ready to
hear what God has to charge them in his Courts, as to see and charge their
own: What cause have we to hope, that though sinners be the shame of a Nation,
yet such Rulers will exalt it by righteousness.

The words are one of Solomon's Axioms, and have him for their Author, who was
both Judge and King in Israel; one that better deserved to be styled Master of
the Sentences for those his Proverbs, than ever Lumbard, say our late
Translators. Assemb. Annot.


The Verse divides it self A Thesis. And an Antithesis.


1 A Thesis; in those words, Righteousness exalts a Nation.

2 An Antithesis; in those words, But sin is a reproach to a people. Dedecus
populis. So Drusius. Miserum facit Vid. D^usium in loc.
populum. So Hierom. In both, we have Sin and Justice described by their
contrary effects, Altero corripimur, altero corrumpimur; the one cures us, the
other corrupts us: Justice exalts us, but Sin brings us to shame.

The Thesis needs no new mould, it is a Doctrine of it self; I shall

Briefly Explain. Prove. Apply it.


By Righteousness or Justice; we are to understand Explanation 1.
distributive Justice, or public Justice especially, which consists in giving
every man his right, either in punishing the nocent, or justifying the
innocent: So we read the word used Psa. 119. 121. I have done Judgment Vid. A
Lap. in loc.
and Justice; where the latter explains the former: I have done Judgment and
Justice (that is) I have done Judgment justly, or have been just in doing
Judgment.

Well, this Justice exalts a Nation; it is a special piece of Solomon's
Politiques; and he lays down the assertion again, Pro. 29. 4. The King by
Judgment establishes the Land; but how a due administration of Justice exalts
a Nation, let us see in the next place.

This it does these three ways; Ut Fundamentum. Munimentum. Ornamentum.


1 Ut Fundamentum. As the Foundation bears up the house, so does Justice a
Nation: (...) is so called from (...) and (...) the foundation of the Temple:
If the fo^ndations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Psa. 11. 3.
Positiones vel Statut aeverterunt: So Luther renders the Luther in loc.
Orig They have imbroiled and destroyed the Law; and when there is no Law for
loose men, what can the righteous do? What but glorify God by suffering his
will, and relieve themselves in the words that presently follow; the Lord is in
his holy Temple, the Lords Throne is in heaven.

2 Ut Munimentum. As Sampsons strength lay in his Locks, so does the strength
of a State in government: Justice was wont to be portraitured with a balance in
one hand, and a sword in the other; as with that she weighs the case, so with
this she defends the guiltless, and hate of the impious. For this too;
Magistrates are called the shields of the earth, fencing and securing their
people, Psa. 47. 9.
as a shield does the body. Once more, they are called the Cornerstone, Zac.
10. 4. Out of Juda shall come the Corner. Corner stones unite the walls, draw
out these, and the house will fall without any more trouble; Magistrates are
the strength of a State; as the walls gapes when the corner is out, so a Nation
without government must needs be divided; and what follows, a Kingdom Luke 11.
17*
divided, cannot stand*

3 Justice exalts a Nation; ut Ornamentum: Cornerstones do not only strengthen,
but also adorn the building; they are more costly and curious then those that
lie by them; their Daughters shall be as corner-stones polished, after the
similitude of a Temple, Psa. 144. 12.

Besides, they are called a Nail in Zac. 10. 4. Nails do not only fasten and
strengthen, but they serve to hang things on. Do not think it strange, that the
glory of a Nation should hang upon the nail of authority: When God promised to
fasten Eliakim as a Nail in a sure place, (that is, to establish his
government) it is added, and they shall hang upon him all the glory of his
Fathers house, Isa. 22. 4.

It Is worth notice, that when the Psalmist was in a vein of extolling the glory
of Jerusalem, he commends her, among other things, as glorious for this,
because there were the Thrones of Judgment. Thus good Laws Psa. 122. 5.
well executed, are the bottom, beauty, and bullwork of a State, and it briefly
teaches us;

That Anabaptists and Libertines, as they are enemies Use 1.
to the Church, so they are bad friends to a State; to ruin Laws, and to
destroy a Nation, are but the same thing in diverse expressions: Those satanized
Monsters that despise government, and speak evil of dignities, are such as
follow the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, 2. Pet. 2. 10. Law is one of the
greatest enemies to lust, two Masters they are, that cannot be served both, but
he that will lean to the one, must despise the other. A Lap. proposes the
Query, why Epicurus had more Disciples than the rest of the Philosophers; and
he gives this answer; Non quod Disciplina verum afferat, sed quod voluptate
invitet; Liberty is a bait that lust loves to bite at, and he that would catch
the one, must angle with the other. Corruption could never endure to be bridled
by Authority, but loves to run in a loose rein: Elies sons were first lustful,
and then disobedient; 1 Samuel 2.
and still do their impure offspring decry Authority to foster their impurity,
every where voting down Laws Psa. 12.
and Justice; as they in the Psalm, Who is Lord over us.

We may learn nezt the necessity, both of Law and Use 2.
Justice, and the misery of a Nation that is without them. The Persians had a
custom when their chief Ruler died, there was among them, (...) a lawless
liberty for five days after, so that every one might do for that five days
what he pleased. Now in this short interval of government, there were such
murders; rapes, and robberies of all kinds committed, by the headless
multitude, that before the five days were expired, they were exceeding glad to
accept of a new Governor. Justice is the very pulse of a State; and as we know
the man's dead when his pulse does not beat; so in a Commonwealth, when Justice
cease: The Prophet saw nothing but spoiling and violence, and the wicked
compassing about the righteous; and why? Defluit Lex, the Law was dissolved; no
life any longer in the State, its pulse had done beating, Heb. 1. 4.

It Is an observation of learned Weems, that so necessary is Justice to the very
being of a Commonwealth, Hab 1. 4. Weems his Christian Synagogue.
that no society can subsist without it, even Thieves and Robbers could not
long subsist, if every one had not his share, the whole Society must needs be
dissolved. Use 3.


Miserable is that Nation where Justice is corrupted, that looks for judgment,
and meet with oppression, and for righteousness, but behold a cry; wrong
judgment is worse then no judgment: It Is sad when judgment is turned into
gall, and the fruit of righteousness into Am. 6, 12.
hemlock, where should a man look for justice, but where men profess
holiness: Yet this was the grievance of which the Preacher complains, Eccles.
3. 16. I saw under the Sun the place of Judgment, and behold, wickedness was
there; and the place of righteousness, and iniquity was there. Such
corruptions gave Cato cause to complain of the Roman State, that private
robbers lay in chains of iron, but public thieves went in chains of gold. In
short, a people is then at their last cast, when God finds not a man to do
Justice among them, Jer. 5. 1. Run too and fro through the streets of Jerusalem,
and see, and know, and seek in the broad place thereof, if there be any that
executes judgment, and seeks truth, and I will spare it. The want of
Justice upon earth, provokes God himself to do justice from heaven.

Learn we next to prize this grand blessing; Justice Use 4.
executed by men is a mercy from God; since sin entered into the world, Justice
is the remedy that God has provided to purge corruption. Nebuchadnezzar was
none of the best Governors, yet a Cedar, under which the beasts of the field
found shadow, and the fowls of heaven dwelt under the boughs thereof; if a bad
Magistrate Dan. 4. 9.
be so useful; what is the worth of a better? When the Queen of Sheba came to
hear Solomon, she made it 1 Kings 10. 9.
matter of her joy, and blessed God that he had set Solomon on the throne of
Israel; because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore he made the King to
do judgment and justice, 1 Kings 10. 9. Sure it is our happiness, had we
hearts to acknowledge it, that we have justice weighed to us by the balance,
when for sin we might justly have expected to have seen it carved out to us by
the sword.

Addresses it self to you (Right Honorable) with the Use 5.
rest that are in authority, you see what is your duty, and the Countries
expectation, would you raise a poor Nation that is almost in the dust; you see
the way, and your duty lies somewhat more exactly described in Deuteronomy. 1. 16. I
charged your Judges at that time, saying; Hear the causes between your
brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother.

Five things especially are requisite to make a complete Magistrate, and they
are briefly these.

1 Wisdom and Judgment to find out the truth; Magistrates are the eyes of a
State, and if this light be darkness, how great would the darkness be; let us
ever Zac. 11. 17.
deprecate that curse that God justly once threatened Israel with; shepherds
they should have, and the sword Boni pastores debent esse cent oculi ut se
ipsos introspici, aut and alios curent, cui enim bonus qui sibi nequam? Vid A
Lap. in loc.
upon their right eye. Job here deserved to be a pattern to posterity, seldom
at a loss in judgment, but the cause, that I knew not: I searched out, says
he, Job 29. Guilt usually stands at the bar under a disguize, and has a design
to carry away the blessing, as Jacob from Esau, under the pretense of
innocence. Of Alexander it is reported, that he was wont to sit in Judgment
with one Ut nemo navem dirigit sine ferro quod attricuit Sideri^es: sic nemo
rem publ. sine mente quam offlavit prudentia. Sibelius. Tom. 3. p. 389.
ear stopped, and never heard with that, till the party accused came to speak.
It Is Gods own Law, Exodus 22. 9. When there is a difference about an Ox or an
Ass, Sheep or Raiment, or any lost thing, both the parties must come before
the Judges (that is) must be heard by them.

The other four virtues to complete a Magistrate, are in one Scripture
enjoined, Exodus 18. 21. Provide you among all the people men of courage,
fearing God, dealing truly; and hating covetousness, etc. and let them judge
the people.

I shall crave leave briefly to run them over.

And 1. They must be men of courage, such as Cato, of A quo nemo unquam rem
injustam petere audebat.
whom it is said, that no man ever durst petition him for a favor that was
contrary to equity. Solomon symbolized this courage by the steps of his Throne,
which were adorned with Lions, to mind him always of that courage that beseems
him that sat thereon: For this reason 1 King. 10. 19.
Constantine in Sc. is called the man-child, Rev. 12, 13. to See Brightman on
the Apoc. chapter 12.
to imitate his valor in venturing for the Churches weal; this valor was
eminent in Job, who brake the jaws of the unrighteous, and plucked the prey
out of his teeth, Job 29. 17. This holy boldness would be as a shield to fence
us either against the frowns of superiors, or the murmurings of inferiors;
who so well fences against the reproach of others, as he whose heart does not
reproach him: Been agere, and male audire Regium est, says Seneca.

2 They must be men fearing God, and that as they are considered in a double
capacity.

1 As Christians in common with others; this (says Solomon is both the
beginning and the end of Christianity, it is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1.
7. and it is the end of all things, Eccles. 12. 13. Yea, it is the all of
Christian, that one thing that is necessary; and oh that we could Luke 10. 42.
choose this better part.

2* As Magistrates in place above others; as unjust Judges (one says) is a
solecisme: A Magistrate, says J^nkin.
Luther, should be vivalex, such whose life should be but a Comment on the Law
of God and man* the way to do righteousness is to be righteous: How ill does
it become him to punish a drunkard, swearer, or sabbath-breaker, Quid valiant
statuta legum que illi maxim spernant qui ministrant. Salvian, pa. 276. 2
Chro. 3. 17. Respublica been constituta duabus vastis innititur columnis and
vera religio ne and justitia. Sibelius. Tom. 3. page 382.
that is such himself. Religion and Justice uphold a Nation, as those two
Pillars Jachin and Boaz did Solomon's* Temple. Now Religion must stand as
Jachin, on the right hand. Luther long since told the Reformers of Germany, it
would never be well with the State, till they first secured the peace of the
Church; yet alas, how apt are we to begin at the wrong end; do our own work
first, and then Gods. Good Constantine kept Gods method, first sought Gods
Kingdom, and then (says one) other things sought him; adeo ut tanta terrena
nullus auderet petere etc. So that none durst to desire so much of worldly
happiness, as God freely gave him; and this was the Isalmists order too, who
first tenders a Petition for Zion, and after that for Jerusalem; Do good in thy
good pleasure unto Zion, and then build the walls of Jerusalem. Psa. 51. 18.
Zion signifies the state of the Church, in regard of things spiritual, and
Jerusalem the evil state. Mr. Leigh.
O then let me beg this one thing, as upon my knees, be as zealous that God
has his due, as Caesar or his Subjects theirs; shall blasphemy escape better
than felony? shall a Cutpurse die, and a blasphemer, a God-robber, a
Kill-Christ live? Is sacrilege become a less sin than theft? If ever rage
beseems a Magistrate, it is when he comes to rescue the honor, or revenge the
dishonor of his God; then if ever Moses might* be excused for tearing the
tables, when Israel had turned the glory of God into the similitude of a calf
that eats hay. Servetus the Heretic, charging Melancton of harshnesse in a
Dispute, made this answer, In aliis mitis sim, cum blasphematur nomen Christi
non ita. Religion (my Lord) has the greatest interest in us all: All the Tents
were pitched about Weems.
the Tabernacle, to teach us, that the whole world is but a great Inn for the
Church to lodge in; the Vine is a Noble plant, and the wine that is pressed from
it has noble quality, yet they say, if a mandrake be set near the Vine the
grape is far the more generous; Justice is a rare virtue in it self, but if
Religion be planted near it, its far the more admirable. The Centurions
servant commended his Master to the utmost when he told Christ Jesus that he
loved the Nation, and confirmed it by this, that he had built them a Synagogue.
O bring back the Captive Ark, build Gods house, Lev 7. 5.
repair the ruins of the Tabernacle of David. This will honor you indeed, and
prove you lovers of your Nation.

3. They must be men of truth (that is) of Justice, Virgo haec judicibus
commissa est in custodiam ut ipsi nec violent nec violari patiantur. Delrio
Adag. ver. Test. page 530.
says A Lap. for in all wrong wrong judgment there is a lie. Delrio tells us,
that Justice was wont to be described by a Virgin and the Magistrate, by an
Eunuch armed, To show,

First, that Magistrates must not violate the chastity of Justice themselves;
and secondly, they must preserve her from others. Two enemies especially
justice is in danger of,

1. The Lawyer, who makes it a great part of his Art to raise a mist before the
Judges eyes ('it is a rule, that where the discourse is general, there is no
personal wrong to any) it is sad to see a cause prove good or bad according as
it is pleaded. Methinks I cannot mention the employment, but mind too that of
poor Spira, whoat once breathed out his soul, his hopes, and this sad
lamentation together; Good causes I pleaded coldly, or else sold perfidiously;
Bad causes I followed zealously, and pleaded with all my might, O legitur
historiam ne sitit historia. Be not too wise or too learned to be saved by the
foolishness of preaching.

2. The second enemy is the false witness, if truth and innocence escape the
one, how usually do they suffer by the other. Though a faithful witness, I
must confess, as great a friend to truth, as Jonathan to David, yet that
thoroughly sifted, I doubt not but too often they would deserve to be handled as
Paul, when he was examined with stripes. Alas, who knows not (says Luther)
that Steven Luther Mensal. Colioq.
died by witness, and Christ himself died by witnesses, though sometimes
suborned. Between these two enemies, when truth is like to be torn in pieces,
as Paul by those contrary factions, the Pharisees and the Sadduces, Acts 23.
What need of a complete Magistrate, like the Centuriont, here to come and make
a rescue.

4. Hating Covetousness. When the Prophet complains of Jerusalems Officers.
Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves, he adds the cause, Isa.
1. 23
they love gifts. As Paul shook off the viper from his hand, so should a
Magistrate a bribe, and say as he at another time, (if he meet with a
temptation) when he dealt with Simon Magus, thy money perish with thee. O
honorable comfortable testimony, when our hearts can witness. as Samuels.
Here I am, etc. whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or of whom
have 1 Samuel 32, 3
I received a bribe, and I will restore it. And now to move you a little, let
me quicken this grand duty with these few Argumens.

1. Consider those many honorable titles wherewith God has dignified you,
wherefore are you called Princes, Nobles, Nursing-fathers, Shepherds,
Mountains, Sons of the Almighty, but that you should honor those titles by
acting for his honor that has conferred them on you, it is a saying of
Salvians, reatus impii est pium nomen. Titles of honor do but greaten wicked
men's guilt that do abuse them.

2. Consider the influence that men of place have upon their inferiors.
Magnates Magnetes, great men's lives are small men's Laws, Magistrates are the
countries looking glasses in which other men look and dress themselves by them.
If a Magistrate will drink, or swear, or slight the Sabbath, who will not bear
him company. As an eclipse in the Sun always produces some destructive
effects upon inferior bodies, so it is here, let a man of place be either good
or bad, he is sure to be exemplary: We read when Crispus the chief Ruler of the
Synagogue believed, many of the Corinthians beside believed and were baptized
with him, Acts 18. 8. on the other side the Psalmist could imagine no heavier
curse for his Psalm 109. 6.
enemy then this, set you an ungodly man to be Ruler over him.

3. Meditate seriously whose work you are in. Solomon tells you, the weights of
the bag are his work, Prove. 16. 11. Et quae Dei sunt trimide tractanda. Judges
are Gods Lieutenants, and you judge for him, says Jehoshaphat to his Judges.
Take heed what you do, for you judge 2 Chronicles. 9 6 Lorinus in Ps. 48.
not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment, and that is
the third.

4. Consider that God himself is present with you, and president over you,
Psalm. 82. 1. God stands in the Congregation of the Princes. Loring on that
Scripture tells us, the Ethiopians were wont to set an empty chair in the
midst of their judicatories to mind them that God was there, O think that
God attends to hear what charges, evidences, pleas, and sentences are there
past, Cave Cato videt, was wont to be a watchword in Rome, and this awed them
from evil, let our watchword be, the Lord sees.

5. Lastly, he is Judge of Judges, all causes must once more be heard over, and
called again, he judges among the gods, when the preacher complains of wrong
judgment upon earth, he looks upward, and relieves himself from heaven, but God
(says he) shall judge the righteous and the wicked, Eccl. 3. 17.

Ciprian in his prayer before his martyrdom among many heart-wounding passages
from the consideration of the last judgment, this especially is one, Ve
peccatis Cyprian. Tom. 3. page 5 14
nihil cum elevaneris confringere terram sub qua fissura petrarum me
absconsurus sum cui monti dicam cade super me, cui colli tege me, etc. Woe to
me when thou O Lord shall arise to shake terribly the earth. In what rock shall
I find a clift to hide me? To what mountain shall I say, fall on me? to what
hill cover me, etc? O if Martyrs tremble, how will sinners stand. If such as
lose their lives for Christ's dread that day, what will become of such as
venture their lives against him. If this be done to the green tree, what will
be done to the dry? Oh that we were wise to consider our latter end, that we
could provide by holiness, and prevent by repentance the sad issues that sin
will in that day bring upon us: God Psalm 56. 8
in Scripture is said to have a bag and a bottle, a bag for our sins, a
bottle for our tears, oh as we have filled the Job 14. 17
one with sin, so lets fill the other by repentence.

And oh blessed be that God that after we have made shipwreck by sin, has
provided us such a plank as repentance upon which we may swim safe to heaven.
Let us then all take the shame of sin to our selves by repentance here in the
day of grace, that sin may never bring us to shame in the day of judgment.

A SERMON preached at the Assizes at Taunton in the County of Sommerset. August
3. 1657.
ROMANS 13. Ver. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good, but if you do
that which is evil be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain.
GReat places and employments God never intended as privileges to secure any
from his service, The King himself, how great soever be his business was (with
his own hand, says Philo) to write two copies of the Bible out of the
Original, the one he was to use at home, and if he went abroad the other he
must use as a running library or hic vade mecum, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. And the reason
is added, v. 20. that his heart be not lifted up. O it is a hard matter to keep
our hearts down when our honors rise.

Vespasian is said to be the only man that was ever the better by being
Emperor, self-love like a false glass makes us see our selves bigger, and
others less then they are; to prevent which, we are never to be without that
true glass of Gods Law, that will tell us that even Gods among men are but men
with God, and that the greatest Magistrate is but Gods Minister, and that is
honor enough, for he is the Minister of God to thee, etc.

To be large in Prefacing were but to wrong my Text. As though like the
Prophets strait bed and his narrow covering it could not hold me an hour, when
rather indeed it is like the great and the wide sea, where there is room enough
for the tallest ship to float, and the great Leviathan may take his pastime
therein. Psalm. 104, 26


To the words then briefly.

And here, as by the portal we go into the inner rooms, so let me give you by
the coherence, occasion, and other circumstances to the text.

It Is Aretius observation of the Jews, that they ever Judei semper iniquissime
tulerunt alienum imperum, etc. Aretius in loc.
scorned subjection to any, especially to the Romans, and Alsted of the vain
glory of their successors to this day, says thus, antiquum obtinent; They are
no changelings, still fill up their fathers sin by their present pride, you
may read their temper in that brag of theirs, John 8. 33. We were never in
bondage to any Trap in loc.
man, when yet they were scarce ever out of bondage to some or other, and at
that very time in bondage to the Romans. Well, Bondage being so burdensome to
this people, There was liberty by the Gospel preached by Christ and his
Apostles, which doctrine of liberty was so misapplied, and abused by diverse,
that they thought themselves by their Christian liberty discharged from being
any longer subject to secular authority; Whence Julian, Porphirius, Proclus and
other Heathens traduced the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, as that that
was seditious, and fathered the rebellious practices of the people upon the
doctrine of their Teachers. On this occasion (says Clemens Alexandrius) did
Christ and his Apostles studiously endeavor to vindicate the doctrine of the
Gospel from this aspersion, and did enough to convince the world that Gospel
liberty was far from countenancing rebellion against civil authority. This
Christ did when he paid tribute money himself, and gave it in charge to others
to give Caesar the things that were Caesar's. And Paul Mark 12. 16
among the rest makes it his professed business in this chapter, in which both
his matter and method are exceeding plain.

1. He enjoynes subjection on all as a general duty, verse 1. Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers.

2. Draws up his Arguments in order to prove his doctrine, and the first is
this.

1. The Author of government, that is God, for there is no power, but of God:
True, the constitution is from man, the manner or mould of Government, as Solon
said of the Athenian Laws, they were so good as the people could bear, fitted
(he meant) and accomodated to the state of the people, but still the
institution or ordination is from God, (...), they are ordained of God, from
which conclusion follows this fearful consequence, he then that resists the
power resists the Ordinance of God, v. 2.

2. He proves his position from the end of authority, v. 3. for Rulers are not
a terror to good works, but to the evil. Jeroboam then forgot his duty and
proved a shame to Magistracy, when instead of encouraging his people to serve
the Lord; he set a net on Mizpeh, and spread a snare on Tabor to watch who
would go from him to worship God in Judah, Hosea 5. 1.

3. He argues from Magistrates relation to God, whose person they represent,
and by whose authority they act, verse. 4. for he is the Minister of God, etc.

The words in short are a vindication of Magistracy

drawn from Its Author. Its End.


1. From its Author, that is God, for he is the Minister of God.

2. From its End, and that is twofold,

1. The protection of them that are good: Gods Minister to thee for good.

2. The punishing and suppressing of the wicked, to such the Magistrate is
intended for terror, and the reason is added, for he bears not the sword in
vain.

Doct. Observe then, 1. That a lawful Magistrate is Doct.
Gods Miinister (...), Gods Vicar, Deputy, or Vicegerent.

Several ways this may be evidenced.

1. They are commissioned by him not only Kings, but Haec sententia duo
significat. 1 Hanc potestatem esse a Deo. 2 Reges vicem gerere Dei, etc. A Lap.
in loc.
Judges also, Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice;
by me Princes rule, and Nobles, and all Judges of the earth. God alone is the
absolute Monarch, and has the sole sovereignty of Heaven and Earth, and this
power he delegates to Princes and Rulers who govern for him.

2. They act for him, and this will appear two ways.

1. They are Gods Laws whereby they judge God himself prescribed Israel her
judicials, Deuteronomy. 17. And he is supreme Logislator still. Hence that prayer of
the Psalmist, Give the King thy judgment, O Lord, and Psalm. 72. 1, 2
thy righteousness to the Kings Son, and then he doubts not when God has given
him righteous Laws, and a righteous heart to execute them, but that he will
prove a blessed Governor, Then shall he judge thy People in righteousness,
and thy poor with equity.

2. It Is Gods sentence (or ought to be) which they past; Though the King be but
a man, yet it is a divine sentence that is in his lips, and his mouth
transgresses not in judgment, Prove. 16. 10. Our old word Conning, and by
contraction, King Becanus says, comes from Con, which signifies three things,
p^ssum scio Audeo, I can do justice, I know how to do it, and I dare to do it,
if either a Magistrate want power, or skill, or courage to do justice, it is but
vain to expect this divine sentence; and oh it is sad if the judgment be man's
only, and not Gods.

A few things briefly I shall infer from the point. Use 1.
And first, what means that bedlam spirit, whereby Anabaptists, Quakers, and
the rest of that same batch are acted, that have learnt a Religion to justify
their rebellion, pretending as the Jews of Caesar that they know no King but
Christ, as if he were a loyal subject to his Prince that contemned his Deputy;
Facile imperium in benos, pessimus quisque asperime rectorem patitur, etc. The
corruptest tempers have ever been most apt to scorn authority, I wish such
masterlesse monsters would consider how well that querie might might be
proposed to them wherewith the Lord confounds Sennecharib; 2 King. 19. 22
Whom wast thou railed on and whom have thou blasphemed, and against whom have
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? (not against
Hezekiah) but against the holy one of Israel. 1 Samuel 8.


Israel was weary of Samuel, and God tells them plainly they had cast off him.

Secondly, it shows us that Magistrates power is not Use 2.
arbitrary, they are some of heavens commissioned Officers, and may say as the
Centurion, though they have others under them, yet that they themselves are men
under authority; and oh how careful ought such to be of breaking their
Commission.

Thirdly. it serves exceedingly to encourage Magistrates: Use 3.
Can they think that God will employ them in his work, and not bear them out in
their employment? sure you serve no such hard Master. It Is a note of Paraeus,
did not God (says he) countenance Pareus in loc.
and assist them that are Ministers of Justice, did not he stand in the
Assembly of Princes, it could never be that the face of authority should be so
formidable: that God that promised Israel, that one should chase a thousand, is
he that makes the face of a single Magistrate to awe the hearts of a thousand
malefactors.

Take heed next of undertaking Gods work, and doing Use 4.
their own. Yea, judge for God said, good Jehoshaphat, to his Judges, therefore
take heed. Oh how should it be the study of a Christian Magistrate to pass
such a sentence as God himself would pass did he take the matter into his
own hand.

It acquaints us with that harmony that there is between Use 5.
Magistracy and Ministry. The same word serves for both: Minister in a general
name that will agree to either. They drive but one design, and serve but one
Master, though in different places, Moses and Psalm. 77. 20 Lam. 2. 6.
Aaron, the King and the Priest lie usually together, like sweet twins in the
arms of Scripture. O let them not prove, like the twins of Rebecca, one
struggling against the other; but, like the twins of Heraclitus, always weeping
and laughing together. Magistracy Christ likens to a neck of ivory pure and
potent, Ministry to the eye, of the body clear and transparent, like the
fish-pooles of Heshbon, and these he joins together, Cant. 7. 4. Oh those
which Christ has joined together, let not man put asunder. Never Magistrates
fared worse than such as were enemies to the Prophet, as Paul and Ahab, and
none ever prosper'd better then such as were nursing to them, as David and
Hezekiah, and that general rule is still true, believe the Lords Prophets, so
shall ye prosper. So 2 Chr. 20. 10
much briefly for the first Note, let the next be this,

Doct. 2. That the peoples good is the end of Doct. 2.
Government. He is the Minister of God to thee for good.

Hence as Gualter notes, the ancient title that was Gualter in Rom 13.
given Magistrates, was benefactor, Luke 22. 25. The Kings of the Gentiles rule
over them, and they that bear rule over them are called bountiful (...) called
benefactours, the Magistrate comes Ahimaaz In bonum ci qui bonum agit. Estius.
with good tidings; and wherein this good lies, I shall briefly show you. A
fourfold good comes by Government.

1, Natural good. It preserves our lives, As Moses slew the Egyptian, but saved
the Israelite, so does the Exodus 2. 12.
Magistrate, cuts off the nocent preserves the innocent.

2. Civil good, how quickly would the hills become mountains of robbers, and
the highways be once more unoccupied as in the days of Jael, Judge. 5. no
safety would there be to him that went out, nor to him that came in, did not
the sword of justice guard the innocent, as that flaming sword did the tree of
life.

3. Moral good, by restraining men from vice; and encouraging them to virtue;
were there none to reprove Ad hoc instituta est potestas secularis ut and pacem
publ. conservet and vitae communis honestatem. Estius p. 154.
in the gate, sin would quickly grow impudent and audacious, what could we
expect but that all prodigious impieties, like another deluge, would drown the
world, were the gates of authority thrown off their hinges. Therefore the
Apostle bids us pray for Kings, and all that be in authority, that under them
we may live peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2, 2.

4 Spiritual good Magistracy was ever intended to be a guard to the Gospel;
defenders of the faith they are all in their places: Of Charles the great it is
recorded, that he had his office written on his sword, which he wore as his
great glory, december praeceptorum custos Carolus, Charles, Lord Keeper of the ten
Commandments; How careful good Governors have ever been to secure Religion. I
might instance in David, ^oas, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Solomon, and others. Take
two for all, of good Josiah it is said, that he was so far from leaving his
subjects to an intolerable tolleration that he commanded Judah to serve the
God of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 33. 16. And so did Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 4.

I am forced to leave the Application to your selves, and must hasten to the
next thing.

And that is from the other end of Government ( viz.) the punishment of
evildoers, but if thou do evil, fear.

Doct. 3. Whence we note next, that good Laws are Doct. 3.
terrible to none but to evil persons. In this sense the Law troubles not a
righteous man; but its threatenings are levelled against the lawless, such as
tear the bonds of Government, as Sampson did his withes, and cry out we will
not be be bound. To such the Law is intended for terror, excellently Solomon
to this purpose, Prove. 20. 26. A wise King scatters the wicked, and causes
the wheel to turn over them.

Quest. But what evil is it that falls within the reach of civil justice.

Answ. Any civil or religious: the Magistrate is custos utriusque tabulae, all
Laws propounded without limitation Mr. Leigh.
must be understood in their latitude.

Two things briefly it lessons us. First, to observe a Use 1.
difference between the precious and the vile, and in drawing the sword of
justice always to have a blow at wickedness, the Psalmist deserves to be our
president here, who having sorted his subjects, bestows his favor on the good,
his frowns on the evil, Psalm. 101. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful in
the land, that they may dwell with me. These he intended should be to him, as
Joseph to Pharaoh, men of office and honor, but v. 8. betimes I will destroy
all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off the workers of iniquity from the
City of the Lord: if men in place would study this choice, and make such a
difference among their inferiors, I had almost said they might save the labor
of forcing men from evil by their power. I am prone to believe they would win
so many by their practice.

It charges Magistrates that they do not do justice by Use 2.
halves, take heed you do not punish one for speaking one word against Caesar,
and let another escape that speaks too against Christ, to all evildoers a
Magistrate must be terrible. David threatens impartially to weed out the
wicked, to cut off all the workers of iniquity; This is indeed not to bear the
sword in vain, the last thing that craves your attention and notes to us is
this,

Doct. That the end why God has armed authority Doct.
with the sword is to do execution upon the wicked. An allusion, says Calvin,
to the Roman Consuls, who had Calvin in loc. Principe non frustra gladium
testat sed ut stringat in malafactoris, Estius in loc.
axes and swords carried before them as ensigns of their power; It Is not in
vain this sword is committed to them, no it is to give notice that they have
potestatem vitae and necis, Gladium gestant ut impios plectant (says one) it is
to cut off the wicked, which otherwise, like rotten and gangreen'd members,
would endanger the body. But here it must be remembered that the sword of
justice must be furbisht with the oil of mercy. The Malefactor in the Law must
lie down and be beaten, and that before the Judge but with a certain number of
stripes, and that too according to the nature of the trespass, Deuteronomy. 25. 3.
the same punishment is no more fit for all offenses then the same physic is
for all diseases; The Romans had as well rods as axes borne before their
Consuls to intimate that some offenses were as sufficiently punished by the whip
as others by the block.

And now that I may not lose the advantage of doing Use.
God some service in so sacred a solemnity as this, I shall keep me no longer
to generals, but parcel out the residue of my discourse, and address my self
briefly to all sorts in particular, that my doctrine may fall as the dew, and
though here a little, and there a little, yet may leave some moisture upon all.

And first, (Right Honorable) your dignity bespeaks the upmost room, it is for
you, there is none more honorable then your selves that is bidden of it. You
here authority is no empty word. Magistracy implys somewhat more then a title
of honor, take heed of sparing when God bids you slay, let not the sword of
justice rust in the scabbard, and prove like the sword of Jeth^r which he could
not draw nor use*

Judges had need often to edge the sword of Justice Judge. 8. 20.
with the file of courage, fiat justitiarunt coelum was a good resolution. Be
champions of justice while you can, and when you can no longer serve her as
such, keep your ground, and resolve to die her martyrs.

As to the case of Religion (my Lords) though I hope I may say as Paul to his
Thessalonians, of love I need 1 These. 4. 9*
not speak to you, though you know and do this already, yet suffer me a little
to put you in remembrance, for Sions sake I cannot hold my peace. Oh help the
teeming woman, the traveling Church, the fruit is come to the birth, but there
wants strength to bring forth, is it not pity she should miscarry, with Ephraim,
and stay in the place of bringing forth children? sure Hosea 13. 13*
a hand of authority would do much to further her deliverance, Christ by the
sword has been paring and pruning his Vine till at last some some young grapes
of Reformation did appear, but ah on a sudden the subtle foxes threaten to
devour all; the petition that at this time I shall tender to their hands shall
be the Churches prayer, Cant. 2. 15. Take us the foxes, yea, the little foxes
which destroy the Vines, for the Vines have tender Grapes; never pity nor spare
them for that they are young. Happy shall he be that takes the brats of Babel,
any of her little ones, and dasheth them against Psalm. 137. 9
the stones.

To Commissioners of peace that are assessours with you, I have only this, do
not say, as Saul, all is well in the Country, if so, what means the bleating
of sheep, and the lowing of oxen that we hear? what means the roaring in
Alehouses, profanation of Sabbaths, with other crying abominations? what is
the matter that so many with Malchus have lost their right ear that they
cannot hear a complaint, nay, sometimes the right eye, that they cannot see a
disorder? Is it not woeful, that many a Magistrate, like George on horseback,
sits always with the sword up, but never strikes. The Lord give you Moses spirit
as well as Moses place, and write upon your hearts resolution for the Lord.

As for you, Gentlemen of the Gown, I intend no Satyr but a Sermon, and
therefore it is but a word of Council that I would venture to give you, looking
Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, etc. Mat. 7. 12
neither for bribe nor fee, save only a desire to see the fruit of my lips in
the consecrating of yours. O read often the Law which is both the Law and the
Prophets. Converse much with heavens Statutes, all which, like the Laws of
Draco are written in blood, death being the penalty that is threatened to Romans
6. ult. Psalm, 10. 18
all. Take the fatherless and the widow for your Clients, God owns them for
his, and always judge your selves most bound to speak when Truth wants an
Advocate.

For the Gentlemen that are Jurors; so far have you honored your employment
of late, that without flattery. I question not, but that like a well-drawn
picture, you will have your eyes on every corner in the County, you are your
countries representatives, a Petty Parliament, O make faithful reports of your
countries case, when God by you makes inquisition, bring forth the accursed
thing whatever it be, out with Jonah that you may save the ship.

For the Jurors of inferior order, and the witnesses, Oh that there were none
of Jezabels Knights of the post to be found among you, that should sell an
innocent man for eight pence. Remember that for oaths the land mourns, and
before you lay your hands on Jer. 23. 10
the outside of the Bible, fix your thoughts on something of the inside. It Is
Zech. 5. 4. where the curse comes like a flying bood, and enters into the house
of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely, and there it must
remain til it has eaten up the stones and timber thereof. For Barretters, and
litigious Brawlers, that like Salmanders, live in the fire, and contend for
trifles, even the Turks send away such with a whip, if any be found in their
Courts, I wish heartily ours might speed no better, doubtless authority would
be far less troubled then now, if men's hearts were not bigger then their suits.

I shall make but one turn more to them that are in authority, take leave, and
I have done.

O mind your duty, and do it, and to make it sure, I would take but two or
three Temple-nailes, and fasten all.

1. Consider it will make you great blessings to your Country; If any thing
fetch life in a dying state, Ad Magistratum maxim utiles qui privata comoda
public post habent qui sciunt civium non servitutum sibi traditam sed tutelam
nec Republ. suam esse sed sc republicae etc. Sibelliq. tom. 4. p. 383.
it is justice, it is worth our observation, that when God promises to give a
spirit of judgment to them that sit in judgment, he promises also to be a
Crown of glory to the residue of his people, Is. 28. 5, 6. O that the
generations to come might rise up and call you blessed.

2. It Is the way to live honorably, and to die comfortably.

1. To live honorably: Of Cassianus the Emperor, it is storied that he refused
to be called pius, but would be called foelix, a wild design to reach after
felicity by the neglect of piety; nothing so surely honors us among men, as
when we seek the honor of God, it is 1 Samuel 2. 30
a bargain of Gods own making, those that honor me, them will I honor. 'Twas
this that made Deborah cry out in her song, My heart is set toward the
Governors of Israel. Judge. 5. 9


2. It Is the way to die comfortably, when the sight of grim death makes others
look wan, conscience of their integrity will steel their hearts against the
King of terrors; Oh blessed case, when in the closing up of men's lives, they
can with that zealous Magistrate, Nehemiah, say boldly, Remember me O Lord
concerning this, and Neh. 13. 14, 22 Dr. (...).
remember me, O Lord, concerning this also. To borrow the elegant words of a
Reverend Author, what happy Items will these be in our last reckoning, such
Magistrates may sweetly close their lives with those comfortable words wherewith
he closes his book: And remember, O my God, in goodness. A vast and blessed
difference between the righteous and the wicked, when of the one the Lord
protests he will never forget any of their works to let them escape
unrevenged, Amos 8. 7. of the other we have as strong an assurance that he will
never forget any of theirs to let them go unrewarded, Heb. 6. 10. It Is not
consistent with the Justice of God, the Lord is not unrighteous to forget your
work and labor of love. O that your works might praise you in the gates of
your own Courts while you live, so shall they follow you to the gates of Heaven
when you come to die.

FINIS.
Courteous READER be pleased to take notice that these Books following are
worth thy perusal; Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at the George
at Fleet-bridge.
A Divine Message to the Elect soul, delivered in eight Sermons upon seven
several Texts, by that laborious and faithful Messenger of Jesus Christ, Mr.
William Fenner. B. D.

Divine Meditations upon several Subjects, Whereunto is annexed Gods love, and
Man's unworthiness, with several Divine Ejaculations, Written by John Quaries.

Choice and profitable Secrets, both Physical and Chirurgical, formerly
concealed by the deceased Duchess of Lenox, and now published for the use and
benefit of such as live far from Physicians and Chirurgions: being approved
of by eminenent Doctors, and Published, by their charitable advice, for the
Public good; Whereunto is annexed, a Discovery of the Natures and Properties
of all such Herbs which are most commonly known, and grow in Country Gardens.


