MALICE REBVKED, OR A CHARACTER OF Mr. Richard Baxters ABILITIES. AND A
VINDICATION OE THE Honorable Sr. HENRY VANE FROM HIS ASPERSIONS in his Key for
Catholics.

As it was sent in a Letter formerly to Mr. D.R. and is now printed for the
public Satisfaction.

By HENRY STUBBE of Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

Prove. 12.19. The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying
tongue is but for a moment.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLIX.

READER,
I Know many persons will be apt to censure this ensuing piece, as being too
virulent, considering the disparity of years, repute, and that calling in which
Mr. Baxter lives. I profess I have no personal quarrel with the man, nor
have I read more of his works then I was necessitated unto for the penning of
this letter: he should still have enjoyed his ill-founded esteem, if it had not
been abused to the prejudicy of the Good old cause, and the Common-wealths-men:
I have followed an example of his own giving, and it were not fitting that
Court-parasites should be wore forward and servent to enslave us, then we to
defend our Liberty. As I voluntarily engaged in a vindication of the Honorable
Sr. Henry Vane, so besides the resentments of Gratitude which I have for his
many favors, I brought with me those of a more general concern: and I make
it my most humble request to that Honorable personage, if I have fallen into
any mis-becoming transports in a discourse wherein his name was mentioned, that
he would not interpret my zeal and ardour for the public, as a diminishing of
that respect which is due to him from me and all the World.

Sir,
I Could wish the subject of this letter could yield you more divertisement
then the present posture of our Affairs will permit, and that I might
entertain you with a pleasing as well as necessary discourse. The Age wherein
we live has been all Miracles; and the coming forth of the Woman out of the
Wilderness has been attended with so many wonders, that a pious heart can
never want Employment in its contemplations. We have seen and our eyes bear
witness to the Actings of our God, the overturning of a Monarchy settled upon
the foundation and usage of many hundreds of years, strenthened by what humane
policy could contribute to it is establishments, and what of buttresse a
complying Clergy could assist it with, out of the Pulpit: yet have we seen a
change so brought about by our Jehovah, that he may in extraordinary,
acknowledgements be proclaimed, Wonderful, Counselor the mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, Prince of peace. We have seen the most glorious cause in
the World accompanied with no less success, and the Lord in his mercy to us,
and justice to them, Has bound our King in chains, and Nobles in fetters of
iron, such as wherewith they had formerly oppressed the good people of this
land. This honor have all his Saints; (Ps. 149. v. 9.) Vengeance has he
returned upon their heads, and their own shame has covered them. The true
anointed ones of the Lord have appeared, for their sakes has he rebuked
Monarchs, and the former have reaped the fruits of that Holiness and Sacriety,
whereunto the latter vainly pretended. But Sr. to our no small discouragement
after such expense of blood and treasure, after such high disputes and contests
in the field, after so many prayers and tears shed, and that we were in hopes
to see our selves (in a literal sense) no longer aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, but enjoying those Liberties, Spiritual, and Civil, into which the
Lord had enfranchised us; that God who had secured us from the malice of our
foes, and broken their violence, has occasioned our stumbling by counterfeit
friends; and false-hearted brethren have almost reduced us into Egypt, to the
house of bondage, after all our endeavors for such immunities, as, when we
thought our selves possessed of them, we did not sufficiently improve. These
things to a Cato, to a spirit acted only by Gallentry, would be insupportable;
and a Soul agitated only with the concerns of the Natural man in his grandeur,
would not out live. But we have not so learned Christ: we know it is God's
usual way to endear his favors to his children, by heightning their
Expectation, and profering only at first that wherein he will afterward
enstate them. When Israel began to think Canaan-wards Pharaoh's taskmasters
said the people were idle, and thereupon they increased their oppressions: when
the generous English put on thoughts of Liberty, and claimed their privileges
in Spiritual and Civil interests; it was objected that riches and ease had
made them rebellious; our Parliaments became discontinued, the Court employed
their utmost Artifices to reintroduce a Vassallage: but after that providence
had disengaged us from those encumbrances, and that we were upon our way to
Freedom by the help and conduct not of one Moses, but many illustrious
personages, whose Memory shall live when that of Thrasybulus, Timoleon,
Epaminondas, Brutus, Valerius or any worthies Greece or old Rome could ever
boast of, shall cease to be mentioned. When we were upon the way to freedom and
happiness, when we were within sight of the Cape of good hope, after a
perilous voyage thorough an Ocean of blood: then it befell us, as it did the
Israelites after they had cast off Pharaoh's yoke, and passed the red sea
under the protect on of God visibly appearing in their behalf, the Spies
brought an ill report upon the land, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram mutined, (men
questionless, of extraordinary Endowments, and pretenders to sanctity) these
created divisions, Aaron together with Miriam murmured, and such confusion upon
sundry occasions arose, that what might have proved a journey of a few days,
was protracted 40 Years, and those men who had been isntrumental in bringing
the people out of Egypt, and felt the comfort of the visible presence of God,
and had eaten Monnah, all these lost their works (if not themselves) and after
much wandering and travail two only of them (though their children lived to
enjoy what their Fathers had the promise of) entered into Canaan. Sr. Our case
has been parallel to those accidents, and we may therein read the grounds of
our Confidence, that thorough a resemblance of events the same providence
operateth now in us, which did of old, and we expect the same issue, though (I
hope) so far bettered, that a greater number shall enjoy the benefit of their
first intendments, then did formerly in the wilderness. Truly, I am nothing
discouraged at those emergencies, those disorders, and that loss which we are
at; I assure my self these are but the pangs of that birth in which we shall at
last with joy cry out, A man-child is born: and not the pains attending a
false conception, a dead offspring, or such as whereto there wants strength to
bring forth. God will not loose his own mercies, and all is but as the wandrig
Jews in the desert, or as the going back of the sun upon the dyall of Ahaz ten
degrees, which was a sign of recovery to disconsolate and languishing
Hezechiah. But though I am confident of the final issue of things, that the
prisoners of hope shall receive double satisfaction, and the ransomed of the
Lord shall return, and come to ^ion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their
heads; they shall obtain joy, and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away: However these may be my thoughts, yet I suppose I may justly be afflicted
for the attempts of such as labor to reinslave us. Shall I say only,
reinslave us, and put upon our necks the former yoke. No, Sr. we are not so
little versed in the World, as to ignore, that New Governments, though Good,
create advantages for aftertimes, and not those wherein they are erected; but
such as are bad threaten all with perpetuity of misfortunes, unless God be
more merciful then man is wise. Persuasions now are of that Nature, as if they
should bid us, not return to Goshen, but the most dismal parts of Egypt,
rather then proceed on to our Felicity. Nay this is not all which my soul
regrets (though to recede from Engagements, Remonstrances, Declarations and
Protestations, to forsake that providence to slight those mercies which we
implored with tears, be things meriting our highest resentments, and the
consequences whereof may involve, not the Actours alone, but such as afflict
their righteous souls for the sins of Sodom; and they who are strangers to
their crimes participate often in the punishments of the wicked, as Elijah
suffered by the famine, though Ahab and his Father's house troubled Israel)
certainly we ought all to lay it to Heart, That the Ambitious ones of these
times are not content to render others miserable, (by depriving them of, or
endangering them in their Liberties and fortunes) unless they can make them
criminal to: and since the integrity of our Patriots is so well known, that
Envy it self can fasten no real imputation upon them, they must be blemished
with surmises and imaginations, and what is defective in the proof of the
charge, the Authority of those that divulge it, must supply. I could instance
in many persons of such worth, that this Age may blush they are not in greater
dignities, to which they would give a luster rather then receive any thence
themselves: (It was a complaint of the wise man, an evil under the sun, and an
error, that folly should be set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low
place, that servants were upon horses, and Princes walked as servants upon the
Earth. How much more ought we to be aggrieved to see the most pious and prudent
counselors outed, and disgraced, and men of different qualifications
advanced?) yet these men are aspersed and vilified thoroughout the Nation, and
by an uncouth barbarity they are assassinated in their reputes, and whose names
should be as precious ointments powered forth, these are represented as such
which dead flies have infected with a stinking savor. But their implacable
malice has discovered it self against no man so much, as the Honorable Sr.
Henry Vane, one whom not to have heard of, is to be a stranger in this land;
and not to honor and admire, is to be an Enemy to all that is good and
virtuous: One, whose integrity, whose uprightness in the greatest employments
has secured him from the effects of their Hatred, (veiled with justice) in
whom his sincere piety, Zeal for the public, and singular wisdom may have
raised envy and dread. Against him have they set themselves, him have they
damnified in his Estate, prejudiced in his Liberty, and labored to disgrace
unto the people of his native country; but finding the Court-artifices to
fail, and that his inocence was not so to be prevailed upon, they have at
length incensed the Pulpit against him, and made use of Mr. Richard Baxter's
pen to serve their ends.

Sr. Henry Vane published (in 1655) a book called, The retired man's
meditations, in which he has discovered the most glorious Truths that have
been witnessed unto these 1500 years and more, in a manner as extraordinary. I
mean not in the persuasive words of humane wisdom, not in the sophistry of
School-learning, not as the Scribes and Pharisees, but as one having Authority,
and in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit: in that Book (upon which
none hitherto has animadverted but Mr. Finch, who had never yet found a name
in the World, but by the esteem of his Adversary) he has laid down this
position: That the Mystery of iniquity working in men of a legal conscience,
is the Magistrates entermedling with Christ's power over the judgments of men.
Upon which saying that may serve for a paraphrase which is laid down by the
same Author in his Healing Question, where speaking of freedom to be exercised
and enjoined in matters of religion, or that concern the service and worship of
God, He says, Unto this freedom the Nations of the World have right and title
by the purchase of Christ's blood; who by virtue of his death and resurrection
is become the sole Lord and ruler in and over the conscience; for to this end
Christ died, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and
living; and that every one may give an account of himself, in all matters of
God's worship, unto God and Christ alone, as their own Master, unto whom they
stand or fall in judgment, and are not in these things to be oppressed, or
brought before the judgment seats of men. For why should thou set at naught
thy Brother in matters of his Faith and conscience, and herein intrude into the
proper office of Christ, since we are all to stand before the judgment seat of
Christ, whither Governors or Governed, and by his decision only are capable of
being declared with certainty, to be in the right, or in the wrong?

By virtue then of this supreme law, sealed and confirmed in the blood of
Christ unto all men (whose souls he challenges a propriety in, to bring under
his inward rule in the service and worship of God) it is that all Magistrates
are to fear and forbear intermedling with giving rule or imposing in those
matters. They are to content themselves with what is plain in their commission,
as ordained of God to be his Minister unto men for good, whilst they approve
themselves the doers of that which is good in the sight of men, and whereof
earthly and Wordly judicatures are capable to make a clear and perfect
judgment, in which case the Magistrate is to be for praise and protection to
them. In like manner he is to be a Minister of terror and revenge to those
that do evil in matters of outward practice, converse, and dealings in the
things of this life between man and man, for the cause whereof the judicatures
of men are appointed and set up. But to exceed these limits, as it is not safe,
nor warrantable for the Magistrate (in regard he who is higher then the
highest, regards, and will show himself displeased at it) so neither is it good
for the people, who hereby are nourished up in a biting, devouring, wrathful
spirit one against another, and are found transgressors of of that Royal law
which forbids us to do that unto another, which we would not have them do
unto us, were we in their condition.

This tenderness of Sr. H. V. might have been entertained with less
opposition, at least rage, then it has yet found in the spirits of many. I
never reflect thereon, but methinks I see Stephen praying for them that stoned
him; and admire a Charity so diffusive as not to comprise only friends but
even enemies: a love beyond that of Publicans, toward them which hate,
despitefully use, and persecute: in fine, a perfection like that of our
Heavenly Father, who (besides that he makes them so) endures with much long
suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, though he wont not
power, though his knowledge by infallibly discerning, and his justice in
punishing, both would be unquestionable: He knows who are his, yet does he
tolerate in [his] great house not only vessels of Gold, and silver, but also of
wood and earth, and some to honor, some to dishonor. But Mr. Richard Baxter,
Mr. Richard Baxter teacher of the Church at Kederminster, Mr. Richard Baxter a
Catholic Christian, and pastor of a Church of such at Kederminster, Mr.
Baxter Envoy from heaven, and Ambassador of Christ (as he calls himself in the
Dedicat of Saints everlast. Rest) he cannot endure this Tenet, this
compassionate, tender and peaceable frame of spir it. From this Candid
principle, and which allowed Mr. Baxter the liberty of his sentiments, has he
taken an occasion [in a late infamous Libell, if so great a farce may be so
termed, called a Key for Catholiques] to decry the Vanists with such language
as may justly deserve that reply of Michael to the devil, THE LORD REBUKE
THEE. But, however this may be an Answer suitable to the Christian temper of
Sr. H. V. and the quality of the person he has to do with: yet because
several weak ones may be betrayed into an ill opinion of that Honorable
personage thorough that general [though undue] esteem which Mr. Baxter has
gained in the World for Learning, judgment and moderation, whereby innocence
may be distressed and railing become hallowed; I shall vindicate Sr. H. V. from
the reproaches of this Philistim, or Shimei, or Rabshakeh, and defend that
invidious Assertion, but you must first give me leave to premise a character of
the man, As the man is, so is his strength.

I cannot give you any account of the Birth or Education of Mr. Richard Baxter,
but I think I may say that he either never was at any University, or made
little stay there, nor took any Degree; (unless the late persuasions of some
may have prevailed with him, who apprehended something of worth in him, and
were sensible how great a detriment might arise if Qualifications without
university degrees should capacitate one for the Ministry in our days) in a
Time when ignorance, or terror, or both, had taken off the Ministers of this
Nation from opposing those called Anabaptists, then He took occasion to
signalize himself by an intricate Dispute with honest Mr. Tombs, and the Act
being plausible the performance was thought great. Since that time he has
aggrandized himself in the World, and wanting not confidence to print what made
for the interest of others, he knew he could not fail of the applauds of such
as (however they might discover his weakness) were concerned, nor of the real
admiration of such as could not discern. I am a stranger to his life, and
report speaks not much to his disadvantage, nor is he wanting to his own
praises. Whatever become of the precept, let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand does, he in several of his works acquainteth us with his
charitableness to the poor, and his care for the sick to whom he administers
Physic. Not that this successor of the Apostles, delegated by the same
commission, Anoints them with oil, and so heales them: or cures them as he
walks by virtue of his shadow; nor does he distribute hand-kerchiefes: but all
(as I am told) is achieved by looch sanum and a liquorish stick, or Gascoines
powder, etc. Yea in his saints everlasting rest he is no less tiresome with
the recital of his infirmities and indisposition; then is Balzac or Voiture in
their letters, with the Colic, and feavour.

As for his learning the account he gives of himself is to have spent much time
in reading over the Fathers, (of whose use or rather inutility read Daille) the
Schoolmen (an upstart study unknown to the purer times, modelled and
professed by that Order which now manageth the Inquisition, and was at first
erected for the suppressing the truth in the Abbigenses (and Philosophers, such
as if the Apostle had not Authorized us to call Vain, their own writings
would) How much he has benefited in these studies he has endeavored to give
the World an account in a multitude of books, which he voides continually:
Joachimus Fortius, who was resolved to write a book every year whilst he
lived, was but a slight pretender in comparison to Mr. Baxter's works. And what
Henry the fourth, King of France, said of King James, that he was a fine King
and wrote pretty little books: this makes up but a part of Mr. Baxters
commendations, he writes not only single sheets, and little books, but large
volumes. This tedious impertinent having run thorough the usual method of
English controvertists, now assumes the fashion of the Dutch, and that our
countrymen may have something of novelty in his papers, they who are in love
with a lowedutch dress, may have recourse to Mr. Baxters disputations at
Kederminster: yea he out-goeth his pattern, for theirs are disputes managed in
universities, but these Kederminsterian disputations have only Mr. Br. for
President, Mr. Br. for respondent, Mr. Br. for Opponent: Thus I have seen some
play at shittle-cock managing their battledoores in their right and left hands:
Thus children play by themselves at Cards: thus the madman in Horace imagined
himself at the Roman sports, in vacuo sessor plausorque Theatro. But for such
as admire the man and buy his books, for whose sakes the price is printed on
the title page, or at the end, at three farthings a sheet; though that rate be
not extraordinary for one or two books, yet they had need of fair estates that
are in a possbility of buying according to the Quotient in the Revelations, Ten
thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands of sheets. God Almighty
thought it sufficient to give us one book, (if I may so call it) and that such
as to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works: But
Mr. Baxter affordes us more, not furnishing men to all good works, (unless
railing and uncharitableness do that) and of that value, that one may cheaper
buy the Bible that TRVE SAINTS EVERLASTING REST, then Mr. Baxter's FALSE one.
He one told us, That, he judged those Tostatus's impudently proud, who think
the World should read no body's works but theirs: yet for ought I can see
Tostatus will be but a puny scribler to him. It was a pretty piece of Drollery
in our Illustrious Romancist, to desire Mr. Br. to finish his Saints
everlasting rest, which he mistakeing for a complement, possibly upon that
ground may have created the Saints (that have leisure-time from the sincere
word of God, and hours for which they are not accountable) more trouble. His
works are stuffed with Citations and school-notions and unsetling debates, yet
he cannot but know, that the Judicious hold no part of Theology, or
scholasticall deductions to be matter of faith: which Assertion if it were as
heartily owned amongst Protestants, as it is ingenuously professed amongst
Papists, our faith-confessions would be much shorter, and the number of
Herasies without a persecution soon abate Whither he has read all the books
he quoteth, I know not, but the false names of Authors (not recorded amongst
the errata) makes his dealing suspicious. In his Metaphysics he has so
profited, that he has incurred manifold reproves thereupon, as (for example)
he has been charged with high blasphemy about the immanent Acts of God: from
which tenet common reason would have acquitted him; as ordinary skill in real
philosophy would have showed him the ridiculousness and falsity of his simile
of the Looking-glasses. I cannot insist long upon these things, it being not my
design to Catalogue Mr. Br. errors, but to give you a sample of his
proficiency in those courses he has taken: and oblige my credit unto you, that
I shall upon any warning furnish you with such an after-reckoning, as will make
good my opinion of him. As for Church-Herory I shall by and by tell you that he
understands not Greek, and so is not likely to have any perfection or
assurance in that, or Chronology: judge of his skill however therein by his
declaiming against democraticall Government, which notwithstanding was the
Government of Christian assemblies till the people were deprived of their
votes: and which was the Government of Israel instituted by God himself,
besides, in his Key, etc. p. 330. he makes the Jesuits to spawn the doctrine
of Liberty of conscience; which is as absurd, as that Serarius called Herod a
Machiavellian: I shall have occasion elsewere to show how it is the doctrine of
primitive Christians: now let it suffice that S^ H. Vane is not more full in
his judgment then Constantine the great, nor does he insist upon any other
practice then what was the decree and usage of that Emperor. If Eusebius had
not written in Greek I should refer Mr. Br. to him in his life of Constantine
lib. 2. c. 5.59. The Heathens had in his time their expenses of public
sacrifices defrayed out of the treasury, and their Temples [though not all, yet
most] openly were frequented; their Sophisters were maintained by the public
purse: they were employed in places of trust, and dignity; civil and military:
and all this not only in the time of Constantine but even till Justinian's
time in great part, as Procopius in his secret history tells us. Theodosius did
indeed refuse to defray the sacrifices of the Heathens out of the public
treasury, yet even in his time the Senate were generally pagans, and until the
time of Gratian (if not after) it was the custom of the Flamines or Heathen
Priests to present the new Emperor (though Christian) with a Stole or
Pontifical garment, so that they had not only a toleration, free and open,
but even the Emperors were Christian Emperors, but Heathen Priests. Thus you
see, what others think would introduce Heathenisme, this was the course that
brought in and established Christianity. But these things being to be fetched
out of Greek authors, I forgive Mr. Baxter his ignorance thereof, and only
tell him that the great soldier and eminent protestant Monsieur La Nove was of
no other judgment then Sr. H. V. as one may read in his discourses; and that
Possevin the Jesuit wrote against him for it.

As for his skill in languages it is so mean that I am amazed to see him quoted
by the name of learned. The Syriack, the Arabic, both which are of great use
for understanding the Scripture (of which you may read in Mr. Beveridge's
discourse of the Eastern tongues) upon the vulgar Analysis of faith, of these I
may suppose him totally ignorant. His skill in Hebrew is as little: Mr.
Robertson has said so much upon this subject in a particular book, that I
shall not urge it: only tell you that two or three days study in that tongue
would have prevented some of his mistakes; and one months diligence would have
corrected such lapses as are not to be excused, or endured. Dare he boast unto
the World, what time he has spent in impertinencies, and yet be ignorant of
that which is almost the unum necessarium in his function! There is not that
Quaker, or most fanaticall sectarian (whom he so undervalues) but can ground
his truths upon the true version, and his errors upon the mistakes of our
English translatours. Of this you will be much more convinced, when I shall
ascertain you he is no better at Greek then other tongues; weigh him in any
balance and you will find him light. I shall not run over all his works, but
attacque the most renowned Olio of practical and Schoole-Divinity (the latter
of which is apt to create everlasting disputes rather then rest: and made no
part of the rest of the primitive, whither Christians or Antichristians) I
mean his Saints everlasting rest. In this book I observe he cites other
Authors at large in their original Latin and English, but with the Greeks he
deals not so. Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athanasius, Laertius, these
are cited either in English or Latin. A man so ambitious to stuff his Margin,
cannot be thought to have declined this out of modesty, which he ought to have
done out of necessity, since in rational discourses other proofs are not
allowed then which are fetched out of the tongue in which the Author wrote. To
evince this more, he has adventured sometimes to checquer his book with
Marginall Greek words, though but seldom, as p. 74. there are placed two
Greek words out of Polycarp, to no purpose that I can imagine, but to let men
see Mr. Baxter is not ignorant of Greek; p. 118. There stands a Greek word
(...), with an animadversion that women shall not rise again in their own Sex,
which is a thing improbable, I would say false, if all the philosophy I have,
together with colorable texts of Scripture were a ground for such
peremptoriness. p. 551. you have Greek quoted out of Ignatius, but it is only
to disgrace our Army, viz. that soldiers are Leopards, and the more they are
favored and regarded, the worse. But he has so bespattered the Army publicly
in his Key, etc. Key for Catholics, p. 319.
that I may forgive him this reflection, but I hope they will not pardon him
that: so much lying and insolence deserves to be taken notice of, and they who
have resented, the disgraces thrown upon the famous long Parliament; they who
have avowed the punishment of the late King to have been condign; they who
have complained of catalogues being scattered abroad of such as tried him, they
in justice ought to demand exemplary satisfaction from Mr. Richard Baxter, who
has dealt with them more bitterly and undeservedly, then all the virulent
pamphlets put together, which have come out fine these wars. But to proceed? p.
105. there Mr. Br. makes some show of learning in a passage out of Ignatius,
which too was not greatly material to any business he was then upon, but yet
had something of Novelty in it according to Mr. Baxter's judgment. Viz. that
Ignatius should call his condemnation to Martyrdom the DAMNATION of the
devil, because his judges were but the Devils mouth and instruments. Fire,
the Cross, cutting off, separating, breaking of my bones, rending of my
members, destruction of my whole body, and the damnation of the Devil ((...))
let them all come upon me, so I but deserve to obtain Christ. Ignar. ep. ad.
Romans p. 86. edit. Usser. Indeed Mr. Br. will find that he has receded very
much in this text from the mind of Ignatius: he might have excused himself by
the Latin version which he follows, but that the intermixture of the Greek
deprives him of that excuse. The words are, (...). It is pretty how Mr. Br. was
put to it in this sentence, (...) is interpreted in the lattin belluarum
constantia; out of this Mr. Br. could not frame any meaning and therefore
omitted it in his English: it signifies either a collection of wild beasts for
the devouring men, as the Roman custom was; or a letting them loose to fight
over the prey; and so alludes to the (...) of the ancients, or fighting with
beasts; to which malefactors, and several Martyrs were condemned. (...) these
are not well rendered cutting off, separating: but the Latin had it, Abscissio,
separatio: the former signifies a cutting up by beginning from the bottom of
the belly: (as Eustathius somewhere expounds the word) and the later signifies
a cutting in two, or in the middle; as the prophet Isaiah is said to have been
sawed in two. So (...) is not breaking the bones, but the Latin had confractio
ossium, it was the scattering of the bones (or ashes thereof) after that the
body had been devoured or burned. (...) is not the destruction of the body, but
it was in his translation interitus totius corporis. It signifies nothing but
only a restless jactation, or inquietude of the body when one tumbles and
tosses. The word is an usual medicinal term, and Mr. Br. should not be so
little read in Hippocrates, as not to know the meaning of it, It is an Allusion
to (...), 1 Timothy 3.6. where Calvin observes it to be taken passively not
actively.
and that one might be under such a restlesnesse without the destruction of the
body. (...), is not the damnation but punishment of the devil, viz. anguish of
mind, or ejectment out of Heaven: but his translatour deceived him, there he
found damnatio diaboli. As for that (...) it signifies only that I may gain
Christ, not that I may deserve to obtain him: but he read in the same place, ut
Christum merear adipisci. In sum, upon perusal of the place I find no
inducement why I should put Mr. Baxter's interpretation upon Ignatius: he
expresses in most passionate terms his love and Zeal for Christ, and his defire
to be with him: he wishes to be, devoured by beasts, and professes he is ready
upon occasion to force them to tear him: then adds, let me be consumed with
fire, crucified, torn by wild beasts, slashed or cut in pieces, let my bones
be scatterd abroad: [these were punishments usually inflicted upon malefactors
and Martyrs] let my limbs be seizsed with aches [for I think (...) is the same
with what physicians call (...), but he having used the word (...) before, did
decline that phrase afterwards] let a restlesnesse possess my whole body,
[these are not effects of extrinsick violence in punishing, but of corporal
indisposition] and the punishment of the devil [this refers to afflictions of
mind] let all this come upon me so I may gain Christ, This is all he says, and
neither in what precedes, or follows, does he leave any ground for Mr. Br's.
assertion, that Ignatius calls his condemnation to Martyrdom the Damnation of
the Devil, his judges being the Devils mouth and instruments. For such his
opinion I find no proof, but the deceit of a fraudulent interpreter, to whom if
he had remitted us, all these errors (of so many in so little a compass you
shall hardly find a man guilty of, though of never so mean parts) had not been
imputed to his ignorance, which yet no less discovers it self (and with more
danger to his Auditors and readers) in his scripturall interpretations: I
shall instance in one or two, that you may see however he may not in his
devotions serve an unknown God, yet in his disputes he urges an unknown word
of God, as Mr. Robertson observed in his Old Testament misstakes. In his second
sheet for the Ministry, he urges for the perpetuity of the Ministerial office
(which, if I had leisure, I would evidently show how he has overthrown it)
Matthew. 28. v. 20. lo I am with you always, even to the end of the World This
text seems indifferently clear (in English) and to give ground to Mr Baxter's
insultation viz. To this EXPRESS promise Clem. Writer had no WISER an answer,
but that [it is conditional; if they teach all things that Christ has
commanded them, then he will be with them else not] Repl. This is your FORGERY:
here is no such words, but an ABSOLUTE promise. His being with them is to
support and help them in their work; and will you feign Christ to promise them
help on condition they do it without? But notwithstanding this confidence of
Mr. Richard Baxter, there is not any such thing in the Text as he lays down,
and the London Ministers. And in the second place Clem. Writer's answer
participates neither of that folly, nor forgery, with which Mr. Br. presses
him. It is evident, that Christ spoke to his eleven disciples only: that he
intended any more, cannot be proved, or said without addition to the written
word: Nay, since that Commission is admitted by the Harmonists to be the same
with that in Mark 16. v. 15. It is certainly personal, since those that are to
be converted by the preaching of those commissioners to whom Christ spoke, and
to believe, several signs were to follow them, which are not now, nor have
been these many years visible. Furthermore, The text says not, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the World. But either, Behold I am with you all the
days [or time] until the end of this Age Or, I am with you all [your] days
until the end of [your] life. Upon any occasion but this, which is a dispute
of interest, the words [for ever] (though it be a passage only of the English
version] should have been interpreted by the subject spoken of; as where it is
said, the servant, whose ear was bored, should serve for ever. Exodus 21.6.
Deuteronomy. 15.17. I have not seen any divine argue thence (as Mr. Br. does here)
that he should live for ever, or that he must needs have successors to verify
so EXPRESS and absolute a command: but that as long as he lived so long he
should serve; which is a man's for ever. The word in the Septuagint there, is
the same that here, and I could inform Mr. Br. that (...) in Scripture [ Ezech.
26.] stands only for the term of 70. years; and in other writers commonly for
100. or 110, as corresponding to the latin, Seculum. If any shall object that
the text does not contain the words [your days] nor end of [your] life. I
answer, that it is usual for Divines interpreting Scripture to repeat such
pronounces (...) as they call it, or from the passages foregoing or subsequent
in the same sentence: I could instance in sundry places, but I will give you a
parallel one out of the Septuagint. Deuter. 6. v. 24. (...). Sr. you may judge
of this exposition, and see how much more facile and natural it is to repeat
the pronoune, then to insert [your successours] I shall now come to that which
I first alleged, viz. I am with you all the time until the end of this age.
(...) I will not beg the least addition or gloss to make out this: read it
without a comma after (...), and the article (...) cannot be justly denied to
be Emphaticall and determine the promise (so express! so absolute!) to the
(...), which is again restrained by the article (...). Now I would fain know,
since such articles are in the writing, and Sermons of divines so often made
Emphaticall, why I may not be allowed to make it so here? Is there a balance
and a balance? God hates that. Shall we have different weights and measures,
one for the commonalty, and another for the Sanctuary. If you read it with a
comma after (...), the latter words art exegeticall, and (after the accustomed
dialect of the Scripture) explain the precedent. Give me leave to digress a
little in way of illustrating this interpretation. Christ being to depart,
gives his Apostles their Commission, and tells them what they must do: They
must teach all nations, etc. go into all the World (Marc. 16. v. 15.) and
should be witnesses to him both in Samaria and Jerusalem, and all Judea, and
unto the uttermost parts of the earth. This was a great work, and encumbered
with many difficulties; persecution, Scoffs, yea death it self was likely to be
their portion. He had told them (Math. 24.) what was to succeed upon their
preaching, that he came not to send peace, but a sword, that they should be
hated by them without, betrayed by them within, opposed by false Christ's,
finally, that they should fall under so great a tribulation, as had not
happened from the beginning of the World to that time, nor ever should be again
Math, 24.21. Marc. 13.19. Luc. 21.22. etc. And this Answer he had given them
upon an occasional question Math. 24. v. 3. The disciples asked him privately,
Master what shall be the sign of thy coming, (...); and of the end of the
World? The words are the same with those now controverted: and you may in the
chapter 24. read an answer to that query, what is, as well as what shall be the
signs of the end of the World? I shall not stay to prove that Christ's answer
is to be understood of the destruction of Jerusalem, and overthrow of the
Jewish polity, Jansenius and Dr. Hammond have done that for me. In the recital
of these afflictions he foretells them, we find frequent mention of the
consummation (as the vulgar calls it) or End. Math. 24. v. 6. but the end is
not yet. (...). he might have said (and it is evident from the question that he
meant) (...). And v. 14. then shall the end come (...). In the Syriack (which
language our Savior spoke in) not only (as in the Greek) is there the same
common expression for the end of the World, but where the Greek differenceth
(...) and (...), that language does not. It is said also (and there is the like
allusion in the Syriack) that, (...), etc. Matthew. 10.23. ye shall not have gone
over [or finished] all the cities of Israel till the son of man be come. It is
true in this last place, he sends them out only to Israel, but his prediction
of their being persecuted so sorely agrees with his iterated prophecy, Matthew.
24. we neither read that they were persecuted in that voyage, nor do we find
that Christ came to them, but they to Christ. From these considerations, I
suppose that the Apostles, who had heard of what was like to be their lot and
portion when the bridegroom should be taken away: these children of the
bridegroom (being not over-confident in Christ's promises, nor
over-well-skilled in gospell-mysteries; as he that reads the passages after
Christ's resurrection, and the question they proposed to him at his ascension,
Act. 1.6. may easily judge) might be sorrowful and troubled, as they had been
at the discourses made in John, being previous to his departure, and withal,
it is probable, that they might weigh their abilities, the greatness of the
work, and the difficulties and dangerous attending, it which [to humane
appearance] were likely to be greater then they could go thorough with, and
bear up against for the first generation, when all would strive (and the
attempt would be easy) to suppress the growing sect, whilst it was in it is
infancy. And upon this account Christ bidding them go out to preach (which act
could not but renew the memory of former prediction) he adds for their
comfort, and to prevent Objections, And behold I am with you to the end of the
World. (...). He who knew what was in the Heart of man, he anticipates all
their objections and fears; The great difficulty is in removing the settled law
of Moses, and first establishment of the gospel: after the gospel is once
prevalent over men, and that Moses's prescripts shall have vanished before the
Antitype, then indeed my presence would not be so necessary, as at the
beginning; why? I came to this end that I should by fulfiling abolish the
Leviticall law, and I will extraordinarily be with (...) until this
generation, this present age, Pesid^s he told them that the greatest
persecution that ever could happen, was then to be; so that it was necessary to
promise an uncommon strength for an unwonted trial.
and posture of affairs have an end or period. What is there in all this more
then is commonly said that miracles and an extraordinary presence of Christ was
necessary for the planting, but not continuing of the Church? And is it not
further said Hebr. 9.26. that Christ came (...), in the end of the World, which
end of the World is to be understood of the destruction of the Mosaicall laws
and rites, which was not done till the subversion of Jerusalem: then Shilo came
and the scepter departed from Judah: The old World or time before the law, and
that other under the law, were the Worlds in the finishing of which Christ
appeared. And you may further think, whether the Apostle does not inply this in
that he faith to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 10.11) these things were written for
our admonition upon whom the ends of the World are come (...). This
disconsolatenesse of the Apostles gave Christ occasion to name the Holy Ghost,
the Comforter: and [for the first age of the Church] he promises to be with
them (John. 14. v. 18.) and so to continue with them in a special manner
raising them up others besides, some prophets, some Evangelists, and some
pastors and teachers (not that they shou^^ continue in a successive ministry,
but th^^ the Saints might be fitted for the propagating the Church, and
building up the body of Christ. Which is not only the reason of Mission, Romans
10.15. (where to preach without sending is represented not as unlawful, but as
impossible; as impossible as to hear without preaching, or calling upon one of
whom they have not heard.) which is necessary only at first, and not to
after-descants; but is the plain meaning of Ephesians. 4. v. 11, 12 as I shall show
you, after I have showed more fully Mr. Baxter's ignorance in
Scripture-disputes, by his exception against Clem. Writer. What Clem. Writer
objected is not forgery: How express and absolute soever the promise be, yet
often in Scripture such denunciations are to be limited. Is the saying of
Christ more express then that of Jonah, Yet 40. days and Niniveh shall be
destroyed? Viz. if they persevere in their wickedness. They who were in the
ship with Paul had an absolute promise of their safety, Act. 27. v. 22.24. yet
that was but conditionally to be understood. Except these [shipmen] abide in
the ship, you cannot be saved v. 31. God swear he would bring the Israelites
that came out of Egypt into Canaan sc. if they obeyed his voice, and murmured
not. Numb. 14. v. 30. Doubtless ye shall not come into the land concerning
which I swear to make you dwell therein. And to instance more particularly, the
prophet tells Gehezi that the leprosy of Naaman the Syrian should cleave to
him, and to his issue for-ever, (...) say the Septuagint. Yet hence it cannon
be inferred, that Gehezi and his posterity should live for ever, or his
offspring should never fail: but that as long as he, or any of his posterity
should continue to live, so long they should be leprous. Again, what Clem.
Writer said was not mere folly, for can any considering man deny, but in a
Scripture-dialect, Go, teach all nations etc teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you; And lo, I am with you always, even unto
the end of the World: this may pass for Conditional? Is it not allowable in
common talk, Go, do this, or that, and lo I give you, etc.

I now come to explain Ephesians. 4.11, 12. in which place I find Mr. Baxter to be
the same man still: and no better a textuary in one place then another. As in
Matthew Christ promised the disciples he would be with them till the total
remove of the Jewish ordinances, and establishment of Christianity; so the
Apostle Ephesians. 4. says that he made good his word; when he ascended (near
which time he made the promise in Matthew) he gave some Apostles; and some
prophets; and some Evangelists; and some pastors and teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. Thus our English reads it: But the Greek bible printed
Compluti, has it thus, (...). He gave some Ap^s^les, some prophets, some
Evangelists, some pastors and teachers for the perfecting of the Saints unto
the work of the ministry for the edifying of the body of Christ. So the Latin
version there has it -- pastores and doctores ad consummationem sanctorum in
opus ministerii in edificationem corporis Christi. Here is no succession of
Ministers, no distinction of ordinary and extraordinary officers, some to
build, others to lay the foundation: But Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
pastors and teachers, all are given [not to perpetuate in a succession, but]
to perfect the Saints for the work of the ministry. The persons to carry on
the work are the saints perfected for it, and the end of their ministry is the
building up of the body of Christ. Judge now, Sir, how Mr. Baxter is out in his
Greek, who from Ephesians. 4. says, Pastors and teachers [are given to the
Church] for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ etc. Extraordinary and ordinary officers are
here conjoined, who between them are to perfect the building, the first laying
the foundation, and the latter building thereon. These last words contain a
distinction not recorded in Scripture, and it is an usual saying, non est
distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit. None ought to distinguish where the law
(especially God's law) is silent. Oh! that Mr. Br. would prove pastors and
teachers to be distinct: or that the latter together with prophets (whatsoever
become of Evangelists) were any way Officers: or, that we are to recede from a
literal sense to a figurative one, when there is no necessity; yet it is
observed by Grotius upon the place, that here is a Trajection, the immediate
end of the Apostles, etc. ^eing given, was the work of the ministry. But not
only does the literal placing favor me, but also the construction of the
words in Greek that change, (...).
of prepositions [especially the proper Syntaxe of (...) being with (...)]
cannot be insignificant. The text as I have represented it, and expounded it,
agrees with the best manuscripts, with the Bohemian, Danish, German, Polinian
Versions. The Spanish Testament has it, for the consummation of the Saints in
the work of the Ministry, etc. (see Elias Hutterus) In sum, the very vulgar
edition of Pope sixtus reads it no otherwise: And he must have no skill in
Greek that admits it not, since all periods, commas, parentheses, accents,
distinctions into chapter and verse, all these are novell and of no authority.
You may now give me, leave to dismiss Mr. Br. from his Greek examen, I hope I
have not been tedious though long; and that the effect of these last
digressions will be more then an use of humility to Mr. Baxter. For his Latin,
as to the composure thereof, if one of the Articles for condemning John Husse
the Martyr to the fire, was that he wrote false Latin, Mr. Baxter would not
have escaped at the Council of Constance. There is a marginall account of his
maladies in Latin p. 90. Postea autem affectione Hipochandriaca
innumerabilibus fore stipata symptomatibus per annos 14 laborasset, in longam
tandem and inexpugnabilem inciderit debilitatem and contabescentiam, and demum
in narium haemorrhagiam ad l. 8. and inde in Atrophiam, pro deplorato a medicis
petitissimis relictus est: in qua tamen Atrophia ex immensa Dei bonitate
debilis ad huc supervivit: modis etiam poste^ mirabilibus ex orci favibus
saepius ereptus. If I had a better account of the state of his body, I should,
I think, as much laugh at the miraculous recital of his infirmities, as I now
do at his Latin elegancies: my present thoughts are, that if he understood [by
all his philosophy, and physick] the nature of the blood, and life of man, and
had considered the story of the man in Oeneadis Hippocr. Epidem. 5.. 6. his
cure would have seemed less miraculous, and Physicians more ignorant. But some
may say, that one who cannot write Latin may understand it, and so he may be
sufficiently qualified for the repute of learning, if he have but so much as
will enable to apprehend others: he quotes Latin Authors, Fathers, Councils
and Schoolmen in abundance. There are not wanting those that will say he has
not capacity enough to understand the latter [and I would evince it in some
particulars, but I will reserve several things till a further occasion, when I
may either have time to read over his works, or the public concerns may
require it though I grant him knowledge enough for that purpose, as far as a
small skill in Latin will advantage him, and a very small skill is sufficient
for that design: But that any man should think without a profound knowledge in
Greek, and I atine to determine of antiquity, affairs of the Church, or to be
able to understand the primitive Fathers, is to me the greatest folly that an
Hypochondriack can be possessed withal. That single controversy of Episcopacy
is of such difficulty, and requires so much of this learning an conve rse with
an infinity of Greek Authors, (the versions of which are very bad) that I
pity Mr. Baxter if any solid Episcoparian shall daign to make him his
adversary.

Though the insertion here be unseasonable, yet give me leave to tell Mr. Br.
that it was ignorantly said of him in his second sheet for the ministry, p. 12.
shat the Quaekers had no being in the World till a few years ago. If he means
as to the name, I grant it; but so had not the protestants; as he admits of:
but if as to the generality of their opinions and deporment, I DO A VOW it out
of as sure and good records as any can be produced, that they can plead more
for themselves from the first 270. years, then Mr. Br. for the present Orthodox
religion laid down in the Saints ever lasting rest, or the confession of the
Assembly. It is false that he says, the Puritans were Presbyterians. It is
false that he says the Protestants allow not of wars against their
Magist^ates, and of deposing them: let the practices of France, Geneva, Savoy,
Holland, Germany, Swedeland, Switzerland, Scotland be examined. It is a base
belying of the English Papists to charge them with disloyal doctranes in
general: They have written better against the Pope's power in temporal's then
Mr. Baxter. They do not own his infallibility, nor will they grant him any
power to deprive Kings of their Kangdoms, and civil subjection by
encommunication. They hate the Jesuits, (and many noble families will not
admit them within their doors) and revere the memory of Widdrington, Preston,
etc. as much as they detest Parsons, and Garnets actings. Their Remonstrances
to Q. Eliz. their subjection to K. Edw. 6. K. James, and the testimonies they
gave in the late wars, besides the transactions under a Protestant King in
France and the State of Venice, abate the Universality of a charge, whereof the
Spaniards, Jesuits and Courtparty of Italy are only guilty. These things may
satisfy you, or any else, of Mr. Baxter's great abilities in several studies,
of an whereof the Apostle said, who is suffierent for it! To conclude his
Extravagancies he is of late turned State-Tinker, and demeanes himself in
politiques as successefully as in other matters. Oh! what pity it is I cannot
write him Mr. Br. of Banbury, as well as Kederminster! I know not whose
pensioner he is of late become; but any man may see whose projects he venteth:
if he be not bribed, I am told he has been cajolled, and caressed with
complements and presents into an esteem for a compliance with them whom he
ought to detest no less then others. Possibly this is not true; and possibly
our young-states-man may be such a novice as to be insensibly drawn in by
Courtartifices. In his address to his Highness before his Key, etc. He
desires that he would frustrate the subtility of the Democraticall politicians
that are busy about the change of Government, and would bring all into
confusion under the pretense of the people's liberty or power, and would have
the major part of the Subjects to be the Sovereign of the rest, that is the
worst, that are still the most; and the ignorant, that cannot rule themselves;
and the vicious, that are enemies and hinderers of piety; and the worldlings,
that mind nothing but what is under their feet, and have no time to think on
Heaven, they have so much to do on Earth; as Augustine says, had rather their
were one Star less in Heaven, then one cow less in their pastures: these
must be our SOVEREIGNS. If Politicians be taken by him in an evil sense, it
seems Mr. Br. has no great quarrel with them, so they be not Democraticall:
according to what is usually observed, if one fawn upon the Clergy though he be
as perfidious in all his actings as the most proflicate politic, yet shall he
possess their regards: But for a Democraticall politician, I understand not
the name, if it be a co^umely; for to seek the public good, to decry and
subvert all self-interested designs, to continue all power in the hand of the
people, have so little of particular advantages in them, that it is not for
corrupt policy to embrace that party Aristotle tells us that they who are ruled
by the arbitrary commands of men (and all governments are such where the
Magistrate is no otherwise bound by law, then that he is judge of his own
deviations) are governed by beasts; but they who are governed by laws are ruled
by God. They are busy to change the Government! are not the Baxterians so too?
Is there any for the present model of affairs? But Mr. Br. mistakes; they
would preserve the Government, and the Monarchiall politicians would change it;
they would continue that liberty wherein the long Parliament enstated us; and
to perfect a fabric, is not to alter it: it is one thing to be Protector, and
another to be Sovereign of a Commonwealth. They would bring all things unto
confusion! because they would bring all things to a settlement, and fix the
mountain (as far as prudence permits) beyond a possibility of removal: they
would secure the laws and immunities, the the spiritual and civil enjoyments
of the good people of this land, and that undenyably: yet with Mr. Br. these
are but pretenses! shadows! not worth the striving for! However all change is
not to be condemned, but such as is for the worst; nor all confusion, if the
issue thereof be the public safety. Mr. Br. is a practitioner in physic;
poisons and wholesome medicines, both alter the body, both create a confusion
in the humors, yet does the one destroy, and the other Save. But they would
have the Major part to be Sovereign of the rest. If so, then not Sovereigns,
as he afterward says: you may see how much he has thought on what he says,
who in so few lines cannot only speak nonsense, but contradict himself. In a
Democracy neither all, nor the Major part of the people are Sovereigns, but
that Sovereignty which one Monarch possesses, the people share by actual
exercise of their natural right: Nor is any member of a well-formed
commonwealth cancluded by any majority to which he has not previously
consented, or in the Election of which he has not demeaned himself with as
much prudence, as they who plow and sow not fearing a deluge or drought. It is
false that the most are still the worst, and ignorantest: Mr. Br. that is
accounted, probable which seems so to the most: and Aristotle says, that the
multitude, ((...)) judges better then any one man whosoever: The multitude too
is not so bad as Mr. Br. thinks: such vices as render men unfit for state
employments are the debaucheries of a few, and not of a multitude, unless that
multitude be under one. I never yet read of a Monarchy which did not in it is
own tendency corrupt the best men; nor can I imagine a regulated Democracy,
upon a balance, ballot, and rotation of Governors which will not amend the
worst of men: Wickedness and Ignorance universal are the consequences of
Monarchy; they who plead that all may be free, and capable of bearing such
offices as they can merit, it is their interest as well as intent all should
deserve. These trifling arguments of Mr. Baxter will not persuade the state of
Venice, Holland, Switzerland, Geneva, the Hanse-townes out of their liberty,
nor overthrow the real happiness Rome, Athens, Sparta, Syracuse, etc. enjoyed
under that form of Government. I am sorry Mr. Br. did not live in the time of
Caligula, he who brought his horse into the Senate, would have allowed Mr.
Baxter a place in his Cabinet, where he might have argued about the convenience
of a change of the principality of Rome into a Kingdom. God Almighty
established a Commonweal amongst the stiff-necked Israelites: Christ endowed
his Church therewith; yea the name thereof, and others therein used are taken
from this popular Government. Was not Christ Jesus then faithful to him that
appointed him? was not Moses faithful in all his house? Or are not these things
written for our instruction, who are so far from being incapable of a
Democracy, that we are not capable of a Monarchy. (It is only for the
ignorant, and unexperienced to commend a Linsey-woolsey mixt-Monarchy: nor is
it for a Christian here to practice an absolute one) I would this puny statist
had showed his Highness how he must have debauched the Gentry out of their
estates, and advanced a Nobility to such riches and esteem, as that their power
might overballance the Commons; (without which there is no security) or that he
had divided the land unto Timariots, and so erected a Monarchy upon a military
interest: or showed a third way of settlement. But I leave this cause to be
managed by better pens, though I may remit Mr. Br. to the Lord Broghill, who
in his Parthenissa has excellently debated the case of a Republic, let them
give, or receive satisfaction one of another. As for Mr. Harrington there is
too much of learning and judgment in his works that I should refer Mr. Br.
thereunto: his model is so far above the praises, as it agrees with the
posture of our Nation.

Sr. I should entertain you with more raillery about Mr. Br's. Catholicisme
(that is a Greek word, but not the only one which he makes use of though he
understand them not) and with his designs for peace, in which there is nothing
almost good but the designs themselves. But I shall no longer detain you from
reading a vindication of the truly Honorable Sr. Henry Vane, which was the
principal motive (next to the concerns of the public) that induced me to this
writing. You may from what I have already said frame a character of this
Retailer of other men's reading, and Quoter of quotatations? Mr. Baxters his
abilities, and discretion; the latter cannot be so little, but the former is
less; and if you will any way uphold his credit, it must be by such a
distinction as whereby Strafford lost his Head; though the parts of his
accusation were not treasonable, yet put together they did amount to
Accumulative Treason, so Mr. Br. may own an accumulative learning though he be
deficient in all manner of knowledge.

Had this Honorable and pious Knight had any other name, Mr. Br. had lost
several jeasts and clinches, which I shall endeavor to preserve to posterity,
that they may know the man had some wit though no learning. In the dedication
to his Highness he calls such as adhere to Sr. H. Vane the Vani. and p. 342.
The Vane and Steril language of Paracelsian Behmenists and popish juglers does
serve me for no other use but to raise me into suspicion of their designs and
doctrines, and to signify a Vain and Steril mind. I am heartily sorry (out
of compassion to the new edition of Archy, the Court-fool, his jeasts) that for
Sr. Henry his adversaries name was not Sr. Walter; and a controversy was not
agitated, whether the Surname were FANE or VANE, then we should not have been
put to repetition for want of fresh wit, but out of physic we might have heard
of the Tela Gualiteri; I am Scandit Gualter had not been lost; nor would Mr.
Br's persecuting spirit (I am informed that he struck a Quaker openly) have
omitted the raillery of an Halter. We should have heard of fictions too (as now
of Hiding) and a Grammatical dispute might have been moved, whether the new
Cavaliers should not be called the profane, profani tanquam procul a fano, as
being opposites to the Fanes: you will pardon me if I took notice of this
Kedenminster wit; it is remarkable in regard both of the Vanity and Sterility
of the man, that neither Malice (which usually supplies natural deficiencies
in point of wit) nor Melancholy (which Aristotle observes to dispose men to
ingenuity) should not furnish him with better Quibbles; yet they are as good as
what he objecteth in earnest against the aforesaid Patriot. So certain it is
that we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. He very often
reflects upon him under the term of an Hider. I do not apprehend his reason for
it; fince Sr. H. V. has never declined to give forth an account of that hope
that is in him. He speaks plain and good English, and if in his words the
spirituality of the matter make all seem to be hidden, it is but the fate of
the greatest soul-saving truths, that they are hid to them that perish: the
Calumny of Mr. Br. is very old, and made use of by the old Serpent in the
Apostles time: but they having renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, gave
this reason of their hidden words. If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost: in whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of them that
believe not, least the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the
image of God, should shine unto them. 2. Cor. 4. v. 3.4. But what reason is
there Sr. H. should suffer for Mr. Br's intellectualls? thousands bear witness
to the pretionsnesse of those truths, they are his seal, and experiment the
comfort of what Mr. Baxter condemns as vain and empty. This will be of no
strength till our great physician avow that we ought to resign up our senses to
the delusions of Hypochondriaques; and because the stupid do not, we must not
say we do feel. What if Paul be reputed a babbler by the Grecians (as Sr. H. is
by one that is no Grecian) what if the doctrine of saving grace be a
stumbling block to the Jews, and folly to the Greeks? must the saints
therefore quit their hopes of Salvation, and that which is to them a Savor of
life unto life? We know what it is that the animal man entertaineth not,
because it is foolishness unto him, neither can he, because it is spiritually
to be discerned: But shall the man of God be concluded by those his sentiments,
that he should thereupon renounce him, who is made unto us wisdom, and
sanctification? shall the enlightened complain of Darkness, because to others
the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not? If Sr.
H. Vane had opened his mouth in parables, how should he have been called an
Hider? And may not Mr. Br. be called an Hider, that he obscures the light of
the Gospel by intricate disputes? is there any thing more hid then the
Aphorisms, which if no man should be justified but who understand them upon
Mr. Brs. proposal, the redeemed of the Lord will make up a less flock, then is
conceived? Might not he also be called an Hider, because under a pretended zeal
he hides the malice of others in his slanderous books.

He tells his Highness in the dedication that the Vani have been confounded by
God by wonders in New England, but have here prevailed far in the dark. As
for their prevailing in the Dark, I am not acquainted therewith. I am sure Sr.
H. never hid his candle under a bushel; what he has taught, he has done it
openly, before great Auditories, and as great personages for spiritual
discernings as this nation affordes. He may almost reply in Christ's words, I
sat daily with you teaching in the Temple, and ye laid no hold of me. But
suppose the Vani had increased in the dark: ought that to prejudice a good
case? Or is it not a reflection upon the iniquity of such Governors as forced
truth into corners. Truth and error may increase in the dark, but the former
brings a light to dispell darkness, which the other augmenteth, or does only
vary.

As for the wonders wherewith, God has witnessed against them in New England I
am a stranger to the transactions of that land; yet I may very well suppose Mr.
Br. has not omitted any thing that might tend to their disrepute in that
digression which he on purpose framed against them. p. 330. The principal of
these Hiders are the Vani, whose game was first played openly in America in New
England, where God gave in his testimony against them from Heaven upon their
two prophetesses, Mrs. Hutchinson and Mrs. Dyer: the latter brought forth a
monster with the parts of a bird, beast, fish, and man, which you may see
described in Mr. Welds's narrative, with their discovery, the concomitants, and
consequents. The former brought forth many (near 30) monstrous births at once,
and was after slain by the Indians. This providence should at least have
awakned England to such a Godly jealously, as to have better tried the
doctrines which God thus seemed to cast out, before they had so greedily
entertained them, as in part of Lincolne-shire, Cambridg-shire, and many other
parts they have done. At least it should have wakened the Parliament to a wise
and godly jealously of the councels and designs of him that was in New England
the master of the game, and to have carefully searched how much of his doctrine
and design were from Heaven, how much of them he brought with him from Italy,
or at least was begotten by the progenitour of monsters. Such extraordinary
providence ought not to be despised.

I am not in a place where I can either inform my self of those accidents in
New England, and how far what Mr. Br. says out of Mr. Weld's is true: nor
can I meet with Mr. Weld's narrative that I might see whither Mr. Br. do more
truly vouch him, then the word of God, or Greek writers: I would therefore
grant his Assertions, did not that passage of Sr. H. Vane's bringing his
doctrines with him out of Italy (where he never was) make me tender of
crediting all Mr. Br. says. I have since the writing hereof spoken with Mr.
Clerk of New England, who was there at the time of these monstrous births. As
for Mrs. ^yer he could not say any thing of his own knowledge, but that she was
privately delivered, two women only being by, of a falsebirth, which was buried
immediately: and from these two women comes this Narrative: for though it was
dug up eight days after, yet the shape was not determinable. He was at Mrs.
Hutchinson when she was delivered of what he had long foretol^ would be a Mola:
it was a misshapen beast, which being separated from its c^ates and integuments,
did put into four pieces, two were like clotted blood in a tunicle, and two
like cluste^s of grapes, being a congeries of little round bladders full of
water only. This he was an eye witness of; and Mr. Cotton having related
openly such stories as Mr. Br. does, did in the open Congregation at Boston
retract them, as I expect Mr. Br. should do no^, or prove each vesicula of
water to be a m^ster.
The name of prophetesses is made use of by way of reproach (I suppose) God
forgive him! Luther was not against women's prophesying; nor God, who, besides
instances in the old, under the new testament endowed Philip's daughters with
prophesying; and Peter says Act. 2. v. 16.17.18. This is that which was spoken
by the prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass in the last days, (says God)
I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your
DAVGHTERS shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old
men shall dream dreams: and on my servants, and on my HANDMAIDENS, I will pour
out in those days of my spirit, and they shall prophesy. But Mr. Br. likes not
this dispensation of the spirit; the Holy Ghost though it be given to every one
to profit with [(...)] ye women must be excepted until Mr. Br. learn Greek.
It is observable that Mr. Br. in the body of his book speaks timorously, as
if his Objection from the providentiall actings of God were of no great moment.
These things should have awakened at least England to such a godly jealousy as
to have better tried the doctrines which God thus seemed to cast out, before
they so greedily entertained them. -- I am confident S. H. V. never desired any
man to embrace his doctrine without trying it: the example of the Beraeans does
not offend him: being assured of the truths he lays down, that they will
abide in the day of the Lord, he fears not man's day. Yet he conceives that
the precept to try all things, does not exclude the holding fast [or laying
fast hold on] that which is good. To such enquiries he wishes all men were
inclined, and that not upon the motives Mr. Br. lays down, but upon the
account of souleconcernes. As for Godly jealousy, I understand not the term; I
see Mr. Br. is not always Zaphnath Pahaneach (as Pharaoh named Joseph, Genesis
41. v. 45.) or a discoverer of what is Hidden; he is now got amongst the
Hiders; and indeed it is no commendation for him to Hide Malice. Godly
jealousy is of a destroying nature: Phinehas the son of Eleazer when he slew
Zimri and Cozbi is said to have had a Godly jealousy, Number. 25. v. 11.13. Zeal
and jealousy for God being all one, both there and elsewhere. How far then
this Godly jealousy should have extended, Mr. Br. limits not: nor yet that
wise and godly jealousy in the Parliament, which Sr. H. Vane is so far from
dreading, that he would join (I dare say) with Mr. Br. in the advice: he ownes
no doctrine nor designs but such as Heaven inspires him with, and which he
will not be ashamed of on earth, least Christ should be ashamed of him before
his father. If he had been in Italy he would have brought thence no other
designs, no other faith then what Paul planted there, and of which he tells
the Romans, that their faith was spoken of over the whole earth. Yet is not Mr.
Br. so moderate here as he might have been, for if God did but Seem to cast
out the Vanists, how comes he to say that God has given in his testimony
against them from Heaven upon their two prophetesses. Who taught Mr. B. to make
positive conclusions from seeming premises? Thus he told the Protector, that
God had confounded them by wonders.

All this is but a remote argument drawn from the providentiall actings of God
in and upon two persons that witnessed some of those truths (though with
several weaknesses) unto which Sr. H. Vane has given out a testimony amongst
us. There are some that cry up Mr. Br. for a rational disputant, unless he
have given them other evidence then I see, it must be for some hidden
excellencies. I know not how he came to be of God's counsel, and to understand
the intent of his various dispensations. He was a wise man (without
disparagement to Mr. Br. be it spoken) who said Eccles. 9. v. 1. 2. 3. All this
I considered in my heart, even to declare all this, that the righteous and the
wise and their works are in the hand of God: no man knows [except Mr. B.]
love or hatred by all that is before them. All things come alike to all, there
is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean:
it is a very unsafe way then to argue from events to the justice of a cause, or
it is injustice, for those things Mr. Br. urges, (though it be not necessary
that Monsters should be ominous, as Licetus and Riolanus observe) they may as
well [unlesse Mr. Br. hide a part of his evidence] have been warnings to the
Colony or natives, as Vanists. When a Sheep of old yeaned a Lion, it was no
ill-aboading presage to the sheep, but to the Commonwealth that should fall
under Tyranny. God often times takes away the righteous, but in mercy, and out
of judgment to the surviving wicked. The Eclipse at Christ's death, the
disturbances and destruction ensuing in Judea, were no declarations against
Christianity: no more then the sad ends to which many of the Apostles and other
eminent Servants of God came, James was slain by the sword, Paul scourged, and
sh^p-wracked at Melite, there a viper fastened on his hand, and the people
(like Mr. Br.) concluded, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he has
escaped at sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live. The Calamities that befell
the Roman Empire upon the preaching of the Gospel, if Mr. Brs. arguing hold
good, (contrary to Tertullian) were by them justly attributed to the Gods
attesting against the Christians. The new Star, the comet at the beginning of
the reformation, was differently expounded by the Papists and Protestants. At
Charenton (not many years ago) there was a boat cast away on the Lords day
full of French Gentry and others, [either coming from, or going to Church]
which the Papists avowed for a judgment; but Mounsieur Daille in a sermon about
those on whom the tower Siloam fell, refuted those conjectures. As they upon
whom the tower of Siloam did fall, and they whose blood Pilate mingled with
their sacrifices, were not greater sinners then others; but suffered for
example, that all might repent: so I hope Mr. Br. will acquit O. P, from an
ominous dissolution; that day being famous for the vanquishing of one, and
death of another usurper.

But might not one say, that the prodigious birth of Mrs. Dier's, was a
witness against the polity of those days in it is several corruptions: men
desiring then Unity, though of persons as Heterogeneous as was her monster? Or,
might it not be an Emblem of the various temptations, thorough the influence
whereof they who either reject or hold the truth in unrighteousness are
instigated; and such are the spoils of birds, beasts, and fishes, wherewith
man either prideth or pampereth himself. It is an adulterous generation that
asks a sign; and it is none of the wisest that judges thereby. Her death is
to be laid at the doors of them that persecute her, so as that to avoid the
terrors they affrighted her with, flee fled, and was slain by the Indians as
they set upon the Dutch planters.
As for Mrs. Hutchinson's being slain by the Indians, Mr. Br. ought to know,
that there is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is a
wicked man that prolongeth his life in Wickedness. Eccles. 7.15. There be just
men to whom it happens according to the work of the wicked: again there be
wicked men, to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous: And
if Solomon say that this is vanity (Eccles. 8. v. 14.) I may say so of Mr. Brs.
arguing I am sure: I could enter upon a discourse about the cause of Monsters,
but that what I have said is enough to chastise Mr. Br. for his peremptory
censure, which (though twice repeated) has little of the two-edged sword, but
much of an edged picture, which according to the different Station of the
beholder entertaines him with a different representation. If one should argue
against Mr. Brs. opinions, that an evil disease cleaves unto the Author,
that God has declared against his tenets by the sad afflictions which he has
laid upno him, that he has visited him in wrath, and chastised him in his
sore displeasure: that by Hypochondriacall distempers he has witnessed against
the flatulency of his brain; that by the maladies of his spleen, and rivers of
blood issuing from his nose, he does wonderously confound his malice, and
sanguinary principles. Satia te sanguine quem sitivistr: that those profusions
from the neighboring parts warn him to employ his eyes in lamenting the
troubles to which he contributes in this Nation; in fine, that the Atrophy of
his body is a manifestation of the Sterility of his principles. These
discourses have a show of as much reason as Mr. Baxter's, and not less
ingenuity.

But Sr. Henry Vane is sundry times by him called close-papist; and such are
desired that they may be kept out of Parliaments, Armies, Councills, etc. There
is none that know the frame of Sr. Henry Vane's spirit, but can bear me
witness, that if the cause of God, and the good of his people amongst us, did
not prevail mightily upon him, and the apprehensions thereof as it were eat
Him up, he had rather enjoy a retiredness under the immediate teachings of
God's spirit, then be taken up with distracting employments in Parliaments and
Councills. This would be to him an infinite satisfaction, (and to be valued
above all those preferments, and dignities, which he as much deserves, as
others can ambition them) to spend his time in soule-converses with his
beloved, and those delights which attend the highest spiritual entertainments,
that so much Meekness, Humility; and unfeigned piety is capable of. As for his
being a close-papist, it is a calumny that nothing but a tongue set on fire by
Hell (and not touched with a coal from the Altar) could utter: which the most
barefaced enemies of the public good and tranquillity of the Nation, the most
ambitious and self-seeking men (with whose interest Sr. H. Vane's uprightness
does enterfere) never yet charged him with. But Mr. Richard Baxter may say any
thing, either as transported with Zeal (though not according to knowledge) or
bribed, or enveigled into such language. There is not a man in this Nation who
has more laid his Ax to the root of Popery, then Sr. Henry Vane; no man has
so thoroughly endeavored to extinguish that Mystery of iniquity, in which Mr.
Baxter, (moderate and healing Mr. Baxter) says he walks. How far Mr. Br.
has been wronged in the charges of Arminianism, Socinianisme, Pelagianisme,
and Blasphemy I shall not now discuss: certain I am that they who charged him
therewith, had colorable pretenses for those imputations; and the very sense
hereof might have made him less precipitate to asperse others; but his
earnestness for Bethel made him not apprehend thoughts of Sion. The Author to
the Hebrews, c. 2. v. 17. says, in all things it behooved Christ to be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest
-- for in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor
them that be tempted. But though Mr. Br. has had his share in
tongue-sufferings, and those of the worst quality, yet has not that disposed
him to a tenderness toward others; and that which was so effectual in Christ,
has lost it is prevalency upon this pseudo-minister. If to destroy all
Spiritual power that usurpeth upon the rule and kingdom of our Lord Jesus, all
soule-oppression, and conscience-distressing persecution, be to be an Abettour
of Rome, it is power, and inquisition; If to cry grace, grace to the building
and builders of Sion, be to comply with Babylon, and make one a partisan of
Antichrist; Farewell all the declarations of afflicted innocence, and let not
Christ [nor Mr. Baxter] call for a confession or profession of faith, which
though never so positive, evident and clear, cannot defend a man from the
imputation of CLOSE PAPIST. Are those doctrines fetched from Bellarmine,
Persons, and Gretser, which are as opposite to them, as to Mr. Baxter's
designs; Did Sr. H. V. divest the civil Magistrate of spiritual power to
invest the Pope therewith, Mr. Brs. words had not been groundless, as now they
are, since he no more advantageth the Pope by such his opinions, then the
Presbyterians, out of which number I do not yet here of any that think Sr. H.
V. does agitate closely their cause, and is underhand an abettour of
Presbytery. To deny the Civil Magistrate power of entermedling in religion;
for this he needed not have gone to Italy, nor consult Bellarmine, Parsons or
Gretser (names made use of merely to draw an odium upon him) The Scotch and
Dutch Presbyters in the Erastian and Vedelian controversies would have
furnished Him with arguments; as Mr. Br. may have furnished himself from their
Antagonists, or from Goldastus's collection of Popish writers, that defended
the Emperor's authority against the Popes. You will perhaps reply, that what I
have said may acquit Sr. H. V. from being an open papist, but not from being
one in secret. Oh! accursed malice! against which there is no defense but an
appeall to the searcher of hearts, since words and actions are not sufficient
fruits whereby to be known! Might not I say that Mr. Br. is a close papist too?
and give you the like answer when you should allege his frequent writings
against them? Nay, could not I add that many men may prevaricate (as Mr.
Baxter says the Jefuites do amongst our forces) and maintain what is not their
judgment, only to create us new divisions? and that the Romanists abound no
where so much, as near Mr. Br? Might not I either, fix any odious imputation
upon Mr. Br. as Arminianisme, Socinianisme (upon another account then that his
book of infidelity is borrowed from Socinus) yea Atheism, and say that he
ownes all, or any of these, but closely. If this procedure be once admitted of,
the whole world must become criminal, and when surmises or bold assertions
shall be taken for proofs none will be able to plead not-guilty.

There is not any thing more (that I know of) which Mr. Br. Mr Rogers in his
Vindication of Sir H. V. gives this full account of his having no hand in the
Kings death: That upon that great change and alteration of affairs in the year
1648, he absented himself from the Parliament, and Lieutenant General Cronwell
who sat upon the Trial of the King, and encouraged the H^gh Court of Justice to
sentence h^^) could hardly, and after much importunity, prevail w^^h Sir H. V.
to resume his place in Parliament and Council of State: Now Mr Ba^^er (the
matter of f^ct being thus stated) if you would have been impartial, you should
rather have said, That your Lord Protector and his followers had a chief hand
in the death of the King (whether upon a public or private account, I leave
it to the Lord) then that Sir Henry Vane and the Vanis^^ were the chief Actors
in it: But you were resolved to cast dirt in the face of this Gentleman, and so
to ingratiate your self with the New Court, the glory whereof is now laid in
the dust, together with all your stattering Addresses.
has objected to this Honorable personage, or reproached him with: for I do
not esteem my self bound to take notice of that Satyr against those Patriots of
the long Parliament and Army, who executed justice upon the late King, and
erected a Commonwealth, I have recommended that part of his book to the
soldiery, who if either their own repute, or the cause of God and of the good
people of this land in their religious and civil concerns be dear unto them,
will not suffer the language of the Pedant to be unpunished. If he had not been
interested in making the Vanists odious, how come they (who were none at all)
to be more Regicides then the late Protector? If Mr. Br. were so impartial, as
some would have him thought, why did he spare his memory, since many of those
things which are charged upon the Vanists Anabaptists, etc. had their rise and
management principally from him, Some were only his Acts. Did not he debauch
the Army, if to engage them to the true service of their country were to
debauch them? was not he an enemy to Ministry and Tithes? did not he maintain
and uphold a toleration? why then was not he upbraided with close popery, etc.
If Mr. Br. is resolved to meddle with no man, but such whose names afford him
occasion for a Quibble; he could not have missed of a Dozen in him, besides
that which is as obvious from the Greek as is that on Sr. H. from the Latin.
Viz. that he endeavored to reduce us to our primitive slavery, to the onyons
and garlic of Egypt: and that he would stink in the sense of all posterity:
these had genuinely issued from the name of Cromwell, and the Greek (...)
signifying an onyon. But I shall leave this discourse to entertain you more
seriously with an enquiry into that invidious question, which does so much
disquiet Mr. Br. and others amongst us.

Whither the civil Magistrate has any thing to do in matters of spiritual
concernment?

Upon that subject I intend to set down what my own thoughts are, without
interesting any therein but my self: being no less resolved alone to receive
all that the Obloqui and malice of others can throw upon me, then to continue
all my life.

Chapter Chapter April. 20. 1659. Sir your most affectionate humble servant H. S.


