NEMO ME IMPUNE LACESSIT SERO SED SERIO The Most Honble. William Marquess of
Lothian
blazon of clan Kerr

TEN Lectures ON THE OBLIGATION OF Humane Conscience.

READ In the Divinity School at OXFORD, In the Year, 1647,

By that most Learned and Reverend Father in God, Doctor Robert Sanderson,
Bishop of Lincoln. etc.

Translated by Robert Codrington, Master of Arts.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Leach* and are to be sold by John Martin, James
Al^stry, and Tho. Dicas, at the S^gn of the Bell in St. P^uls-Church Y^rd, 1660.

SEVERAL CASES OF CONSCIENCE Discussed In Ten Lectures IN THE DIVINITY SCHOOL
AT OXFORD.

By that most Learned and Reverend Father in God, Doctor Robert Sanderson, now
Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Leach, and are to be sold by John Martin, James
Allestry, and Tho. Dicas, at the Sign of the Bell in St. Pauls-Church-Yard,
1660.

To the most Noble Robert Boil, Son to the Right Honorable Richard Earl of
Cork, deceased, and Brother to Richard Earl of Cork now living.
Honorable SIR,
THis small present whatsoever it is, coveteth to prefer it self to your
Trust, and Patronage, and to come abroad into the world under the protection of
your name. Most willingly therefore I do here make a tender of it unto you,
who, as I understand by Fame, (and in Subjects of worth, Fame is seldom found a
Liar) are not only Illustrious by the splendour of your Birth, but far more
Illustrious by the nobility of a generous mind, by your love to Learning, your
Humanity, Piety, and all manner of Virtue, howsoever to me living privately,
and contentedly in a small Cottage, and not much solicitous what is done abroad,
especially as the times noware) never known by your face, nor by your name
until within these few Months, no nor as yet known unto me, but only by your
MUNIFICENCE. Nevertheless I hope this poor gift will find some acceptance with
you, because having already obtained my Rod of Liberty you endeavor to enclose
me again in my ancient circle, and to draw me back to my discontinued exercise,
by proposing to me some honest Salary by the excellently learned Mr. Thomas
Barlow, chief Keeper of Bodleys Library in the famous* University of Oxford, It
is indeed well^done, that in this deplorable state of Civil and Ecclesiastical
affairs, (if we may call (...) and a hideous confusion of all things) there are
peradventure found one or two of a more refined clay, who either by their
encouragment, or their bounty are careful to comfort the sad Muses, and the
Retainers to them, of whatsoever condition, those especially who being
Professors of true and Christian Philosophy are every where neglected, and
despised, as the refuse of the world: I^ any thing therefore (by the permission
of the Almighty) shall hereafter be undertaken and published by me in this kind
of writing, which pertains to moral Philosophy that may be either profitable
to the Public, or useful to any private man, for the better Institution of his
life, and the framing of his manners, by the prescript of the Divine Law and
Gospel, whether it be in the Latin tongue, or in the English, which I perceive
to be more acceptable of to many of our Nation, I do here willingly
acknowledge, and freely profess, that for the greatest part, it is due unto
you, who were both the Author to me to undertake it, and an Assistant
cheerfully to proceed in it: And do you, most w^r^hy Sir, proceed to do good,
that is, to do that which you do already, to adorn Learning, to favor learned
men, to advance Piety, to procure you faithful friends at the charges of
unfaithful Mammon, that so ou^ of the abundance of good works sowed in this
world, there may redound unto you, a most fruitful Harvest of eternal
blessedness in the world to come. Amen.

From Botheby Pannel^ (...) Lincolnshir^. 10 Call. December. 1659.
To the Courteous READER.
Friendly Reader whosoever you are,
BEfore you advance into the House it self, you are ^ere in the first entrance
to be encountered, and desired in some few things to suffer your self to be
informed of the cause that chiefly compelled us to the publishing of these
papers which here we represent unto you. I had rather indeed, if others had
been of the same mind with me, that they should never have seen the light; for
the proof whereof this may be one Argument, and of force enough, that part of
these Lectures, written by me some y^ars since, were never for the space of ten
years, and more, reserved in any Desk, but lay in corners up and down amongst
my rejected, as much as neglected papers; had I not another Argument of far
greater force than the former, viz. The Imperfection of the work, which of it
self does betray it self. For a Writer that understands himself, and makes
provision for his Reputation, and Dignity, m^st carefully finish the work he
has begun, Lib. 2. de Nature. deorum.
and not so much as think of sending* it abroad before (to speak with Cicero)
it be every where apt and polished, and made complete, and perfect, in all the
parts and numbers of it. For in vain from thence you may look for Praise, where
you may think you come off very handsomely, if, for Praise, you deserve Pardon.

What ^h^^fore? Were friends the cause of it? Who are accustomed to encourage
and give more rains to those who of their own accord are running into those
hazards, and to spur on others who draw back? I will not affirm this neither,
for although I may grant that the exhortations, and desires of friends, (the
common refuge of the greatest part of Scriblers) may serve oftentimes for an
honest excuse, yet they could never seem to me to be the just and allowable
grounds for such a Cause. Nevertheless (as most frequently it is seen) there
were not wanting some ergodioctists, some Brain-Exacters who demanded of me,
and (that I may use the words of Fabius) with daily and reproaching
Importunities did efflagitate, that I would present those things to the eyes of
all men to be read, which heretofore in reading were so grateful to their ears,
but I who was not ignorant how acuter was the judgment of the eye than of the
ear did constantly deny it; They, on the other side, were more instant with me,
and more vehemently did urge me, and (as often in like cases it comes to pass)
they did gently chide me; But I, who was resolved to be obstinate, stood fixed
to my self; for whatsoever they could object unto me* I was ready always to
answer them, that a work begun (and not half of it, nor the third part of it
peradventure hardly accomplished) was not rashly to be communicated to the
public; But they again were as ready to reply, Why cease you then? Why do you
not set your self close unto your study, and put your last hand unto that work
which your first hand has so happily begun?

What shall I say for my self in this case? I am ashamed to confess, and I may
not be silent; I answered howsoever, (and what was too true indeed) that unless
some Necessity did enforce me, of which I was not then capable (being out of
the Readers place) it could not be. As a faint-hearted soldier whom only
Desperation makes valiant, grows then hot, and is fiercely carried on unto the
Fight when no subterfuge is left for him, so is my wit, give it leisure, space,
and time, nothing is done; Hotat. Sat. 3.
The Quill in vain is vexed, my mind is unsettled, it roams, and rambles, and
degenerates into sloth. Use compulsion to it, and check it, it unites, and is
entire, it is stirred up and recollecteth strength, and what force it has,
since there must be care and Industry, it puts it all forth at once, and in one
word it does that which is necessary to be done; So the Beams of the Sun
diffused in a free and open air, do so gently warm us, that we are hardly
sensible of it, but being united and contracted into the round of a hollow
Glass, as into a Center, they do vehemently burn. Being by long use instructed
from my youth to this age, I have learned how true is that Hemistich of
Pythogoras -- (...), Pythag. aur Car^^*
Performance is a near Neighbor, and dwells at the next door to Necessity.

And although this imperfection of a slothful mind may to many men appear to
carry before it some show of modesty; yet it seems to me that it cannot be
handsomely defended, unless it be by this excuse, that it is (...) so born and
bred up with some men (and I am in the same number with them) that in vain he
labors, whosoever he is, that hops by any Art to correct it, or by
industry to overcome it. But enough, and too much, of so unpleasing a Subject.

Peradventure you will demand (for as yet we are come up to ^o certainty, and
are returning back still where at first we were) If as you say, you are so slow
of your self, and so contumacious to your friends, from whence at last came
this Edition? Certainly from nothing else but from this very Necessity of which
but even now was our discourse, and which usurpeth so vast a Dominion over the
affairs of men.

(...)*
(...). Euripid.

For wise men speak it, Helen.
and not only we,
Nothing so strong as dire Necessity. Act. 2.

But to hold you no longer in suspense; I will in a few words declare the whole
business to you. All this contumacy was broken as it were at one blow, by Mr.
James Alle^^^y* Bookseller of London, who in his Letter to me, did acquaint me
that two Copies of these Lectures were brought unto him, and that he had them
then in his own custody, in his own house; that he who brought them to him was
in hand with him, that either by himself, or at least by his procurement, they
should be printed, which he denied to do without my consent; He warned me
withal, there being other Copies abroad, i^ hardly could be prevented if I
neglected it, but that they would be published by some one else, I not knowing
of it; I did commend, nay I did love in a man, at that time utterly unknown
unto me the candor of his mind and his reverent respect to Equity; especially
being of their profession, who almost do make their gain their only business.
I therefore wrote back unto him to send me one of the Copies, that seemed to
him to be the fairest of the two, and the most perfect, and in the mean time I
would consider with my self what was needful to be done. To be short, he sent
it I did read it, and examine it, (...), Every Page was turned over, and
nothing was found sound, nothing perfect; for besides the innumerable faults of
the Transcriber, not a few things which in my first meditation were written by
my self with too hasty a Pen, did seem, as they indeed ought, to be called back
again to the Anvel and the Hammer. Hence I perceived I was to undergo a
troublesome and tedious task, to write over the whole work anew, which
nevertheless was to be endured. I endured it, and wrote it over, and did
perfect it as I could, and (if no man be a Debtor beyond his power) as I ought;
If not as I would, I require this one thing as reasonable, (nay as due unto him
who does as much as lies in his power) Pardon.

The Summary of the first Lecture.
1. The reason of the undertaking the work. 2 2. The Definition of Conscience
is proposed. 2 3. The name of the Thing defined. 3 4. etc. And the original of
that name 5 7. etc. Illustrated from the Ambiguity of the word Science. 9 10.
etc. And the H^monymy of the word Conscience. 10 14. Of the Genus of
Conscience. 17 The first opinion that it is an Act is confuted. 18 15. The
second opinion that it is a Potentia. 16. Which is confuted also. 19 17. The
third opinion that it is a Habit Innate. 18. Or a Faculty is stated. 19. And
unfolded. 21 20. The Subject of Conscience (...) or of which. 23 21. And (...)
in which. 24 22. etc. The Object of Conscience. 26 24. etc. The first Act of
Conscience. 29 27. And the following Acts. 31 28. Many things are obscured
rather than illustrated by defining them. 33
The Summary of the Second Lecture.
1. etc. The twofold respect of Conscience. 37 3 The erroneous, and deceitful
Rules of Conscience. 39 4. A good Intention does not suffice to the g^odness of
the Act. 40 5. Which is proved first by the words of the Apostle. 41 6. etc.
Secondly, from the nature of Evil. 43 9. Thirdly, from the conditions required
to the goodness of an Act. 46 10. etc. An Objection is answered. 48 12.
Fourthly, by the perfection of the Divine Law. 51 13. Fourthly, by the
perfection of the Divine Law. 51 13. Fifthly by the revenge of God punishing
the transgression of a Law, although done by a good Intention. 52 14. Sixthly,
from the Inconveniences of the contrary opinion. 54 15. etc. The first
Corrollary we must take heed lest under a pretense of Zeal to Gods Glory we be
not carried away to the committing of unlawful and forbidden things. 56 17.
etc. The second, a less sin is not to be committed by us to avoid a greater
sin in another. 59 19. etc. Whether it be lawful for any man to persuade to a
less sin to avoid a greater. 63 21. etc. The Third Corallary, one evil is not
to be driven out by another. 65
The Summary of the Third Lecture
1. The reason of the method that is here observed. 70 2. etc. The Fact of Paul
reproving Peter. 72 6. etc. All the deeds of the Saints barely recited in the
holy Scripture are not to be imitated. 77 8. etc. No, nor all those deeds
neither which are praised. 78 12. It is an easy thing to err in the
application of examples. 82 14. etc. Some examples of perverse Imitation. 85
16. etc. An argument from the example examined against the custom of kneeling
in the holy Supper. 87 23. etc. What is the use of examples. 95 25. etc. It is
unsafe to subject the Conscience to the opinions of every man. 99 28. The
tyranny of the Pope of Rome over the Consciences of men. 102 29. etc. Not to
impute too much to the judgments of other men. ibid. 31. Nor yet too little.
104
The Summary of the Fourth Lecture.
1. etc. What is that Rule of Conscience to be enquired after? 106 4. etc. To
which we ought to conform our selves. 109 6. etc. Diverse Degrees of those
things which do oblige the Conscience. 111 9. etc. The first Conclusion, God
alone has a peculiar and a direct command over the Conscience 113 12. etc. The
second Conclusion, The next Rule of Conscience is right reason. 116 14. etc.
The third Conclusion, The Scripture is not the Adaequate Rule of Conscience.
119 18. etc. And nothing hereby derogated from the perfection of it. 124 20.
etc. The fourth, The Adaequate Rule of Conscience is the will of God* which way
soever it be manifested. 126 23. Which is also the Fundamental of the
Obligation, 13 24. etc. The three parts of this rule; first the light by nature
infused into the mind, which is the Law of Nature. 131 26. Secondly the light
conveyed into the mind by the written Word of God. 27. etc. 32. etc. In the old
Law, or the Law of Moses. 137 In the new Law, the Law of the Gospel 142
35. Thirdly, the ^ight acquired. 143 Which consists by 36. The discourse of
Reason. 145 37. And the Authority of the Church. ibid.
The Summary of the Fifth Lecture.
1. etc. A rehearsal of what before has been spoken. 147 2. etc. What is to be
understood by the word LAW. 149 5. And what by the word OBLIGATION ibid. 6.
Question. Whether Humane Laws do oblige the Conscience? 154 7. etc. The first
Conclusion. Unjust Laws do not oblige the Conscience. 155 Which is unfolded.
157 9. And confirmed. 158 10. The Second Conclusion. The Law of man can
superinduce a new Obligation to the former. 159 11. The Third Conclusion. A Law
made by one not invested with lawful does not oblige. 162 14. etc. A Discourse
concerning the Office of a Subject, when de Facto it is manifest, that he
commands who has no right to command. 166 22. The Fourth Conclusion. Humane
Laws do oblige of themselves in general. 175 23. And in particular also, by
consequence. 177 24. etc. Which is variously confirmed. 178 31. etc. An
Objection is answered drawn from the liberty of a Christian Man. 184 36 As also
from the allegation that there is but one Lawgiver God and Christ. 190 37. And
from what else is disputed against this opinion. 191
The Summary of the Sixth Lecture.
1. A proposal of the most remarkable things here treated of. 2. The duty of
Obedience and the difference of the either sort of Subjection. 197 4. The
Conscience is free under that obligation which the Laws induce. 20^ 6. etc. The
first Doubt. Of a Law commanding a thing impossible. 202 8. Second Doubt. Or a
thing possible, but very burdensome. 204 9. Third. Or what before was
necessary. 205 10. etc. Fourthly. Or a thing filthy and unlawful, wherein are
Questions and Answers. 207 10. 13. 14. 1 Whether an unjust Law ought to be made
for the public profit? ibid. 2 Whether the Subject be bound to observe it so
made? 210 3 Whether it be lawful for him to observe it so made? 4 what unjust
Law he may obey, and what not? 213
15. 16. etc. What is required to make a Law obligatory? 214 What a Subject is
to do, being not satisfied whether the Law be just, or unjust? 215
18. etc. The Fifth. of the Obligation of a Law permiting evil. 217 22. etc.
Sixth. Of a Law determining a thing indifferent. 222 26. The Seventh. Of
Ecclesiastical Laws in specie. 226 27. Those things are refelled, which are
alleged against them by the adverse party. 228
The Summary of the Seventh Lecture.
1. A Rehearsal of what has been already spoken. 238 2. etc. The first Doubt,
who it is to whom it belongs to make Laws. 237 Where it is stated that, That
the Power of making Laws is the Power of a Superior. 238 4. Having an external
Jurisdiction. 239 5. And that in the highest Command. 241 6. etc. Which
conclusion is largely unfolded. 243 9. etc. And diversely confirmed. 246 11.
etc. The late fiction of a Coordinate Power confuted. 248 13. The second
Doubt. Whether the Consent of the people be required to the obligation of a
Law. 250 14. etc. The chief Command or Sovereignty is from God. 253 19. And is
an offspring of Fatherly Power. 255 17. etc. What are the Peoples parts in
constituting a Prince. 259 21. The People having given the supreme Power to the
Prince have not any right to reassume that Power again. 261 22. etc. How it
comes to pass, that some consent of the people is thought to be necessary to
the obligation of a Law. 264 25. etc. The third Doubt. what? And how far the
consent of the people is required? 266 28. The fourth Doubt. Of the Laws of
less Commonaltyes. 268
The Summary of the Eighth Lecture.
1. A Proposal of things to be spoken. 273 2. Of the PROMULGATION of a LAW. 274
The first Doubt. Whether it be necessary? 275 3. etc. The second Doubt. When a
Law is conceived to be sufficiently published. 276 6. The third Doubt. When a
Law, that is promulgated or published, begins to oblige. 279 7. etc. The
Fourth Doubt. Whether and how far that man is obliged to the observance of a
Law, who is ignorant of the Promulgatian of it. 281 10. Of a LAW PENAL. 28^ The
first Doubt. How far the Constitution of the penalty pertains to the Essence
of a Law. ibid. 1. etc. The second Doubt. Of the Obligation of it; And what a
penalty is? 287 3. etc. What manner of Law a Penal Law is, and how manifold it
is. 290 5. etc. The first Conclusion. A Penal Law does so far oblige, as the
Legislator does intend it. 293 7. etc. The second Conclusion. A Law purely
Penal, does of it self, and ordinarily, oblige only unto the penalty. 295 9.
etc. Diverse Objections are answered. 299 4. The third Conclusion. A mixed Penal
Law does oblige unto the Fault also. 304 5. The third Doubt. How far the
transgressor of the Law is bound to undergo the penalty, ipso facto.
The Summary of the Ninth Lecture
^. The end of the Law is the good of the Commonalty. 31^ ^. etc. The first
Doubt. Whether there be any necessary use of Humane Laws? 312 4. etc. The
second Doubt. Whether it belongs to a Lawgiver to command the Acts of all
Virtues, and to forbid all Vices? 315 ^. etc. The third Doubt. Of what
importance the intention of the Lawgiver is to the effect of the obligation.
320 2. etc. The fourth Doubt. Of the changing of Laws. 322 5. The fifth. Of the
changing of the form of the whole politic Government. 326 6. The sixth Doubt.
How that Axiom The safety of the People is the supreme Law is to be understood.
329
The Summary of the tenth Lecture.
^. etc. A rehearsal of some things already spoken. 334 4. The genuine sense of
this Aphorism, viz. The Safety of the People is the supreme Law, is again
debated and resolved. 146 7. What is to be understood by this word Safety. 340
8. etc. And what by the word People. 342 11. etc. When words coll^ctive, are to
be taken collectively, and when to be taken Discretively. 345 13. The Safety of
the People does include also the safety of the King. 348 14. etc. And his
safety especially. 349 16. In every Commonwealth there must be necessarily
some Authority which is to be above all Law. 351 17. etc. Which cannot belong
to any other but to the Prince only. 353 19. The original of this Aphorism is
examined. 355 20. What Subjects may do in this case, and how far they may act.
357 22. An Illustrious example of it. 359
THE END.
THE FIRST LECTURE* In which the Definition of Conscience is propounded, and
unfolded.
1 COR. 2. 11. What Man knows the things of a Man, but the Spirit of Man
which is in him.
I. THat the power of Conscience is very great, Cicero pro Milone.
either in the respect of Fear or Confidence, has been of old declared by wise
and learned Men, and more nearly and abundantly attested by the sense and the
experience of all Men. It is therefore the more to be lamented that many (while
greedily they employ all their studies in the knowledge of things indifferent)
are in so dark an ignorance in the knowledge of their own Consciences,
notwithstanding there is no where to be found, a more faithful Admonisher, or a
more diligent Accuser, or a Severer Witness, or an uncorrupter Judge, or a
sweeter Comforter, or a more importunate Enemy. That therefore I may instill
into the Minds and Ears of the ingenious, that old, and so often repeated
instruction (...), that is, Know thy self, and divert them a little from the
too immoderate desire of a more unprofitable knowledge, gradually by inviting
them to a greater care and study of their Consciences; I thought it would be a
work worth the labor, if I should a little more diligently inquire into the
use, and Nature of Conscience, and in this place, according to my obligations,
communicate to you, my Auditors, those Meditations which I shall find most
observable on this Subject. I have determined therefore in this first Lecture
to lay open the Nature of Conscience by defining it, and in my following
Lectures, by the Almighties permission, I will expound unto you the use and
office of the Conscience, especially as it reflecteth on things to be done, and
that in a double respect: the first, to the rule of the Law to which it ought
to be Subject, and the other in respect to former actions over which it is
ordained to govern.

II. But the method of defining being twofold, the one Synthetical, or by the
way of Composition, when by due weighing of every part of the premises, the
definition at last is perfectly collected: the other Analytical, and by way of
resolution which does take asunder every piece of the definition, and open and
unfold that, which at first was propounded entire; Although the former may
peradventure seem more convenient to the order of Nature, yet I have made
choice of the latter, which I conceive more fit for instruction. Thus therefore
I do briefly define Conscience. Conscience is a faculty, or a habit of the
practical understanding, by which the mind of Man does by the discourse of
reason apply that light with which he is endued to his particular moral
Actions. In this definition two things do prefer themselves to observation.
First, the name of the thing defined, which is the voice of the Conscience it
self. Secondly, the particular members of the definition, which are all those
that are ordinary in the definition of the qualities of the first and second
Species; that is to say, the Genus, the Subject, the Object, and the proper Act.

III. As to the Name of the thing defined, it is observed by learned men that
in all the old Testament there is not found a Hebrew word which precisely, and
peculiarly does signify the Conscience; But the Hebrews, according to their
custom of speaking, as often as mention is made of Conscience, they make use of
one of those two words to express it (...) or (...), and (...), the first
whereof is known by all to signify the Heart, and the other the Spirit of Man.
According to this is that of Solomon in the fourth of Proverbs; Prove. 4. 23.
Keep thy Heart with all diligence, as if he should have said, Le every one
have a diligent care of his own Conscience; And in the seventh of Ecclesiastes,
where according to the old interpretation the words are, ^ccle. ^. 23.
Thy Conscience knows that thou thy self has often cursed others; And
according unto the Translation of Tremellius, thy Mind is Conscious; It is in
the Hebrew Text (...) that is, Thy Heart knows, And in the new Testament,
especially in St. John, in whose writings there are many Hebraisms; the word
(...), the Heart is often put for the Conscience as John 1 3. 1 John 3* 21.
If our heart condemns us not, that is if our Conscience does condemn us not,
it being the proper office of the conscience to condemn, or not to condemn the
guilty person standing before the tribunal of Justice; From this proceeds that
common allusion of St. Bernard, and others; Conscientia quasi cordis scientia,
The Conscience is the hearts consciousness. The conscience also in the holy
Scripture oftentimes by the Hebrews and the G^ecians is called and expressed by
the name of Spirit; I will only instance two places, for what needs any more in
a thing so evident: In the Old Testament Proverbs the 18 and the fourteenth
verse, The Spirit of man will sustain his infirmity, but a broken Spirit who
can endure? As if he should say, a man of a sound and unstained conscience will
endure with as much courage as patience whatsoever calamities shall befall him,
but an afflicted and guilty conscience is a burden insupportable. And then in
the new Testament, I shall make use of that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 11. which is
the Theme and foundation of this present discourse. What man knows the things
of a man, but the Spirit of man which is in him. That is his own Conscience.

IIII. But most certain it is that the Latin word Conscientia, Conscience and
the Greek (...), which in all things is most responsible to the Latin, did both
of them receive their de^ivations a sciendo, from knowing; but a praeposition
being added to both the words in the pronunciation of them, does seem to imply
more then can hereby be contained in the single word Science; but several
Authors do give a several signification of it. To omit those two allusions that
by many are alleged, (which if we look on the nature of the thing it self,
may peradventure be retained as altogether not improper, but if brought to the
exactness of a lawful examination, will presently appear but vain and not
worthy to be insisted on.) viz. that Conscientia est quasi cordis scientia,
Conscience is no more than the hearts consciousnes; And Conscientia quasi
concludens scientia; Conscience is as it were a concluding Science: It is most
certain that those two words (...) and Conscientia, beyond the bare notion of a
Science, have a certain order and relation of that science to another; for such
is the force of the two particles, (...) and Con, that in their composition
they imply a certain conjunction and an association of many things, so that
this word Conscientia or Conscience may be said to be conjuncta multorum
scientia, a conjoined science of many things, which two ways may be understood;
For it may be said to be the science of many things, in respect of the
subjects, as the science or the knowledge of many men that do know; as when
many persons do know the same thing: or in respect of the objects, when it is
the knowledge of many things that are known, as when the same person knows many
things alike. Let the word Conscience be taken either in the one sense or the
other, the account of the word neither much borrowed nor incongruous may be
given, whether we look on the thing it self, or the use and manner of speaking
amongst approved Authors.

V. For in the first place when many men know the same thing, they may be said
to be conscious of it, and to know it altogether; So those whom Catiline had
chosen into the society of his wickedness, and were made partakers of his
counsels, were said to be conscious of that conspiracy. And he is said to be
conscious of the Kings secrets, to whom his privy counsels are entrusted,
Ascitus in conscientiam facinoris, says Tacitus, Drawn in into the conscience
of the villainy. Mrrtial 12. 24.
O si conscius esset hic Avitus says Martial in his Epigrams, Juven. Sat. 14.
O that this man were conscious of it, and Conscia Matri Virgo fuit, the
Daughter was conscious to what the Mother did; And Meorum omnium consiliorum
periculorumque testis conscius, et adjutor, says Cicero in his orations; A
Conscious witness, and a helper to me in all my counsels and dangers. I should
here be infinite if I should collect whatsoever to this purpose I every where
do meet with in the Authors of greatest reputation; But that may serve which
already is alleged, unless peradventure you exact of me to produce something
from the puddle of the Grammarians which may conduce to this purpose; I will do
it, not that the authority of those men is so much to be valued, but because in
these things they seem as it were by right to arrogate a kind of pre^eminence
to themselves. In the first place, hear Nonius, In hoc differunt, says he,
Scius and conscius, scius secum, conscius cum alio scius est, That is, the
knowing or scious man does differ in this from the conscious; the scious knows
by himself, the Conscious is scious with another.

From this original of the word, they who thought that Conscience was so called
as one Science with another, do give this reason for their opinion, that man
not only knows what things he has committed, but he has God who searches the
heart and the reins, to be a conscious witness and an inspector into all his
works, nay, into his most secret thoughts, And this is most certain, though
words be tongue-tyed, and the Voice be dumb. Behold my witness is in the
Heavens, and (...) my Record that is conscious of me is on high: Job. 16. 19.
The blessed Apostle also St. Paul, in the ninth of the Romans and the first,
when he had called on God to be the witness of the truth he was about to
speak, he presently subnecteth (...), my Conscience bearing me witness; As if
he should have said, (...). Christ knows it, and I know it with him, (...).
Christ does testify it, and my Conscience does a^^est it with him. Let this
therefore be the first reason of the derivation of the word, that Conscience is
so called, because the deeds of Man are known unto God, as well as to himself.

VI. In another sense the Conscience is called the conjoined Science of many
things, as of Objects, or of things that are known, when a man knows many
things at once, or (which strikes on the same string) when he conjoyneth and
jointly applies the knowledges of several things, that are in themselves
distinct. From whence proceeds this second reason of the word, which pleased
much St. Thomas of Aquine, and a great part of the Schoolmen; and which seeming
to be deservedly preferred above the other already mentioned, does bear no
unprofitable light to illustrate the Nature and the force of Conscience, which
is, that Conscience is so called, because it adds Science unto Science, that
is, the universal knowledge, or the knowledge of Law, and Right, to the
particular knowledge, or the knowledge of the fact by applying one unto the
other; I shall make this more manifest to you by one or by two examples, in the
first of Samuel the 24 Chapter, and the 50 Verse, it is said that David's Heart
did fail him, after that in the Cave he had cut off the wing of Saul's Garment,
that is to say, his Conscience did prick him; for we may imagine that David
thus reasoned within himself; I know that I ought not to offer any violence to
the Sacred Person of the King, I know also that very lately I have done that
which comes very near unto violence; I am afraid therefore that I have done
that, which peradventure I ought not to have done, and I give thanks unto God
who held back my hand from acting that which certainly I ought not to have
committed. In this manner also the Conscience of Judas the Betrayer did object
unto him: Thou know that thou ought not to betray thy Master, and thou
know that most basely thou have done it. The sense and knowledge of a
particular fact either committed, or to be committed, coming in this manner to
the universal knowledge of Law and Right which is in the mind, and being
conjoined, and applied, and wholly reflecting on it, there arises from thence
all that which we call Conscience. The words which by way of Reciprocation are
expressed, and are most frequent in this kind, do confirm this derivation of
the name of Conscience, Isocrat. ad Them.
of which nature is that of Isocrates, (...); Although you lie hid from others,
yet you your self will be Conscious to your self, Horace 1.
and that of Horace, Hic murus abeneus esto, Epist. 1.
Nil conscire sibi; This is as a Wall of Brass, to be conscious of no offense;
And that of Virgil, Virgil
Men's sibi conscia recti; A Mind which is conscious to it self of its own
uprightness; Anaead. 1.
And to conclude all, of the same sense, is that of St Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 4.
(...), I am conscious to my self of nothing.

VII. I do believe that it is now manifest to you from whence the word
Conscience is derived, and it is left to your choice to prefer the one
acceptance, or the other, or to receive them both with an equal approbation.
The other Reasons which the common Schoolmen, according to their own
capacities, do produce, are too weak to stop the progress of this discourse,
of which there are many things that are yet remaining to be spoken. I proceed
therefore to open to you the (...) or the cognomination of the word, from
whence there arises amongst grave Authors so wonderful a difference in the
definition, that as yet the controversy is high, and difficult concerning the
very first Term of the definition to find out what is the Genus of it. To
remove therefore all Ambiguity, it is in the first place observable, that there
is such an affinity, by nature, of the Indowments of the mind, viz. of
Potentia's, Habits, and Acts, and so near a conjunction, so close a connection,
according to the use and exercise of them, that not only the appellations of
words, but the offices, and real proprieties of every one of them, are
promiscuously, and without any distinction attributed to one another, and that
not only in the Rhetorical expressions of the Poets and Orators, and others the
Professors of Humane Literature, to whom a Liberty was permitted; but even in
the Dogmatical positions of the Philosophers and Schoolmen themselves, who were
denied that happy elegancy. Nevertheless, although it was always accounted a
great task, in their own certain bounds, to define and distinguish of things so
united by Use and Nature; yet as to the word Conscience which is a kind of
Science, and so named from it, it will be no little advantage to us, in this
place a little more precisely to explain the (...) or cognomination of this
word Science, that so, by the manifold use of the single word, the ambiguity of
the compounded may more rightly, and more thoroughly be understood.

VIII. In the first place therefore (as the Names of Habits do familiarly pass
into their Objects) Science is taken in a double consideration, formally and
objectively. And as the Divines do distinguish of Faith, that, Faith by which
we do believe, which is a Habit of Faith existing in the mind, is one thing;
and that the Faith which we do believe, which is no more than a thing believed
by Faith, and but the object of the former, and extrinsical to it, is another
thing; the first whereof may be called Faith formally, and the or the but
objectively: so in the same manner we may distinguish of Science, and
consequently of Conscience, that they are taken either properly, and formally,
for the very Habit of the Mind by which we know something our selves, or
acknowledge it with others; or improperly, and objectively for that thing it
self which we know, and know that others do know it with us. In which latter
and improper sense, the Law which is written in our Hearts, and is as it were a
rule of well living may be called Conscience; And in this sense is that to be
understood, which is so often repeated in the Schools of Damascene, that
Conscience is the Law of the Mind, when indeed Conscience is not properly and
formally the Law of the mind, but rather an object of the Conscience either
adaequate or in part.

IX. Secondly, Seeing these three things Potentia^'s, Habits, and Acts, are
pertaining to the Soul, and although distinct in themselves, they are yet
ordinated to one another, Potentia's, as the natural virtues of the soul it
self, Habits, as forms perfecting those Potentia's, and enabling them for the
more ready, and the more pleasant exercising of their Acts, and Acts which are
the exercisings as much as the Potentia's, as the Habits, as the names of
Science, and of Conscience do in some measure extend it self to all these. For
as the Carpenter is said to cut, or hew, first with his Axe as his Instrument,
secondly, with the edge of the Axe, as the formal disposition of the
instrument, and thirdly, with the cutting or hewing it self, as the use and
action of the Instrument: in the same manner the mind of man may be said to
know; First, with the Potentia of knowing, as the Instrument, Secondly, with
the Habit of knowing, as a disposition that brings that Potentia to perfection;
and thirdly, with an actual consideration as with the use, and operation of the
Potentia and the Habit. Science hereupon is taken in threefold respect
Subjectively, formally and effectively. First Subjectively, Pote^tia in whom it
is and which it is apt to bring to perfection, as every form in some measure
does perfect its Subject; For example, when we say, that the mysteries of Faith
do exceed our understanding, the meaning is, that they exceed the measure of
our cognitive power. Secondly, Formally, Habit of knowledge, either innate, or
acquisite; in the same sense we are said to know principles known by
themselves, and conclusions by a legitimate discourse of reason deduced from
them, and universally all things of which by the assistance of sense, and
reason, we have any certainty. Thirdly, Effectively, for the actual
consideration of things before known; In which sense (to touch upon it by the
way) the words of St. Paul the Apostle, in the 23 of the Acts, and the 5 verse
(in the expounding whereof, Interpreters have wonderfully perplexed themselves)
are absolutely to be understood. Brethren (says he) I knew not that it was the
high Priest, (...) that is, I did not think, I did not diligently enough
consider of it. As if he should have said; Brethren, pardon my just
indignation, if transported by the heat of a troubled Spirit I have spoken
something more liberally than what became me, being at that instant forgetful
of his place, and person, and of my duty, I ought not to revile the High
Priest, although he has done something unworthy of the honor of it; but the
exilience of my passion did prepossesse me from giving that respect unto him,
which by a more attentive deliberation I should have done. This is the sense of
the Apostle in that place, and it is as easy, as it is proper and pertinent.

X. But I proceed, as Science, so Conscience also is taken in three several
ways or acceptations Subjectively, for the intellective, practical Conscience.
Secondly; Formally for the Habit pertaining to that Potentia^, and informing
it; In the same sense, making mention of a person notoriously wicked, we say he
is a man of no conscience, and that he has either thrown off or lost all
conscience, Thirdly Effectively, for any Habit; as when a man says that he is
conscious of this, or that fact; In which sense is that of St. Peter, the first
Book, second Chapter, and 19 verse. If any man for his conscience to God does
suffer troubles.

XI. Again, seeing that Conscience is properly (...) or a knowledge
Syllogisticall, insomuch that all who do treat of the nature and the method of
it do conceive that it cannot more openly or more aptly be illustrated than by
a practical Syllogism; It is to be observed that the word Science in the very
same respect does fall under a fourfold consideration. First, and most
properly, conclusion, and thus it is taken by Aristotle in his Analyticks and
many other places, Secondly, for the Principles from which conclusions are
demonstrated, as if a man should say he knows that Omne totum est majus
qualibet sui part, Every thing that is whole is more and greater than any part
thereof. Thirdly for the knowledge of the whole syllogism, Conscience (as is
already mentioned) being a conjoined Science, that all which comes under this
name may more fully, and as it were at one sight be discerned: the whole
business (as I conceive) will more commodiously be dispatched, if we shall
frame the whole discourse of Conscience so to consist of two Syllogisms, that
the conclusion of the first Syllogism be the Major proposition of the
following.

Every thing that is unjust is to be eschewed, Every Theft is unjust, therefore
Every Theft is to be eschewed.
Let this be the first Syllogism, the first proposition whereof is known of it
self by the light of Nature: Reason does prove the Minor, and the Conscience
does bring in the conclusion; which conclusion it presently takes up to be the
beginning of the following Syllogism* and applying it to some particular Fact,
accordingly as the Will shall propound unto it, it argues in this manner.

All Theft is to be eschewed. This which is now propounded to me to be done is
a Theft, therefore it is to be eschewed.
And the Name of the Vice being changed, it proceeds in this manner, as often
as it judges of any past particular Fact.

XII. These things being thus stated, I say that Conscience as well as Science
is taken four ways; practical understanding is contained. As if a Man should
say, my Conscience does suggest unto me that this Theft is not to be committed,
or my Conscience cries out unto me, that it ought not to be committed; And the
knowledge of this conclusion is properly (...) or Conscience, as it is distinct
from (...), or a guiltless conservation of ones self. Secondly it is taken
Synteresis which is a guiltless conversation of ones self, is often used for
Syneidesis or Conscience, but improperly, as in this and such like expressions;
The Conscience is nothing else but a Synteresis, or a guiltless conservation
of the mind from falling into any Vice, when indeed between Synteresis, and
Conscience properly so called, there is no little difference; for there is as
great a diversity betwixt this Synteresis, and Conscience, properly so called,
as betwixt Science, and the Habit of the Intellect, which are two habits of the
mind specifically distinct as heretofore we have read in the fifth of
Aristotle's Ethics. As therefore in Speculatives, Intelligence is a habit of
the first principles, about Truth and Falsehood, from whence conclusions are
deduced, out of which proceeds Science; So in practicks, Synteresis is the
habit of the first principles, about Good and Evil, from whence conclusions
are deduced, out of which proceeds Conscience. Thirdly Conscience is taken
Synteresis, and Syneidesis also properly so called. For a man's Conscience does
easily suggest unto him all these things viz. that no unjust thing ought to be
done, and that Theft is deservedly ranked amongst those Crimes which do carry
on them the face of injustice, and that this particular act which is by me now
committed, or which opportunity does tempt me to commit, is the guilt of Acts
23. 1. To the same sense is that of the Author of the Hebrews, Cap. 13. ver.
18. we do assure our selves we have a good Conscience desiring to converse
honestly with all men; and that of St. Peter in the first Book, third Chapter,
and fifteenth verse, where (as a godly and learned man has observed) that
which in the beginning of the verse is called a good Conscience, the very same
thing in the end of the same verse is called (...), a good conversation, for as
often as we do praise and dispraise any one, to be a man of a good or a bad
Conscience, it is by reflecting altogether on his manners, and daily
conversation, without respect to any particular fact he has committed.

XIII. I have expounded these things more largely I confess, then at the first
I determined, or peradventure then you expected; but I presume you will be more
favorable to me, if it shall appear that this prolixity in explaining the
thing defined, will be the means to make the rest of the treatise more
compendious, I shall now proceed in the explication of the Definition of
Conscience it self, and give you an account of every part, and member thereof;
I shall only praeadvertise this, (which indeed is clear of it self) that the
Definition which before I gave you of Conscience, does adaequately pertain to
Conscience properly so called, As it is taken for the knowledge of the last
Conclusion, of a practical Syllogism, nevertheless with the due permutation
of some words it may serve to explain the other significations as usually it is
done in almost all other words which Analogically are aequivocall. The
Definition of Conscience, which I shall repeat again, because of many other
things since intervening, is this, Conscience is a faculty or a Habit of the
practical understanding by which the mind of man by the discourse of reason
does apply the light with which it is endued to its particular moral acts. In
this Syllogism these four things are contained, which by themselves are
severally, and singly to be expounded, viz. The Genus, the Subject, the Object,
and the Act.

XIIII. There is a great and fierce controversy amongst the Schoolmen
concerning the Genus of Conscience; But in the first place they do all agree
that Conscience pertains to the mind of man, but whether to the Potentia, or
the Habit, or the Act, thereof, is a wonderful dissension. Aquinas who in the
Schools has a great trayn to follow him, Aestimare consc^entiam m^^^is suae
Cic. pro Cluent.
does state it to be an Act; whose opinion many have entertained, and not only
the Schoolmen, who are swayed (as I believe,) more by the authority of so
great a man, then convinced by his reasons, but the Divines also of the
reformed Churches, Aqui. 1. qu. 97. 13.
out of a fastidiousness to that contentious generation, had rather in these
things follow the most received opinions (if clear from all tincture of
profaneness, and superstition) then to make too curious a search into their
thorny subtilities. But if I may freely express my self, this most common
opinion is altogether to be disproved, and to overthrow it there needs no other
argument then this. In Conscience there are very many Acts; It dictates, it
forces, it holds, it testifies, it excuses, it accuses, it comforts, it
gnaweth, it tormenteth, etc. But of Acts there are no Acts, but of Forms,
Potentia's and Habits; therefore Conscience of necessity must be, a Form, or a
Potentia, or a Habit, but no Act. To the argument of Thomas Aquinas and those
that follow him viz. That Conscience is an application of the knowledge or
light which is in the Synteresis, or the unstained conservation of the mind,
and that every application is an Act; I answer that the word Conscience (as may
appear by what is already spoken) is taken sometimes Effectively for some
certain Act of it, in the same manner as the word of Science is taken for an
actual consideration, but improperly. For to speak properly, the Application of
Science or Knowledge, is not Conscience it self, but an Act of it; as
consideration is not Science or Knowledge, but an Act of it, therefore
Conscience is not an Act.

XV. It must be therefore a Power, or a Habit; for that it is not a Form, (to
wit the Soul it self, but something of it) is confessed by all men: there are
many of the Moderns who do deny it to be a Habit, and labor to prove it to be
a Potentia, and Memory, for the Intellect reflecting on things Agible, that is,
on things done, or to be done, has a relation to the Conscience, as the
Intellect reflecting on things speculable, has its relation to the Memory. And
it is sufficiently known that the Memory is a Potentia, or Power, and not a
Habit. Secondly, because Potentia is that by which the faculty Acting is
primitively enabled to Act; Now, by Conscience a man is able to dictate to
himself what is to be done, and either to approve or to disprove what has been
performed by it, and that in the first place; because, let him admit but of the
Conscience, he can do all these, take away the Conscience, and he cannot do
them. Thirdly, because it is contradistinct Potentia as Tit. 1. 15. where (...)
and (...) the Mind and the Conscience are openly described as opposite Species;
It is therefore necessary, according to the rules of contrary Species, that
they both must have one, and the same Genus, now the mind is a Potentia; and
therefore so must the Conscience be also. Moreover it is abundantly Conscience
is not a Habit, both because it seems to be as natural to a man, as the Will
and Affections; and because it is found in all; even in Infants and Sucklings,
by a certain instinct of Nature* at that Age when they do not seem to be
capable of Habits.

XVI. Scotils nevertheless, and Durand, and some others of the most subtle
Schoolmen, are of another opinion, viz. that Conscience is a Habit, and to
speak the truth, their judgment is grounded on no contemtible Conscience is a
kind of Science, whereupon the very same Acts are attributed to it, as to know,
and not to know. And thus in the 7 Ecclesi. 23. Scit conscientia tua, thy
Conscience knows; And in the 43 of Genesis 22. Nescimus quis reposuerit pecuniam
nostram in faccis nostris, we know not who did put our money into our sacks,
where the vulgar translation reads it, Non est in conscientia nostra, It is
not in our Consciences. Nil mihi conscius sum (says St. Paul,) in the 1 Cor.
4. 4. I am conscious to my self, that I am faulty in nothing, but Science is a
Habit and therefore Conscience. Secondly, because by the right institution, and
the new information and illumination of the Conscience, a man is enabled to do
that, to which he was before unable, but by the access of the same
illumination, there is no new Potentia engendered in Habit. Thirdly, because
from mere Potentia's, no man is morally denominated either good, or evil, but
from the Habits, neither is he praised or disprais'd for Potentia's, but for
the Habits; but men are said to be good, or evil, and are either praised, or
disprais'd for the quality of their Consciences, therefore Conscience is a
Habit. Potentia's, but to Habits, to be obtained, to be assumed, to be laid
down, or to be lost; but men are said to find, to lose, to take up, and to
depose their Consciences. The Conscience therefore is not a Potentia, but a
Habit.

XVII. I do therefore thus state it. The Conscience properly, and formally and
by a direct praedication is a Habit, yet notwithstanding it may be a Potentia,
and that two ways, first materially, because it is in the Potentia as in the
Subject, (...) that is to say in which; Secondly by approximation, for being
placed as it were in the midst, betwixt Habitum acquisitum, and puram potentiam
a Habit acquired, and a pure potentia, it can assume the name of either, as the
Mediums do participate of either of the Extremes; And hereupon it is that
Conscience is found in little Children, who are not capable of acquired Habits;
Neither is it altogether necessary that (...) and (...) the mind, and the
Conscience, in Tit. 1. be contradistinct as bare Potentia's, but it seems
rather that both words are there taken by a Synecdoche; the mind for the
speeulative Intellect with all its pertinences, as the Schoolmen speak it, and
the Conscience for the practical Intellect with all its pertinences, that is,
with all the faculties, Habits, and Acts, and what do respectively pertain to
any of them.

XVIII. In the Definition of Conscience, I have placed the word Faculty, which
in some measure does seem to me to be common to the Potentia's and Habits, and
is very proper to signify Habits innate. Peradventure you will object, that
every Habit is acquired by often actings, and therefore this does so appertain
to the essence of a Habit that Habits are especially to be known from
Potentia's by it, as by a specifical difference, to wit, that the Potentia's
are accquired, and the Habits natural, therefore unless a man will maintain
mere contradictions, he ought not to say that Conscience is a Habit innate. To
this I answer, that it must be indeed confessed that all Habits whatsoever,
both are, and ought to be called accquired, nay even those Habits which seem to
be most natural, and for this cause, because they want the assistance of the
senses, and many praevious sensible actions that so the Species of things
sensible (in respect whereof the Soul of it self is like a clear Table Book)
may be conveyed into the Phantasy, and become at last intelligible;
Nevertheless some Habits may be called, and with great reason too innate, for
as much as the mind by an inbred-light does immediately give an assent to the
thing propounded, without any fear of the opposite to it, only the Apprehension
of the Terms being supposed; neither to procure its assent, does it want the
helps of internal study or external institution. For example, The Intellective
Habit of this Principle, Omne totum est majus qualibet sui part, Every thing
that is whole is greater then any part of it, is a Habit innate so far as by
the force of the light of Nature, and only out of the apprehension of the
Terms, the truth thereof of its own accord does enter into the mind, without
any study or Teacher; And yet nevertheless this Habit is acquired, so far as it
needs the assistance of the senses, that so by often actions in sensible
things, one may arrive unto the knowledge of the Terms, that is to say, what
belongs to the whole, and what unto the parts.

XIX. If it may be yet objected that the Conscience cannot be called an Innate
Habit, for those things which are Innate, are not capable of error, neither
can they be defective, and they are the same in all, in whomsoever they are,
but the Conscience can err, and be evil, neither is it the same in all men, I
make answer, that it does indeed follow from this that the Conscience is not a
Habit simply innate (which no reasonable man will affirm, for it is repugnant
to Nature, but as partly (as before mentioned) it is innate, so also it is
partly acquired. The Soul of man does bring with it as it were, some seeds of
knowledge of good, and evil, which grow up and are perfected by study and
institution; In the same manner, natural agility is completed by Exercise, and
natural Logic, by Logic artificial; the Conscience therefore in respect of
those moral Agibles, which as the Schoolmen speak, are of the first Dictates
of Nature, and are its primary objects, is a natural or an innate Habit, and is
alike in all men, and is always right, without any error or depravation; but
in respect of those things which are afterward learned and come close up unto
those first principles, (...) whether it be by an internal and proper
meditation, or an external institution, it is a Habit acquired, and may be
erroneous, and defective.

XX. But this is enough, if not too much, of the Genus of Conscience. I shall
more briefly dispatch the rest. The second member of the Definition is the
Subject which is twofold, viz. Subjectum (...) and Subjectum (...) the Subject,
in which, and the Subject of which; The Subject (...) or of which, is man, or
rather a reasonable creature, Math. 8 29.
if we will speak more exactly, for it is found in holy Writ, that the Angels
themselves are conscious of their Rebellion, James 11 12.
and of the punishments thereby due unto them, 1 Corinthians. 6. 3.
and that they know they shall be tormented, yet nevertheless they tremble at
the revealed word of God, as also that they are to be judged at the coming of
the Lord, and to give an account of all things they have done. But because it
belongs not much to this discourse to know the nature of Angelick minds, and
it has pleased the most wise God to make but little mention of it in the
Scriptures* I have appropriated this Definition of the Conscience unto man
only; For although in brutish creatures there appears a shadow of Conscience,
as of reason, and many things are performed by them which do bear a show of
Justice, and Prudence, (as indeed what is reported of Elephants, and of the
policy of Bees, and Dogs, and of some other living Creatures is much to be
admired) yet they are all but the works of the Phantasy, and not of Reason, and
they proceed from a natural Instinct, and not from Conscience. Man therefore is
the proper Subject as well of Reason, as of Conscience, and every man is so,
the very Heathens, the Reprobates, and even Infants themselves, being not
excluded. As for the Heathens, St. Paul Romans 2. 15. expressly speaks, that
they do show the works of the Law to be written in their hearts, their
Consciences bearing them witness; And the same Apostle* Tit. 1 15. declares,
that the filthiest persons have a Conscience although an impure one, for the
uprightness and integrity of Conscience is lost by the Fall, and not by
nature. And being regenerate and new born, there as no new Conscience infused,
which before was wanting, but the Conscience foul before, and impure by sin,
being sprinkled with the blood of Christ, is purified by Faith* according to
the eternal Counsels of the Almighty God; And even in young Children (that the
name of God may be magnified in sucklings) some Sparks do fly from the ashes of
the old fire, and though but very weakly, there is some light of reason to be
seen, the force of Conscience so early working in them, that if they have
committed any trespass, they will modestly strive to cover and conceal it.

XXI. Subjectum (...) The Subject in which; now the Potentia of the Soul, in
which the Conscience has its seat, is the practical Intellect, I say, the
Intellect and not the Will, and the practical, not the Speculative Intellect.
There is a great controversy amongst the Schoolmen; whether the Conscience
does pertain to the Intellect, or the Will, or unto both. I will not thrust my
self into these contentions, you have had enough, if not too much already of
the nicetyes and difficulties of the Schoolmen. I shall therefore in few words
dispatch unto you what I shall find expedient for my present purpose. Aristotle
in his third Book de anima, does number up three distinct Potentia's of the
part intellective, two whereof are Cognitive, that is to say, the speculative
Intellect, and the practical, and the third appetitive, which is the Will. Of
these three, the Extremes are the Intellect speculative which looks on Truth
as Truth, and precisely rests in it, without any order or respect to
practice; and the Will which is nothing at all speculative, and precisely
tends to operation, Now amongst both these Potentia's the practick Intellect
is seated in the middle, and according to the Custom of things intermedial,
does in some part concord with either of the Extremes, and in some part does
differ from them. The practical Intellect does agree with the Speculative in
this, that it does look on Truth, and with the Will in this, that it inclines
to operation. As for the Conscience, it is most certain that it does not
pertain to the speculative Intellect, because it altogether does direct its
Science into practice, neither does it properly pertain unto the Will, for if
it were so, it would be in it as a Potentia, and be the same as liberum
arbitrium or free will, or as a Habit, and so it would become one of the moral
Virtues, neither of which was ever admitted, or asserted by any Divine, or any
Philosopher. It therefore altogether belongs to the cognitive, practical
potentia, that is, to the practical Intellect. And thus Aristotle, although he
had placed the moral virtues in the power appetitive, yet he placed the Habits
of Arts and Prudence (though ordinated to practice) in the cognitive power, as
may be seen in the fifth book of his Ethics. This opinion is confirmed by
Conscience is a kind of Science, and all Science is in the Understanding.
Secondly, Error, and Error is a Understanding. Thirdly, according to the common
use of speaking, he who underderstandeth the Kings Secrets, whether he
approves them, or not approves them, is properly said to be Conscious of
them; therefore the proper Seat, and Subject of Conscience in the Soul of Man
is the practical, cognitive power, which is the practical Intellect.

XXII. We have seen the Genus, and the Subject, the Object follows, which is
that about which the Conscience is versed, and they are the particular and
proper Moral Acts. In the first place I say Acts, that is, something done by a
Man, as he is a Man, or a rational Creature, whether it be for the future or to
be done, or whether it be past and already done, or present, and now in doing.
The Conscience is compacted of Eyes, it sees, and searches into all things;
It beholds things to come, if you are about to commit any filthynesse, it
does Council you to forbear it, it beholds things present, and in the very
act of sinning, it murmureth, checketh, biteth, picketh, it justles, and joggs
you to give off; It looks back on things past, and when you have sinned, it
reproves, it stingeth, and accuses, it condemns, and tormenteth you. On the
other side, to good deeds it exhorts you, and whilst you are a doing of them,
it does encourage, and excite, and provoke you, and having done them, it crowns
your head with Honor, and fills your breast with Peace and Joy. In the Second
place I say particular Acts; not by limiting the Subject, Acts that were not
particular; but oppositely to that Science which the Conscience does suppose
and apply, and although this Science be universal, it is yet referred to
particular Acts. In the third place I say particular, proper Acts to exclude
that signification of Conscience, which more largely accepted, is extended to
the Actions of other Men; as when a man may be said to be Conscious of the
Kings secrets, to be conscious of Catilines conspiracy, and the like; Such
Actions do not belong to our intent in this place, who do here treat of
Conscience properly so called, which is exercised in Agibles, either performed,
or to be performed by it self. In the fourth place, I say Moral Acts, where it
is to be observed that some things are brought about by necessity, and some
things do fall out by contingency; By necessity, as the Rising of the Sun, the
Eclipse of the Moon, etc. of which there is a Science, by reason of their
certitude, but they have not the least relation either to Conscience or
Free Will. Those things which casually come to pass, are either (...) things
in our own power, or things not in our power; Things not in our power, as the
flying of Birds; a Tempest suddenly raised, etc. which come not within the
compass of Science by reason of their uncertainty, and being out of our power,
they may be as well put out of our care, the Will having nothing to do to
choose, nor the Conscience to determine of them. Again, things that are in our
power, are some of them morally neutral, and (...) that is, which neither of
themselves, nor on the account of any, permanent circumstance do contain any
moral good or evil; as to go into the market, to write a letter etc. And such
things indeed may pertain to the freedom of the Will, if at least they be
worthy to be taken into consideration, because they may come under the compass
of Choice, but of themselves, they do not pertain to the Conscience, I say, of
themselves, for they may pertain unto it by accident, by reason of some
Scandal, or any other circumstance of which the Conscience may take cognizance;
Other things there are, which are morally good or bad, as to serve God, to
honor our Parents, to restore the pledge, to oppress the poor, to plunder, to
keep or to break our trusts, and all other things which the Philosophers call
(...) or (...) that is, worthy praise, or reproof, and the Schoolmen
meritorious or demeritorious. And these things are properly the objects of
Conscience.

XXIII. The object therefore of the Conscience of man is a moral operable that
is either done, or to be done, either omitted or that may be omitted;
Nevertheless it is to be advertised, that in men as they are Christians, the
object of the Conscience is further to be extended, and not only oblige them to
the performance of their duties, as they are men, but to believe the mysteries
of Faith revealed in the word of God, as they are Christians, for infidelity
does cause the Conscience to be impure, Tit 1 15. And the Conscience does sting
that man as much, who dispiseth what he vowed in Baptism to believe, as him who
violates the commandment which he promised to keep; And it may not unfitly
peradventure be said that even the Evangelical Faith it self is to be accounted
amongst the moral operables. They are the express words of our Savior, This is
the work of God that you believe in his Son, Joh. 6. 29. And the like in the
first Book of the Apostle St. John, the third Chapter, and twenty third verse.
This is his Commandment that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, as
he has commanded us.

XXIIII. The last member of the Definition remains, which is, The proper act
of Conscience, to wit the application of the light which is in the mind by the
discourse of reason to particular Acts; I say in the first place, that
application is the proper, and primary Act of the Conscience. That Axiom in
the Schools is in every man's mouth; That of, one Habit there is but one Act,
to wit, the primary and the chief, and unto which all the other Acts pertaining
to it, may be reduced; It may sufficiently appear by what is already spoken,
that there are many Acts of the Conscience in the Species of it, but what is
that most common Act, which brings all the other within its compass, is most
of all to be inquired after; for no other Act but that prima^ry one, which is
adaequate unto Habit, and to which all other Acts are reduced, ought to come
into the Definition of Habit; And hereupon it is that many when they observed
that most of those Acts exercised by the Conscience may in some measure be
referred to the Act of judging (for the Conscience does judge of Acts past,
present, and to come, they concluded that this primary Act was the Act of
judging. But there are some Acts of Conscience which cannot but hardly and with
restraint be referred to it; As that Act (for example) by which the Conscience
gives testimony of some thing committed, or omitted; For it is not for a Judge
to be a witness, nor for a witness to pass judgment on a Trespass; Moreover
that Act of judging does necessarily presuppose the Act of applying, as going
before it, for it cannot be but that the Conscience must first apply the Fact,
which it is about to judge, to the light of the mind, before it can give true
judgment on it; And this Act of application is very near of kine to the
derivation of the word, of which I have before spoken, that Conscience is so
called because it is an application of knowledge unto knowledge.

XXV. In the second place, I say, that this application is an application of
the light which is in the mind, that is of the light present to the mind at
that time when the Application is made, whether it be that light of Nature,
viz. common notions written in the Hearts of men by the dictates of nature, and
kept in the Synteresis or guiltless conservation of the mind, as a treasure
snatched from the Common fire, and the relics of the Image of God after the
Fall, or whether it be a light of Divine revelation either extraordinary by
Visions, Dreams, and Prophesies, or ordinary, being laid open to mankind in the
books of the old and new Testament. Or lastly, whether it be the light of
reason, to wit, whatsoever from the principles of both kinds, from the law of
nature and the Divine revelation, is so immediately and evidently deduced, that
no man who does grant the one can doubt of the other.

XXVI. In the third place I do say that this light is applied by the discourse
of reason, for this light that is to be applied being quid universale,
something universal, and that which it is applied to, being particular, or
singular Acts, such an application cannot be made but by the mediation of this
discourse of reason which is able to unite Universals unto Singulars; And this
is the work of Reason, by such a Syllogism, (...). Arist. 1. Poster 17.
or such practical Syllogisms, as already I have exhibited unto you. Moreover
it often comes to pass, (as it is commonly spoken, and experience does prove it
to be true) that we err by going downwards, and so it is, that although we do
not easily fall into an error concerning the Prima and Universalia principia
the universal principles which do carry with them a greater evidence; yet in
the application of those principles, and in deducing conclusions from them,
errors most often are committed, wherefore we must use the greater care,
(...); Aristot. 2. Metaph. 1.
and diligence, that we do not deceive our selves, but that in this discourse
of reason all things be exactly considered, that so we may justly proceed, and
as legitimately and duly conclude.

XXVII. Fourthly, I say that this application ought to be made to particular
Acts, which four ways may be done, for the Conscience does apply the light of
the mind, with which it is endued, either to things already done, or to things
to be done. To things already done in a twofold consideration, first by bearing
testimony that this is done, or that it is not done by us, in this manner are
those forms of the Rhetoricians in the question of the Fact, Crestes have thou
killed thy mother? the Conscience makes answer, I have killed her; Secondly by
(...) judgment whether the fact committed or omitted, be well or ill done, or
whether well or ill omitted; as in the question of right or Law (among the
Rhetorici^ns) where the Fact is evident, as Did thou kill Clodius, Milo? the
reply is, I killed him. Do thou therefore confess thy self guilty? I have
killed him lawfully Here in the first application the Conscience proceeds by
the way of a witness; in the second by the way of a Judge; for the offices,
and Acts of Conscience in the first proceeding are to bear witness, in the
second to reprove, to accuse, to excuse, to condemn, to absolve; From hence
there do arise diverse effects in the Soul from the Conscience reproving,
accusing, and condemning; a great sadness and trouble of mind, remorses,
terrors, and torments; and on the other side, from the excusing, defending,
and absolving Conscience, there proceeds an extraordinary peace, and
tranquillity, an unspeakable joy, and solace, an erected hope, an unstartling
confidence, and a most steadfast and unshaken constancy of mind. The third
application of Conscience does look on things, future that are to be done, in
which the Conscience does proceed as a Lawgiver, Schoolmaster, and Admonisher
or a Counselor: And in this manner of proceeding, the offices and Acts of
Conscience are to dictate, to oblige, to incite, to retract: these are the
principle Acts of Conscience to whose voice encouraging to righteousness
whosoever shall give ear, he shall not fear her as a witness, or as a Judge.

XXVIII. I have now finished what I conceived necessary to be spoken concerning
the nature of Conscience, in which I have been longer (I fear) but certainly
more obscure then either I would or ought to be (if the Subject could otherwise
have born it,) or then I hope I shall be in the following Lectures concerning
the use of Conscience; But truly all disputation concerning the faculties and
Potentia's of the Intellective soul, is intricate and perplexed, as most grave
and learned men have already complained of it, both because the things
themselves are something more remote from sensible matter and motion, as also
by reason of their mutual relation and connection. But peradventure you will say
unto me, by your Definition you have rather obscured, then any ways illustrated
a thing that is manifest, and vulgarly known, which is in the daily use, and in
the mouth of all men; truly in this, I cannot deny the objection, so empty are
the studies and cogitations of men, and so weak are all our endeavors, Those
things which are before our feet, and eyes, which of themselves do jump into
our thoughts, and senses, those things which are not unknown to the Cobbler, and
the Weaver, things which the most illiterate men do think they understand, Odi
ego in quit definire -- facilius est mihi videre in alterius definitione quid
non prob m, quam quicquam be^e definiendo (...) August. 2. de Ord. 2
and indeed in some measure do understand them, the same things are not
understood by the greatest of the Philosophers, and the most refined wits are
here at a stand. What Clown almost is there that thinks himself so wretchedly
sil^y, as not to give you a perfect account, of what is Time, or Place, or
Motion, and the like, into the diving into, and the unfolding of the Nature
whereof, Profound, Accute, Angelick, Seraphick, Doctors have for many ages
past, exercised, and are still exerciseing themselves, and after so much sweat,
and labor, have, not yet attained their desired Gole. In time I am, and of
time I speak, and yet I know not what time is, says St. Augustine of time. In
which I cannot sufficiently admire the infinite wisdom of the Almighty, by
this means beating down all humane pride, Gal. 6. 3.
and presenting to mortals as in a miror that empty (...) seeming wisdom, by
which they would appear to be something when they are indeed nothing, Hor. 1.
Epist.
miserably deceiveing their own hearts, that so men might learn metiri se
modulo, 7. Romans 12. 30
ac pede suo to measure themselves by their own Last and their own Module, and
not to be wiser than it becomes them, but to be wise unto sobriety,
acknowledging their own foolishness, that to God alone may be the glory of his
wisdom.

THE SECOND LECTURE. In which it is declared that in the Conscience of a good
Intention there is not such a Protection, that a man might safely rest therein.
ROMANS 3. 8. And as we are blamed, and as some affirm that we say why do we not
evil, that good may come thereof whose damnation is just.
THat the mind of man does contain something in it of Divinity, is with a great
consent confessed by the wisdom of the An^ients, Horat. 2. Satyr 2.
who have termed it to be Divinae particulam aurae, a particle of the Divine
Air; ^pictetus.
(...) and have affirmed that our minds have been taken from the immortal Gods,
and are pure as Heaven it self; Nay some of them rising higher and speaking
more boldly, have not been afraid to say, that the mind is God himself, and
have raised Temples to it as to a Diety, (...) says Menander in Plutarch, and
Ovid, Men's quoque Numen habet, Menti aed^s in Cop^ tolio vid. Cic 2. de not.
deor. and Live. lib. 23.
and Seneca, Quid aliud voces animam quam Deum inhumano corpore hospitantem,
What else will you call the mind but a God lodging in a humane body. In which
words as some of them seem to have most reference to the (...) or the substance
of the soul, which being void of matter and bulk, and free from Death and
Corruption, Plutarch. in quaest. platon. Ovid. 2. Fast. Senec. Epist. 31.
and endued with understanding and the liberty of will does seem rather to come
nearer to the nature of immortal Gods then of corporal things, so the others do
reflect upon that Power and (...) against energetical Virtue, which we call the
Conscience. And from hence it is of Menanders (...). (...). Xenocrat. apud
Aristot. 2. Top. 6.
To mortals every ones Conscience is a God. And in this sense the Lord said
that he had placed Moses as a God to Pharaoh, because he did inculcate into
Pharaoh the will of God, he did excite Pharaoh to the performance of it, M^
min^rit Deum se ad ibere testem, id est ut arbit^o, mentem suam. Cic. 3. Offic.
and for not obeying it, he did prosecute him with continual plagues, and in
the same sense it may be said that God has given to every particular man a
proper Conscience to be as a God unto him, which in Gods steed, as the Preacher
of his eternal Law; should dictate to him what he ought to do, and what to
avoid, and which sollicitously should importune him to the performance of these
duties which are commanded, Exodus 8. 1.
and severely should call unto him for an account of his actions good or evil,
which should extort from the most wicked an acknowledgement of the Divine
Justice, and as a most just Judge should discern and assign unto every one
either rewards, or punishments, according to their deserts; for by nature the
state of Conscience is placed as it were in the middle betwixt both, beneath
God, but above Man, subject unto God as a Handmaid, but set over man as a
Mistress.

II. From hence it is, that Conscience is taken into Sub and Supra, Above or
Under, in which those which possess the middle place have a twofold relation,
the one to the thing Superior, under which they are, and the other things to
the Inferior which are placed under them; Thus a Captain obeys his Lieutenant
Colonel, but commands the common Soldier. I am a man placed under Authority,
having Soldiers under me, Math. 8. 9. And in the praedicamental course and
order, those things which are placed between the highest Genus, and the lowest
Species, are both the Genera of those Species of which they are predicated, and
the Species of those Genusses to which they are subjected. In the same manner
Conscience receives a diverse Condition, as it has a relation unto diverse
things, for it has the condition of a power regulating, or of a thing
regulated; In the respect of God, and the Law of God, it has the condition of
a thing regulated, but in respect of man, and of humane actions, the condition
of a power regulating. And since it is our purpose to expound unto you the use
of Conscience, of which in our last Lecture we have given you the Definition,
especially so far as it pertains to the performance of things, and is
commodious for the Institution of our life, and manners, the course of the
Subject, and of our studies does here require, that we should now speak of the
double obligation of Conscience that shall be useful to us, which is the
Active and passive obligation; The passive obligation of the Conscience is that
by which it is obliged to confirm it self to the Divine Will, to which as to a
Rule it is subjected. The Active obligation is that which obliges all humane
Acts to a conformity thereunto, and is as a rule over them; There are therefore
two parts of this present treatise, the first of the subjection of Conscience,
or the passive obligation. The second, of the power of Conscience or the active
obligation of it.

III. Of the first of which, that this discourse may more legitimately proceed,
this is first to be premised, seeing that the Rectitude of every thing
consists in its conformity to its next and immediate Rule, and so gradually
ascends to its first and most chief Rule, and seeing the immediate Rule or
Law of Conscience, is right Reason, but subject to the Superior Law which God
has praescribed to it, the Conscience may there be said to be right when it is
conformable to right Reason according to that Law which God the supreme
Lawgiver has praescribed to it, for the condition of that Act or Work,
whatsoever it be, which at that time we are performing.

The last Explication or resolution of Conscience is into a certain Law imposed
by God on a rational creature, as being the Lord of Conscience alone, and the
Supreme Legislator, who endued man with a Conscience, and who is the only
knower and the Judge of it, and who alone has power to save or destroy a Soul,
accodingly as it has kept or broken his Commandments, James 5 12. There is
but one Lawgiver who can save and who can destroy. Which is so confessed by
all men in whatsoever parts of the world they live, that there is hardly one to
be found who will not of his own accord allow it to be most true in the Thesis
or the Position of it; but in the Hypothesiis or Supposition, (when any thing
is to be done,) I know not by what depravedness of the heart it comes to pass
that many men (and even those men who appear neither to themselves nor unto
others to have thrown off all care of Conscience) are with such prone
affections transported to those things which they desire to be done, that they
do not only forbear to bring them most faithfully to be examined by that most
chief and supreme rule, which is only able to secure the Conscience, but they
conceive it is enough for the security of their Consciences, if either by the
pretense of a good Intention, or by the Example of some holy man, or if by the
Authority of some great Divine they can any ways defend themselves, and what
they have acted. And because this Deceit in the hearts of men has been too
prevalent in all ages, and especially in these last times, I persuaded my self
that it would be a work most profitable, and most necessary for the manners in
which we live, if I could expound those three vulgar suppositions, which are so
full of the trepanne, and so dangerous unto so many Consciences, therefore
before we do descend to seek and find out the true rule of Conscience, we must
first remonstrate that there is not any protection enoguh for the security of
the Conscience, in the performance of any affair, if that which is do^e be not
performed only with a good intention, or be supported by the example of a Godly
Man, or by the Judgment of a Learned one. Of the two last (God willing) we
shall treat hereafter, our Discourse at this present shall be of that subject
which in the first place does encounter us, viz. Of a good Intention.

IV. Where I shall lay down this Conclusion, That the goodness of the
Intention is not enough to justify the goodness of the Act. That is, a good
Intention cannot alone, and of it self procure that any humane Act should be
morally good, or, which is the same, and they are the very words of the
Apostle, that Evil should be done that Good may come thereby. When I say an
Act, I understand both the inward Act, which is in the Will, and all the
exterior Acts in the executing faculties, which are flowing from it, it being
my meaning, that out of a good Intention alone it does not follow that either
the Will it self, which is the first principle of acting, or any external Act
flowing from it should be said to be good. The Intention may be taken two
ways; first properly and formally for the Act of Intending, that is, for the
motion of the Will, tending to the end by some certain mediums. Secondly,
materially, and objectively, for the thing it self intended, that is, for the
end to which the Will so tends. For the Act intending, and the end intended
are of one and an alike consideration to the goodness or the evilnesse of the
Act, if we look upon the quality of the Act, but if we shall reflect upon the
quantity of the goodness or of the evilnesse of it, there will be found some
disproportion in the consideration thereof. For it being granted that such a^
Act is good in its own Species, and upon the account of its Object, and that it
may be done for a good end, or on the contrary it being granted that the Act is
evil, and is done to an evil end; by how much the stronger the Will is moved
whiles it tends to that end, by so much the Act respectively, will either be
the better or the worse; As if a man should partake of the Supper of the Lord,
to that end, to put himself in remembrance of the death of Christ; the more
entirely that he applies the mind to the remembrance of his death, the better
he performs the duty of a true Communicant. Again, if a man should slander his
neighbor, intending the ruin of him, by how much the more violently he
intends it, by so much the worse is his Act of Calumnation, The quantity
therefore of a good or an evil Act is correspondent to the quantity of the
goodness or the evilnesse of the Intention, and is commensurate with it, if
the Intention be understood according to the Act of intending, and not as to
the thing intended. But the intention taken either way does not suffice to
prove this, that any Act which otherwise is evil, should be made good.

V. This conclusion is proved by many and most strong arguments, first by the
words of the sacred Text, in the third Chapter of the Romans where the Apostle
not without indignation does detest that grievous slander by which it was said
to be taught; That evil may be done that good should come thereof. That the
sense, the scope, and the force of this place, may be the better understood,
that St. Paul amongst all the Apostles was abundantly the most copious in
asserting every where, the mercy of God by Grace, making a Covenant of grace
with sinful men, and faithfully fulfilling the Evangellical promises,
notwithstanding all that unrighteousness and unbelief of men, which lies
within their hearts, and openly and abundantly does declare it self in their
daily lives, and conversations, which he professes to be so far from making
these promises of God by Grace to be in vain, that on the contrary they do
render the glory of his grace and truth to be far more illustrious, Romans 5. 2.
for where that the offense abounded, there it is manifest that Grace
superabounded. From hence the Sophisters and Imposters took on one side to
themselves an advantage to slander, and to diminish if they could the authority
of the Apostle. On the other side the Hypocrites and profane did take an
occasion to live more licentiously, and to sin more securely; For if that be
true (said they) which is preached by Paul, that the sins of men do redound to
the greater glory of God, there is no reason that God should punish sins, or be
angry with sinners; There is no reason that a man or woman should abstain from
sinning, nay they should sin more abundantly that God might receive the more
abundant glory, and evil things are altogether to be done, that good things may
come thereby. The other objections the Apostle confuteth, but to this, let us
do evil that good may come of it, he does not vouchsafe any answer at all; he
only cries out, that it is a manifest slander, and near of kin unto blasphemy,
and unless they repent, the just judgment of God is threatened to such
importunate slanderers, as if this Sophism was of that kind of arguments which
Aristotle adjudged not to deserve an answer, but rather a reproof;. It is hence
manifest, and all Interpreters do acknowledge it, that the Apostle most
constantly denies that any evil ought to be done for any intention be it never
so good. It much avails (says St. Augustine) to consider what, Aug. contra
meudaciam.
what end, what intention such a thing is done, but those things which are
manifest sins ought not to be done under any pretense of a good cause, or a
good end, or of a good Intention. This is the first argument.

VI. The second it is taken from the nature of evil or of sin, which of its own
nature is not first to be chosen, (...). Hiercl. page 78.
neither is it secondly, ordinate to a good end, neither is it thirdly, apt of
it self to produce any good, first it is not eligible, or it is not to be
chosen by reason of its own nature, qua tale, as it is of such a nature, for
there is nothing eligible which is not also Expitible, and all things that are
desired, are desired under the account of good.

Neither is evil of its own nature ordinable to any good end, for if it were,
it were also to be desired; for the appetite in Philosophy is not only carried
to the end propounded by the Agent, but to those things also which seem to
conduce for the obtaining of that end. If you object* God does dispose of our
evils into a good end of his own, and therefore it is not against the nature of
evil to be ordinated to a good end. I answer in the first place, that the ways
Lord of Nature, and according to his good pleasure can produce good out of evil
are far different from ours, who have not the same right or the same power;
neither is it for us either too curiously to enquire, or too magisterially to
pronounce any thing of the Providence of God concerning evil. In the second
place I answer, Glory, Grace and Providence, and that it is lawful for us
also, as opportunity shall serve, to follow his example and to make use of the
sins of other men for our spiritual or temporal advantage; Notwithstanding,
as God, although he makes use of the evil of others, and produces Good out of
it, yet he never does evil himself, that from thence he might abstract good; so
neither is it lawful for us to do evil, that good might proceed from it; It is
one thing to make use of the evil of others, and turn it into good, and another
thing to do evil with an intent of good. Thirdly, I answer, a thing may be said
to be ordinated in a twofold respect; either improperly, in the same manner, as
a thing which way soever it is made use of by the Agent, does notwithstanding
tend to its end, being so done by the wisdom and power of the supremer Agent,
contrary to the will and intention of him that did it, or it is taken more
restrictly, and properly, and so that only is said to be ordinated to its end,
which antecedently is chosen by the Agent as a medium that by the nature of it
is convenient, and conducible to such an end. In the first sense, that is to be
understood, when we say that God does ordinate and dispose of evil to a good
end, that is, when God, Non co^venire homo viro Vitiis uti Quint 6. Instit. 1.
out of his infinite mercy and power, either abstracts good from evil or
turns evil into good; But we must above all things take heed, that these
expressions be not understood in the latter, and proper sense, as if God
antecedently did well approve or make choice of any evil, as a medium
convenient by the nature of it to the assecution of any good end.

VIII. Moreover it is opposite to the nature of sin to produce of it self any
good effect, as an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Mat 7. 18.
nor darkness produce light of it self; 2 Cor. 4. 6.
but the same great and glorious God who out of his omnipotence, brought forth
light out of darkness, can also out of our sins take an occasion to illustrate
his infinite wisdom, his righteousness, and his goodness; But these are the
effects of a divine power, as of a cause working properly, and of it self, to
the production whereof there needs no assistance, nor strength from our sins,
which as to those effects are but merely contingent, and but by accident. Those
words therefore of David Psalm 5. which St. Paul alleges, Romans 3. 4. I have
sinned against thee (...) that thou may be justified when thou speak, are
not so to be understood, that David for that end committed murder and adultery,
or that it was lawful for him so to do, that God might be justified in his
words but the word (...) and some other Greek particles of the same
signification in many places of Scripture are to be understood, according to
the interpretation of St. Chrysostom not (...) but (...) to denote and infer
the event only, and not the true cause of the thing; For as he who is in a
serious argumentation can infer a true conclusion from the false praemises
which before were granted by another, and yet the same Disputant would show
himself ridiculous, if to prove a true conclusion, should willingly make use of
some salse assumptions, for Truth does not stand in need of the patronage of
Falsehood; so Almighty God (and we also in some respect may do the like) can
dispose of things that are ill done into good, but it is neither congruous to
the divine Justice and Goodness, neither is it any ways lawful for us to will
and to do evil that good may come thereby.

IX. The third argument is taken a natura boni Actus, from the nature of a good
Act, to the complement whereof the concurse of all requisite conditions is so
necessary, that if one be but absent amongst so many of them, although all the
other be present, and subservient, yet that Act shall not be morally good. Most
remarkable is that Axiom, Bonum ex causa integra, malum ex quolibet defectu,
Good proceeds from an upright and an entire cause, but evil from any defect.
And it is besides manifest in all kind of things that there are more required
to raise up, than to throw down; or to destroy. The defect of a good Intention
is enough to prove any Action evil (for that, the end whereof is evil, must of
necessity be evil it self) but it is not enough, it is not sufficient that a
good end, or a good Intention should prove the Action good, unless all the
other requisite conditions be conjoined; Now that any Action whether the
internal of the will or the external of the work, may approve themselves to
be good, we are to understand that there are three distinct goodnesses, viz.
the goodness of the object, the goodness of the end, and the goodness of the
circumstances. The quality of every Act does first of all, and principally
depend on the quality of the object, or of the matter, about which it is
conversant, so that from thence every Act may indefinitely and according to the
whole species of it be denominated, either good or evil; in this respect we
affirm that Theft and Adultery are evil in the whole Species of them, and that
Prayer and the giving of Alms are good in all their several respects, and the
acceptations of them; but with this difference, that things which in themselves
are simply evil, are so evil, that neither upon the account of the end although
good, nor yet on the account of their circumstances, although never so
promising, they can ever be made truly good; But things which are good in their
own nature, may yet be so corrupted by the end, or by undue circumstances, that
they may leave off to be good, and become evil; The pravity therefore of the
object being presupposed we are altogether to abstain from the Acts of Theft or
of adultery, as being simply evil in themselves; But the goodness of the
object being presupposed it is not safe for any one, at the first, either to
undertake to do it, or to approve it being done, unless he has diligently
weighed before hand the end, to which it is directed, and the several
circumstances with which it is attended, and clothed: In these things
therefore in which it is said that the Goodness of the Act does depend on the
end, and that the end does discriminate and crown the actions, they may be said
so for to be true, if the Acts be good in consideration to the object, or the
matter, or at the last, if they be of a middle nature and indifferent, but not
if they are evil. For the goodness of the object being supposed the Act does
chiefly take its goodness or its evilnesse from the end. For examples sake, the
Act of giving a poor man an alms though it be a good Act in respect of the
matter or the object, yet if it be done for vainglory it is morally an evil
Act, because it is not ordinated to a good end. The same Act, if it be to
relieve the necessities of a neighbor is an Act so far good, that it has a
lawful matter, and a right Intention and so partaketh of both the goodnesses
above mentioned, to wit, of the object and the end, but it cannot yet be
affirmed to be simply good, unless it be moreover duly circumstanced, for to
this complement of a good work, besides that goodness of the object and the
end, there is required the goodness of circumstances; And from hence it is,
that commonly it is spoken that the goodness of the Act does depend upon its
circumstances not primarily, and principally, but ultimately, and for the
accomplishment of it, the goodness of the object and the end being first laid
down, seeing therefore these three things are required to the goodness of every
moral Act, and they are all to be conjoined, to wit, the matter lawful, the
intention right, and the circumstances due, it is most manifest that a right
intention cannot alone suffice by it self, and by consequent, that nothing can
be performed out of a good Conscience, whatsoever the Intention be, that is
either unlawful in the object or defective in the circumstances.

X. But some there are who peradventure will object unto this, those words of
our Savior, Mat. 6. 22. If thy eye be single thy whole body shall be full of
light, but if thy eye be evil thy whole body shall be full of darkness. Where
if the intention be undesstood by the eye which is the judgment of almost all
the Interpreters upon it, it seems that the goodness of the Act does
altogether depend on the goodness of the Intention, and that adaequately, so
that what power an evil intention has to corrupt an Act although otherwise
good, the same power a good intention has to approve and to render an Act
good, which otherwise is evil, for a good or a single eye is as efficatious to
inlighten the whole body, as an evil eye is to infuse darkness on it; To add
more strength to this opinion much may be alleged from the Fathers and other
Divines, of this nature is that in the Gloss; As much good as you do intend,
so much you do perform; And that verse in the mouth of every Scool-boy.

Quicquid agunt homines, Intentio judicat illud.
It is the Intention judges true
Of whatsoever things we do.
XI. But in the way of answer, as to that place in the 6 of St. Mat. I am not
ignorant in the first place, that some learned men of this age do give an
interpretation to it far different from that of the ancient Fathers, and not
consonant to that we have now in hand; But in reverence to those ancient
Doctors, be it granted that those words of our Savior had a proper relation to
the Intentions of men; I make answer, that the intention (when it is a motion
of the Will tending to some ends by certain mediums) is taken into a twofold
consideration, first whether it be for the intention of that good into which
the Will is finally and precisely carried, being taken from all consideration
of the mediums to attain it; As if a man should say he intends the glory of
God, or his own profit, and pleasure: or secondly whether it be for an entire
ordination of the whole progress of the work, from the beginning of the work
unto the end, including also the mediums or the means to attain it; As if a man
should say that he intends the glory of God by building a Temple, or staining
an Idolater, or that he intends his own profit, by getting riches by his honest
labor, or by theft, and plunder, And as he may be said, that he intends a
journey to Rome who only thinks of going thither, and has not yet resolved
with himself which way, or upon what accounts he will go, as well as he who
has resolved with himself, when to go, which way, and upon what occasions. We
speak in this whole discourse of the Intention taken the first way, viz. on the
intention which looks altogether upon the end, and not on the means, and which
is so taken in the common use of speaking; but those words of the Fathers and
other Divines which seem by the intention alone to measure the goodness or the
badnesse of men's actions, and which are grounded on those words of our Savior,
in relation to a single eye, and to an eye that is evil, do receive their
intention in the latter signification, as they include the means with the end;
observable is that of St Bernard, That the eye (says he) be single, two things
are necessary, viz. that truth be in the election, and Charity in the
intention. That is, that our intention be absolutely right both are required,
that so we may not propound unto our selves such an end which is averse unto
the love of God, and of our neighbor, and that we make not choice of any means
that are not joined with honesty and righteousness. In every work therefore we
must not only look to propound unto our selves a good end, but we must withal
endeavor to the end so propounded by apt, lawful, and honest means, for seeing
that the election of the means or the mediums do arise from the intention of
the end, and is so necessarily joined to it, that in the respect thereof, it
has the place of an accident inseparable, or a necessary circumstance, Animum
laudo: Consilium reprehend^^. Cic. 9. ad Attic. 11.
the Schoolmen do almost all of them conclude, that an evil election does
corrupt an intention that is otherwise good, by rendering that evil which before
was good, in the very same manner as evil circumstances do corrupt those
Actions, to which they are retayners.

XII. The fourth argument is taken from the perfection and obligation of the
Law of God; For there is a Law propounded from God to men, a most perfect Law,
which commands things to be done, and forbids those things which are not
to be done; It has showed unto thee O man what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee Mich. 6. 8. This is the Law which we must obey if we will
fulfill our duties, by this Law we are commanded (as the Scriptures every where
do declare) to do good, and to eschew evil; But if we on the contrary, without
the least regard to the law of God, shall measure out unto our selves things to
be avoided or performed, according to our own profit, and as we shall think
good, and shall either omit those good things which God commands to be done
for the fear of some following evil, or shall commit those evil things which
God forbids, for the vain hope of some good to come, what is this but (worms
as we are) to prefer our own Counsels above the express will of Almighty
God, and the wisdom of the flesh above the Authority of the most holy Spirit.
Far otherwise did that holy man David, By thy precepts (says he) have I
gotten understanding, therefore have I hated all unjust ways, Psalm. 119. 104.
As if he should say, being instructed by thy Law which both night and day is in
my heart, my mouth, and before mine eyes, I do plainly understand what I have
to do, and what I have to eschew, wherefore I do not only decline but hate
every way which is not consentaneous to thy Law, whither soever it may seem to
lead me. Therefore since every sin is forbidden by the Law of God, and that Law
of his contains not the least exception of any good Intention, or Event, and
we ought not to distinguish where the Law makes no distinction, nor to except
where the Law makes no exception it is most manifest, that he whosoever he is
who for what Intention, or what cause soever it be, does knowingly and
willingly do that which is evil, he does sin against the Law of God.

XIII. The fifth argument follows, drawn from the examples of those who under
the pretense of a good end being so bold as to disobey the express Commandment
of God, have satisfied his anger by the just punishment of their rashness, and
disobedience. The Prophet Samuel being sent to Saul the King of Israel, who
saved some of the cattle of the Amalekites, which God had commanded should be
totally destroyed, for no other end, as he pretended, than by the bulk and
fatness of his sacrifice to make it the more acceptable, the said Prophet did
lay before his eyes the grievousness of his sin, and for the punishment of so
great a disobedience, did prophesy unto him that his Kingdom should be taken
from him; If any man shall think this example not congruous to prove this
truth, because it does not appear that Saul did this with any good intention,
neither was the end which afterward he pretended, fixed and grounded in his
resolution when he did it, but it is more likely that he looked after his
temporal advantage and commodity, both because it was objected to him by the
Prophet, and laid unto his charge that he obeyed not the commandment of God,
and because (which is common with Hypocrites) he did make an excuse for his
disobedience; That this exception may be waved, and create no more trouble or
scruple, it is to be observed, that where Hypocrisy is joined to disobedience,
the crime is not so much increased, as it is doubled. There is no man doubts
but that Saul was guilty of a double fault, of disobedience, and dissimulation,
not to make mention of the third crime which was the root of the two former,
viz. a mundane affection, and a desire of gain, and of his own glory. The sins
of disobedience and of dissimulation were distinct in Saul and neither
conjoined by nature or by time; not by nature, for one of them can be in any
man, without the other; nor by time, for disobedience had the precedence, to
which. afterward upon another occasion was added Dssiimulation, which not
obscurely may be collected from the very words of Samuel himself, who making no
mention of the dissimulation of the King, did only sharply and securely
reprehend him for his disobedience; obedience says he is more acceptable than
sacrifice, as if he should have said, What do you tell me of sacrifices, which
if you did in earnest before intend them, or now to excuse your disobedience
you do pretend them, it is all one in relation to your duty. You ought to have
obeyed the commandment of God, and without the least murmuring or dispute to
have fullfilled that which he prescribed: But whatsoever this miscarriage of
Saul was, most certain it is, that Uzzah, whose History is written 2 Samuel 6.
did put forth his hand to the holy Ark not deceitfully, but devoutly, and with
a most pious Intention, that the Ark of the Covenant should not fall on the
ground (which at that time under the ^economy of the old Testament was a
dreadful Symbol of the Divine presence) when the Cart in which it was carried
being violently shaken, it seemed even ready to slip down out of it; By this
slight (as some have thought) but importunate temerity, although he had not the
least ill intent, yet he merited (a multitude of people beholding it) that he
should suffer the punishment of a sudden death, which. God then did inflict upon
him. Number. 7. 9.
Indeed the Lord Jehovah had before declared that the Ark of the Covenant
should not be carried in a Cart, but on the shoulders of the Priests, neither
was it lawful for any, who was not of the order of the Priesthood, and of the
Family of the Koathites to carry the Ark, or to touch that sacred vessel, Numb.
4. 15.
he that should presume to do it was to perish by an evil death; Therefore by
this severe punishment on the first violator of that Law, God did strike into
the hearts of men a reverence to the more strict observation of the Law, and
preserved its Authority, that no man under any pretense whatsoever should
boldly presume to do or to attempt against that which he had ordained; And the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah, and God smote him there for his
rashness, and he dyed by the Ark of God 2. Sam. 6. 7.

XIIII. The last argument is taken, from the inconveniences that do attend the
contrary opinion, And they are many, I shall only urge but one instead of all,
and it is often mentioned by St. Augustine, which is, that the restraint of the
Law being taken away, all things would be carried at random, as the bars being
broken, when once the waves of the Sea do exceed their banks they will not
endure to be contained within any bounds, but will grow upon all places, by an
unruly usurpation, that are far or near them. He who has once transgressed
the bounds of modesty will quickly grow into a height of impudence, says
Petronius. But let us rather be attentive to St. Augustine, Quod
seeleratissimum facinus, quod turpissimum flagitium, quod impiissimum
sacrilegium. non dicatur fieri posse recte atque just, si semel concesserimus,
in omnibus malis operibus hominum ideo non quid fiat sed quare fiat quaerendum
ut quaecunque propter bonas causas facta obtendantur, nec ipsa mala esse
judicentur, What abom nable act, what most filthy wickedness, what most
impious, sacrilege, ( Ah do you not guess that he prophesyed of this our age,
and of our affairs?) may not be said to be done justly, and uprightly, if we
shall once grant, that in all the evil works of men we are not to demand so
much, what is done, as wherefore it is done, that so those things which are
pretended to be done for good causes, may not at all of themselves be judged to
be evil.

And again, Cum concesseris admittendum esse aliquod malum ne aliquid gravius
admittatur, non ex regula veritatis sedex sua quisque cupiditate aut
consuetudine metietur malum, et id putabit gravius quod ipse amplius
exhorrescit, non quod amplius revera fugiendum est. When you grant that some
evil is to be admitted, that a greater one may be omitted, every one will be
ready to measure that evil, not by the Rule of truth, but by his own desires,
or by Custom, and will think that to be most grievous which he does most
abhor, and not that which indeed is most to be avoided.

The strength of the argument is in this, If evil things are to be done that
good things may come thereby, when most sure it is that all things evil are not
to be done, and not for all things that are good, we must put some limitation
or rule to both these doubts, as first to know what evil is to be done that
good may come thereof, and what not; and Secondly for what good things some
things evil are to be done, and for what they are not to be done) or it must be
left to every man's judgment, to arbitrate according to the nature of the thing,
and as himself shall think good, what is to be done, and what is not to be
done, and for what it is to be done; If any of which be granted, there will be
nothing safe amongst men, nothing sacred, nothing free from injuries,
perjuries, deceits, rapine, slaughter, and destruction. Those things without
which Commonwealths and the societies of men cannot be preserved, must all be
banished from the earth, in which number are, Religion, Justice,
Righteousness, Faith, and Peace.

XV. The conclusion which I undertook to prove, being now, as I conceive,
sufficiently confirmed; I hope it will not be inconsonant, nor ungrateful,
certainly not unprofitable to you, to derive some corallaries from it which may
be useful to us all for the institution of our lives and manners. It follows
therefore in the first place, from that which is already spoken, that all pious
men must take heed, least being transported by a zeal to the glory of God, they
be carried away to unlawful Acts. There is no true Christian will deny but
that the glory of God is the supreme and ultimate end of all our actions.
Whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do, it must be all done to the glory
of God 1 Cor. 10 31. But being transported with too hasty, and too prepostrous
a zeal to the glory of God, what contumelies, what slaughters, did not those
men of that faction amongst the people of the Jews commit, who peculiarly were
called Zelots; And amongst Christians in the memory of our Fathers the same
things have been recorded (by men worthy of belief, and who were no ways
ignorant of the transactions of the affairs of their times) to have been done
in Germany, and other places by the Anabaptists, in whose Chronologies such
horrid acts, and so far from all humanity are reported, that we should hardly
have given any belief unto them, if we had not of late seen the same tragedies
every day to be prodigiously acted to the life, by their unhappy offspring,
the dismal scene being translated into our Britannies.

XVI. That none of you may be deceived therefore with so splendid a deceit, and
that you may not deceive others; Consider with your selves in Seducers, the
ministers of Satan, and instructed by Satan himself, the chief Seducer, 1 Cor.
11. 14.
who is accustomed to transform himself into an Angel of light have not more
advanced themselves by any artifice, nor imposed more upon the belief of the
common people of Christendom, nor more vigorously troubled the peace of our
Churches, and Commonwealths than under the pretense of the glory of God, and
of the reformation of Religion, and of the propagation of the Gospel, and of
rooting out superstition, and of the exalting of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The most eminent of the Protestant Ministers in the preceding age, as
Calvin, Bucer, Zuinglius and others have all along in their writeings
grievously complained of this; Amongst whom Jerome Zanchius a man second unto
few in learning modesty and piety has this expression, Ego non intelligo istam
reformatorum mundi Theologiam, Zanchius.
I do not understand this divinity of the new Reformers of the world. I would
to God that the experience of what is daily acted amongst us did not confirm
too much the truth of that vulgar Proverb, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum.
Secondly, Consider a heat of Spirit, the glory of God is pretended to all wars,
tumults, quarrelling, contentions, and unprofitable disputations, of which the
holy Apostles of our Lord Jesus did hardly ever make mention of, (and full
often they have mentioned it) but in order to peace and brotherly-love, and
that sweet deportment in things indifferent, which especially becomes
Christians, that so no man might abuse that liberty which we do by the benefit
of Christ, to be an offense or a stumbling block unto his Brother. In the third
place consider, that the man who does propound unto himself the glory of God to
be his End must also propound unto himself the Law of God, to be the Rule of
all his actions. Ad Legem, and Testimonium, to the Law, and to the Testimony
Isa. 8. 20. Grant that the respect unto the glory of God is the final cause of
thy acting, as it is fit it should be so, but the Rule and as it were the
formal Reason of thy acting is not to be the glory of God, but his revealed
Will; In the whole course of our lives the glory of God is to be looked upon as
the mark or the Gole to which we run, but we must look upon the Rule also, that
so we may go the right way which does bring us to it, lest that deservedly be
objected to us which is commonly spoken, Been curritis sed extra viam, You run
well, but you run out of the way. Lastly, consider, that the glory of God in
the respect of singular actions has the estimation of an end transcendental.
Now it is manifest that to a Transcendent no Individual can immediately be
subjected, so not of any singular Ens or being, whether it be substantial, or
accidental, is immediately subjected to the summum Ens or the chief being;
Therefore as Ens transcendentale, the transcendental being is verified of every
very being which is in one of the ten praedicaments, whether it be universal,
or singular, so the glory of God is the end of all duties, and of all acts
thereto pertaining which expressly, and virtually are contained in any praecept
of the Decalogue; God is to be worshipped, our Parents honored, our Neighbors
beloved, our promises performed, Justice, Truth, and Chastity preserved, and
other duties of Piety and Charity performed, to the honor and glory of God.
Now as nothing has truly the condition of an Ens or being which may not aptly
be reduced to some species of it in some one of the ten praedicaments, so no
particular action, let men that mind their own ends say what they will to the
contrary, can ever truly and properly be referred to the glory of God as to its
end which is not reducible to some duty of piety and charity; grounded in some
one of the ten Commandments, of the Law of God. He but deludes you therefore,
whosoever he is who obstreperously cries out the glory of God, the glory of
God, and yet is not able to tell you by what commandment in the Law of God he
can maintain that, which he vainly professes that he performs for the glory
of God.

XVII. From the Conclusion above named it follows in the second place that
they are in a great error who think it is lawful for them to commit a less
sin that a greater sin might be avoided, many things are alleged to maintain
this error, as in the first place, that common saying which is in the mouth of
every man, (...). Arist. 2. Ethic. 9.
Of evils we must choose the least, and to give a reason for what they say,
they allege that of Aristot. that a (...), Id. 5. Ethic. 7.
less evil being compared with a greater, may be taken for a good. To which is
added that of Gregorius magnus, Dum men's inter minora, et maxima peccata
constringitur si nullus omnino sine peccato evadendi aditus pateat, minora
semper elegantur, When the mind is perplexed betwixt less sins, and those of a
higher nature, if there be no possibility to escape without sin, the less sins
are always to be chosen. Neither to this are wanting the examples of godly men,
in which that Act of Lot is remarkable above all the rest, for in the
nineteenth of Genesis we do find that he persuaded the filthy and most impure
Inhabitants of Sodom to the Act of incontinency with his own Daughters, to
divert them from more nefarious lusts. I should appear too tedious if I should
here insist upon too many examples, Of evils the least, is properly, and
primarily to be understood of the evils of punishment (as they call it) and
not of the fault, that is to say not of Sir, but of External evils compared
amongst themselves; In the same sense as David did, who, the choice of three
evils being propounded to him, 1 Samuel 24. 14.
viz. of War, Famine and Pestilence, (...) Vid. Suid. (...).
did make choice of the least of those three: In the second place I affiirm
that the same proverb, in the interpretation of it, is extended to a further
sense, For two evils being propounded, the one of punishment, the other of the
fault, if neither of them can possibly be avoided, but of necessity one of them
must be chosen, the evil of the punishment is to be made choice of, and not the
evil of the fault, for it is the least evil of the two, to suffer evil than to
do evil. We ought therefore rather to choose, to lose our goods than to
renounce our faith; and to suffer banishment than to be guilty of perjury; And
from hence it is that the Martyrs, of old, were endued with such a gallantry
and strength of courage, as to be plundered, and tormented, and to lose their
lives, rather than to burn incense unto Idols, or to consent to any thing which
were dishonest, or unworthy the name of a Christian. In the third place, if it
two sins, and most manifest it is unto his Conscience that both of them are
sins, I do affirm that he is not to make any choice of either, but to eschew
both of them. If you object, that put the case that neither of them can be
avoided, but one of them must of necessity be committed, as those words of
Gregory do manifestly imply, what will you persuade a man unto being in these
streights. I answer, that this cannot be supposed, for seeing that all sin is
so voluntary, that if it were not voluntary it were not sin, as St. Augustine
truly affirms, it cannot be that any man should be brought into such a straight
that of necessity he must sin, (...) Arist. 2. Eudem. 11.
he therefore does contradict himself who shall affirm that he committed such a
sin being compelled by mere necessity, for there is no man sins unless it
be by his own Will, and the will is so free that it cannot be compelled; And
surely this is the sense of St. Gregory although at the first sight the words
do seem to bear another construction, Nulla est necessitas delinquendi, quibus
una est necessitas non delinquendi. Tert. de Cor. Mil. Cap. 11.
these words especially, ( Si nullus sine peccato evadendi aditus pateat) But
if it be impossible to make any evasion without the committing of sin. For St.
Gregory does not here speak of two things propounded to be done, both whereof
are sins (which is the subject of which we now do treat) but of two things
whereof it is manifest to the person that does commit them, that one is a sin,
and the other by a mistake of the Conscience is conceived by him to be a sin,
when indeed it is not so, but upon some ungrounded suspicion, or some new
scruple that does invade his Conscience, he is afraid lest peradventure it be
a sin, which case is different from our present institution.

XVIII. If you demand, is it lawful for Caius to admit unto himself a less sin
to hinder a far greater one, which Titius otherwise would have committed, as to
be guilty of some petty larceny, that the other might not commit a murder. I
say with St. Augustine, that it is not lawful, his words are these, Si
quaeratur quid duorum potius debuit evitare qui utrumque non potuit, sed
alterutrum potuit, respondeo suum peccatum potius quam alienum, and levius
potius quod suum, quam gravius quod alienum. If it be demanded of me ( says
he) what of the two he ought rather to avoid, who cannot eschew both sins, but
may one of them. I answer his own sin rather than another, and more easily his
own than another. The reason is ready, for it is in my power that I do not
sin, but not if another sins. And thus he proceeds, Ego utrumque malum fieri
nollem, sed id tantum cavere potui, ne fieret quod erat in mea potestate. I
would have neither of the two evils committed, but I could only be cautious in
this, that the evil should not be committed which was in my power. But
manslaughter is a greater crime then theft, St. Augustine does confess it,
and makes answer that nevertheless it is worse to act a theft, then to suffer a
manslaughter; And to the same purpose he expresses himself in another place,
Quantumlibet distet inter tuum and aliennm, hoc tamen erit tuum illud alienum.
Let the crime be never so rightly stated, yet this shall be thy own, and that
shall be another man's. This is clear, and I need no longer to insist upon it.

XIX. In the fifth place, if it be yet demanded, is it lawful at least for any
man to persuade a less evil to him who is ready to commit a greater, as if a
man be ready to cut the throat of his enemy, to persuade him to inflict only
some slight wound upon him. The speech of Lot to his fellow Citizens tends to
this purpose; And there are many who differ in their judgment concerning it. I
do not much wonder that Chrysostom does excuse it, for it is the inclination
of his Genius and in the same manner he excuses all the infirmities of the
Patriarchs. Ambrose does excuse him also, and so do many more, especially the
Ancients. But St. Augustine does censure him as guilty of sin, and his judgment
has been approved of by many who since have followed him; and undoubtedly it
does appear, that this holy man out of a pious affection to his Guests, being
extremely sollicitous, that no force or inj^ry should be offered to them, did
some things, and peradventure spoke more out of the distemper of a troubled
mind, than might easily be excused. Therefore to pass over this fact of Lot,
we will return from the Hypothesis to the Thesis, or to the question now in
hand; I do conceive that it is lawful for a man to persuade a less evil unto
his friend to avoid the commission of a greater. If peradventure you shall
allege, whosoever persuades a sin unto another, although it be but a little
one, does nevertheless persuade him to a sin, which whosoever does do, he in
that very Act does make himself guilty of another man's sin. I make answer, that
it is one thing absolutely to persuade a man to this or that sin, which
whosoever does, he does undoubtedly sin, and another thing to persuade him to a
sin conditionally, and upon that supposition that he cannot otherwise eschew a
greater sin, which being supposed, and granted, he is not so much to be
esteemed, to have induced by his Counsel another to a less sin, as to have
diverted him from a greater and a more crying one, for he did not persuade him
to sin as it was sin, but as it was a less sin, and the hinderer of a greater
one. If you shall again object; If it be lawful for me to persuade another man
to make choice of a less sin, why is it not lawful for that man of his own
accord to make choice of that sin, I not persuading him to it, nay, why may I
not do that safely my self, which lawfully I do persuade unto another, and that
is of two sins propounded to make choice of the less. Or of the three ways here
spoken of, why is the first only thought to be lawful, and neither of the two
others, the manner and the account of all the three appearing to be the same. I
make answer, and do constantly deny the condition and the reason of them to be
the same, the difference being most manifest, that it is not lawful for him on
his accord, nor for me on my own accord to choose a less sin to avoid a
greater, is because it being in both our powers ( respectively) to forbear
both, we are both obliged to make choice of neither, but that it is lawful for
me to persuade unto another, a less sin that a greater may be abandoned, does
proceed from this, that it is not in the power of me the perswader, (for that
is already supposed) to hinder or to stop the course of either of them; I must
do my endeavor indeed, as much as lies in the power of my persuasions, to give
a stop unto them both, but when I find that I cannot perform that, which above
all I would, and have a desire to do, I do at the least perform that which I am
able, and which I ought to do, to persuade to a less sin to hinder the
commission of a greater.

XX. By these things hitherto discoursed of it is easy to be understood, what
is the sense of that Proverb, E malis minimum, Of evils the least, and what is
the use of it in all humane consideration, whether it be applied to the evils
of punishment or to the evils of fault, for (as St. Augustine does rightly lay
down the state of the questions) it holds and that universally also, and in
both the kind of evils, as often as things do come so to pass when it lies in
our power, to eschew one of the two evils if not to avoid them both. Indeed
every evil as it is an evil is to be eschewed by a pious and a prudent man as
much as lies in his power, therefore two kind of evils, of what kind soever,
being propounded, he ought to avoid both, if possible, if not he may give ear
to his admonisher, and choose that which is the least; Nevertheless it does
not follow that although he may choose the least of two evils, whether the evil
of the fault, or the evil of punishment, that he may choose the least of two
sins, for in sins both of them may be avoided as is already above demonstrated;
And thus much concerning the second corallary.

Out of this principal conclusion, it follows in the third place, that they
are in no less, if not a greater error who conceive, that sin may drive out
sin, as one nayl does drive out another, as for example, Superstition is to be
driven out by Sacrilege and Tyranny by Sedition etc. And this commonly is the
error of those men who think themselves to be then most wise, when like
Gardiners, when their plants and twigs being crooked, and stooping too much on
the one side, they bend them so much on the other side, to make them straight,
that they quite do break them off, and by taking too much care to avoid one
extreme, they improvidently do fall into another, so.

Stulti dum vitant vitia in contraria currunt. Hor. Satyr.

Whiles fools some vices strive to shun,
Into their contraries they run
Whiles they endeavor to keep off from Scylla, they fall into Charibdis; And
as that Aphorism has some place in curing the affections of the body (which
notwithstanding is not altogether approved by all the sons of Esculapius) viz.
Contraria contrariis curari, extrema extremis, that Contraries by contraries,
(...).
and extremes are cured by extremes, so in correcting the manners, and
reforming the corruptions of the Church and Commonwealth, instead of remedy,
it brings for the most part a certain ruin. Grave is that saving of
Sophocies, in his Stobaeus, (...). Hence it is that the affairs of mortals do
so much decay, that with one evil they would cure another, and much of the same
nature is that in his Ajax.

-- (...),
(...).
(...)
One being tame, no more ill medecines try,
Lest you contract some greater grief thereby.
XXI. But if no other remedy can be procured for the public evils, unless
some go^ly cousenages be administered, and the laws of God and men be violated,
were it not better to suffer for a little time that such things should be done,
than that the Commonwealth should be sick and perish? I do read indeed in the
Holy Writ that Chaiphas the high Priest of Jerusalem was of that opinion, who
in the Senate of his Nation, all the respects to Law and Justice being laid
aside, John 11. 50.
pronounced that Jesus though guilty of no crime, was to be put to death,
because it was expedient; I do remember I heretofore have read that one of the
Bishops of Rome being present at a great debate in the conclave of the
Cardinals, when it was told him by one of them that the counsel which was then
propounded did not appear to be just unto him, he made answer, Although it may
not be done by the way of justice yet it must be done by the way of expediency.
This you see what is the only way to be wise; This is the Divinity of those men
whom they call Politicians taken (as I believe) from the counsels of the
Jesuits, to measure all things by the profits of the holy mother the Church, to
write the word of God himself as they please, and this way and that way to bend
it like a nose of wax, and to enforce it to an interpretation for their own
profit, according to their own sense; And as that Lacedemonian said, that all
things at Sparta were honest which were profitable, these sparks of Sparta
think nothing is filthy enough, nothing is to be avoided that may be
subservie^t to their advantages; But fie on this mad Divinity, let it be f^r
from our Schools, Pulpits, and Breasts. The holy Apostles of our Savior, have
far otherwise instructed us, who would give no place to that question, Is it
expedient or not, 1 Cor. 10. 23.
before they were fully satisfied in that other question, is it lawful or not?
Nay the more sober sort of the Heathens themselves were of another judgment,
who as often as Honesty did seem to disagree with profit, they so always have
made the reconcilement, that they have pronounced that the same is not
profitable which is not also honest.

XXIII. But to make no long digression, St. Paul in this verse does altogether
deny, that any evil is to be done that good may come thereby, than which words
what can be spoken more plainly, or effectually to prove our conclusion; But
not long since I heard with these ears when those words of the Apostle were
urged, and some then present could not otherwise defend what they so much
desired to maintain, they made use of this distinction, that it was not lawful
indeed for a private man to do evil at his own pleasure that good may come
thereby, and this was only that which St. Paul in these words did prohibit, but
it was lawful notwithstanding for the Common Council of a Nation to whose care
it does belong that the Commonwealth should receive no detriment to do it, if
the public necessity and the safety of the people do so require; What and how
much is to be done for the safety of the people I shall hereafter God willing
examine, and determine: In the mean time it is in the first place to be
observed that this is but an extravagant suggestion, and that there is nothing
in the whole discourse of St. Paul, on which that distinction may rely.
Secondly, If we shall mark the force, and the scope of St. Paul's argument in
this place, we shall perceive that all such limitations, and ridiculous
inventions of deceitful men, for the Apostle here meets with the objection for
promoting the glory of God, by the sins of men, he denies that evil is to be
done for that end to render the glory of God more illustrious. It follows
therefore, a fortiori, from the stronger, that no evil things are to be done,
for any thing that is inferior to the glory of God; And seeing the glory of
God is infinitely to be preferred to all humane good whatsoever, whether
public, or private, and it is not lawful notwithstanding to do evil for Gods
glory, certainly it is not lawful for a private man or for the Representatives
of a whole Commonalty for the redress of any public or private inconvenience
to do evil themselves, or to commend it to be done by another.

XXIV. Let us meditate I beseech you (my hearers) on these things with our
selves and that most seriously, and the worse that the days are, and the more
that the snares of temptation are, and the assaults more violent, let us walk
the more exactly, and look unto our steps with a greater circumspection, let us
not suffer our selves by any machinations of the Devils, or allurements of
flesh and the world to be led aside, though never so little, from that right,
and that straight path of the Commandments of God; carrying always in our
memoryes that the evils which wittingly and wilfully we have committed, shall
find no excuse in that day when God shall be our Judge, and our Consciences our
witnesses, And thus much concerning the pretense of a good Intention: what
remains to be spoken concerning the examples and placits of men, so far as it
appertains to the regiment of conscience, I will (God willing) proceed to
give you a full account of it in my following Lecture.

THE THIRD LECTURE, In which is declared that neither in the examples of good
men, nor the judgment of experienced men, there is protection enough to secure
the Conscience.
GAL. 2. 13. (...) -- And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, insomuch
that Barnabas was brought into their dissimulation also.
HAving propounded to my self to examine and discover to you the adaequate rule
of Conscience which is to be the certain and safe Law how to lead our lives; I
conceived it in the first place most necessary, to declare unto you in what a
grievous and dangerous error they are, who think in the things they do they
provide well enough for the security of their own Consciences, if either by the
flattering intention of some good end, or the example of some holy man, or the
authority and judgment of a man famous for learning and piety, they can any
ways defend themselves and what they have done; And truly how little protection
there is in a bare good intention either as to the benefit of the Conscience or
the confidence of any good work, without the other concomitants of it, I think
has been sufficiently declared by me in my former Lecture, where by many
reasons I have convinced, that no evil is to be done that good may ensue
thereby. It remains that this day, I do represent unto you, that neither the
example nor the judgment of any man ought to be of so great authority with us,
that our Consciences may securely rest in either of them; and neither from that
alone can we duly conclude, that all things which are passed are rightly done,
or those things for the time to come are simply lawful to be done, which
another man endued with never so much learning and sanctity has either done
himself, or has judged lawful to be put into practice by another.

II. Moreover, how unsafe it is to frame our lives and actions to the examples
of other men, and how unsatisfying it is to the security of the Conscience to
defend our selves by alleging, that whatsoever we have done or are about to
do, has been done already by some pious man before us, may by a most clear
argument appear by the words of the proposed Text, especially if we shall go a
little higher and derive the ground and the occasion of them from the History
of the thing performed. St. Peter the Apostle living at Antioch amongst the
Gentiles converted to the Christian faith, who were not bound inconscience to
the observation of the Law of Moses, did freely eat with them, and did partake
of whatsoever meats were set before him, as well prohibited as permitted to the
people of the Jews, without the least scruple according to the liberty which
he had in Christ. But when some Christians of the nation of the Jews came to
Antioch from Jerusalem, whither they were those false brethren (...) of whom
mention is made in the fourth verse of this 2 of the Galatians, who pretending
that they came from James did indeed creep in privily of themselves, to observe
the liberty of St. Paul, and other Christians, as some do think, or rather (as
others are of opinion, and more probably) whether they were weak Brethren sent
indeed by St. James, but as yet not thoroughly instructed concerning the
cessation of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law; St. Peter desiring to be
gracious with them, or rather fearing to give them an offense, did immediately,
and altogether, abstain from the Tables, and the society of the Gentiles, and
from the meats forbidden in the Law of Moses, by whose example the Jews of
Antioch being induced, who by the Sermons of Paul and his fellow laborers in
Christ had been taught the Christian ^iberty a little better than those that
came from Jerusalem, and more fully understood the abolishing of the ceremonial
Law, yet being but weak themselves, and more addicted to the ceremonies to
which a long time they had been accustomed, they easily suffered themselves to
be separated from the communion of their brethren the believing Gentiles, not
without some suspicion (as it is probable) that Peter the chief of the
Apostles, was the more compent judge of these things, and what was to be done,
and that themselves were hitherto drawn in by Paul with the grateful but the
empty show of liberty; and what is more to be admired (for it is not strange or
unaccustomed for the weaker sort to stumble) even Barnabas himself, who was St.
Paul's colleague, and his daily companion in his journeys, who constantly
asserted the Doctrine of Christian liberty against the Jews, being overcome by
the authority of so great an Apostle, did stoop with him into the same
fellowship of dissimulation, not without a great offense to the believing
Gentiles.

III. Paul does here declare, that for this fact St. Peter was reprehended by
him, and that vehemently, openly, and deservedly; Not only that he himself, to
the scandal of so many of the brethren, out of too great desire of complacence,
or the fear of offense; had showed himself more favorable to the Jewish
ceremonies, than did become him, but that he drew others by his example into
the same participation of Hypocrisy with him, and by the same example had
endeavouted to enforce the believing Gentiles, although unwilling, and against
their Consciences, unto Judaisme: I am not ignorant that St. Hierom (having
alleged some other Authors that jump with him in that opinion) does give a far
different interpretation of this reproof, than what I here have specified, viz.
That this affair was not carried seriously, and as indeed it was betwixt these
two chiefest of the Apostles, but (...), and by contrivance, the benefit of the
Church at that time so requiring it. Indeed he would persuade us that this
dissimulation of St. Peter was necessary to retain the good opinion of the
Jews, which that it might not be too dangerous to the Gentiles, this
counterfeit reproof of St. Paul was altogether as necessary, by which the
error of the Jews, concerning the continuing force of the ceremonial Rites
might be so corrected, that by the same endeavor, provision should be made
that no danger of scandal should be given to the Gentiles. And thus by the
conjoined dissimulation of both the Apostles, it was so effected, that the
Jews as well as the Gentiles should by this pious fraud be more easily
retained, in the faith of Christ, which not long they had embraced. These words
therefore (...) are so handsomely interpreted by him to maintain his own opinion
(as above all other of the Fathers he is accustomed (...), to serve those
assertions which are but his own conjectures) that the words he withstood him
to the face do not in his construction signify, openly, and before the people,
or to his own face, but only under a pretense and show, and according to the
outward appearance, in which construction these words (...) are by him usurped
also, as it is manifest 2 Cor. 10. 7.

IV. This opinion of St. Hierome was nothing pleasing to St. Augustine, who
denies that any thing was here done by contract or contrivance, but that St
Paul most sincerely, and exprssely did oppose himself to this unseasonable
combination; he therefore in a letter did very friendly admonish St. Hierome of
his error, Inter Epist. Hierou. Epist. 97.
who persisting more obstinate in his opinion, (letters being often sent from
the one to the other) the question began to be disputed betwixt them (as became
the contestation of two such great wits) with much acuteness on both sides,
and with solid weights of reason; at the last in the judgment of most men, the
victory stood on St. Augustines side, and his arguments being conceived to be
more sound, and more considerable, but very few did adhere to the opinion of
Chrysostom; in which it is not to be wondered at, if Cardinal Baronius were
one, who being careful that the affairs of Rome should not suffer any
diminution, and that the infallibility of his Jove of the Capitol should not
grow into contempt, if any stain of rashness or error should blemish the
reputation of St. Peter, or if any man should be so bold to reprove him, or to
dare to open his mouth against him, by saying, ( Master why do you so.) does
here use all his art and industry to crown with applause the exploded opinion
of St. Hierome, and to restore it unto honor, though banished, and begging for
reputation all the world over; but truly this is that Baronius (as every where
he does betray himself to be partial) who in his voluminous, and laborious
Chronicles did make it all his business to gratify the Bishop of Rome, and to
measure the faith and Authority of all monuments and the great moments of all
opinions and testimonies by the dignity and Advancement of the Sea of Rome. But
Paul (to return from whence I have digressed) did most justly reprove St. Peter
his fellow Apostle (...); that is face to face (as the same phrase is read in
the 15 of the Acts and in other places) of importunate dissimulation, and this
he did boldly and openly before all, and more especially because that by his
example; he had drawn Barnabas into an error, and the Jews of Antioch, and
given a great, and a greiveous offense to the Gentiles who had newly embraced
the Christian faith to the great danger and scandal of the liberty of the
Gospel.

V. I have more willingly enlarged my self upon this, as well to give some
light to a place heretofore obscure, and much controverted, as to make more
manifest the force of the argument which for the confirmation of our position
is deduced from this discourse of the Apostle. For St. Paul judged that not
only St. Peter who was the leading example, but that Barnabas, and others also
who followed him, and did consent to the same dissimulation, were to be noted,
(...) as men that did not tread with an upright foot, nor walked according to
the simplicity of the truth of Christ: By which it is most evident, that, St.
Paul being Judge, it would render no great advantage unto uncertain Barnabas,
and halting as it were betwixt Judaism and Christianism to call into the
patronage of his dissimulation the example of St. Peter, although of the
highest estimation amongst the Apostles; but grant that Peter was worthy of a
sharper reprehension, because that by his example he became a stumbling block
to another, nevertheless Barnabas is not the more to be excused, that he
transgressed by following the example of another; And this may suffice
concerning our first argument taken from the Text of St. Paul.

VI. The second argument is derived from the difficulty of judging, for seeing
that all the deeds of the righteous are not to be imitated, it is no obvious
thing to understand what deeds of theirs are to be examplar; and what not; and
that by reason of a twofold uncertainty that is in them; For it may so come to
pass both ways, that what a righteous man has done, may not be well done, and
has been well done by him, is nevertheless not to be imitated by us. In the
first place most certain it is, that those deeds of theirs which are ill done
are not to be imitated, and that the most holy of men have had their blemishes,
and infirmities, it having pleased the most wise God to permit them to fall
sometimes into the most grievous sins, of murder, adultery, idolatry, and the
renouncing of their faiths, that they might consider that they are but men, and
by their own experience that they as well do partake with, as they do pardon
the mistreadings of another, that so they might not trust in their own
strengths against temptations but depend altogether on the assistance of God,
and if unconquered, unshaken, or unhurt they have sustained the most violent
assaults of temptations, that they may acknowledge it to proceed wholly from the
providence, and the grace of God; and it has pleased him who works all in
all according to the counsels of his own will, that some of their foulest
defects should punctually be expressed in the book of holy Writ, that so
illustrious, and never dying examples should remain unto all ages, on the one
side of humane frailty and inconstancy, and on the other of the Divine goodness
and mercy.

VII. Peradventure it will be here objected. It is true indeed, that those
Examples of the Saints are not to be imitated, which in the word of God are
expressly noted to be ill done, for what sober man will propound unto himself
either the abnegation of St. Peter, or the adultery of David, as examples for
him to imitate; Nevertheless it does seem that we may safely take examples
from those acts of theirs which are so recorded in the Scriptures, that they
are there as free from dispraise, as from any tincture of guilt; I make answer,
that this is not to be done, for in the Scriptures (as every where in other
Histories) the deeds of many men are only historically and nakedly related,
just as they were done, and are neither expressly commended, or discommended
by the Writers, notwithstanding it is not to be doubted, that some of them were
unjust, some of them dishonest, and far from the duty of a godly man; And many
other things there are recorded of, which we may not undeservedly doubt,
whether they were well done or ill done, concerning which the Interpreters are
accustomed to express themselves probably and liberally on both sides; Of such
a nature is that act of Lot, offering the violation of his Daughters
Virginities to the impure Citizens of Sodom, and that act of Joseph swearing as
it is thought by the life of Pharaoh; Genesis 19. ^. 42. 15. 16.
and that act of Jacob, craftily stealing from Esau his brother, the
benediction of his father; and many other examples of the same nature, which if
any man shall adventure to follow, on this presumption only, that he has read
the same things to be acted by godly men, and not to be condemned, he shall
object himself to a most certain danger of error and of sin, by subjecting his
Conscience to a most uncertain Law.

VIII. But you will say, we may safely howsoever follow those examples which
expressly are commended in the world of God; I make answer, that even this
also is not simply to be granted, for in the first place I say, that whatsoever
deeds of men are openly condemned in the word of God to be vicious, they are
simply to be eschewed; for the strength and use of bad examples are more
powerful to argue negatively upon them, than of good examples to argue
affirmatively, which manner of arguing out Apostle uses, 1 Cor. 10 6. etc.
where having propounded out of the Hostory of the old Testament the examples of
several sorts of sins, as also of the judgments of God upon the prevaricators
of his Law, he does admonish that all of us would look upon them as types and
examples, not to imitate, but to eschew them. (...). Ut fugerem, exemplis
viti^rum quaeque nota^do. 1 Satyr. 4.
That we may not lust after evil things as some of them lusted, nor worship
Idols, nor commit fornication, nor tempt Christ, nor murmur in afflictions as
they have done.

-- Hoc quidem non belle, nunquid ego illi
Imprudens olim faciam simile: Horat. ibid.
This is not well, but filly Elf,
Shall not I do the like my self.
IX. In the second place I do affirm that what Deeds in the Scriptures are
expressly praised, and are so praised, that they may seem to be propounded to
us for Examples, are notwithstanding not suddenly, and headily to be followed
by us, neither must we imagine that the whole aggregate Action, as it was at
first performed, is commended unto us to imitate; But we must use choice and
caution to imitate those things which are commendable, on that part only of
them, and entirely on that account for which they are commended. The reason of
this Caution is, because that God oftentimes in a mixed Action according to his
infinite goodness, does approve and look upon that only in it which is Good,
and does pass by, and as it were takes no notice of that in it which is Evil;
As in the 16 Luke 8. The Lord praised the unjust Steward, because he had done
wisely; although in the same Act he had hazarded the Reputation of his Trust.
The Wisdom therefore, and not the Injustice of that Steward, is to be
imitated; Again in that commended Example of the Egyptian Midvives preserving
the newborn of the I^raelites, and by a Lie excusing their contempt of the
Kings Commandment, their Lie is not to be numbered with their humanity and
their piety, but careful^y to be severed, and distinguished from it, for their
Lie was a Vice, and not to be followed, but their humanity and their piety is
praised by God, and they both deserve our Imitation.

X. In the third place I say, that the extraordinary achievements of the
Worthyes are praised in the Scriptures which, being stirred up by a peculiar
motion and inspiration of the holy Spirit they performed as it were by a
peculiar mandate, and beyond the ordinary Law, and yet notwithstanding those
achievements are not to be followed. Of this Nature, is that remarkable Act of
Phineas, for which he received both commendations and recompense from God
himself, for being but a private Man, and invested with no Lawful Authority, he
did notwithstanding with his Spear, run through the bodies of those two
shameless persons, whom he had taken in the Act of Incontinency. Numb. 25. 8.
And of the same nature was that of Elias the Prophet, who having called Fire
down from Heaven destroyed the Soldiers that were sent to secure him. 2 Kings
4. 10. etc. Which Act of his, when two of the Disciples of Christ James and
John desiring to imitate, having asked counsel of their Master concerning it,
he was so far from approving their rash desires, Luke 9 54
that he did reject them, and gave a great check to their Chole^ick
Importunity, You know not (says he) of what Spirit you are; As if he should
have said, forbear the extravagant heats of your unquiet minds, and contain
your selves within the bounds of your Vocation; If Elias heretofore did any
thing severely, do not you suppose that the same thing is fitting to be
performed by you. That which he did, was effected by the extraordinary Spirit
of God, which inwardly did suggest and dictate to him, and was like unto that
particular Mandate which was given to Abraham to kill his Son Isaac, But this
belongs not to you whom the Spirit of God has not yet called to the Execution
of so extraordinary and so high a charge, you ought not to entertain any
thought of attempting it.

XI. Seeing therefore it is not always certain that what has been performed
by a Godly Man, ought to be commended, and though it has been commended, it
ought not unpremeditately to be imitated, it is far more conducible to the
security of our Consciences to bring home and conform our Deeds to the Rule of
the Law which is certain, than to follow the uncertain Examples of Men. Most
true is that of St. Augustine, Haec quae in Scripturis Sanctis legimus, non
ideo quia facta credimus, etiam facienda credamus: ne violemus praecepta, dum
passim sectamur exempla. We ought not to believe that these things which we
read in the Holy Scriptures, are therefore to be done again, because, that
already they have been performed, least we violate the precepts, whiles every
where we do follow the Examples. And after other words to the same purpose, he
does thus conclude; Unde constat, quod non omnia quae a Sanctis et justis viris
legimus facta transfere debemus ad mores. From hence it is manifest, that we
ought not to translate all things into practice and manners which we do read to
have been performed by holy and just men. And thus far of our second Argument
concerning the difficulty of judging the examples of Godly men by reason of the
great uncertainty which is in them.

XII. The third Argument follows, taken from the difficulty of rightly
applying the Examples of other men, to our own Affairs and Actions, by reason
of the uncertainty of the Circumstances which being of an infinite variety, do
also infinitely vary the qualities of humane Actions; That which is free and
lawful in the Thesis, that is, the Positions, is so also in the Hypothesis or
Supposition, the same Circumstances remaining, I call that lawful which may be
done without Sin, and that free, which without Sin may be omitted; now the same
thing (any one circumstance being added or taken away, or any ways changed)
may be made unlawful of that which was Lawful, and necessary of that which
before was free; and this we see every day by Experience in our Courts of Law,
when pleadings are made at the Bar, where by the advocate of one side, the
preceding Examples of Cases before judged are cited for the advantage of their
Cause, and it is answered by the Advocate of the other side, that there is not
in both Cases the same Reason of Law, that the Circumstances are varyed, from
whence it comes to pass that the Case is altered, and those things which were
cited to be reported, and to be judged of before; do not appertain to the Suit
now in Controversy; But if that rightly the Case be demonstrated, the whole
frame of the Defense which did support it self on this Foundation, does
presently fall to the ground; And the precedent taken heretofore of the things
that have been so judged, will be of no moment at all with the Judges. From
hence it comes to pass, that amongst the several kinds of Argumentation with
Logicians, the Exemplum or Example is ranked amongst the last, as more fit to
illustrate than to demonstrate a thing. And certainly if that of Fabius be
true, Tot seculis nullam repertam esse causam quae sit tota alteri similis; In
so many ages there has never yet any cause been found which has been
altogether like to one another; Its likely enough that very easily he may Err,
who by the condition of one cause does hastily pass his Judgment on another
like unto it, having not first with all diligence weighed with himself the
circumstances of them both.

XIII. In which consideration we are so much the more ready to fall into an
error because we are most of us of such a temper, that in the application of
the examples of others unto our selves, we only look upon the bare fact, and
greedily make use of it by enforcing it to our purpose, especially if it seems
to comply with our affections, and the desires of our hearts, in the mean time
taking not into our least consideration, either the causes of the fact, or of
the end, or the manner of the circumstances of it, especially if they are not
suitable or complacent unto us. The Prophet Amos in the sixth Chapter, and
fifth verse, does reprove some of his time, who in the midst of public
calamities, being too slothful and secure, did delight themselves in Riot and
all manner of pleasures, and amongst other things did whisper unto themselves
that like unto David they did invent unto themselves instruments of Music, as
if they should have said, why should that be condemned in us to be a Vice,
which was a praise and honor unto David. That Holy Man did exercise himself in
Psalms, and Instruments of Music; And we do the like; but in the mean time we
do dissemble with our selves, and fail in that which principally was to be
imitated in David, for he did it to the Honor of God, and the Solemnity of his
worship in public, and not to the excess in Bankettings, and the fomenting of
Sloth and Wantonness.

XIV. The Rhetoricians do give many Precepts concerning Imitation in Oratory,
to wit, that it will be profitable for him who would be an Orator to propound
unto himself some remarkable person, who is excellent in the Art of Speaking
whom he must endeavor to imitate; which also the Philosophers do make mention
of as a salubrious precept for the institution of our lives. Seneca does exhort
us to the Example of some famous and excellent person for the better
composition of our lives, and manners, for the way by precepts, he says, is
tedious, which is made but short and more effectual by Examples. Examples
moreover do carry with them a kind of secret delight, and have joined to them
as much profit as persuasion, as we may see in little Children, who unwillingly
do obey the commands of others, but take a great pleasure to imitate their
Acts; Those men nevertheless who give these Counsels do withal advise us, that
to live well and happily, we ought to have a sound judgment to make a wise
choice, both of the men whom we would propound unto our selves for examples,
and of the things themselves which we are to imitate; Fabius derides those weak
Orators, who endeavoring by a vain affectation, and empty circumstance of
words, to imitate the style of Cicero, do conc^ive they have performed
something rare and happy if they can often but conclude with an esse videatur;
And Tully himself does reprove the perverse diligence of some men in this
particular, who having propounded to themselves some famous Orator for
examples, do imitate nothing of them but their infirmities; Such a man was
Fusius an evil imitator of a good Orator, Caius Fimbria, Nervos Caii Fimbriae
in dicendo, (says Tully) non assequitur, oris pravitatem imitatur, He attains
not to the soundness and pithinesse of Caius Fimbria in speaking, he imitates
only the imperfection of his speech. Nazianzen relates that Bazil Bishop of
Caesaria, (by reason of his great piety, and learning, called commonly Bazil
the great) was had in such a reverent esteem by all men, that not a few did
studiously affect, and strove to have some resemblance of his bodily
infirmities, as of the paleness of his countenance, his slow gate, and
pronunciation of his words, and other defects of his body. In the same nature
others do attest, that there were not some wanting who with all their industry
did endeavor to counterfeit the drawling of the great Orator Demosthenes, and
the stammering of the famous Philosopher Aristotle. O Imitatores servum pecus!
says Horace, 1 Epist. 19.

XV. These things and a thousand more like unto them, which every day we read
of in approved Authors, being all of them the examples of a perverse imitation,
would provoke our mirth rather than our choler, if this perverseness consisted
only in words and in the outward habit and gesture of the body, and had no
place at all in our lives and manners. But here also, nothing peradventure more
unfrequently, but certainly far more dangerously, Decipit examplar vitiis
imitablie, The example does deceive being vitiously resembled, whiles too
indulgent to our own affections, and transported by the pravity of our desires,
out of the abundant heaps of examples, we make choice of those most willingly,
and in them do most vehemently urge those circumstances, which seem most
suitable to that side, to which already our minds do incline, that sow may the
better serve our vain affections and desires. And this, whosoever shall more
diligently peruse the books published by the Anabaptists and Brownists and
other Sectaries, of that complexion, or what some few years before have been
written by their true predecessors, the Puritan Reformers he shall most readily
find to be egregiously performed by those who make it their business to
disturb the order of the Church and the peace of the Commonwealth, and that I
may give you some testimony of the perverseness of these men's spirits, (which I
hope I shall perform without just offense to any sober man) give me leave I
pray you but briefly to examine one of their arguments, taken (as they allege
from the example of Christ and the Apostles) which being handled large enough,
and with great animosity by them how solidly, and sincerely they have carried
themselves therein, I shall leave it unto you to judge.

XVI. About forty years since there came forth a book published by some
Ministers of the Diocese of Excester (for there were many heads and hands in
it) against the Rite of kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament. Amongst
other arguments which they had every where sought for, and brought together,
they seemed to triumph most in this, which they say was taken from the example
of Christ himself, The sum and strength of the argument lies in this. It is not
lawful for a Christian in any religious action pertaining to the worship of
God, to recede a jot from the example of Christ and the Apostles, the action
being imitable, as every action of Christ is to be imitated, and being rightly
followed by others, ought to be imitated as well by all Christians; But Christ
and his Apostles did receive the holy supper in another posture than kneeling,
therefore we Christians also ought to do the like; This so weak and so
pittyfull a Sophism, being imposed not only on the unlearned people but on
others also, who, if they were more wise, it would be better with the Church of
Christ, it will not be labor lost to propound some things unto you which may
abundantly demonstrate to you the vanity of the whole argumentation.

XVII. In the first place therefore, observe that here is a (...) a transition
to a thing of another kind, which is so foul an error that it is hardly to be
pardoned in Schoolboys, for the whole controversy being altogether of the
gesture, they dispute here with much importunity on another Subject, which is
of Actions only. Let us grant that every action of Christ is to be imitated,
but who will say that gesture is an action, there being so wide a disparity and
and disproportion betwixt them, that they are not in the capacity of one common
Genus, but do properly belong to two distinct praedicaments, for gesture
belongs to Situs or the praedicament of posture, and Action to another proper
praedicament of its own name.

XVIII. In the second place observe, that the four last praedicaments are of a
lower extract, viz. Ubi, Quando, Situs, and Habitus, the where, the when, the
gesture, and habit, are almost of one estimation and account in respect of
those actions to which as it were they are added as Concomitants, for they are
nothing else but some relations of an inferior note, and circumstances
altogether extrinsical to the actions themselves; It seems not therefore
agreeable to reason that by the force of the example of Christ and the Apostles
we should be obliged to the imitation of one of them only, which is in the
gesture, and that in the other three, viz. the where, the when, and the habit,
we have no obligation even in the judgment of those men who do urge this
example; For as to the where they themselves do not hold it necessary whether
the Sacrament or holy Eucharist be celebrated in private houses below or in
(...) in the upper room thereof; Neither do they hold themselves obliged as to
the when, whether it be after supper, or in the dusk of the Evening, nor as to
the habit, whether it be solemnized by a Minister in a Semealos coat,
notwithstanding that all these particulars were observed in the first
institution of the supper, it is apparent in the sacred History, neither is it
denied by themselves; Since therefore they themselves do assume the liberty,
and do grant it unto others, that with a safe Conscience it is lawful for them
in all these things to recede from the practice of Christ, and his Apostles, I
would willingly learn from these new masters what it is that is so singular in
the praedicament of Situs, or of gesture, that it is so much to be ranked
either above or beneath the estimation of the rest of its Consorts, and it is
not lawful without great Sacrilege to startle the least on this side or on
that side from that primitive example. Surely it is but reason that these four
praedicaments should either go hand in hand, or walk with an even pace
together, or some reason for the difference should be assigned, that we may
understand wherefore it is not to be done, which as yet, as far as I can learn,
they have neither performed, nor attempted.

XIX. In the third place observe again, that seeing every Act examplar ought to
be so certain that it cannot be denied, it is not so clearly manifest by any
Text of Scripture, that should it be denied, that could be proved which they
assume, and I willingly will grant, viz. that Christ and the Apostles did not
celebrate that first Supper with bended knees but in some other gesture. But
they will object does not that word (...) in the Gospels intimat only a
triclinary gesture, by lying along on a bed, which was familiar to those times,
and Countries? I answer, no, and altogether do deny, that any certain kind of
gesture can be proved by the signification only of that word. From that kind of
gesture which heretofore at Dinner or Supper was used in Parlours was the Greek
word (...) derived, and the Latin word discumbere which is to sit or to lie
down, but he will put the weight and force of the words in a very unrighteous
balance, whosoever, after they are grown more old by use, and of a far larger
extent, shall endeavor to bring them back again to their first Cradles, and to
include them within their ancient limits. Those two words therefore in the
common use of speaking, do signify that act by which we do purposely and
usually apply our selves in some commodious place to eat our meat, in
whatsoever gesture or posture of the body it be done, whether it be by
standing, or sitting, or kneeling, or lying down, properly or improperly so
called.

XX. But although by the force of the word in the original we cannot prove it,
yet (by some circumstances of the History) it may very probably be collected,
that Christ and the Apostles in that first Supper, did use a triclinary gesture
by lying along on beds, where in the fourth place observe, that our new
Dictators do not obey themselves that Law which they impose upon the
Consciences of others; For if Christ in the institution of the holy Supper did
use a triclinary gesture, his feet, and all the lower part of his body being
stretched forth on a bed, and leaning with the upper part thereof on his elbow,
why do not these men, who are so hot upon it in their disputations imitate this
example of Christ, which undoubtedly they may? why do they not provide
themselves with beds, and parlours that so being provided with all things
necessary, they may be made partakers of the holy Table in the same gesture
which Christ and his Apostles used? From which gesture it is most certain that
those do differ who either stand or sit, (the one of which they both do
themselves, and persuade others to it (as much as those who kneel upon their
knees: If they shall object, as some of them do, that in this Western part of
the world, the tricliniary gesture is out of use, and therefore we are not
obliged to the same posture in the same sp^ifical manner of it, nevertheless
by the force of that primitive example we are bound to observe the same posture
as to the generality of it, that is, that at least we may use the Table gesture
which according to the custom of our Nation, is anological and successive to
it, as they then used that gesture, which after the fashion of those times and
places was accustomed to be observed. But let them feed the people with such
deceits; Is it possible for men out of a prejudicate affection, and a vain
desire of contradicting to sink so much from understanding as to thrust into
the world such empty conceits for solid ones, or to think to impose on any
sober man such ridiculous assertions; which how vain, and how empty they are,
that I may briefly and clearly show, I must desire those men that do so
dispute, directly and without any tergiversation to answer to these few
Interrogatories.

XXI. In the first place I do demand, that seeing it is so certain that Christ,
if he used the tricliniary gesture, that he did not eat, neither sitting nor
standing, kneeling on his knees, why by the power of the same example are we
not obliged in the act and instant of communicating to abstain as well from
sitting or from standing as from kneeling? For by the same supposition it does
follow that there is not any one of the said three Postures which is not as
destitute of the example of Christ, as the other two. It is therefore most
right (as a little above was spoken of the four last predicaments) that these
three should enjoy the same privilege, and be either all of them condemned as
guilty, or acquitted as blameless; If they shall reply, as it is their usual
refuge, that by the custom of the Nation sitting or standing did succeed
triclinary Gesture and not kneeling. I demand in the second place, how comes it
about, that only the silent custom of any Nation (suppose the English) should
be of power, that sitting or standing should succeed the tricliniary gesture,
or lying down on the bed, at our common tables, and the positive Law of the
same Nation should not suffice, that kneeling should succeed the same Gesture
at the Sacred Table. Can a Custom changed without any public Authority
sensibly so prevail, that what before was not un-decent, or un-lawful, must now
no longer be decent, and no longer lawful? Cannot a Law inacted by Public
Authority, and established by an express consent of the people, and allowed of
by daily use, prevail, that what upon no lawful reasons was ever found to be
ever unlawful, should be esteemed lawful again for the time to come? Indeed,
where these two things Law and Conscience do fight between themselves (as
hardly they do in this case) there is no man of a sober understanding but will
acknowledge; that Custom should give place to Law, and not Law to Custom. In
the third place, I demand of them, do they seriously believe, or do they not
believe, that he Communion with bended knees? If they shall say that he
Sins, seeing that every Sin is a transgression of the Law of God, let them
show me some precept in that Law against which he that so does, Sins? If
they shall acknowledge that it may be done without Sin, then by their own
confession they will level their own Rise, and overthrow all the force of their
Arguments. In the fourth place, suppose that the said tricliniary gesture had
been abolished before the first institution Holy Supper, and that Sitting or
Standing did succeed it, so that Christ and his Apostles must have eaten either
Standing or Sitting, both of which could not be used at one time; I demand if
they had eaten Standing, whether it were so necessary for us to stand also,
that we should have sinned if we had sat, and on the contrary, or whether we
might have been free to have used which we would? If they should say, that we
are free for both, the Argument taken from the Example of Christ, will be of no
power, and will fall to the Ground, for he used only but one of the said
Gestures, and not both of them. If they shall say again, that we are precisely
bound up to the observation of that posture which is supposed was used by our
Savior, wherefore do these so severe Dictators, and Controulers of the Liberty
of every Church, admit unto them an Indulgence of Standing or Sitting at the
Holy Supper, but not of kneeling, or of that posture which it is most probable,
that our Savior used? In the fifth place I demand, If the Example of Species,
and has no reference to some higher Genus, or why does it not fall lower to
some more inferior Species? To make it more obvious to your understandings,
seeing those three things are to be considered. The gesture or Posture it self,
as a superior Genus, the Posture at the Table as a Species subalternate to it;
And the Posture of lying along and leaning, as the lowest Species; And it is
probable that Christ used the last according to the custom and practice of
those Times, and Climates, why must the posture only at the Table, which is but
an intermedial and a subalternate Species be accounted necessary and sufficient
to the true Imitation of Christ, and not any other posture sufficient in the
Genus of it, or why may not the posture of Leaning and lying along be as
necessary in the Species. Lastly I demand, Is the posture of leaning and lying
along practiced by our Savior and the Apostles at the first institution of the
Holy Supper to be imitated or not? I am confident they will not deny that it is
to be imitated, for indeed they cannot deny it, because from thence they do
derive the chiefest ground and foundation of their Cause; For thus they do
propound the examples of Christ of necessity to be imitated by us, that is to
say, not every example simply in it self, but every example that may be
practiced by us; I Only therefore in this argumentation take that which they of
their own accord do grant, which is, 1st. the proposition, That every imitable
example of Christ does oblige a Christian to the imitation of it. And 2ly. the
assumption, that the posture in the Species of it which Christ used in the holy
Supper whatsoever it was is imitable. From these premises I infer this
conclusion; By the force therefore of this example, say I Christians of the next
age unto our Savior, were obliged to the same posture in the same Species
which he used, And in the same manner were Christians of the second and third
age, ever since, unto these present times; And it must accordingly be
acknowledged that the Church of Christ even at this time also is obliged to the
practice of the tricliniary or leaning posture, if indeed Christ did use it, or
at least it must be shown, at what time and on what account, and by what Author
and Authority the force of this obligation is made void.

XXII. By these things which have been spoken it is manifest that all the force
of their Argument which with so much pomp is dressed and held forth by them,
does come to no more than this, that it cannot more rightly or more
commodiously be propounded for their own purpose than under this form. The
example of Christ and his Apostles does so far oblige, as we think it
expedient that it shall oblige, but we think it expedient that it shall oblige
to the not bending of the knee in the receiving of the Sacrament, and no
further; therefore so far only, and not a jot further is the extent of the
obligation. I am ashamed I confess to furre your ears with the repetition of
these vanities, for it becomes not this place, nor my age, or manners to
provoke to laughter in so serious a Subject. But what shall we do with these
men? A bad cause indeed does need such a Patronage, and it cannot but come to
pass that oftentimes they are enforced to speak many vain and incongruous
things, and (if thoroughly they be examined) very absurd ones, whosoever they
are, who like unto those men, do suffer themselves to be governed by
affectation rather than truth. I do speak from my heart and as indeed it is,
although in their writings we do meet with many things not solidly argued, and
sometimes not sincerely, yet I do not remember that I have any where observed
mere trifles to be carried on with so much animosity and contention, or the
swelling Hills to bring forth a more miserable and ridiculous production, than
when the bare examples of good men in the holy Scriptures are so importunately
urged, either to excuse those acts which by the law of God do seem to be
prohibited, or to induce an obligation upon the Consciences of men for the
observation of those things which do not appear by any law of God to be
commanded. But I return from whence I have digressed, if have transgressed at
all, and proceed.

XXIII. The fourth argument is taken from the end, and proper use of examples,
for we must duly confess, that examples in themselves are of great use, both
for the institution of our manners, and for the amendment of our lives; And
certainly otherwise so many precepts had not been left us in the word of God,
for whatsoever is there written is written for our instruction (...). Rom 15 4.
And for our admonition, (...). neither would the Apostles otherwise have so
constantly inclucated them. My brothers take the Prophets for an example of
patience, you have heard of the patience of Job, Elias prayed, James 5. 19 11.
17. Again, Be you followers of me as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. What you
have heard and seen in me do those things Philip. 4. 9. Observe those who so
do, walk as you have us for an example, Phil. 3. 17. And the like in many
places. But the use and end of examples are not to be rules unto us for good
liveing, but only as helps and as it were spurs to shake off our dullness, and
to rouse our sloth when we are more heavy and dull in the performance of our
duties than indeed we ought to be. For humane frailty (especially upon some
great temptations, and violent suggestions of the Devil and the World) is
commonly attended with many murmurings and complaints against the security of
the Law of God, and the difficulty of giving obedience to it, nay oftentimes it
is heard to cry out that there are Lions in our way, and that there are snares
and stumbling blocks laid under our feet to cause us to trip and fall; that we
must endure injuries, contumelies, and calumnies, the plundring of our goods,
the sequestering of our Estates, the loss of our dear parents, and of those
dearer pledges, our Wives, and Children, and that with the loss of our
friends, that we must lose our Country, nay even life it self, and become a
hatred even to those who most of all are obliged to love us. How unpleasing are
these discourses? How unsupportable is the burden of this oppression? As often
as these thoughts, and the like, do invade our minds, so that we even begin to
despond all hope, and even to abandon the care of all our duties, as of things
impossible, which in vain we do endeavor to perform, our languishing spirits
are revived and raised by the seasonable authority of examples, Tu^^iter
desperatur quicquid fieri potest. Quint. 1. Instit. 10. cum quid difficile
videtur, difficiliora alios obeuntes re^^^ amus: Tert. 1. ad uxor ^
and are by degrees encouraged and armed, to despise all difficulties, overcome
all temptations, and to endure all contumelies whatsoever, when I say we
seriously thus do consider that pious and godly men, and obnoxious to the same
troubles and temptations with us, being assisted by the grace of God, (which
will not be wanting unto us if we wholly depend upon it and faithfully add our
endeavors thereunto) have performed and endured all those things which by the
help of God are to be performed and to be endured by us, our spirits will begin
to return, and our breasts grow warm with a godly emulation, the fire will burn
within ns as we are musing and in the fullness of the heart these or the like
expressions will break forth; Behold Lord I am ready to perform what thou
command, and to undergo what thou layest upon me. The same cloud of
witnesses, that which way soever we look, does every where surround us, will
persuade us also, that all revenge and distemper of spirit being cast away, as
also the importunity of sin (which as it does closely embrace us, so if we use
our best endeavors, by the grace of God, will with no great difficulty abandon
us) we courageously constantly and patiently do run the race that is set before
us.

XXIV. St. James the Apostle in his fifth Chapter does exhort us to a fervency
in prayer, after the example of Elias, who by the importunity of his prayer,
did as it were at his pleasure, lock and unlock the Gates of Heaven; And that
no man might conceive, that it was to be imputed rather to the sanctity, and
the merits of Elias, than to the promise of God to the prayers of the faithful
by the Covenant of Grace: The Apostle in the very beginning of this narration
does take away all occasion of suspicion, Elias (says he) was a man the same
passions with us verse 17. (...). He was a man, not a God, or an Angel, nor
made of better clay, but out of the same mass out of which all other men are
fashioned; This here urged is the most proper and the most profitable use of
examples, we ought therefore to bear in our minds that examples are not the
rule it self, neither do they carry with them the weight or estimation of a
rule; nay, if any doubt be made of the uprightness or the pravity of the act,
they are themselves to be brought, and diligently to be examined by the Rule
(...) says St. James in his fifth Chapter and the (...) verse, where I know
not well if that word (...) does carry with it a special force of
signification. Certainly, it seems unto me, to imply that the acts of the
holy Prophets are no^ (...), the principal copy and example which is to be
observed by us, but as it were the (...), or the second example, which is not
of authority of it self, or for it self, but so far to be believed, and
received, as it agreeeth with the original.

From what hitherto has been spoken it may be now made manifest, that it does
not suffice to prove the goodness of any humane act, that it is comformable to
the example of some good and holy man; and therefore no man's Conscience can
securely and safely acquiesse therein, unless the example it self be
comformable to the rule.

XXV. Again, that we may now come to the other part of our proposition; The
account is almost the same of another man's judgment, as of his example, and
that almost for the same Causes, so that we need not to make many words to
enlarge our selves upon this Subject, I will therefore run it over in as few as
I can.

And in the first place, all men though godly and learned are no less liable
unto errors, than they are to sins, nay peradventure much more, and therefore
we ought to have a more acute investigation of the mind, to discover the
difference betwixt Truth and Falsehood, then betwixt Good and Evil; First by
reason of that natural ignorance with which our minds are darkened, and vaild
as with a cloud. Secondly by reason of our education, which fashione and
forms our minds, as yet but tender, and does imprint certain notions on them
which it is no easy task to expunge. Thirdly by reason of long use and Custom,
which is as it were another nature. Fourthly, by reason of the depraved
affections which do eclipse our judgments, and do hinder the right use of
them. From these and many other causes it is so obvious unto men to err, to
fall, and to be deceived, that it has been long ago a proverb, Humanum est
errare, It is the property of a man to err.

XXVI. Add to this in the second place, that not we our selves do not always
sincerely judge of their piety and wisdom, whose Judgments we do desire to
follow, it being very customary with those men who permit themselves to be
governed by the arbitration of other men to make choice of such Conductors whom
they before are confident will lead them in that way in which before hand they
had determined to go themselves. Thus does Satan hold fast unwary men, being as
it were enclosed in his circle. If you demand of them, why they suppose such a
thing to be true and right, they answer, Because this, or that wise, and godly
man has so taught us. If you again shall demand of them, how they do know
their Teacher to be a pious and a prudent man; they answer, or at least would
so answer, if they would speak according to their hearts, because he thinks
as we do think.

Et sapit and mecum facit and Jove judicat aequo.
The man is wise and does as I intend,
And judges rightly having Jove his friend.
Many there are indeed who do measure the piety of other men, not according to
the practice of the duties of a Christians life, and by the works of
righteousness, Mercy, Charity, and Devotion, but by an affection to that
faction to which they have bequeathed themselves, and by the hatred to another
party to which they profess themselves to be Enemies. (...) says the Apostle,
2 Timothy 4. 3. They shall heap up unto themselves, Teachers according to their
own desires. The Metaphor following is most proper, (...); when their ears do
itch they seek those that will tickle them; and thus the same does befall them
which in the old proverb is expressed; Muli se mutuo scabunt, One Mule does
scratch another.

XXVII. Thirdly, the word of God does expressly forbid us to subject our
Consciences to the judgment of any other, or to usurp a Dominion over the
Consciences of any one: Ne vocemini Rabbi, unus est enim vester (...) Magister,
Praeceptor, Doctor, Unctor, Christus. Be not ye called Rabbi for one is your
Master who is Christ, the word in the original signifies as well Schoolmaster,
Tutor, Leader, as Master. And my brethren be you not many masters says St.
James Chap. 3. verse 5. To this purpose is that of St Peter, in his first Book
Chap 5. verse 2. Feed you the Flock of God which is committed to you, (...), as
holding forth a light before them, that is, the Doctrine of the true faith, and
the example of a godly life, but not (...), not as excercising a domination and
an uncontrouled empire over the Clergy or the people of God, And again, 1 Cor.
7. 23. Emp^i estis pretio, nolite fieri servi hominum You are bought with a
price, be you not made the servants of men; that is, do not submit your
Consciences to be governed by the Authority of any man, according to his
pleasure, and command.

XXVIII. From these things which are thus stated, and proved, to give you now
some few Corallaryes, and those in a few words, it follows in the first
place, that the insupportable pride and tyranny of the Pope of Rome ought most
deservedly to be hated by every true Christian who by arrogating an infallible
judgment to himself, and to his chair, does by that name exercise an usurping
power and domination over the Consciences of men, and pretends so much right
thereunto, that if he should say virtues were vices, and vices virtues, all
Christians are bound under the penalty of mortal sin, to submit to his judgment
without the least doubt, or scruple. We are therefore with all thankfulness to
acknowledge the great and Singular goodness and mercy of Almighty God, who for
these many years has freed us, and our forefathers, and the Church of England
from so unconscionable a Tyranny, and has again restored us to our just
liberties.

XXIX. But we must all of us, and every one of us take heed, that being freed
now from that Tyranny, we do not stoop our necks to a new bondage, least we be
found not so much to have shaken off our yoke, as to have changed it.

-- Quae bellua ruptis
Quum semel effugit reddit se prava catenis, Horat.

Like to the Beast who having broke his chain
Fondly returns to have it on again. 2 Satyr. 9.

It does indeed concern us highly, if seriously we would provide for the peace
of our own Consciences, or of the Church and Commonwealth, to take care least
what heretofore was spoken of the Church of Corinth; I am of Paul, I of
Apollos, and I of Cephas be not heard of us; I am of Luther, I of Calvin, I of
Arminius, and I of Socinius. No let God be true, and every man a Liar; He is
not worthy to be Christ's Disciple, who is not the Disciple of Christ alone. The
simplicity and sincerity of the Christian Faith, has suffered a great
prejudice since we have been divided into parties; neither is there any hope
that Religion should be restored to her former vigor and purity, until the
wounds made wider by our daily quarrels and dissentions, being anointed with
the Oil of Brotherly Love, as with a Balsome, shall begin to close again, and
to grow entire into the same unity of Faith and Charity.

XXX. In the third place we are to take heed, lest being too indulgent to our
depraved affections, we do suffer our selves to be so drawn aside into the
admiration of some men, that we wholly depend upon their Authority, Jude 1^
(...), In which words the Apostle with a finger points at the very Fountain
of all this evil; For this perverse admiration of Names has no other Spring
from whence it flows, but from this desperate self-admiration, viz. whiles
every man studyeth his own profit, is ambitious of Honor, and pursues
vainglory, and esteems no otherwise of all other men, than according to the
advantage he may receive from them; And his Judgment being corrupted with
these sordid affections, he is most ready to admire those persons whom he
thinks will be most ready to advance his Profit, Honor, Glory, and his other
inordinate desires. And the very same thing another of the Apostles, whom
already I have cited, does expressly intimate they did choose unto them
Master, 2. Tim. 4. 3.
(...), according to their own desires.

XXXI. Nevertheless, that due Authority may be given to the Catholic Church,
and to every Learned and Godly Man, notwithstanding those things which have
been here by me represented; You are in the first place to be admonished, that
in the Interpretation of the Scriptures, and in judging of Controversies in
reference to Faith and Manners, much Reverence and Authority is to be given to
the Judgment, and the Practice of the Universal Church.

Secondly, That much also is to be imputed to the Authority and the Judgment
of a Learned Man, for the satisfying of ordinary scruples that too often arise
in the minds of men, as also for the directing of the Conscience in doubtful
things concerning which no certainty can otherwise be had; But of both these we
shall express our selves, we hope, more commodiously hereafter.

THE FOURTH LECTURE, In which it is both Discussed, and Stated, what is the
Adaequate Rule of Conscience.
JAMES. 4. 12. For there is but one Lawgiver who can both Save, and Destroy.
I. HOw small is the Benefit and Protection which redoundeth to every one,
either in the respect of the Fruit of his Conscience to excuse those things
which he has done, or of the security of it with confidence to undertake those
things which he is about to do, if they only do rely upon the Intention of a
good End, or upon the Authority altogether of another Judgment or Example, I
have abundantly declared in my two last Lectures, in which my purpose was,
those stops being removed, to make the way more plain and ready to proceed unto
those things which I had determined to speak, of the obligation of Conscience;
which obligation being two fold, Active, by which it brings one obligation on
another, and Passive, by which it is subjected to the obligation of another,
the method and privilege of order does require that we should begin with the
Passive; For then we more securely can pronounce of the thing measured, when it
is once manifest that the measure it self is just. Our business therefore now
in hand, is to inquire what that is which properly does oblige Conscience, or,
(which is the same) what is the proper and Adaequate Rule of Conscience, to
which, to be upright, it ought to conform it self; which inquisition, that it
may be the more certain, and profitable, some few things being premised by way
of explication, I shall endeavor at the last by certain conclusions to give
you an account of the thing it self.

II. In the first place therefore it is to be understood, that for the more
exact performance of the offices of Conscience it is necessary to lay down some
Rules to which it ought to be subjected; for wheresoever there is any Virtue
active which of its own Nature is not determined unto one thing in its acting,
but is in a Potentia to another, so that it may act either well, or evilly;
whether this Virtue be a Habit of the first Species of Quality, or a natural
Potentia of the second, it is necessary that there should be some Law or Rule,
which may direct it in the acting; For as often as any thing does offer it self
to the Fancy to be done, whither represented by the exterior sense, or by some
internal suggestion of the mind, because the Will which is the next principium
of acting is (as commonly it is spoken in the Schools) but Potentia caeca, a
blind Potentia, and of it self cannot discern Good from Evil, so as to be a
Rule unto it self, the Inquisitive Reason does straight reflect on Conscience,
and does listen to her Dictates. Now it is the Office of Conscience presently
to Examine the thing propounded; And the examination being made, to Judge
whether it ought to be performed, or eschewed, whether to be admitted or
omitted, and accordingly as she has judged, so presently to transmit her
Judgment to the Will, that is to propound it to the Free Will, the same thing
either to be chosen, or disliked; To which Office, of Examining, Judging, and
Informing, least it should rashly be performed, and lest the Conscience as
blind as the Will it self should misguide it, it is necessary that there should
be a certain Rule according to which it should be examined.

III. In the second place we are to know, that in Rules as well as in Causes,
there is a kind of subordination; And as in Causes that are ordinated to one
another, the latter, if compared with the former, carry with them the Relation
and the Account of Effects; So in Rules and Measures ordinated to one another,
every one of the posterior, in respect of the superior, does seem to be
regulated, or to be mensurated by it. Since therefore the Rule of the
Conscience is two fold, one next or the immediate, and the other the first, and
more remote; that Rule which is next, as it is a Rule in respect of the
Conscience, which it does direct, so it is also as a Rule Regulated in respect
of the first Rule by which it is it self to be directed.

IV. Seeing the Rectitude of every thing, whatsoever, does consist in the
conformity of it to its Rule; we are in the third place to understand that (as
I have said) there is a two fold Rule of Conscience, to wit the Rule which is
nearest, and the Rule which is more remote; So there is also a twofold
Rectitude of Conscience correspondent to that two fold Rule of it; For the
Conscience may be said to be upright either absolutely and simply, or
respectively, and secundum quid as the Schoolmen do express it; In this last
Acceptance, a Conscience may be said to be upright when it is conformable to
its nearest, and immediate Rule, as he is said to have a true and certain
knowledge of any proper passion, who from the Subject of it, can demonstrate it
by its next Cause, although he can ascend no higher. But in the former
acceptance, the Conscience may then be said to be upright, when it is not only
conformable it self to its next Rule, but when that Rule is conformable also
unto the first Rule; In the same sense he may be said to have attained to a
perfect knowledge of any thing, who knows all the causes of it from the first
to the last, so says Aristotle lib. 1. phisica: Tunc enim unam quamque rem
scire dicimur, quum omnes ejus Causas, principia and elementa cognoscimus,
usque ad prima. We are then said to understand what any thing is, when we can
give you an account of all its causes, principals, even to the first Elements
thereof. Therefore as the certainty of Science, though immediately arising from
the knowledge of the next Cause does not arrive to its ultimate perfection but
by the knowledge of the first cause, so the Rectitude of Conscience though
immediately it reflecteth upon a conformity to its next rule, yet it ascends
higher, and ultimately concludes in that Rule which is the first rule of it,
and the supreme.

II. In the fourth place it is to be understood that when we speak of the
obligation of Conscience, that the said obligation does not signify any
compulsion (for to speak properly, the Conscience can no more be compelled than
the Free Will) but a power rather and authority (which she is bound to obey) to
urge her to the performance of that which belongs unto her duty; In the very
same manner altogether, as a King, who has the Legislative power, by enacting
laws, does oblige his subjects to the observation of them. As therefore in the
external Courts, Subjects properly and formally are obliged to obedience, not
so much by the law it self, as by the power of the Lawgiver, (howsoever the
Law it self is said to oblige, but when it is so spoken, it is to be understood
improperly, and as it were materially and terminatively because the obligation
is made by it, and to it, so the Law is said to judge, John 7. 5. Does our Law
judge any one? although the Law it self does not judge, but the Magistrate,
because the Magistrate ought to judge according to the Law) so in the internal
Court, the Rule or the Law imposed on Conscience does not properly oblige it,
but the power and authority of the Imposer, yet so, as by the Consequent truly
and not unaptly although not so properly, the Rule it self may be said to carry
with it an obliging Virtue. When therefore it is demanded, what is that which
obliges Conscience to the performance of her duty? At the same time both these
questions are propounded; First and principally, who is the Lord of Conscience,
who has right and power to impose a Rule or Law upon it, to which it ought to
conform it self? And then secondly and consequently, what is that Rule of
Conscience, or that Law which is imposed on it by the Lord thereof, and to
which by his dominion and Empire over it, it is bound to conform it self.

VI. In the fifth place it is to be understood, when any thing is attributed to
another, it is attributed either by it self, or not by it self, that is to say,
by accident; Those things therefore to which the power of obliging the
Conscience is any ways to be attributed, do fall under a threefold
consideration; For in the first place they either oblige the Conscience simply
by themselves, that is, they do directly oblige by themselves, and by their own
power, not only as the Term by it self is opposed to the Term by accident, but
as it opposed also to this Term by another. Or in the second place they do
oblige by themselves respectively, that is, as the Term by it self is opposed
to the Term by accident, and not as it is opposed to the Term per aliud, that
is by another; The meaning is they do not oblige by their own proper power, but
by the virtue of another, having a power to oblige. Or thirdly they do oblige
by accident only, and in neither of the considerations by it self. It is
besides observable that in those things which do oblige the Conscience in the
second consideration there is some difference to be made according to the
different account of the cause from whence the obligation does arise; For it is
one thing when the obligation is forcibly imposed by the authority of another,
and another thing when it is willingly contracted, and of its own accord,

By this that has been spoken it is manifest, that there are four degrees of
those things which do oblige the Conscience; For examples sake (to give you a
short view of what has been already spoken, and of what as yet remains to be
spoken) you are to understand in the first place; that the express

In the second place, the Laws of men, and the

Thirdly, Vows and promises being made of our own accord, when it was wholly in
our own choice proper fact, and freedom of election oblige our Consciences to
the performance of them.

Fourthly and lastly, the Law of consideration of by accident oblige the
Conscience.

VII. We are here to understand, that only that obligation which consists in
the first degree is absolute and universal, the other three are relative and
particular; I say it is absolute because it does directly and always oblige,
and because it obliges all persons; and the obligation of it is never to be
cancelled. The others may be said to be relative both because they do not bind
of themselves, or by their own power, but by a relation to some precept, or
institution of God, as also because they do not always or every where oblige,
and in every case, but when those considerations do require which they do bear
a reference and respect unto. The obligation therefore of the first degree is
predominant over any obligation whatsoever in the other three, insomuch that it
is able to make them of no effect, but it is impossible for them to render it
frustrate; Nay, if we take it universally, the obligation in any superior
degree, (the other being equal) is more valid than the obligation in any
inferior degrees whatsoever, and does judge over them, either by taking away
what was done and contracted, as oftentimes, or at least by hindering what was
to be done, as always. Therefore as to the power of obligation, the Laws of men
must give place to the Laws of God, private contracts and promises to public
constitutions, and the Law or consideration of offense or scandal to them both.

VIII. These things being thus premised, that we may be happy in a certain Rule
by which we may know how to live, I will according to my promise comprehend in
some few conclusions those which are most necessary to be understood concerning
the Rule of Conscience and the passive obligation of it.

The first conclusion is; That God alone has a most proper and direct command
on the Consciences of all men; So that none but God alone has power to impose
a Law upon the Conscience of any man, to which it ought to be subjected, as
obliging by it self, I say by it self, for we are all bound in our Consciences
to observe the just Laws of men, to keep our vows and promises made to God, or
men, and to be careful that we become not a scandal or an offense unto others;
But we are bound unto all these things upon no other tie but as they are
reduceable to the will of God, commanding them as in its due place we shall
give an account unto you of the particulars thereof.

IX. This Conclusion is proved first by the words of the Apostle already
mentioned, There is but one Lawgiver, who can both save, and destroy. In which
words two arguments do prefer themselves to our observation; In the first
place; they assert there is but one Legislator; not one picked out amongst
many, not one above many, but one exclusively, that is to say, one, and but one
only. The Apostle otherwise had made use of a very uneffectual argument, to
prove what he had propounded; For he rebukes those who unadvisedly did pass
their judgments either on the persons, or the deeds of other men, as the
invaders of their Rights. Who art thou (says he) who Do judge another? As if
he should have said, do thou know thy self, what thou art, and what thou
do? It does not belong to thee to thrust thy saucy Sicle into the harvest of
another man, much less boldly to fling thy self into the Throne of Almighty
God. If already thou are ignorant of it, then know, that it belongs to him
alone to judge of the Consciences of men, to whom alone it does belong to
impose Laws upon the Consciences of men, which none can do but God alone.
(...), There is but one Lawgiver.

It is observable, that the Apostle does ascribe unto God alone the power of
saving and destroying, from whence we frame the second Argument; He only has
power over the Consciences of men either for command or prohibition, who has
power with unmerited Rewards to crown the well-doers, and with just punishments
to torment the transgressors: but it is in the power of God alone, the only
Lawgiver to give Rewards and Punishments according to the quality of every
conscience; Therefore he alone has a right and privilege over the Consciences
of men.

X. It is thus proved again in the second place; He who alone knows the
internal motions of the Conscience, he only has the power of prescribing a Law
unto them (for the Law does neither determine or judge of things unknown) But
unto God alone the searcher of the heart, the internal motions of hearts and
Consciences are discovered; Therefore he alone has the power of imposing a Law
upon the Consciences, which may oblige them. From hence it is that the Laws of
men do only bind the external motions of the body to an external Conformity,
from the knowledge and command whereof, all internal motions, and several
hammers that strike upon the clocks of the mind, and Conscience, are altogether
to be exempted; And upon this account it was, that not only holy men and endued
with the knowledge of the true God, such as were the three Captive young men
amongst the Babylonians in the third of Daniel, and the seven brethren of
Maccabeus, but many wise men amongst the Heathens did deride the threatenings
and torments of Tyrants, as exercising their violence not so much upon
themselves, as upon the outsides only, and on the subburbs of them. But let us
consider what our Savior Jesus Christ did think himself of these things, and
what Counsels he prescribed to his Disciples concerning them: Fear not them,
says he, that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do upon
you, but fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell, yea
I say unto you fear him, Luke 12. 3, 4. As if he should have said, Tyrants by
the permission of God have power upon the Bodies, but upon the Souls and
Consciences of men they have no power, no right at all, the Laws can neither
ordain nor afflict any punishment which does belong to the inward man; God has
only the prerogative of the Soul and Body, and for the neglect of their duties
can afflict punishments on both, and condemn the whole man to everlasting
torment.

XI. In the third place it is proved by the condition, and natural estate of
the Conscience it self, which (as before I have expressed) is so placed as it
were in the middle betwixt God, and the Will of man, as that which is usually
and truly spoken of Kings and Emperors, may as truly be verified of the
Consciences of every man, Solo Deo minores esse, nec aliquem in terris
superiorem agnoscere; They are less than God only, and on Earth do acknowledge
no Superior. That speech of the Emperor Maximilian the first is very
memorable, Conscientiis dominari velle, est arcem coeli invadere, To exercise a
domination over Consciences, is to invade the Tower of Heaven. He is a
plunderer of the glory of God, and a nefarious invader of the power that is due
unto him, whosoever he is that shall claim a right to the Consciences of men,
or practice an usurpation over them. Let the Bishops of Rome, (and the
Canonists and the Jesuits who do flatter and cringe unto him, and all others)
take heed that they be not guilty of this so great a Sacrilege; I would also
have those admonished who do so submit their Consciences to the power of any
creature which ought only to be subjected to God himself, to be careful, lest
whiles they confer the Honor of that service to the creature which is due
unto God alone, they make a God of the Creature, which at least is interpreted
to be Idolatry. From this first Conclusion thus proved, there follows this
remarkable position, That the proper Rule of Conscience is that which God the
supreme Lawgiver has prescribed to it, and besides that Rule there ought no
other to be admitted.

XII. The second Conclusion follows, which is, That the next and most
immediate Rule of Conscience (although it be neither the Adaequate or the
supreme Rule) is that light with which the mind at that instant is endued.
(...). Socrat. ap. Stob. (...). Joh. 1. 9. (...). Nazian. Orat 15.
And this is the same light which some do call the light of Reason, others the
Law of the mind, and which the Schoolmen following the Philosophers do call
right, or rectified Reason. This is first proved by some places out of the word
of God, as Luke 12. 57. Wherefore even of your selves do you not judge that
which is right? They are the words of our Savior; as if he should have said,
You have the light within you infused into your minds from that true light
which enlightneth every man coming into this world, by the help whereof
(unless you will be wanting to your selves) you can distinguish what is
straight from what is crooked, and what is just from that which is unjust. The
Text Romans 2. verse 14. and 15. is very remarkable, Quum Gentes quae legem
(scriptam scilicet) non habent, natura ea quae sunt legis faciunt, Seeing the
Gentiles who have not the Law ( viz. the written Law) do by natue perform those
things which are of the Law, to wit they practice the Acts of Justice,
Prudence, Fortitude, and Temperance, and of all other Virtues, These men having
not the Law are a Law unto themselves, for they show the works of the Law
written in their hearts, their Consciences giveing witness thereunto, and
their thoughts either accusing or defending them. By which words it is
manifest, that in the particular Acts of Testifying, accusing, and defending,
and in whatsoever Acts that already are committed by any person, his Conscience
does pass its judgment on every one of them by the light of Reason which is
infused and imprinted into his mind; And seeing the Rule is the same concerning
Acts to come, as well as concerning Acts past, it follows, that the
Conscience as well in those Acts determined to be done, as in those which are
already done, does make use of the same light of examining, judging, and
dictating, as the Rule and measure of those Acts. I here shall willingly take
no notice of that Text in the fourth Psalm and sixth verse, which is commonly
produced by the Latin Fathers especially of the latter times, and by the
Schoolmen, for a proof of this Conclusion, the words are Signatum est super nos
lumen vultus tui domine, Thy light O Lord is signed over us, because that
interpretation of the words are grounded on a bad translation, and seems not
to appertain to the mind and scope of the Prophet.

XIII. This is proved again by our common custom, and manner of speech, for we
usually say, that the man who acts according to the light of his mind, does
use a good Conscience, although peradventure he has committed or omitted that
which was not to be omitted or committed by him; and again, that he who has
not obeyed those dictates of his mind, but has acted contrary to them, has
used a bad Conscience. St. Paul the Apostle, Acts 2^. 1 does profess, that In
all things he served God with a good Conscience even unto that day, which
words, if they are to be extended to the former part of his life before he was
made a Christian, (which interpretation has been complacent to many, and
seems probable unto me) we may conclude by them, that although he was an open
and a dangerous enemy to Christianity, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
and as he himself confesses, a persecutor and a blasphemer, yet it may be
said, that even then, in all good Conscience he served God, because in all that
time he acted nothing but what his Conscience (according to the measure of that
light with which it was then endued) did prescribe unto him; For indeed he then
thought (as he himself does openly and sincerely profess in his Apology before
King Agrippa) that (...), he thought in himself, Act. 26. 9.
that he ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth; But
whatsoever may be determined of Paul and of his Conscience at that time, most
certain it is, that God himself gave a testimony to Abimeleck, Genesis 20. 6.
who ignorantly sent for the wife of Abraham, that he did it, integritate
cordis, in the integrity of his heart, that is with a good Conscience, and for
no other reason but for this only, by which he did excuse himself, for had he
known her to have been the wife of another man, he would not have sent for her
unto his house. The Conscience therefore (by an ignorance of it self not much
to be blamed, peradventure erroneous) may be said to be good and right, God
himself being Judge, (not simply and absolutely, but as but so far, and
secundum quid, as they speak it in the Schools) by reason of the conformity
which it has with the light of the mind thereof, as its next and immediate
Rule. But that the Conscience may be said to be right (...), that is fully, and
in every respect, there must another and a further Conformity be of necessity
added unto it, which is, it must be conformable to its first and supreme Rule,
which what it is, shall most diligently be now discussed.

XIV. This therefore shall be our third Conclusion: The holy Scripture or the
written word of God is not the Adaequate Rule of Conscience. Which in the first
place is thus proved; Beyond the Adaequate Rule of any thing whatsoever, it is
not necessary that for the same thing there should be any other Rule to be
added to it, for Adaequation does exclude the necessity of any Supplement: But
it is necessary that there should be another Rule of Conscience besides the
holy Scripture, for otherwise the Gentiles who have not the Scripture should
have no Rule for their Conscience, which comes quite cross to reason,
experience, and the express testimony of the Apostle in the Text above
mentioned. Most certain it is, that there is a Conscience in all men, and that
it is under a Law, which is a rule to direct it; For as the Apostle makes
mention, and it is every where extant in History, and confirmed by daily
experience, from whence do proceed those grievous accusations of Conscience,
those whips, those pangs, and torments of the Soul, and those furies expressed
by the Tragedians, but from the violated Law of Conscience? of which if there
were no Law at all, those people that are most barbarous should be so much the
more happy, as they are the more far remote from the voice, and sound of the
Gospel, because that then no crime of sin could justly be imputed to them, For
where there is no Law, there is no transgression, Romans 4. 15. Sin being nothing
else but the transgression of the Law, (...), 1 John 3. 4. That the power of
Conscience is strong in both regards, to fear every thing when it is guilty,
and to be in dread of nothing when it is innocent, is not only cried up by the
Schools, but by the Theaters of the Heathens, who notwithstanding knew nothing
of Moses, or of Christ, nor of the Law or the Prophets, and never heard of the
Gospel or the Apostles. The Scripture therefore is not the sole and Adaequate
Rule of Conscience.

XV. It is confirmed again in the second place from the proper end of the holy
Scripture, which is (...), 2 Timothy 3. 15. To make us wise to everlast^^g
Salvation by faith in Jesus Christ. For when the light of natural reason could
not raise us high enough to those things which do tend to a supernatural end,
both because of our natural light too much obscured and ecclipsed by the fall
of Adam, and because we must have supernatural helps to arrive to supernatural
ends, it pleased Almighty God in pity of our infirmities, in his own word to
open his own will unto us, according to that measure which he himself thought
good, insomuch that by this gracious and saving Counsel, not only those things
by divine revelation may be made known unto us, which properly do concern our
faith, and cannot be known by the light of nature, but that more perfectly and
more savingly we may be instructed in those things also which by nature are
known unto us, that so those works which nature enjoyneth to be performed,
taking their rise from a nobler principle, which is, the love of God, and
ordained to more noble ends, to wit the Glory of God, and the salvation of our
souls, may from moral become spiritual, and be grateful and acceptable to God
by Christ. The Scripture therefore, as supernaturally it is to be believed, is
the only and Adaequate Rule of our faith, and according to our actions and
performances (so far as they are spiritual, and pertain to a spiritual end) it
is to be the only and Adaequate Rule of our Manners, and by consequent the
principal, and (as I may so speak it) the Architectonical Rule of all our
actions. But seeing it does belong to Conscience to look back on things that
are done, not only upon this account as they are spiritual, that is to say
whether they are done out of Charity, and directed to a supernatural end, but
as they are moral, that is, whether they be good or evil, lawful or unlawful,
free or necessary, that a right judgment may be passed on these things, we are
not only to seek unto the holy Scriptures, but to make our seasonable addresses
unto other helps.

XVI. In the third place this is proved again, by the Form, the Character, and
the Temperature of the Scripture, which seeing it contains in it very many
precepts, but not all of one kind, some of them pertaining to Manners, some to
Rites, and some indifferently common unto all, and some peculiar only to some
Nation, and some again to some one order or person; Some of them enduring only
for a time, and others of a perpetual obligation, some by way of Counsel, of
things expedient according as the exigence of the affairs requires, and some
again in the way of mandate or command, of things simply or absolutely
necessary in themselves, if there were not some other rule, besides the
Scriptures, for the discerning of moral from ritual precepts, and of things
temporary from perpetual and of things peculiar from common, the Conscience
would oftentimes labor in a Labyrinth of doubts, and know not which way to
turn, especially when precepts of diverse kinds being delivered as it were in
one and the same breath, in the same Phrase, and in continued connection of
words, do immediately follow and tread on the heels of one another. For
examples sake, Levit. 19. 18. An example is there given to love thy neigbour as
thy self; And in the verse immediately following there is a command, that two
Beasts of a several kind might not be suffered to mingle in generation with one
another, and that one Field be not sown with diverse sorts of seeds, nor any
garment made of Linen thread interwoven with Woollen. The first command herein
is moral and universal, the other but Ceremonial and judicial, and peculiar
only to the Nation of the Jews; But when these things are read in the Churches,
it cannot by the Text appear what so great a difference there is betwixt them;
And in the 30th. verse of the same Chapter, the Sanctification of the Sabbath,
and the reverence of the Sanctuary are equally commanded, and in a continued
course of words, and even in the very same solemn sanction of the Law given,
Ego Jehovah, I the Jehovah: yet I doubt not but that most men are of opinion,
that in one of the Precepts the Consciences of men are at this day obliged to
the performance of it, and that in the other they are not. Now what the reason
is that their opinion is such, the precepts in the Text being all alike, and no
distinction, nor the least appearance of so great a difference, there can
certainly no other reason be given but that it proceeds from the judgment of
reason and prudence, which being excluded, obligatory precepts cannot so be
known from those which are not obligatory, but that the Conscience will be
oftentimes in a suspense, and not able to know or judge what is commanded to be
done, or what to be left undone.

XVII. It is proved in the fourth place by an argument drawn from the
inconvenicies which do arise from the contrary opinion, that is, from the most
grievous calamities which have a long time afflicted the church of Christ by
reason of the misunderstanding of the perfection of the holy Scriptures, from
whence a most dangerous error has possessed some men of great estimation, that
they have declared, that nothing can be lawfuly done, or commanded, which is
not authorized by God in the Scripture, or at least there approved by some
laudable example. This foundation being once laid, not a few men of a hot
spirit being transported ( to judge charitably of them) with a zeal to God,
but not according to knowledge, did begin to raise unnecessary strifes and
disputation concerning the Ceremonies of the Church, they did declare that all
Ceremonies not expressly mentioned in the word of God, were to be thrust out,
and for ever to be banished from the Church of Christ; that Laws ordained by
men concerning things Indifferent were to be cancelled, that all the Churches
throughout Europe were to be reformed, and all things to be reduced to the
Evangelical purity and Simplicity. The unruly rage of these men did hete for a
while make a stand, but it did not stand here long, but as commonly it comes
to pass (...) one absurdity being granted, a thousand will ensue, their
boldness derived from his fountain did flow at last into an open rage, and
brake forth into an Anabaptistical fury; And although the growing mischief has
gone so far that it can scarce rise higher, yet every day it swells, and more and
more does enlarge it self by bringing into the world new monsters of opinions,
that were we not assured by the word of God, that the foundation of God does
continue firm, and that the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail
altogether against the Church, it were much to be feared, lest the universal
Church of Christ overwhelmed with a Deluge of Atheism, should utterly be
swallowed up by it throughout the world.

XVIII. And let no man think that in vain Rhetoric I do complain of this, with
more envy, than truth; for I am most confident, that he whosoever he is that is
strongly prepossessed and infected with this error, shall never be able in his
daily controversies any ways to satisfy the importunate arguments of the
Anabaptists, Socinians, and other Sectaries, whose names I am ashamed to
mention. For to pass by the established form of Ecclesiastical Government
which now adays our Political Divines would either referr to the Civil
Magistrate, or quite take them away, upon no other account but this only, that
they think it is no where expressed in the word of God, they must take away
with it the observation of the Lords day, the Ordination of Ministers of the
Gospel, the Baptism of Infants, the Sprinkling of water in Baptism for the
dipping of the whole body, the Sacramental reverence, and many other things,
with all Ecclesiastical Rites, and Laws, or else having reformed their
judgments, they must confess they may all of them be retained without, or sin
or scandal.

XIX. But this, you will say, is to derogate from the perfection of the
Scriptures (which all the Divines of the reformed Churches do willingly
acknowledge) and to open a door to the Traditions of the Church of Rome, and to
take away all the force from the arguments drawn negatively from the
Scriptures, which the ancient Fathers of the Church, and the most learned of
the Divines of these times do very frequently make use of. I make answer, that
the Church of Rome does derogate from the perfection of the Scripture in this
consideration, that in the matters of Faith, and things necessary to salvation,
they do thrust in their unwritten Traditions to be received with the same
reverence as the written word of God, as if it were not enough for the sons of
God, to be wise unto salvation, by having the new Testament conferred on them,
which is the Inheritance left them by their Father, but they must also have the
vain books inserted of humane Traditions; But as for those who do dispute
negatively from the Scriptures, concerning things which are necessary to
salvation, either to be believed or practiced, let them make use of this
argument, as indeed they ought to do. But there is no question here of the rule
of Faith, but of the rule of Conscience, and not of the chief rule of it, but
of the Adaequate, and not what is necessary for a Christian to believe or
practice to attain unto the salvation of the Soul, but what is lawful for a
pious and prudent man to do lawfully, or to leave undone, at such a time, or in
such a place. The sum of all is, that the holy Scripture is the Adaequate Rule
of Faith, and of things supernaturally to be believed, as also of all moral
actions so far as they are spiritual, and ordained to a supernatural end, and
it is also the the Law of Conscience, and the Chief and supreme Rule for the
putting of moral things in practice; so that where the Scripture determines of
any thing universally, either by the way of precept or prohibition, it is not
lawful for any other Law whatsoever to stand in opposition to it: but it is
not so to be understood to be the only Law of Conscience, that what is not
commanded there, to be therefore presently unlawful: And thus much of the
third Conclusion.

XX. The fourth follows; The proper and adaequate Rule of Conscience is the
will of God, in what way soever it is revealed unto Men. Some call this the Law
of God, others the eternal Law, the words differing in the sound, but agreeing
in the sense. Every part of this Conclusion is to be weighed by it self; In the
first place I do say, it is the will of God, which by the Schoolmen (though by
some of them not rightly expounded, and by others of them not rightly applied)
is distinguished into Voluntatem, beneplaciti, and Voluntatem signi, the will
of the good pleasure, and the will of the sign. The first called the will of
the good pleasure of God, is that, which God from all eternity did with himself
resolve what he himself will do; the other which is called the will of the sign
is that by which God has given us a Law, by signifying what he would have us
to do. The first is called the will of God properly, and univocally, the other
improperly, and analogically. The will of the good pleasure, (if it be lawful
to speak of the majesty of God after the manner of men) is in some respect a
Law unto God himself, whereby he acts, for he always acts that which is
complacent unto him; but it is not given to us by God to be a Law, or to be a
rule unto our Consciences, or at the least for the putting of any thing into
action; In some respect indeed it may be said to pertain unto the Consciences,
in regard of sufferings; but this is a posteriori, and from an after
observation, and in this sense, that in Conscience we are obliged with patience
to endure all things whatsoever shall befall us, after that by the event it is
manifest to us that God would have it so; For rectified reason does dictate
this unto us, that we ought not to be displeased at the method of the Divine
Providence, who can will nothing but that which is most righteous: It remains
therefore, Optimum est Deum quo Authore omnia proveniunt sine murmuratione
concomitari: Senec. Epistol. 108 Placeat homini quicquid Deo placuit. Idem
Epist. 71.
that the will be the rule of our Consciences, which is called, The will of the
sign; For when God by prohibiting and by commanding has signified what we
ought to do, and what we ought not to do, it is our duties absolutely to
conform our wills unto his will. Many things amongst the Schoolmen are with
unprofitable acuteness disputed on this Subject, viz. Whether and how far the
will of the reasonable creature in a thing willed is bound to conform it self
to the will of the Creator? When the whole matter (as much as belongs to our
business, and the use of humane life) may briefly in one word be dispatched,
which is, That we are always bound to will that which God wills, that we
should will; Thus when God commanded Abraham to offer up his Son Isaac,
Although God in the will of his good pleasure would not have had that done
which at the same time he commanded to be done, as by and by shall appear by
the event, yet Abraham was bound to will the very same thing, because God by
commanding it, did signify that it was his will that Abraham should have a
will unto it.

XXI. I say secondly; the will of God revealed unto Men, because this revealed
will is the formal Cause and Reason of the obligation; For the will of God does
not oblige those unto whom it is not revealed; And hence it is, that the
Gentiles to whom the Gospel is not preached, are not bound to believe it, or to
have any faith in Christ; for there is no man that is bound to that which is
impossible: And it is impossible for that man to whom the Gospel has been
never preached, and who never has heard any thing of Christ, to believe either
in Christ, or in the Gospel, seeing that the light of Reason cannot ascend so
high, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 10. 15. How shall they believe in
him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?
And the same Apostle thinks it not meet, that others should be judged by the
Law, but those only who have sinned in the Law, Romans 11. 12. Neither does this
suffize to bring an obligation upon the Conscience, that the will of God is
revealed to him, unless it be revealed to him as the will of God, in a
peculiar reference to himself. Insomuch that if any of the Gentiles who were
Aliens should casually have met with the Books of Moses; and by reading of them
should observe the Commandments which are there given to the people of Israel,
he had not presently been obliged to the performance of them, because they did
not pertain unto him, but were only peculiar to the Israelites; and it is
known, that the Law does not oblige all men unto whom it is known, but all
those only to whom it is given.

XXII. In the third place I say, the will of God in what way soever it be
revealed; for the will of God receives its authority from it self, and not
from the manner of revealing it. So that the Church of Rome, in their
controversy concerning Traditions, need not to take so much pains to prove
That the word of God unwritten is of equal authority with the word of God that
is written, for this we willingly do grant unto them; We only ^ain would
understand how we may satisfy our selves that the Tradition unwritten, may
appear to be the word of God, as undoubtedly as the word which is written. The
will of God therefore in what manner soever it be revealed, is the Rule of the
Conscience, provided, it be so revealed, that it either actually be made known,
or may be so made known unto the mind, if culpable negligence does not hinder;
And it does oblige the Conscience to acknowledge it, and to propound it unto
our own will, as the will of God, to which it is bound to conform it self, and
not only so, but to command the executive potentiaes to bestirre themselves for
the fulfilling of this will of God. Remarkable is that of Damascene, (...),
what God wills, m^st of necessity be good; for his will is the measure of
goodness: but the Law of God is (...), that commandment by which (...) that
good will of his; he proceeds (...), the Law of God coming to our ^ind does
attract it to it, (...), it does incite, instim^late, and as it were spurs it
does urge our Consciences to the performance of their duties, by representing
and inculcating into our wills the will of God. And this is that most proper
and exact obligation of Conscience which we before have spoken of.

XXIII. The force and effect of this obligation is variously expressed by St.
Paul; Sometimes he confesses himself a Debator to the Grecians and Barbarians,
Romans 1. 14. As if he should say, seeing I know by the will of God that I am set
apart to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, without difference, whether they
are Graecians, or Barbarians, I acknowledge that in this respect I am a Debtor
to them; And in the 2 Cor. 2. 14. he says, that he is tied, and bound, as men
are bound with bonds, to the performance of this duty. And in the first of the
Corinthians, the ninth Chapter, and the sixteenth verse, (...), The preaching
of the Gospel is entrusted to me, so that I have not the leisure to be idle,
for a great necessity does press me, and woe unto me if I should neglect it.
The like necessity to be imposed upon them, and not to be shaken off, was
openly and before St. Paul's time acknowledged by two of the greatest of the
Apostles, and for a long time individual Companions, S. Peter, and St. John,
Acts 4. 20. (...), For we cannot but speak. God has commanded us to speak with
authority, and you command us to hold our peace; Whether it be better to obey
him, or to obey you, Do you judge? We are free, and can be so from your
command, for you have no power upon our Consciences: but the command of God
does hold us fast, and ha^h such a coercive power over us, that unless we will
perish, we cannot be free, nor do any thing but that only which he commands.

XXIV. Moreover, when it is asserted, that the next and immediate Rule of the
Conscience is the light of the mind, and the primary and the supreme Rule, is
the written word of God, and the proper and the Adaequate Rule of it, the will
of God by manner whatsoever revealed, or which is to the same sense, The Law
imposed by God on the reasonable Creature, That these things may more fully be
understood, we are to know, that the light of the mind is threefold, as God in
three ways has manifested his will to the reasonable Creature. There is the
light innate, the light inferred, and the light acquired; or the light of
nature, the light of Scripture, and the light of Doctrine. The first light,
which I do call the light Innate, does proceed from the Law of nature; For in
the first creation of the World, as God endued brute and inanimate Creatures
with a natural instinct, by which they are inclined unto those things which are
congruous to their natures, and the conservatives of it, which is as a Law unto
them, as it is so expressed by David, Psalm. 148. 6. Thou have given them a Law
which they may not transgress, So a certain natural Law is given unto man, and
proportionated to his nature, as he is a reasonable Creature, that is, more
sublime and noble, and if I may so speak it more Divine than what is given to
other Creatures of this inferior O^h; And this Law does incite him to the
performance of those things which are agreeable to his nature, as he is a man,
that is to say, a living Creature endued with reason, or to live according to
reason. Now this Law is natural impression, and as it were a figure of that
eternal Law which is in the mind of God, and it is a part of that Divine Image
after which man at the first was said to be made, Genesis 1. by which knowing of a
certainty that there are some things in our reasonable nature that are
congruous to the will of God the Creator, and other things which are not so, we
do conclude, that the one is good and ought to be performed by us, and the
other evil and altogether to be abhomined. The light proceeding from this law
is extremely obscured by that grievous ruin which followed the fall of Adam,
and from hence arise those thick clouds of Ignorance and Error in which all his
posterity whilst we live in this World, are invelopped. But the providence of
God has so most wisely ordered it, that in the common wrack it has come off
more unhurt than many other of the Faculties: for it has pleased God that
certain propositions, and practical principles, Quae animis imprimuntur
in^^^atae intelligentiae Cic. 1 de leg.
which the Philosophers call (...) and (...), and Basilius most acutely (...),
spark of the Divine Fire which in the great conflagration was preserved in the
ashes of it, should still remain, that so in our breasts and most inward parts,
Haec tamen exigua lucis scintillula r^mansit. Calvin. Instit. 10. Sect. 5.
he might have the Preachers of his will. These (...), These common Notions,
are that Law of God, which the Apostle Romans 1. does say is written in the
Hearts of men, in the very same manner, as the Laws of Cities or o^ the Prince
are accustomed to be inscribed in Tables of Brass. For they have the same
authority and estimation of a Law or of a Rule imposed by God upon us, as the
Will of the Lawgiver signified in a public instrument, and exposed to the
peoples view, is adjudged to be a Law.

XXV. This natural Law does consist of dive^ practical principles which
notwithstanding are red^ced to one first and universal Law which does contain
the other, This universal Law, though but short, is bipartite, of two parts,
viz. Good is to be done, Evil is to be avoided. In the same manner all the
Commandments in the Decalogue are reduced to one Universal Law, to wit, the
love of God, and the love of our neighbor. To this Universal Law conserved in
the Synteresis there are other particular Laws subordinated, which are derived
from it, as Conclusions are from Premises; some whereof are of the first
Dictate of Nature, and next of all adjoining to that principal Law; others
stand farther off, and have only a Secondary relation, and by the virtue of
those which are more near. Those which are of the first dictate of Nature, as
soon as they are presented to our minds and cogitations, they presently command
our belief, and by reason of the undeniable evidence of them, they do enforce
us to assent unto them; for it is not lawful to doubt of the truth of them, nor
is it possible for any one who understands the sense of the words, to err
concerning them; for no sooner it is propounded that God is to be worshipped,
and no man to be injured, but the mind presently is at rest, and without delay
assenteth to it; but in the latter, by reason of the difference which may arise
from Circumstances, it most often comes to pass, that we both doubt, and err,
and the more remote we are from those first Principles, the more prone we are
to run into error. For the first and universal Principles, are so much the more
certain than the posterior and the particular, as they are the less
circumstanced. For by Circumstances, and by descending, as commonly it is
spoken we oftentimes do fall into errors, The precepts of the first kind are,
that Parents are to be honored, Children nursed, the life of our neighbors to
be preserved, the pledge to be restored; which as they are commonly and for the
most part to be observed, yet they are not absolutely and simply if the thing
and place (which might so come to pass) should otherwise require it. For the
Commands of the Parents are to be despised in comparison of the Love of God,
and there may be a just cause of disclayming unreclaymed Children, and taking
away the life of our neighbor, neither is the sword to be restored to the mad
man. Near unto this distinction is that distribution of Offices, Cicer. lib. 1.
Offic.
in Cicero, which he has taken from the Stoics, for with them, a right and
perfect Duty which the Greeks call (...) is one thing, and a mean or a common
duty which the Greeks call (...) is another. Wherefore that the Conscience may
judge more rightly and more certainly, what is the will of God so far as is
pertaining to this part of the Rule of it, it will be requisite to direct it to
the most universal precepts that possibly may be had, and to those first Axioms
which are of themselves to be believed. But because I must make haste to other
observations, I shall here put a period to my discourse concerning this Law of
Nature, and present you with that of Cicero, in his lost books de Republica,
which by Lactantius, 6. Instit. 8. is expressly thus recorded. Est quidem vero
lex recta ratio, naturae congruens, diffusa in omnes, constans, sempiterna,
quae vocet ad officium jubendo, vetando a fraud detereat. -- Huic legi nec
obrogari fas est, nec derogari ex hac aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari
potest; Nec vero aut per Senatum, aut per populum solvi hac lege possumus. Nec
est quaerendus explanator, aut interpres ejus alius; Nec erit alia Lex Romae,
alia Athenis; alia nunc, alia posthac: sed and omnes gentes, and omni tempore,
una lex and sempiterna and immortalis continebit. Unusque erit communis quasi
Magister and imperator omnium Deus ille Legis hujus inventor, disceptator,
lator, cui qui non parebit, ipse se fugiet, ac naturam hominis aspernabitur;
atque hoc ipso luet maximas poenas, etiamsi caetera supplicia qu^e putantur
effugerit. The Law is right Reason, agreeable to nature, diffused into all,
constant, everlasting, which calls unto duty by commanding, and by forbidding
deterreth from deceit. -- This Law is not to be contradicted, neither is it
lawful for any man to derogate from it, neither is it possible that it should
be altogether abrogated. We cannot be discharged from it either by the Senate,
or the People; It needs not an Expounder, or Interpreter; It will not bear one
construction at Rome and another at Athens; it will not be one now, and another
hereafter: but being the same Law, perpetual, and immortal, it includes all
Nations, and at all times* And there is as it were one common master, and
Sovereign Commander over all, the one God, the Inventor, Discussor, and
Communicator, of this Law, whom whosoever shall not obey, he shall fly from
himself, and be unworthy of the nature of man; and for this alone shall
grievously be tormented, although he escapes other punishments that are
conceived. A remarkable place, and which so clearly unfoldeth the force and
nature of this inbred light, that we need not to make any addition to it.

XXVI. The second light which is conveyed into the mind (as I have said) does
come unto it from without, and proceeds from Divine Revelation, to wit, from
that light which God has held forth unto us in the holy Scriptures, in which
more fully he has made known his will unto man; that there nothing might be
wanting which is necessary for the institution of his manners, and the
attainment of everlasting happiness. And the rather, because the inward
natural light, as already I have showed, does not suffice thereto. Now this
light differs from the natural light, not only in its original, but in its
perfection. First, because it manifests the will of God in those things to
which the light of Nature cannot attain. Secondly, because it ordinateth the
moral actions dictated by the light of Nature, to a higher end; Thirdly,
because that whereas the Law engraven in the mind is instituted by God, as he
is the Author of Nature; This Law revealed in the word is instituted by him, as
he is the Author of Grace and Salvation. Therefore where the light of nature is
either weak, or defective, as it is defective in those things which are beyond
its Sphere, of which nature are the mysteries of Faith, and weak in those
things which are a little more remote from those precepts which are most
universal, in those cases I say we must have recourse to the light of the word,
as to a light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. To the Law and the
Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Ifa. 8. 20. Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto
my path, Ps. 119. 105. If I should enlarge my self upon the perfection and the
profit of this Law, there would be no end of my discourse. See on this Subject,
the nineteenth Psalm, where there you shall find much in few words, and
concisely; And the hundred and nineteenth Psalm, where you shall find the same
things in more words, and more largely represented.

XXVII. Moreover, there are two parts of this Law, the Law properly so called,
and the Gospel. I do not here understand the Law and the Gospel in that sense,
as for the most part it is taken by Divines, for the two Covenants made by God
with man; The covenant of Works, and the covenant of Grace: but in the more
common acceptance, for the Books of the old and new Testament, which the
Fathers not unaptly for this purpose have called the old Law, and the new Law;
but both these Laws, all the whole Law of Moses, and the new Law of Christ, for
that part of it which contains moral institutions, is cried down by the
Antinomians, the Anabaptists, and Enthusiasts, and other prodigious names of a
generation of people of our age, as altogether unprofitable, and unworthy of
the care, and study of a Christian, after he is come to be of age in Christ,
and anointed with the unction of the Spirit; They will admit of no Law but
only the Law of Faith, and the Dictates of the Spirit. I am not at leisure now
to confute them, neither indeed is it very needful, seeing that the Apostle
James has long since so opposed the Monsters of such errors, as if by some
Prophetic Spirit, he had on purpose undertaken the Confutation of them.

XXVIII. The old Law, which is called the Mosaical Law, is distinguished into
three parts, the Moral, the Ceremonial, and the Judicial; Of every one whereof,
many things are diversely disputed by many men; I shall at this time pass them
by, and briefly propound unto you what I conceive of the obligation of them,
reserving in the mean time to every man his own Judgment. I say therefore in
the first place, That no Law at all delivered by Moses, does formally,
directly, and by its self oblige the Conscience of Christians, as it is the Law
delivered by Moses; my reason is, that every Mosaical Law, as Mosaical, was
positive, and a Law positive does oblige none but those only on whom it is
imposed. Seeing therefore that the Law delivered by Moses was only imposed on
the peculiar Nation of the Hebrews, as may easily appear to any man that will
observe but the beginning of it, Hear Israel, and the whole Address of the
following discourse, it cannot so appertain unto those who are out of the number
of that Nation, as by that account to oblige them because delivered by Moses.
But if any part of that Law does now oblige Christians (as certainly the
Commandments of the Decalogue are obliging) it comes to pass by Accident,
and ratione materiae, by reason of the matter, not because Moses so commanded,
but because that which has been commanded by him is either agreeable to the
Law of Nature, or confirmed in the new Law by Christ himself.

XXIX. I say in the second place, That the Ceremonial Law of Moses does oblige
the Jews in their Consciences, before the Gospel of Jesus Christ was preached
to them, but not other men, unless those only who were Proselytes of the
Jewish Religion, and worship, who consisting of two kinds, Proselytae Portae,
and Proselytae Justitiae, so called by the Jews, that is to say, Proselytes of
the Gate, and Proselytes of Righteousness, were obliged to the observation of
the Ritual precepts; Those of the former kind were obliged to the fewer, but
those of the latter, as the Jews themselves, were obliged to the observation of
them all. Now from the time of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, since the
Gospel began first to be preached to the Jews, and afterward to the Gentiles,
until the eversion of the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Jewish Commonwealth,
this Law indeed was dead (if we love to speak after St. Augustine) but not
deadly, which is to say, that it had lost the force of obliging, but the Rites,
and Ceremonies delivered by Moses were not altogether unlawful, but left as
indifferent to the observation of every man, so that it was lawful for any one
(according to the emergency of the occasion) to use the freedom of his own
will, and to use them, or not to use them, a due respect being always had to
Prudence, and Charity. And that this was the sense of St. Paul, is so manifest,
both by his constant Doctrine and his Practice, that there needs no proof of
it. And* after the eversion of the Temple it was spoken by diverse men, that
this part of the Law of Moses was not only dead, but mortiferous; which unless
it be rightly applied, and with a prepared Distinction, I am afraid will be
found to be more wittily than solidly expressed; For all Ceremonies are not
alike to be esteemed; But those which concern Order, and Decency, are wisely to
be severed from those which were the Figures of Christ to come: for those
figurative Ceremonies, which were instituted by God, to be Types of Christ our
Redeemer, to come in the Flesh, such as were Circumcision, sacrifices, and many
such like, became certainly of no use after Christ did really fulfill all
things which were typically figured in those Ceremonies, and sufficiently
declared to the whole world by the Preachers of his Gospel, that all those
things were rightly fulfilled, they are therefore to be taken away, not only as
dead, and rotten, but are most carefully to be shunned by every true Christian,
as deadly and pestiferous; and above all things it must most precisely be taken
heed unto, that they be not observed with any opinion of necessity, according
to that, Gal. 5. 2. I Paul say unto you, if you be circumcised, Christ will
profit you nothing. But those Ceremonies which pertain only to the outward
Decency, in the solemnity of the Divine-worship, although peradventure it were
better not to use them where a just cause of offense may be given, yet they are
not simply to be condemned as unlawful, upon this bare account, that they are
a part of the Mosaical paedagogy.

XXX. I say in the third place, That although many do distinguish betwixt those
Political Laws of Moses which were of a common right, of which they assign some
Notes and Critisms, and betwixt those which were of a particular right, it is
not necessary that any such distinction should be made; Nay we may roundly
affirm, that those Laws of Moses which are called Political, or Judicial, do
none of them oblige Christian Magistrates to a strict observation of them, but
it is lawful for them, according to their own discretion, and as they shall
find find it expedient for the safety and profit of the Commonwealth, either
to revive them into power, or to make them of no effect.

XXXI. I affirm in the fourth place, That the moral Law delivered by Moses,
that is to say, the praecepts of the Decalogue or the ten Commandments, do
oblige all Christians as well as Jews to the observation of them; All
Protestants that I do know of, do with one mouth acknowledge this truth;
Bellarmine therefore does us the greater injury, who feigneth, that we do make
Christian liberty to consist in this, not to be bound in Conscience to be
subjected to any Law, and that Moses with his Decalogue does not pertain unto
us. Let him see how he can clear himself of this scandal, and vindicate those
of his part from this crime, if we are in it. For the Controversy amongst his
Schoolmen is agitated, Whether Christians are bound to the praecepts of the
Decalogue, only as they are the Declaratives of the Law of Nature, or as they
were also delivered by God to Moses, and by Gods Commandment given by Moses to
the people of God, and transmitted into the holy Books; Some there are of them
that do deny the one, and others that do affirm both. And in our Churches the
same diversity of opinions is to be found, if it be not rather a diversity in
words, than in opinions. For seeing they amongst themselves, and we do agree
with them in this, which is the main of all, that the Moral Law which is
delivered by Moses, and is contained in the precepts of the Decalogue, has the
power to oblige the Consciences of Christians, it will peradventure, be not
worth our labor, from whence it does obtain that power to oblige; In my
judgment they speak more unto the purpose, who say, that this Law of Moses
does not oblige Christians formally, and as it is delivered by Moses, but only
by reason of the matter, as it is the Declarative of the Law of Nature; and it
receives therefore all its force of obliging, not from Moses bringing or
delivering it, but from the Dictates of the Law of Nature, which God in the
first Creation did inspire into our minds, and after the Fall would have it to
remain in them, as the Remembrancer of his will. And this may suffice to be
spoken of the old Law, or the Law of Moses.

XXXII. The new Law, or the Law of Christ, that is to say, the Gospel, does
contain these three things. 1. Mysteries of Faith to be believed, in which
chapter I comprehend the promises of God by Grace. 2. Sacred Institutions
Ceremonial, and Ecclesiastic. And 3. The Moral Precepts, of which I speak, and
universally of all of them; That the Gospel obliges none but those only who
are called, those only to whom it is preached. For where there is no Law, there
can be no transgression, for moraly, especially in Supernaturals, it is the
same thing, Non esse, et non apparere, not to be, and not to appear, or not to
be so sufficiently propounded, as it may be known. The words of our Savior are
expressly to this sense, Ioh. 15. 22. If I had not come, and spoken to them,
they had not had sin, that is, they had not been guilty of despising the
Gospel; But it obliges all men to whom it is preached to an obedience as well
of Faith as of Life, so that we are all bound, to whom the Gospel is preached,
both to believe in Christ as our Redeemer, and to obey him as our Lawgiver;
And whosoever shall fail in the performance of these two things, shall suffer
everlasting punishment for the neglect of his duty.

XXXIII. I say in the third place, That the Christian Church is obliged to the
Sacred Institutions, that is, to the preaching of the word, the administration
of the Sacraments, the Ordination of Ministers of the Gospel, and the exercise
of the Keys as well of Knowledge as of Power; it is bound, I say, in all those
things which pertain to the essence of them, according to the institution of
Christ, and the Apostles, so that it is not lawful for the Church, much less
for any particular congregation, or person, either willingly to diminish, or to
change any thing at all therein: But the external circumstances of the Sacred
Institution are so free, that any particular Church may determine of them
according to Time and Place, and to the custom of the People of God, and as it
shall seem most expedient to Edification.

XXXIV. In the third place I affirm, That the Moral Precepts of the New
Testament are the same, according to their substance, with the Morals of the
Old Testament; and they are both of them to be reduced to the Law of Nature,
which is contained in the ten Commandments; as omnia Entia realia, all real
Beings are reduced to the ten Predicaments. But the Precepts of Christ in the
new Law, as the holy Fathers of the Church do every where acknowledge, are in
many things far more excellent than the Precepts of Moses in the old Law, not
only in that respect, that they are propounded more fully and clearly, but
because they ascend also higher, and do advance the true Christian to a more
eminent degree of perfection, and that with most effectual inducements on both
sides, the past Example of Christ being propounded to him on the one side, and
the inestimable reward to come in the Kingdom of Heaven on the other. And this
most clearly may appear in those two great Duties of a Christians life
commanded in the new Law, viz. of loving our enemies, and taking up the cross;
For as some have dreamed, these are not so only to be esteemed, as if they
were only Counsels to a more perfect life, propounded to all men under the
condition of a more large reward, and oblige no man under sin and punishment,
but those only who by a vow have obliged themselves to the observation of
them: But they expressly in themselves are Precepts, and properly so called, and
universally obliging, to the observation whereof all those who profess the Name
of Christ are bound under the guilt of the most grievous sin; to wit, the
abnegation of Christ, and the punishment of eternal damnation unless they truly
do repent. And thus much concerning the second Light of the mind.

XXXV. The third remains, which we call the light acquired; which surely is
nothing else but an addition or increase of that light (whether of Nature or
Revelation) which was before in the mind, to some more eminent degree of
clearness; as when the will of God, the knowledge whereof has hitherto shined
into our minds (whether internally imprinted by the light of Nature, or
externally revealed by the Word) or whether by our own meditation, or by the
institution of others, is now more excellently, and more illustriously made
manifest unto us. The chief Helps or Mediums thereunto are the Discourse of
Reason and Authority; the last of which is the Judgment, and the Practice of
the Church; of which neither does the time permit to speak much, neither does
it self require that many things should be spoken of it. From the Law of Nature
many partic^lar Propositions of things to be done, like so many Conclusions
from their Principles, are deduced by the discourse of Reason to the use of the
Conscience; In which, unless we orderly proceed from the first unto the last,
we shall be apt to err, as already I have expressed; we must therefore be very
careful, that in every part of the Discourse the proceeding be legitimate,
that those things that follow, may aptly depend upon those which go before, and
that the consequence be necessary; lest the Conscience being misled, do not
dictate this or that or otherwise to the will than what it ought to do. It is
again to be feared, lest we err also in applying the holy Scripture unto the
use of the Conscience, unless a due regard of Reason be had unto Reason, and of
Authority unto Authority. The Papists, while they bestow all their studies that
nothing be taken away from the Authority of the Church, they give but little
unto Reason. The Socinians on the other side, whiles rejecting all Authority,
they do measure Faith by Reason only, they do only attain unto this, that
they grow mad with reason. Both have the same error, but it variously
deceives; And both rocks shall not more easily be avoided, than if Authority
with Reason, and Reason with Authority shall handsomely and prudently be
conjoined.

XXXVI. What place either of them ought to have in the right and orderly
unfolding and applying the holy Scripture, it is not for this time, or my
present purpose to represent unto you; I shall touch upon it in few words:
There is especially a twofold Use of Reason in relation to the Scriptures,
Collative and Illative; Collative, diligently to compare those diverse places of
Scripture, especially those which seem to bear a remarkable correspondence, or
repugnancy amongst themselves. Illative, the propriety of the words, the
context and the scope being found out, effectually and artificially to infer
Doctrines; being in the mean time not forgetful that we must attribute, so
much the more, to humane Reason in things to be done, than in things to be
believed, as the mysteries of Faith do more exceed the capacity of natural
understanding than the Offices of Life.

XXXVII. The chiefest use of Authority is to beat down the boldness of
Heretics and Impostor, who endeavor to cast a mist over the clearest
testimonies of the Scripture, and to elude the force of them with their
subtilties and distinctions; whose mouths you can no better stop, nor more
effectually preserve your selves and others from the contagion of them, than by
opposing unto their Sophisms and Deceits, the Judgment and Practice, not of
one, or of a few men, not of one Age, or of one corner of the Church, but of
the whole Catholic Church, of all places, and all times, spread over the whole
face of the Earth; so heretofore those great Advocates of the Christian Faith,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Vicentius, and others; judged it to be their safest
course to deal with their Adversaries by the right of prescription; which how
advantageous it has been to Christendom, the event has taught. But those
things which deserve a larger consideration, I am now forced to omit, being
mindful of the time, of you, and of my self, and to defer unto another day
what remains to be spoken concerning the Obligation of Humane Laws.

THE FIFTH LECTURE, In which the Question is thoroughly handled, concerning the
Obligation of Humane Laws in general.
ROMANS 13. 5. Wherefore you must be subject, not because of anger only, but for
conscience sake.
HAving begun the last Term to treat of the passive obligation of Conscience, I
proceeded so far, that having discovered and disclaimed those subterfuges, in
which a seduced generation of men do vainly fl^^ter themselves, that there is
some excuse or protection either for the fruit of their Consciences, as to
things already done, or some security for things that remain to be done, for
the Intention of a good end or by the authority of another man's example, or
judgment; I have proceeded, I say, so far as to examine and represent unto you
that proper and Adaequate Rule of Conscience to which absolutely and simply it
ought to conform it self, where in the first place I showed you that God only
has an Ultimum judicium Intellectus practici; The last judgment of the
practical understanding. Thirdly, that the written word of God, is primary,
(...).
but not the Adaequate Rule of Conscience. 4.
Fourthly, that the proper and Adaequate Rule of Conscience is the will of God,
which way soever it be revealed, or (which is the same again) the Law imposed
by God upon the reasonable Creature; Moreover, (that more fully and more
distinctly we may understand what this will of God is,) I made manifest unto
you, that Almighty God did lay open his Will unto mankind by a threefold means.
First, by the Law of Nature, Romans 2. 15. Which is with an inward light, and of
the same o^iginal as our minds; Secondly by the written word of God, external
light supernaturally revealed, and infused into our minds; Thirdly by a
knowledge obtained from both the former, either acquired light, the chief helps
and introductions whereunto, are the Discourse of Reason, and the Authority,
that is to say, the Judgment and the practice of the universal Church.

II. I also did advertise you (to make some way to this following Treatise)
that besides the Law of God, which absolutely by its self, and by its own
peculiar power does oblige the Consciences of all men, and that in the highest
Degree, there are also many others which do carry an obligation with them, but
inferior to the former, and do oblige the Conscience not primarily and by
themselves, but secondarily and by consequence, not absolutely, but relatively,
not by its own power, but by the virtue of some divine precept or Institution
on which they are grounded; which although they do all agree in this, that
whatsoever power of obligation they have, they altogether acknowledge it as
proceeding from the Law of God; For the first in every kind whatsoever it be is
the cause of the rest, neither would the Law of God (as already it is stated)
be the Adaequate Rule of Conscience, if it should oblige any beyond it self,
which it did not oblige by virtue of it self; yet these things (as I have said)
that do so agree in one, do notwithstanding every one of them differ amongst
themselves, not only in the Species by reason of the diversity of the matter,
but also in the Degree according to the efficacy of the obliging; and they
chiefly consist in a threefold difference, for some of them do oblige
constantly, of which there humane Laws, the Commandments of Parents, Masters,
and the like; The other in reference to those, whose obligation does arise from
the free election of the will it self, As Vows, Oaths, Contracts, Promises and
the like; Somthings again by accident and as it were cursorily, according to
Time and Place and the exigence of other circumstances, as the Law, or Reason
of Scandal.

The privilege and priority of order and method do require that we begin with
humane Laws, concerning the obligation whereof those things which at this time
shall be spoken of, may all of them be reduced to these two questions. 1.
Whether humane Laws do oblige the Consciences, and secondly, how far they do
oblige them. The determining of most of the particular cases do pertain chiefly
to the latter Question, which, God willing, shall be the Subject of our
following Lecture, we shall only at this time touch upon the first, Delectus
vim in lege ponimus Cicero 1. de legibus.
which is, Whether humane Laws do oblige the Consciences. The Subject of the
question needs not any large exposition. Lex or the Law is first so called in
an active construction, a legendo, id est eligendo, from choosing, as Cicero
will have it; because the Lawgivers do make choice of those things which they
conceive to be most profitable to the Commonwealth. Or secondly Lex, or the
Law, is so called a legendo, from reading, and that in a passive construction;
because the Laws after they were Enacted were engraven in Tables of Brass, or
otherwise legibly written, and fastened unto Pillars Aquin, 1. 2. quaest. 90.
Arti 16. Biel. 3. did. Arti 1.
Or lastly, according to other men's derivation. Lex is so called a ligando that
is from binding; because it does bind the Subjects to the observation of it;
but in the Genus of it, it is nothing else, than a Rule of acting imposed on
the Subject by the Superior being empowered thereunto. They are called humane
Laws in opposition to Divine; for as those Laws are called Divine, which
immediately are constituted by the authority of God himself, whether they be
Laws Natural, or Laws Positive, so those Laws are said to be Humane, which
although they have an authority derived to them from God, yet they are
immediately commanded by men, and imposed on their Subjects.

III., The Law of man is thus defined by Aquinas, 3. 1 a. 2. ae. quaest. 90
arti 4.
It is the ordination of Reason to a common good promulgated by him who has
the care of the Commonalty. His words are, Lex humana est Rationis ordinatio ad
Bonum Commune, ab eo qui curam Communitatis habet promulgata. By others it is
defined otherwise, they differ in the words, but almost all of them do agree
in the sense; and well so they may, for this Definition is very suitable to the
public Law which is the most known and the most usual acceptance of that
word. And so we use to speak, Analogum per se positum pro famosiore significato
praesumitur, an Analogick being placed by it self is presumed to stand for that
which is the most remarkable in the signification; But in this present
question, and to our present purpose, Under the Notion and Name of Humane Laws,
the public Laws of Cummonalties are not only to be understood (although most
chiefly they are, and primarily) but even the particular Commands of Parents,
Masters, Magistrates, and all other Superiors, imposed on their Children,
Servants, or their People; for when both of them are a kind of Precept, in this
one thing especially there is a Difference betwixt a Law properly so called,
and a Mandate; for a Mandate or Command is but the Precept of a private person
invested with a private Authority; but the Law is a public precept of a person
endued with a public Authority. In all other considerations there is but
little diversity. Certainly, as to the effect, and force of obliging, since it
is apparent by the tenth verse of this Chap. that all Legitimate Power
whatsoever it be, not only public, (which notwithstanding I must confess to be
the only meaning of the Apostle in that place) but also all private power is
constituted of God, and the Command of a Father to his Son, is no less a Rule
for acting, than the Law of the Prince to his Subject; all those things which I
shall now discourse of concerning the obligation of humane Laws, are so to be
understood, (and let this one premonition suffice) that the mandates of private
persons be comprehended in the public Laws, and oeconomical Commands with
Politic Constitutions, and others of the like nature, as far as the Course,
and Consideration of the Analogy will permit. And thus much be spoken of the
Subject of the Question: The Praedicate follows.

V. The Praedicate of the Question is the obligation of the Conscience. Now
what Conscience is, and what is an Obligation in the generality of it, has
largely enough been already unfolded by me, neither is there any need of
repetition; When we say the Law does oblige we mean nothing else than that the
Law does impose on the Subject a Necessity of observing and obeying it.

Law, does carry in it self a double force or necessary effect, that is, the
force of directing, from whence it is called a Canon or a Rule, as it lays
open to the Subject the will of the Superior, and shows what it is that he
would have to be performed by him; and a power of obliging (by which it differs
from Counsel and Admonishment,) because it commands the Subject to obey his
will, and does so oblige him to the performance of it, that if he does not obey
him, he does sin or err, for Sin is nothing else but an aberration or a
receding from that Rule or Law which we ought to follow, (...), so Monsters by
receding from the ordinary Law of Nature, are said to be the sins of Nature. In
the the obligative power of it, is grounded on the Will, and the power of the
Lawgiver, so that to speak properly, the Law it self does not bind so
effectually, as the Will and Power of the Lawgiver, by causing and inducing an
obligation by the means of the efficient Cause; but it may be said, and indeed
usually so it is, that the Law does oblige terminatively, that is, as a Term of
obligation, and by the virtue of an exemplar Cause, because it is that, to
which a man is so obliged, that he may work according to the Rule of it; as an
Artist in working is directed by the Copy that is propounded oblige the
Conscience, is so to bind a man up unto obedience under a mortal fault (as the
Schoolmen speak it) that if he prove disobedient, he is not only liable to a
temporal punishment, either ordained by the Laws, or to be inflicted according
to the sentence of the Magistrate, but he is deservedly checked by his own
Conscience, as guilty of the neglect of his Duty, and thereby of the Anger of
God contracted on him.

V. The sense therefore of the Question is, Whether Humane Laws have the power
to oblige the Consciences of those men to whom they are exhibited, in the same
way as I have now explained; amongst the Protestants Calvin does deny it (as
Bellarmin at least does object against him) it is denied also by Beza and many
others; Amongst the Papists it is denied by Gerson (Bellarmin himself
confessing it) and by Almain; Bellarm. 3 de laic. 9.
And as some affirm by Navarrus. Amongst the Protestants again it is affirmed
by Musculus, Ursine, and others; And amongst the Papists it is confirmed by the
Jesuits, and a great number of the Schoolmen; Some there are who do distinguish
on it, Romans 13.
as David Paraeus and others; And it must needs indeed be acknowledged, if by
the heat of too much opposition, and the affectation of contradiction, they had
not on both sides erred, this controversy had long ago been cast out of the
world; In disputations such as these, I oftentimes do call that to mind, which
when I was a young man, I did read in Aristotle (...). It is manifest that it
is so, but not why another does dispute it so, In which place he disputes, An
principia sunt contraria? Whether Principles are contrary? An detur infinitum?
Whether there be an infiniteness or not? and the like, And therefore in these
doubts (for this is the true sense and reading of that place in the third of
the Physics) we had more need of an Arbitrator (who may reconcile both
opinions differing rather in show than in substance) than of a Judge, who while
he determins one part does condemn the other; And this indeed would prevail
much in a great part of the controversies which with such contention of minds
and bitterness of style are now amongst parties carried on in the Christian
world, if Divines would not suffer themselves to be swayed rather by faction
than affection. Indeed in this present question (as far as I can judge by the
perusal of those few books which the infirmity of my health, and the
straightness of my time does permit to look over) the height of the Spirit of
contention being on both sides taken away, they neither of them do seem to me
to be in any great error; but I conceive that those who affirmatively have
defined this question (to speak freely what I think) have spoken more
commodiously to the institution of our lives, and more carefully and safely to
avoid the danger of error, and more properly to the form of sound Doctrine,
than those who have defined it negatively. But that more distinctly I may
propose unto you what I conceive is to be determined in this question, I will
as briefly, and as clearly as I can, with some Conclusions comprehend and
terminate the whole Subject; I will confim my own opinion with some reasons, as
need shall require, and I will answer the arguments which commonly are alleged
by the adverse party.

VII. The first Conclusion is, that Humane Laws if injust do not oblige unto
obedience; The thing is manifest enough, if the words be rightly understood,
and that no man might give a misunderstanding to them, we are to be advertised,
that a Law may be said to be unjust either in respect of the End, or the
Manner, or of some Circumstance extrinsecal to the Law it self, or in respect
of the Matter and Object of the Law; For it differs, if that be commanded
which is manifestly unjust, or whether that which peradventure is not otherwise
unjust, be yet unjustly commanded. That kind of Injustice which adhereth to the
Law it self, per se, that is, of it self in respect of the thing commanded does
take away the obligation; but it takes not away that obligation which comes
unto it extrinsecally, and as it were by accident, that is to say, by the fault
of the Commander; For suppose that a Prince should by a Law made command
something to be done, the doing whereof of it self were not unlawful to be
done; or should forbid that to be done which were not simply necessay; And
suppose withal, there should be no such just cause why he should command this,
or forbid that, being induced to it either by the desire of filthy Lucre, or
the mere Lust of exercising his Tyranny, or by some other depraved affection of
his mind, this Law is unjust indeed on the part of the King that did command
it, but the Subject nevertheless is obliged to the obedience of it. The Reason
is, because that Injustice does hold altogether on the part of the party
commanding, and not of the thing commanded; So that although the King could not
without sin make such a Law, yet the Subject without sin could perform that
which by that Law is commanded; And whatsoever the Subject can perform without
sin, he is bound if commanded to perform by the Duty of obedience* Let the
Prince himself look to it by what Counsel or Intention ^e inacted such a Law,
It does not belong to me who am but his Subject to examine it, neither shall it
be imputed unto me if he has offended in it, but as long as nothing is
commandmanded but what Lawfully may be performed, it shall be imputed to me if
I am wanting in my Duty, and shall not obey him.

VIII. Moreover, I add this also, if the Law it self either in respect of the
Object or the Matter be peradventure unjust, and grievous to the Subject, as
for examples sake, if he demands the payment of a greater Subsidy than the
occasion does require, the Conscience of the Subject is not here freed from the
obligation; But here again we are to distinguish; For a thing may be said to be
unjust, either as it is unfit or grievous to be born, or unlawful to be done;
In the first Interpretation, if it be unjust what by the Law is commanded, that
is if it be unequitable and not dishonest, yet if it be done, it is the fault
only of him who does command it, He that obeys the Command is so far from
fault, that he should be a great Transgressor if he did not obey it; But in the
latter sense, if any thing what is commanded be unjust, that is not only
grievous to be born, but also shameful to be done, and notwithstanding it is
done, the Sin lies heavy on both, First on the Magistrate who commanded an
unjust thing, Secondly, on the Subject, who acted an unlawful one. The sense of
the Conclusion is this, Wheresoever the Law by its Command does forbid any
thing to be done which is so necessary that it cannot be omitted by the Subject
without Sin, or wheresoever the Law does Command any thing to be done which is
so unlawful that i^ cannot be put in execution without Sin, that Law does not
oblige in Conscience.

IX. My first reason is, De jura. praelec. 2.
Because (as elsewhere I have fully explaned) there is no obligation for an
unlawful Act. Sect. 13.
first Obligation does prejudge the following; insomuch that a new obligation
contrary to the former cannot be superinduced; Now any Law commanding a thing
unlawful, as homicide, Perjury, Sacrilege, or forbidding a necessary duty, as
the worship of the true God, or the performance of our Duties to our Prince or
Parents etc. does exact that of us which is contrary to our former obligation,
by the virtue of which divine Precept we were before obliged; therefore that
humane Law cannot induce any obligation on us; Contradictories, but if that Law
were obligatory, it would oblige to the performance of that thing which the Law
of God at the same time does oblige to the not performance of it; Now to do and
not to do are Contradictories. Commands of the Emperors; But if any thing
though by the authority of Law was required of them which was against Faith, or
good manners, or any ways repugnant to common honesty, they openly and
courageously did deny the Command, and for the fear of God despised all humane
Laws, and institutions. The Decree being made at Babylon, that the concent of
music being heard, they all should worship the great golden Image which the
most mighty monarch had set up, and a most severe punishment threatened to those
who should do otherwise, the three young men of the Hebrews would not suffer
themselves to be obliged by that Law; Dan. 3. Because an unlawful thing, the
worshipping of an Idol, was commanded. In the Law again of the Persians it being
commanded, that no man for certain days should make a Petition to any God or
man for any thing but to the King of Persians only, Daniel did not obey that
Law, but as his Custom was, at his set hours he prayed unto God, Dan. 16. And
Peter and John being forbidden to speak any more in the Name of Jesus, they not
only disobeyed the Command; but confidently answered; Whether it be right in
the sight of God to obey you rather than God judge ye. Acts. 4. The Reason
indeed was, because the things that were forbidden were necessary, viz. The
worship of the true God, and the preaching of the Gospel committed to their
Chatge.

X. The second Conclusion. The Law of man prohibiting a thing simply evil; as
Theft, Adultery, Sacrilege, or commanding a thing good and necessary, as the
worship of God, the discharge of Debts, the Honor of Parents, does induce a
new obligation in the Conscience. proper Cause being given, the necessary
effect of it will follow, unless it be hindered by some other means; But an
obligation is so necessary an effect of the Law, that some have thought that
the very Name of the Law has received its derivation from it, as already I
have men^ioned; And nothing seems to be here assigned which may hinder the
consecution of its effect. The second reason is a Minori ad majus, from the
Less to the Greater. By the confession of all men, a Law prohibiting a thing
otherwise Lawful, or commanding a thing otherwise free does oblige; therefore
much more prohibiting a thing unlawful, or commanding a thing free. But
something there appears that may be objected to both these reasons, viz. Non
esse multiplicanda Entia sine necessitate; Beings are not to be multipled
without necessity; For every man by the power of the Divine Law being obliged
to the performance of what is necessary, and the eschewing of what is unlawful,
the same obligation does exclude that, which we think to obtain by humane Laws,
as superfluous, as water praeexistent in a full vessel does hinder the infusion
of new moisture; And it seems that two obligations to the same thing can no
more be admitted in one Conscience, than can two Accidents of the same Species
in one Subject. To this I answer, that it is usu^ly spoken, and indeed truly
enough, Obligationem priorem praejudicare posteriori, The former obligation
does prejudice and take place of the posterior, which Argument we our selves
have even now made use of for the confirmation of the former Conclusion; But
this Saying has place only amongst those obligations which are Destructive to
one another, and whose effects have so great a Contrariety, and Repugnancy
amongst themselves, that one being admitted, the other of necessity must be
taken away; Notwithstanding this does not hinder, but that another and a new
obligation may come unto the former, provided it be of the same reference, and
can be consistent with it. Neither, in this consideration, is that of any
moment as is alleged of water in a full vessel, for the impediment why the full
vessel admits of no more liquor, does not consist in the part of the liquor,
but proceeds from the incapacity of the vessel, and the nature of the place,
which cannot at once receive more bodies; And nothing hinders but there may be
many Accidents of the same Species in one and the same Subject, provided they
be Relative and not Absolute; as suppose that Socrates had ten Sons, there must
be in Socrates ten Paternities, for relations are multiplied according to the
multiplication of their Terms; And we said but even now, that the Law did
oblige according to the manner of the Term. Therefore seeing that every Law,
according to the nature of it, and as it is a Law, is an Inductive to an
obligation, there will be so many obligations as there are Laws being
correspondent to them as to their Terms; Neither is this Multiplicare entia
sine necessitate, to multiply Beings without necessity, for the causes being
multiplied, it is necessary that the effects of those causes should be
multiplied also; And that it may seem incredible to none, we may behold it, or
something very like unto it, to come to pass every day, both in things natural
and moral; It is evident to the sense that a man may be tied to a Pillar with
two or three cords, as Peter. Acts, 12. 6. He slept (...), bound with two
chains; And it is to be doubted by none, but that a man having obliged himself
to the performance of such a duty which by the Law of God was incumbent on him,
he (notwithstanding that first obligation) may again oblige himself by Vow, or
Oath, or Promise, to render that obligation the more effectual. Thus Jacob the
Patriarch vowed that Jehovah should be his only God, Genesis 28. 21. And David
swore that he would keep the righteous Judgments of God, Psalm. 119. 106. And
all of us who are Christians, when we were sprinkled at the Fount, did by a new
Covenant of Baptism bind our selves to Faith in Christ, to renounce the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh, and to keep the commandments of God, to the
performance of all which duties most sure it is that we were obliged before.

XI. The third Conclusion. Humane Laws (whether things unlawful, or necessary,
or things indifferent be commanded) being made by a single Person or by a
Commonalty not having a lawful power, do not oblige in Conscience. As if the
Mayor of this City should impose Laws on this University, or my next Neighbor
should command my servant to yoke my Oxen to bring in his harvest, etc. Or as
if a company of seditious Persons being met in some one County of England (as
they did heretofore under the conduct of Ket in Norfolk, and many times in
other places) should demand of the inhabitants a certain Sum of money, or
should publish Edicts to exact a servitude of their persons not due unto them,
and by force of Arms should compel them to obedience, although it peradventure
were lawful for them to do as they were commanded (it being found they were
unable to make resistance) yet certainly their commands should oblige no man in
Conscience to the observation of them; Aquin. 1. 2. quaest. 96. art. 4.
First, because the said Laws are Laws only in name, and aequivocally; But in
deed, and in earnest they are rather violences than Laws, and an aequivocal
Cause does infer no effect; as a sentence spoken by one who is no Judge does
not oblige the Parties; And Secondly, Because the Power of obliging (as already
has been mentioned) is not effectively derived from the Law it self, but from
a will joining with the power of the Lawmakers; therefore where Power is
wanting, the Cause that is properly the efficient of that obligation is wanting
also, and the proper Cause being defective, it is necessary that its Effect
should be deficient also; And this is easy to be collected by the words of the
Apostle in this place, who deduceth the Duty of obedience on the part of the
Subject from the Power of Jurisdiction in the Magistrate; from whence it is, no
man is bound to obey him who has not the Right of Commanding.

XII. If you shall object, that an un^uly multitude of factious persons, such
as before I have made mention of, have the Power of Commanding, because they
can compel those to the performance of their commands, over whom they exercise
their Tyranny; I answer that the Power of which I speak, and on which
Obligation does depend, is not that Power which the Greeks call (...), that is
Might or Puissance (which by most is used in this sense) by which a man is
potent to give such an effect to his Intention that it finally cannot be
hindered, but that Power, which the Greeks call (...), that is a lawful Power,
which comes by some Right of Nature, or of Nations, or by a Civil Right, in
respect both of the person who bears it, and of those who are any ways
substituted under him. This Power in this present Argument the Apostle does so
much press, that in the space almost of three Verses he names it five times,
and makes not the least mention of the other.

XIII. But you will allege, that those, who in the time of the Apostles were
the supreme Governors, did ascend unto the height of the Empire, not by any
Right of Inheritance, nor by the free Suffrages of the people, or any lawful
Authority, but by Force and Treachery, or military Tumult, and yet the Apostle
notwithstanding does expressly attribute an (...), that is a lawful Authority
to them, as unto legitimate Magistrates, and imposes on their Subjects a
necessity of obeying them, and that not for fear of Punishment, but for
Conscience sake. We must confess indeed, that the first Emperors of Rome,
after the eversion of the Commonwealth, did not attain unto the Empire by any
great lawfulness of Right, yet withal we must confess, that they were
invested with the Right of the Sword, and a legitimate Jurisdiction, to which
all whosoever were under the Roman Power ought to be subject, for there was not
then any single person that could challenge it as due unto him by more Right,
and the Senate, and People of Rome in whose Power not long before, and for many
Ages also was the chief Command, what by fear, and what by obsequiousness, did
give way to the loss of their Privileges, and acknowledged those for their
lawful Princes, who had obtained the Empire by unlawful Acts. This being
granted, which certainly in my opinion can no ways be denied, there can remain
no other doubt concerning the necessity of obeying. But in a dubious case, what
is the duty of a Christian, whether and how far he is obliged in the Court of
Conscience to give way unto the Times, and to accommodate himself to the
present manners, and be obedient to the Laws, the Edicts, and the Commands of
one who in his Judgment at least has attained to the Sovereignty de facto,
that is by Power and by no Right at all, it is no easy thing to judge, neither
is it the part of a wise man to determine any thing on so great, and so high a
Point.

XIV. I here therefore do conclude on nothing positively; but that I may not be
censured to be wanting in my duty, or at least to your expectation, if I should
make mention of a Question, and give you not the least satisfaction in it, I
will in a a few words expound unto you what seems to me (having been very
serious hereupon) to be most consentaneous to true reason, unless peradventure
some circumstances, as oftentimes it comes about in such deliberations, shall
grow too much upon my Judgment. In the first place therefore I say, That he who
de facto is chief Magistrate in a City, or Nation, although he has attained to
that power by evil Arts, is neverthheless to be esteemed by the Citizen as his
lawful Prince, and by the obligation of his Conscience he is accordingly bound
to obey him, provided there be no just cause of any doubt to the contrary; And
in this case, this seems to be the only and just cause of doubt, when most
certainly it is manifest, or at least when it seems very probable to the
Citizen, that there is some other person to whom the chief power is due by
greater right. If this be not so, the Citizen cannot in a good Conscience
refuse the commands of the present Possessor; For ordinarily, it does not
belong unto a Citizen too curiously to enquire by what right the possessor does
possess, it may suffice him for the security of his Conscience that he does
possess de facto, and there is no other man, at least so far as he knows, who
ought by right to possess that place; And besides that which I have already
spoken concerning the Roman Emperors, the Government of that Commonwealth
being subverted; to this the whole History almost of all the Kings of Israel
does pertain, many of whom relyiug not so much as on the least shadow of
Right, but having obtained the Kingdom by unjust Arms, and nefarious
wickedness (the Royal offspring of their Predecessors being utterly
extinguished, that not one of them might remain to succeed in their Fathers
Dignities) did ascend the Royal Throne, and governed the Kingdom, by a full and
as it were a proper Power, and the people rendered obedience to them no
otherwise than if they had been invested in it by the greatest right; Neither
do we find that the people were ever blamed for it, But right reason rather
persuaded that it so ought to be done; For it concerned the public safety,
that there should be one who should sit at the Helm of Government, and it could
not otherwise be better provided for the affairs of his people, and himself,
than that he should be esteemed to have the greatest right, who as a true
possessor had no right at all; And by the Law of Nations, those things which
belong to none, do pass into the right of the present possessors of them.

XV. In the second place I say, That in an Hereditary Kingdom, where the right
is doubtful betwixt two or more Competitors, it is the part of a good Citizen
whiles the contention is yet depending, and the right to be descerned by a
friendly treaty, or by war, to obey him as his lawful Prince who is in present
possession of the Sovereign command. Of this Histories can every where afford
us very many examples; amongst those which are most remarkable, are the many
differences which happened amongst the competitors of the Kingdom of Portugal
after the death of King Sebastian; And the six contestations at least for the
Kingdom of Scotland after the death of Alexander the King; And the most fierce
and lasting contention for the Government of the English Nation between the
most noble families of York and Lancaster; Most certain it is, by the consent
of all nations throughout the world, that the Law did always favor the Person
possessing; And in these Cases that remarkable saying of the Civilians always
prevailed, In rebus dubiis melior est conditio possidentis, In doubtful things
the condition of the Possessor is always the better.

XVI. But again, the lawful Prince and Heir of the Kingdom being forced away by
the Power of Arms, or being so oppressed that he cannot prosecute his own
Right, If any person whatsoever (the said Prince yet living) shall violently
take into his own hands the Reigns of Government, and deport himself as a King,
when he is more truly an Usurper, so that now it is no longer a doubtful right,
but an open injury; If you demand of me what a good Ci^^zen shall do in this
condition, who peradventure has taken the Oath of Allegiance in the b^hal^ of
his lawful Prince, or if he has not, yet he is no less indutyed to him, than
if he had taken it, I say in the third place, that a good Citizen may not only
lawfuly obey the Laws of him who Governs de facto, and not de jure, that is, by
present power, and not by right, and perform all his commands (provided there
be nothing in them that is unjust, or foul,) but according to the condition of
humane affairs, there may be such an exigence of necessity (as oftentimes it so
comes to pass) that he may be adjudged to fail even in his duty, if he does
not do it. It may be objected, that but even now it was said, that Laws made by
one who has no lawful power do not oblige in Conscience; It was so said
indeed, and it was truly said so, and I believe what I have now proposed is not
repugnant to it; For suppose that a Subject be obliged to perform what by the
Law is forbidden, yet he is not bound to the Law, but to himself and to his
Country. The obligation is annexed to that Law which is truly so of it self,
and as it is a Law, and it necessarily follows it, as the Effect follows
its Cause. We have already said, that a Law made by one who has no right unto
the Government is not a Law properly but aequivocally, and therefore has no
power to oblige; Therefore whatsoever obligation does from hence appear to
charge the Conscience of the Subject, does arise from another account, and not
from the Law it self to whom this obligation comes extrinsecally and only by
accident, as if a professor of Music should act the part of a Mason.

XVII. You will demand, If not from the Law, from whence then proceeds this
obligation of the Subject? I answer; It being the part of a pious and prudent
man, not only to attend on that which is lawful, but also to observe what
becomes himself, and is expedient for others; A good Citizen may be obliged to
do that for the advantage of himself, and his fellow-Citizens, to the
performance whereof he is not upon any account, or by any right obliged. For
this obligation does arise from that double part of duty, by which every man is
a debtor to himself, and a debtor to his Country; In the first place it belongs
to a prudent man to provide for himself, and for his own affairs, and it
belongs to an honest man to consider in what present condition he is; For no
man will deny, even by the Dictates of Nature, but that all must endeavor by
all lawful ways and means, to defend their livelihood, and themselves, and so
to deport themselves, that they may live safely, and in peace, to have and to
hold to themselves their own Fields, Houses, and possessions, and be careful
not to offend those who at their pleasure can take from them both their lives
and their fortunes; And from hence is the first necessity of obedience, which
our Apostle therefore does not so much urge as suppose, because that every man
is endued with the sense thereof by Nature; Romans 13. 5.
(...), not only for wrath, as if it were not the part of a discreet man rashly
to provoke his wrath who has the power of the Sword in his own hand, and by
his contumacy to incur his displeasure upon no occasion; It should become him
for the advantage of his own safety, to endure many affronts, to obey Laws, and
as much as can be without Sin, (...), to submit to the present powers; and
thus, though he cannot shake off the yoke, yet by well enduring it, to make it
more gentle, and more easy.

XVIII. But he whosoever he is who from a Politic Government shall diligently
observe with himself what good from thence may be derived to his Country, shall
find himself bound to the performance of this, with another, and a stronger
obligation, and which more properly pertains to the Conscience; and so indeed
St. Chrysostom in this place does interpret those words of the Apostle (...),
as if the Apostle chiefly attended to the benefit received by that protection
which a Civil Government conveyeth to the Subject; As if he should have said,
Seeing that every Citizen is conscious to himself how many benefits he does
enjoy under a politic Government, he must know, that for the requital of so
many and so great favors, he is bound by a certain Law of gratitude to pay due
obedience to him who is invested with the highest Authority, (...), as
Chrysostom there speaks in a sense not much incommodous, (...) unsuitable to
the meaning of the Apostle, as by (...) by we shall represent unto you; I
acknowl^dge the truth of that which by Tacitus is observed, Raro fieri ut quis
imperium flagitio quaesitum bonis artibus exerceat; It seldom comes to pass,
that any man with good Arts does exercise the ruling of an Empire which he has
obtained with wicked artifices, for with what Arts that Empires have been
gained, by the same for the most part they are preserved, and wickedness is to
be defended by wickedness; Nevertheless that it may be done, the examples of
Hiero the Sicilian, and of Edgar King of England, and of many others do
sufficiently declare, who modestly have managed the Government of a Nation
which not so rightly they had obtained; But howsoever a Prince does manage his
affairs, he can never so abuse his power, as (...) in the mean time to be
(...), the Minister of God, for good, as the Apostle ^^^aketh in the fourth
verse of that Chapter; for there cannot be so great a Tyranny which does not
retain some show of a just Government, and does not, at least a little, conduce
to maintain the society of men, as Calvin rightly on this Text observes it.
Seeing therefore that we are Masters of our own Estates, and do live safe from
slaughter, and rapine, and seeing that even that we live is a Debt we do owe to
the chief Powers (without which there would be no defense or remedy against the
lusts, fury, and injuries of wicked persons) a most reasonable and righteous
thing it is, that at least we should return something for so many benefits. The
old form of Trafficking (an excellent Law of good and right) does exact the
same of us, (...), Give something, and take something; And certainly it argues
a most perverse mind, to be willing to live under the protection of his
Government whom you are unwilling to obey, and to refuse his commands, under
the umbrage of whose patronage you do find your safety.

XIX. Moreover, since no man is born only for himself, but for public profit,
and for mankind in general, there arises from hence a third necessity of
obeying the present power, although it has been procured by never such
indirect means. From hence also it may in some manner appear what measure, and
what bounds are to be given to that obedience which by the duty of Conscience
is to be given to him who uniustly sits in the throne of supremacy; For
whatsoever is to be done in a peculiar reference to its end, ought so to be
done, as shall appear most necessary and profitable for the obtaining of that
end; Now the end of Civil Government and of the obedience due unto it, is the
tranquillity and safety of Humane society; As far therefore as the peace and
safety of that society of which that Citizen is a Member does require, so far
he is bound to obey the commands of that person, who de facto is the chief
Magistrate in that society. Now for the preservation of Humane societies there
are three things very necessary; The first, the defense of our Country against
all Foreign force, and endeavors of our Enemies. Secondly, the administration
of right, that due rewards may be given to deserving Citizens, and punishments
to the bad which is the office of distributive Justice. Thirdly, the care of
Commerce, and Merchandise, concerning buying, selling, exchangeing, and all
manner of contracts, which belongs unto Justice Commutative; In these three the
safety of mankind is so contained, that unless they be executed, it cannot be
but all things presently will run to ruin, all things and all places will be
filled with Plunder, Slaughter, Deceit and Injuries, the lives of the most
innocent Citizens, their Wives and Fortunes will become a prey, and a sport
unto the lusts of our armed Superiors; to prevent which calamity, and that the
petulancy of wicked men may timely be restrained, the only remedy is for good
Citizens to remember that it belongs unto them in all things pertaining to the
public safety, to be obedient to their Laws, and Commands, by whose Sword, and
authority they are defended from the injuries and the violence of the Spoylers.

XX. But that no man may give a false interpretation to what here is spoken,
they are to pay only such an obedience, that at the same time they are to
remember, that they are no further obliged to it, than either the account of
gratitude, or the safety of the public do require; And the Laws of an Usurper
are to be observed, not as obligatory by any right of the Commander, 1. a 2.
ae. quaest. 96. art. 4.
but as Aquinas rightly has it, to avoid offense, and the trouble of the
Commonwealth. In which case he says we ought to depart from our own right,
and he proves it out of the words of Christ, Mat. 5. 40, 41. Ei qui vult tecum
litigare, et tunicam tuam capere, dimitte et pallium, Et qui te angariabit ad
miliare unum, abi cum eo duo, If any man will sue thee at the Law, and take
away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also; And whosoever shall compel thee to
go a mile, go with him twayn. A man therefore may, and if occasion so requires,
he ought to depart from his own right for his own peace, but much more for the
public tranquillity, and obey him who has no lawful power to command; But
above all he must have this Reserve, so to depart from his own right, that by
so doing, he takes not any thing away from the right of another; And Abraham
in this did justly and wisely, Genesis 14. who though he made the King of Sodom
partaker of the spoils which by the right of war was his portion from the five
Kings that were overthrown, yet he cautelously provided, that both the Priest
should have his Tenths, and his three Associates in the War should not want of
their full proportions. In the like manner obedience is so to be paid to an
Usurper, that the fidelity due unto the lawful Heir be no ways violated, and
that his right suffers no prejudice by it.

XXI. But it may be objected; How can this be done? That which is grateful to
an Usurper cannot but be most ungrateful to the lawful Prince? No man can serve
two Masters that look so contrary, all whose Votes, Mat. ^.
Studies and Counsels are violently carried on to the ruin and destruction of
one another. I answer, the account being well computed, there is no reason that
we should think that this obsequiousness of the Citizen, so ordered, and
bounded, as we before have delivered, should be unpleasing to the lawful
Prince, but altogether to the U^urper; nay we may presume that with the consent
of the true Prince himself, it ought to be so; For by this obedience the
Citizen is not to be accounted to have assisted so much the unjust Possessor as
the whole Commonalty, or Republic, the safety whereof does no less concen the
true Heir, than the unjust Possessor: Nay peradventure much more; because being
the true Father of his Country he is to be believed to love it sincerely, and
to wish it more happiness, than the other, who (having excluded him) has
thrust himself into his house, and has excercised a command over his Family;
and by how much the affections of a Mother to her Children are more pure, and
vehement, than a Step-mothers, as may appear by that remarkable contestation of
the two Harlots before Solomon, the true Mother who knew the Child to be her
own desiring the safety of it, and that it should be given rather to another,
nay, unto her Adversary, than that it should perish by the Sword; so it is most
likely, and it is to be presumed* that the lawful Heir has a greater care of
the safety of his people (whom although for the present under the yoke of a
Stranger, yet he does acknowledge them to be his own, and hops well that in
time they will prove profitable to him) than he who having newly usurped the
supreme Magistracy will be more careful, it is likely, to establish his newly
acquired Greatness, than to procure the safety of the public, and therefore
the lawful Heir had rather that as modestly as they could they should
accommodate themselves to the present affairs for their own safety, than to run
into a certain destruction, by making an unseasonable, and an unsuccessful
opposition against one that overpowers them. And thus I have given you my
opinion concerning this most difficult and high question, determining
possitively of nothing, but being ready, if any man shall render more certain
reasons, to correct what has been spoken, and to jump in to the same Judgment
with him.

XXII. The fourth Conclusion follows, Humane Laws concerning things not
unlawful, do by themselves, and directly, in the general oblige the Conscience.
Which is as much as to say, This general precept, that Subjects should obey
humane Laws being duly made, is obligatory directly and by its self; And this
Calvin himself, who does not use to attribute too much to humane constitutions,
does acknowledge, who in the 4 Institute, 10.. 5. does advise that such a
distinction be made inter Genus et Speciem, betwixt the General, and the
Special, that although it be denied that Laws in the Special do oblige the
Conscience, yet it must be granted, that they have an obliging power in the
General. The reason is perspicuous, for this general precept does pertain to
the eternal and Divine Law, every part whereof does directly, and by it self,
and not only by consequence, oblige our Consciences. It pertains to the Law of
God in a double respect; First, Because natural Reason dictates, that Peace and
Order, which is the Soul of Commonwealths, and of all humane Societies, cannot
be preserved but by an Obedience to the Laws, according to the solemn
Constitution of them. Secondly, Because that God in the Holy Scripture does
command us to be subject unto those who are over us, in that Order as God has
appointed, and to obey (...), he Higher Powers, as may appear in the first, and
second verses of this Chapter, and not to draw back our necks from their yoaks,
upon a bare pretext, that they are meet men, 2 Pet. 2. 13.
and Creatures such as we are, (...), the Sons of Adam, of the same ^ace of
mankind, and subject to the same Affections, Sufferings, In^irmities, and
Casualties as our selves, but rather being mindful, that Almighty God by a
delegated Power, did set them over us as his Vicegerents on Earth, and has
been pleased to vouchsafe them so much honor, as to communicate his own Name
unto them as to so many visible and mortal Gods, Psalm. 82. 6.
I have said you are Gods, we should reverence, honor, and obey them with the
greatest Reverence, and though not for their own sakes who are but men as we
are, nor composed of better Clay, yet in respect to the Divine O^dination, who
making them to b^ Pr^nces, has preferred them into a higher place abov^ other
men, and in some measure made them Partakers of his own Power, (...), according
to the Lord as the Apostle S^. Peter ^n another place, and by consequence
(...), according unto Conscience, as the Apostle S^. Paul has it in this place.

XXIII. The fifth Conclusion. Humane Laws, according to the solemn
Constitution of them, do oblige the^ ^^science, even in particular, and
although not directly and by themselves, yet by Consequent, and by (...) of the
general Divine Commandment. I say in the first place Laws solemnly and rightly
constituted, that is, both by reason of the efficient Cause, being made by him,
who is endued with lawful Power* and by reason of the matter, commanding
nothing unlawful, dishonest, or filthy, or any ways unworthy the Duty of a
Christian; For we already have asserted, that the Laws which do offend in
either of those two senses, are not obligatory. I say in the second place, In
the particular, that is, to a particular Determination, in things of a middle
Nature, and in others; As what, and how much tribute is to be paid; What
merchandise is lawful, and what unlawful to be exported or to be imported in
such and such a Country; What habits are suitable to such and such degrees in
an University; What Statutes are dispensable, and what not, etc. I say in the
third place, that such Laws do not oblige by themselves, and directly; I
prove first because, that God alone is that Lawmakers, who has a most peculiar
and direct Command over the Consciences of men. There is but one Lawgiver, who
is able to save and destroy, James 4. 12. In things of a middle nature, and
which are indifferent (which for the most part are the subjects of humane Laws)
we do suppose that God made no Law in particular, but left them all to the
arbitration of those who are his Vicegerents on Earth. It is proved thus in
the second place, because that those things only do oblige directly, and by
themselves, matter as of an internal Cause, without any respect to the external
Causes, the Efficient and the Final, which would have obliged of themselves, if
they had not been commanded by Men; But things indifferent, and of a middle
Nature, determined by a particular and positive humane Law, when they are so
qualified in themselves, that before the Determination of them, they may freely
be made, or nor be made by any, they do not oblige in respect of the matter,
therefore not of themselves. I say in the third place, that the same Laws
notwithstanding do oblige in particular by the Consequent and by Virtue of the
general Divine Commandment; And because in this last position, the hindge of
the whole controversy is turned, I will more plainly propound the Conclusion,
which by and by I will more fully confirm; The Conclusion is this, Positive
humane Laws being rightly and lawfully constituted, which contain particular
determinations concerning things of a middle Nature and in themselves
indifferent, and which before they are determined are free to be made, or to be
unmade, do by the virtue of of the Divine Commandment (by which we are bound
to obey those who are set over us by God) so oblige the Consciences of the
Subjects to perform obedience to them, that they are bound under the pena^ty of
mo^tal Sin, and the fear of Gods displeasure, to give obedience to the said
Laws, and if they shall fail in the performance thereof, they shall endure the
checks and s^ings of their accusing Consciences.

XXIV. This Conclusion is confirmed by diverse Reasons, the first whereof is
taken from this present Text, we must therefore be subjected, not only for
wrath, but for Conscience sake. The words in themselves are perspicuous enough;
In the former verses the Apostle had largely insisted upon the necessity of
Christian Subjection, which he urged chiefly by two Arguments, the one from the
Institution, and the Ordination of God, in the two first verses, and the other
from the fear of the Punishment of man, in the two verses following; In the way
of recapitulation he briefly recollecteth either Argument, and repeateth them
in this fifth verse, and (as it is very usual in the Scripture) in an order
inverted, beginning the repetition from the latter, and the next member; As if
he should have said, A great necessity of Obedience does lie upon you in both
respects, whether the fear of punishment may deterr you, or the Conscience of
the Duty may incite you; If you despise the Power and Authority of the Laws,
and do evil, consider with your selves, that the Magistrate who is set over you
is the Minister of God, the Revenger of your neglected Duty, and ready to draw
the Sword (with which God has entrusted him) to inflict a corporal punishment
due to the despisers of his Laws. But if these things move you not, being
deluded by a vain hope to find out one subterfuge or another to escape the
force of his Arm, yet think on God the just Remembrancer of a^l Acts committed,
whether they be good or evil, stand in awe of him as of a just Judge, Fear your
own Consciences, those severe accusers, those faithful witnesses, and
importunate Tormentors; you cannot avoid them by any Artifices, not elude them
by any Inventions. From the scope of this place, the Argument is thus framed;
Those things, which being violated, do leave a Remorse upon the Conscience, do
oblige the Conscience, for so it must necessarily be, that all remorse or
reproof of Conscience must proceed from the sense of some obligation, as all
other effects do follow their causes; but humane Laws being violated, do leave
a remorse upon the Conscience, for that is the expre^^e sense of those words in
the Text, Necesse est subjici propter Conscientiam, You must of necessity be
subject for Conscience sake, you cannot keep your Consciences upright, and
safe, unless you be subjected; Therefore humane Laws do oblige the Conscience.

XXV. But some there are who to un-nerve the force of this Argument, do in this
place give another Interpretation unto Conscience, and chiefly herein they
defend themselves by the Authority of Chrysostom, as if no, other Conscience
was to be understood in this place, but a Conscience only of benefits which is
derived unto Subjects from the Political Government; I have made mention of
this heretofore, and praised it; for the sense, I confess, is pious, though
not so genuine; And I have thus much against it; For in the first place amongst
the Ancients Chysostome is singular in this Interpretation, whom hardly one or
two amongst so many Interpreters have followed, Theophy^act only, and
Oecumenius excepted, Who are not to be reputed in the number of witnesses, for
they so tread in the footsteps of Chrysostom, that all three of them do make
only but one witness. Secondly, Paul, or any other of the Apostles have made
use of the word Conscience, in that sense as Chrysostom here does feign unto
himself. Thirdly, temporal punishment; for which end it was better to affright
them with the fear of the Divine anger, than to admonish them of any benefits
received Conscience of the benefit, but of the duty.

XXVI. The second reason follows, from the use and the end of the Laws; It
being most necessary that they should be made and observed, for the
preservation of humane societies in peace, and public tranquillity, for
otherwise there would be no certain rule of Contracts, no measure of Faith, and
Civil Justice, which are the firmest bands of Cities, and societies; for the
natural, and the written Law of God, although both of them by themselves are
most perfect in their own kind, and being joined do contain the particular
Principles of supernatural faith, and the general Principles of things to be
done, accommodated to all parts of life, yet neither of them does descend to
all those particulars, which either may be, or for the most part are necessary
for the preservation of Peace and Order, in Cities, and Governments. For
examples sake, the Law of reason, which is the same with the Law of Nature does
dictate, and the Scripture also in the next verse of this Chapter does teach,
that Tribute is to be paid for the maintainence of Princes, and of the charges
of Wars, and other public uses, but unless it be by a L^w determined, how
much is to be paid, and by what proportion, and by whom, and in what space of
time, and other circumstances, either th^^ payment will miscarry, or not be
made timely enough, or else it will not be enough for the use; of the
Commonwealth; If you say, that by this* Argument the necessity of Laws is
proved indeed, but the obligation of them is not determined, for Subjects may
be enforced to their duties by the ^^nunciation of punishments; We confess
indeed the truth of this, if we should go no higher, but it furthermore we
shall consider without selves how headlong man is burryed to forbidden sins,
and how bold to venture through them all, and how (...) a Keeper Fear, is of
Duty, unless that withal there be some sense of Religion to contain men in
their duties, it will most easily appear how wisely* Almighty God, the most
prudent Moderator of all things, has provided for the affairs of men, who has
endued their Consciences with a certain religious reverence to the Law, which
does grow up together with their use of Reason: From hence it comes to pass,
that amongst the Heath^^^ ignorant of the true God, there were scarce any one
found of the ancient Legislators but pretended to the people, that the Laws
which ^e made were delivered to him by some God; to (...) need not give you the
names of (...) Lycu^gus, and many others who^ the (...); make mention of, it
being a truth so well known to all.

XXVII. The third argument is this; What is to be done for the Lord, we are
bound in Conscience to the performance of it; But we are bound to be subject to
Humane Laws rightly established (that is, so constituted by the supreme power,
or by others receiving their Authority from it) for the Lord, ^ Pet. 2. 13. Be
subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the
King, (...), as the Supreme (which sufficiently expounds the meaning of St.
Paul (...), the Higher Powers, in the first verse of (...) Chapter) or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, etc. And that these words (...),
For the Lord, or for the Love of God (as the French Translation has it) does
imply the obligation of Ephesians. 6. 1. where speaking of the Duty of Children
toward their Parents, the words of the Text are, Liberi obedite Parentibus
vestris (...), in Domino; Children obey your Parents in the Lord; And by the
Duty of Servants to their Masters, in the same Chapter v. 7. With good will
(...), serving the Lord and not men, which in the third of the Col. v. 23. is
(...), as to the Lord and not to Men, as if he should say, For Conscience and
not for Wrath only, or for the fear of God, rather Peter, (...), for so is the
will of God; And ^o St. Paul in the said sixth chapter of the Ephesians, and
the sixth verse, speaking of the Duty of Servants, he exhorts them to obey
their Masters in the sincerity of Heart (...), doing the will of God from the
Heart; Now the will of God is the very same Rule of Conscience which I have
said to be the Rule Adaequate.

XXVIII. The fourth Argument; What Natural Reason does so prescribe to be done,
that both the fault and the guilt of the fault are contracted, if it be not
done, we are without all doubt obliged in Conscience to the doing of it; For
since the sense of Sin pertains to the Conscience, as also does the fear of
Punishment which arises from it, whatsoever it is that the Mind rightly
conceives does induce the stain of a fault, and a guilt of punishment for that
fault, it does directly appertain to the obligation of the Conscience; Now
Natural Reason (whose Judgment cannot be indirect) does so far command us to
obey Humane Laws, that if that obedience be not performed, we are immediately
conscious to our selves, that it is merely by our own fault that we fayl in
that Duty.

XXIX. The fifth Argument; ^he Violation of that which necessarily draws
along with it the Violation of the Laws of God, does oblige the Conscience
(because no man with a safe Conscience can viol^te the Law of God which is the
Rule of the Conscience) but the violation of every particular Law solemnly
constituted by Men, does necessarily draw along with it the violation of the
Law of God, to wit, of that General Commandment by which God commands
obedience to the Magistrate; Therefore the said Violation of the particular Law
of Men does oblige the Conscience.

XXX. The sixth Argument; We are bound in Conscience not to Act that, which (if
it were acted) is in a manner to resist God himself; For we are bound to be
subject, and to submit our selves unto God, and therefore not to resist him,
for Subjection and Resistance are contrary unto one another, neither can any
Man at the same time, be subject unto, and resist the same person; But not to
obey Humane Laws solemnly constituted, is, interpretatively, to resist God; For
he who obeys not the Laws, does disobey the Legislative power of the
Magistrate, which whosoever he is that does it (the said power being ordained
by God) he does oppose himself against Gods Ordinance, and by Consequence and
interpretatively he does oppose God himself, which is the Determination of St.
Paul in the second verse of this chapter, and from whence he orderly concludes
the necessity of Subjection (...), according to Conscience, in this ve^se.

XXXI. From what has been already spoken, it will be no great difficulty to
answer to the Arguments which commonly are objected by the Adversaries to this
Truth: The first and chiefest whereof, is taken from Christian Liberty, and to
the Confirmation of it, many places of Scripture are alleged with much pomp and
circumstance, which seem to adstipulate to that Liberty; And many are the
objections which. from hence do take their Rise. They allege, it is written by
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be ye not made the
Servants of men; And ag^in Gal. 5. 6. Stand firm in that liberty in which
Christ has set you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
And again Col. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in meat or drink etc. and other
places to the same effect. They dispu^e also that it is not likely that Christ
at last should have freed us so from the positive Laws of God himself, which
were certainly most just, to leave us captivated under the slavish Bondage of
the Laws of Men.

XXXII. I will answer to all these places, but I would have you first
preadvertised, seeing that there are many Texts and heads of Christian liberty,
that we diligently do take heed not too rashly to confound them, neither rudely
and unskilfully to wrest and cite those places of Scripture which pertain to
one kind of Liberty to another kind to which they do not belong; which
transition to another kind is not only the perpetual and Solemn vice of the
Antinomians, and the Anab^ptists, but of many others who would be esteemed the
Reformers of this age; and this as they often put in practice in other
disputations, so most especially in those where the debate is concerning the
Rites of the Church; having thus preadmonished you of their Errors, I now
proceed to the solution of their Arguments. In that Text to the Corinthians the
Apostle would exhort the faithful, that in whatsoever place God had constituted
them, and with whatsoever gifts he had endued them, that contented in that
Station they would modestly contain themselves within their own limits,
measuring themselves by the gifts, and calling of God, and acordingly
accommodate their lives and actions, whether they be servants or free, and not
so inslave and emancipate their Consciences to the Judgment and command of any
Man, as wholly to depend upon his Will and Opinion, but being mindful that he
is the servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus, so to study to please men, and to
be subservient to their affections and commands, as to do nothing unworthy of a
man who professes himself to be the Servant of God and Christ; And this being
the certain sense of the Apostle in that whole discourse, we may most truly
conclude from hence, that we ought not to be obedient to the pleasures of
Masters, Parents, or Princes, or any Mortals whatsoever, if they command any
thing to be done which is wicked, or unlawful, for instead of being the
Servants of God, this were to make themselves the Servants of Men; But he, who
out of Conscience does obey the just, honest, and profitable Constitutions of
Men, is so far from being thought, that he is therefore the Servant of Men,
that by the two chiefest of the Apostles, he is expressly said to serve the
Lord God, and not Men. Ephesians. 6. 7. Col. 3. 23. and 1. Pet. 2. 16. In this Text,
To serve the Lord and not Men, the particle of Negation (as usually in other
places) is taken comparatively, that is to say, rather God than Men, he serves
God for himself, and Men for God; He serves Men, as he performs what is
commanded by them, and he serves God, as he does it out of the Conscience of
his Duty.

XXXIII. That other place to the Galathians is best of all to be understood by
the whole scope of the Epistle; Some false Apostles in the Churches of Galatia,
being either Jews, or Judaizing Christians, did violently contend (contrary to
the institution of the Apostles in the Council at Jerusalem) that the Gentiles
newly converted to the Faith, should not only be baptized but circumcized also;
And those Impostors, as their custom is, under the pretense of piety, and a
wicked diligence amongst the credulous vulgar, did so wonderfully prevayl, that
they had drawn many into so great an error, that they thought they could never
attain unto everlasting happiness, unless they suffered themselves to be
circumcized; The Spirit of the blessed Apostle not enduring this wretched and
growing Imposture, does inveigh against the grossness of the error of it,
with more than ordinary Indignation throughout the whole course almost of the
Epistle; And amongst other Arguments he admonishes the Galatians of that
liberty, by which Christ after his coming did free his Church from the
unprofitable burden and yoke of the Mosaic Ceremonies, and does exhort them
constanly to maintain the liberty obtained by the death of Christ, and not to
stoop their necks again unto the yoke of slavery, which they should altogether
do, if they should believe the ritual observation of the dead letter of the Law
to be necessary. Now how incongruously this is by the Anabaptists applied to
the Laws of Men, profitable and necessary for the Commonwealth, from which the
Scriptures do no where tell us that Christ has freed us, he is wilfully blind
that does not discern it.

XXXIV. The third place taken out of the Epistle to the Colossians, does not at
all appertain to Humane Laws rightly constituted concerning things of a middle
nature, but to the Doctrines of Impostors, who dogmatically propounded to the
people of God some things to be necessary, which God never commanded (which was
the Custom of the Traditionary Pharisees, whom Christ Mat. 15. reprehends upon
that account for making the Commandments of God of no effect by their
Tradition) or clean contrary, they as dogmatically did forbid other things as
unlawful, which God never did prohibit, injoyning the people as to such, and
such things, Touch not, taste not, handle not. The Apostle admonishes the
Colossians to have a care of such dogmatizing Teachers, and not suffer any
snare to be thrown upon their Consciences by these Impostors; Magistrates
therefore in a political Government do not offend, who in things of a middle
nature, do either command or prohibit any thing to the people for Profit,
Honesty, Decency, or for Orders sake, but without any opinion of necessity on
either side, which belongs to the thing it self that is commanded or
forbidden; Those pitiful Ministers (I may more truly call them Magistrates, so
Magisterially they do pronounce all things do rather offend, who so
importunately vex and inveigh against the harmless Laws of Magistrates, and
exercise a Tyranny o^^er the Consciences of the people, and whatsoever is
distastful to them, is presently condemned for Impiety, or at least for
Superstition.

XXXV. That which in the fourth place they do allege, tha^ because Christ has
freed us from the positive Laws of God, therefore much more from the Laws of
Men, is in many respects erroneous, positive, and from which they would have us
freed by the death of Christ, whether they be ritual or judicial were only
imposed on the Jews, but not on us who are Christians. Again, Moses should not
oblige the Christians, and that the Laws of men rightly and solemnly
constituted by the Magistrates should oblige the people under their Authority.
Thirdly, obligation, but altogether the use also of all humane Laws; For
Christ has no otherwise freed us from the obligation of the Mosa^ck Laws, than
so by taking away the use of them, that by us they are no more to be esteemed
as Laws. Therefore if in the same manner he would have us to be free from the
obligation of humane Laws, it must of necessity follow, that he would have no
humane Laws to be any longer extant amongst us. So wild a proposition is this
of the Anabaptists and other fanatic persons, neither is it admitted by
themselves who do propound it.

XXXVI. Again, they object that of Saint James, Chapter the fourth, there is
but one Lawgiver, to wit God and Christ, who is only Lord of the Conscience;
He is an invader thereof of Christ's right, and thrusts himself into the Throne
of God, whosoever he is that assumeth unto himself a power of obliging the
Consciences of other men. I answer, There is indeed but one supreme Lawgiver,
who has a direct and Sovereign command over the Consciences of men, as by
himself and by his own virtue and authority to oblige them, which Lawgiver is
God and Christ, as the Apostle has it; But this hinders not, but that there
may be other Lawgivers of an inferior order and degree, who by a power
granted and derived to them from that supreme Lawgiver, have of themselves a
right of making Laws which may consequently oblige the Conscience; Just as a
King who solely in his own Kingdom has a peculiar Legislative power, yet
notwithstanding by his Charter he may give to some College or Corporation, a
right of making Laws, which may oblige all the members of that body, not by
their own power, but by the force of the royal Donation, and the Authority
granted to them from the King; Our Universities (as you all know) are happy and
rejoice in this privilege, that in a Legitimate Convocation they may make Laws
which we call Statutes, and ordain punishments for Delinquents, and if it be
expedient, they may abrogate again and cancel the same Statutes; Now there is
no man of a sober understanding who will conceive that the exercise of this
power does any ways derogate from the Legislative right of the King, or can be
any deceit, or prejudice unto it, unless it be extended beyond the limits of
the Donation defined in the Charter; Nay it is rather an excellent, and a
singular mark of the royal autocrasy, that the King has not only the
Legislative power himself, but that he can vouchsafe it unto others to be had
and used, his own right being notwithstanding safe and entire into himself.

XXXVII. The other objections relying on one and the same Foundation may be
resolved by one a and the same labor; I will briefly run them over. temporal,
and therefore belongs not unto the Conscience which is spiritual. Fourthly,
the end external peace of the Commonwealth, and not the internal peace of the
Conscience; therefore the Laws themselves do only oblige the outward man, and
not the Conscience which lies within. Fifthly, the Magistrate cannot Actions
be commensurated to the intention of the Agents, and they ought not further to
be extended.

XXXVIII. I answer, and first universally to them all; By all these Arguments,
this only is obtained, that humane Laws do not oblige directly and by
themselves, or by their proper force, which of our own accord we grant; for we
assert no other obligation but what comes to them ex consequenti, by
Consequence, and by the virtue of the general command of God of rendering
obedience to the higher powers; And from this ground, I answer to the
particular objections; And as the to third, I say, that the Civil power being
merely temporal, cannot of it self, and in respect of the Object in which
properly and immediately it verseth, have a spiritual effect, and therefore of
it self cannot induce a spiritual obligation; nevertheless by consequence it
may have a spiritual effect, by a derivation from the power of some superior
cause, in the virtue whereof it works; Now every Magistrate, as long as
rightly and d^ely he does exercise the Legislative Power which God has put
into his hands; he works in the virtue of God himself, and by ordination of
him who is himself a Spirit, and as the Lord and Father of Spirits has a
Command over the Spirits of men.

XXXIX. I answer to the fourth; that although peace be an external blessing of
a Commonalty, yet the internal Conscience is obliged to the uttermost to the
procuring and preserving of it by all lawful and honest means, because that God
the Lord of Conscience has commanded us to love and follow peace, and if
private, certainly much more public peace. Neither is it any way inconsistent,
that although Conscience be internal, yet it is obliged to a thing external;
for the obligation of Conscience does not arise from the Nature, or any
condition of the thing or Object into which it is carried, but from the will of
him who has the right of obliging, that is God himself.

XL. I answer to the fifth; that the Legislative and Judicial power does
originally pertain to the same person, that is, to him who has the supreme
jurisdiction over the Subjects; nevertheless dispensatively and by the will of
the supreme Magistrate it may both of them and both ways be administered by
other persons, as he shall think expedient. Therefore although God alone has
in himself a peculiar power over the Consciences of the Creature, and makes as
well as judges Laws by an original, proper, and absolute right, yet according
to his good pleasure he may either delegate a dispensation of either power to
another, or he may reserve it to himself; Therefore it would not be absurd if
any man should grant that God in some measure has delegated a Legislative
power to the Magistrate of obliging Consciences, but has reserved the Judicial
power over them entire unto himself; But there is no necessity that compels
us to grant (...), or to use any expressions that may be helped although by
never so gentle an interpretation; For we do not say this, that God has given
to the Magistrate a power to oblige by his Laws the Consciences of those that
be under him, but this rather (which is a more wary and a more commodiou^ kind
of speaking) that God has given to the Magistrate a power of making Laws,
which (but by the only Authority of God himself) do oblige the Consciences of
his Subjects; For to speak properly, the Magistrate does not oblige the
Conscience to obey the Law, but God obliges the Conscience to obey the
Magistrate.

XL. And by this, a way is made for an (...) to the last objection. I do grant
indeed (...) effects of Actions ought not to be extended (...) the intention of
the Agents, nevertheless where there are more Agents subordinate there is (...)
hinders but that the effect may be extended beyond the intention of the
inferior Agent, provided it does not exceed the Intention of the princip^^
Agent; As in the generation of a Monster (which being but boys we have learned
from Aristotle) the effect, which is the production of the Monster, is besides
the intention of the second cause, or as they speak it, of Nature natured, that
is to say, of the person that begets or brings it forth, but it is not besides
the intention of the first Cause, or of Nature naturing, that is, Almighty God.
Therefore although the Magistrate in the making of a Law has no explicit
intention of obliging the Consciences, yet by instituting the Law, he does
institute that, which by the intention, and ordination of God, has an implicit
force of obliging them, and which necessarily is conjoined to him. And this may
suffice to be spoken of the obligation of Humane Laws in general; I will
shortly proceed to the Questions, or particular doubtful Cases, if God shall
permit, and my health be more constant to me.

THE SIXTH LECTURE, Of the Obligation of Humane Laws in reference to their
material Cause.
PROVE. 8. 15. Per me reges regnant, et Legum conditores justa decernunt. By me,
Kings reign, and the makers of Laws do decree Justice.
I Have reduced to two general Questions, or to two heads, what I have
propounded to be spoken concerning the obligation of humane Laws; The first is,
whether humane Laws do oblige the Consciences of Subjects? Concerning which in
the former Lecture I have expounded to you what was my Judgment of it; The
other Question is, How they oblige? To which question, I have told you, there
belongs the de^^ding of some Cases and Doubts which mee^ in this ^ubject; And
because they are (...) few, no^ of one kind, therefore to avoid Confusion, and
that we may proceed in some Order and Method to that which is to be spoken, I
have thought is not impertinent to give you a rough Representative of the whole
Treatise now in hand; And that Method which most of you do remember, I observed
in those my former exercitations concerning the obligation of an oath, I here
conceive it very necessary for me to use again, that those things may all of
them be reduced to the four kind of Causes which I conceive may commodiously be
referred to them* But because I do find many things to remain which cannot
easily be included in those bounds, we will assign them their several ^lasses;
And they are chiefly two, the first of Persons who are under the obligation of
those Laws; and the other in the comparing of the obligatory Virtue which is in
Humane Laws, with that which arises from the Judgment of the Conscience, by
Vows, Oaths, Promises, Contracts, and from the Law of Scandal, or if there be
any thing else which elsewhere obligatory, for these two obligations do seem to
be in a contestation and (justling for precedence) to strive which of them
should give place unto (...). To add the third Classis for some certain species
of Laws which seem to contain in themselves something singular to themselves, such
as are Ecclesiastical Laws Penal Laws, and the local statu^es of Colleges, and
less societies, will not peradventure be very necessary seeing in some manner
they may be reduced to something in the four kinds of Causes, and though not so
aptly as to satisfy the curious, yet so fully as to serve our present purpose;
for whilst our hearers understand what it is we speak of, we have never taken
any great care in what method we have gone. We will in the first place
therefore (if God shall grant life, health, and opportunity to accomplish what
we have propounded) speak of the obligation of the Laws as to the four kinds of
Causes; In the second place of the persons who are obliged to the observation
of those Laws; And lastly, of the comparison of the obligations which quarrel
amongst themselves, giving you beforehand one or two distinctions which will
be of great concernment in the whole management of this discourse.

II. We must understand therefore in the first place, Seeing that to the end of
Political Government and order, there is a twofold power in those who are
invested with Sovereign Authority, A directive power, by which the Subjects may
understand what they have to do, and a Power Coactive or Coercitive (for, by
reason of the Analogy, it is better so to call it than Coercive) by which the
Subjects may be compelled to the performance of those things that are
commanded, if of their own accords they shall refuse to give obedience to them,
both which are so contained in the Laws, that the one consists most in
precepts, and the other is most to be seen in punishments; there arises from
this double power of the Magistrate, a double duty of the Subject which
answers to that double power; The duty of Obedience in reference to the
Directive power, and the duty of Subjection in reference to the power
Coercitive; I here understand subjection as it is properly so called by an
appellation Generical, which as elsewhere it often comes to pass, is
restrained to one certain Species; For obedience also is a Species of
Subjection largely taken; The Apostle comprehends both those duties, Heb. 13.
17. and signifies them in those two words (...) Obey them that have the
oversight of you, and submit your selves; The first whereof pertains to the
Duty of obedience, or of performing that which is commanded by a lawful
Superior, the other to the Duty of Subjection, or of enduring what by him shall
be inflicted. Furthermore, As from a double Power, there arises a double Duty,
so from a double Duty, there arises a double Obligation, for every Duty does
infer an Obligation, and every Obligation does suppose a Duty; Therefore one
kind of the Obligation of Humane Laws, is that, by which Subjects are bound to
obey the precepts of the Law it self, and the other, by which they are bound to
submit themselves to the power of the Lawgiver, one of the Obligations
belongs to Active Obedience, the other unto that Obedience which is called
passive, and to which we give the Name of Submission.

III. If it be here demanded how far Humane Laws can oblige the Consciences of
the Subject; It is to be said in the first place, that all Laws made by one
invested by a lawful Power, do oblige to Subjection, so that it is not lawful
for a Subject to resist the Supreme Power by force of Arms, whether things just
or unjust be commanded. This w^^ evermore the mind, and practice of the
Christians in the first Age of the Church, living under the most griev^us
Tyranny of the greatest Enemies to the name of Christ; and to make no mention
herein of the Conduct, and the instinct of Nature, and the light of right
Reason, this is most manifest by the Doctrine of the two chiefest of the
Apostles. For so Peter the Apostle of Circumcision* does diligently instruct
the Jews; And so Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, does as carefully instruct
the Gentiles; St. Peter in the first book and second chapter, commands Servants
to be subject to their Masters, not only good and gentle Masters, but those
severer ones, who would punish them with Scourges, when they had not deserved
it. Saint Paul, Romans 13. does urge in many words the necessity of Subjection,
but grants unto none the Liberty of Resistance, be their case, or their
pretense, never so good. In the second place, I say, That although this
Subjection is simply necessary, yet it is not satisfactory as to Duty, unless
the command of the Law be obeyed where it can be done without Sin, And
therefore the Subject is bound to Obedience in Conscience, in all things that
are lawful and honest. Hence it is, that this word be Obedient is so often, and
so expressly inculcated by the Apostle. Ephesians. 6. Col. 3. and in other places.
In the third place, I say, Where the precept of the Law cannot be observed
without sin, if the Subject shall patiently submit himself to the Power of the
Lawgiver, he has satisfied his Duty, and is not obliged in Conscience to
perform that which the Law commands; nay, he is obliged not to do it; for
there can be no Obligation to things unlawful; It is always necessary
therefore to be subject, but not always necessary to obey.

IV. Furthermore, seeing both are certain, that the Consciences of Men are
free, Servitus in totum hominem uon descendit. Sen. de Bencf. 20.
and ought to be so, which Liberty no Humane Power can, or may infringe; And
that an Obligation is a kind of a Bond, and does induce a necessity, which
seems to be opposite, and to fight with just Liberty (for neither is he any
ways free who is bound, neither can he be free to both, who by some necessity
is bound to either) that it plainly may appear that this Obligation of
Conscience, of which we now do treat, may consist with the just Liberty of
Conscience, we must necessarily in this place give you another distinction,
which is, that the Precepts of Humane Law may be taken two ways, either
formally for the Act it self of giving the precepts, or materially for the
thing precepted; If the Lawgiver therefore should intend an Obligation, or
impose on the Subject a necessity of obeying, from giving the Precept of his
Law taken materially, that is, from the necessity of the thing it self which is
precepted, which notwithstanding in the truth of the thing, was not necessary
before that Law was made, he in that very fact should lay a force upon the
Conscience of the Subject, which should be repugnant to the Liberty of it; But
if he should derive his Obligation from giving the precept of his Law taken
formally, th^^ is from the legitimate Authority with which. he himself is
invested that gives it (a moral indifferency of the thing precepted in the mean
time remaining, and in the same state in which it was before the Law was made)
although the obligation follows which imposes on the Conscience a necessity
of obeying, yet the inward Liberty of the Conscience remains uninjuried and
entire.

V. If this seems obscure to any, I will illustrate it unto him by an Example;
A Civil Law being made, that no man should eat flesh during all the time of
Lent, if the Lawgiver either in the preface or in the body of that Law should
signify that he laid this Command upon his Subjects, because it were ungodly,
and unlawful for them in that time to eat flesh, This were to throw a Snare on
the Consciences of his Subjects, and as much as in him lay to weaken their
Liberty; But if expressly he should signify, that the thing being otherwise
free in it self, he did so ordain it for the profit of the Commonwealth, that
his Subjects according to the Example of the ancient Church, should thereby
take an occasion to exercise a more abstemious and severer Discipline; or if by
the words of the Law it self, or elsewhere it might appear, that the Lawgiver
intended not by that Law to fasten any opinion of necessity on the thing so
commanded, there would on this account no injury be done to the Consciences of
the Subjects, and the liberty thereof. For there is a great difference, when
one thing is commanded by the Magistrate, because it is thought to be
necessary, oris prohibited, because it is conceived to be unlawful, And when
another thing begins then only to be thought necessary and lawful, after that
it is commanded by the Magistrate, and unlawful, because it is forbidden by
him. The first Necessity which anteceded the Law, and is supposed by it to be
some cause of it, is contrary to the liberty of the Conscience; but the other,
which follows the Law, and proceeds from it as an essect thereof is not
repugnant to it; The reason of this difference is, because the antecedent
necessity which the Law supposes, does necessarily require some assent of the
practical judgment; but to the following necessity which proceeds from the
Law, the consent of the will is sufficient to the performance of that outward
work which by the Law is commanded. Now an Act of the Will cannot prejudice the
liberty of Conscience, as an Act of the judgment does, for the Act of the Will
does follow the dictates of the Conscience as the effect follows its cause,
but the Act of the Judgment does precede those Dictates, as the Cause goes
before its effect.

VI. These distinctions being premised, I proceed unto the Doubts, where in the
first place those which we meet with concerning the material Cause shall be
examined and discussed at this time. The first doubt is De materia impossibili,
of a matter in it self impossible, concerning which I say in the first place,
That no Law ought to be made concerning a matter altogether impossible; If such
a Law be Acts, as, to be acted by a man who is a free Agent; now liberty
speaks a power unto both, but in things impossible there is no such liberty
of power, as by fault unto him, nor ought to be imputed to him for punishment
(for every obligation is either to a fault, or to a punishment, or to both) but
the omission of a thing impossible cannot be imputed to any man for a fault,
nor ought it to be imputed to any one for a punishment: Ergo etc. But that
there is no obligation of a thing impossible (whether it be impossible by the
Nature of the thing, or by circumstances, Praelect. 2. Sect. 12.
or any other way) has already by me been proved in my treatise of the
obligation of an oath, and there is no need of repetition.

VII. I say in the second place; A Law which is possible to some, but seems
to any other, or to but few, or peradventure but to one or two to be
impossible, may lawfully be made, if it be useful to the Commonwealth, but not
unless there be some extraordinary great cause, and a manifest necessity does
require it; but being made it does oblige all those who are able to keep it,
but not those who cannot keep it; as if some great Tribute were commanded for
the necessary use of the Commonwealth, for the payment whereof some of the
Subjects are nothing so able as others, Those who are so poor that they cannot
pay the sum which the Law lays upon them, are not bound in Conscience to do
that which they are unable to perform, as is already apparent by the
proposition above mentioned; Nevertheless they are obliged to make their
addresses to those who are over them, (...). Nazianz. Orat. 9. Debeone omittere
quod possum, quoniam quod debeo minime possum. Bernard?
and openly, and sincerely, and without the least falsehood, to profess the
slenderness of their Estate, and unless they can prevail to be quite exempted
from the Law, or to procure a remission of some part of the sum with which they
are taxed, they are to bring into the public as great a part of it, as
possibly they can; for he who cannot do what he ought to do, he yet ought to do
what he is able to do.

VIII. The second doubt is, concerning a thing commanded by the Law, not
impossible, but very grievous, and very burdensome, and which the Subject
cannot perform without great inconvenience, loss, danger of life, and the
ruin of hi^ whole Estate; I say in the first place, That in this case the
Lawgiver (if he foreseeth this will come to pass) ought to use some caution
in the clauses of that Law, and as conveniently as he can, he is to provide a
remedy for this Evil; And if it cannot so well be done in the form of the Law
it self (le^t subtle and deceitful Knaves, and too much intent to their own
profit may thereby find a hole to escape, (...). Isae ^s ap. Stob. (...).
and so elude the force of the Law) yet what possibly in him lies, he ought to
provide, that in the execution of that Law some qualification may be had, le^t
a Law otherwise profitable and necessary may become a sn^re or a detriment to
any honest man. I say in the second place, That the Subject, though so heavily
taxed, is nevertheless bound in Conscience to obey that Law, although with the
ruin of his whole Estate, if any evident or necessary Cause for the good of
the Commonwealth does so require. For example, suppose a hostile Army be
invading the Kingdom, if a Law be made that all the corn in the Fields, for
some miles, not far from the Shore, be spoiled, and all the Corn in the Barnes
or Ricks which cannot be carried away, be burned, and that all the Houses in
the Suburbs be pulled down, and that all the Sluices thereabouts shall be
opened, and the Fields be drowned, every Citizen and Subject is directly bound
to obey this Law, and cheerfully, and willingly to obey the Commands thereof,
and with the loss of his own goods to redeem the public safety, and not only
upon that account, that his Country being betrayed to his Enemies by his
unseasonable parsimoniousness, it is sure enough that every private person will
be suddenly sensible of the ensuing calamity, but especially out of the
Conscience of his duty; because that every good man is to prefer^ the public
above all private interests; I say in the third place, That a Subject, unless
some remarkable necessity does appear or fear of public

IX. The third doubt, is concerning things necessary, as if the Law of men
should command any thing which was necessary before, and commanded by the Law
of God, or forbid any thing which was before unlawful and prohibited by the Law
of God; What is the obligation in this case? I answer briefly, That the Subject
by this Law is absolutely obliged; For first, the obligation which was the Law
of God, and therefore necessary, as to the manner, quantity or some other
circumstance^ of it which was free before, or by adding some determination to
the Law of God prohibiting a thing unlawful, as to the degree of the Crime, or
the manner of the punishment, or the measure of it, or other things of the like
nature; for examples sake, it is by Divine right that there should be public
congregations to perform the duties of Divine worship, but at what hour the
people shall meet, and in what place, what form of words are to be used, and
what must be the gesture of the body the several parts of the service, and
other things of the same nature, are all of them to be determined by Humane
constitutions. In the same manner, the Law of God forbids Theft to be
committed, but what kind of Theft is to be animadvertised against with such a
punishment, and what with another punishment, is from the Laws of man; From
this determination of a general thing and undetermined by the Law of God, the
Law of man has this privilege, that it can induce a new obligation on the
Conscience of the Subject, not only different from the first obligation in
number, and in respect of the Term, because it is of another dependency, but
also diverse in the Species, and in respect of the matter, because it is
exercised on another object; for the first obligation, which arises from the
Law of God is to the thing it self as it is a substance, but this obligation
which the Laws of men do super-induce, is to the manner of the thing or to the
circumstance of it.

X. The fourth Doubt, is of a thing that is foul and unlawful, which is indeed
a Doubt of great moment, and contains many cases: for almost all the
Conditions which are required to the right Constitution of Laws, (...).
Aristot. 5. Ethic. 3
are reduced to Justice alone; And not only for that reason that universal
Justice does in her Circle comprehend all Virtues, but especially for this
reason, that particular Justice, and more specifically that Justice which is
called Legal Justice, is above all other Virtues the chief and the only Pillar
of Commonwealths and all humane Societies. Concerning this Doubt, In the first
place it is questioned, Whether an unjust Law ought to be made for the public
profit; Of which opinion was Nicho. Machiavel, who affirmed, that the due
matter of Laws, whether just, or unjust, was that which was most commodious for
the preserving and the increasing of a politic State; for when, in his
opinion, the end of Civil Power is the preservation of it self, and the
increase of Sovereignty, which Power cannot vigorously be preserved, much less
the Sovereignty enlarged, if all the Laws, and Councils of Princes were
examined according to the exact Rule of Justice, and Honesty, It concerned
those who sat at the Helm, so to bend (as occasion should require) the Rule of
Honesty, as to make it subservient to the public advantage; for the end in all
things is to know how best to measure those things that are of a middle nature;
what so ever was the opinion of Machiavel, this was certainly the Judgment of a
personage of great account amongst the Lacaedemonians, who openly pronounced,
that was most honest to the Spartans which was most profitable to them; To
confirm this opinion that of Horace is alleged, Ipsa utilitas justi prope matter
et aequi* Hor. 1 ^a^yr. 3.
Profit almost the very mother of Justice and Equity; And how thriving a
Principle this is, may be proved by the Example and success of the Turks, who
relying on this Foundation, most happily have far and near extended the bounds
of their Empire throughout Asia, Africa, and Europe. And to speak the truth,
had not some men (who above all others do profess themselves to be Christians,
nay the only Christians, and delight to be called the Reformers, and the
Restorers o^ the purer Religion) made a great use of this most wicked
principle, the Christian World had not every where groaned under so many
Sacrileges, Perjuries, Seditions, Wars, Tumults, and Tyrannies.

XI. But on the other side; Princes on earth ought not to abuse that power
which they have received from God, against his will, or otherwise than he
intended, for this power is not given them so much as to Lords, as it is
entrusted* to them by God as his Ministers, (...), Romans 13. 4, 6. It is
entrusted to them upon that account, that they should work righteousness, and
not exercise Tyranny, and an unjust Domination: And this is manifest by the
very words of the Text; By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree just things; As
if to Reign, and truly to be a Prince, were nothing else but to decree those
things which are just and righteous; And the Prophets do every where denounce
the most severe anger, Esai. 10. 1.
and vengeance of God against those Kings and Princes who had decreed unjust
Judgments, Psalm. 94. 20.
and had meditated iniquity as a Law. Neither is the enlargement of Empire, the
and of Civil Power, as the Politicians of this world do affirm, but the
preservation of the people in Tranquillity, and peace, with all Godliness and
Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. For Justice (if there be any other) is the best preserver
of the public peace; And as the Righteousness of Faith does procure and
conserve the inward peace of the Conscience, so legal Justice does preserve the
outward peace of the Commonwealth, Esai. 32. 17.
the fruit of Justice, says the Prophet, Pinda^.
shall be Peace, and the Theban Poet, calls Quietness the Daughter of
Justice; Neither is that the meaning of Horace, as if Honesty were merely to be
measured by profit, the scope of his sense is far otherwise, to wit, that men
wild at first, and wandering, by the observation of the public profit, and the
common good, were brought at the last to draw together into one Body, and
maintain Societies, and by just Laws and Punishments to restrain injuries, and
wickedness. The Arguments drawn from the Turks (whom it appears that God
especially had raised up, and made them as his Scourge to correct the great
perfidiousnesse, and other Sins of the Christians) or from any others, to
maintain a bad Cause by the prosperous success that did attend it, do favor
rather of the Alcoran of some abominable miscreant, than of the Purity of the
Gospel of our Savior Christ.

XII. The second Question is, Whether an unjust Law (though it ought not to be
made, yet being made) may oblige the Conscience of the Subject so far, as to be
bound to observe it? For many things there are which ought not to be done, yet
being done are valid; And it may so come to pass, that what could not without
sin be commanded, yet without sin may be performed, as abundantly we have
confirmed in our foregoing Lectures. The reason of this doubt is, Because that
true obedience is no Disputresse; for the practice of obedience does properly
consist in this, to subject ones self to the will of another without the least
murmur or dispute; Nimis delicata est obedientia, says Bernard, quae transit
in genus causae deliberativum; That Obedience is too delicate when it comes
once to be so deliberate, as to inquire after the Cause thereof. But I answer
briefly, the Conscience of the Subject is not bound by that Law; It was my
first Conclusion in the former Lecture, and confirmed by many Arguments, and if
any man be yet unsatisfied, it may be further proved; For no inferior power can
oblige against the will of the superior power; therefore the power of God being
above all the power of Men, there is no power of any man whatsoever that can
oblige against the will of God, who by his Law has forbidden all wicked and
filthy things; from whence is that of Saint Augustine, There can be seen no Law
which is not just; And by this reason, the Argument drawn from that of
obedience is answered, by granring that the Subject ought to submit himself
without dispute to the will of his Superior, to wit, the supreme superior, into
whose will, all obedience is ultimately resolved; Quod jubet homo, prohibet
Deus: and ego audiam hominem, surdus Deo? Be^nard. Epist. 7.
and not of the subordinate Superior, if it appears that his will is averse
to the supreme superior; Now, God is absolutely the chief Commander, the bare
signification of whose will is sufficient to induce an obligation of Obedience,
especially since it is most certain, that his will cannot be unjust; Therefore
Abraham obeyed God commanding those things, which if God himself had not given
him the charge, might seem not only to be hard, and unjust, but impious and
full of wickedness; To wit, that his Father, his Country and kindred, being
all abandoned, he should become a poor banished Man, and travel into a remote,
and an unknown Country, nay, that with his own hand he should cut the throat of
his own Son, in whom alone was not only all the Comfort, and the Succor of his
Age, but all the Hope of the Promises of God, and that he should lay him on the
Altar, and offer him as a Sacrifice to that God who commanded of him such cruel
things. He did rightly indeed, and as it became a man who deserved to be called
the Father of the Faithful, and to be the singular Example of an unshaken Faith
to all the world; without the least haesitation and with a most willing
obedience he made himself ready to put in Execution the Commands of God; But as
for the Commandments of men, seeing that every man is liable to Error, and
sin, and his Will may be depraved, it is very lawful, nay where there is a just
Cause of suspicion, it is needful also, to examine and to try them. That
admonition of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Try all things, and keep that which
is good, may with great right and as fitly be applied to the commands of the
Superiors, as to the Instructions of Teachers, of whom notwithstanding St. Paul
in that place does especially speak. Away then with the haughtiness and proud
commands of overlording Spirits; sic volo, sic jubeo; This will I have, This I
do command; Away with the base flattery of the Papists, who think it a sin for
any man in any manner whatsoever, to suspect the Dictates of their Lateran
Jove: Away with their blind obedience, by which those that enter into their
Religious Houses do by a vow oblige themselves to obey their Superiors in every
thing, and in all things without distinction.

XIII. In the third place it is propounded; Whether it be Lawful for a Subject
to depart from his own right, Pura mala, ut nunquam just juberi, sic nec
licite possunt fieri. Bernard. Epist. 7.
and although he be not obliged, yet of his own accord to obey such an evil
Law? I answer, it is not lawful; for the law of God does simply oblige to the
not doing of any thing that is evil, or unlawful; Therefore an unjust Law (I
understand unjust in that sense in which we now speak, as unjust in relation to
the matter) cannot lawfully be kept, because God cannot lawfully be offended;
For whatsoever is repugnant to the Law of God, or to the light of Nature known
and written in our hearts, or revealed in the written word, is not to be
admitted by a Christian, either to avoid any particular detriment whatsoever,
or the scandal of our Neighbors, or to promote the favor, or to decline the
hatred of our Superiors; Daveniam Imperator* tu Carcerem, ille Gehennam, were
the words of the primitive Christians, Excuse us Emperor, you can only condemn
us to prison, but God unto Hell. And so before them, said the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Whether it be right in the sight of God, Act. 41. 9.
to hearken unto you rather than unto God, judge ye; And before them, the
three young men of the Hebrews in the third of Daniel; Dan. 3. 18.
Be it known unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the
Golden Image which thou have set up.

XIV. In the fourth place, it is demanded, What Law is to be thought so unjust,
that it is not only not obliging, but moreover it is unlawful to obey it? I
answer, a Law may be said to be unjust for manifold considerations; First if it
be made by Proper defectum Justitiae Commutativae, for the defect of Justice
commutative, because the Lawgiver assumeth more than is due or by right does
belong unto him, it does not therefore oblige the Subject to obedience,
nevertheless the Subject if it seems expedient to him, and he be not otherwise
hindered, may depart from his own right, and obey that Law. Secondly in
consideration Final cause, if it does not tend to the public good, nor
preserve the rights due unto the Commonalty; And this Law is unjust by reason
of the defect of that Justice which they call Legal, which always intends
the common good, and that the republic may receive no detriment; (...). Homer.
(...). ad ^.
But this Law, howsoever it be unjust, does notwithstanding oblige the Subject,
for the Subject is no competent nor fit Judge of Legal Justice, and if by his
obedience any thing does follow which is either incommodious, or noxious to the
Commonwealth, it is not to be imputed to him, who performed his part well
enough, but to the Supreme Magistrate, whose duty it was to provide for the
preservation and advancement of the public good. Thirdly in consideration of
the Formal Cause, if Justice distributive, which commands to give all things
by equity to every one, as every one has deserved; And this Law, howsoever it
be unjust, does notwithstanding oblige, as well as that, of which but now I
spoke of, and for the same Cause; for the dispensation of these things does not
belong to the office of a Subject, but of the Supreme Magistrate. Fourthly, in
consideration of material Cause, of which we do now discourse; if the Law does
command any thing that is base, dishonest, or any ways unlawful, the said Law
is unjust, for the defect of that Justice which is called Universal, which
requires a due rectitude in every Action; And this alone is so far from
obliging the Subject to obedience, that it does altogether oblige him to render
no obedience to it.

XV. It is demanded in the fifth place, What Justice is required, and how much
of it will suffice as to this, that a Law may be said to be just, and esteemed
obligatory? For answer, I say in the first place, It is not necessarily
required, that what by the Law is commanded, should be just positively, which
the Philosophers call Honest, that is, that it may be an Act of some Virtue,
but it does suffice, if it be just negatively, that is, if it be not unjust, or
shameful, as are the Acts of all Vices; Otherwise there could no Laws be made
of things of a middle nature, or of things indifferent, which notwithstanding
(as by and by shall be manifest) are the most apt matter of Laws. I say in the
second place, Grant that some Law be unjust, in regard of the Cause efficient,
or the final, or the formal Cause, in any of those respects newly mentioned,
yet if there be no defect of Justice in respect of the material Cause, that is,
If by the force and power of the Law the Act to be performed by the Subject be
such that he may put it in Execution without any sin of his own, that Justice
of it is sufficient to induce the obligation.

XXVI. But lest the Subject (too licentiously to withdraw himself from the yoke
of the Law) should give some pretense for his disobedience (as it is a wonder
to see how many men do suffer themselves to be deceived by this paralogism) and
should allege that the Law does seem too unjust unto him, and which with a good
Conscience he cannot obey, and therefore ought not to obey, for this they say
were to obey with a doubting Conscience, which cannot be without Sin, as the
Apostle, teaches Romans 14. 23. For whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; It is
necessary therefore in the sixth place, to inquire farther, and to demand, What
certainty is required to know whether any Law be unjust or not, that so a
Subject may be secure in his Conscience whether he be bound or not bound to the
observation of it. I answer moral certainty (after some due diligence in
searching out the Truth) he judges it to be simply unjust. I say in the second
place; If out of any confirmed Error of his Judgment, which it is Case we
shall have a greater opportunity to speak, when (if God shall permit) we shall
come to the Comparison of both the sorts of obligations. doubt or scruple he
suspects it may be so, that the Law is unjust, that scruple is to be contemned,
and the Law altogether to be obeyed, And no man under the pretense of his
tender Conscience, is to excuse him self from the necessity of giving obedience
to it.

actually to obey it, so that he sins if he obeys it not, and does not sin
if he obeys Rule of Equity, In dubiis potior est condition ^ossidentis, In
doubtful things the Condition of the Possessor is the better. Therefore when
there is a Case at Law betwixt the Lawmakers, and the Citizen, unless there be
some apparent reason to the contrary, it is presumed always to be on the side
of the Lawmakers against the Citizen, as being in the Possession of Right; But
if there appears any sound reason to the contrary, the Case is altered, because
it is against the supposition of Reason; for we then suppose that they contend
in Law, one having as much Right as the other. The second Reason arises In re
dubia tutior pars est eligenda, In a doubtful Case, the safer part is to be
chosen; And its safer to obey the Conscience doubting, than the Conscience
doubting not to obey; Because it is safer, in the honor due unto Superiors, to
exceed in the mode that is due unto them, than to be defective in it. The third
Reason proceeds Wisdom of the flesh, and the Craft of the old Serpent, would
suggest unto us excuses enough which would retard and hinder us from the
performance of our Duties. And so much of the fourth doubt.

XVIII. The fifth follows; Of the permissive Law of Evil; Wether it be
lawful, and how far lawful? And whether it be obligatory, and how far obliging?
Where in the first place we are to observe; That an evil thing may three ways
be admitted by the Law, that is to say, privatively, negatively, and
positively. Privatively to be permitted is the very same, which is pretermitted
by the Lawgiver; And in this sense all those things are permitted, concerning
the forbidding of which, or the Punishing of which, the Laws do determine
nothing. That negatively is permitted, the exercise Usury. Thirdly, that is
permitted positively, the exercise whereof is tolerated under a certain pay of
some Tribute; and thus houses of Incontinence are permitted at Rome.

XIX. This distinction being permised; In the privatively many Evils are
necessarily tolerated in all Commonwealths; for it is impossible that the Laws
should extend themselves to all the Species and kinds of vicious Acts, or that
all kind of Sin should be restrained by humane Laws; The Law of God has this
only which is admirable and peculiar to it self, that it alone commands all
things that are to be done, and forbids all things that are to be avoyed.
Now in this permission there is no place for obligation, for it is necessary
that every obligation should arise from Act, and not by the privation of an
Act, or a Non-Act. I say in the second place, That the negative permission of
evil may be lawful; For if there be some evils that cannot be quite taken away
without some great Inconvenience to the public, it pertains to the political
prudence of Government, so to moderate the use of it, and circumscribe it
within certain bounds, as to make it subservient to the Public profit; And
this by the Example of God himself, who permitted the Divorce of Wives to the
people of Israel, to that purpose, as Christ the most excellent Interpreter of
the Law expounds it, Mat. 19. ^.
Lest by the hardness of their hearts, and the unbridled roughness and
cruelty of Husbands to their Wives, there should arise more grievous
inconveniences. I say in the third place; That by this Law, there is no man
notwithstanding obliged to perform that which this Law permits, for the end
of permission is, not that that be done which by this Law is permitted, but
that nothing be done beyond that which the said Laws permit. Therefore as the
permission it self is only negative, so it induces only a negative obligation;
That is, the Subject is obliged to do if he pleases what the Law permits,
and not to exceed the bounds which that Law prescribes. I say in the fourth
place, That the positive permission to oblige, for a permission grants
Liberty, and every obligation is a kind of a Bond. As to the latter part,
Because we suppose that what by the Law of man is so permitted, is of it self
evil, and by the Law of God, we are obliged not to do Evil; The permission
therefore of Evil, as it is a bare permission, does oblige no man to the
performance, but as it is the permission of Evil, it does oblige every man not
to do that which is permitted.

XX. But it has often heretofore been spoken, that every Law has a power
obligative, which so individually does accompany it, as but to grant the Law,
the obligation must necessarily follow, and take away the obligation you take
away also the Law with it; It may therefore be objected* that we must hereupon
either deny the permissive Law to be a Law, or acknowledge it does oblige. To
answer to this objection, we need not fly so far as to deny the Law permissive
to be a Law, which we do acknowledge not only to be a Law, but a Law properly
so called; Certainly that Mosaical Law of Divorce mentioned. Mat. 19. Though it
comes by name of permission, (...), in the eighth verse, yet in the seventh
verse of the same Chapter it is called a command, (...). What, and is not the
very name of a Law every where given to it, and is not the Definition of that
name as congruous to it as to a Law either commanding or forbidding something
to be done, so that it cannot be denied but that the Law is predicated of them
all univocally and as a Genus in reference to its Species? it is not then to be
granted, that the Subject by this Law is obliged; I do so conceive it
altogether to be granted; which that it may more rightly be understood to be
not incohaerent with those things which have been already spoken permissive
Law, I say in the sixth place, That every Law permissive, as it is a Law, does
oblige the Subject in his Conscience to the observation of it. The reason is
manifest; for an obligation (as often it has been already spoken) is a
necessary effect of the Law, and not to be severed from it; Which that it may
not seem to be quite contrary to what now has been delivered, these two things
are to be observed, which therefore the more remarkably I shall give unto you;
The the observation of it; Now it is one thing that the Subject is obliged to
the observation of the Law, which I still affirm, and another thing that the
Subject is o^liged to do that which the Law permits, which I have before
denied, and do deny it still. The second, that I said the permissive Law as a
Law differentaa divisiva, but a divisive difference of the Law, it must needs
come in order after it, as every difference divisive is by nature in a
posterior place to the Genus which does divide it and presuppose it, but is for
the most part expressly or at least virtually contained in that praeception
which is as it were the constitutive and formal difference of the Law, and in
the very words of the Law it self; For this preception is that from whence the
obligation of the Subject does first arise, and to which his obedience is
ultimately terminated; I will make it manifest unto you by example. By reason
of the necessity of borrowing of money, the maker of the Law permits of
Usury in a moderate proportion amongst the Citizens, a punishment being
denounced to those who shall exceed by taking more use than the Law allows. I
will not here define whether Usury be simply, and in every kind of it, unlawful
or not, neither does it belong to my present purpose, nevertheless this is
certain, that were it never so lawful* no man by that permissiou is obliged to
the exercising of it, But in this Law besides this permission which obliges no
man, there are two things which belonging to the Precept of the Law, have
thereupon from the Intention of the Lawgiver a force of obliging the Citizens
to the observation of them; One whereof is enjoined formally and in express
words, to wit* That no man exact moneys beyond the allowance prescribed in the
Law, the other virtually and by Consequence, That no man be punished for
trading in usury as it is by that Law permitted; To conclude therefore in a
word, the Precept or Injunction of the permissive Law does oblige all Subjects,
but the Permission no man.

XXII. The sixth doubt is of things indifferent, and of a middle nature; Now
these things indifferent, or of a middle nature are such, all the Species
whereof are neither commanded nor forbidden by any Divine Law, (natural, or
positive.) They are therefore of themselves, and of their own nature, lawful
to be observed as they are not forbidden, and free to be observed as they are
not commanded. There were some of an opinion that there ought no Laws of man to
be made concerning things indifferent, but of those things only which are of a
natural, or a divine right, and thereupon they said, That Civil Laws were not
so much the Constitutives of a new Law, as the Declaratives of the old, and
explications and evolutions of the Divine will; But what need we to confute an
opinion so abhorring from all sound reason, that rather to the contrary we may
rightly judge, that these things indifferent are the most proper and the only
most fit matter of Humane Laws? For we are bound to the observation of those
things which God has commanded, although the commands of all men whatsoever,
are either silent, or do contradict them; And as for those things which by God
are forbidden, we are obliged to the not performance of them, the Laws of men
being silent, or never so importunately commanding them. Therefore these things
indifferent do remain, as a large Field in which the power of man might
exercise it self, and put forth its force by inducing an obligation where there
was none before. That manifestly it may appear that the civil Magistrate in
things indifferent, and which before any Act of his were free to both, may
state and decree something on either side, by determining that indifferency,
which may oblige the Consciences of his Subjects to obedience; For as in Meat
and Drink, and Pleasures, as also in giving and receiving, the moral prudence
of a privare person, by allowing unto himself a golden mediocrity, does so far
advance his natural and indifferent Acts beyond their state and native
Condition, that from thence they begin to be Acts of Virtues, to wit, of
Temperance, and Liberality; so a person invested with the public Authority
does by his politic prudence in giving certain bonds of mediocrity to his
Subjects concerning things free, and of a middle nature, so advance those Acts
enjoined in his Laws beyond the degree of their former State, that they now
begin to be Acts of virtues, to wit, of Obedience and Legal justice.

XXIII. A thing most plain, and which would have found no Adversary, if so
manifest a truth had not prestringed some Reformers of our age, nay, and of our
own Nation, who to make a way to that wild Reformation for which they so much
contended, had rather against common sense to take away from the world all
indifferency, than to grant unto the Magistrate any power of determining of
Rites and Laws, Altogether like that Macedonian who with his Sword did cut that
Gordian knot asunder, which by no Art he was able to untye; In this, as in many
other things the true Disciples of the old Stoics, who asserted that there was
nothing indifferent to a wise man, but that he mannageth all things from the
greatest to the least, and even to the paring of his nails, with the highest
point of discretion; But they so took away this indifferency out of affairs
with words only, that at last being enforced to it by the reasons of their
adversaries, they in deeds did grant it, having invented some frivolous
distinctions, more honestly to hide their error, that they might not seem to
have erred at all. But there have been found some amongst us, who have been so
bold as to defend their odious, and exploded Doctrine in their public
writings, and that more pertinaciously than the Stoics themselves did
heretofore. Two especially, the one of them a Divine, a man of some account
amongst those of his own party, the other a Layman, and one of the Peers of
the Land, both of them now dead, with whom, because I believe their Doctrine to
be dead also, and not easily to be received into the belief of sober men, much
less to find a patron amongst them, I think it not worth my labor to insist
on the confutation of it.

XXIV. I do receive therefore as granted, that there are things and actions
indifferent, at least in their own nature, and in the Species of them which I
believe there is no man so Stoicized that will de^y; Of which in reference to
our present purpose, ^^is is next to be advertised, that an Act indifferent in
its own nature, that is, in respect of the matter or the object of it, if it be
commanded by the Law, from good and lawful, does become honest and necessary,
and if it be forbidden by the Law, from good and lawful, it becomes evil, and
unlawful; which come^ not to pass by reason of any change made of the thing it
self, (which whether it be commanded or forbidden, both physically, and morally
does remain the same as it was before, for there is no respect that alters
nature) but proceeds from that obligation which the Law induces; From whence
it is, that being before, both in nature and of it self, so also in use and as
to us, free unto both, the authority of the Law being added to it, it becomes
in the use of it, and as to us, no longer free, but it is either necessary, or
unlawful according to the exigence of the Law.

XXV. If it be demanded, seeing the Law appears to have an equal power on
either side, how comes it to pass, that the Law by forbidding an Act, can make
it of being good and lawful, to become evil, and unlawful, but the same Law,
(as heretofore we have denied it) cannot by commanding an Act, make it from
being evil and unlawful, become good, and lawful; I answer, the reason of the
difference is most manifest, from that most known Axiom, Bonum ex caus^
integra, malum ex quolibet defectu; An Act therefore that is evil in its own
Species, and in the respect of the object of it, must of necessity be always
evil, neither in any exercising of it, be the circumstances what they will, may
it be made good, by reason of the defect of goodness in the part of the object,
which defect is sufficient to corrupt the whole Act; But an Act, good in its
own kind, or at least not evil, if it be attended but with some one
circumstance that is indirect, it becomes wholly vicious, by reason of the
defect of a due rectitude in that circumstance; From whence arises another
difference betwixt an affirmative, and a negative Humane Law, or a Law
commanding, or forbidding; For a Law affirmative does not give any goodness to
the Act which it commands, if it be otherwise evil in any part of it; But a
Law negative does contribute evilnesse to the Act which it forbids, although
it be otherwise good in every part of it; Or, which is the same again, a Humane
Precept affirmative does make that necessary which it finds to be good, a
humane precept negative does make that unlawful which it found to be good, both
of them what they found evil do leave it to be evil as they found it;
Notwithstanding both do oblige in their manner and as to us, this, to the doing
of that which by commanding is now made necessary, and that to the not doing of
that which by forbidding is now made unlawful.

XXVI. The seventh Doubt remains of Ecclesiastical Laws in Special. By Laws
Ecclesiastical I do not understand those Laws which are constituted by
Ecclesiastical Persons without the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, (which
consideration pertains not to this case, but to a Cause of an other kind, to
wit, the Cause efficient) but those which, being made by any lawful Power, do
treat of Ecclesiastical things, for at this present we dispute only of the
material Cause. I have never heard of any besides those two above named who
denied all Indifferency, or who would not grant to the political Magistrate
some Power in things indifferent, merely political; But we meet every where
with a great number of Innovators, who would take from men all Power of making
Rites and Ceremonies in the public worship of God, besides those which are
prescribed by Christ and his Disciples in the Gospel; But sincerely I profess,
that to give satisfaction to my self and to others in this particular, Having
perused many Books written by many Authors, but especially of our own Nation,
concerning this Subject, I find not any one, that can produce any just or any
likely Reason of Difference, why there may not be a Power of ordaining and
determinating concerning things indifferent, as well in Cases Ecclesiastical as
Political; For the Arguments which are urged from Scandal and Christian Liberty
and other common Places of the same Nature do equally fight against the Laws,
and Constitutions of both Kinds, and do overthrow them both, or neither of
them. Those which are thought to carry a peculiar force against Ecclesiastical
Laws and Rites are four, which as the time will permit, I will briefly, and
orderly examine, they are derived 1. From Christ the Lawgiver; 2. From the
perfection of the Scripture; 3. From the nature of holy Worship; 4. From the
example of the ancient Church.

XXVII. In the first place they object that of the Apostle James, 4. 12. There
is one Lawgiver who can save and destroy; In the reign of Elizabeth many who
were the Coriphaei of that Disciplinary Faction did make very much of this
argument as the foundation of their whole Cause; They alleged that Christ was
the only Prince, and Legislator of his Church; And the Laws which he made did
oblige the Church to a perpetual observation of them, and that no other Laws
ought to be admitted, nor any other Legislator acknowledged; whosoever shall
presume to make any other Laws besides those which Christ made, shall act the
part of Antichrist, and declare himself a rash Invader into the Office of
Christ. We have discoursed on this place, and expounded it already as occasion
did require, especialy where it was to be proved, that God only and his Christ
did exercise an absolute and a direct Command on the Consciences of Men; But
that this has no greater a place in Laws politic, than in Ecclesiastic, he
must needs be blind that does not observe it. For why can the obligation of
humane Laws in civil things consist with the legislative Power of Christ alone,
and why cannot there be the same consistence in Laws Ecclesiastical? Who can
discover or produce the least shadow of any difference from that Text. Be
Christ the Lawgiver of the Christian Church, Is he not as well the Lawgiver
of the Christian Commonwealth? But the Apostle in that place made not the
least mention of the Church, nor instituted the least disputation concerning
things Ecclesiastical, neither does he treat there at all, of Political Laws
or Rites but of the Censures of Private Men. He would have the faithful
admonish^d to be mindf^^l of Christian Charity, and that they should forbear
from passing a rash Judgment on their Brothers, for God was only the Judge of
Consciences, who alone made that Law by which every man in the last Day shall
be judged. This is the true scope of that place, This is the mind of the
Apostle. What is here I pray you, that tends to the condemning of Humane
Laws? or if to the condemning of them, why of Ecclesiastical Laws, more than
Civil? Neither of which, either the one, or the other, are asserted by us, by
themselves, and of their own Virtue to oblige the Conscience.

XXVIII. In the second place they object the Perfection of the Holy Scripture.
This they say is the Rule both of Life, and Manners, and which can make a man
of God wise to every good work, to which if any man shall add any thing of his
own, he shall commit a most remarkable trespass against God, and pull most
heavy punishments on himself. All this is most certain: But if the Scripture in
all considerations be the absolute rule of our lives, and of all things
whatsoever to be done, and (if we may believe these Stoics) it extends to the
slightest things, insomuch that it is not lawful to take up a straw, unless it
be by the prescribed word of God, will it not suffice as well for the
regulating of things Civil as Ecclesiastical? or how can the Laws of ^he Church
derogate more from the perfection of the Scripture, than the Laws of the
Commonwealth? or who is he who rightly can say that he has added something to
the word of God, who for Honesty and Orders sake, did make the Ecclesiastical
Laws, seeing he propounded not his Laws unto the people as the word of God, and
God in his word has commanded that all things in the Church shall be done
honestly and in order?

XXIX. In the third place they object the Nature of worship, to wit, that the
worship of God is a thing sacred, in which worship all things are to be done by
the Command of God, and all Humane inventions are to be driven far away as
superstitious, nay plainly Idolatrous, and traditionary Rites; Indeed the
worship of God is a sacred thing, neither is it lawful for man to institute any
other worship besides that which God has ordained; But because there is an
Ambiguity in the word, we are to distinguish of the worship of God, which is
taken in a threefold consideration; Faith, Hope, Love, Invocation, Secondly,
those outward Acts by which that inward worship of the mind is partly
expressed, and partly helped, and fostered, such as are public Prayers,
Singing of Psalms, the Hearing of the word, and the participation of the
Sacraments, etc. may reducibly, and less properly be called, and oftentimes
are called the worship of God, as they are the outward Testimonies and Helps of
that worship which so properly is called. Thirdly, Seeing it is impossible that
any outward action, especially if it be a solemn one, should be performed
without some Circumstances, either more, or less, of Time, Place, and Gesture,
from whence it comes to pass, that the very same Circumstances (which if
established by Laws or Customs, are called also Rites) do sometimes receive
the appellation of worship, although very improperly, and only for that
Concomitancy which they have to that outward worship, which it self also is
improperly called a worship. It is therefore to be affirmed, That the inward
primary worship, and properly so called, does only so acknowledge God to be the
only Author of it, that it is not lawful for any man either to institute a new
worship, or being instituted by God, to exhibit it to any other besides God
himself. We are to affirm also, That the outward worship, according to its
substantials, is instituted only by God; but there is a far different account
to be made of the circumstances which are accessory to this outward worship,
and those which do accompany it, If there be any who will Honor them also with
the Name of worship. For seeing that the outward worship of God cannot be
performed without Circumstances, and God in the Gospel has not given any
certain particular Circumstances perpetually to be observed in sacred
Assemblyes, but only has laid down some Generals as may conduce to Order,
Honesty, and Edification, it must necessarily follow, that the Determination of
the said Circumstances, which are but Accidental to the worship it self, and
mutable according to the respect of Times, Places, and Occasions, must pertain
unto those, who under Christ have a Right and Power of Governing the Churches,
which that they may be imposed by those, who in the several Churches are
invested with public Authority, and being imposed, may Religiously be observed
by all the Members of the said Churches; the nature of Holy worship does not
forbid, but Solemnity rather, and Decency does require; We observe also, that
even those Men themselves who so Lordly and bitterly do inveigh against the
Canons, and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, yet as often as they please, do use
those Rites in the outward worship of God no where prescribed by Christ or his
Apostles, as the lifting up of their hands in the taking of an Oath, the
uncovering of the Head in the Holy Conventions, and many other things, which
because we daily observe to be done, it is unnecessary to rehearse them.

XXX. In the fourth place they object, that Moses, the pattern of the old, that
is, of the Jewish Church, who was given by God to the people of the Jews to be
their Lawgiver, did not only by his Law define the Substantials of the Jewish
worship, but according to that fidelity which was in him, he omitted not the
least Circumstances, and in building the Tabernacle which was to be a Type of
the Christian Church, he most completely and perfectly finished all things
according to the Idaea of the Example which was propounded to him in the Mount;
And now if Christ the-Lawgiver of the new Testament should not have prescribed
all things, and every thing even to the least Circumstances which are to be
performed in the Ecclesiastical worship, it may justly be believed (to suspect
which is near to Blasphemy) that he was less faithful in the House of God than
Moses, and thereupon there is a remarkable injury and contumely done unto
Christ* if any new Rites never instituted by him should by humane Authority be
brought into the Church, or be received by the Christian common people. But
they who do object these things, ought in the first place to have considered
that by this Argument, all humane political Laws are no less everted than
Eclesiastical, for Moses by the commandment of God did give unto the people of
Israel, a certain, and a defined Law, not only of those Rites which belonged to
the worship of God, but also of those Decrees, and Judgments, which belonged to
the Administration of Civil Government.

XXXI. In the second place, it is a wonder moreover, that they observed not
that by this comparison of that fidelity which was in both Lawgivers, Moses and
Christ, that they could not more importunately have alleged any thing that
could bring a greater damage to their own Cause, or more strongly have
confirmed ours; For, as from that, that Moses both in rituals and judicials did
give many Laws unto the people of the Jews, we do truly collect it was the will
of God, that the people of the Jews should be so restrained in their duties
under that paedagogy, and Mosaic Discipline, as under a Yoke of servitude, so
that very few things should be free unto them; so from that also, that Christ
the most faithful Interpreter of his Fathers Will, did give unto the Christian
Church but a very few Laws of Ceremonies, we do truly collect that it is the
will of God, that the Magistrates, and Christian people, should be permitted in
those things to their own Liberty, so that it is now free for any private Man
of his own accord (no command, or prohibition of a superior intervening) to do
as shall seem in his own Judgment to be most expedient, and to the several
Churches, and their Governors, to prescribe those things which according to the
condition of the time and place shall seem to them to be most subservient to
Order, Honesty, Edification, and Peace.

XXXII. Moreover, Those who do make use of this Argument, ought in the third
place to have considered, that under that Paedagogy of Moses, the Jews
themselves had not all the Liberty of Rites in things pertaining to the worship
of God so take away, that it was not lawful for them by their own Authority, to
observe and to institute those things, which it is manifest were never
commanded either by God himself or by Moses his Servant. Of many take these few
instances; First, the solemn feast of the Passover which by the Law of Moses
was commanded should be observed but seven days, was by a special Law of
Hezekias (who received a singular testimony of his piety from God himself) and
by the consent of the people, continued seven days longer; The History Chron.
30. Secondly Esther and Mordecay did institute that the seast of Purim should
be yearly celebrated in memory of that Deliverance which God vouchsafed to the
Nation of the Jews under Ahasuerus King of the Persians, Esther. 9. Moses
commanded but one day only in the year to be observed in the seventh month for
a solemn Fast, the Kings and Magistrates of that people (for what causes it is
not known, but likely in the remembrance of some remarkable Judgments of God)
did by their own Authority institute annual solemn Fasts, insomuch, that in the
days of the last of ^he Prophets, there were four solemn Fasts kept every
year, viz, three others besides that of the seventh month, in the fourth,
fifth, and tenth month, of all which Zach. 8. 19. Fourthly, the Feast of the
Dedication of the Altar, called Encoenia, was instituted by the Asamonians
without any command of God; The History is to be read; Maccab. 4. 59. And by
the Judgment of the most and best Interpreters, Christ himself is thought not
only to have approved of it, but to have honored Joh. 10. 20. Fifthly, we find
it no where to be enjoined by any Commandment of God, that in solemn Fasts and
penitential mourning, they should put on Sackcloth, and strew Ashes on their
hair, but amongst the Jews for some Ages past, the long custom was so received,
and so obtained the force of a Law, that Christ himself did use that manner of
Speech, as from the custom of that Nation, and showed not the least dislike of
it; Mat. 11. 21. Sixthly, it is manifest Rabbis; that it was the manner also
of the Jews before the supper of the Passover, that the Master of the Family
should stoop solow, as to wash the feet of those of his own household, which
although commanded by no Law of God, we find it to be observed by Christ, as it
is manifest in the History of the Gospel, John 13. Why shall I here number up
the Synagogues every where builded in so many Cities, and Towns, for the
Convenience of sacred Conventions, and many other things, a long Catalogue,
whereof the Jewish Commentaries do afford us; From all which this may be
concluded, If so many things pertaining to the worship of God were lawful for
the Jews to alter under that yoke of Severer Discipline, there can no probable
Argument be derived from their Example to overthrow the force of Ecclesiastical
Humane Laws.

THE SEVENTH LECTURE Concerning the obligation of humane Laws, in relation to
the Efficient Cause thereof.
PROVE. 8. 15. Per me reges regnant, et Legum conditores justa decernunt. By me,
Kings reign, and the makers of Laws do decree just things.
IN the last Term we did treat of the obligation of humane Laws, both in the
Generality of them, to wit, that Laws rightly constituted do oblige the
Consciences of the Subjects to obedience, so also in the Species as to those
doubts which seemed properly to pertain to the material cause, to wit, how
humane Laws do oblige them. First, we treated of things impossible; Secondly,
of things possible but very burdensome; Thirdly, of things necessary;
Fourthly, of things unlawful and dishonest; Fifthly, of Evils to be permitted;
Sixthly, of Things of a middle Nature, and indifferent in general; Seventhly,
of Ecclesiastical Rites in Special; of all these things which have been spoken
(that I may not appear too tedious in repetition) the Sum is this; That
Subjects are obliged to obey just Laws, but they are not obliged to obey Laws
that are unjust; And so Solomon in this Text requires of the makers of Laws,
that they do decree nothing but what is just. I must now proceed to prosecute
those things which are yet remaining to be spoken of; In the handling of which
I will use as much brevity as the subject will permit, that so in its due time
I may finish the whole work, or at least so much of it as pertains to the
obligation of Laws.

II. In the order of Causes (according to the method which I have elsewhere
observed) the Efficient Cause does follow next to the Material; And the Formal
next to that, the Final Cause is the last of all, and does both head the Rear,
and shuts it up. Concerning the Efficient Cause of Laws, I have already
sufficiently showed, in the third Conclusion of the fifth Lecture, That humane
Laws do not oblige unless they are made by a person invested with a legitimate
Authority. This in the first place is now remaining to be considered of, In
whom is the just and lawful power of making of Laws, or who are those makers of
Laws, to whom according to the mind of Solomon, The Right of discerning
righteous things belongs. To give a full Answer to this first doubt, which is
the chiefest of all by far in this kind of Cause, two things are to be
supposed; In the first place, I suppose the legislative power, to be the power
of a Superior, as to give a Command (in which appellation, I do also comprehend
a Prohibition) which is a proper Act of the Law, to be the Act of a Superior.
You are to observe, that in this consideration there is not a little difference
betwixt these three; A Promise, A Petition, and a Command. Without the least
distinction it is common to all Superiors, Inferiors, and Equals, to promise;
For a Father may promise something to his Son, and the Son to the Father, and
the Brother, or a Neighbor, to his Brother, or to his Neighbor; But to Crave,
or to Petition, belongs properly to Inferiors, and sometimes in some respect
to Equals, As the Son beseeches his Father, or the Neighbor his Neighbor, to
excuse him, or to receive the acknowledgment of his thankfulness, but this
belongs not unto Superiors, unless it be very improperly, and by discending
to a lower degree than their condition is; But it is so peculiar to Superiors,
and of Men placed in a pre-eminence of Dignity to Command, that he would be
altogether ridiculous whosoever he is, whether an Equal or an Inferior, that
seriously should command his Superior or Equal to the performance of any thing;
For every Act does require a Beginning proportionated to it, And an Equal has
no Command on an Equal.

III. Now as to an obligation concerning these three, it is thus to be Stated;
He who craveth one thing of another man, obliges by that petition, neither
himself, nor the party of whom he craveth it: for it is a petition, and a
petition is an Act of Indigence, and not of power, whose effect, because it
depends on another, and proceeds not from the Agent it self, cannot induce any
obligation. But he who promises something to another man, does by his promise
oblige himself, but he obliges not him to whom the promise is made; for a
promise being the Act of a free will, every man as he is a free Agent, and has
a power over his own will, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 7. 37. can exercise
on himself that Right and Power which he has over his own will, but not on
another; For by the force of Free will, a man is master only of his own will,
and of his own Acts, and not of another; Now on the contrary, he who lays a
precept upon, or who does command another, if he has right to command, he
obliges by commanding that man whom he commands, but he does not oblige
himself; Because a command is an Act of power and Authority, and of right upon
another; and is fit and proper, unless peradventure there be something that
hinders it, to induce an obligation; so the Father with Authority commands the
Son, the Master the Servant, the General the Soldier, the King the people, and
God as a Superior commands man to such and such duties, and by commanding
does oblige him to the performance of them.

IV. In the second place I suppose, that the Legislative power is a power of
public Jurisdiction: for it suffices not to the power of making Laws, that a
man has a Right, and power over others to prescribe unto them what is to be
done, unless he be invested with an external power to compel them to the
performance of it, and to afflict punishments on the Refusers; (...) says
Aristotle, Ethick. 10. The Law has a necessitating power; The Schoolmen
therefore do distinguish that power which a Superior has over an Inferior,
into that power which they call Dominative, or the power of Masterdome, and the
power of Jurisdiction; The first whereof is less and more private, and not
admitting an external Jurisdiction, the other greater and of a more enforcing
Authority. These two powers do not a little differ between themselves, matter
or object, for the Power Dominative or of mastery, is properly exercised on the
more imperfect and private Commonalty, as a House, a School, or a Family, but
the power of Jurisdiction on the more perfect and public Commonalty, as a
City, an Army, a Commonwealth. End, for the power Dominative, by it self, and
Primarily is ordinated to the profit of the person endued with that power, that
is the master, and but Secondarily and by Consequence to the good of the
Commonalty, as it is profitable for a Family that the master of it should grow
rich; Now the power of public Jurisdiction is Primarily ordinated to the
public good of the Commonalty it self, and but Secondarily, and Consequently
to the good of the person endued with that power, which is the Magistrate
himself, it being profitable for a Prince that the Commonwealth should
flourish. Thirdly power of jurisdiction than in the Power Dominative, by reason
of a greater coactive Power; for examples sake, The Master of a Family cannot
so efficaciously prevail that his Commands may be put in Execution by his Sons,
or Servants, whom he cannot correct but with a rod, or Cudgel, as may the civil
Magistrate, who by his Power may enforce his Subjects to Obedience, by
imprisonment or banishment, by confiscating their Goods, or by Death it self;
(...), The fatherly Authority has nothing in it that is enforcing, nothing
that is necessating, says Aristotle, in the place newly quoted. Therefore to
the making of Laws every superiority is not sufficient, but besides that
Dominative, there is required the power of Jurisdiction so properly called, for
the Laws cannot be made or established, unless by a Person that has a public
coactive power; by this time you understand I believe (that I may need no more
to admonish you of it) that what here has been spoken by me concerning Laws,
does absolutely pertain to the chief Laws of a Nation, and not to any others
unless analogically, and after their way and the proportion that is due unto
them, as they come near or are more remote from their perfection.

V. To these two suppositions (which to what sense they tend, you shall easily
understand from those things which presently I shall represent unto you) I in
the third place do now add a responsive position, viz. That the power
Legislative is a power autocra^ical, That is, the power of making Laws, which
may oblige the Commonalty, does consist in him alone (whether he be a single
person, as in the state of Monarchical Government, or whether they be more, as
in other Governments) who exercises the chief power over the whole Commonalty;
I will in the first place explane this position, and afterward I will confirm
it; And for the explication of it we are in the first place to understand, that
for the happiness of humane societies, and the more commodious Adminstration of
Commonwealths, it has pleased Almighty God, the Author of Order, not only to
constitute a political Government, that there may be Magistrates to be set over
the people, but also in that very Government to constitute a political Order,
that amongst the Magistrates themselves there might be diverse degrees, as well
of Dignity, as of Power; And it is likely that the military word of (...),
which the Apostle uses in the Romans, has a relation to this sense, to show
that there is not only an ordination of Magistrates from God, but a
subordination also, such as is seen in a military Army.

VI. In the second place we are to know, that in all things in which there is
order, to avoid a proceeding to an infiniteness, which Nature does abhor, we
must at the last come necessarily to something which is the first and chiefest
in that Order, where we are to make a stand. Therefore seeing that Magistrates
of the same Commonalty are some of them superior unto another in Dignity and
power, it must of necessity so come to pass, that some one of them must be
transcendent above the rest, that the others may depend on him, and he on none;
In the same construction, the head is the highest in the body, the Admiral in a
Fleet, and the Emperor in an Army. The supreme Magistrate is only less than
God himself, and in governing the people committed to his charge, has neither
a Superior nor an Equal; St. Peter calls him (...), the Superior; St. Paul
(...), the higher power, 1 (...) 13.
and (...), Romans 13. 1.
the man in Authority; And the Schoolmen, 1 Timothy (...)* 2.
caput communitatis, the head of the Commonalty, in whom solely the chief
command, and the Majesty of the Empire does consist, and to whom all inferior
Magistrates do owe all that power which they do exercise over the people,
(...), as being sent from him, 1 Pet. 2. 14.

VII. In the third place we are to know, that this supreme power, which we call
Majesty, or Autocratical, that is governing all by it self, according to the
diverse form of Commonwealths, is placed either in some one person, or in more;
In a popular state which is called Democraty, the chief and Sovereign power
consists in many Magistra^es, yearly chosen by popular Suffrages, or by
certain other Intervalls of time, and this heretofore was the state of the
people of Rome, when they were governed by Consulls, Praetors, Tribunes of the
people, Aedils and other yearly Magistrates, and from hence proceed those
Expressions which oftentimes we find in Tully, Populi Romani Majestas, laesa
populi Majestas, Visum est Senatui, populoque Romano; The Majesty of the Roman
people, The injured Majesty of the people; it seemed good to the Senate, and
the people of Rome etc. In a state Aristocratical, the same Majesty resideth
amongst some of the Lords, and Nobles, whom in some places they call
Illustrissimoes, in others the Peers of the Land, and in other places again,
they receive other titles and appellations, according to the custom of the
Nation; Amongst whom, although peradventure but one (as in the Commonwealth of
Venice) or more of them may have a pre-eminence of place and dignity above the
rest, being as it were a certain Primacy of Order (which heretofore was the
Honor of the Bishops of Rome, and some Patriarchs in their Councils) yet no
man was so superior above the rest in power, that by his own authority he
could judge any one of them, neither could he himself be judged unless it were
by all of them altogether; Some form of this Government is still retained by
our Mayors and Aldermen in our Cities, and by the Heads and Fellows of Colleges
in our Universities, and although as it were but in a shadow, yet in some
manner they do represent it to us; But in a Monarchial Government (as the Name
it self implies) the chief Power is resident in the Person of the King alone,
whereupon St. Peter, a most excellent Interpreter of St. Paul, does admonish
the Christian People to obey the King, as their superior, that no man might any
more doubt of whom St. Paul speaks when he makes mention of the higher
Powers To. 1. 3. 1. Samuel also the Prophet of God does so propound unto the
people the fullness of the Kingly Power to be considered of, by them, 1 Samuel 8.
That if a King, the supreme in his Kingdom, should act all those things which
in that Chapter it is manifest that it is lawful for him to do, upon no just
Cause but upon the mere desire of Domination, and to show himself a Tyrant, and
not a King, although he wanted not Sin before God, yet he ought not to have any
force to be put upon him by the People, nevertheless he may justly be said to
have abused his Power but his own Power. Amongst us English, what more
certainly or more clearly can appear (unless at noon we choose rather to be
blind than open our eyes) than that the supreme Power of the three Kingdoms
does entirely appertain to the Kings most excellent Majesty, whom we are
accustomed to render more remarkable by the title of Majesty, not only
according to the common use of speaking, but in our solemn Ordinances, and in
all our forms and actions of Law, and in the taking of an oath, laying our
hands upon the Gospel of the eternal God we acknowledge him the supreme yea and
the only supreme Governor of all persons and Causes in his Kingdoms.

VIII. In the fourth place we are to understand, That when we say, the Power of
making Laws is in the King alone, It is not so to be understood, as if we
meant that whatsoever the King is pleased to command shall immediately obtain
the force of a Law, for by and by I will show unto you that some Consent of the
People themselves, and many other things are required to the Constitution of
Law, but this is that, which I would hold forth unto you, that the Counsels of
the People and Senate, and other Demands of the Peers, People, or any
whomsoever, do not oblige the Subjects, nor do carry with them the Power of a
Law, unless they are strengthened and established by the Authority of the
King, to which being maturely and duly prepared, as soon as the Consent of the
King accedeth they immediately receive the Name, the Form, and Authority of a
Law, and forthwith begin as soon as they are published, to oblige the Subjects;
Therefore, seeing that only is to be esteemed to be the Principal and the
efficient, Cause of any thing, which by it self, and immediately produces, and
into a prepared matter introduces that Form which gives to that Thing both
the Name and the Being, although other things ought to concur to the
production of that Effect, or to go before it as so many praevious
dispositions, that so the matter may be rendered more apt to receive the Form
intended by the Agent, It is most manifest, whatsoever those things are which
antecedently are required to the Constitution of a Law, yet the will of the
Prince, from whose Arbitration and Command alone, all Rogations of Laws are
either established, or made void, is the only adaequate, and efficient Cause of
Public Laws.

IX. These things being premised, The Position is confirmed by many Arguments,
And first by the Testimony of Holy Scripture; First, Genesis 49. 10. in that
remarkable Testament of the Patriarch Jacob being about to dye, The Scepter
shall not be taken away from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from his Thigh* is a
Prophecy of the future Royal Dignity of that Tribe, which the holy old man does
periphrastically describe, and to the Confirmation of it, he mentioned the
Scepter, the most remarkable witness of Kingly Authority, and the Legislative
Power the chiefest Perogative of it: Secondly Deuteronomy. 33. 4, 5. Moses was said to
be a King in Israel, because having gathered together all the Tribes of the
People, he gave them a Law to observe. Thirdly Psalm. 60. 7. Judah is my
Lawgiver, that is, King. And the vulgar Interpretation reads it, Judah is my
King. In the Text now in hand, Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings reign, and the makers
of Laws do decree just things, where (which is usual with Solomon in the whole
Book of the Proverbs, that the latter part of the verse does contain an
Amplification or Antithesis) the very same Persons who in the beginning of the
verse are called Kings, in the latter part by way of Amplification are called,
Makers of Laws. Fifthly, In the new Testament St. James also makes mention
(...) of the Royal Law.

X. Secondly, It is confirmed by the Testimonies of Philosophers, and
Historians, and by the Authority of the Civil Laws, and the municipal Laws of
our Nation. The thing being so manifest we shall be content to give you but few
Examples; Aristotle, Plutarch, and almost an infinite Number of other Authors of
great Estimation do all affirm, that we must have a Law, and the Law of the
Prince; But that of Ulpian, is very remarkable which he has in his Book of the
Roman Laws; Quod principi placuit Legis vigorem habet; What pleases the Prince
has the force and Vigor of a Law; which lest it may seem to make a way for
tyrannical Domination being ill understood, has heretofore been thus expounded
by our Countryman Bracton, What pleases the Prince, that is, not every thing
which headily and out of the heat of his troubled mind is suddenly conceived,
and resolved upon, but that which by the Counsel of his Peers, (his Royal
Assent giving Authority unto it) and deliberation, and a debate being had
thereon, shall maturely and rightly be defined. Cui (...) legibus ipsis legum
vim imponendi potestatem Deus dedit. Finch. Nomotech. in Epist. dedic.
And in our Laws, In the daily proceedings in our Courts of Pleas, the Laws,
according to the solemn Form of Appellation, are called the Kings Laws, for no
other Cause, as our Lawyers have informed us, but because the Kings of England
are the Fountains of Justice, and Laws, and (the Laws themselves in the reading
of them professing it) because from Almighty God they have granted to them an
autocratical or a self-Ruling Power of giving force unto the Laws themselves,
that they may pass for, and be esteemed as Laws; This is so plain, that we
need not take any further pains in producing more witnesses.

XI. And indeed this were enough, and might give abundant satisfaction, were it
not for the impudence of an idle person that conceals his own Name, who by a
ruinous and a nasty fiction, and which was never heard off in the world before
these unhappy times, has endeavored to cast a mist over so clear a light, by
raising an Invention of I know not what coordinate Power: And to flatter the
nefarious Counsels and Endeavors of some Neotericks in these days, which
being destitute of all defense of Right, were nevertheless for the time to be
supported by some specious pretense although never so weak and slender, he does
in a Book published for that purpose, earnestly labor to make the people
sensible of that wild Philosophy which hither to had been imposed on them by
way of contradiction, viz. That the King being supreme and having no equal, is
notwithstanding at the same time not supreme, and has an equal: yet is it not
so much to be admired, as lamented, that there were found some who greedily
snatched at and embraced this ridiculous Invention, as slid down from heaven,
and indeed because it concerned their Interest, that the people should be
seduced into such a false Belief, they therefore suffered themselves to be so
ensnared by this gross Sophism, as to become guilty of the foulest Perjury:
For what can deserve to be called Perjury, if this be not Perjury in the
highest Nature? As to acknowledge, and constitute a Power equal to him in his
Kingdom, whom in express words you have sworn to be the only and the supreme
Power in the Kingdom. Away then with this our so absurd Coordinator, and with
all his portentuous Jugglings, and having so cleanly rid our hands of him, let
us proceed.

XII. The said position or Conclusion is thirdly proved by reason; the chiefest
Act of Governing does require the chiefest Power, for every Act being the
exercise of some Power does presuppose in the Agent a Power proportionate to
it; (...), or the making of Laws is the supreme, and chief Act of Governing; It
cannot therefore be excercised unless by a person who is invested himself, or
who by his virtue and authority does derive unto another the supreme power and
jurisdiction over the Commonalty subjected to him; For seeing there are two
most noble parts and Species of jurisdiction and public power, and remarkable
above the rest, viz. the Legislative power, and the power Judicial, both of
which consist in jure dicundo, that is in pronouncing the Law, from whence the
name of jurisdiction does proceed, but with this difference, that the
jurisdiction of the Judge, is the speaking of a Law only as it is already
given, or exhibited, but the Jurisdiction of the Lawgiver, is the speaking of a
Law that is as yet unmade, and remains still to be exhibited, it follows,
that the power of the Judge is far more narrow, and not of such a noble
extension as that of the Lawgiver. It is the office of the Judge to speak and
give Laws unto the people by a Law already made, but it is the office of the
Lawgiver, to give Laws unto the Judge himself, and to ordain a new Law which
may be a Rule unto him in his seat of Judicature; the Judge is obliged to
pronounce according to the prescript of the Law constituted, The Lawgiver out
of the plenitude of his power does prescribe and constitute the Law, which the
inferior Judge is no less bound for the future to observe than the people
themselves; It is therefore no ways inexpedient that the judicial power being
a power of an inferior nature be ordinarily exercised by an inferior person,
but it is as necessary as expedient, that the supreme and architectonical power
of making Laws should be excercised by none but only by that person who has in
his hands the supreme power; and so much of the first Doubt.

XIII. The second demand or Quaere is, Whether the consent of the people be
required to the obligation of the Law? For by what has been already spoken, a
man may peradventure conceive, that the power of making Laws does pertain unto
a Prince by so absolute and full a power, that the Subjects have no part in
this great affair, and in whatsoever he determines there remains nothing for
the people to do but to perform his commands, and to humble their necks under
the yoke of his obedience; And indeed according to the lusts of those who
heretofore bore sway, it may appear by their sic volo, sic jubeo, that this
excess of command did take such place amongst the Kings of former ages, when
the mere arbitrations of Princes stood for Laws, that the name of a Tyrant, of
an innocent, at the first, and of an honest signification, did grow at the last
into a great ignominy by the foul abuse of so saving a power, and even in our
days it does convey something that is horrid into our ears as often as we hear
it spoken. But that some consent of the people is at least required, I have
both heretofore manifested, and it is granted by all of the most approved
Authors that I have read; Insomuch much that the Jesuits themselves, the most
stout Defenders of the Popes ecumenical omnipotence, and which by them is by
no limits to be included, do yet hold, that many in Germany and other places
are to be excused for the non-observing of the Laws of the Council of Trent,
and the Bulls of the Sea of Rome, only upon this Account, that those Laws were
never received into use amongst those Nations; I affirm therefore, and it is
the common received opinion, that the Laws propounded and instituted by a
Prince, or the Head of a Commonalty, do not oblige the Subjects, nor have the
Power of a Law, unless they be received by the Commonalty themselves, and are
allowed by the Customs and Suffrages of those that use them. According to
Demosthenes, the Law is (...), The Common Engagement of a City, and if
peradventure his authority be of less value, because he lived in the popular
Common wealth of the Athenians, will you be pleased to hear the great Lawyer
Julian, who lived when the Roman Emperors had the fullness of command? his
words in his two and thirtieth Book de legib. are these, Ipsae Leges nulla alia
ex causa nos tenent quam quod judicio populi receptae sunt, The Laws do oblige
us for no other cause, than that they are received by the judgment of the
people.

XIV. But though all acknowledge the necessity of that reception or consent,
yet all men do not derive it from the same Fountain. There are some who think
that the consent of the People is therefore required in the making of Laws,
because that Princes have all their power flowing to them from the people,
which if they do abuse (as they are to be esteemed to abuse it, if they shall
extend it further or longer than it shall please the people) the people by
their own right may again reassume that power which before they had granted to
them. This is a most erroneous and a dangerous position, and which all those
who are not enemies to mankind and the public peace ought deservedly to
abhominate; All their reason relyeth on a double foundation, but both of them
very weak, and abhorring to sober sense; The first is, that Princes do owe unto
the people for all their power; the other, that whosoever he is who grants
power to another, it lies in his power to revoke that power when he pleases.
O most egregious Sophistry! if this were so, Were Samuel more to be condemned
for his Oratory, who the more to affright the people being weary of their
Theocracy, or Government immediately from God, and to deter them from their
perverse affectation of innovation, had enough to do to lay before their eyes
the vast extent of the power of Kings; Or were the people of Israel more to be
condemned for their folly, who ignorant of their own right would suffer
themselves to be circumvented and baffled by so gross a pretense, and return
nothing back unto the Prophet, no not so much as a word? Were they all so dumb,
and stupid, and void of resolution as well as understanding, that not one in so
great a multitude could be found, as had either so much acuteness or
confidence, as readily to make answer to these objections of Samuel, it being
so easy for them to give such a sudden check unto them? Tell Boys these tales
who have the leisure to hear them, and not the wit to understand them; We, if
(our King shall thus begin to domineer) will use our own privileges, and
presently take away that right from him which we have given to him. In how few
words had they done the whole work, and stopped for ever the mouth of the
Prophet, if these fictions of new Magistrates had been so much believed in
former ages, as they now are confidently suggested to new Disciples, and
willingly entertained by the unadvised multitude.

XV. But to be in earnest, and to draw more near unto the thing it self, (...).
Homer. in hymn.
I say in the first place, That the power of Governing in a Commonwealth, by
what means soever men arrive unto it, proceeds only and immediately from God
himself. The Testimonies of holy Scripture to prove this are most manifest: Non
alio animo populus rectorem suum intuetur, quam si Dii immortales potestatem
visendi sui faciant. Seneo. 1. de clem^^ 19.
By me Kings reign, Prove. 8. That is by my authority alone, and not by any
authority of men; The Powers ordained, are ordained by God, and not by the
people, Romans 13. 1. The Magistrates themselves which are set over the people
are the Ministers of God, Romans 13. 4, 6. And therefore they are called Gods,
Psalm. 82. 6. because they are his Vicegerents on Earth; God himself, and not
the suffrages of any people conferring this honor on them; I have said you are
Gods. Can any people constitute Gods unto themselves without the filthy Crime
of Idolatry? Seeing it belongs to men by their own authority to make choice of
their own Vicegerents and to entrust them with places and power according to
their own, and not another arbitration. Will any mortal man be so bold as to
arrogate that right unto himself, as to affirm that the Minister of God on
Earth, and as it were a Vice-God, is made so by his authority, and by a power
which his wretchedness has conferred on him? although peradventure there may
be some references or parts of the people concerning the person of the King as
he is the Subject of Power, as by and by you shall see, just so as in the
Generation of natural things there are some praevious alterations which may
prepare and dispose of the matter to receive the Form to be introduced, yet the
conferring of the Kingly Power, and the application of it to the Person, is not
the work of the People, but immediately of God himself, as the Production of a
Form into the matter subjected is the immediate work of the Agent or Person
generating. Lib. 5. contra haeres. cap. 20.
That is elegantly spoken of Irenaeus, Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus
jussu et Reges constituuntur; By whose Command men are born, by his Command
Kings are also constituted.

XVI. I say in the second place (to point directly to the Fountains Head) that
political Domination at the beginning was only the offspring of paternal
power; Those who have the leisure to look more diligently after the beginning
of things, will find that the Nations did not grow up into Kingdoms and
Commonwealths by the mutual consent of the people, but that all Empire amongst
the posterity of Noah, did for a while consist within the bounds of paternal
Authority. At that time there were neither Kings, nor petty Kings, much less
Monarchs of vast Continents, nor so much as the least signs of any
Aristocratical Government, or popular State, a word not heard of throughout all
the world in those ancient times, and first of all brought into Greece (a
moving Nation, and desirous of novelty) by the ambition or fury of some who
industriously affected new things. All Domination at that time consisted in the
power of Heads of Familyes, amongst which he who was the first born of every
Family, (...). Aristot. 7. Eudem. 10. (...). Id. 1. Polit. ^.
without any suffrages or election, was by a certain Right and privilege of
Nature, the Governor of all things both Holy and Civil, and as it were the
Prince of all that alliance, who according to his Arbitration, did chastise
Delinquents, first with moderate punishments, and Families afterward
increasing into greater multitudes, he afflicted the guilty with more grievous
Chastisements, till at the last, the numbers of Men still increasing, and Vices
increasing with them, there was a necessity of condemning notorious Offenders
unto Death; From hence it came to pass, that heretofore the Father had the
power of Life and Death over his Children, and his Family, Pater jussi. Hoc
nomen ^mni lege Majus est. Jus nobit vitae necisque concessum est. Quintil.
declam. 6.
of which power there remained a long time some Impressions after the
Constitutions of Kings amongst the Nations: And from hence, amongst the
Persians, the too much severity of the power of the Fathers over their Children
was so much observed, but nevertheless disproved by Aristotle; And that old and
solemn form of the Romans of arrogating their Children which Aulus Gellius
makes mention of, Noct. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 19. UTI. EI. VITAE. NECIS. QUE.
IN. EO. POTEST AS. SIET. That he has the power over him both of Life, and
Death, etc. From these beginnings, by the increase of Families, Kingdoms by
degrees did every where arise; And those who commanded over them were called
Kings, and in their Dominions (although but of a short extent, peradventure but
one little City with the Hamlets and Villages b^longing to it) they exercised
an absolute Authority and Command, Principio rerum, gentium Nationumque Imperia
penes Reges erant, In the beginning of things the Governments of People and
Nations were in the Power of Kings, Justin. 1. hist. 1. Cic. 3. Legib. (...).
Arist. 1. Polit.
so Justine begins his History; And Cicero before him says, Omnes antiquae
Gentes regibus quondam paruerunt, All ancient Nations did heretofore obey
Kings; And Aristotle more ancient than both of them does testify, that those
Cities which were free in his times (he means the Cities of Greece, and others
which followed their Examples) were at the first under the Command of Kings.
Amongst many other things, this is no light Argument of this original which I
have spoken of, that the Dominions of Kings were heretofore enclosed in such
narrow limits, that in Canaan alone, which is no great Country, we do read that
there were one and thirty Kings overthrown by Josuah the Captain General of the
Host of Israel, Jos. 12. And probably we may conjecture, that he left above as
many more unfought with, for not long after the death of Josuah, we find that
Adonibezek did exercise a barbarous cruelty on seventy Kings whom he had
Conquered, Judge. 1. 7. What need many words? so little is the difference
betwixt the Prince of a great Family, and a King of a small Territory, (...).
Gregor. Presb. in vita Greg. Nazianzeni.
that they seem to differ more in Name, and Bulk, than in Deed, and Power, so
that it is not to be doubted (if a true Calculation be made) but that the
Domination of a Family in the process of Time, did by degrees, and by an
unperceived enlargement, grow up into a Kingly Name, and Power; And the
Original of the greatest Empire, is no where else to be extracted, but from
this Head. And thus far there is nothing more plain, nothing more sure, than
that in the conferring of Kingly power, the people had no part at all, neither
indeed could have.

XVII. From these things (as I conceive) we safely may conclude (to note that
by the way which is worthy your observation) That the form of Government, by
which the firstborn of the whole Family does succeed into his Fathers rights,
as the next Heir, is justly to be preferred above the rest, for many
considerable reasons, but especially for this, because it best of all answers
to that Original, to which it seems that Nature it self in some sort has made
man; From which most ancient and congruous Form of Nature, when once we have
departed (the impotent and unruly lust of Domination attempting forbidden ways
to ascend to the height of Sovereignty) all things are thereby laid open to
Tyranny, and popular Endeavors; For they who arrive to Sovereignty otherwise
than by a legitimate succession, must necessarily be promoted to it by one of
these three ways, either by open Force, and strength of Arms, or by Craft and
Policy, or thirdly by a free Election; Those who by force of Arms have obtained
the Sovereign Power, whether it were by mere Usurpation, without any pretense
of Right, or by War made upon their Enemies, who unjustly have provoked them
(for both ways it comes to pass) it is certain do owe no more their Authority
to their Subjects, than those who succeed in their Kingdoms by Hereditary
Right, nay much less, For the one do govern over their willing Subjects, and
used to the yoke, and the other over an unwilling people, and if they were
equal to him in strength, ready to make resistance, and to fight against him;
So that in this consideration also, in conferring of the chief Power, the
people have no interest at all.

XVIII. But in the establishing of the Power of those Men, who by Tyranny and
Deceit, do exercise a Tyrannical Power, it cannot be denied, but that the
people have a great interest. For those who affect Tyranny, are accustomed
above all things to court the favor of the people, potentiam ex vulgi
adulatione quaerentes, seeking after power by flattering of the Vulgar. Justin.
13. 3.
The Histories of diverse Nations do afford us many Examples to confirm this
Truth, I will make use only of the Abridgement of Trogus Pompeius, where we may
find by what Arts Pisistratus of the Athenians, Ibid. 2. 8.
Clearchus of the Heraclians, Ibid. 16. 4.
Dionysius Junior of the Sicilians, and others of other Countries did allure
the people to side with their factions; Ibid. 21. 1.
With invective and envious orations, they would incense the Spirits of the
credulous multitude against the best of the Citizens; they would Act and Inact
many things publicly to be praised, and which carried a face of Clemency,
Justice, and Benignity to the people; they would insinuate themselves into the
affections of the Citizens (as if they were the only assertors, vindicators,
and patrons of the public liberty) with all kind of flatteries, and
allurements with which the Vulgar love, and are accustomed to be trepanned.
Their pretenses and dissembling of duties, their often-repeated promises, the
hopes they throw in, of happier times, and of the change of Government into a
better, are those egregious artifices by which they who by deceit do arise to
Sovereignty, do solicit, and bend, and lead which way they will, the moving
and unwary people, flattering them with fair words to serve their foul
Ambition; And Hos equidem per-raro haec alea fallit, These are the men who have
the Dice that always run upon the Sice; for relying on the favor of the
people, and being assisted with their stocks, and their endeavors, they at
last ascend to that height of Honor, and imperial Dignity, to which their
Ambition did so long aspire.

XIX. But how little this avails to prove the legitimate power of the people,
in conferring of the Sovereign command, he may easily observe, whosoever shall
consider, that First, it was always a facto ad jus; From the Deed to the Right
of it; Secondly, true Right, or legitimate Power of the People.

XX. There remains therefore but one only Form of a Commonwealth in which
there appears any show of popular Right, for the constituting of a Prince,
and that is a Kingdom elective, when in the Place of the deceased Prince, a new
King succeeds to be chosen by the free Suffrages of the People; And here
prolixly we profess, that the People have their share, and which indeed is
lawful, and by good Right due unto them; but this notwithstanding is not any
ways to be granted, that thereupon the whole power of the elected King, does
depend upon the people, or that it ought to be acknowledged to be due unto
them; For it is one thing to constitute a power, and another thing to elect a
person, that is to exercise that power; Neither is it only another thing, but
for the most part, it belongs also to another Interest. The Mayor or Bailiff of
such a Town or City, is yearly chosen by the Townsmen, or the Burgers, and
being chosen, he exercises a kind of Jurisdiction within the Subburbs and
Precincts of that place, which it were not lawful for him to exercise, unless
he had been so elected. In the same manner amongst the Fellows of Colleges, as
often as the Presidentship is vacant, they have the Right to choose a new
President, to whom being so chosen, by virtue of the said Election, the whole
Government of that College does pertain; In both places, the right of persons
electing, does consist wholly in the designation of the person to be elected,
who is to exercise the power due unto his Office, not as derived from the
persons electing, but as granted to him upon another account; For the chief
Magistrate of a City, owes not that power which he exercises in the City, to
those fellow Citizens of his who made choice of him for that year to sit at the
Helm of Government, but to the Royal Charter, which according to the favor of
it has indulged to the City with such a privilege; neither does the Master of
College receive the Authority which he obtains in it from the Fellows, by
whose suffrages he is elected, but from the Founder, and from his Statutes, who
has given that Authority to him. In a word, where the election of a Prince is
received from the people, either by Laws, or Customs, there the people indeed
do design, and nominate the person of him who Governs, but God alone does
confer upon him the Authority of Governing.

XXI. But let us grant to the Flatterers of the people, this their Supposition,
a little to gratulate their Importunity, it will notwithstanding nothing
prevayl, unless we shall grant this also, which they had rather take, than
solidly prove, That whosoever conferreth a Power on any one, it is lawful for
him, as often as he thinks fit, to take from him that power which he has given
him, and to resume it into his own hands; And this is that which must never be
granted; for all Reason, and Laws, and Courts of Judicature, are directly and
Loudly against it; They declare That all lawful Contracts are not to be broken,
And that a Donation absolutely made, Populus in cum omne suum imperium and
potestarem transtulit Ulpian. F. de constit princip.
and without any condition, cannot be revoked, neither in the whole, nor in
part, for the right which before the election was fully in the persons
electing, the election being made, does presently and in that very deed pass
into the person elected; and many other things, to the same purpose, are over
the whole world the most received Dictates of nature, and of reason, and
approved and confirmed by the consent of all Nations, as by the use of daily
observation may abundantly appear. The seven Princes of Germany have a full
power to elect an Emperor, but to remove him from the Empire being elected,
they have no power; The Commonalty of all the Counties and Boroughs of England,
that is all the Inhabitants and Freeholders (as we speak it) beneath the
degree of the Nobility of the Land, have a right by common Suffrages to elect
Knights, Burgesses, and in their name to send them to the high Court of
Parliament, as their Repesentatives, and to entrust them with a power in their
steed, and in their behalf to debate of the public affairs of the Kingdom; but
to abrogate the power which is once committed to them being elected, although
peradventure they answer not the expectation of those who did elect them, they
have no right at all. The same account is to be given of those men in whose
power there is a right of electing a Mayor of a City, or a President of a
College, or the head of any other civil Corporation, who, the election being
ended, have no more to do at all, the right and anthority of Governing being
translated into the persons elected, whose power they are afterward bound to
obey, and to accquiesce in the election which they have made, and if the person
elected shall deport himself unworthy of his place, they are not to impute it
to any but themselves.

XXII. These things I confess might longer be insisted on, and indeed it would
be worth the labor to proceed further in the proof thereof, and to pluck up
out of the minds of men all the strings of so dangerous a root, and so much
tending unto sedition, did not the reguard of the time, and my intentions call
me back from whence I have digressed; And peradventure there is no great need
of any longer discourse on this subject, seeing out of the things already
spoken, I believe it is manifest enough, how rashly, and how dangerously also,
this so vast a power is attributed to the people; Nevertheless there be other
considerable reasons to be alleged, which vehemently may persuade us, that the
peoples consent and approbation is to be had in the making of Laws. First,
because the Law ought to mind void of any extravagancy of desire: but the Laws
of Princes rashly sent forth to the unwary Subjects, Aristot. 3. Polit.
in the favor and on the behalf of Courtiers and Flatterers, are oftentimes
corrupted with the depraved desires of impotent affections. Secondly, because
those Laws which are not allowed when propounded to the Subjects, to speak
Contrary Custom, that they cease any longer to oblige, which Custom is
nothing else, than a conjoined consent of the people, neglecting to observe
that Law as being unprofitable, together with the consent of the Prince not
exacting an observation of it; Therefore it being in the same power to destroy,
as it is to make, the force of the Laws do seem not a little to depend on the
approbation, and consent consent of the people, and the supreme power of the
Prince in making Laws, may friendly, and at once consist together, (besides
that there seems to be no repugnancy in the things themselves) may appear by
this, that our Kings of England, whose supreme power the Inhabitants of this
Kingdom before these late unhappy times, have most fully always, and most
freely acknowledged, did notwithstanding never so exercise their Legislative
power, as to impose any Laws on their Subjects without their own consent.

XXIII. We conceive it therefore to be granted, that at the least some consent
of the people is to be required in the making of those Laws which in Conscience
may oblige the Subjects. (...).
But it may be here doubted, Aristot. 1. Polit 6.
and that not unjustly, (I shall therefore make this the third Doubt or Demand)
how great, and how much of the consent of the people may be required to this,
that the placit of the Prince may have the vigor of a Law? I answer, in this
consent of the people of which we now treat, two things are to be considered,
viz. the time and manner of consenting; And both these do fall again under a
twofold consideration; For either the Law is consented to, as to the time, that
is before the promulgation of it, or after; or as to the manner, that is, with
an express consent, or suffrages, or with a tacit consent, or customs. From
the complexion of these there do proceed four sorts or degrees of popular
consent.

XXIV. The first and the lowest, and least degree of all, is the tacit or
silent consent before the publication or asking of the Law, which is, when a
people have so put themselves, and all that they have, in the power of the
Conqueror, or by a long custom of obedience, have so entirely submitted
themselves to the will of the Prince, that whatsoever he determines, they do
yield unto it; And this may come to pass both ways, for by the Law of Nations,
that power of the Prince is just, which is either obtained by a just War, or
confirmed by a continued succession as by a right of praescription; And this
degree indeed, although not very profitable to the people, if the Prince be
pleased to turn his power into tyranny, yet it will so far suffice, that the
people cannot complain of any injury done unto them, if it should so fall out
that the Prince should determine any thing too severely against them, which
peradventure is not unjust, but such a thing as they would not willingly have
to be done. As amongst us many of the Presbyterians do importunatly (as their
Custom is) and unjustly complain that the election of Parochial Pastors is
unlawfully taken away from the People, when those who ought to be chosen to
that Office by the Parishoners, are presented by some private person, or by
some College under the name of a Patron without their Consent; not dreaming all
the while, that the right of Electing, if the People heretofore had any, (which
is very uncertain, and if denied can never be proved) for some certain Cause
from the beginning, but by the long prescription of Time now unknown, was long
ago conveyed unto those whom they call the Patrons of Benefices, and so in the
election made by the Patrons, the Consent of the People is virtually involved
and contained; which answer, if it be of no force amongst men that are
obstinate in their own opinions, yet of this at least they are to be
advertised, which may be enough to satisfy the most importunate Adversary,
which is, that the Rights of Patronships, and the Advowzons or Advocations of
Churches were long ago established by Authority of Parliament, that is, by the
common and full Consent of the whole People. And therefore what is done in this
Case by a legitimate Patron, the People have already consented that it is
lawful for him to do it.

XXV. The second Degree is the silent Consent of the People to such a Law after
the promulgation of it, that is, when the People do not contradict the Law,
made and published by the King, but rather do approve it by their Deeds, by
conforming themselves to the will of the Prince, and by observing that which is
commanded by the Law; for if he who but holds his peace does seem to consent,
much more is he presumed to consent, Leges constituuntur cum promulgantur
firmantur cum moribus utentium approbantur Distinct. 4. Sect. in istis.
who expresses an actual obedience. Of this degree of Consent thus speaks
Julian again in the place above cited. Quid interest suffragio Populus
voluntatem suam declaret, an rebus et facto? What difference is it if the
People do declare their Consent by suffrages, or by deeds and Acts?

XXVI. The third Degree is the express Consent of the People, to a Law
propounded to them by the Prince, and they consent unto it being asked, that
is, when a Prince having prepared at home the matter of the Law by the Counsel
of wise men, and though not perfectly drawn it up, yet he has run it over, and
put it into some Form, and transmitted it to his Subjects to be further
examined, that nothing may openly be contained in it that is either
inconvenient, or absurd, requiring withal that they, or a great part of them,
if they find it to be advantageous to the Commonwealth, would confim it with
their Suffrages, that so by their Consents it may pass into a Law, and this, in
some manner, was heretofore the Custom of the Romans, their Commonwealth yet
standing, And from this asking, the Rogation of their Laws received its
original, A word most frequent amongst the best of the Writers of the Roman
affairs.

XXVII. The last, and highest Degree, which is the greatest and indeed the true
Liberty of the People, by which we Brittans have so long been happy even unto
envy under excellent Kings, and prescribed Form thereof (a just and deliberate
Debate being first had of the words, and the matter of it, and approved by the
House of Peers, the Suffrages of the House of Commons conjoined with them) is
at last exhibited to the Kings Majesty, to whom alone the chief Power of making
Laws does belong, that being by him confirmed if it seem good unto him, it may
have the Power and Virtue of a Law, or otherwise it may be made void, and be
esteemed no Law; which manner of enacting of Laws being most prudently devised
by our Forefathers, and brought even unto our times by so long a Series of
Kings and years, has been found by the Use and Experience of all Ages past, so
profitable to the Commonwealth, that if unseasonable Counsels had not been
taken (to speak no more of it) for the removing of the old Marks and Limits
from their right Places, our Churches, Universityes, The King, The People, The
Commonwealth, and every private Family had by the bles^^ng of God yet
flourished, which now by his most just Judgment do go to wrack, and every day
do suffer more and more. And I do believe that a better way cannot easily be
thought upon by the wit of man, to moderate on the one side the Power of Kings,
and to check, and to restrain on the other side the License of the People.

XXVIII. The fourth Doubt follows of the Laws of less Commonalties, for
examples sake of Cities, Universities, Colleges, and Schools, which besides the
Laws common to all the Subjects of the Kingdom, do rejoice in their own private
Laws, Rights and Statutes. The Question is, to what Persons the Power of making
their Laws does pertain, and being made, whom and to what they oblige? The
answer is not difflcult, I say therefore in the first place, these Societies,
Corporations, orbs of the Heavens are contained in the Superior, it is not
lawful for any College or Society, or for the Governors or Oversers of them,
to make private Laws for their own use, which may be contrary or any ways
prejudicial to the public Laws of the whole Kingdom; I say in the second
Legislative power which is derived from them, is a derived, and not a primitive
power, and is at last to be resolved into the supreme power of the King as the
true original of it, and therefore the said Societies and Governors of them
cannot according to their own will either constitute or actually exercise any
power in the making of Laws, unless according to the manner and the measure of
that power vouchsafed by the indulgence of the Prince. I say in the third
place, that Laws made by private Colleges and corporated Societies, according
to the tenor of the power granted them by the King, do oblige all the Members
of the said Societies, and of all those that directly of it self, and by its
own force, but by the Virtue of the Kings supreme Majesty on whose authority
they rely, and from which they receive all their force, they do in some sense,
and indirectly oblige all and every Subject of the whole Kingdom; but there is
not the one and same account, nor degree of these two obligations; For these
Laws oblige those of their own Society to the diligent observation of them, but
the others unto this, that they do no ways violate, or diminish them, or hinder
the observation of them.

XXIX. The fifth Doubt is of Ecclesiastical Laws in the Species of them; And
that new Laws may be made concerning Rites, and Ecclesiastical things and
persons, and of all Circumstances of outward external worship belonging to
Order, Honesty, and Edification, besides those delivered by Christ and his
Apostles in the word of God, is a thing so manifest, and consentanious to
Reason, that he will hardly clear himself from the suspicion of a perverse and
obstinate Spirit, who being dry, and sober will deny it; but since the time
that the Divines have divided themselves into several parties, it cannot easily
be agreed upon amongst them to understand unto whom it does belong to make
Ecclesiastical Laws. The Papists who would have the Clergy to be exempted from
all jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate (of which controversy we cannot here
dispute) do affirm that Bishops only, and amongst them the chief Bishop
especially, whom they call the Bishop Ecumenical, has the right and power to
make Laws, which may not only oblige the Consciences of the Clergy, but of the
Laity also, and that without any consent, or license of the politic
Magistrate. There are some who (the person only, but not the opinion being
changed) do embrace this Tenet, as also many others of the Papists, who
notwithstanding do profess themselves most bitter enemies unto Popery, but in
the mean time the Disciplinary Reformers our new Davusses do disturb all
things, and having taken away all Power, Authority, and Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction from the King, they do challenge it only to themselves, and to
their own Classes and Conventions. The Erastians on the other side, and our new
Reformers no less than they, under the pretense of Reformation, having
altogether disinvested the Clergy of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, do wholly
attribute the universal right of the external Government of the Church to the
Civil Magistrate; And moreover as for these our own Disciplinarians at home,
Good God! what Monsters of names and opinions, as full of Deformity as of
Difformity have these last seven years fruitful of prodiges brought forth, and
nursed under the pretense of Reformation.

XXX. I have neither the leisure nor resolution (unless I should appear too
troublesome to you) to grapple at this time with both these Adversaries; But in
these (as in many other Debates) that opinion seems to be the truer, and is
truly the safer, which is lodged in the middle betwixt the two extremes, and I
am confident you will be so much the more willing to embrace it, by how much it
is more agreeable to the Doctrine of the English Church, as also to the Laws of
the Kingdom, which is, That the Right of making Ecclesiastical Laws is in the
Power of Bishops, Elders and other Persons duly elected by the Clergy of the
whole Kingdom; But so nevertheless that the Exercise of the same Right and
Power in all Christian Common-wealth^ ought to depend on the Authority of the
supreme Magistrate, both a Part ante (as the Schoolmen have it) and a part
post, on the part precedent, and on the part subsequent, to wit, that they
ought not of themselves to assemble for the making of Ecclesiastical Canons,
and Laws, unless they be called to it by his Mandate or Command, or at least
defended by his Authority; a f^ll and free leave being both asked, and
obtained, and being thus called and warranted, their Laws or Canons to which
they have consented, are not ratified, not have any Power of obliging, until
the Assent of the supreme Magistrate be obtained, by whose approbation, and
Authority, as soon as they are confirmed they are presently to pass for Laws,
and do oblige the Subject; And these things may suffice to be spoken of the
Cause Efficient.

THE EIGHTH LECTURE Of the Obligation of Humane Laws from the Formal Cause:
where, Of 1 The Promulgation of Laws, 2 Of Laws Penal.


Ezra 10. 7, 8. 7. And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem,
unto all the Children of the Captivity, that they should gather themselves
together unto Jerusalem.

8. And that whosoever would not come within three days, according to the
Counsel of the Princes, and the Elders, all his substance should be forfeited.


OF the obligation of humane Laws, as to their material and efficient Causes,
we have spoke enough, and as much as conduces to our present purpose, in those
points which have already been handled by us. In this place we are to speak of
such as may be reduced to the Formal kind of Causes, and although peradventure
not so properly, (if examined according to the acurate and exact Method) yet in
my Judgment not altogether incongruous to our Discourse on this present
Subject. They may all of them be reduced to two Heads, The one of the
publication of Laws, and the other of the penalty adjoined to them to be
inflicted on Delinquents. Both of which as they are expressly contained in the
Text above cited, (The Publication of the Law in the seventh verse, and the
penalty of it in the eighth verse) so the use of them is very necessary, both
by the Nature of the Law it self, and to obtain the Effect of the Law; For
seeing the Law by its own Nature, and as it is a rule of things to be done,
ought to have a double Power, viz. A Power of Directing, by showing unto the
Subjects what is to be done, and what is not to be done, and a Power of
obliging, by suggesting into their minds a necessity of obeying; The Law could
not duly, and effectually exercise this twofold Power, unless the Subject were
informed what is the will of the Prince, which is done by publication, and
understood withal by the penalty annexed to it, how much it does concern him
to perform it.

II. Concerning the Publication of the Law; the first Doubt is, Whether this
publication be merely on the Account of, and as it were intrinsecal to the Law?
That is to enquire, Whether, that as the Law has the Power of directing and
obliging, the promulgation of it be so necessary that it wants of that Power
unless it be promulgated; Now in all this Discourse you are to understand, that
I take not this word Promulgation as it is used in Cicero and other Roman
writers, but according to the received manner of speaking amongst the Schoolmen
and the Canonists of the latter Ages; for in that Promulgation of the Ancients,
the Law not yet established, or fully made, was propounded to the people
publicly on three Market days of their approbation of it; But the Publication
of which we now speak, is the Promulgation of a Law already made, that the
People may take notice of it. I therefore shall briefly answer to the Doubt
proposed, and say, That this Publication is so necessary and so intrinsecal to
the Law, that in some manner it may be called the Form of it, and thereupon
amongst many Authors it is a part of the Definition of it; and indeed it is
absolutely necessary to this, that the Law may exercise the Office of a Law,
which is to direct, and to oblige the Subjects, whom it cannot direct, much
less oblige, although made by never so just, and undoubted Authority, unless it
be known to them, and it cannot be known unless it be published; For that which
properly induces the obligation, is the Will and Authority of the Prince or
Governor, not as a single, but as a public Person, and the Head of the
Commonalty; But unless by some public means he shall cause his Will to be
propounded, and made known unto the People, it cannot by any Law be manifest
(at least according to the interpretation of the Law) that it is his Will, and
proceeds from his Authority as he sustaineth a public Person; Did. 4. Sect.
In is^is.
And from hence is that of the Canon Law, Leges constituuntur cum promulgantur,
Laws are constituted when they are published, And that also of the Civil Law,
Leges quae constringunt vitas hominum ab omnibus intelligidebent, The Laws
which do bind the lives of men ought to be understood by all; which being
approved by the Common Consent of all Doctors, and the Dictates of Reason, we
need not here, for the confirmation of i^, to instance the Example of God him
self solemnly pronouncing his Law unto the Israelites from the Mount of Sinai,
or the Practice of the most flourishing Commonwealths and Cities in the whole
world, who as soon as their Laws were made, did in the most public places
expose them to the observation of the people engraven in Tables of Brass or
Wood; the words are most known which every where we meet with amongst ancient
Authors, and to this classis pertain the (...), and the (...), which signify
nothing else but the Tables in which the Athenians wrote their Laws. Of the
same nature were the twelve Tables of the Romans, and others of other Nations,
concerning which let those men who have the leisure to be curious of such
antiquities consult with the Philologers, and the writers of Dictionaries of
both languages; we must proceed to other things.

III. The necessity of the publication of Laws being thus granted and
determined, there arises a second Doubt, What this promulgation of the Law
ought to be, that it may pass for lawful, and infer an obligation? In answer
to which I say in the first place, that the manner, and the reason of
publishing a Law, as to the particular Rites and Circumstances, may be varyed
according to the Customs of diverse Nations; But all do agree in this, and by
common use it is required, that the Lawgiver take ca^e to have his will so
propounded, and manifested to his Subjects by some external sign, that it may
publicly be known unto them all, so that none of those who are bound to
observe the Law maybe ignorant that the said Law is extant, and this is
therefore required, because the power of directing is intrinsecal and essential
to the Law, and Subjects cannot direct their actions according to the will of
their Prince, unless they know what his will is, and how can they know it
unless by proclamation, or by writing, or insculpture, or some other outward
sign it be sufficiently exposed, and manifested to them?

IV. I say in the second place, To the publication of a Law to oblige the
Subjects, it is not only required that the Lawgiver does publicly signify his
will unto them, but he is to proceed further, that is, to have it done in a
solemn manner, or at least that it be so done (which is even as much as a
solemn Right) that it may be sufficiently testified and made known unto his
Subjects, that the Lawgiver intended, that this will of his may have the power
of a Law, and that it may oblige them; the reason is, because, not every will
of the Superior, although known unto the Subject, does presently, and in ipso
facto oblige him, unless withal it be manifest, that the Superior had an
intention that it should oblige him; For every Superior endued with a
Legislative power, and sustaining a double person, the one private, as a single
man, the other public, as a Lawful Superior, does come under a double
consideration. In the midst of these late tumults, the unhappy caprichiousness
of some wits did put me to this new distinction, concerning the personal, and
political Capacity of a King. The Distinction in my judgment is something more
proper to our present business, than to the Subject then in hand; It is this,
the will of a Prince, (if a Prince: be considered as in his personal capacity)
that is as he is a single, and as it were a private person, carries not with
him the respect of a Law, and obliges not his Subjects to direct their Actions
according to it; Therefore to oblige the Subjects, It is not enough for a
Prince any way to signify unto them, that he will have this or that done,
unless upon some other account it be manifest, that it is his will to have it
so done, as he is in his Political Capacity, that is, as he is a Prince, and
the Head of the Commonalty, and as he sustaineth a public person with a
Legislative Power, which seeing it cannot be made manifest enough by the bare
signification of his Will, it is needful that by some more public, and solemn
Ceremony, it should be attested unto those whom it concerns to have the
knowledge of it, lest any man, for the excuse of his Disobedience, might
pretend that rotten, and that vulgar one, I had not thought of it.

V. I say in the third place, In large Empires which contain many Provinces, it
is requisite that the publication of a new Law be made in every Province of the
Empire. Some there are who think this to be simply necessary, and to be
required from the nature of the Law, which does not oblige, unless it be
received of the people; And therefore if be only published in a Princes Court,
or in the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, or some chief Cities thereof, the
promulgation of it is no way sufficient to oblige those who do live in the more
remote places, and provinces; But although this be not absolutely necessarily
(neither does the nature of the Law seem to require it, and the common opinion
of the Doctors, as well as the common practice of most Nations are of another
Judgment, yet it is profitable that it should be done, that so the Law, to
which all men are bound, as much as may be, may come to the knowledge of all
men; which by how much the more easily it may be done in our times, than in
Ages heretofore, before the Art of printing was found out, by so much the more
inexcusable is the neglect; But to make no digression, The manner of publishing
our Laws which is received amongst us, does not only seem to be the most
sufficient, but the most easy and commodious of all others, viz. that the Laws
signed and passed by the King, by the consent of the Representatives of the
whole Kingdom in the Houses of Parliament, the Parliament being dissolved, be
committed to the press, and printed by the Kings Printer, and in a known
Character, that no man may doubt, but that the said Laws are lawfully made, and
sufficiently published.

VI. The third Doubt, It being supposed, that the Law is sufficiently
published; When does i^ begin to oblige the Subjects, presently after the
publication of it, or some time afterward? I answer in the first place, that
it is beyond all controversy, that those Laws, in which a certain the space of
two months after the promulgation of them, because that this time by some
Authority in the Novels, as in all other of their Laws is to be observed, is
universaly prefixed and defined, and for this intent, that it is presumed, that
in the space of two months the knowledge of the said Law may easily be brought
unto all the Subjects. I say in the second place, That in the Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths, where nothing of any certainty is either defined by Law, or
received by custom, concerning the time in which Laws new made do begin to
oblige, the said Laws having no certain time of obligation affixed to them, do
presently as soon as ever they are published, according to the manner of the
Country, oblige all those Subjects to whose notice they are arrived, or where
it was not in the fault of the Lawmaker, but that they might have come to the
knowledge of them. For seeing the obligation of the Law depends on the will
of the Lawgiver, and not on the notice of the Subject, it follows, that the
obligation of the Law is of force, when the Lawgiver has sufficiently
expressed his will to his Subjects by some outward sign, whether it were made
known to all his Subjects, or whether it so fell out that some of them
peradventure were ignorant of it; For grant but the Law, and the obligation is
granted, which has its dependency on the Law, as it is a Law, and necessarily
follows it, as every necessary Effect does follow its proper Cause, as
already we have often mentioned. Therefore there being nothing wanting to a Law
that is required to the completing of its essence, after that it is made, and
sufficiently published, it altogether follows that a Law so made and
published, ought presently to infer an obligation; neither is it any ways
inconvenient, that an obligation be made, and become ours by the will only and
Act of another, we not knowing it, if the said obligation does carry with it
the nature and construction of a moral Debt, as the Schoolmen speak it;
Although from obligations and debts which. arise from contracts, the case is
otherwise.

VII. The fourth Doubt; How the Law does reach unto those, who though after a
sufficient publication of it, and the elapse of the time prefixed by the Law,
have not yet actually any knowledge of it? Which is to demand, whether he to
whom the Law is not actually known, be so guilty of the fault, that he
transgresses, if he does any thing against it, and thereupon deserves that
punishment which that Law inflicteth on the transgressors of it? The reason of
this Doubt is, on the one side, because that obligation is vain, or rather none
at all, which obliges neither to the fault, nor to the punishment; And on the
other side, both because it is absurd to be bound to that which is impossible;
but to observe a Law which we know not, is certainly impossible; as also,
because from the two Offices of the Law above specified, it is necessary that
the power of directing, as first by Nature, must go before the other power of
obliging, so that the Law cannot oblige any, but whom it directs, and it
cannot direct any, but those to whom it is known. This being laid down in the
first place, which admits of no scruple, viz. that the Subject to whom the Law
is known, is obliged both to the fault, and to the punishment; As for those
that know not the Law, I answer to the propounded doubt, and say in the first
place, that he who by his gross negligence is ignorant of the Law, when it
proceeds from his own fault that he is ignorant of it, is no less, or at least
not much less guilty of the fault, and deserves punishment as well as he who
does know the Law, and does it not. For the Ignorance of that thing which every
man ought to know, and may know, does excuse no man; And in the interpretation
of the Law, there is no great difference betwixt a wilful Ignorance, and a
fault committed.

VIII. I say in the second place, That he who is therefore ignorant of the Law,
because he was a little more careless, or negligent, than in a business of
that moment he ought to be, although the fault be never so light, as the
Civilians term it, yet because it is manifest, it was done by a fault, and by
his own Fault, he is not altogether free from the obligation of the Law. My
Reason is, because that Ignorance was vincible, as the Schoolmen speak, that
is, which could be overcome, for if the Subject had been so diligent as he
ought to have been, and as the dignity of the cause required, and as wise men
use to be in their employments of greater weight, he could not be ignorant, it
is presumed, of the promulgation of the Law; Now his Ignorance of that Law,
according to which every man is bound to direct his Actions being in him an
ignorance that might have been helped, this Ignorance cannot be but culpable,
and if culpable, in whatoever degree it be, it cannot but accordingly be
inexcusable. It may be argued; But by how much the lighter the fault is, the
Ignorance in both Courts, is so much the more excusable, and amongst the equal
Arbitrators of things, does deserve a more easy pardon. It is to be answered,
that he was before obliged by the Law, although he was ignorant of it; And it
is manifest by this, because as soon as ever, by the Testimony of some man of
Reputation, he understood that the Law was published, he immediately in his own
Conscience judged himself to be obliged by that Law, now there could arise no
obligation from a new report, or by the Testimony of this man, neither is there
any power of obligation either in himself, or in his Testimony, therefore
without doubt he was obliged before by that Law, although he had neither notice
of the Law, nor any Conscience of the Obligation.

IX. I say in the third place; He who in earnest and invincibly, either by
accident or any other impediment, and by no neglect of his own, is ignorant of
the promulgation of a Law, as if any man should be visited with madness, or
labor under some long or grievous disease, or being newly returned from foreign
Countries, should never hear of the publication of such a Law, nor indeed could
hear of it, he is not by that Law obliged either unto the fault, or any
punishment of the fault so properly named; Nevertheless by the same Law which
he is invincibly ignorant of, he may become so far liable to a punishment
improperly so called, that is to some loss to be sustained. The first part of
this position is thus proved; No man commits a fault, or deserves
punishment who does not Sin; but he who keeps not a Law, of which he is
invincibly ignorant, does not Sin (for if he should sin, he were obliged to
that which is impossible) therefore he cannot deservedly be blamed, nor justly
punished; But that he may be obliged to some damage to be sustained by that
Law (which is the other part of our assertion) shall appear to be most clear by
this example. Suppose there be a Law prohibiting some certain kind of
Trassiquings and Contracts, by which Law, amongst other things, it is decreed
that all such contracts, made one month after the promulgation of the said Law,
shall be altogether void, and of no effect; If any man after that month is run
out, being in good earnest, and invincibly ignorant of the promulgation of that
Law, shall strike such a bargain, which is by the said Law forbidden, he will
be clear indeed from the fault, by reason of his invincible Ignorance which was
impossible to be helped, and consequently he ought to be free from the
punishment, which justly is due to no man, but for the fault; nevertheless he
shall not only sustain the Damage, by reason of the nullity of the Contract,
which he entered into, but he is bound also to sustain it according to
Conscience; both by the force of obedience, which is due unto the Law; and by
his reflection on the public profit; The like is to be determined in many
other Laws of the like nature; For examples sake, In those Laws by which
persons are disabled, and by which privileges are revoked, In those Laws by
which Usury is moderated, and in those by which certain prices of things to be
sold are constituted, and in the like, of which the Canonists and the Divines
do treat at large. Neither ought this seem to be unjust to any man; for
although a Damage be sometimes called a Punishment, it is only analogically,
and very improperly, for otherwise there is a great difference betwixt a
Damage, and a Penalty or punishment properly so called; If an innocent person
be punished, a great injury is done unto him; but often it comes to pass, that
an innocent person may be dammaged, and yet no great injury done unto him. And
thus much as conduces to our present purpose, may suffize to be spoken of the
promulgation of the Law.

X. In the next place we are to speak of the penal Law, in which many things
being omitted which unprofitably are accustomed to be disputed by many of the
Casuists, and which pertain rather to the external and pleading Courts, as that
of the Canonists and Papists, than to the internal Court of Conscience, we
shall be contented to give a view unto you of some few, and the most remarkable
of them, and which most nearly we conceive do conduce to the Government of
Conscience: In this kind we meet first of all with this doubt; Whether the
Constitution of the punishment does any ways pertain to the Essence of the
Law. I answer; It seems that it does, not as something that is extrinsecally
requisite to complete the Essence of it, so that the Law were not a Law, if the
penalty were not annexed to it, but only consequently, as something necessary
to this, that the Law may effectually obtain the end which it intended; For the
Form and Essence of the Law consists in the Precept of it: I here understand
Precept as it is largely taken to comprehend a prohibition with it, as in the
Scriptures are the words (...) and (...), and amongst the Divines, as well
Negative Commandments, as Affirmative, are commonly called Precepts; And from
this Precept alone, both the powers do depend, which we have said to be in the
Law, viz. the power of directing the Action, and of obliging the Consciences of
the Subjects; For the Subject has a sufficient Rule, according to which he
ought to direct his Actions, and to the observation whereof, unless he will be
wanting in his duty, he is bound in Conscience, as soon as he understands that
his lawful Superior has commanded this or that by Law, whether there be any
punishment annexed to that Law, or not; Therefore this necessity of annexing
the punishment does not arise from the Nature of the Law it self, which
consists in the mere Precept, but (that the Precept which of it self would
not barely suffice, Tatite permittitur, quod s^ne ulti^ne prohibetur. Tert. 1.
contra Marcion. 26.
may with the greater vigor obtain its effect) from another double Hypothesis,
the one of the Subject, the other of the End; For it is expedient that the Laws
should be most religiously observed, which is the Hypothesis in respect of the
End, nevertheless the inbred Depravity of man's heart being supposed (which. is
another Hypothesis in respect of the Subject) it can very hardly or almost
never come to pass, but that the most profitable Laws will be despised, either
by the negligence, or the perverseness of most men, unless by fear they are
contained within their bounds, Qui ratione traduci ad meliora non possunt, solo
metu continentur. Quintil. 12. Instit.
who make but a mock of the Dictates of Conscience. From this double
Hypothesis, it comes to pass that the wisest Lawmakers, have always judged
it necessary, and saving to the Commonwealth, to add more force to the
observation of the Laws, by the fear of punishments, and that after the example
of God himself, who pronounced not the first Law which he gave to man, without
the threatening of a punishment, Genesis 3. Some good Citizens peradventure (whose
number are but few) induced only by the Conscience of their Duty, and their
Love unto Virtue, and their Country, would render Obedience unto the Laws,
although there were no punishment propounded, but the Turba, or the greatest
number, are enforced only by the fear of punishment to the performance of their
Duties; It is manifest hereby, that the Constitution of punishments in the
making of Laws, is necessary.

XI. The second Doubt is, concerning the obligation of the penal Law, as to the
extension of it, whether the penal Law does oblige only unto the penalty, or
whether it obliges unto the fault also? Which is to demand, if a Subject may
so satisfy the Law, and his Duty, if being prepared to undergo, and by
undergoing the penalty constituted by the Law, he may be no longer guilty of
the Delinquency, although he observes not the command of the Law; Or whether,
for all that, he is not bound in Conscience to the performance of that, which
is by the is Law commanded. That more clearly and distinctly we may answer to
this doubt, it being a Question of great Moment, and of which in the Common
Lives of Men, there is a most frequent use; It will not be amiss, the better
to unfold it, to premise some things which are very profitable before hand to
be known. We are to understand therefore in the first place, that that positive
Humane Law, ought only to be called Penal, which by the will of the Legislator,
does expressly determine some temporal punishment for the Transgressors of it;
And in all this discourse, as often as mention is made of punishment, you are
to understand no other, but only a Temporal punishment. This word Temporal
punishment is taken in a twofold Consideration, either as it is opposed to the
Spiritual, or as it is opposed to Eternal punishment, And for the most part in
common discourse they are taken as Members contradistinct to one another,
sometimes Spiritual opposed to Temporal, and sometimes Eternal unto Temporal;
there are therefore three kinds of punishments, or, if you will, you may call
them, Species, or manners of punishments, or degrees of punishments; For
whatsoever comes under the name of punishment; loss or the deprivation of
Grace, and of the friendship of God, or of that inward joy, and consolation,
which arises from the sense of his Grace and Love. Eternal Deprivation of the
beatifical vision of God and Christ, and partly, Torments of Hell. Or thirdly,
it is a temporal punishment, distinguished from both the former, which
pertains to the state of this present life, and has relation only to the
body, and external things, neither does it take away of it self and necessarily
either the sense of the Grace of God, or the Hope of everlasting life; Temporal
punishments of this nature are the loss of money. Banishment, Imprisonment, or
Fines set on the head of any one, courgings, and many of the like; and lastly
death it self. Those punishments which are the chiefest and of most frequent
use may be reduced to these heads, Death, Banishment, Confication of goods, and
Imprisonment.

XII. In the second place we are to understand, that punishment as it is
opposed to the fault, is taken again two ways; For sometimes it is taken
largely, and materially, as it is opposed to it in a contrary opposition, that
is, as it is another Species condividing the same Genus; And so every Evil that
befalls any man, which is not malum culpae, the Evil of the fault, is called
a punishment, or malum Poene, the Evil of punishment, although it be not
inflicted on him who indureth it for any fault going before, but casually or by
injury it may happen to him; so a sudden Disease, money taken away by theft, a
Wound given by a thief, goods lost by fire, or Shipwreck, and all kind of Hurt
or Damage which is grievous to endure, is to be numbered amongst things penal,
and to come under the name of punishment; Sometimes the word punishment is
taken more strictly, and as it were formally, as it is opposed to the fault in
a relating opposition, that is, as it is inflicted on a man for a preceding
fault; As if a man should be mulcted fourfold for the goods of another taken
away by Theft, or should be banished for sedition; And this is the proper, the
former the improper signification of the word penalty or punishment for
punishment is improperly so called, when no fault did go before it; From hence
proceeded that most known Definition of punishment, that it is, Supplicum quo
quis proper delictum afficitur; It is a punishment with which any man is
inflicted for a fault. Secondly, in this present disputation we intend to
debare on both the significations of the word, as the nature of the discourse
shall require; But the last is the chiefest, for it is called a penal Law, not
so much in the respect of the Damage, or the Hurt which. can come unto any man
by occasion of the Law (and that peradventure justly, though without any fault
of his) as in respect of the punishment, which. by the determination of the Law
is appointed for those who do trangress it.

XIII. In the third place we are to know, That in penal Laws, some are purely
penal, and others mixed, A Law purely penal is, when in the simple ordination
of it, it only appoints the punishment, and neither by commanding, or
forbidding does expressly enjoin any thing. For examples sake, suppose there be
a Law which gives power to the Inhabitants of any City or Town, to choose
every year one of the most remarkable of the Citizens to be their Mayo^, or
Bailiff, this clause being added to the find Law, The Citizen who is chosen,
and shall refuse the place, shall be finea one hundred pounds, This Law is
purely penal, because it ordains a punishment for those who shall refuse to
undertake that office, nevertheless it commands no man to undertake it, nor
forbids any man to refuse it. A penal Law that is mixed, is, when it
commands any thing to be done, or forbideth any thing, the penalty being
added that is to be inflicted on the Transgressors. For Examples sake, let us
suppose a Law to be declared in this or the like Form, Let no man presume to
transport any of the Merchandise of this Nation into a forain Kingdom, or to
sell any forain Merchandise in any place of this Kingdom, unless be paeyeth the
accustomed Tribute, he who shall (...) otherwise shall suffer the loss of the
Merchandise he vendeth. This is a penal Law, because it has a penalty annexed
to it, nevertheless it is not purely penal, but mixed, for under that penalty
it commands the Customs to be paid, and forbids the exportation, or the
selling of Wares, the Customs not paid. Some there are who think that there is
a third kind of a penal Law to be added to these two, which contains at once
both the command and the punishment, but neither of them positively and
specially, but both of them disjunctively and indifferently; For examples
salt, let there be a Law under this Form, Being chosen by the Commonalty of
the City, either undergo the Office of the Mayor, or chief Magistrate, or pay
a hundred pound; There needs not for this cause that any new Species should be
added; For the Species of things are not to be multiplied without necessity;
And this disjunctive Form of propounding the Law, ought to be referred to that
which is purely penal, for in it self it contains no absolute command; if you
allege; Of these two things, though neither of them is commanded definitely,
yet both of them are commanded indefinitely; I easily may reply, to command
indefinitely, and under a disjunction (to speak properly) is no more to
command, than to say that the picture of a man, i^ a man; This disjunctive Law
therefore (as I have said) is purely penal, which is manifest by the compared
Form of the examples. For if the Lawmakers shall put forth the Edict in this
manner, He who being elected shall refuse the Mayoralty, shall pay one hundred
pound, or in this manner, being elected, either be Mayor, or pay one hundred
pounds, it is all one; There is, in both, the same sense, the same force of the
words, and one and the same ob^igation.

XIV. In the fourth place, we are to know, that between an obligation to the
fault, and an obligation to the temporal punishment, there is no necessary
Connection, or certainly not so neeessary that it may be also reciprocal; There
is a necessary Consequence indeed from a Temporal punishment properly so
called, to the fault; And this Argument therefore is of force, Peter is to be
punished by the Law, therefore Peter has committ^d a fault; But from a
temporal punishment, properly so called, suppose any damage or the like, the
fault is not necessarily inferred; For a man without any fault of at all his
own may be obliged to a loss, as already we have said. Neither is the
Consequence reciprocal from the fault to the temporal punishment; For it may so
come to pass, that a man may be obliged to the fault, and yet not be obliged
to the punishment, I mean a temporal punishment, for the account is far
otherwise of the Spiritual and Eternal punishment. For examples sake, suppose a
man has committed a fault, as he has told a lie, or betrayed the secrets of
his friend, or has privately detracted from the good name of his Neighbor,
for which the Laws of men do appoint no punishment, he therefore cannot be
punished by man with any temporal punishment, neither is it necessary that God
should temporally afflict him. But that no man may too boldly flatter himself,
and assume unto himself hereby a greater liberty of sinning, because he thinks
himself free from temporal punishment, he ought duly to call to mind, that he
is nevertheless obliged to a far more grievous punishment, which is a
Spiritual, and an Eternal punishment, Both which punishments are so
necessarily, and so reciprocally conjoined with every fault, that the
punishment does always presuppose a fault going before it (for God punishes
no man that deserves it not) and at the last the deserved punishment must
necessarily follow the fault, unless it be prevented by the mercy of God
remitting the fau^t in Christ by Faith, and by Repentance.

XV. These things thus premised, to answer to the propounded Doubt, I will
infer some Conclusions; And in the first place we must judge, How the penal
Law does oblige the Subject in Conscience by the mind and Intention of the
Lawmakers, If it be manifest that there is any certainty of it that is, if it
be certain that the Lawmakers did intend to oblige the Subjects, not only to
the penalty, but to the fault also, they are undoubtedly obliged to observe
that which is commanded by the Law, and do not satisfy their Duty if they are
prepared to undergo the Penalty ordained by the Law; But if it be manifest that
he intended not to oblige them, but only to the Penalty, it is certain that the
Subjects are not bound beyond that Penalty. The Reason is, because the
Foundation or Ground of the Obligation of the Law (as elsewhere is showed) is
the manifested will of the Lawmakers invested with a Lawful power, Therefore
where the Will of the Lawmakers which is the adaequate Measure of that
Obligation which the Law induces, is manifest; we need not to make any further
doubt concerning the extent of the Obligation.

XVI. Peradventure, you will demand, what assurance may suffice, that a Subject
may be secure in his Conscience, that sufficiently he understands the mind, and
intention of the Lawmakers? I answer, that a mathemat calcertitude, which is
manifest by Demonstration, and impossible to be false, is in va^n to be
expected in morals, by reason of the infinite variety of Circumstances, and
uncertainty of Humane affairs, nevertheless a certain logical certitude may
oftentimes be had of the Intention of the Lawmakers, which is to be collected
from the words of the Law it self, from which, his Intention may so
perspicuously appear, that there needs not any further Evidence. The mind of
the Legislator may be manifested, partly by the form and manner of the Precept
he enjoyneth, and partly by the greatness of the Punishment that is to be
inflicted, but especially from the Preface of the Law it self, in which that it
may be more acceptable to the people, he uses to declare the causes and
reasons that do induce him to the making of that Law, as also how just it is,
and necessary for the taking away of abuses, and for the advantage of the
Commonwealth; From all which being rightly weighed together by comparing of
the circumstances, it will be no great difficulty for a wise and apprehensive
man, so to learn the meaning and intention of the Lawgiver, and to have such a
sufficient moral certitude thereof, (for in morals, a moral certitude is
sufficient) as to conclude, that undoubtedly he intended such a thing in the
making of it; But if the Subject be not of so great an apprehension and
Judgment, as duly to examine all the importances of the reasons, or if he be
afraid (since every man is not a Competent Judge in his own Cause) left he
might interpretate the mind of the Lawgiver more favorably on his side than
he ought to do, it would be his best course (if it be a business of so great
Importance, that it will be very uncommodious or troublesome to him to observe
that which by Law is commanded) to address himself to some man of approved
Piety and Prudence, and plainly, and sincerely to declare his mind unto him,
and to acquiesce in his opinion, and his judgment.

XVII. But because it may be, and oftentimes it so comes to pass, that after
all diligence there can be obtained but little certainty of the mind of the
Lawmakers from the Law it self, or not so much as the Conscience of a good man
may safely acquiesce therein; We must seek further in so doubtful a case, and
examine what interpretation we are to follow in so doubtful a case, whether
that which is the more large and favorable, as many will have it, or as
others, the stricter interpretation; Martin Navar a man of great authority
amongst the Canonists, is said to be of an opinion, that he thought no penal
Law did oblige to the fault, by it self, but only to the penalty. Other Authors
have been of another judgment, and have taught, that every penal Law, unless by
the mind of the Lawmakers it was manifest to the contrary, did oblige to the
fault also. I must confess that the extremes of both opinions have been always
suspected by me, and it may so come to pass, that as some have spoken too
favorably, so others too severely. That therefore in a thing So dubious we may
have something to follow which is certain, let this be the second Conclusion, A
Law purely penal, does by it self, and ordinarily, oblige only unto the
penalty, and not unto the fault. I say in categorically taken or disjunctively.
I say in the second by it self, for by accident, and by the supposition of a
former obligation, it may oblige to the fault also; for a penal Law is made to
that end, that Subjects by fear of punishment be compelled to their Duties, to
which they were bound before by a former Law, divine, natural, or humane, so
those penal Laws (he that kills a man let him suffer the pains of Death; He
that transporteth Merchandise beyond the Seas, let him either pay the Custom,
or lose his Merchandise) do oblige to the fault, so that whosoever shall
undergo the punishment shall not clear his Conscience thereby, unless he shall
obey the precept of the Law, but they do not bind so, by themselves and by
their own virtue, but by the force of a precedent obligation that takes its
rise from the command of a former Law. For the Subject was obliged before that
Law (according to our supposition,) was made, both by the Law of God not to
commit murder, and by the Law of his Country to pay customs, Ordinarily,
because it may be done extraordinarily, the present state and condition of
things so requiring, so that what otherwise was free, and might be omitted, may
in an exigence fall out so necessary to be done, that he may offend, and fail
in his office if he does not do it, but ordinarily, these extraordinary cases
being excepted, he who is prepared to undergo the punishment imposed by the
Law, is no further bound by that Law, if the Law be purely penal.

XVIII. The reason of the whole Conclusion is, because the maker of Laws does
not oblige but by commanding, and therefore a simple ordination which
commands nothing does no more oblige of it self, than the Counsel of a
friend, or the exhortation of a grave man; For as he who gives Counsel to
another, or does exhort him to do this or that, does declare what it is that he
desires him to do, but does neither oblige him to it, nor intend to oblige
him: so a Legislator in that Law in which he commands not any thing of the
Subject, but only shows him what he would have him to act, under the Condition
of a proposed punishment, is to be presumed not to have a will to oblige him
further, but only to the penalty he proposed; For if he had an Intention to
oblige him to the fault also, it had been most easy for him by adding a command
to signify his intention so unto him. Therefore seeing that a simple and bare
ordination does not it self oblige unto the fault, and the addition of a
temporal penalty cannot of it self oblige but only to the undergoing of the
temporal penalty, it is manifest, that a Law purely penal, which contains
nothing in it self besides a bare ordination and temporal penalty annexed to
it, neither of which is obligatory to the fault, cannot of it self oblige unto
the fault, but unto the punishment also. And the same is to be spoken of those
Laws which are called conventional, which example I the more willingly do use,
because it serves not only to confirm, but excellently to illustrate our
Conclusion To which also may be added the will of the Testator, and many other
things, which as to the power of obligation are all of a like nature. The
Inhabitants of some Town, who have not the power to make Laws, properly so
called, do yet in the Court of the Lord of the Manor (for so they term it)
debate and agree amongst themselves concerning some things conducing to the
keeping of peace and justice amongst their Neighbors, and under the name of
penalty, a pecu^iary mulct is imposed on those who shall violate the agreement,
these conventions are called the Laws of the Inhabitants, and in our own
language BY LAWS, for learned men and skilful in antiquity, do note that in
the ancient language of the Saxons, the monosyllable BY, does signify a
habitation; We with many others, for informations sake, do call these Laws
conventional Laws, for although they be contracts only, and conventions amongst
private persons, and to speak properly, not Laws, by reason of the defect of
the public Authority, yet they are commonly called Laws, by reason of the
Analogy which they have with Laws properly so called, and as to those two
effects of the Laws, of directing and obliging; for as the Laws do direct the
Subjects, so those Conventions do direct the Persons confenting in the acting,
and do oblige them to the performance of what they are to act, and certain it
is, that in these Conventions the persons contracting did not intend mutually
to oblige themselves to the Fault, but only to the Penalty; For Example sake,
The Inhabitants of some village do agree amongst themselves, that the Masters
of every Family in that village shall every year in the Month of May work in
their own persons three days for the repairing of the Highwayes, and they who
shall not do so, (suppose here that every days work is valued at ten pence)
shall have a mulct upon them to pay twenty pence; It is certain by this
conventional Law, that the persons who did contract it, did chiefly intend the
yearly repairing of the Highways, and moreover they wiled, that every Master
of his Family should labor in his own person for so profitable a work,
otherwise they would not agree upon a mulct, that they who refused should pay
as much again as the days work came unto; And as certain it is on the
otherside, that they intended not mutually to oblige them selves any further
than to the paying of the imposed mulct, if any one of them either by the
reason of other employments could not, or upon any other pretenses whatsoever,
would not in his own person perform that work. Imperia mortuorum. Senec. 3.
Contr. v. 9. Legatum est quod legis modo testamento relinquitur VLV. Institu.
Cap.
So in Wills and Testaments (for Testaments are as a Law also, both to direct
and to oblige the Executors and those thar are to receive the Legacies.) Caius
^^lleth that his Wife Caia, while she remains a Widow, shall retain the
houses with the adjacent lands which he bought of Titius, but if she marryeth
he is to lose them, It is manifest, that it is the Will of Ca^ias, that his
wife should remain a widow, and should not marry again, for in that Intention
he annexed that Condition by the fear of the Damage to deter his wife from a
second Marriage, And by inserting that Condition, he intended not, and indeed
could not intend to oblige his wife to the Fault, as to have offended if she
should have married another Husband.

XIX. But you will allege, Agreements do oblige, and Wills and Testaments do
oblige to the fault, for he offends who stands not to the Agreement he has
made, And those offend who do otherwise than by the will of the Dead is
ordered; I answer, that the Case is far different to violate Contracts, Laws,
or the Wills of the Dead, and to infringe the will of a Legislator, or a
Testator made under a Condition; How great the difference is, the Examples
which before we have produced will best of all inform us. He does not presently
transgress against that conventional Law of working for three days under a
pecuniary Mulct, who refuses to work, unless he refuses also to pay the
Mulct; For he stands to what was agreed upon, if he performs either, and that
also according to the intention of those who made the agreement, who intended
indeed mutually to oblige themselves to the performance of that work, but not
simply and absolutely, but under the condition above specified; So in that
Testamentary Law of Caia marrying another Husband, Caius being dead, she
offends not by marrying, although it be certain that the Testator had rather,
and indeed willed (for he who had rather, wills) that she should not marry,
yet notwithstanding she should undoubtedly offend if being now married unto
another, she should still retain the Lands and Houses upon such a condition
bequeathed to her in the Will, and should not restore them to the Heir. The
reason of both the examples is the same, because in both of them the obligation
was not pure, simple, and absolute, but only conditinal; For always a condition
of its own nature, does suspend the obligation, so that the condition being
kept, the obligation immediately, as if the Bonds were loosed, does fall to the
Ground. The Case is the very same in Laws that are purely penal, as to the
manner, and measure of obliging, which they will easily understand who have the
will and the leisure to compare these considerations amongst themselves, so
that we need not any longer to insist in the explication of them.

XX. But peradventure some one may yet instance, that no man can be obliged to
the Punishment, but he must be obliged to the Fault also, for a Penalty cannot
justly be imposed on any, unless for some antecedent Fault, according to that
of St. Augustine, Omnis poena si justa est, peccati poena est; Every punishment,
if it be just, is the punishment of some sin. The second objection is derived
from the Nature of the Law, they urge, which is to command something, therefore
that Law which we have said is purely penal, has not the Nature of a Law if it
commands nothing, or if implicitly at least it contains some Command, it must
also oblige unto the Fault, for a fault is nothing else but a Transgression or
a Violation of a just Command.

XXI. To the first objection we may answer several ways, For in the first place
it may truly be said, that indeed eternal Punishment as it is under the
absolute Notion of Punishment, and cannot otherwise be considered but in the
true Nature of Punishment, must therefore necessarily suppose some antecedent
fault which has deserved it, and for which without any other respect
whatsoever, he who is guilty of that Fault, is afflicted with the Punishment,
but there is not the same consideration in all spiritual Punishments, much more
in temporal Punishments; For although both of them as it is a Punishment, does
suppose some precedent fault worthy of such a Punishment, for otherwise it
would not be just, yet because they may be otherwise considered, than under the
bare notion of a punishment, viz. In respect to the End ^ntended by the party
punishing (that is, not so much as ordinated to revenge a fault past, as to
prevent a fault to come) it comes thereupon to pass, that neither God himself
when he afflicts a man either with a spiritual or a temporal punishment,
neither man when he inflicts upon a man a temporal punishment, does always
precisely respect their Sins or offenses, but very often they do propound other
ends unto themselves. To this purpose belongs that answer of our Savior,
when his Disciples asked him concerning the blind man, whether it were for his
Sins, or his Fathers that he was born blind? Joh. 9. 3. His answer was, that
neither his Sins, nor his Fathers were the occasion of his blindness, but that
the works of God might be manifested in him; The reason is, because in morals,
the Estimation of things, and the Denomination of them, is taken rather from
the final, than from the efficient, and meritorious Cause.

XXII. Secondly, it may be said, that the relation of a temporal punishment to
a Sin, does properly consist only in that punishment which relatively is
opposed to the Sin, and not in that punishment which only contrarily is opposed
to it, which is the looser and more improper signification of the word. We have
heretofore made use of this distinction, and explained it in the second
Praecognisance to this Doubt, therefore there needs no repetition of it; It may
suffice to put you in mind, that the punishment affixed to the Law that is
purely penal, is not called a punishment, strictly, and properly, but
improperly, and more largely, as it signifies another kind of Evil, diverse
from the Evil of the Fault, which kind of punishment may be infflicted on a
person without any legal injustice, and for a profitable end, as to avoid some
public Inconvenience, without the delinquency of the person suffering, for the
word punishment so taken does contain all losses, m^^fortunes, or adversities,
or whatsoever befalls a man which he desires might never have to come to pass.

XXIII. If these things shall not satisfy the Reader, yet this will be very
remarkable which here in the third place I shall propound unto you, and which
will quite remove all this Doubt, and very aptly meet with another objection,
which is, that the Intent of a penal Law (of which we now speak) being to
oblige the Subject, and yet but conditionally to oblige him, may be considered
two or three ways; First, precisely, as to that to which it intends
aggregate, that is the whole Law it self, which at once consists of the
complexion of them both. This distinction being laid down, I say in the first
place, that that part of the Law which contains only the condition or the
punishment does not of it self oblige unto the fault, for a bare condition is
of no prevalence, as all do grant, and it is manifest of it self; He does not
therefore transgress, nay rather he very well performs his office, who avoids
the penalty of the Law, provided he performs that which the Law ordains.
Secondly, Legislator by that part of the Law did not intend, per se or by it
self, to oblige the Subject to the fault, for then it had intended to have
obliged him simply, ^r that part, taken precisely and by it self, does contain
no condition in it; but by the condition of the Law added in the other part, it
is manifest that he did not intend simply to oblige to the doing of that which
the Law ordains, but under a condition in that Law expressed. I say thirdly,
that a penal Law taken wholly and jointly does oblige to the Fault, in this
sense, that he is guilty of the Fault, and sins against the Law, who when he
ought to observe both parts, performs neither; For as amongst Logicians, the
truth of a disjunctive proposition depends upon the truth of some one part of
it, so that it is all of it true, if either of the parts of it be true, and not
false unless both parts of it be false; So in morals, he observes a
disjunctive Law (and every Law purely penal is disjunctive, or formally, or
equivalently,) who performs one of the two parts propounded, and he does not
violate the Law, unless he does neglect them both.

XXIV. This which was to be spoken of the obligation of a Law purely penal,
being as I conceive sufficiently unfolded, let us now pass to the
consideration of a penal Law mixed; Concerning which I make this my third
conclusion; A penal Law mixed (to wit, which openly commands something to be
observed, and that it more diligently may be performed which is commanded, does
appoint a penalty to the transgressors) does oblige both to the fault, and to
the punishment, insomuch that he neither satisfies the Law, nor his Conscience,
who undergoes the punishment, unless he does perform that also which is
commanded by the Law. There is none can doubt that such a Law does oblige to
the punishment, for otherwise of what use would the punishment be that is added
to it; And it is manifest that it obliges to the fault, because it contains
a manifest command; And every command obliges to the fault. For a Fault, or a
Sin, is nothing else but the transgression of some precept, 1 John 3. Neither
can that be probably spoken, which is said to be the opinion of Navarr, that
the Lawmakers by inserting the punishment, does signify, that he has no
intention of obliging, but only to that punishment which is annexed. Observe I
pray you, how perverse it is, so to interpret the appointing of a punishment,
which it is certain is for that end annexed to the precept, that the said
precept by the fear of punishment, might more diligently, and more accurately
be observed, as to make weak, and take-away the obligation of the said precept.
Numberless are the Laws which throughout the world are made against Thieves,
Murderers, perjured Persons, and other wicked and nefarious people; God also
gave a Law to our first Parents, by which he forbad them to eat of the fruit of
the Tree which was in the midst of Paradise, having annexed to the prohibition,
the punishment of death, if they should eat thereof; Genesis 2. Can any man be
found so d^stitute of reason as to think that Adam was obliged by this Divine
Law, and that others are obliged by Humane Laws, to the punishment only, and
not unto the fault? Who will affirm (to omit humane Laws) that Adam was not
obliged in Conscience by that Divine Law to abstain from the forbidden fruit,
but to this only, that if he did eat thereof, he should be ready to undergo
the setence of death? The opinion therefore of Navarre being exploded as
dangerous, and by all men confuted, (if indeed the opinion was his, which I
shall hardly believe, he being a man of so reverend a fame) we are to affirm,
that a penal Law mixed, being both penal, and preceptive, does oblige both to
the punishment, and to the Fault, to the punishment as it is penal, and to the
Fault as it is preceptive.

XXV. The third Doubt remains; How, and how far the transgressor of a penal
Law is bound to undergo the punishment in the fact it self that is appointed
by the Law? I must make haste, I will therefore be as short as I can; I say
therefore in the first place, if the punishment appointed inability to do
something which was commodious for him to do, or in an incapacity of receiving
something which would be profitable for him, he is guilty of the Law so
violated, and is bound ipso facto to undergo the punishment. There are many
Laws which do forbid transgressors, to do this or that, as the Civil Laws for
certain causes do forbid translationem Dominii, the alteration of power or
free-holds; There are also many Laws which for such a certain time, do make
Delinquents incapable of such a place, or dignity; As if a Disturber of the
peace, by a statute of the University, be prohibited to have his Grace
propounded in the Congregation House for the space of two years after the fault
committed; In such and the like cases, where the punishment consists only in
the Inability, or the In^^pacity, because to undergo this punishment there is
no Cooperation required of the person to be punished, but rather a certain
Cessation of operating, He who has violated the Law, is obliged willingly to
suffer the punishment, although cooperation of the person offending be
necessarily required to the Execution of the Law, that is, that he who is to be
punished is to act something himself in his own punishment, he is not obliged
ordinarily to undergo the said punishment ipso facto, before the Judge has
pronounced the sentence, or which is the same, before the punishment be exacted
of him, by a person to that purpose invested with lawful Authority; The guilty
person is bound indeed to suffer the punishment, but if he called to it,
punishment passively, but he is not obliged actively to cooperate in it, which.
he knows to be ordained by the Law, and which by his default he has deserved;
And let this suffice to be spoken of the necessity of the Promulgation of Laws,
and of the Obligation of those penal Laws which may seem to have any reference
with the Formal Cause of Laws.

THE NINTH LECTURE Of the Obligation of Humane Laws, in respect of the Final
Cause thereof.
1 TIMOTHY 2. 2. For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty.
IN our former Lectures we have treated of the Obligation of Humane Laws, as to
their Material, Efficient, and formal Causes, in some places peradventure more
largely, and in others again peradventure more concisely than was requisite; It
remains, that we should proceed to the explication of those things which do
pertain to the final Cause of Laws; But before we do come to dissolve these
doubts, we are first to premise, and pronounce as an undoubted Truth, That the
ultimate end of the Laws, is the good of the or the public peace and
tranquillity; This is proved first from those very words of the Apostle, that
we may live a quiet and a peaceable life. The Apostle does here exhort, that
both privately, but especially in public Congregations (for so I conceive this
place to be understood, and the best Interpreters are of the same opinion with
me) Requests, Prayers, and Supplications, with thanksgivings, may be made, as
first for all men in general, out of Charity, and in order to a Spiritual end,
viz. Eternal happiness in the life to come, as they are men, and either in Act,
or in Power, Members of the mystical Body of Christ, so more especially for
Kings and others invested with supreme Authority, and this out of Prudence, and
in order to a Temporal end, to wit, external felicity in this present life, as
they are the chief Members of the body politics, from whose legislative, and
executive power, accordingly as they have administered it, whether rightly or
unjustly, either the chief happiness, or unhappiness of the rest of the
Members, and by consequence of the whole Body, does depend; Therefore the
making of Laws being the chief Act of the supreme political Jurisdiction, that
which is the supreme End of that supreme Jurisdiction, is also the supreme End
of the making of Laws, to wit, End, as by a Demonstration a priori; That, in
its order, is the ultimate End of everything, to which all the Acts of that
thing are reduced, (...). Arist. 8. Ethic. 11.
as to their first regulative principle, and to which they are referred as to
that for whose sake they are ultimately ordained, Therefore the Final Cause is
commonly called by Aristotle That for which; But all the Acts of Laws, are
regulated by the Common good, as by their first Rule and Principle, and are
referred to the Common good, as to that for whose sake they are made, as may
appear by running over the several Acts, Therefore, etc. For wherefore are good
things commanded, or evil ones forbidden, and things indifferent, and of a
middle Nature permitted? Or wherefore are Rewards decreed to men that have
deserved well of the Commonwealth? or wherefore are punishments appointed to
the Violators of Laws? or wherefore are the Laws in the Courts indifferently
pleaded unto both? of which those are the first Acts of Laws, and by the way of
Form, and the other more remote, and by the way of Effect; Is it not for that
end, that the Commonwealth may flourish in peace and safety, and that private
men according to their measure and degrees, may partake, rejoice, in the
public happiness, in a word, that they may be all inservient to the Common
good? Thirdly, it is proved a posteriori, from the posterior, by the sense and
consent of all men; For the Lawmakers who do decree just judgments, do indeed
appear, and those who meditate on Evil as a Law, do notwithstanding desire to
seem to have an Eye to the Common good and profit in the making of their Laws,
and to prefer the public interest above their own; Whether they sincerely
intend, or craftily pretend, they all profess that in the making of their
Laws, their chiefest Intention was the public Good.

II. This foundation of the present discourse being laid, to wit, That the End
of Laws is the good of the Commonwealth, I proceed to the Doubts, whereof let
this be the first, Whether there be any necessary use at least of Humane Laws?
And indeed we should not have needed to have made any Doubt of it, did not the
mad errors of the Anabaptists, and some others of their faction, make this
business for us, from whose Principles, seeing they affirm, it is not lawful
for a man that is a Christian to be a Magistrate, or to contend by war, or by
suits in Law, to swear, or to administer an oath to any one, it seems to
follow, that there is no need at all of Humane Laws; For take away but
Jurisdiction, there will be no man to make Laws, and take away the Seats, and
Courts of Justice, there will be no man that will fear them. What need sad
complaints, if the offense be not redressed by punishment, what will vain Laws
profit without the execution of them? The Directive power of the Law must of
necessity fall unto the ground, if the Coactive power does not assist it. The
reason of this Doubt is, for the Law of Nature may suffice to leave the
Gentiles inexcusable, which dictates to them to eschew all Sins, and
trespasses, to injure no man, and the like; But if that be defective, the
Christian has at hand a more sublime, and a more perfect Law, to wit, the Law
of Faith, Justice, and Charity, made by our Savior Jesus Christ, whom St.
James acknowledges to be the only Judge and Lawgiver. James. 4. 12.
This place in my Judgment, does nearly touch our Innovatours, who have
derived and drawn most of their opinion from the unclean wells of the
Anabaptists, whilst they collect from that place of the Apostle, that it is
lawful for no man besides Christ alone to make Ecclesiastical Laws, for it no
ways appears either by the force of the words, or by the scope and order of
the whole perioch, that the Apostle has spoke more there of Ecclesiastical
Laws, then of Civil; And unless they had rather deal unfaithfuly and deceitfuly
with us, than be ruled by reason, they must do one of these two things, which
they please, either turn absolute Anabaptists, and take away altogether from
mankind all the power of making Laws, or grant unto supreme Magistrates, as it
is fit they should, the power of making Ecclesiastical Laws.

III. But how these our Brethren can disintangle themselves from the snares of
the Anabaptists, it does not much concern us, let them look unto it themselves;
We easily do answer, that the Law of Nature is written in our hearts, and the
Law of Christ is revealed in the Gospel, and that both of them in their kind
are most perfect, but so, that for all that, it is most manifest that the
profit of humane Laws is very great, and their use as necessary. Because those
divine Laws do contain only general Principles of things to be done, From
which, as Conclusions from their Principles, more special Rules are to be
deduced, accommodated to the right Institution of public Societies, and of the
manners of single persons. Neither is it any way to be feared that it may
derogate at all from the perfection of the Law of God; For the makers of humane
Laws do not go about to add any new stock to the most rich Treasure of the
divine Law, but they rather take from thence what they judge most profitable to
themselves, and to their people, and the good of the Commonwealth; Humane Laws
therefore, if they are just, are nothing else but the Relicts of the Law of God,
that is, particular determinations of the general Rules which the Law of
Nature, and the word of God have exhibited indeterminatly, wisely accommodated
to the Condition and Utility of certain people, according to the consideration
of Times, and Places. For Examples sake, The Law of Nature does teach in
general, that we are to offer an Injury to no man, and he who does so is bound
to make restitution; but to descend to the specialty, what injury he has done
unto his neighbor who has broke down the Hedge, and let in his Cattle into
his Grounds, and what is the restitution to be made for such an Injury, is not
determined by the Law of Nature, but by the Civil Law; And the Scripture does
openly hold forth, that wicked men are to be punished by the Magistrate. Romans
13. 4. and in other places; But what kind of wickedness the Magistrate is to
punish, what punishment to afflict, and after what proportion, is no where
defined in the Law of God; Power being transmitted to Princes and Lawmakers,
by God, to define of themselves, by Laws well constituted, what accordting to
their wisdom they shall find most safe and profitable to the Commonwealth;
The Rights therefore and the Laws of God, and of a Legislator, and a Judge, are
distinct, and proper to themselves, and disposed in so excellent an order, that
the Precepts and Commandments of God, which are general, and indeterminate, are
by the Lawmakers determined, and accommodated to certain Species of persons,
and actions, and being so determined by the Laws, the Judge does effectually
apply them to the particular causes of persons, and actions; so that if a
Legislator should make a Law which is not complacent to the Law of God, he is
to be adjudged to have made an unrighteous Law, and if a Judge in any
particular Cause shall pronounce Sentence which is not congruous to the Law
constituted by the Prince, he is to be judged himself to have pronounced an
unjust Sentence.

IV The second Doubt is, whether a Lawmakers be obliged, if possibly he can
effect it, to command all the acts, and offices of all Virtues, and to forbid
all Sins of whatsoever nature they are, or if he cannot all, whether he be
bound to command and forbid as many of both kinds as possibly he can? The
Reason of the Doubt is, because there is nothing more conducing to the proper
end of the Law, which is the common good, than as much as possibly may be, that
all the Citizens may be good, and none of them evil. Therefore it is the part
of a Lawmakers, who always is to have before his eyes this end which is the
common good, to take all possible care he can, to command the practice of all
Acts of all Virtues, that so all his Citizens may be good, and to forbid all
Sins whatsoever, that there be no unrighteousness amongst them; and the two
chief of the Apostles do seem to require this of the political Magistrate,
Romans 13. 3, 4. St. Paul has these words, Do good and thou shall have Praise,
but if thou do evil, fear, for the Magistrate is a revenger to execute wrath
on him that does evil, that is, on him who does any manner of evil; And St.
Peter in his first Epistle, second Chapter, and fourteenth verse (...), for the
punishment of evil doer^, but the Praise of them that do well, that is, of all
well-doers, and of all evildoers; For that which is pronounced indefinitely is
equipollent to an universal and it is consonant to the Rule of the Logicians,
(in a necessary matter) and to the will of God, who forbids the Magistrate
the acceptance of Persons.

V. For answer, I say first, and generally that the Lawmakers is bound to use
his utmost Endeavor that his Citizens be all of them good men, and none of
them evil, and by consequence to command all Acts of Virtues, and to forbid all
Vices so far, as the Reason of the Beginning from whom, and the End for which
he works, does require, but beyond that he has no obligation at all; For the
Beginnining and the End in the operations of all, work they naturally, or work
they freely, are the adaequate measure of all Intermedial Acts, so far as those
Acts are proportionate, and conformable, with the Beginning from whence they
proceed, and with the End to which they tend. The Acts therefore of Commanding
and Forbidding, and others in which the Exercise of the legislative
Jurisdiction does consist, must be proportionated both to their Beginning in
whose Virtue they are done, to wit, the Higher Powers granted by God, and to
their End for whose sake they are done, to wit, the Common Good. A Lawmakers
therefore ought so far to command, prohibit, permit, and to perform all other
Duties, as they are agreeable to the power granted to him by God, and is
expedient for the Commonalty which God has committed to his change.

VI. But these considerations are general, and indefinite; To satisfy
therefore the Doubt propounded, we must descend to something which is more
particular, but which howsoever may rely on this general foundation. I say
therefore in the second place, the acts of Virtues and Vices, some of them
being internal, of which nature are the freer acts of the Will, as to will and
not to will, and the movings of the affections, to love, to hate, to grieve,
and if there be any other cogitations, and intentions of the heart, and mind;
and some of them being external, of which sort are all the commanded acts of
the will, and the indeliberate motions of the affections, which are exercised
by bodily Organs, as to see, to speak to strike, to plunder, and innumerable
others; the Legislative power is only exercised on the outward acts, but not on
the inward. A Lawmakers may therefore command the payment of a debt, the
restitution of stolen goods, and the outward worship of God; He also may
forbid Theft, Adultery, Manslaughter, Blasphemy, and the like; But he cannot
command the loving of his Neighbor, the confidence to be had in God, the
contempt of the world, nor prohibit the coveting of his Neighbors goods,
unchaste cogitations, the hate of his Neighbor, and the Atheism of the heart.
The reason is, because to determine of internal actions is neither
proportionate to the beginning from which, nor to the end for which the
Legislator works; For Almighty God has only permitted to the Magistrate the
Government of the external man, and has reserved to himself alone the
knowledge and judgment of the inward actions, and the inspection into the
hearts of men; for the Legislator and the Judge is the same, as we have already
proved by the testimony of St. James, and the Legislative power would be
altogether ineffectual to obtain its proposed end if it were only directive
coactive. First therefore, seeing an external Court cannot understand, nor
judge of inward Virtues or Vices. In which regard, as in many others, the Law
of God and Christ which requires Truth, Purity, Sincerity, in the inward
parts, and restrains and checketh the highest and first inordinate motions of
the Will, and punishes as well Sins thought on, as Sins committed, does most
infinitely excel the most excellent Laws of men; And therefore David in the 19
Psalm says, that the Law of God is perfect and undefiled, and the Law of
Christ, is as the maker of it is described to be in the fourth of Hebrews, A
word lively and mighty in operation, and sharper than a two-edged Sword, and
enters through, even to the dividing asunder of of the heart and Spirit, and
of the Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the thoughts and intention of
the hearts.

VII. I say in the third place,, that Humane Laws may de Jure, or by Right
command all the outward Acts of all Virtues, and forbid all the outward works
of sin, but they cannot do it de facto. The Reason of the first member is,
because there is no external Act of Virtue or of Vice, in the whole Nature, and
in every Species of, it so disposed, but that the commanding or the forbidding
of it (according to the Condition of Affairs and Times) may be ordinated to the
publiek good. Therefore not only the Acts of Justice, properly so called, (as
some will have it) but the acts also of all other Virtues whatsoever may become
the due object, and matter of the Law; And this I remember to be the
observation also of Aristotle, and if I be not much mistaken, he gives
Instances of it in the Acts of Fortitude and Temperance; As if, by a military
Law it were ordained, that none of the Soldiers should run from his Colors,
or from his engaging with the Enemy, or throw away his Arms, or as if, by
another a Law of frugality, or moderation, the excess in banqueting were
prohibited or as if, there were a Command that none should; exceed in the
bravery of his habit, or in the greatness of his retinue, or in the Ornaments
of his House. The Reason of the latter member is, because there is so great a
variety even of the Species themselves, much more of the Degrees, both of the
Offices of Virtues and the Acts of Sin, that if the Lawmakers should provide a
Caution for every one of them, the very multitude of the Laws would be a
burden to the Commonwealth not to be endured.

VIII. I say in the fourth place, that a Lawmakers is not obliged to this, viz.
To forbid all the evil that he can forbid, or to command all the good: It will
suffice, that the greatest and most remarkable of both kinds are to be
contained in the Laws, and which are so conjoined with some extraordinary
public profit, that unless something were determined of them, there must
necessarily follow some great and grievous Evil which would prove extremely
incommodious to the Commonwealth; for amongst the lusts of the Flesh, the
Allurements of the world, the temptations of the Devil, and the di^positions of
men so fruitful of all manner of Iniquities, may we so much as dream of a
Platonic or an Eutopian Commonwealth; we are to think we have done well
enough, if we stick not too deep in the mire; For it is necessary that in every
Commonwealth some evils should not be prohibited, but tolerated, and many good
things not commanded, but left to every man's discretion, and that many things
of both kinds should be passed by, by the Laws, lest being too unseasonably
active to remove one evil, we peradventure make way for more and greater to
arise.

IX. The third Doubt is, concerning the Intention of the Lawgiver, whether,
and how far it is required to the effect of obliging? Which is to demand, If a
Prince, out of no foresight, or intent to Justice, or to the public good at
all, being either carried away by hatred, or ambition, and the mere lust or
ruling, or by avarice, or any other depraved desire of an impotent mind, should
give a Law to his Subjects, whether they are bound in Conscience to obey it?
The answer is easy, they are obliged to obey it, if there be no other
impediment, that is, if he who made the Law has a lawful Power, and the Law it
self be otherwise just, and according to the Law of the Nations duly debated,
and sufficiently promulgated; I say therefore in the first place, that as in
Artificials, the End of the work, and of the person wotking, is not always the
same; as in the building of a House, the End of the work (that is of the House)
is that it may be a commodious habitation for the master of it; but the End of
the Carpenter is, that he may get some gain thereby; Just so in a
Commonwealth, it may come to pass, that the Lawmakers may intend his own
advantage, and yet the Law it self may tend to the public Good.

X. Peradventure you will object, that an indirect End or Intention does always
corrupt the work, and therefore the evil Intention of the Lawmakers does
vitiate the Law which was his work. To answer this objection, I say in the
second place, that an evil intention does always blemish the work as the work
speaks the action of the person working, but it does not always blemish the
work as it is the effect of the operation. These two therefore, the Action it
self, and the Perfection of it, differ not a little amongst themselves,
although they are commonly called by the same Name; In the same manner as the
Effecting and the Effect it self. The building of the House, and the House
builded, are both of them called the work of the Carpenter, although the one of
them is but an action transient, and the other, after the house is finished, an
action permanent. A bad Intention therefore does corrupt the work of the
Lawmaker, that is, his own Act which makes the Law, and which for the defect of
a good end is not without fault, but it corrupts not the work of the
Legislator, that is the Law made by him, if that which is commanded by the Law
is reducible to the Common good, So, for all the evil intention of the Judge, a
Sentence pronounced by him either for favor, or for hatred, is firm and valid,
if the said sentence in it self considered, appears not to be unjust. For as
rightly St. Augustine has it, potest ex libidine imperantis sine libidine
obtemperari, We may without any lust, obey the lust of the Commander.

XI. I say in the third place; Suppose that a Law be not only made with an evil
intention, but unprofitable to the public, nay in some sense obnoxious, yet
the Subject is bound to obey it, provided it be made by just Authority, and the
matter of the Law, or the thing commanded, be such that it may be done without
Sin: The reason is, because every man ought to be careful and diligent in the
performance of that which belongs to his own part, Gal. 6. 5.
and not too scrupulous of what concerns another; For every man shall bear his
own Burden. If a Lawgiver shall be wanting in his Duty, what is that to you?
Do you perform your Office howsoever; As for his intentions whether they be
right or not, let himself look to it, for he must give to God an account of all
his actions and intentions; And do you look to your self, for if you shall
refuse to obey him, you shall give to the same God an account of your
disobedience.

XII. The fourth Dout, of the Changing of Laws, if they seem to be unprofitable
or obnoxious to the Commonwealth; whether, and how far the Change of them is
either to be attempted by the Prince, or to be required, and urged by the
People? The reason of the Doubt in one respect is, because in a body Civil, as
in a body natural, every change, especially if it be sudden and great, is
dangerous, and on the other side, because it concerns the Commonwealth that
the Laws be accommodated to the Times and Customs, (...). Aristot. 4. Phys.
text. 128.
and if the one does change, that the other be changed with them; For answer to
this, I say in the first place, it is certain that the Laws may be changed,
yea, and sometimes that they ought to be changed, for they have heretofore been
changed with great profit to the Commonwealth, therefore they may now be
changed again, and may be so in all future times, if occasion shall require,
and it shall be found profitable to the Commonwealth; And why may not that be
lawful to be done again which has been lawful heretofore? There are every day
new emergencies, new inconveniences, new evils, and if there are not new Laws
made to redress them, there will be no remedy. Arist. 2.
And all men says Aristotle seek not (...). Polit. 8.
And if heretofore it were expedient that a Law should be made because it was
profitable to the Commonwealth, it being found afterward by the change of the
conditions of Times and manners to become unprofitable, why is it not expedient
that it should be taken away again?

XIII. I say in the second place; That the change of particular Laws is not
without danger, and therefore not to be attempted unless it be upon some great
and urgent necessity. Aristotle acutely and briefly as his custom is produces
diverse reasons, 2. Poli. 8. These three are the chiefest, (...). These often
changes do very much derogate from the authority of the Law, and the Lawgiver;
As we conceive that person to be of a very slender and weak judgment, who for
no sound or evident reason, is easily enduced to change his Opinion, Secondly
(...), It makes the people wanton and petulant (This is true enough, we not
long since have had the experience of it) and apt to fly at any thing, if they
shall find their Lawgiver easy on this account, and departing from his own
right to humor the Votes and unsatisfied desires of the people; Therefore the
chief Philosopher most gravely and deservedly does reprove the Law of
Hippodamus a Lawmakers of Miletum, viz. That whosoever had discovered or found
out something profitable, to the City, should be recompensed for his good
service, with a public reward. This Law was specious enough at the first
sight, and plausible to the people, but look thoroughly into it, and you will
find nothing in it either of prudence, or safety, or Advantage; For what could
be found more dangerous to disturb the public Peace, than that factious men
and of a turbulent and cunning Spirit, under the shadow of a public good,
should not only occasion the subversion of the Laws, but also call in question
the Form of the whole Civil Government, and obtrude unto the State a new Idaea
of Government, according to the humor of their own Invention. Do you hear, I
beseech you, a Philosopher famous in his times, or rather a Prophet, and a
foreteller of the manners, and the times in which now we live? Grav^ora inserre
vulnera, dum mino^^bus mede^i defid^ amus. Ambros. 2. O^sic. 2.
Thirdly the Innovation of Laws being ordained for the removing of some present
Inconvenience, and being it may come to pass, and oftentimes it does so come
to pass, that from this sudden Immutation, many and more grievous
Inconveniences may arise, though not peradventure at the first discovered, the
most grave Philosopher did judge it to be far safer to tolerate and endure some
Inconveniences, and those not slight ones neither, in a Common wealth (which
may be avouched of the Church also which is a kind of a Commonwealth) than in
pretense of Reformation either Ecclesiastical or Political to cancel old Laws,
and Statutes, and turn all things upside down; Of a far different judgment to
those of our times were the wise men of former Ages, whose Rules and Principles
were as are here these following (...); Malum been positum non est movendum;
Imperiti medici est pejus malo remedium adhibere; an Evil well placed is not to
be removed; It is the part of an unskilful Physician to apply a Remedy worse
than the disease.

XIV. I say in the third place, That although the changing of Laws may seem to
be necessary, by reason of some great, and evident Cause, yet it is not to be
attempted by the people, without the consent of the Prince, but modestly they
are to crave, and patiently to expect it of him; and this may aptly be
collected from the Analogy of the Head, and the Members, for how like a monster
were it, and destructive to the whole body, if the Arms, the Breast, or the
Feet should assume unto themselves the office of the Head? This is abundantly
enough demonstrated in those things which not long since we declared to you,
when we spoke of the efficient Cause of Laws, viz. That the principal Act of
Jurisdiction, cannot be exercised but by him only who is the Head, and chief of
the whole Commonalty; Therefore the Constitution, the abrogation, and any
Immutation of Laws whatsoever, which are all of them the principal Acts of the
chiefest Jurisdiction cannot pertain unto the people, unless where the people
are Prince, as in a State Democratical, but to him only, who does exercise a
Sovereignty of Dominion over the whole Commonalty, in a State Monarchical, and
who has the undoubted power of a transcendent Command by himself; In a
business of so great an importance, the duties of the people are these,
sincerely, and openly, but with all due reverence, to present their just
grievances to their Prince, and faithfully to lay before him with what present
remedies they may cure those evils that oppress them; and humbly to beseech
him, that he would be pleased to condescend to the petions of his Subjects, as
he shall judge it to be most safe and advantageous to the Commonwealth, and
confirm the grant of them with his Royal hand. And if he being thus petitioned
to shall refuse, they are to desist for that time from their purposes, and to
be content with their present affairs, and Laws, and that without all murmuring
or the least sign of force, until their Prince being thoroughly persuaded by his
Council, and Entreaties of some friends; or induced by the arguments of Reasons
shall renounce that pertinaciousnesse of his Spirit, and give an open Ear to
the desires of his Subjects.

XV. The Fifth Doubt, Seeing that the Common good is not only the End of the
Laws, but of the whole politic Government, Is it lawful out of any foresight
or pretense of the Common good to change the present form of Government, or to
attempt the change thereof, and how far, and to whom is it lawful? For Examples
sake, Is it lawful for the people to change a Monarchical Government into an
Aristocratical, or into a Democratical, or on the contrary? A Question of great
difficulty, and concernment, especially in these times, and manners, in which
we live. For my part I will faithfully represent unto you what I think of it,
and will leave unto every man the liberty to think what he pleases; I suppose
only what is already granted by many, and what cannot easily be deny, dviz.
that a Monarchy by Inheritance, or a successive Kingdom, is absolutely the best
amongst all the forms of Commonwealth, and highly to be preferred above the
other two; This being granted, I think in the first place, that the people, if
they please, may change a Democratical into an Aristocratical, or into an
Monarchical Government; First, because it seems to be a change for the
better; moreover in Democracy, the chief Command is in the Power of the people,
so that they may determine of themselves as they themselves please, provided
that no Injury be done to any man; Now it is most certain, that by this Change
no Injury is done by the people unto any one; It cannot be to any other, for no
Injury can be done to any man in any thing to which he has no Right, neither
can any Injury be done herein to themselves who of their own accord do make
this Change, for no Injury can be ever done to a willing Person. (...).
I think in the second place, that for all these reasons the Peers of a Land
also may turn their Aristocratical Government, Arist. 5.
into a Monarchical one; For it is a change into the better, Ethic. (...)
and by so doing, no injury is done to any man; But I cannot so easily resolve
you this doubt, whether it be as lawful for them to convert an Aristocracy into
a Democracy, for although they have power to do it, and it may be done by them
without any injury, yet it seems not to be a Commutation into a better State;
Thirdly, I believe, that the Monarchy of an elective Kingdom, may be changed
peradventure into any form of Government, but especially into an hereditary and
a successive Kingdom, and that for almost the same Reasons above alleged,
nevertheless this ought not to be done, unless the Kingdom by the death of him
that last Reigned be vacant, for otherwise it would be an injury to the present
King; And Secondly, it ought not to be done, unless by the joint consent of
the Peers of the Kingdom, and People, and of those persons who have the right
of electing. I think fourthly, that a Monarchy by inheritance cannot lawfully
be changed into an Elective Kingdom, or into any other form of Government,
either by the people alone, or by the joint consent of People, Peers, and King,
which is the whole people in their greatest latitude, unless peradventure
there shall be such a defect in the Royal Progeny, that there is not one of
them remaining to challenge the Kingdom due by inheritance to him. The Reasons
of this opinion are, First, Because according to our former supposition, it
were a change from a better to a worse; Secondly, Because by reason of that
exchange, an apparent injury would be done to the lawful Heir; Thirdly, Because
that not only the Exchange, but because such a desire, and endeavor, does seem
to be quite contrary to the words of Solomon, Prove. 24. 21. My Son fear God,
and the King, and have nothing to do with them who affect new things. What
before I said, I must in this place again repeat, viz. I do not urge this as
too confidently to affirm it, or to cause a disputation with any man in the
proof of this particular, if he be of another judgment.

XVI. The sixth doubt, How may that be understood which so commonly is spoken,
Salus p^puli est suprema Lex, The safety of the People is the supreme Law; The
reason of the doubt does proceed, from that which we propounded, and proved in
the beginning, viz. That the End of Laws is the public good; From hence on one
side it seems to follow, that the safety of the Commonwealth does depend on
the strict observance of the Laws, and on the other side, that all observancy
of the Laws ought to give place to the safety of the Commonwealth; And from
hence, some who within these few years have brought a new Divinity, and a new
policy into the Church and Commonwealth, have no less confidently, than
perversely collected and suggested, that the Liberty which they call the Right
of the Subjects (for so they interpret the Safety of the People) is to be
preferred above the prerogatives of Kings, or the enacting, or establishing of
Laws, and therefore all Regal Power and Authority of the Laws is to stoop unto
it. For the resolution of this doubt, you are to know, that all the deceit
almost on this vulgar Axiom, does arise from the Equivocation which lies hid
in the Terms, especially in that word People; For the people being a kind of a
Metaphorical Body, may be taken two ways, as the word Body may it self,
Collectively as it signifies the whole Commonalty of the Republic, that is
both King and Subjects, and Discretively, as it signifies the Subjects
precisely by themselves, and severed from the King; As when we say the King,
and the people; So in the word Body sometimes the other Members are to be
understood with the Head, as when we say the Soul and the Body, And sometimes
the Members only are precisely to be understood and the Head to be taken by its
self, as when we say the Head and the Body.

XVII. First therefore I say, that most precisely and by a very evil Counsel,
that is wrested, which is spoken of the people in the first sense to be
accommodated to them in the latter. There is no sober man will deny, that the
safety of the people, that is of the whole Commonalty, as that word comprehends
the King, together with the Subjects, is the supreme Law; But that the Safety
of the People, that is, of the Subjects, the King being excluded, is the
supreme Law, there is no man will affirm it, unless he be a fool, or an
Imposter; A fool, if he does believe what he himself says, and an Imposter, if
he does not believe it. But if any man will seriously look into the original of
this Aphorism, I do believe he will more easily grant, that it ought more
precisely to be understood of the safety of the Prince, than of the safety of
the Subjects. This saying so tossed up and down in the mouths of all men came
to us from the Romans, and was then used by them when their Republic did
flourish most of all under a popular State: And there is no great Reason that
any man should wonder, that the peoples Safety was the supreme Law with them,
with whom the people themselves were the supreme Power; In the Judgment
therefore of those wise Ancients, who were the first Authors of this Aphorism
the safety of the supreme Power was the supreme Law, of the people indeed in a
Democracy, but of a King in Monarchy.

XVIII. I say in the second place, it being admitted, but not granted, that
this Aphorism is properly understood of the Safety of the People, that is, of
the Subjects, it is nevertheless perversely wrested to the prejudice of Regal
Dignity, which even so does render its Power more ample and illustrious. In
this sense. A King that gives Laws and Statutes to his people will not be so
bound up by his Laws, that it shall not be lawful for him, the Safety of the
Commonwealth being in an apparent danger, to provide for the Safety of Kingdom
and people committed to him by God, even against the words of the Law; Not that
it is lawful for Subjects under the pretense of the defense of their liberty to
break all the bonds of Laws and fidelity, and by an intolerable presumption to
trample on the Authority of their King, but that it is lawful for the Prince,
in the preservation of his own and his Subjects Safety, to lay aside for a
while all strict observance of the Laws, and to make use a little of an
arbitrary Right, lest by a too unseasonable, and superstitious Reverence of the
Laws, he may suffer both his own person, and his people that are subject to
him, and even the Laws themselves, to fall into the Power of his Enemies.

XIX. I say in the third place, it being again admitted, but not granted, that
by this Aphorism some license were indulged to the Subjects themselves, as
necessity so requiring, to lay by the Laws to provide for the public Safety,
yet from hence that cannot be inferred, which may would conclude; For it is not
lawful for the Subjects, when they find their liberty in any thing to be
injured, or when they cry out they are sensible of it, to break through all
Bars of Laws and Duty, and without the knowledge of their Prince, to have
immediately their recourse to Arms, and to fill all things with tumults and
seditions But when the defense of their Princes, and their own liberties,
against all foreign or domestic Enemies, upon an urgent necessity does so call
them to it, that a pious and a prudent man would make no doubt of it, but if
the Lawmakers himself was present he would dispense with his own Laws, it is
then lawful for the Subjects to have a greater regard of the Common safety,
which is the supreme Law, and the end of all Laws, than to be fearful to
prejudice any particular Laws, which were therefore made to be subservient only
to the public safety.

XX. The sum of all is, The safety of the Commonwealth, that is to say, of the
Prince and of the Subjects, is the supreme Law, to which all inferior Laws are
so to submit, that present necessity so requiring, it is lawful for the Prince
by the prerogative of his own power, yea and it is lawful for the Subjects, the
consent of their Prince being according unto reason presumed, to recede
sometimes from the words of particular Laws, to assist their endangered
Country, and to be careful of its safety as the supreme Law, but so, that
unless the will and consent of the supreme power be expressly obtained, or
according unto reason presumed, they are not to attempt any thing under the
pretense of the public safety and liberty, but what the Laws do permit them to.

XXI. There are not a few Doubts, that are yet remaining, which in some manner
do pertain to this Final Cause, as concerning Privileges and Dispensations, and
the Relaxation of the obligation, in the danger of life, and others of the same
nature, which unto some may peradventure appear not altogether to agree with
the End of Humane Laws; The Solution whereof I have thought it more expedient
for to defer unto another time, although never so long, than by too much
prolixity, to tire and to torment so attentive and so courteous an Auditory.

THE TENTH LECTURE In which that most vulgar Speech (The safety of the People
is the Supreme Law) is more largely examined, and unfolded, that it may more
rightly be understood.
1 TIMOTHY: 2. 2. For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and Holiness.
I At this time and place, if peradventure you do remember it (Courteous
Readers) did intend to finish and complete this Treatise, concerning both the
obligations of Conscience, to wit, the Passive, and the Active; In the
unfolding of the former, having in first place, and in a Scholastical manner
excussed the Definition of Conscience, I was as elabourate as I could be in
examining, and discovering that proper, and Adequate Rule of Conscience, from
the directions whereof, it ought to exercise all, and every one of its Acts,
both of Dictating, and Judging. It was then represented to you, that the Holy
Scripture was the principal part of that Rule we held forth, but the Adaequate
part was that Will of God (which the Schoolmen call the Will of the sign) in
some degree made manifest to every man, whether, first, by an inbred light, by
Synteresis, and known by themselves, which the Philosophers (...) Common
Notions, and the Apostle, the Law of God written in our hearts; Or secondly, by
an Light, by some external Revelation, partly extraordinary, and private, to
some single persons, by visions, dreams, etc. at sundry times, and in sundry
manners; Partly ordinary, and made public to all mankind in the written word;
Or lastly, by an acquired light, by conclusions rightly practical principles,
or from the written word of God, or from our own meditations, or the
Institution of other men.

II. I affirmed, that all these, and every one of them do oblige the
Consciences of men, and only these, absolutely and primarily by themselves, and
by their proper virtue: for all these, and these alone do exhibit to us the
will of God, who alone of himself, has an absolute, and a direct command over
the Consciences of men; But I gave you to understand, that there were many
other things which Secondarily, and relatively, and by Virtue of the Law, or
the Divine will in which they are founded, do in their manner oblige the
Consciences; And all of them do agree in this, that they owe all the force of
obliging which they have to the Divine will, for otherwise the Divine Law would
not be the Adaequate Rule of Conscience; nevertheless they do all differ among
themselves, both in the Species, by reason of the diversity of the matter, and
also in the degree, according to the power of obliging. Moreover, there are
three degrees of those who do thus oblige. a right or power, in which number
are Humane Laws. proper will, such as are Vows, Oaths, Promises, and
Spontaneous Contracts. The third degree is of those things whose obligation
does arise from the intuition of brotherly Charity, in which classis is ranked
the Law, or the Consideration of Scandal, or offense.

III. As for the obligation of Humane Laws, I have spoken much more than at the
first I propounded to my self, yet it may be much less than the weight of the
thing deserved (of which in our daily Conversations there is a most frequent
Use) or the Abundance and Variety of those Doubts required, which might cast a
scruple into the minds of men; In the resolution where of I proceeded so far in
the former Terms, that having gone over those difficulties which I thought
could not improperly be reduced to the material, efficient, and formal Causes
of Laws, in my last Lecture I came to treat of those which more properly did
pertain to their final Cause; where at first having laid this foundation for
the whole following Discourse, That the good of the Commonalty, or which is the
same, that the public Peace and Happiness is the End of Humane Laws, with
what brevity and perspicuity that I could I answered to the six following
Questions. First, Common good being the end of Laws, The safety of the People
is the supreme Law is to be understood.

IV. These things I thought necessary to repeat more fully to you, that after
so long an interruption of Academical exercitations, my whole proceedings in
these Lectures, and the order I have observed therein, might better appear unto
you, and that I might recall into your memory the heads of those things which
having heard before with so much humanity, I justly do believe that in so long
an interval of time, you have almost forgotten. You will expect I conceive, and
not undeservedly, that I should now proceed in my intended course, and go
directly on to those next Doubts which yet remain to be resolved; As of those
of Privileges, of Dispensations, and to others which some ways do belong to the
final kind of a Cause. I do confess it indeed and I ought to do it; But my
friends do interrupt me, they advise, me that the stubborn and intolerable
boldness of some men do rather efflagitate, that seeing so precisely and so
impudently they abuse the Aphorism to the public ruin, although I expounded
it but in my last Lecture in the former Term, yet that I would take it under
examination again, and open the genuine sense thereof more clearly and fully
than before I had done; This in my Construction was nothing else but in a new
pomp of words, to do over that, which I had done before, and to the loathing of
your Stomachs to give you that meat you before were cloyd with. This desire was
not pleasing to me, but they did grow upon me with new importunities to take it
in hand again. It will be your humanity to resent and excuse that modesty which
I granted to my persisting friends, especially having used such a prevalent
Argument to overcome me to it, not doubting but it would be grateful to the
most of you, if I should again undertake it.

V. It is therefore my present business to declare unto you what is the
meaning of that common Axiom, The safety of the people is the supreme Law, and
how it is to be understood. Some men within these few years, not well employed,
have invented, and brought at last into the Commonwealth a new state of
Government, as before they had brought into the Church a new Religion, and as
they have earnestly endeavored under the pretense of Conscience, or of
Christian liberty, to overthrow all the force and frame of the Ecclesiastic
Government, so under the pre^ence of Civil liberty, or the liberty of the
Subject, they labor in this confusion of times, and with incredible heat of
spirit, and military terror, to shake, and from the very foundation of it to
pluck up the whole Fabric of the Government of State. These as often as they
are accused of the Royal Dignity trod under feet, of the despised Authority of
all holy Laws, of the disturbance of the public peace, of an unbridled and
horrible tyranny exercised on their fellow Subjects, all bars of Right and
Justice being broken down, of an affected parity in the Church, and in the
Commonwealth, all difference of birth, and honors, and States being taken
away, and many more such Anabaptistical impieties, they presently defend
themselves, and their manners, with this safety of the people, as with a
Buckler, and think this alone to be preferred to all Laws, Kings, Ordinances,
and Customs whatsoever.

VI. From so loose and dangerous an Interpretation of this vulgar Axiom, not
only a window, but a spacious door being opened to seditious tumults, and all
manner of popular license; It is manifest that they who defend their horrible
wickedness with this forbidden buckler, do not entertain the pure and genuine
construction of that Axiom, but do feign another to themselves, which by an
enforced Interpretation, may give some show of Patronage to their depraved
Counsails, and their Cause; For as often as any man to serve his Avarice,
Ambition, Hatred, or Anger shall attempt new designs, and fill all things with
Rapine, Blood, and Plunder, he incontinently may pretend the Safety of the
People for his nefarious Villainy. Examine I pray you the Annals, and
Chronicles of all times throughout the world, both sacred, profane, ancient,
modern, exotic, or our own, you shall every where find that the Catilines, and
Cethegi of all times, and places, did constantly practice these things, under
the pretense of liberty, and popular safety, so that he may seem to have a
Melonin stead of a Heart, (they are Tertullians own words) that will suffer
himself to be thus Circumvented, and deluded; But whether unwarily, has this
Tempest hurried me, whiles I let loose the reigns to my just Indignation? I
therefore do contain my self, and that I may appear a Disputant, and not an
Orator, I return to the matter in hand.

VII. Where in the first place this is to be considered, what in that vulgar
Axiom is meant by the word Safety; For it any man finds his dignity, or
liberty, affronted, or injured in some small thing, nay, and if it be a great
one, he is not presently to complain that he has endangered, or lost his
Safety; For every Hurt, or Blemish is not directly opposed to the Safety of any
thing, or person, but the Ruin or Destruction of it. It is altogether the same
thing (a due Analogy being reserved) in a body Politic and Republic, as it is
in a humane body, and a single person; By reason of the jarring of the contrary
qualities in a man's body, because of the defect or excess of inward Heat, and
Cold, and a various Immutation of extrinsecal Accidents, it may so come to
pass that a man may hardly enjoy his health, but very often in one part or
other of his body, he may endure that, either within, or without, which may be
very troublesome to him, it may also come to pass, that by the Stone, the
Toothache, or the Gou^, or by some other disease in some other part, he may
feel an extreme pain, or be so sick in every part that he may lie down, yet in
the mean time it may be neither necessary, nor seasonable, to have recourse
unto extraordinary Remedies, as if he were in apparent danger of his life, and
safety. So in a Commonwealth, we must not presently attempt against the Laws,
and Ordinances; We must not gather together a rabble of the vulgar, and raise
tumults; we must not presently cry out Arms Arms for the safety of the people,
as soon as any popular Soldier, or bold Babbler, shall complain unto the
people, and accuse the Prince, the Peers, the Magistrates, and Judges, or their
Ministers, or any one of them, of violating the Laws, doing Injury, or
neglecting their duties, although peradventure they have deserved it. There
ever were, and will be under the best Kings, and the best governed
Commonwealths, some oppressions of the meaner Citizens, proceeding from the
abuse of Power, and many other grievances, for the preventing or redressing of
which, no care or industry of the Governors, no severity of the Laws could
prevail, for if it shall be lawful for the factious Citizens, as soon as ever
they see one or another example of this nature, to despise all Laws and
Ordinances, and under the pretense of the public safety, to revenge themselves
upon the oppressors by force of Arms; Kingdoms and Commonwealths will never be
free from troubles and tumults; Our Savior says, Luke. 17. 1. It cannot be
avoided but that offenses will come, and we must go out of the world, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5. 10. or seek some Eutopia or Platonic Commonwealth to
preserve us, if we shall make such an Interpretation of the safety of the
people, that unless every one of the lowest degree of Citizens be altogether
secure from all unjust force, and unrighteous Domination of some Superior or
other, there shall be no public peace at all. The safety of the Commonwealth
is then indeed in danger, when by the incursions of Exotic Enemies, or by the
depraedations of wicked Citizens, the affairs are brought into so manifest a
danger, that unless some timely help be provided, the City and Country
undoubtedly will be destroyed.

VIII. We have seen what our Innovators do mean by the word Safety; In the next
place we are to observe how rightly that word People is interpreted by them.
The People as St. Augustine defines them from the lost books of Cicero in his
Repub. is Coetus multitudinis Hominum juris consensu and utilitatis Communione
Sociatus; De (...).
A multitude of men associated by the consent of Law and Right, and the
Communion of profit; (...) in this appellation of people, all the Roman
Citizens of every Order and Condition were contained; For besides Kings in
their first times, and Emperors in their last, the Romans had a threefold
degree of distinction; Patricians, Knights, and the Common people; But in what
a latitude this word is to be received amongst the Latin writers wheresoever
it is found, the Reader may collect by the adjoined circumstances, which for
the most part for a most sure argument for this purpose may best be done by
those words which are annexed, viz. the opposite Terms. The word People is
taken three ways by the Roman Writers; First (and of all the most unusual) it
is taken for the Common People alone, Rom^, as in that of Martial, Dat populus,
dat gratus eques, dat thura Senatus. Where the word People being opposed to the
Senate, and the Knights, can signify nothing but the Common People. Secondly,
for both the inferior orders of People, viz. the Common People, Turba of the
People; From whence came those solemn Forms; The Senate, and the People of
Rome; It seemed good to the Senate, and the People of Rome; In which the name
of People does comprehend all the other Citizens, both Knights, and
Common People, Fathers, Knights, and Common People, for of these three orders,
after that Kings desisted, and there were as yet no Emperors, the whole City
did consist; And in this sense (for in the whole duration of that
Commonwealth, the State was popular) the Roman writers are to be understood,
as often as they make mention of the preserving of the Safety, Dignity, and
Majesty, of the people.

IX. I have the more diligently expounded these things, not only because the
proper significations of many words of this kind do depend on the use of that
people, from whom the words themselves are derived to us, but for another two
fold Cause; The one, that we suffer not our selves to be deceived people, there
may be no force to the prejudice of him who is Prince of the Commonalty, and
the head of the people; Either of which, of what moment they are to our present
purpose, you shall presently understand by those things which I am to prefer
unto you.

X. I say therefore that this word people (as many other words, signifying an
aggregate multitude) collectively, as it signifies the whole Commonalty of the
Republic, discretively and precisely, as it signifies the Subjects only, and
severed from the King; In the very same manner, as the Body either implies the
rest of the Members with the Head, or the rest of the Members without the Head;
And the appellation of a Family, does sometimes comprehend all who are within
one House, Wife, Children, Servants, and the Master of the Family himself, who
is over them all, and sometimes again those only who are under his command, and
of whom he has care; And in the name of an Army, sometimes the General is
comperhended with the Soldiers, sometimes he is not comprehended; And the like
is to be observed in the words of Parliament or Kingdom, and other words of the
same kind, which signify indeed a collection of many, but with order and
reference to one as their principal, or their Head. Therefore if not with a
malignant intent, yet certainly by a most dangerous Error it comes to pass,
that that which is spoken of the people collectively in the former sense,
inclusively to comprehend the whole Commonalty, that is, the Prince with the
Subjects, should be so wrested, that it should be applied to the people in the
latter sense, that is, to the Subjects alone, the King excluded.

XI. But you will say, how may it appear to us that the Appellation of people
in the first sense, may in that Axiom be understood collectively for the King
and people, and not discretively, in the later sense for the common people
alone? I answer, that most manifestly it does appear by the common use of
speaking, and the Analogy of other words of the same signification; In which
the most certain rule of Interpretation is, that words collective are always
to be taken collectively, unless the Adjunct which is opposite to it, does
require it. For examples sake, where it is said, 1 Col. 1. 18. Christ is the
Head of the Body of the Church; It is manifest by the Adjunct opposite to it,
to wit, the mention of the Head, to which the Body is there relatively opposed,
that the word Body is there taken discretively for the other Members of the
body, precisely severed from the Head; So if any man should say that the
General had advanced with his Army into the Fields, or had sent them to their
winter quarters, or that the Master of a Family had forbad any belonging to him
to go out of his doors at twelve of the Clock at night; Or what is written of
David, That whatsoever the King did, was acceptable to the people; It is
manifest by the Adjunct every where opposed, that in the word General, master,
and King, those collective words of Army, Family, and Subjects, are not to be
understood collectively, but discretively and exclusively that is, by the
appellation of the Army, the Soldiers are only comprehended, and not the
General, and by the appellation of Family, the Servants or Children are
comprehended, and not the Master himself, and by the appellation of people, the
Subjects are only comprehended, and not the King; The reason is, because the
Opposite, which is one of the correlatives, being adjoined, does necessarily
imply the word collective, answering on the other side, and relatively opposite
unto it, to contain precisely its correlative, that is, the multitude only
annexed and conjoined to the Head, and chief, and not the whole Commonalty
aggregated as it were from both the Terms correlative.

XII. But when an Opposite is not added which may necessarily carry its
signification to the other part of the Relation only, it were incongruous to
sense and reason to take the word collective. otherwise than collectively, and
in its just latitude, so that ^t may thereby comprehend both the Terms of the
Relations, especially when the speech is concerning safety, profit, or any
other good or advantage which is or mat be common to them both; for examples
sake, if it were commanded that tomorrow the camp should march because the Army
should not be environed by the Enemy, or that Corn should be bought for the
present use of a Family, Orectes himself would swear that the man was not of a
sober understanding, who should apprehend that what was spoken either of the
Army or the Family had relation only to the good of the Soldiers, and the
Servants, no account or care being had of the General who commanded the Army,
nor of the Master who governed the Family; which is all one as if a sick man
being admonished by the Physician to have a greater care of his body for the
future, should with a great diligence begin to keep warm his Breast, and his
Thighs, and other members beneath his neck, but take no care at all to provide
for his head, because the Physicitian did only put him in mind of his body but
not of his head.

XIII. But I come yet nearer to the point in hand, if Peradventure a whole
company of common Soldiers should affirm that the safety of the Army was the
supreme Law military, but they had a General who did put them upon such hard
service, by his unsufferable commands that unless they timely should shake off
the yoke of obedience to him, the whole liberty of the Army would be in great
danger to be lost, and thereupon from this Principle of asserting their own
liberties by force of Arms, they should consult and agree amongst themselves,
no longer to obey his commands, but to take away the life of their General; Or
if household Servants, (whom the Apostle 1 Peter 2. 18. would have obedient not
only to those who are good, and favorable to them, but to those also who are
rough and rigorous,) should combine amongst themselves, to refuse his commands
as too burdensome, and therefore because too insolently he domineereth over
them to drive him out of his house, to seize upon his Keys, Truncks, and all
his goods, and to manage themselves the Government of the Family at their own
pleasure, under this pretense only, that The safety of the Family is the
supreme Law oeconomical, There is no man but will confess but that these
wicked and nefarious Counsels, may by some lawful consequence be deduced from
these Principles, which Principles being rightly understood are most true and
profitable; And yet an egg is not more like unto an egg, than the Arguments
of those men, who by pretending the peoples safety fill all things with
sedition, are to this wild kind of reasoning, as if (and that very eminently
also,) the safety of the General were not contained and included in the safety
of the Army; and the safety of the Master in the safety of his Family, and the
safety of a Prince in the safety of his people. To be short, we must
acknowledge, the safety of the People, that is of the King and People together,
is the supreme Law, but the safety of the People, that is, of the Subjects, the
King being excluded, is not so.

XIV. In the second place I am to add something more; And though I conceive
that I have clearly enough proved, that in this Axiom by the word People
neither the Subjects without the Prince, nor the Prince without the Subjects
ought precisely and by themselves to be understood, but both of them
conjunctively, yet if any man will more exactly consider either the dignity of
the persons, or the original of this Aphorism, he will willingly grant it to be
understood more precisely of the safety of the King, than precisely of the
safety of the People; For first, that the Kings Majesty is sacred has not been
only most copiously acknowledged by all the Fathers of the Church even at that
time when there were no Christian Kings, who have reverenced them as men second
to God, and less only than God himself, and have offered Vows, and Prayers
unto God for their safety, and have taught that on their safety, the safety and
happiness of the whole people did depend; But God himself (as largely may be
shown if need required) has been pleased that abundantly it should be
testified in the holy Scriptures; From whence it came to pass, that all good
Subjects and endued with a right understanding, in the height, and heat, and
the extremest danger of Battle, have judged that the safety of the King alone,
was to be preferred above the safety to them all, which as it became good
Subjects, those Israelites gallantly professed, who at the time of the
execrable Conspiracy of Absolon, preserved their fidelity which they vowed to
King David, 2 Samuel 18. 3. And of the same mind were they, who (not basely
flattering a mortal man for their own profit, but speaking according to the
Dictates of the Spirit of God) have called the King the breath of their
nostrils, for so that godly Prophet, and sanctified from his mothers womb, the
Prophet Jeremy speaks it, Lamen. 4. 20. In a most apt signification, That
breath which is attracted, and emitted through the nostrils being that vital
breath, Animus R^publica tu es: illa corpus tuum. Senec. 1. de clem. 5. -- Ille
spiritus vitalis, quem haec tot millia trabunt. Ibid. c. 4.
with which the soul as with a Bond is united to the Body, and which failing,
the living Creature must forthwith necessarily expire and perish; His Breath
goes forth, he returns to his Earth, Psalm. 146. 4.

XV. This also is worthy your observation, that the Axiom of which we now
treat, has been brought unto us from the Roman Nation, and then in use with
them, when Rome did most flourish in a popular state. And there is no reason we
should wonder, That the safety of the people was to them a supreme Law, to whom
the people themselves were the supreme Power. The Laws were then the Peoples,
the judgments the Peoples, the whole jurisdiction the Peoples, the entire
Government and autocratical Majesty was the Peoples. And from hence it is, that
amongst all the Historians, and in Cicero also and other Writers of that age,
so frequent a mention is made of the majesty of the Roman people, as being in a
state Democratical, which in a state Monarchical is not the Peoples but the
Kings. Therefore, as much as the safety of the People was to them, with whom
was the Majesty of the People, which how much it was, by the Aphorism they
would it should be testified to the world, so much unto us if we will make use
of of that Aphorism (an Analogy in the so different forms of both Republics
being rightly observed, as fit it should be so) should be the safety of our
Kings who acknowledge no other majesty but the Kings, only.

XVI. From these things which have been spoken, I believe it is manifest
enough, that neither in the appellation of Safety, nor in the appellation of
People there is any force at all in this vulgar Axiom, as to wrest it to the
prejudice of Kingly dignity, unless with the greatest injury that can be done
unto it; And if the two other remaining words of it, viz. The supreme Law
should be rightly weighed, they would acknowledge I believe if they had but any
Modesty, or Reason, that nothing can be spoken in this Axiom which is more
ample and illustrious to establish the sovereign Power of Kings; For these
words the supreme Law do suppose that in every Commonwealth there ought
necessarily to be somewhere a sovereign Power which is above all humane Laws
positive, (...). Arist. 5. Ethic. 14. Nulla tanta providentia potuit esse eorum
qui leges compo^ebant, ut species criminum complecterentur. Quinti^. declam.
331.
to which he ought to look, and by his Authority to take care, that neither by
the defect of Laws, or the too superstitious observance of them, the
Commonwealth may receive any damage. And the reason of this is plain enough,
for the wisest Lawmakers cannot so foresee all circumstances of events to come,
neither can he make such a sufficient precaution by the Laws, as to prevent all
those Evils, and inconveniences which he suspects may come to pass; and this
is not by the fault of the Laws, or of the Lawmakers, but as Aristotle has
excellently observed it, it is by reason of the nature of those things that are
to be defined by the Laws which being indefinite by Reason of their variety,
and uncertain, (...) Ibid.
because depending on futurity, cannot be comprehended within some certain
Rules of Limitation. The Lawmakers therefore has discharged his part, if by
his Laws he has ordained those things which are for the most part just,
Aristot. 1.
and profitable to the Commonalty, Ethic. 14.
although it may so fall out, as indeed often times it does, that on some
sudden and unexpected Emergencies, those Laws may be defective in some
particular cases not foreseen; And in this Case, if there be not a person,
orsome persons to exercise a kind of an arbitrary Power, there will be no other
effectual Remedy to relieve the endangered Country, and provide for the public
safety; And this is the reason why wise men have always determined, and Reason
also persuades to it, that in exigent points of necessity, Legal Justice ought
to give place to Equity, Equity according unto Aristotle being nothing else
then the rectifying, (...) Arist. ib^d.
or the correcting of legal justice, or even of the Law it self, (as presently
afterward he explains that Definition) by supplying its defect in particular
cases, in which it comes to pass that by too much generality it falls short of
either Justice, or the public Profit; For it is necessary that Laws should be
constituted generally out of a respect to those things, which generally, and
for the most part are done, but not out of a respect to all those things which
may be contingent in particulars, in many of which, if Laws were strictly and
by a praes^ript of words accommodated, they must necessarily be defective also,
and fall short of either moral Justice, or of Common Profit, or of both of them.

XVII. This being then granted, that the safety of the People, that is, the
public profit does require, that there be some Authority in the Commonwealth
which is to be above the Laws, and to supply the defects thereof, it will
necessarily follow by Consequence, Aistot. 3.
which Aristotle asserteth in his politics, Polit II.
that this supreme Authority cannot appertain to any one else than to him alone
who is set over the whole Commonalty, and invested with the chiefest Power,
Whether he be a single person, as in a monarchial Government, or many, as in
other Forms of Commonwealths: Shall it be lawful therefore now for Subjects,
under pretense of of public liberty and safety, to break all the Bonds,
Ordinances, Laws, and Fidelity, and by an intolerable rage of Pride, (...),
to tread under their Feet, the Authority of Laws and Princes, and for the
Defense of so great a Villainy, impudently to abuse and pervert that Aphorism,
which those factious men are always boasting of and repeating to one another,
viz. Salus populi est suprema Lex; Homer. Illiad. ^.
The safety of the people is the supreme Law; How comes it to pass, that on the
contrary, they will not understand, that even by the very same Axiom it is
acknowledged, that the Prince has a Power even over the Laws themselves; so
that it is lawful for him out of the fullness of his Power, if necessity
compels, and the Affairs admit of no delay for the defense of his own, and his
Peoples safety against foreign or domestic Enemies, to lay aside for awhile the
stricter observation of the Laws, lest by a too superstitious, and too
unreasonable Reverence of them, he suffers both himself, and his people, and at
last the Laws themselves to fall into the power of his Enemies.

XVIII. As to that Question, whether a Ptince be free himself from the Laws he
has made, and which are confirmed, and approved by the Consent of the People,
and received by common Use, and how far he is bound, ordinarily, to observe
them, I shall hereafter (God willing) give you my Judgment therein; It is now
only here demanded, whether it be lawful for him, without order, and in case of
necessity, for the defense of his Country, to do some thing either besides, or
against the Law it self? That it is lawful for him so to do, and that in good
Conscience the defect of the Laws in respect of the whole, and from the
uncertainty and multiplicity of particular events, Sam. on the Right of Kings,
1. Sam. 6. and which cannot well be interpreted otherwise, although many in
vain have attempted so to do. But that the least scruple may not arise, nor
remain from any thing which has here been spoken, and is misunderstood, Give
me leave I pray you to call back this so divulged an Axiom to its first
Original; And if I shall not so perform it, that you your selves may confess,
that the Care of the public safety, the Laws sometimes laid aside does
according to the meaning and sense of the Axiom it self, depend wholly on the
will of the Prince, and nothing at all on the will of the People, proclaim me
to grow dark in the cleare^ light, and that I have hitherto been not the
Defendor, but a Prevaricator, and Betrayer of the best of Causes.

XIX I have declared already, that this Axiom was derived from the Romans unto
us; I shall now add that which first of all (as I know of) is written in the
first Book of Marcus Cicero de Legib. But by himself as he affirms taken out
of the ancient Laws of that Nation, and described by him in the very word of
the Law it self; Having therefore in the former explained the Laws belonging to
Religion, and the worship of the Gods, in his third Book he proceeds to give an
account of those which belong to the Magistrates, and Commonwealth. Where
amongst other things he has these words, I must beseech you to give due
attention to them, Regio Impereo duo sunto: iique praecundo, judicando,
consulendo, Praetores, Judices, Consules appellantor. Militiae summum jus
habento; Nemini parento; Ollis Salus Populi suprema Lex esto. Let there be two
in the Sovereign Command, and for their going before, Ruling or Judging and
Counselling, let them be called Praetors, Judges, and Consuls; Let the chief
Right of the Militia be theirs; let them be under none; Let the Safety of the
People be a supreme Law unto them; To them, that is, to them that are invested
with the sovereign Command, who had the chiefest Power of the Militia, and
acknowledged not any Power above their own to which they were to be obedient;
That is, to the two Consuls, who although by the Constitution of that
Commonwealth did exercise only a yearly Magistracy, yet for that time, they
had the chiefest Power over the City, and the greatest part of the world, which
was in Subjection to the Roman Empire; Come hither all you, whosoever you are,
who amongst these or other Nations are assertors and Patrons of popular
License; Read, and^ read overagain every period weigh every sentence, clause,
and point Examine every word, syllable, and tittle. Where will you find, the
Prince being unwilling, the least sign of any Power granted to the Subject,
either of judging of the safety of the People, or of acting, or determinating
any thing against the Laws? Does not the whole course of the words in Cicero
openly pronounce, that the supreme Authority, which is above all Laws, and the
whole Care of the public safety, does properly belong to him who has the
Regal Command, and the chief Right of the Militia, Salutem Reipublicae nulli
magis convenire, quam Caesari.
and a transendent Power to be subject unto none? And that to prove this truth
you may have the Consent of the most excellent Writers both Greek and Latin,
Aristotle does express the same in these words, 3. Polit. 2. (...), Paulus. l.
3. F. de off. praef. vig.
That is, He who is set over the Commonwealth, whether he be a single person
or more, has the Arbitration and Power of determining those things of which
the Laws cannot accurately, that is, speak of in particular, because it is no
easy task universally to comprehend particulars.

XX. Some peradventure will except against this, and say; It goes very ill with
mankind, if the safety of all must depend on the Arbitration of one, when in a
case of the highest necessity, it is not lawful for any man to provide for his
own and the public safety without his Counsel. What, if by some sudden and
unexpected casualty the affair will not admit the delay of one day? Whiles we
are going, (...), Eurip. ap. ap. Stob. (...). 1. 10.
counselling, and returning, the Commonwealth may be destroyed, what will you
advise us to, if it be necessary in such a straight of time, and distance (...)
place to expect the leave, and consent of the King? I answer, in this nature,
the Subjects may be permitted to act something of themselves, and without the
Princes consent, if an urgent and unavoidable necessity does require, for
necessity as the Proverb speaks it, has no Law. I deny nevertheless, that from
this assertion that may be done which some would have to be done. I say
therefore in viz. That all Laws being neglected they should themselves provide
for the public safety, does come unto them upon another account, for it can no
ways rely on the authority of this present Aphorism as on its foundation which
leaves unto the Prince alone the care of providing for the public safety, and
does not permit it to the people; Again, it is one two things above all other
must most precisely be observed, and he who shall neglect either of them cannot
defend himself by any excuse of necessity, and how religigiously they have
observed them, who have been the Authors or Fomentors of the most deplorable
troubles in this Kingdom, I forbear in this place to make mention of, let them
look to that themselves; The two conditions are these; First that no thing be
done, or attempted to be done, to the prejudice of the Prince, whose person and
whose dignity it pertains to the public safety to be most careful to preserve
inviolable; Secondly, that nothing likewise be attempted against the Laws and
Rights of the Kingdom, In manifestis non opus est interpretatione, sed
executione. Aquin. 2. 2 qu. 120. art. 2.
but by the Princes consent, either his express consent, where conveniently it
may be had, or at least reasonably presumed; if he be at a great distance, and
the affair admits of no delay, the consent of the Prince is then reasonably
presumed, when the necessity is so great and evident that no wise or sober man
can doubt, but if the Prince himself were present he would grant unto his
Subjects a relaxation of that Law.

XXI. These two conditions being observed, unless there arises no impediment
from particular Circumstances, certum est omnia licere pro patria. Quintil.
declam. 369.
I say it is lawful for Subjects for the defense of the safety of the Prince,
and of themselves, if it be against the Invasion of Foreign, or the Insurrection
of Domestic Enemies, to look more to the common profit which is the supreme
Law, than to the letter of particular Laws, which are therefore made to serve
the public profit, and not to prejudice it; The reason is evident, for middle
things are for the end, and not the end for middle things, and therefore these
middle things ought to be subservient to the end, and not the end to them;
therefore seeing the public safety has under it the consideration of the End,
and the Laws, but the consideration of middle things, and seeing it is certain,
that in the Intention of the Agent, the End is before and more to be respected
than all middle things are or can be, it must follow, both that the common
profit of our Country is to be preferred above all particular Laws, and that
rightly it is to be presumed, that the Prince is of the same opinion, who is
Principal Agent in making of Laws, and therefore whatsoever herein is done in
his absence, or to be done, he tacitly does consent unto it, (provided his own
Dignity and Right being saved) a manifest necessity does exact it for the
public safety.

XXII. The Histories are full of examples to prove this, but the reason of it
being so manifest, I purposely pass them by as superfluous; I will only produce
one, but an Illustrious one, and worthy to be inserted into the Annals of this
Nation for the eternal memory of the Gentleman, and which was done also in this
age, and in the memory of some here present; It was the remarkable act of the
high Sheriff of Worcestershire; To put the Laws in execution, and chiefly for
the preservation of the public peace, there is an yearly Magistrate called a
high Sheriff, set over all the Shires of England, to this Magistrate for the
undergoing of so great an Office, there is granted by the Laws of the Land, the
power of summoning the trained Bands to assist him as often as need requires,
to go with him, to discover and suppress any Tumults, and Disorders, that may
happen in any place of his County, but so, that it is not lawful for him to go
with the said trained Bands beyond the Terms and bounds of his own County;
After that by the great and wonderful mercy of God the Powder Treason was
discovered, some who were conscious of that Conspiracy, and one or two of the
chiefest of them did fly into Worcestershire; the high Sheriff, a gallant and
prudent man, did follow them as they fled from place to place with the trained
Bands, and being come to the uttermost confines of his County, he feared if he
should make a halt there, and pursue them no further, by reason of the fear of
the Laws, they might escape away, he was therefore so venturous that for all
the Law he brought the trained Bands into the County that was contigious to it,
where having overtaken the Traitors, he reduced them unto his Power, and took
along with him the Ringleaders of them, with the rest of that desperate Rabble;
He conceived to himself (as indeed he ought to do) if he should thoroughly
perform the duty of a good Subject, he could never express it in a more
honorable service, and in that point of Necessity the more strict observance
of the Laws was unseasonable, he was therefore to obey the supreme Law, that is
to say, the safety of his Country, and to disregard all things in respect to
the public profit. The Business being thus dispatched according to his own
Desire, the wise and active Gentleman, least the Authority of the Laws should
be disparaged by his Example, which indeed was to be imputed to Necessity, and
being sensible withal to how grievous a Punishment they are liable in the Rigor
of the Law who are the violators of it, believed he had not done enough to
acquiesce in the consciousnesse only of what he had achieved, unless withal
he had made a provision for his safety for the Time to come, and took as much
care as in him lay, that no man should abuse his Example, by (peradventure) too
boldan undertaking of any new Design. He therefore posts away unto King James
of happy memory, and prostrating himself at his feet, he humbly craved pardon
for the violation of the Law, and as he deserved, he not only from the most
prudent King obtained pardon for the not observance of the Law, but praise for
preferring the public safety above it.

XXIII. To give satisfaction to some friends, I have here (my Auditors)
expounded to you a little more largely then my Custom is, what is the sense of
that Axiom Salus populi suprema Lex. The safety of the people is the supreme
Law, and to stop withal, the Mouths of some importunate Men, who to speak with
Solomon do force blood from the too much wringed Nose, that is, by
misinterpreting a pious saying, and indeed (if it be rightly understood)
salubrious to the public, they perversely render it impious, and destructive
unto mankind. To be short the sum of all is this, If some private persons be
hurt or injured, If the Subjects have some public Grievances of which they
justly may complain, they must not presently have a recourse (as if the safety
of the people were in the extremest Jeopardy) to extraordinary Remedies, and
which are contrary to the Laws; But if there be a just fear that the
Commonwealth will be ruinated, either by foreign Enimyes, or seditious
Subjects, unless something be effected which is not permited by the Laws, It is
then lawful for the Prince by the Prerogative of his own Power, nay, it is
lawful for the Subjects by the presumed Will of their Prince (provided nothing
be acted to his prejudice, and the present exigence of Necessity so requires)
to recede from the word and sense of particular Laws to assist the endangered
Country, and to be serviceable to the safety thereof, as to the supremest Law.
I shall suddenly proceed to prosecute the rest, as God shall permit and
opportunity shall enable me. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ etc.

Thus far I have committed the Sayls unto the Winds, although in a blustering
season, and the face of Heaven being masked with many Clouds, (yet God being my
Pilot) I safely proceeded in my intended course, and now I did begin to stand
more off to Sea, being resolved if the Times would give me leave, to have
reached the desired Port, when behold a sudden and over-powering Tempest did
over my head admonish me, that for the time to come it would be very unsafe to
adventure further, or to continue ploughing through these unquiet Deeps, I
perceived therefore that new Counsels were forthwith to be taken, and unless I
would be come the reproach and sport of the Winds, I must no longer stay on
such a dangerous and such a vaunting Sea; I suddenly therefore tacked about,
and timely brought my Ship into the Haven, for it seemed to me more honorable
gradually to retreat, than to be beaten back by force, and more profitable for
my affairs to live within my own doors with ease and umbrage, than to be seen
in the Market place, or on the Theater, attended with noise, and fear, and envy.

Hinc eadem FINIS discriminis, atque laboris, Therefore till Heaven some calmer
days shall send,
The Work, and Dangers, here together END.

THE END.
THE FOLGER SHAKESPEARE LIBRARY



