A Pious PRESIDENT To both KINGDOMS, For a Sacred COVENANT. Being an
Abstractive Exposition by way of Paraphrase, upon the tenth Chapter of
Nehemiah, the 28, and 29. Verses.

By DANIELL SWIFT, Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Quidni dulce eruam ac salutare epulum Spiritus de sterili et insipida litera,
tanquam granum de palea, de testa nucleum, de osse medullam? Bernard in Cant.
sermo. 73.

Omnis panis nutrimentum assert ad salutem, aegris autem saepe inutilis, sic et
omnis scriptura munda mundis. Basil. ad Chyl. de solitaria vita.

Seen and allowed.

LONDON: Printed by Mary Oaks, dwelling in little St. Bartholomewes. 1643.

To the Right Honorable, Right worthy and religious Patriots of their
Country, Robert Earl of Essex, Robert Earl of Warwick, and Ferdinando Lord
Fairfax, renowned Instruments for disappointing, and discouraging of the Romish
and bloody adversaries of Gods sacred Truth.
Right Honorable,
I Know you expect not flattering Titles, for (besides the dint of Divine
displeasure) this were but to despite you with seeming Honors. I desire not
with airy ambages to tickle your ears, I am sure down right truths make the
deepest impression upon honest hearts; neither do I sound the trumpet of
applause; Heroicke actions, are glorious encomiums; Faithfulness to God, the
King, and Country, are the only diadem of true Nobility, I may lay my hand
upon my mouth, your own works shall praise you in the gates. There be many
(Right Honorable) in these times, who care not to adventure their necks to
advance themselves, and matter not to hazard their souls, to ruin the Church;
but as your Honors have public spirits for the common good, so I am
persuaded Gods glory is your highest aims, and to approve your selves before
him, in all your understandings the chief endeavor of your souls: Let them
look at worldly acclamations as pleasing cordialls; It is your Crown, and
will be the rejoicing of your hearts, that you keep a conscience void of
offense, both toward God, and toward his Saints; they are deceived who so
highly estimate a little Laud, for he only whom God commends is approved;
without, or against whom whosoever desires to be applauded shall not be
defended when God judges him, nor delivered when God condemns him. It is
more then probable that nefarious wretches, and profane creatures, by
reproachful speeches, cast firebrarnds in your Honors faces; But what though?
Physicians make the best Triacle of venomous Serpents, Jasons impostume was
opened, and so healed by his enemies sword in the wars. You are Wise Men, I
hope you will make better use of your foes, then fools of their friends: their
aspersions may prove doctrinall, teaching you to keep closer (in a holy
dependency) unto your God. I confess you might be free from these, durst you
but abnegate or desert the Truth; their revilings shall be your blessings: they
are nocent, you innocent; they are deceived, they take you for such as you are
not; they have with the bellows of Malignancy blown up the coals of
contention, they have enforced you (seeking by violence to depresse the power
of godliness) to take up arms in the defense of Christ, and his indeered
servants, surely it is a double injury to beat men causelessly till they cry,
and then to beat them for crying, by injury, and oppression to kindle strife,
and then to cry out against it, as Athaliah cried out of treason: offenses will
come, but there is no woe denounced against the persons offended, but against
those by whom they come. Ride on Noble Lords, keep your swords still girt
about your thighs, let nothing discourage you, outface the proud looks of
approaching adversaries, their own sparks shall further their own burning,
Gods wrath shall not end in your, but in their destruction. Your honors zeal
for Religion, love to your Country, courage in the public cause, and mutual
agreement in an holy Covenant, have hitherto spoke your sincerity, declared
your piety, and made you exemplary to them that shall succeed you. O now afresh
pluck up your spirits, quit your selves like Worthies in Israel, Christ like a
man of war leads out your forces, if our sins interrupt not our mercies, the
blood of your enemies shall spring up to the horse bridles, and a glorious
victory shall be yours. Pardon my boldness in speaking to your Honors, accept
of my Mite though it be small; I hope when you try it, you shall not find it
reprobate silver, but current coin. You have entered into an Oath, it is for
God, the Gospel, our Sovereign, the Kingdom and your selves, I doubt not but
you will set the Lord Jehovah in the prosecution of this sacred Covenant,
continually before your eyes, and by your zeal provoke many, adding fuel to
the fire, and oil unto the flame of their endeavors. The Lord prosper you in
your great affairs, cover your heads in the day of battle, and go forth
before you in all your enterprises, against the Romish and Antichristian
Faction. So prays he, who remains ever

Your Honors humbly devoted, D. S.
October 16. 1643.
To all that wish well to the Cause of God, and the Gospel of Christ, in the
two famous Kingdoms of England, and Scotland, and in particular to his native
Countrymen, in the County of Leceister; D. S. wishes a firm Union in a
sacred Covenant, with a godly peace as the glorious effect thereof in this
life, and eternal and everlasting peace in the life to come.
EXpect not Complements, I am no Courtier, they are not for Christians. look
not that I should wind into your affection by Rhetorical expressions or smooth
Supparisi ations in the Preface; my intention is otherwise, viz, to present
unto you matter directory in the Treatise. Brethren my prayer to God and hearts
desire for you is, that you may be sanctified in this life, and saved in the
life to come. I beseech you cast your eyes upon Isreal's Oath, and see zeal
against impiety, reflect upon her Nobles and behold forwardness to promote
Gods glory, look upon her Clergy with her whole Commons, and learn submission
to a public yet a pious injunction. Let her Covenant be your President, and
her obedience your encouragement. Your Worthies intend nothing but Loyalty to
his Majesty and the continual preservation of your safety, help them with
your prayers, adhere to them in their sacred Vow, let not your estates and
lives be dear unto you for their sakes, and see that you start not from them,
but stick to them, lest you be found fighters against the Lord; Defend his
Majesty's Royal person in authority (in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms) to the last drop of blood in your
veins, that the world with your consciences may bear witness of your
Loyalties, and that you are no Traitors. Maintain the truth of God with the
privileges of Parliament, though with the hazard of your lives: And for the
underminers of Church and State, prosecute them until you have brought them to
receive a reward according to their de^^^ts. Thus doing in the sincerity of
your hearts, I doubt not (however dangers threaten you) but in the end you
shall become glorious Conquerours through the power of the Lord Christ: I am
persuaded, in what I have done, I shall displease some, but as Malis difplicere
laudari eft, so my pur ose was not to give content to malevolent persons, but
to approve my self to God and his hidden ones; for I should be loath to speak
or write ought that Christ should disallow, he (truly) is that Master to whom
every man stands or falls, and one good look from him, is in stead of all
acclamations to my self. The Lord direct you, preserve you, and knit you
firmly unto himself. So prays he who rests.

Yours in the Lord Christ. D. S.

The Contents, or the particular Observations. contained in this book.
1 MVtuall society makes a sweet harmony. Page 1 2 The Clergy not exempted from
civil Authority. page 2 3 A good Clergy, a Kingdoms felicity. page 4 4 Every
Christian must be a porter to his own heart. page 9 5 We must not he fickle,
constancy must crown our actions. page 10 6 Austerity, and Magnanimity, become
the professors of Christianity page 11 7 Sacred Covenants do not (...) be
seem the most cheerful spirits page 12 8 Worldly affairs must not shoulder
out Christian duties. Ibid. 9 Washing should proceed Covenanting. page 13 10
Meannesse of place and calling, debarres not any (by vowing) from binding
themselves to Religion. page 14 11 Godliness in others should be an attractive
to our desires. Ibid. 12 Other men's sins, must not make us turn our backs
upon the pure Ordinances of God. page 15 13 Matrimonial Leagues with
Idolaters, an inlett to false worship, and a strong bar to keep out the
power of godliness. page 16 14 Covenanting Christians, should be courageous
Christians. Ibid. 15 Women not privileged from spiritual vows. page 18 16
Christians should be politicians. page 19 17 None exempted from a sacred Vow.
page 20 18 Examples of Superiors, strong cords to draw on others unto holiness.
page 22 19 Pride becomes not noble Spirits. page 35 20 Inferior persons must
accept of motions from their Nobles as motions from affectionate Brothers.
Ibidem 21 Though imprecations and execrations be not usual, yet sometimes t ey
are very Lawful. page 36 22 We may vow against sin, we may swear obedience
unto God. page 38 23 Gods Satutes the Christians way. page 42 24 The Law an
effect of gods Love. Ibid. 25 Our obedience must be universal: page 43 26
Sense of misery under sin and sorrow with hope of mercy, puts the soul upon
Covenants, yea sure Covenants for nsicere and exact obedience to the God of
Heaven. page 45
A pious President to both Kingdoms, For a sacred Covenant.
NEHEMIAH 10.28, 29. And the rest of the peop e the Priests, the Levites, the
porters, the Singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated themselves
from the people of the Land unto the Law of God, their wives, their Sons and
their daughters, every one having knowledge, and having understanding.

They clave to their Brethren the Nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an
oath to walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses, the servant of God, and to
observe, and do all the Commandments of the Lord our God, his statutes, and
his judgments.


IN these Verses you have the Commons of Israel, joining with their Nobles in a
firm covenant to the Lord Jehovah: wherein you may take notice First of the
persons who are described. First generally The rest of the people
Secondly more particularly. 1 The Priest that offered Sacrifice. 2 The Levits
that instructed the people 3 The porters that kept the doors of the Sanctuary.
4 The Singers. 5 The Nethinims, that drew water for the house of the Lord. 6
All that had separated themselves from the people of the land, unto the Law of
God, their wives, their sons and their daughters, every one having knowledge
and understanding.

Secondly of their actions. They clave to their brethren the Nobles. They
entered into a curse and into an Oath, to walk in Gods Law, etc.



And the rest of the people. Mutual society causes a pleasing and melodious
harmony; Observation. Isreal's mutual communion.
they do not harp upon the jarring strings of distempered affections, their
tongues utter their minds; their expressions and intentions are not dissonant,
but consonant one with another; they do not only like the Iron and the clay
in the toes of Nebuchadnezzars Image, cleave together, but they are fast
cemented, yea incorporated one into another: now as in a bed of spices there is
a fragrancy in all their graces, their virtues like sweet perfumes, upon
burning coals are become communicative, all that are near them, may receive
comfort and refreshing from them; they are not every man for himself, they are
all in common; they halt not betwixt two opinions; they have not a heart and a
heart like Ephraine; they uphold Christian communion, they will not forsake the
assembly of the Saints; they have all set their heart with their brethren the
Nobles to seek the Lord God of Israel.

Application.
Does not Unity make happy, and perpetuate a people? this is that precious
ointment, that ran down from Aarons beard to the skirts of his garment, this
is like the dew of Hermon descending upon the mountains of Sion: for where
this is; the Lord commands his blessing. Why do not we then of this Nation,
labor to become like Jerusalem, as a City at unity within our selves? It is
civil discord that demolishes and destroys the very being of a Commonwealth,
for as he that bleeds inwardly is in the greatest danger, so a Kingdom divided
against it self, cannot stand. The spirit of Egypt never failed in the
midst of her, until the Egyptians fought against the Egyptians; Isi. 10 2, 3.
neither did the Philistims melt like snow against the Sun, until such time
as they sheathed their swords in one another bowels: O let it not be told in
Gath, nor published in Askelon. that England by civil distention is the cause
of her own ruin: But oh my belly, my belly, I am pained at the very heart: I
hear the sound of the Trumpet, and the Alarm for the war: what, shall I not
now with mourning and lamenting Jeremy, weep day and night for the slain of
the daughter of Sion? O that our rents and divisions were closed, that the
blood of Christians, religious and well-affected persons, might no longer (as
water that is spilt upon the ground) be shed amongst us. O let us yet, though
it be late, (for better late thrive then never) set upon some course, whereby
the sluices of wrath may be let down, the currents of justice may be stopped,
and the fire of Gods jealousy may be extinguished amongst us; why should we
carry more fuel to the fire, and more oil unto the flame of the Lords
dreadful vengeance through want of concord amongst our selves? Let us pray,
yea contend with God in prayer for the peace of Jerusalem: we may know that
none shall prosper but they that love her, and can we love her and not pray for
her? For our brethren and companions sake, let us say, peace be within her
walls, and because of the house of the Lord our God, let us seek to do her
good: Now that we may do thus we all can tell how that united forces are the
strongest, and that a threefold cord is not easily broken; Vis unita fortior.
therefore let us endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. If the prayers of one Moses could suppress the Amalekites; O how soon
then would a Land of praying Christians penetrate the Heavens, and cause our
enemies to fall before us? Cant. 6.9.
why do we stand still divided? let us like Christ's Dove become but one, that
the daughters that see us may power out their blessing upon us. Give me leave
to make use of Paul's request to the Church of Corinth, and beseech you brethren
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we may once all speak the same
thing, and that there may be no schisms amongst us, but that we may be
perfectly joined together, in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
Concordia paruae res crescunt, concord will cause a growth, not only of
strength, but of many other good things amongst us. Unanimously now let us
concur together, let us every man for himself, and all of us one with
another, engage our spirits by promise, and oblige our souls by a solemn vow
to the Lord of Heaven; thus doing we shall establish a blessed communion, and
this we cannot do, unless in covenant with these repenting Israelites we
adhere unto our brethren our Nobles. The Priests and Levites. Observat.


These Priests and Levites were chief officers in the Temple, they stand not
upon their tip-toes, pleading immunity from civil authority; they apprehend
not themselves discharged of, The Clergy not exempted from civil authority.
and exempted from their due allegiance. God has not said by them Princes
rule, but by him they reign and decree justice. It was but fitting they should
express submission, for as every soul must be subject to the higher powers,
so I am sure it is not safe for a Kingdom, but dangerous to a state, where the
Crosiers receive not power from the Regal sword. These worthies of Israel
having set forth their Ordinance for a covenant with God, this Leviticall
Clergy, like the Romish faction, cry not up freedom, and forthwith declaime
against them; they express their yiedling by their present obeying, they
contradict not; these you see as well as others cleave unto their brethren the
Nobles.

Observat. A good Clergy a Kingdoms felicity.
Ministers should be Ringleaders not to rebellion, but submission, not to
profaneness, but to conscientious and sincere observance, these Priests and
Levites are in their due posture, they are not Incendiaries to the Land of
Judah, they are not fomenters of jealousies in their peoples ears, they
condescend in their own persons to prevent suspicious betwixt the Nobles and
the Commons: for what is jealousy? it is as unsatiable as the grave; it is the
greatest evil to a Commonwealth, and the deadliest enemy, as to affection, so
to submissive obedience. The Priests in the time of the Law presented oblations
1 Samuel 2.28. and burnt incense before the Lord; these (considering that
obedience is better than sacrifice, and that God lays more claim to the
living than to the dead,) join with their worthies, observe the Ordinance,
take the Covenant, and in these as a living burnt offering give up themselves
to God. The Levites expounded the Law, displayed the sacred Oracles, in things
spiritual, instructed the congregations, secular affairs were not the subject
matter of their employments; they studied Theology, not policy, the Art of
teaching rather than the Art of ruling, I am sure that thus it was with these
of the Tribe of Levi: for they brake not the Covenant, Malach. 2.8. They teach
holiness, and they practice piety: they are not like wolves in sheep skins,
palliating cruelty under the habit of meekness, their doctrine is a light,
and their lives are a lamp, that like wise builders they set up godliness,
and like savoury salt, season the hearts of their hearers. O Israel it was thy
happiness to have such Levites, it has bin, and I fear me in some measure
yet is our misery, to want such Leaders; darkness discovers no dangers, and if
the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the ditch.

Application.
The time was when old Ely heard of evil dealing in the Priesthood, how Hophni
and Phinehas his sacrificing sons made the Lords people to transgress, 1 Samuel 2.23.24. Thus did the watchmen of Judah, in stead of knocking of the
fingers, Quantum pernitiosa est ad sequentium lapsumuina praepositi, in tantum
contra uti le est, et salutare, cum se Episiopus per firmamentum fi^e fratribut
inultandum, praebet. Cyprian Lib 3. Epist. 21 Omnium felrum promittunt
licentiam et quasi vexillum gerunt ad probandam omnem speciim nequiti^, Calvin.
Cur pec^ata populi commedere a cuatur nisiquia pecca a delinquenitium sove^t,
Grego. Homel. 17 Omnino proditorem se esse noverit, quicunque est ille, qui
vitae quae libet in ia hanc domum conatur inducere, Bernard.
strengthen the hands of the wicked, when by their own example (crying, we
will power forth wine, and fill our selves with strong drink) Esaias 56.12. They
gave them encouragement in their nefarious courses. And was it not because of
this, that they prophesied in Baal, caused Israel to err, committed adultery,
walked in lies, confirmed men in their hellish practices, and not suffering them
to return, made them as Sodom, and as the Inhabitants of Gomorrah before the
Lord. That made Jeremy in a doleful lamentation give out this expression, that
his very heart was broken, Ier. 23.9.13.14. But these mentioned by Nehemiah are
of another temper, they do not eat of the sins of the people by being foster
fathers to their filthy vices; these do not build with their doctrine, and
pull down by their practice, the light of their conversations is now become so
fulgent, that others may behold them for their imitation; they do not seek to
innovate Religion, erect novelties, and advance superstitious vanities, as
sometimes Vrijah the Priest did, who built an Altar according to all that Ahaz
had sent from Damascus. 2 Kings 16.11. nay these resolve too, to bid adue to
Idolatry, to demolish superstition, and not to stand any longer guilty of
spiritual treason, by upholding wickedness in Gilgall, I might have said
Bethel, the house of the Lord. For as they go before the people in the
covenant, affording them their examples for their encouragement; so by covenant
they bind themselves for ever from all idle or idolizing worship, to observe
and do all the Commandments of God; thus they animate the children of Zion,
going before them in the means of sanctification, and thus they seek not to
establish, but to depresse iniquity by a law.

Hearken to me ye that have deviated from the sons of Levi, you style your
selves Priests, and lay claim to the office, as if God had only intayled the
Priesthood upon you; what will you yet be as a snare on Mizpah, and as a net
spread upon Tabor? Hos. 5.1. will you yet as troops of Robbers wait for a man,
murder in the way, and that by consent? Hos. 6.9. why do you still desire to
sell the righteous for silver, to turn aside the way of the meek, and to
drink the wine of the condemned, or of good men fined in the house of your
God? Amos 2.6.7.8. See, see, these Priests, the subject of our discourse read
another lecture to your souls: These breath not out threatenings against the
Church, they rather cry out, what shall we do for the Church? these are not
cruel thirsting after blood, the precious blood of Gods indeered ones; their
arms and their hearts are both open, not only with tender imbracements to
receive them, but to support them; it does not vex them that they are zealous
for the Lord, neither do they seek to find them or punish them for the
strict service of their God; their forwardness to forsake wickedness is the
joy of their spirits, their preciseness in the way of holiness is as marrow
to their bones, and their covenant for new obedience is that they further by
their own president. These are not dismayed with the thoughts of more pains
unto themselves, if thus they covenant to keep strictly all the statutes of
the Lord, they prize Gods mercy to the people before their toil, and their
hearers welfare before their labor, for though never so much sedulity may be
expected from them, Non in verborum splendore, sed in operum virtute, praedi
candi fiductam ponant, non vocibus delectem, tur populi ac clamantis, sed
sterihu^ nec plausum expedeat, sed gem^o^n. pros. per, Lib. 1. Cap. 23.
vitacontemplat. A Pastore exigetur, quicquid perinertiam non custoditur
Cypiran, de sing. Cleric.
they will not flinch off but in the present covenant adhere unto them; Before
like Herod they solaced themselves in their peoples acclamations; now their
tears and their prayers are prime pleasures to their souls; time was, when
breaking the bonds of doctrine, and knapping asunder the cords of discipline
was their delight, now their fulgency in virtue demonstrated by their
resolutenesse for exact obedience is the music in their ears, the honey in
their mouths, and the very rejoicing of their hearts; They know they must give
account, for their peoples souls, and that if they perish, God will require
them at their hands; they give them up therefore now by vow unto the Lord, and
in this their surrender they seem to say, Lord here we are, and all our people
the children that thou have given unto us. They are not ignorant that much
trouble from them who are without may arise by reason of this covenant: they
fear no colors, they put on their auditors, they are resolved to eat of the
same dish, to taste of the same sauce, and if they suffer, to suffer with them,
this must needs hearten them for courageous Soldiers, go not weeping nor
sighing after their Commanders. It may be they apprehend some malevolent and
malignant creatures to be among the people, ready like scab'd sheep to infect
the flock, like Peter's false Prophets by damnable heresies laying aspersions
upon the truth, and like cunning and crafty seducers using all diligence to
make them the devils Proselytes like themselves: These have not their
favorable aspect, these have not their hearts, their hands, their estates;
these are cashiered; the yiedling, the mourning, yet the resolving Israelites
have their affections, amongst these only they are personally present, with
these they side, and to these they join in covenant with the Lord: They are
not as time serving Sycophants, only respective to great men, their deportment
is indifferent, they take care for the poor as well as the rich, it is not
their own preferment, but every man's welfare that they look for. Therefore
as by their forwardness they excite all, so by their actual performance
withal; they show their tender of the happiness and prosperity of all. Learn
then from these Priests and Levites, I beseech you my Brethren, I style you so,
because I would have you so: First, Directions to Ministers.
not to think it strange that others with you run not into the same excess of
riot, that they keep not out of Covenant as well as your selves, they see their
misery, and this to be their remedy, and they know that your non-seeing, or
else perverse slighting of your own estates, can be no healing plasters to
their souls. It behooves every man to look to his own standing, and to be
careful to prevent his own damnation.

Secondly, Do not pine the Lords people through destructive ignorance, do not
conceal the benefit of a sacred Covenant from the eye of their spirits, left
God complain that his people perish, for lack of knowledge, and lay the guilt
of their blood upon your souls.

Thirdly, do not pernitiously poison by corrupt principles those that are your
hearers, teach not exorbitant errors for sacred truths, do not through airy
ambages and false glosses steal away their affections, and make them
heartlesse to holy vows: thus doing you shall still keep them out of the way,
cause them to stumble at the Law, and in the end be charged your selves for
corrupting the covenant of Levi, Malach. 2.8.

Fourthly, do not over-lade your faint and your feeble brethren, with the
onerous burdens of unnecessary things, these burdens may lie heavy upon their
shoulders, they will case themselves by covenant, Luke 11.40.
but as you shall have the practice of the Primitive times to pass a sentence
condemnatory upon you, Act. 15.10.28. so one day they like Scorpions will sting
your consciences, when Christ's woe like a Hue and Cry shall arrest your souls.
These Pastors stand not upon circumstance, they look to the substance, the
pious vow that they and their people must make to God.

Fifthly, be examples to your flocks in word, in conversation and in charity. 1 Timothy 4.12. Let your words utter the Will of Jehovah, your conversations
testify the uprightness of your hearts and your charity witness that in all
means and ways you seek the salvation of their poor souls; speak you to
them, that they may speak from you to themselves, saying, what have we done?
be as lights set upon a Hill, that those who are without may be convinced by
your lives: Love with pity, persuade them, woo them, win them, yea and
because that corrosives are sometimes both more needful and helpefull then
mild and pleasing cordialls; reprove them, rebuke them, drive them by the sight
of sin, with your own president, to see a necessity, as a chief preservative,
of an especial covenant, that so they being engaged to God, and in that
engagement apprehensive of their own mercy, they may rejoice, that though they
were brands, they are now plucked out of the fire, that though they were aliens
to God, yet now by a religious covenant they have entered into a sweet
communion with the Lord.

Sixthly, you are, or at least should be, the Chariots and the horsemen of
Israel, carry them up speedily, with a swift motion, by your prayers to Heaven;
look upon our crying sins with a bleeding heart, for the Vine of England is as
the Vine of Sodom, and the grapes of our Nation do wholly resemble the
clusters of Gomorrah) view our lamentable distractions with mournful
affections; see, see, wrath is gone forth, and the plague is begun; Justice is
incensed, and we turn our backs upon our adversaries; jealousy is kindled,
and the sword is almost drunk with the blood of the slain; your neighbors
houses are on fire, for shame sit not still, bring prayers as waters, and pour
them on as fast as you can, that you may slake the burnings; do not stand
gazing about you, it is time for you to be up, and be doing, unless you mean
that all our souls shall faint because of the murderers; the banners of Gods
displeasure are displayed, and now like a man of war he has begun to strike
the stroke, yea the sword already reaches to the very heart: O does not our
land cry out as sometime Jerusalem did, woe is come upon me because that I
have sinned, does she not bemoane her self unto you daily, asking you if you
have no pity, if your hearts be wholly shut up in obduracy? me thinks these
expressions should set you to your prayers; oh then if you will be accounted
the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and say,
Spare thy people O Lord; questionless these Priests joined with their Nobles
as well in prayers as in covenant for the Church.

Lastly, be not averse to take this binding and obliging vow upon your selves,
these Priests and Levites have observed its equity, taken notice of its
necessity, and found it the sole remedy for the curing of their sores, they do
not scruple it; our case is as bad if not worse then theirs, why are you shie,
bind your selves with a curse, and an oath with the people to stand out against
Popery, and in spirit and truth to serve the Lord. This will be a good
incentive to your hearers, if you go before, they will the willinglier follow
after; your forwardness will make many to come in, who otherways, it may be,
will still stand out to lift up their hands against Heaven; you see this in
effect in these Priests, and in this people, who in this very particular Cleave
unto their brethren the Nobles.

The Porters. A Potter is a Doore-keeper which has authority to admit,
Observat. 1. Every Christian a porter to his own heart.
and let in and out of the house where his charge is, such were Obed Edom the
son of Ieduthun, and Hosah in the days of David, to the house of the Lord, 1
Chr. 16.38. These were to let in the Jews not they that contemned their
worship, these were to keep out the unclean, not they that were cleansed
according to the Sanctuary; the true Israelites were to be admitted, but the
idolatrous heathens were by them to be excluded. Every Christian must be a
Porter to his own heart; whatsoever he is that covenants with God, must look
narrowiy to himself, have a watchful eye over his spirit, and with all
diligence keep his soul, that wicked lusts, vile affections, and vain
thoughts get not in at the door of his heart; these will make hubbubs in this
spiritual Temple, these will disturb and strike with violence at the
sanctifying motions of the blessed Spirit; these like the strong man armed,
will so keep possession, that godliness shall get no entrance, without
struggling and much disturbance: these are ill guests, where they come in they
pretend friendship, but intend mischief, they pay no reckoning, they are
cheaters, they do but deceive the creature with the counterfeit silver of
sinful pleasures; these are like drunken and deboyst strangers, who by vomit
easing their stomachs, leave nothing but stinch, loathsome filth, and noisome
savours in the room behind them. A Sparrow pursued by a Hawk fled into the
bosom of Xenocrates, he refused to put it out, saying it is a dishonest thing
to betray a guest: D ogen. in vit.
Do not thou thus kindly deal with thy sins, it is not inhumanity to refuse
them; it is a piece of the best policy forthwith to expel them. Let lusts
accuse thee of discourtesie, better they complain than thou bleed, for sin is
the souls murderer; therefore, O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved; how long shall thy soul like an Inn,
and thy heart like a Harlot harbor corruption.

We must not be fickle, constancy must crown our actions. Observat. 2.
POrters are continual attendants, they wait daily at the Gates, and depart not
from their service, 2 Chro. 35.15. we must not be fickle, like Lots wife; we
must not look back to Sodom, there must be constancy in all our vows, it is
dishonesty with man, but impiety to break with the Lord; thou must not vow and
not pay, but as without delays, so constantly thou must pay thy vows. Call to
mind thy first vow, remember all thy promises, and self engagements unto God
in the late days of thy humiliation, be not unfaithful, do not like a broken
bow start from them, thou can never lose by keeping touch with the Lord of
Heaven. These Porters leave not their Places because of a covenant, like idle
drones, profane seers, and atheistical wretches they steal not away, leave
their charge, take up arms, and desert their Nobles, because of a strict tie
unto Gods service: They were Porters before, and they are Porters still; now
they are content to do more than formerly they did, they will keep the door
of the Temple; and withal look carefully to the gate of their own heart,
lest at any time it should run out, and depart from the living God. They are
not friends to them that hate peace, favorites to them that delight in war,
they take no pleasure in the tents of Kedar, they desire yet to be
doore-keepers in the house of the Lord, for now as Porters they take the
covenant with their Nobles.

Austerity and magnanimity become the Professors of Christianity. POrters for
the most part are men of a stern countenance, Observat. 3.
men of strength, and men of courageous spirits, for that sometimes they may
meet with resistance. Austerity and magnanimity do well become the professors
of Christianity; we cannot look too sternely upon our lusts, we cannot be too
strong, too courageous, and too severe in keeping down, and in the constant
suppression of our wicked desires. The Devil, the world, and our own base
hearts would keep us from pious and religious vows, we have need of more then
an ordinary strength to repel these fiery darts, lest by hindering our
covenant, they give a mortiferous and a deadly blow unto our souls. Brethren,
be persuaded then to watch, to stand fast in the faith, 1 Cor. 16.13
to quit you like men, to be strong, and not to forsake or refuse the liberty
wherewith Christ would make you free, take heed that you do not again
entangle your selves with the yoke of bondage: Therefore, that you may walk
worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, I
pray that you may be strengthened with all might, according to his glorious
power, unto all patience, and long suffering, with joyfulnesse. It is likely,
these men were austere in their place resolute in their office, and stout
toward all that opposed them in the execution of their charge; yet you see in
this action, here is no gaine-saying no resisting, no withstanding, they are
very tractable, very flexible to a holy vow. When God displayes the excellency,
necessity, and efficacy of a sacred Covenant to the eye of men's souls, Lions
shall become Lambs, wolves shall become sheep, and Leopards shall be as Kids
before the Lord.

The Singers. SIngers were such as played upon musical Instruments, Observat.
4.
who with Trumpets and Cymbals set forth the praise of God; hence it is, that
some interpreters give out the word Musicians, not Singers in the text. Singing
is no Emblem of sadness, it denotes cheerfulness, it betokens alacrity,
therefore well said St. James, If any be merry, let him sing Psalms. Sacred
covenanes do not unbeseeme the most cheerful spirits; expressions of joy,
arising from gladness of heart, may be concomitants in a Christians vows.
Observat. Sacred Covenants do not unbeseeme the most cheerful spirits.
This Oath ordained and confirmed by their Worthies, does not mar their
music, they can still be Singers, and yet covenanters with their Nobles; they
see it is the way for pacification, the only Antidote to prevent destruction,
and the sole remedy to cure their misery; the thoughts of it, lightens their
hearts, vivifies their spirits, and causes them so to perke up the head, that
now with thankesgiving they can take their vow before the Lord, well (beloved)
Gods vows are upon us, we are now to covenant with our God, let us by a
cheerful acceptance set forth his praise. Psalm. 56.12. Jehovah requires a
cheerful giver; Shall we not therefore sing praise to his name for ever, that
we may daily perform our vows Psalm. 61.8. But who are we that should be able
willingly after this sort to offer before the Lord? 1 Chro. 29.14.

The Nethinims THe Nethinims were such as carried water for the use of the
Temple, this they drew for the Congregation and for the Altar of the Lord.
Josh. 9.27. The labor and drudgery of their outward callings does not so
drink up their time, but the express carefullnesse to lay hold of
opportunity, Observat. Worldly affa^res should not shoulder out christian
duties.
for working out of their own salvations. Worldly business must not shoulder
out Godliness; Throng in carnal affairs will not excuse us from sprituall
employments, we must set seasons apart for God, domestique occasions must not
steal away our hearts. I and my Household says Ioshuah will serve the Lord. It
is an ill trouble in earthly matters, or about many things that keeps thee thy
children, or thy servants from sitting at the feet of Christ. Observat.


The water that the Nethinims brought unto the Sanctuary was for cleansing,
they are instruments in purging of the Temple, and they are now by closing in
this covenant coe-workers with God for the purification of their own souls;
Let us wash our hands in innocence before we compass the Altar, let us rub
off the soil of sin, and then fall upon our spiritual employments; we must
wash us and make us clean from the evil of our doings, before God and our
souls by way of Covenant can converse together. Draw water out of the well of
thy heart, I weane the tears of contrition, drench thy soul in them, and
power them out abundantly before the Lord, neither stay here, but that thy
conscience may be cleansed from dead works, carry thy soul with her sorrow to
that fountain that is set open for the house of David and inhabitants of
Jerusalem; O rince it, rince it thoroughly in those clear streams of Christ's
precious blood, that so thou may stand spotless, pure and blameless at the
bar of justice. In the time of the Law uncleanness was cured by washing, for
unclean touchings, the parties washed their clothes Levit. 11.40. for
unclean issues, they washed thesmelves and their clothes, Levit. 15. 13. But
for the uncleannes of leprosy, they washed themselves, their cloths, shaved off
all their hair, and stayed 7 days without the Camp, Levit. 14.8.9. Dear
brethren our pollution is of the worst kind, it is no other then the leprosy
of sin that we are infected with, as it has spread it self all over us, so
it has made our whole man subject to the dreadful curse of Allmighty God.
Romans 5.18. Does any thing proceed from us, but what is foul and damnable? Are
not our splendid performances glittering sins, and our most glorious actions as
menstruous rags? do we touch any thing that we taint not? where come we
that we leave not an ill sent behind us? Let us all then generally apply water
to our foul parts, scour off the scurfe of profaneness, and free our selves
of all filthynesse of flesh and spirit whatsoever; Take the Apostles advice,
cleanse your hands you sinners, Jam. 4.8.9.
and purify your hearts you double minded, be afflicted, mourn and weep,
let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy to heaviness, be ye
humbled, and make a holy Covenant with your God.

Those Nethinims were but water bearers, they had one of the meanest Offices
appertaining to the Temple, Observat. 3 Meannesse of place and calling debarres
not any by vowing from binding themselves to Religion.
yet these you see come into covenant with their Nobles. Meannesse of place and
calling debarres not any by vowing, from binding themselves to Religion. A
poor Sacrifice in the time of the Law received acceptance, where a rich one
could not be brought; the widows mite had its welcome as well as the treasure
of the wealthy; A Nethinim in his place may be as dear to God as a Priest;
with God there is no respect of persons, he that works righteousness is
accepted with him; Therefore you that are mean, you that are despicable in the
eye of the world, be not afraid, let not your meandness and poverty dismay
you, come in if you be for God, your Nobles are brethren, therefore join with
them in covenant before the Lord.

And all that had separated etc. They do not separate from them because they
are more zealous in profession, more heavenly in affection, and more strict in
their conversation then themselves, they love the brotherhood, they make much
of them that fear the Lord, they desert only the Heathen, you see they
approve of, and stand well affected to christian communion. They do not say of
their fellow worshippers as Ahab said of Micaiah, we hate them, we hear of no
good to us from them; or as it was said of Cajus Sejus, they are good honest
men, but only they are Christians, or as some vile Caytiffes of our times, we
like the men well, but we will not come amongst them for they are precisians,
they are not men for our company, they are austere in their carriage, we and
they cannot hit it, for they are zelots in Religion.

Observat. 1. Others Godliness should be our Attractive.
Godliness in others should be the attractive to our desires, and the Loadstone
to draw, not to estrange our affections, David's delight was in them that
excelled in virtue, but in our times it is a Capital crime to be truly
religious, the very name of an honest man who makes conscience of his ways is
now grown odious. I wish there were less Antipathy, and more Sympathy, that
Sympathy might once breed amity amongst us.

They do not separate from them of their own Nation, and of their own
Religion, but from the people of the Lands, such with whom God had denied them
communion, viz. Idolatrous Heathens, questionless there were many formal
persons, many profane creatures and rebellious wretches amongst themselves;
yet because these are daily in the Temple, they renounce not the assemblies,
they turn not their backs upon the Ordinance, like peevish or pettish children
they throw not away the covenant, because these or at least many of these are
likely to take it with them; whereas it is said all they that had separated
themselves etc. it gives us to understand that there were some that had not
separated themselves; Here were divisions, yet for ought I can find, they that
were separated, Observat. 2. Other men's sins must not make us turn our backs
upon the pure Ordinances of God.
and they that were not separated met together in the public place of
worship; Neither is it improbable but as they had many who stood firmly for
this celestial bond unto their Nobles, so they had some who gainesayd it,
withstood it, and opposed it; yet you see that notwithstanding all this they
separate from none but gross Idolaters; we must not for the sins of our fellow
worshippers, nor for difference of opinion amongst our selves make a separation
from the true church. Was not the Church in Christ's time a perverse Church?
Math. 5.21.22. Math. 15.6.7.8. 1 Cor. 2.8.9. And did he not forbid to separate
from this Church, Mat. 10.6.7. Mat. 23.2.3. Did he not himself preach in their
Temple. Joh. 8.2. And reason with them in his own person about Religion? Ioh.
10.24.25.26. Surely Christ's precept back with his own president may be our
warrant not to desert our Congregations.

When did the visible Church in any age since Adam not consist of a mixed
multitude? she has bin, and do what we can, she will be a Lilly amongst the
thorns. If I go further I shall exceed a Paraphrastique exposition, I
therefore refer you to Rutheford, Bernard, and Ball. But it may be you now
dislike us because of the Divisions and distractions amongst us. I cannot deny
our many dissentings, one being amongst us for Paul, another for Apollos, one
for Cephas, another for Christ; nor yet our grievous and lamentable
distractions, being sprung from the civil jarrs of one faith. I confess them
with grief, I wish I could remove them with prayers, or wipe them away with my
tears. But because the sons of my mother jangle amongst themselves, and
proceed from wrangling to fighting. I will not therefore deny her, run away
from her, or desert her. I know that her Childrens dissension is her grief,
and shall I add affliction to her sorrow?

From the people of the Lands. Quest.
WHat are they that are here meant by the people of the lands?

Answ.
The Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Iebusites the Ammonites, the
Moabites, the Egyptians and the Amorites, Ezr. 9.1.

Quest.
How were they joined to these Idolaters?

Answ.
Contrary to Gods Command they were joined unto them in Marriage, neither was it
the sin of the vulger sort alone, but the very hands of the Princes and Rulers
were chief in this trespass, Ezra. 9.2.

Those who are not separated enter not into the oath, and the curse for the
observation of Gods Statutes with their brethren the Nobles; their strange
Wives have with-drawne them, their Idolatrous consorts have set them in
opposition against this Covenant, which is likely to prove a strong promover of
Religion, in its purity, power, and perfection.

Observat. Matrimonial League with Idolaters, a strong bar to keep out the
power of Godliness.
Marriage with strangers, or matrimonial leagues with Idolaters, are not only
an inlet unto false worship, but a strong bar to keep out the power of
godliness. This made Ezra when he heard of it, rent his garment, pluck off
his hair, and sit down astonished: Shall our eyes be dry? shall we not even for
this bedew our cheeks with our tears? It is our sin of England as well as it
was the sin of Israel, amongst others we especially feel the smart of this
now; we must be deeply humbled, or else God will not be reconciled.

And all they that had separated, etc. Observat. Covenanting Christians should
be courageous Christians.
THese men now take heart of grass unto themselves, they are resolved to
continue no longer slaves to sin, and bondslaves unto Satan; they see their
wickedness is a let to their happiness, they now with violence break through
the thorne-hedge of corrupt desires; they matter not for toil, they prize
their liberty, they value not their blood, come what can come, they will sound
out the Trumpet, strike up the Drum, and fight against their lusts which
continually war against their souls; As good soldiers of Christ, so that
Idolatry may be suppressed, other evils subdued, and that God may be
appeased, they care not what hardness they undergo; they are martial men,
and they have got mighty minds, as they have got courage for the conflict, so
they hope to obtain the conquest. They do not now like milk-sops,
white-livered fellows, or saint-hearted creatures for fear of blows, desert
devotion, relinquish religion corrupt conscience, pervert piety, depresse
strictness, and suppress sincerity; they dare now defend, and as much as in
them lies dignifie the honorable, and noble peerelese Cause of Gods precious
people, they matter not what danger they put themselves upon, so they can
ruinate and repress the insolent, wicked, and insupportable abominations of
Belials base and hellish brood. They are not apsaled and affrighted, like some
formidable and pufillanimous spirits, or as Salomons sluggard with the Lions in
the way, they are determined to hazard their lives to maintain Christ's cause,
and to uphold the practical profession of Christianity. O beloved, had they
bin timorous, they had bin unfit for this military course, but it seems they
have spirit, for what do they know but that this Covenant may set all the
Heathens in battle array against them? their familiar acquaintance may be as
Judas, and their late Idolatrous wives may be as Dalilah to betray them; yet
for all this they will not be dismayed, they pluck up a good heart, pass
through the Pikes, adventure upon difficulties, and rather then they will not
covenant with God, put themselves upon the peril of their lives. O that we
like these had magnanimous and undaunted spirits, as we should be content, to
resist to blood, so we should answer our cruel and bloody opposers as that
renowned Cassibelane the Britain answered Caesar, I have not yet learned to
live in servitude, but with weapons in hand to defend the liberty of my
Country; we are not yet contented to live in Romish or infernal slavery, we
have learned to maintain the rights and liberties of our Celestial Country,
we fear not brandished swords, menacing speeches, no not the utmost that
adverse powers can do unto us, we fear not perils, rather then Gods Cause
shall lie bleeding upon the ground, we will adueuture the pouring out the
warmest blood that runs in our veins. These expostulate not the case with
carnal reason, as many do in our days, they do not say, This Covenant tends
to the utter subversion of all will worship whatsoever, no Idolatry, no not the
least must be countenanced if this take place, we are sure to lose many
friends, and to undergo the threats of great men's frowns, a great part of
our Estates are likely to be exhausted, and our very lives may come to be
endangered. Will not those who are averse unto the Covenant, who have sworn to
uphold Babell, to side with the scarlet Whore, (and to defend the
Antichristian cause) grow very furious, and become much more enraged against
us, will they not by open force, and by all secret Stratagems seek the spoil
and undoing of us, they lasht us before with whips, but it is to be feared
they will be turned to Scorpions; we thought in times past that their hand was
heavy, but now they will lay more load, yea, cause their little fingers to be
far more ponderous than their fathers loins; for ought we know, this may
cause our disaffected wives privately in revenge to murder us, our servants
(who by this are sure to be abridged of their former liberty) to rise up
against us; but if these should be quiet, yet Artaxerxes the King of Persia,
and other Princes about us, whose religion we go about to suppress, may
probably take up arms, and break in violently upon us. It is good to prevent
these dangers, it is safe sleeping in a whole skin, the best course to remove
these fears, and to take away these doubts is not to accept, but to reject
this covenant. O beloved, such thoughts as these do not trouble their heads,
these are not scar-crowes to keep them from this holy league; indeed they had
cause at this time (as much as any people under the cope of Heaven could have)
to cogitate thus with themselves, but such is their zeal with their undaunted
courage, that they look beyond perils, come life, come death, with one consent
they will take the covenant,

Their Wives. WOmen are the weaker vessels, Observat. Women not privileged
from spiritual vows.
but though weaker no more then men privileged from spiritual vows; as they
are subject to sin, so their souls are exposed to danger as well as others;
therefore it is requisite that with others they should make use of all means
for sins prevention: Covenants are corrosives to eat out dead flesh, and the
prime Antidote to prevent future distempers; These men love their wives, they
are loath they should dye of their vicious Ulcers; like wise men, men of
knowledge, they seek out for remedy, they have taken advice, they are told,
engagements to God will daunt the courage of corruption, that self ties for
exact observance, will make sins heart like Nabals, and cause it to give up
the ghost; that selfe-searching, selfe-mourning, selfe-condemning, and
selfe-covenanting, will eat out the core of iniquity, heal the conscience,
and preserve the poor soul in safety; they are glad of their directions, they
make haste to their houses, they cannot be quiet in their spirits, this
counsel is as fire in their bones, they must needs forthwith relate it to
their wives. But how is it taken with their consorts, is it not too sharp, too
biting, too full of vexation? No, they are so taken up with thoughts of their
healing, that the tartness of the medicine does not discourage them. From its
application, they accept it cheerfully, they lay it on willingly, and they
keep it on carefully; for as since their disease is the same with their
Husbands, they with them apply the same plaster, entering into a curse and an
oath to serve the Lord.

Observat. 2. Christians should be p li. titians.
He that looks not to all Ports is not likely to keep out an enemy, to
foresee evils, and to prevent dangers is a point of policy. Christians should
be Politicians, we must not only abstain from all appearance of evil, but
cut off all occasions whereby corruptions may be ushered into our souls. These
grave Seniors of Israel leave not their wives at liberty while they stand
bound, Nightingales sing sweetly, they are afraid of seduction, they do not
trust them that lie in their bosom, Sicut mulier adjutrix, ita saepe
insiliatrix, et sicut portus est conjugium, ita et saepe naufragium parit.
Chrysostom.
they bring them to the Covenant, that so they may be as deeply engaged as
themselves. Who but Evah persuaded Adam to rebel against God? He was deceived,
not by Satan, but by his second self; not by the Serpent, but by his Spouse;
not by the Devil, but by a woman; not by a stranger, but by his wife. Did not
Jobs wife tempt him to evil? Job, 2.9. Salomons wives turn his heart from
God. 1 King. 11.4. and Ahabs wife enticed him to work wickedness before the
Lord? 1 King. 21.25. Women are not always helpers, they are sometimes
seducers; they are not always as a safe harbor to their Husbands, there is
sometimes shipwreck of faith in their embraces. Mulieres pericula semper in
auribus habent. Chrysostom.
. Beloved, do not false fears like false fires often burn in many women's
breasts? they are very timorous, suspicions make deep impressions. And what
do they do when they are jealous of an approaching evil? surely buzze their
fears into their husbands heads; using all allurements to draw them to the
fulfilling and accomplishment of their desires; they sing Sirens songs, they
are very observant of their humors: but latet anguis in herba, there is some
mischief at hand. It is very likely a supposed evil of affliction must now be
kept off by some real evil of transgression. I think for this I may appeal
to the consciences of many, who by the enticing words of their flattering wives
have bin put upon those ways, which have afterward caused horror to their
souls. From these men we may learn wisdom, we may fear backsliding; He
that stands must take heed lest he fall. Let us therefore hedgein our selves
with a holy vow, but out of that fence let us not leave our wives,, lest they
being forth, get us out by wiles to sin against God.

Their Sons, their Daughters, and all that had knowledge, etc. THese words
include all inferiors in the Domestique Government: Observat. None exempted
from a sacred Vow.
It is for Iosuahs household as well as himself to serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.
It is common with youth to lay the reins loose upon the neck of their lusts,
to follow their own devices, and to pursue the imaginations of their evil
hearts, the headstrong creature must have a curb; surely an oath and a curse
are a strong reine to hold in the head of sin.

It is not a perfect body that is defective in its members, I much mistake me,
if both Church and Commonwealth will not challenge sons and daughters as
part of their members; why then by way of exemption from covenant should they
be separated from the body? Nehemiah does not shut servants out of doors; here
is no Porter to keep the gate fast bolted against them; for he says, all
that had knowledge took the vow, and as the Jews had servants, so I suppose
their servants were capable of knowledge. Servants be stones in building of the
Church, and props to uphold the Commonwealth, and is it not fit they should be
well cemented, and fast tied by a Protestation?

They clave to their brethren, etc. THey clave, viz. they approved, they did
not dislike, they were cheerful, they did not murmr, they were willing,
they did not hang back, they were sincere, they did not dissemble, they were
resolute, they did not halt, they were submissive, they did not rebel, they
were constant they did not fly off. Particular facts commended in Scripture,
are general examples and bind to imitation, when either the same thing is
elsewhere commanded, or where the ground, drift, and equity of the thing is
not covered with a cloud. These men judge not with a fleshly, but with a
spiritual eye; the carnal man perceives not the things that are of God. A
Covenant, especially such a Covenant would seem harsh to a natural judgment.
Their way is not the way of the world, the Prince of the air works not upon
them for disobedience; they see the beauties of holiness, even the riches of
Heaven, which is Christ, the hope of glory to their souls. Sin like false
wares deludes not their souls with its curious gloss, the spirit of
whoredoms is not in them, they know the Lord, and frame their doings to turn
unto their God: Had contumacy sat as regent in their hearts, in following
vanity, they would have become vain, they had gone after the Heathen, whom the
Lord had charged them they should not do like unto them; they would have
hardened their necks, and steeled their countenance against this covenant; had
they looked through Natures prospective glass, this would have seemed a nicity,
not necessary, they see not men like Trees, their eyesight is cleared, they
now judge this course necessary for their souls.

Surely Israel is in a happy condition; she has a multitude of Counselors,
and therefore safe; she hearkeneth to counsel, and therefore wise; she soars
not aloft with foolish conceits, she is not swollen with the tympany of Pride,
she is not lifted up in her self ( Nabal-like) above the good counsel of
other men, presuming that she is able enough to take directions from her own
principles; neither is she obdurate or melted like wax, either too hard to
receive, or too soft to retain any impression, like them who through anguish
of spirit hearkened not to Moses the Messenger of their deliverance; neither is
she incapable of advice, through simplicity which is the daughter of ignorance,
or through jealousy which is an effect of fear; she suspects not a
circumvention by her Nobles, as being close minded, and therefore aiming at
their own ends; neither is she wilful or heady, because she would not be
thought unable to direct her self, to judge what is needful, or to manage her
spiritual affairs; she has an ear open, and an heart attentive to the
directions of her Worthies.

Observat. Examples of Superiors strong cords to draw others to godliness.
Examples of superiors are strong cords to draw on others to goodness. Pious
Nobles are good guides, their religious actions are good inducements unto
holiness; sometimes to multitudes of persons they are leading, swasible and
prevailing presidents: Though it be true as Solomon says, If the Rruler
hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked, and though Ieroboams Idolatry
became Isreal's sin, yet when Ioshuah resolved in the audience of his people,
that he and his household would serve the Lord, the people replied, that Gods
service was with him the subject matter of their choice. Josh. 24.15.21.22. So
when Josiah made a covenant to walk after the Lord, to keep his Commandments,
his testimonies, and his Statutes with all his heart, they that were present in
Jerusalem and Benjamin, cavilld not against the fact, took not pett and
withdrew themselves in discontent, they are of flexible tempers, a willing
people in the day of assemblies, they maintain, and stand to what their Ruler
has done. 2 Chro. 34 31.32. O how good were it for inferiors, that Superiors
devoted themselves to holiness, they might then guide their feet in the way of
peace, have lighted torches continually burning before them; O how much better
would it be for persons in place of Authority to practice godliness in then
own persons? by this means they should never increase the guilt and intent of
their personal sins, by making them exemplary to others.

Application.
Natu Nobilus, noble by descent; yet this I may say, that they were Nobiles
quia virtute fulgentes, they were fulgent in virtue, eminent for piety, and
very radiant, Gods Image shining clearly upon their souls; The more men
resemble the Deity, surely I conceive they are the more invested with the robes
of Nobility, they are not men that are subservient to their vices, but men that
excel in virtues, that are of Heroicke spirits; He is an only Peer of
Heaven, who disdaines to be overcome by his base corruptions. These Nobles are
like morning stars, they by their godly endeavors bring light to a world of
Persons, they are excellent for brightness, and they communicate their graces,
as desirous of the good of others: They are nursing Fathers; Labor after
reformation and preservation, are Symptoms of paternall affection, they are
ministers of good, and therefore it is not sin, but sanctity, not evil, but
good, that by their practice they preach unto the people; They are Leaders, and
therefore they go before them, by a holy vow guiding them in the way to
heaven: They are ordainers, therefore they prefix order to the multitude, and
to keep them in order, they frame an Ordinance, and that Ordinance is a
Covenant; they are observators, they take notice of, and give directions for
what is to be done, they are Governors, or rather skillful Mariners, they sit
at the helm in the height of the storm, and to keep the ship of their souls
from splitting against the rocks of Gods dreadful justice, as a strong Anchor
they cast out a vow, that if by any means the people may be kept alive and not
dye in their sins. O happy Israel, thy Nobles are the pledges of thy rule, they
confirm and commend the truth and goodness contained in thy precepts; they
direct thee in particulars concurring with thy injunctions, though not
expressed in them; they toll thee on in obedience, though not passive, yet
active; thou may well keep going, when such as these go before to direct
thee; Lazy travelers will hold out with good company which beat the path
before them: Thy great personages are not so taken up with the person for a
time put upon them, that either in speech, look, or carriage, they show that
they forget their natural condition, as men, or their supernatural estate, as
Christian men; thy are counsellable by themselves, they are not oblivious of
those duties that concern their severed condition in respect of another world.
What are they have bin, thou can not now say that they are Idolatrous, they
set not up Idols, they depresse Idolatry, they are not rebellious, and
companions of thieves, they embrace communion with Saints; they are not
ignorant, they are wise as Rulers, and learned as Judges of thy Nation; they
do not with Diotrephes who loved the pre-eminence, refuse to countenance Gods
Messengers, they do not prate against Gods servants with malicious words, they
forbid not them that would entertain them, neither do they excommunicate
them, or shut them out of the Church. Thou may rejoice O Israel in these thy
Worthies, their deportment shows, that they are thy best Counselors, there is
squarenesse, not partiality or perverseness in their actions, they are wise to
preserve thee, not crafty to ensnare thee, they are active, not for their own
advancement, but for thy advantage, they are courageous for thee, not fearful
or fainthearted to defend thee, they are religious, but not factious, secret,
but not fraudulent, they are well read in thy present estate, and apprehensive
of what may promote thy future felicity, and therefore as they have provided a
solemn Covenant, so they as fellow-brethren join with thee in a sacred Oath
for engagement unto God. See then in these thy happiness, they are not as
cross winds to keep thee from shore, they are as prosperous gales to bring
thee in safety to the harbor. Be glad thou daughter of Zion, and with
shouting express thy rejoicing for these thy Nobles.

Agesilaus, that in traveling he always took up his lodging in the Temples,
to the intent that men and Gods might see into his actions; All things are
naked to the eye of Heaven therefore in all your consultations and
untertakings, reflect upon Iehovahs presence, consult with God, and act for
God. Paul complains of many, who sought themselves, but not Christ, stain not
your proceedings with by-ends, let Gods glory be your highest aims, there is
no safety in self seeking, as this argues filthynesse of mind in nobleness of
birth, so it is man's debasement before the Lord; To ingratiate and enrich your
selves, let not the sky of Sovereignty be the only object of your sight, nor
the sundry revolutions of Princes affections, be the sole heaven of your
contemplation, Non nobis nati sumus, next unto God seek the public good,
weigh your intendments in the fruit, as well as the flower, consider what they
will be to others, as well as your selves, be not unthrifts in your places,
look that your designs have a public stamp, that in the success they prove
not a disgrace, but an honor to your names; you must be men of more than
private spirits, the Kingdoms safety must be your care, the Gospells
advancement must be your endeavor, and the peoples prosperity is the thing
you must strive for; Let not your works at any time be works of iniquity;
suffer not an act of violence to be in your hands, permit not your feet to run
to evil, or to make have to shed innocent blood; why should your thoughts be
thoughts of perverseness? why should wasting and destruction be in any of
your paths? A friend is borne for the day of adversity; we do not look at
you as having virgins faces, and vultures talons, we take you not to be fained,
but faithful friends, we are yet in distractions, cease not to help us by
your counsels, you have hitherto stood for our liberty, still stand as pillars
of marble, Quanto illustriores sunt homines in saeculo, scientia it genere,
tante pluribus suit perditionis exemplura Bernard. Epist. 109
spare not your pains, spare not your blood for the preservation of our
felicity; be not as the children of Ethiopians before the Lord; O Let the
light of your lives, as well as the light of your Counsels make it apparent
that Jehovah judges amongst the Gods; to advise well, and live ill, is to
build with one hand, and pluck down with an other; Scarlet Robes are ornaments
to your bodies, but scarlet sins will prove the debasement of your souls; it
is the transparent crystal glass of your holy life, that will show us the
spots upon our garments, and your sticking close unto the Covenant for God,
that is likely to conglutinate our affections more unto your selves, and as a
leading president give us encouragement for a religious walking before the
Lord. Thus qualified, our subject shows you, you should be; and thus far you
see, the example of zealous Peers prevaild in the days of old.

Be you followers of me, says Paul to the Church of Corinth, as I am of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11. many think they are in a good condition if there be any
worse then themselves, but these strive not with the worst, but with the best,
making apace, as fast as they can after them, though they come far behind them,
both in their zeal and in their wisdom; these men are not now asleep as they
were before, their consciences are wakened, the eye of their understanding is
opened, and they see in this their day the things that belong unto their peace:
lately they were insensible of sins deceit, and the spiritual death of their
souls; now with the Apostle they feel the destructive power of corruption,
and cry out, O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from this body
of death! now they conceive a kind of necessity of Damnation, because that
custom in sin has bred a necessity of sinning in them; now they consider
whither sin, Satan, and their Idolatrous wives would carry them, now they lay
to heart the justice of God standing before them as an Angel with a drawn
sword ready to fall upon them, if they post on still in the way of
transgression, therefore to preserve them from utter ruin they begin to set
themselves in battle array, they put on the shield of faith, the breast plate
of righteousness, and the helmet of salvation, that so they may forthwith
wage war against their lusts; they do not stand hovering in the air, as men
not fully resolved, saying, shall we, shall we? they are grown resolute,
though they pass through fields of iron, and streams of blood, they will set
upon a strict course, to curb their heady corruptions, and that course you see
is a covenant to observe the statutes of the Lord: these are not like many, to
pretend much and perform little, they do not break off now it comes to the
pinch, constancy crowns their purposes, and is as a wreath of Laurel girding
the temples of their sacred resolutions, for they fly not off, but cleave unto
their brethren the Nobles. O that we for splendency could make them our
pattern, O that in humility, we could follow them, and that in constancy we
came not far behind them; examples are sometimes efficacious doctrines.
Sozomen reports, that the devout life of a poor Captive Christian woman, made
a King and all his family embrace the faith of Jesus Christ; and Eusebius from
Clement tells us, that when a wicked accuser had brought Saint James to
condemnation, seeing his Christan fortitude, he was touched in conscience,
confessed himself to be a Christian, and so was taken to execution with him,
where after confession and forgiveness, they kissed, and prayed for each
other, and so were both beheaded together. Israel is no ill guide, at this time
she is a very good pattern, her light like a clear and a bright Diamond, may
well shine in the darkness of our souls, her splendour may be the glorious
object of our sight, her present covenanting action calls aloud to us for
speedy imitation, therefore let us up and be doing, let us take her vow upon
ourselves, and vowing adhere, and stick close unto our noble Worthies. Motives.




They are Patriots, not Traitors to their Country; like homebred vipers they
seek not to corrodate and eat out their mothers bowels, they desire not through
the sea of blood to swim to the cape of their hope, they have vowed with theii
lives to defend our Kingdoms liberties; they do not say as Antonius Bassianus
Caracalla, sometimes Emperor of Rome, said (quod libet licet) the Law is the
rule of their will, their will sets not Confines to the Law, they do not what
may please themselves, but what they may and must do for the preservation of
this our Nation; they like Aelius Adrianus seek so to govern us, that it may
be apparent that it is our wealth, not their own that they seek for.

Julian apostatize from Christ, they will not with Dioclesian persecute his
Saints. Now God has called them out to a perfect reformation, they will not
have it said of them as it was of some, that the Nobles put not their necks to
the work of the Lord. Nehe. 3.5. They are not like some in our times, who care
not to damn themselves, that they may hurt the Church, they rather resemble
Justinian, they have no less care of the Church of God, than they have of
their own souls.

We do engage unto you solemnly the word of a King, that the security of all
and every one of you from violence, is, and ever shall be as much our care, as
the preservation of Us and our Children. Thus you see his Majesty judges them
faithful, why should we then think then disloyal? He assures them of his
adhering to them, and care of them, saying, He will be as careful of his
Parliament, and of the Privileges thereof, as of his Life, and Crown; And
shall not we encourage them, by promising to assist them, (so long as they
stand for us, and for our Laws) with out estates and lives? Seeing then they
are thus, zelots for God, Fathers to the Country, and not rebellious, but
loyal to his Majesty; we need not fear to own them, not scruple to be
advised by them, not refuse to enter into a holy Covenant with them.

forsake their God; life is not dear, it is the Lords statutes that they
covenant to keep close unto. 2 Chro. 19 2.
They that love God should be the object of our love, it was Iehosaphats sin,
that he helped the ungodly, and loved them that hated the Lord.



John's Doctrine, they have begun to soar to the highest pitch of affection,
they are willing to lay down their lives for the brethren; some already in the
common Cause are gone to Heaven in a bloody Chariot; others now are in
continual perils, not knowing how soon death may cut in sunder the thread of
their lives; they may well take up the symbol of Alphonsus Neopolitanus, viz,
the Pelican drawing the blood out of her breasts for the feeding of her young,
and considering for what it is that they adventure themselves, they may annex
unto it this inscription, Pro lege, pro grege. Shall they thus freely (for our
Kingdoms Laws, and for our safety) give up their selves, as it were in
sacrifice, and shall we forsake them? O no; let their God be our God, their
Gospel be our Gospel; let not their bondage be our freedom, their death be
our life; let us like brethren dye with them, and dye for them in the
maintenance of this covenant, for keeping off all the judgments of Jehovah:

are in high place, they are in great authority; his Majesty has made them his
Counselors by his own Writ you have made them Patriots of your Country by
your own: choice: Remember what Paul says, Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, he speaks not in the singular, but in the plural number;
denoting that there is more powers then one. I suppose you cannot deny them
this privilege; they have a prelation above you, though they be your brethren,
yet they are to you as these were to Israel, your brethren the Nobles. Listen
to their edict, they require, that you sorrow for your sins, and amend your
lives, they are willing with you to take out the same lesson, therefore with
them make a firm covenant to turn from the evil of your ways.

Prove. 28.28. The wind is turned, the case is altered; your righteous, your
religious Nobles are now in authority, and that they may the better appear to
be so to the eye of your souls, consider a little the particulars.

First, what counsel they give to our Sovereign, is it not like that of the
Seniors of Israel, do they not advise him, if he will be the servant of this
people to speak good words unto them, that they may be his servants for ever?
1 King. 12.7.

Secondly, what is the charge they give unto the Judges of the land? Is it not
that they must take heed what they do, because they judge not for man but for
the Lord; that they let the fear of God be upon them, with whom there is no
iniquity, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts? 2 Cro. 19.6.7.

Thirdly, what injunctions do they lay upon the Ministry? Do they not bid
the Levites sanctify themselves, Sanctify the house of the Lord, and carry
forth the filthiness out of the holy place, 2 Chro. 29, 5, 6.

Fourthly, have they not formerly put you upon fasting, and still continue your
days of humiliation, that you may afflict your selves before your God, to
seek of him a right way; for you, your little ones, and all your substance,
Ezra. 8.21. And have they not now framed a Covenant for them and for us, to
seek the Lord God of our fathers, with all our heart, and with all our soul. O
then, having uch mercies by them, let us adjoyne our selves unto them: They
tender us a covenant, it is for holy observance, their counsel is wholesome,
their demand is equal, and their tender is lawful, themselves have led the
way, let us with Judah rejoice at the Oath, 2 Chr. 15.12, 13, 14, 15. and every
one with them subscribe for himelfe, that he will keep close unto the Law of
the Lord.

Quest.
Wherein must we cleave unto our Nobles?

Answ,
First in obeying them; this the Doctor of the Gentiles imposes as a duty upon
us, when he bids us be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
Magistrates, and to be ready to every good work, Tit. 3.1. and for this those
Jews are a fair president before our eyes.

Secondly, in having a reverent esteem of them, as they are the Lords
Vicegerents, so they are styled Gods, Exodus 22.28. and it is our duty to render
honor to whom honor is due. Romans 13.7.

Thirdly, in being faithful to them, we have engaged our selves by solemn
protestation to maintain and defend them. We cannot maintain the privileges
of Parliament, and destroy the members of Parliament. Let us be loyal not
perfidious, let us have no hand in any thing that may hurt them, if we know of
any plot or projects against them, let us quickly and timely discover them.

Fourthly, in praying for them. Pray for Kings, and all that be in authority
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.2. Preces and lachrymae arma ecclesiae, your
prayers may keep off their enemies, strong cries, and earnest entreaties may
be prevalent for your Nobles safeties. Consider:

First, that your Worthies as they are now assembled are the foundation, and
Basis of government, and consequently of the peace and happiness of the
Kingdom: for as they create Law, by which we are governed in peace and
quietness, so they uphold the power and authority of the Law; so that if
through the neglect of prayer you suffer the foundation to decay, the maine
building cannot long stand. For where no counsel is, the people fall, but in
the multitude of counselors there is safety, Pro. 11.14.

Secondly, that they are to you as Gideon and the Judges were to Israel, A
hedge to keep you within your bounds, and a strong tower to keep off the
maine body of your sins, Judge. 2.19. -- 8. 33. Break down your hedge, you
may ramble whither you please, demolish your Fortress, and you lie open to the
batteryes of all corruptions whatsoever; their dying may prove Idolatries
Vivification, their death is likely to be the life of men's lusts, they may then
go a whoring after their own inventions, therefore as you desire the death of
your sins, pray for the life of your Nobles.

Thirdly, how comes it to pass that hitherto notwithstanding the malice of
your bloody adversaries, your Gospel has had free passage, and your Laws
have bin in force, Remember, that all the days of Samuel, the hand of the Lord
was against the Philistines, 1 Samuel 7.13. you had need pray for them if they be
once removed, your enemies will break in, and if they prevail, where is your
life, nay, the life of your life, your law and religion?

Fourthly, the Heathens abhorred ingratitude, we profess our selves to be
Christians, our prayers are our thanks, they expect that; and well may they
look for it in respect of their unwearied pains. Indeed when we call to mind
what they have done for us, and suffered in our behalves, our lives should not
be dear unto us for their sakes, but I scarce believe that they will afford
them their lives, who seldom or never vouchsafe them their prayers. O
ungrateful wretches, let not such unthankefulnesse be found amongst our
English spirits.

They clave to their brethren, etc, THey were brethren, quoad carnens, as
having reference to the flesh, they all descended from the loins of Abraham,
Ioh. 8.39. They were brethren, quoad fidem, they all laid claim to the
Promise, and they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.
Galat. 3.7. They are brethren in respect of affection; Brotherly love continues
amongst them, for now like brethren they seek to do them good. Lastly, they
are brethren, in respect of their mutual conjunction in this entire covenant;
and thus like Simeon and Levi they are not brethren in evil, cruelty is not in
their habitations, the accomplishment of wicked designs is not the subject
matter of their desires, to encourage themselves in the way of iniquity, and to
strengthen their hands in the support of Idolatry is out of their thoughts, the
amending of their ways runs in their minds, mutual corroboration in the
practice of holiness, is the cause of their league, and strictness with
sincerity in the Lords service, is the end of their present resolves.

Generally from this appellation, whereby they are called, Observat. 1 Pride
becomes not noble spirits.
and with which, for ought that we know, they were well contented, you may
observe, that pride becomes not noble spirits, Rulers must not be of insulting
natures; it is not an haughty carriage that adds to their praise, their
chiefest ornament is an humble deportment: they are but worms, why should they
swell? Did not Majesty empty it self, when Christ was contented to become a
servant? They are but Ministers; and in their chiefest eminence, but Ministers
for good; why do they not then condescend to men of low degree? Romans 12.16.
Thoughts of dignity must be laid down, they must be refused where God may be
honored. My heart is toward the Governors that offered themselves willingly
among the people: bless ye the Lord, Judge. 5.9.

2 In that thus freely, thus lovingly they close with their motion, Observat.
2. Infer our persons must accept of motions from their Nobles, as motions from
affectionate Brothers.
eyeing them in this affable and familiar relation, collect thus much for your
instruction: That Subjects must accept of motions from their Nobles, as motions
from affectionate brothers.

What is the reason our late Ordinances are not observed: that their
injunctions are not obeyed, and that their Covenant is accounted strange, being
but a bit to hold in the head of their lusts? I fear me it is because our
Nobles themselves are strangers not brothers in our repute. But leaving them
we will cast our eye upon the Vow or Covenant it self.

And they entered into a curse, and into an Oath, etc.

To curse, is to wish, and pray for evil things, and execrable to befall
others, or our selves; When David was charged with affecting the Kingdom, and
seeking Saul his deposition, if not his destruction, for his own clearing, he
makes use of dreadful a imprecation, saying; If I have done this, let the
Enemy persecute my soul, let him tread down my life upon the earth, and lay
mine honor in the dust. Psalm. 7.3.4.5. His soul by a Synechdoche sets out his
person, his life the existence of his person amongst the living, and his
honor, his dignity and glory in this world, and in the world to come. It is
grievous personally to be oppressed, more grievous to have the light of life
extinguished, but most grievous with the deprivation of life, instead of glory,
to have perpetual ignominy laid upon him, yet all this in case he be guilty,
he is content with, and therefore to clear his innocence, he calls for no
less than this upon himself. And this did Job, Job 31.5.6.7 8. etc. Neither
was Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles shie of an Execration, when he called God
for a Record upon his soul, that he came not to spare them at Corinth. 2 Cor.
1.23. In like manner these Jews (in case they willingly or wilfully break
the Law) give up themselves unto the curse. As if they should have said, Lord
let evil befall us, misery overtake us, and sorrow be the Lot of our
Inheritance; Let calamity be our portion, distress our reward, and death and
damnation it self the recompense of our souls, if we again return to the
Heathens, if for the future we be not observant of thy sacred Statutes.

(...) precation^d execrations be not usual, yet sometim s they are very
lawful Cautions.
Though imprecations and execrations be not usual, yet sometimes they are uery
lawful; they are not inhibited, by the practice of the Saints, you see they
are highly commended. This our Worthies were not ignorant of, as appears by
the closure of their late Covenant, wherein they call God to witness the
sincerity of their intentions, for which they are content to answer at the
Great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Indeed I
confess these are not commonly in our ordinary affairs, nor rashly, but
considerately to be used by any, and therefore use them but when other ways
the truth cannot be credited; but when by other means thy integrity cannot be
cleared, but that thy intentions for Piety may be freed from the aspersion of
levity, and but as these Israelites did to bind thy soul hand and foot, that
it stir not, that it start not, from an holy walking before the Lord.

And into an oath. THere be three ways to confirm the truth; Affirmation,
Assertion, and an Oath. In the first we only say, yea, or nay; and whatsoever
is above this, viz. (in our ordinary communication) is not good, but evil,
Matthew. 5.37. In the second, when our word is looked at as reprobate silver, and
not taken for current coin, (the matter being weighty) we pawn our truth as
one of our best jewels in an asseveration, and in this way sometimes by a
double Amen, did Christ ratify his sayings. In the third, when men will not
accept of our own pledge, we procure God for our surety, unto whose justice in
our Oath we enter into Counter-bond for punishment by him, if we go about to
deceive. And thus the Jews to testify the uprightness of their hearts in the
present Covenant, enter into an Oath with their Peers.

To swear, or to take an oath, What an Oath is.
is a very solemn and religious calling of God to witness, acknowledging that
as he is the only wise God, knowing the secrets of our souls, and the most
gracious Patron, and faithful defender of all Truth, so on the contrary, that
he is a most severe Judge, and revenger of all such as shall abuse his Name, to
witness a false matter: or more briefly you may thus define it. An Oath is an
holy invocation of God (as the best witness of all truth) and the punisher of
all such as profane his Name in calling him to testify an untruth. Thus in
swearing God is made both Index and Vindex, for therein we desire him, as the
searcher of hearts, and Patronizer only of truth, to evidence with us that we
deceive not, and withal to take vengeance on us if we do deceive. Oaths are
twofold, Assertory and Promissory, Oaths are two fold.
Israel is sure she dislikes her sins, she is not a stranger to her hearts
rising against her corruptions, she knows that her soul is grieved for her
former transgressions, this she affirms by her present swearing before the
Lord of Heaven: She sees how she has deviated, she purposes a speedy return;
she is privy to her precedent rebellion, now she vows though a sudden, yet a
true not a fained reformation: she is conscious that she has provoked the eyes
of his glory, she now promises not again to offend, but in every duty to
please his Majesty, and in all her endeavors to promote his honor. And
because she would not be fickle, but keep fast bound to her word, she enters
into a serious and a solemn oath.

She swears in truth, for now seeing her self in the glass of the Law, she
beholds her sins as so many spots; neither is her purpose merely formal,
but real for cleansing, nor her intention hypocritical but sincere, for the
removal of the evil of her doings from before the Lord: so that her oath is
not devoyd of truth. Secondly, she considers what she binds her self from,
viz. her former Idolatries, and what she engages her self unto, viz. to walk
in spirit and truth in the presence of Jehovah, so that she swears in
judgment. Thirdly, her oath is in righteousness, for as she swears to please
God, so that she may please him she swears only obedience to his commands.

Observat. We may vow against Sin, we may swear obedience unto God.
We may vow against sin, we may swear obedience unto God. I think Saul did
not ill in swearing that David should not be slain, when Jonathan asked him,
Wherefore he would sin against innocent blood, to kill him without a cause,
1 Samuel 19.56. neither did Job offend protesting his innocence, and attesting
his sincerity by a solemn oath. As God lives who has taken away my
judgment, and the Almighty who has vexed my soul; all the while my breath is
in me, and the Spirit of God is in my nostrills, my lips shall not speak
wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit, Job, 27.2, 3, 4. Thus did Asa with his
people, 2 Chro. 15.14, And this is the present act of these Israelites with
their Nobles.

Isaiah Prophesying of the conversion of the Gentiles says, That they shall
swear by the God of truth, Isai. 65.16. What are we but Gentiles? nay, do we
not profess our selves to be converted Gentiles? Why do we then still sit in
sin by consent, lie in it by working it, and by continual custom sleep in
it, as upon a bed of Down? Let us now awake, and stand up from the dead; let
it be seen, that our eyes are in our head to foresee sins misery, and to
hide our selves; that our heart is at our right hand, to withstand temptation:
and with violent blows to keep off insinuating and ensnaring corruption; and
that we are not rash in making of vows. Let it appear, that deliberatenesse
has curbed rashness, by a solemn oath against the evil of our ways; And to
this end consider:

Reasons
First, that naturally since the fall of Adam, the Port-all of thy heart is very
weak; Satan ever and anon makes it his inrode to infect thy spirit: it stands
in need of a strong bar. A strict oath for ought I know, is one of the best
bars wherewith thou may bolt him out.

2. An oath will penetrate and make a deeper impression than a promise upon thy
soul: It will be as a spur continually in thy sides, to put thee on to act that
whereunto thou have engaged thy self. After the children of Israel had sworn
to come up to the Lord in Mizpeh, and that whatsoever he was that did not
vouchsafe his presence, should be put to death. When they were assembled, the
thoughts of their oath put them upon diligent inquest after the persons that
had absented themselves, they must needs for their oath sake look strictly to
them, and therefore they cry out, Who is there among all the Tribes of Israel,
that came not up with the congregation unto the Lord? etc. Judge. 21.5. And when
the Benjamites; after they had vowed against them, lay still as a bait before
them: for being amongst them, they were a daily object of their eye, yet their
oath kept them to their precedent promise made unto the Lord; though they dwelt
with them, yet they would not marry their daughters unto them. And therefore as
to accuse themselves, so to show that oaths make an impresse upon the
conscience, with one voice they give out this expression, Though there must be
an inheritance for them, that be escaped of Benjamin, that a Tribe be not
destroyed out of Israel, yet we may not give them wives of our daughters, for
we have sworn the contrary, Judge. 21.17.18. Promises for the most part with
some are but as morning dewes; when as a solemn oath is as a great rain that
sinkes down, and is long seen upon the earth; they are many times not so
soon spoken, but so soon forgotten: when oaths ring in the ears, and will
be observed, press upon the soul and will not be kept out. What is the reason
that after so many vows to God, not only in the days of distress, but upon
the receipt of mercies, you have again corrupted your selves with your own
devices? surely had you sworn as well as promised, you would not like broken
bows have started from the Lord. Saul's subjects being sworn not to eat
until the evening, though the Honey dropped, they durst not put their hands to
their mouths for fear of the oath, 1 Samuel 14.26. As there is glory, so there
is dread in the rays of Majesty, a remiss, and a careless creature will
remember himself what he should do in the presence of his Prince. God has
stamped a Majesty and power upon a solemn oath.

Quest.
But what shall I do, that swearing I may swear aright, both for God, and
against my sins?

Answ.
First, be sure that sin and thy affections be at a distance, that the league
that was formerly betwixt them, is quite broken, that the loves of Christ are
better than wine to the taste of thy soul, and that because that thy heart is
united to the God of Heaven, that therefore thou art afraid to offend him. For
he that swears against sin, and yet does not detest, but love sin, and swears
obedience unto God, and has not a spiritual panting and braying after God,
does not deal fairly, he has two faces under one hood, he does but
dissemble with the Lord, he swears not truly, that fears not God unfainedly:
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Paul is certain that he serves God in the spirit, before he call
him to witness his actions. Romans 1.9.

Secondly, do this deliberately, considering sins sinfullnesse, and strictly
viewing the beauties of holiness; inconsiderate vows are soon broken,
therefore be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter
any thing before God. Eccles. 5.2.

Thirdly, look at thy call to thy oath, a good call is a good warrant, we must
not be Knights of the Post: By frequency and forwardness, we must not give out
suspicion that we are prodigal of our own credit, and of our own salvation.
Profane wretches often rap out oaths against their sins, and yet do,
considering what they have done, and what they should do, forthwith double
both their sins and their Oaths. If Isreal's Nobles first ordain it, take it,
and subscribe it, she has then good ground to accept it; we have a fair call,
our Worthies are gone before us, let their President be our encouragement, they
propound it to us, and require the taking of it at our hands; we shall resist
authority in their public call, if we take not the Oath against our sins.

Gratum est, deo q^um videt non sponte donuo confirmare votis nostris que ante
etc. 2 Chro. 15.15
Fourthly, do it cheerfully, not unwillingly, do it freely, in taking it,
express alacrity; Forced service is not pleasing service; constrained
obedience neither with God nor man receives acceptance: It is said of Judah,
that they all rejoiced at this oath; could we do thus, and swear with all our
hearts against our lusts, seeking the Lord with our whole desires; we should
have more hope than we yet have, that God would be found of us, and that in
stead of our fears and present distractions, in respect of our bloody wars,
he would give us rest round about us.

Fifthly, if thou do it, do it without any reservation, take it against every
sin, and by it bind thy self to all the duties of Piety whatsoever; one dead
fly spoils the whole ointment; one sin reserved, one duty left out, and
secretly excepted by thee, will make thee guilty of perjury before the Lord.
For tell me, I appeal to thy conscience, can thou swearing to keep all Gods
Statutes willingly commit the least sin, or with self allowance omit any
duties, and not falsify thy oath?

Lastly, be not only resolved of the Lawfulness of it, in respect of the
authority that imposes it, and the subject matter of the same, neither be thou
only persuaded of its necessity, as it is a heavy weight to depresse thy
corruptions, and as it is a strong bar to keep in thy soul from straggling
Dinah-like in the way of transgression, but in taking it avoid wavering, for as
whatsoever is not of faith is sin; So a wavering minded man is unstable in all
his ways, I oppose wavering to constancy, be thou resolute ever to keep it,
resolve peremptorily with thy self, never to be found guilty of the breach
thereof; Thus do these Nobles, thus do these Israelites, and thus observing
these rules in thy oath for God, and against thy sins; thou shall swear in
verity, not falsely; in judgment, not rashly, in righteousness, and not wickedly.

To walk in Gods Law. THeir own fancies shall not now be the rule of their
actions, Observat. Gods Statutes the Christians way.
the hethenish practices of wicked Idolaters shall not now be the helm with
which they will steer the course of their lives, their doings shall be such as
will endure the touchstone, it is to the Law, and to the Testimony that they
go for direction. And no marvel, for a conscionable walking according to
Gods will and exact observance of his sacred Statutes, is the christians way,
the Saints path, and the only high road that leads to eternal life; I have
gone astray says David like a lost sheep, seek thy servant, for I do not
forget thy Commandments, Psalm. 110.176. Peccare, est deviare, whilst men sin,
they straggle, whilst they yield unto their vile affections, they deviate from
the Lords Statutes.

Which was given. That which was given, is still continued; for as there is a
freeness, so there is a constancy in all Gods mercies; God is not as man that
he should repent; the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. It was
mercy, not merit that brought her the Law. the cause moving was in the
bestower, not the receiver, she was as well as others in the blood of her sins;
she before God cast an eye of pity upon her, Observat. The Law an effect of
Gods love.
unwashed, unbathed, unswadled as well as the Heathen. The Law, and the
continuance of the Law is an effect of Gods love. Because he affected her, he
chose her from amongst the Nations: and further to testify his love to her,
he plucked up the floudgates, and let forth the streams of the Law unto her,
that so she might cleanse her self from all uncleanenes whatsoever. He
shows his World unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; he
has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his judgments they have not
known them, Psalm. 147.19, 20.

By Moses the servant, etc. This title is as a glittering Diamond upon Moses
breast, it is not so base a thing as the world accounts it, to be the Lords
servant; Gods service is the Christians honor, not his disgrace. The Jews do
not thus style him in any disparagement, their thus calling him tends wholly to
his praise. Socrates reports of Constantinus, Valentinianus, and Theodosius,
three renowned Emperors in their times, that they called themselves, Vassallos
Christi, the vassals of Jesus Christ. Look at it therefore as one of the
fairest flowers in thy garden, that God has entertained thee into his work;
glory not in thy wealth, thy friends, thy preferments; that man only has the
Crown, and the cause of daily rejoicing, that can say unto God, Lord, I am thy
servant. Deo servire, regnare est.

To observe and do all, etc. GOds revealed Will is here set forth by four
several terms, Law, Commandments, Judgments, Statutes; it is a Law, for it
has a legislative power to bind over the soul to exact obedience: none may
plead Ignoramus, all are bound to look that they have the knowledge of the
same. It is a command, we are entrusted with it, faithfully to observe it; it
is a statute, for as it is prescribed and appointed, so it contains the whole
duties of our lives; It is a judgment, for as there is involved in it the
judgment, and judicial sentence of Almighty God, concerning its equity for
our observance, so it will judge us at the last day, in case of contempt and
negligence. As it is a Law it is worthy to be read, as it is a Command, it is
not to be slighted; as it is a statute it must be the rule of our life. And as
it is a judgment we may see what it thinks of our ways, and what shall be
our censure for the breach thereof. There is none of all this but Israel seems
to take notice of, and to witness the Universality of her respect she vows
and promises obedience unto all.

Christians must not be their own Carvers, they must not pick and choose, they
must not take what they please, Observat. Gur obedience must be universal.
and leave what they list in the work of the Lord; they must yield obedience,
and show a like tender respect unto the all Commandments of Jehovah. Was not
this the lecture which Moses read unto his people, when he told them, If they
look to love and prolong their days in Canaan, they must walk in all the
ways that God had commanded them. Deuteronomy. 5.33. As this was the phrase of
Zachery, and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. So it was David's practice, who said, he would
have respect not to one but all. Psalm. 119.6.115.128. the Prophet knew that
there was the same equity in one that there was in anther, and in all that
there was in some. I press not legal but Evangelicall obedience, thou can
not be free from sin in every kind and degree thereof, only without hypocrisy
in the uprightness of thy heart endeavor to frame thy self to the whole Will
of thy God. Thus doing, thy imperfect doing shall be accounted perfection. And
if thou will be like Israel in doing all, then do all speedily, Psalm. 119.60.
make fas;t, procrastinate not the time, as delays for cure so delays for duty
are dangerous. 2. Do all cheerfully, Psalm. 27.8. Isa, 2.23.55.5. A cheerful
servant best pleases his Master. 3. Do all, but dissemble not, seek Gods
glory in all. A fair glass may be set upon false wares, God cannot abide a
fair face and a false heart. Lastly, do all, but do all constantly, be not
found guilty of Apostasy. If thou hold not out to the end assure thy self thou
visit lose the crown, Apoc. 2.10.11,

And they entered into a curse and an oath to walk etc. WE have viewed the
words in their particulars, let us now cast our eye upon the general, and
therein upon the act that is performed by them; It is a Covenant, or a holy vow
unto the Lord; which is no other than a binding themselves to God, to do some
lawful thing which is in his power, that he may the better attain to his
suits; This was a solemn custom among the children of Israel, wherein the
care of those that were faithful, was first to vow nothing but what was
requisite and requited. Number. 21.2. John. 24.25. Secondly, to see that the vows
that were made, were exactly performed. Psalm. 22.25. Thus to do is apprehended
as a pension of their duty, as a badge, nay as a Seal of a thankeful heart,
and therefore walking to heaven in their desires and living with their head in
their most ardent affections, they give up themselves, they vow their service,
and promise adherence to Almighty God; they find that by their former sins God
is provoked, they are willing to take any course whereby he may be appeased;
they perceive they are much prone to wickedness; they would set a Tutoror over
their wills to keep them within the bounds of promised observance; they may
know experimentally, what are the fruits of hateful impiety; thraldom has
bin the fruit of their sin, they would gladly have their bands broken, be wholly
let loose from captivity, and enjoy their freedom; they now conceive that God
may be reconciled, they know no other but that he may be gracious, so that
being grieved for sin, groaning under pressures, and hoping for deliverance,
they now break off their lusts, renounce their Idolatries, and give up their
souls and bodies in spiritual sacrifice. From whence observe.

Observat. Sense of misery under sin and sorrow. etc. Proved.
That sense of misecy under sin and sorrow with hope of mercy, puts the soul
upon covenants, yea sure covenants for sincere and exact obedience to the God
of Heaven. Sins wounds are full of anguish, their smart, their pain is very
dolourous; Nothing but Gileads balm can take out the fire, allay the heat, and
mitigate the violence; Isreal's experience of this anguish sent her unto God for
cure; when renouncing her sins, she cried out, we return unto thee for thou
art the Lord our God. Ierem. 3.22. When she saw that iniquity had brought a
distraction, and that such was her distraction, that there was not peace to him
that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations upon all the
inhabitants of the Countries, that Nation was destroyed of Nation, City of
City, and that God did vex them with all adversity, then to get rid of her
troubles, finding no other way left to procure her liberty, she entered into a
covenant to seek the Lord God of her Fathers with all her heart, and with all
her soul. 2 Chro. 15.5.6.12. Sore lashing makes a stubborn boy promise
amendment, chains and fetters brought Manasses to his knees, and these were
David's Pedagogue to teach him to know Gods Statutes. 3 When they were in
bondage at Babylon, did not hope of Redemption, make them willing to take a
tart medicine, they do not sing the doleful ditty of accursed Cain, hope as a
Cordial supported their fainting spirits, and as an anchor kept up their
souls from splitting against the rocks; though they go weeping with their
faces toward Zion, yet because they hope their thraldom shall come to an end,
and that their desired liberty shall be accomplished, they will go and try
what they can do by a solemn vow to assuage the wrath of their incensed God.
Iere. 50, 4.5. Hope well, and have well; but for hope the heart would break.

1 These Jews in the Text see their sins, they do not conceal them, they are
set down in great Characters by them, that he that runs may read them, they
acknowledge their obstinacy, having hardened their necks, Peccati marione
conscientium illorum vulneravit. et experve secit Deur. Regertuntur ad cor, et
pectorum memoria pulsaat animus.
and appointed a Captain to return to their bondage, Nehe. 9.17. Their
Idolatry, having made them Idols, saying unto them, these are thy Gods. Nehem.
9.18. Their cruelty; having slain the Prophets which testified against them to
God. Nehem. 9.26. Their ingratitude, having done evil after the receipt of
favors. Nehem. 9.28. And their pollution in all degrees, their Kings, their
Princes, their Priests, having with them forsaken the Law, and not hearkened to
Gods Commands. Nehem. 9, 33.34.35. These sins in their sinfulnes, are now
presented to the eye of their souls, they are patient to God, impatient to
themselves, they smite upon their thighs, they are full of wrath, and resolve
against their lusts. Job 34.31.32.

2 They are not insensible of misery, they have not yet quite forgot the smart
of the eye, the weals are not yet open, the stripes have not quite left
bleeding upon their backs, Non ceciduotur ex somno peccati exitantur.
they are scarce got out of thraldom from barbarous and cruel enemies, Neh.
9.36.37. they are loath to come again into the same condition, they determine
therefore to leave their sins for its prevention.

3 They are in hope of case, they do not say God has forsaken, and that the
Lord had utterly forgotten them. Its true, they see that he is offended, they
study now which way he may be pleased, they are stoning of their Achans, that
have made them turn their backs upon their enemies: they apprehend God
placable, and that they may recover, they are purposed in all things to follow
the advice of their Physicians, men by virtue of an order from their Nobles to
bind themselves by promise to do according to the law of God.

O that England would make use of Isreal's covenant it may he is would prove a
divine balsome for the curing of her bleeding wounds: we have as much need to
apply this plaster, and to take this course as ever this people had. First,
do not our sins hold paralleled with theirs, if we go not before them we
follow them at the heels? But who dare say this Nation has bin obstinate,
obdurate against the means, that she has bin Idolatrors, yielding to
superstitious vanities; that she has bin cruel mis-using and dispitefully
striking the Lords Messengers, that she has bin ungrateful, not rendering
thanks according to her mercies, but grown worse by her glorious favors; or
that from the highest to the lowest, from the tallest Cedars to the meanest
shrubs she is shamefully corrupted* I I cannot excuse her, I must lay my hand
upon my mouth if I may not bring in an accusation against her* my conscience
tells me she is guilty. But if of sins which are of a scarlet dye, continually
crying like the blood of Abel for the execution of vengeance in the ears of
heaven will not move us, yet we think the wrath that is gone forth, and the
plague is begun amongst us, by the hurtful, the oppressing and destroying
sword should forthwith awake us. O consider, it is not only drawn out of the
scabberd, but it is new sharpened, and furbushed, and given into the hand of
the stayer: Has it not already cut off many thousands in the bowels of this
our Kingdom? Is not the point thereof set against all our gates? I wish our
ruins be not multiplied, and that it be not yet for a sorer slaughter. Are not
our houses daily plundered, our estates violently extorted, our men murdered,
our women ravished, and our virgins defloured? Listen and you may hear the
mournful expressions, and the doleful lamentations of wounded persons, nay
their groanings gasping upon the ground for life, wives daily become widows,
and children are bereaved of their fathers, ringing of hands, sadness of
spirit, and brinish tears almost in all quarters may become the objects of
your fight; O England, England, ihis is the fruit of thy sin* wherefore does a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins. Lam. 3.39. O now
search and try thy ways, and turn again unto the Lord use not complements,
perfunctory performances are but as figtree leaves, It is time for thee to
bestir thy self, lift up thy heart with thy hands to God in the Heavens, thou
have transgressed, thou have rebelled, and God has not pardoned, he has
sounded out the Trumpet, stricken up the Alarm for war, and caused his
jealousy to break forth like fire against thee; O see now (with thy brethren
thy Nobles) what thou can do, covenant against thy sins, it may be thou
shall obtain a covenant of peace with the Lord thy God; I do not conceive thy
estate desperate, be not dismayed; though God be angry, it may be he will
repent him of our evil, he will not retain his anger for ever; There is yet
hope in Israel concerning our deliverance, if we would but make a free, a
firm, and a fast covenant with God against our lusts. Ezra 10.2.3. Tell me,
did God ever call forth a people to bind their souls in covenant to himself,
and not intend their prosperity, covenanting times, are but discovering times,
and therefore he promises his people, that when he brings them into the bond
of covenant, he will purg out the Rebels from amongst them; and them that
transgress against him; bellow hearted persons, loose livers, and profane
creatures, will not willingly meddle with sacred oaths, and holy vows; And why
will he purge them out? Surely it is for the peace and quiet of his Saints.
Peruse the place, Ezekiel. 20.37.38. Again, show me when or where any more
sincerely covenanted with God, and received not mercy from God. Mercy is so
intayled upon faithful covenanters* that it cannot be reversed, Isa. 56.6.7.
They of all others shall be brought to his holy mountain, and made joyful in
his house of prayer.

Quest.
But why will God have us thus to enter into a curse and an oath to serve him?

Answ.
First, because he knows, that being once engaged by a sacred vow to the acts
of holiness, our credit, reputation and fidelity lies at the stake for our
obedience, and that therefore we will be more careful of our selves, and not
willingly violate our faith. God cannot abide we should have revolting and
rebellious hearts to depart from him. Jerem. 5.23.

Secondly, because these free promises ishuing from an upright heart, are an
open mark, and a professed badge of a thankful soul, as these evidence our
thanks, so they engage us to grateful expressions upon the receipt of
mercies; God would not have us without a spur to put us on to duties.

Thirdly, that we may the more see the boldness and shamefulnes of sin, like
the devil, the more it is opposed, the more violently it sets upon the soul.
Romans 7.7.8.9.10.11. Lands, Statutes, covenants will not keep it off, were we
not put upon vows, we should scarce believe this.

Fourthly, that having covenanted, and apprehending our own weakness in sins
resistance, we may be stirred up with more earnestness to seek his aid. his
grace and strength to withstand it. Psalm. 119.8.26.

Fifthly, that if we be not careful to obey, that our own vows may rise up in
judgment against us, and that upon the breach of them, his justice with the
more equity may seize upon our souls. Romans 3.19.20.

Lastly, that by these moral covenants our spirits may be raised up higher,
and stird up to seek after investment in the new covenant, even that which is
ratified by the blood of Christ, Galat. 3.21.22,

But what must I covenant against?

Principally against thy sins, temptations, and occasions that lead unto them,
with those God is much offended, and his Name is much dishonored. Sin for a
time may be as sugar under thy tongue, take heed, spit it forth, it will prove
Rats-bane when it comes into thy bowels. Do not trust it, it deceives thee, it
will oppress thy conscience, and damn thy soul. Vow against it.

Sin made the Devil, who was a most glorious Angel an infernal fiend; if thou
do not break off its communion, it will bring thee in very little better
condition; As well as men are conceited of it, it is worse then Hell, for that
is good being prepared by God for sinners. Therefore say as St. Anselme said,
if sin and hell were set before me, the one on the one side, the other on the
other; and that I must needs go through one of them, I would rather enter upon
hell than sin, God will assuredly keep them from hell, whose hearts are thus
set to keep themselves from sin.

But what must I vow and covenant to do?

Vow to believe in God, to hope for eternity of felicity from him, and to live
according to his direction God cares not for oil, for fasts or sacrifice if
they come single without thy self; that, that he has redeemed, that devote
and dedicate unto him; vow that thy soul shall be his Temple, and that whilst
thou live thou will set forth his praise, by a religious, a godly, and a holy
life. Thus vow the Jews.

But when I have thus covenanted, I am not able to walk according to the whole
Law, or perfectly to keep Gods Commands?

I grant it: But that it may be no discouragement to thee, consider how a
Christian is said to keep the Law of the Lord. First, he keeps it imputatively
in Christ, the Commandment is reputed done, when that is forgiven which is
left undone. Secondly, in respect of his Will, he having a desire which is
accepted. Thirdly, in regard of endeavor arising to frame his life according
to the statutes of the Lord. Fourthly, Comparatively in respect of others. And
lastly, in regard of the uprightness and integrity of his heart to one
Commandment as to another, and to all and every one at all times.

But may I take this last Covenant?

What think thou? if it, be against sin, unless thou keep it, thou will
vow against it.

If it be for holiness, if thou affect it, thou will vow to follow after it.

If it be for thy Religion, if thou prize it, thou will vow to maintain it.

If it be to uphold thy liberty, unless thou love bondage, thou will vow
against slavery.

If it be for Law, thou art bound to defend it, for Law is the life of the
Commonwealth.

If it be for the defense of the Kingdom, it is for the King; For what is a
King without a Kingdom?

Thou would not be a Traitor to thy King and Country.

If it be for the defense of the Parliament, it is but what before thou were
engaged unto, and as thou vowed then, thou thus apprehending it, wilt surely be
content to renew thy vow, never to be perfidious to them whom thou have
trusted, never to desert them that have bin faithful to thy self, and never
to destroy those, whom thou have chosen as Saviors of thy own life.

It is against armed papists, he that is privy to their tenets, and acquainted
with their treacheries; will vow if he can shift it, never to come into their
bloody hands.

It is to remove the evil from before the King; A Loyal Subject would have
the Throne established in righteousness.

But what manner of covenant must this be that I must make?

The last clause of the observation tells thee it must be a sure covenant, this
covenant was left upon Record, it was subscribed, and reserved unto future
times, Nehem. 9, 38. Let ours be like theirs, that if we observe it not, it may
lie as an evidence against us, John. 24.22. And if we keep it that it may
testify our faith unto others, and be an encouragement to all succeeding ages;
Covenanting with God is no horse-coursing, thou can not put it off when thou
please, thou must ever keep it, thou must all the days of thy life adhere
unto it, thy intention, thy deliberate purpose conjoined with thy promise must
be, never to desert it. Defer not then O England to covenant with thy God;
Enter with thy Nobles into a curse and an oath to walk speedily, to walk
strictly, and to walk constantly according to the Law of thy God; Express thy
hope yet with them, (and with these Israelites) that God has yet a blessed and
glorious deliverance for thee.

By
1 Fleeng to Gods grace, not resting upon thine own. demerits. 1 Pet. 1.13. 2
Using the means that God has appointed. Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. 3 Resting upon
God, not the means, whether he works with it, or without it, Ester 4.14. 4
Protesting against sin, and in all things to please his majesty. 1 John 3.3.
Dloria Deo.
Perlegi hunc tractatum, proto, et in princendum judico. In. Crawford. (...)


