Aulicus Coquinariae: OR A VINDICATION IN ANSWER TO A PAMPHLET, ENTITVLED The
Court and Character of KING JAMES.

Pretended to be penned by Sir A. W. and published since his death, 1650.

-- Auribus oculisque recepta.
Nemesis a tergo.
printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed for Henry Seile, over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet, 1650.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 20. which read with. p. 7. l. 24. Chimstry r. Chimistry. p. 11.
l. 15. Turnpike. p. 36. l. 24. sore. p. 39. l. 10. Tercera's. p. 45. l. 1.
deserve. p. 52. l. 14. Assassinations. p. 54. l. 5. to. p. 54. l. 7. Exception.
p. 67. l. 15. the. p. 82. l. 2. leave. p. 97. l. 6. of. p. 105. l. 24 was. p.
120. l. 11. her.

Preface.
THere are some Men so delight in sin, who rather than be idle from doing
evil, will take much pains to scandal the Dead.

My fear to offend, has withheld my hand a convenient time, lest I should fall
into the like error with Him that published the Pamphlet, Entitled, The Court
and Character of King James, and Father's the Brat upon Sir A. VV; And if
common fame mistake not the meaning, His Parent took rise from Q. Elizabeth's
Kitchen, and left it a Legacy for preferment of his Issue.

This Man went the same way, and by grace of the Court got up to the
Green-cloth. Jn which place attending King James into Scotland, he practiced
there to libell that Nation, which at his return home was found wrapped up in a
Record of that Board, and by the hand being known to be his, he was deservedly
removed out, as unworthy to eat of his bread, whose Birthright he had so
vilely defamed. Yet by favor of the King, with a piece of money in his Purse,
and a pension to boot, to preserve him loyal during his life, though as a bad
creditor, he took this course to repay him to the purpose.

And I have heard, that in his life, he discovered a part of this Piece to his
fellow Courtier, who earnestly diswaded him not to publish so defective and
false a scandal, which as it seems in Conscience he so declined.

And therefore my Exception willingly falls upon the practice of the Publisher,
who by his Additions may abuse us with this false Story, which he discovers to
the Reader in 5 Remarkable Passages, and gives me the occasion to spare my
censure on the deceased person: but to bestow my unkindness (which necessarily
intervenes in this Vindication) on him who yet lives, to make out his bad act
with a Reply (if he please) more Pestilent, upon Me.

THE CONTENTS.
QUeen Elizabeth page 1 1. Remark. Gowryes Conspiracy, of the name Ruthens, and
Family, the manner of the Treason, and effects af^erwards 5 George Sprott,
Confederate with Gowry, his confessions, arraignment, execution, and testimony
hereof 16 E. of Essex his Character, undertakings, Treason and execution, 36
Caecils. Sir Rob. Caecil his services, sickness, and death 49 Hen. Howard, E.
of Northampton, his character and death 64 James L. Hay, E. Carlisle his
character, Embassies, and Interest 67 2. Remark. Sir Walter Raleigh his
character, treason, trial, and reprieve; observations upon him, and his former
voyage to Guiana, sentence, and execution 74 Sir Tho. Lake his character,
rising, and ruin, with his Wife and Daughter 98 3. Remark. Sir Tho. Overbury,
and Sir Rob. Carr 110 The Nullity of Essex Marriage with Suffolk's daughter,
with the Legal proceedings 113 Of Archbishop Abbot 130 Sir Rob. Carr, E. of
Somerset his Marriage with Essex's Relict 133 3. Remark. Sir Tho. Overbury, his
imprisonment, and poisoned 135 Somerset and his Wifes trial, and Sir Thomas
Monson 138 4. Remark. Pr. Henry his character, sickness, disease, and death,
not by poison 143 Sir Arthur Ingram his condition 158 Sir Lionel Cranfield, E.
of Middlesex, his birth breeding, and advance 160 George Villiers his descent
and advance, a Favorite, and Duke of Buckingham, occasioning several
narrations, etc. 164 E. of Nottingham Admiral 169 Egerton Lord Chancellor 171
Bacon Lord Chancellor 171 Buckinghams Kindred. 174 Williams Lord Keeper. 178 5.
Remark. Spanish Match, the Princes journey into Spain, and return 179
Bristolls concerned 180 Inicossa, Spanish Ambassador 182 Yelverton Attorney
General 186 King James sickness, the plaster, and death, not by poison 192
Conclusion 197 The Character 200
Aulicus Coquinariae: OR THE CHARECTER Of Him who SATARIZ'D KING JAMES AND HIS
COURT.
QUeen Elizabeth died, Queen Elizabeth.
Anno Domini 1602. having bin long sick; and indeed desperate; which gave this
State, time enough to conclude for his reception, the undoubted Heir to these
Crowns; JAMES then King of Scotland; She has been highly valued, since Her
death; the best of any former Sovereign over us. She was fitted for fortunes
Darling, but with some Imprisonment, the better to mould Her, for the Rule and
Sovereignty of a Kingdom; and for the custody of a Scepter. She showed Her
Justice and Piety as a President to posterity. She was a Princess learned,
even then, when Letters had estimation, and began them into fashion; which
brought forth many rare and excellent Men, both of the Gown, and of the Sword.
Some say, She had many Favorites, but in truth She had none. They were near,
and dear to Her, and to Her affairs, as Partners of her care; not Minions of
phansey. And yet such as they were, she ever mastered, by her own Rules; not
they Her, by their own Wills. And she wanted not many of them at need, or
pleasure. She was Magnificent, ( comparative with other Princes;) which yet she
disposed frugally; Having always much to do with little money: for truly,
those either Wise or Gallant Men, were never cloied with her Bounty, more then
in her Grace; which with her Manage, passed for good payment.

The Irish affairs was to her Malign, which drew her Treasure almost dry; the
only cause of distemper in the State, and ended not, but with her life. At
which time, she left her Cofers empty, and yet her Enemies potent; Pamp. 34.
And therefore it could be no Treason in them, that afterward councelled the
Peace, but rather in such who endeavored then, and after, the re-establishing
a New War.

Amongst Her Favorites of the Sword, none could boast more of her Bounty and
Grace, Essex. Pamp. 10.
then the Earl of Essex; whose ingrate disposition, blown beyond the Compass
of his steer, by too much Popularity and Pride, cosened him into that absolute
Treason against his Sovereign, that notwithstanding many forewarnings of his
nearest friends, and unwilling Resentments of his dearest Mistress, his open
Rebellion at last brought him to public trial, condemned and executed as the
most ingrate that former times could produce. (Of which we shall take occasion
hereafter in some particular.) Wherein Sir Robert Cecill acted no more, then a
dutiful Subject, Councelour and Judge ought to have done against him, and such
like of her time, evermore attempting by Assassination or Poison to take away
her life. As were also the like attempts, by others in Scotland, (witness the
forewarning of the Duke of Florence, by express Message of Sir Henry Wootton,
to King James, a year before his coming to these Kingdoms) against Her
beloved and undoubted Heir; and in Them to destroy the Protestant Religion.

The most remarkable, was, Gowries Conspiracy.
that of Gowries Conspiracy, in Scotland. And I never read or heard (till our
Pamphlet) That Sir George Hewms his gravity and Wisdom ushered him into the
Secrets of the KING [therefore] and chiefly to make good that story]. Pamph. 8.
The first passage of the Preface Remarkable.
For of that Nation, both the wisest and most honest, gave great Credit
thereto; And the commemoration, was advisedly settled, by Acts of their
Parliament; which Anathematize upon Gowries House and Name. And Solemnized
there and here, with Narratives in print, of each particular Circumstance, and
the ground the cause inviting that Treason.

And truly, the Anniversary feast day in August, was usually solemnized to
God's Glory, by the most Reverend Preachers: witness those rare Divine Sermons
of our Bishop Andrew's and others, whose Consciences no doubt were not so
large, to cozen God Almighty with a fained tale. Indeed there might have been
more additionall truths, annexed to the relation, which I have heard, to make
it more apprehensive to our Pamphleter; whose Speculations, in this as in other
his stories of Court and State, took Information (belike) but in his Office,
Below-staires; And which makes his faith draw down the effects of those
Sermons for the Father, Pamp. 10.
as a Cause of the sad Events, and sufferings of the Son, and us all to this
present.

The Name of Ruthen in Scotland was not notorious, until Anno 1568, when Ruthen
amongst others, confederates, in those divided times of trouble, labored,
much, for the Imprisoning Queen Mary Mother to King James. In 1582. his son
William was created Earl Gowry, in the time of that King's minority. Though
the father bore deadly hatred to the King's prosperity. And in 1584. himself
was in actual Rebellion, in which he suffered at Dondee. His eldest son John,
then in travel in Italy, returns home to inherit his lands and honors; But
not one jot changed in disposition, from the traitorous ways of his
Predecessors: For not long after, he falls into this Conspiracy. Which is not
so ancient, but that many then and now living can relate, and my self, have
often heard the repetition.

The House of Gowry, were all of them, much addicted to Chimistry. And these
more, to the Practice; often publishing (as such professors usually do) more
rare experiments then ever could be performed; wherein the King (a general
scholar) had little faith. But to infuse more credit to the practice, Alexander
Ruthen the second Brother takes this occasion; and withal conspires with Gowry
to assassinate the King; and taking opportunity in his hunting, not far from
his house, St. Johnstone; invites the King, to be an eyewitness, of his
productions. In their way, Sir Thomas Erskin (after Lord Kelly), overtakes them
and others, Demanding of the Duke of Lenox, then present; why Alexander had
engrossed the King's ear, to carry him from his sports? Peace man, said the
Duke, Wee's all be turned into gold. Not far they rid, but that the Earl
Gowry, made good by protestation his Brother's story. And thus was the King
brought to Guest. Near the end of Dinner, at his fruit, and the Lords and
Waiters gone to eat: Alexander begs of the King, at this opportunity, to
withdraw, and to be partaker of his Production; to the view of that, which yet
he could not believe.

And up he leads the King, into by-lodgings, locking each door behind them,
till they came into a back-Roome: Where no sooner entered, but that Alexander
claps on his Bonnet, and with stern Countenance faces the King; and says:
Now, Sir, you must know, I had a father, whose blood calls for revenge, shed
for your sake. The King amazed, deals gently with his fury, excuses the guilt
of his death, by his then Infancy. Advising him, not to lay violent hands on
the sacred Person of his Anointed Sovereign; Especially, in a cause of his
Innocence. Pleading the laws of God and Man: which so much wrought upon him,
that he said: well, I will speak with my Brother; And so put the King into a
Lobby Room, next the Chamber, where no sooner entered, but that there appeared
a fellow, weaponed, ready for execution; to whose custody the King is committed
till his return.

Alexander gone down; the fellow trembles with Reverence, puts down his sword,
and craves pardon; which gave the King occasion to work upon that passion; and
to ask him whether he resolved to murder him? Being assured to the contrary,
the King gets leave, to open a window, that looked into a back Court. When
presently Alexander returns, and tells the King, that he must die. But much
affrighted, at the fellows countenance, with his sword, offers violence to the
King. Which the fellow seemingly opposes; and between them began a scuffle;
which gave advantage to the King, to cry Treason, at the Window, which looked
into a back Court; where Sir Thomas Erskin, and one Herries, were come, In
pursuit of the King, who was rumored, to be gone out, the back way to his
hunting.

At the cry of Treason, and known to be the King's voice; they both hastened up
a back staire, called the Turnepike; being directed by a servant of the house,
who saw Alexander ascend that way. And so forcing some doors, they found them
above panting with the fray; And up comes also, at heels of them, John Ramsey
(after Earl of Holdernesse) by them Alexander was soon dispatched.

Not long after, came the Earl Gowry (by his double key) the first way, with a
case of Rapiers, his usual weapons; and ready drawn. To whom, Erskin said, as
to divert his purpose; what do you mean my Lord, the King is killed? (for the
King was shadowed, having cast himself, upon a Bed, from his sight: and his
cloak was thrown upon the Body of Alexander, bleeding on the ground.) At which
Gowry stops, sincking the points of his weapons; when suddenly Herries
strickes at him, with a hunting fawchion. And Ramsey having his Hawke on his
fist, casts her off, and steps into Gowry, and stabs him to the heart; and
forthwith, more Company came up.

And the truth, very notorious, then, to every eye and eare-witnesse, not a few.

There remained but one younger son of that House, who though a child, was
from that time Imprisoned, by Act of their Parliament. And so continued
afterward, here in the Tower of London, until that King's death; and the grace
of the late King Charles, restored him to liberty; with a small pension, which
kept him like a Gentleman, to these times. But now failing, he walks the
streets, poor, but well experienced, also, in Chimicall Physic, and in other
parts of Learning.

Not long after this Conspiracy, Herries dies well rewarded. John Ramsey has
the Honor of Knighthood, with an additional bearing to his Cote of Arms, A
Hand holding forth a Dagger, reversed proper, piercing a bloody heart, The
point crowned Empcriall; with this Distick, Haec Dextra Vindex Principis and
Patriae. Afterward he was created Lord Haddington, and Earl of Holdernesse.

And our Pamphlet, bestows on him this Character, A very good Gentleman by
nature, but (in this Story) a Lier by practice: Pamp. 9.
for which all these favors were too little Reward.

Sir Thomas Erskin was after. wards created Earl of Kelly, Knight of the
Garter, Captain of the King's Guard, and Groom of the Stool. And the Fellow,
designed for the Murderer, had a large Pension confirmed, by Act of their
Parliament.

And all these men (but Herries) were living, with other witnesses at King
JAMES' journey, when he went from hence to visit Scotland; and met together by
direction at the same House, with Ceremony; and all of them with a number of
Courtiers, ascended into the same Room, the blood yet remaining, where the
King related the Story; and confirmed by them. And afterward kneeling down,
with tears of Contrition for his Sins to God, and thankfulness for this
Mercy; using many pious Ejaculations, embraced all these Actors in the former
Tragedy; when the poor fellow, also kissed the King's hand.

These circumstances gave occasion then, that this whole story was freshly
revived, to the common Satisfaction of the whole Country, and our English
Courtiers. And in especial, unto the very Reverend Bishop, and Nobly borne,
James Mountegue, then present; to whom the King addressed himself, in this
Relation, and from whose Mouth, I received these particulars, at his return
into England.

And thus much we have by word of mouth: somewhat I shall add out of writings
for more satisfaction.

This Treason was attempted the 4. of August 1600. And though there followed
sundry Suspicions and Examination of several other Persons supposed Abbetters
and Contrivers; yet it lay undiscovered, tanquame postliminio until 8. years
after, by the circumspection principally of the Earl of Dunbar, a man of as
great wisdom as those times and that Kingdom could boast of. Upon the person
of one George Sprot, Notarypublick of Ayemouth in Scotland. From some words
which at first he sparingly or unawares expressed, and also by some papers,
which were found in his House; whereof being examined, with a little ado he
confessed, and was condemned and executed at Edinburgh the 12. of Aug. 1608.

A Relation I conceive not common, but in my hands to be produced, and written
by that learned Gentleman Sir William Heart, then Lord Justice of Scotland, and
Principal in all the Acts of Judicature herein.

And first George Sprot confesses, That he knew perfectly that Robert Logane
late of Restalrig, was privy and upon foreknowledge of John late Earl of
Gowrie's Treasonable Conspiracy: That he knew, there were diverse Letters
interchanged betwixt them, anent their Treasonable put pose July 1600. which
Letters James Bour, called Lord Bour, Servitor to Restalrig (employed betwixt
them, and privy to all that arrand) had in keeping, and showed the same to
Sprot in Fast-Castle. That Sprot was present, when Bour, after 5. days
absence, returned with ^nswers by letter from Gowry, and staid all night with
Restalrig at his house Gunuesgreen, and rode the next morn to Lothiane, where
he staid six days, then to Fast-Castle, where he abode a short space.

That he saw and heard Restalrig read these letters, which Bour brought back
from Gowry, and all their Conference there anent. And that Bour said, Sir, if
you think to get Commodity by this dealing, lay your hand on your heart: and
that Restalrig answered, though he should lose all in the world; yet he would
pass through with Gowry: for that matter would as well content him as the
Kingdom. To whom Bour said, you may do as you please Sir; but it is not my
Council that you should be so sudden in that other matter. But for the
Condition of Darlton, I would like very well of it. To this Restalrig answered,
content your self, I am not at my wits end.

That Sprot himself entered into conference with Bour, demanding what was to be
done between the Earl and the Lord? Bour answered, that he believed, that the
Lord would get Darlton without gold or silver: but he feared it would be
deerer to him.

That Sprot inquiring further, how that should be done? Bour said they have
another pie in hand then buying and selling of land: But prayed Sprot for God's
sake, that he would let be, and not be troubled with the Lairds business: for
he feared, that within few days the Lord would be landlesse and livelesse.

And Sprot being demanded afterward, if all these Confessions were true, as he
would answer upon the salvation of his soul, seeing his death was near
approaching? Sprot said,

That he had no desire to live, and had care only of clearing his Conscience in
the truth. And that all the former points and circumstances were true, with the
depositions made by him the 5. of July last, and the whole confession made by
him since, as he hoped to be saved, and which he would seal with his blood.

And further being deposed; where was now the letter of Restalrig to Gowry? He
answered, That he had this letter amongst other of Restalrig's papers which
Bour had in keeping, and which Sprot copied out, and that he left the
principal letter in his Chest amongst his writings when he was taken and
brought away, and that it is closed and folded in a sheet of paper.

These depositions made by George Sprot the to of August 1608. and others
before (being all included in his Indictment following, to which for brevity I
shall remit the Reader) and written by James ^rimrose, Clerk of the King's
Council, and subscribed George Sprot.

Present
Earl of Dunbar, Earl Lothiane, Bishop of Rosse, Lord Schone, Lord
Hallo-rod-house, Lord Blautire, Sir William Heart Lord Justice, Mr. John Hall,
Mr. Patrick Gahoway, Mr. Peter Hewet, Ministers of Edinburgh; and subscribed
with all their hands.

The next day 11. of August, Sprot was re-examined, and to him declared the
assurance of his death, and was advised not to abuse his Conscience to witness
untruths, and upon the Innocence of the dead or living. To which he deposes,
That being resolved to die, and as he wishes to be participant of Heaven, upon
the salvation or damnation of his Soul, that all that he had deposed were true
in every point and circumstance, and no untruth in them.

The next day being the 12. of August 1608. Sprot was presented in Judgment
upon Pannell within the Talboth of Edinburgh; before Sir William Heart, Knight
Lord Justice of Scotland assisted with these Persons, viz.

Alexander, Earl of Dunferling, Lord Chancelour. George, Earl of Dunbar, Lord
Treasurer. John, Archbishop of Glascoe. David, Bishop of Rosse. Gawen, Bishop
of Galloway. Andrew, Bishop of Brechine. David, Earl of Crawford. Mark, Earl of
Lotharine. James, Lord Abernethie of Saltonne. James, Lord of Balmerinoth
Senitapie. Walter, Lord Blautire. John, Lord Burley. Sir Richard Coburn,
Knight. Master John Preston, Collector General. Sir John Skewe, Knight,
Register.

And he was declared, accused and pursued by Sir Thomas Hamilton, Knight,
Advocate to the King, for his Highness entries of the Crimes contained in his
Indictment; whereof the tenure follows viz.

George Sprot, Notary in Ayemouth, You are indicted and accused, forasmuch as
John sometime Earl of Gowry, having most cruelly, detestably and treasonably
conspired in the month of July the year of God 1600. to murder our dear and
most gracious Sovereign the King's most excellent Majesty. And having imparted
that divelish purpose to Robert Logaine of Restalrig, who allowed of the same,
and most willingly and readily undertook to be partaker thereof. The same
coming to your knowledge, at the times and in the manner particularly after
specified. You most unnaturally, maliciously and treasonably concealed the
same, and was art and part thereof in manner following. And first, In the said
month of July 1600. after you had perceived and known, that diverse letters and
messages had past betwixt the said John sometimes Earl of Gowry and the said
Robert Logane of Restalrig, you being in the house of Fast-Castle, you saw and
read a letter written by the said Restalrig with his own hand to the said Earl
of Gowry. viz.

My Lord, etc. At the receipt of your letter I am so confuted, that I can
neither utter my joy, nor find my self sufficiently able to requite your
Lordship with due thanks. And persuade your Lordship, in that matter I shall be
as forward for your honor as if it were my own cause. And I think there is no
Christian, that would not be content to revenge, that Machiavilian Massacring
of our deer Friends: yea howbeit it should be to venture and hazard life, lands
and all things else. My heart can bind me to take part in that matter, as your
Lordship shall find proof thereof. But one thing would be done; namely, that
your Lordship should be circumspect and earnest with your Brother, that he be
not rash in any speeches touching the purpose of Padua.

And a certain space after the execution of the aforesaid Treason, the said
Robert Logane having desired the Lord of Bour to deliver to him the said
letter or else to burn it; and Bour having given to you all tickets and
letters, which he then had either concerning Restalrig or others to see the
same, because he could not read himself, you abstracted the above-written
letter, and retained the same in your own hands, and diverse times read it,
containing further, to wit,

My Lord you may easily understand, that such a purpose as your Lordship
intends, can not be done rashly, but with deliberation. And I think for my
self, that it were most meet, to have the men your Lordship spoke of, ready in
a boat or bark, and address them as if they were taking pastime on the Sea in
such fair Summertime. And if your Lordship could think good, either your self
to come to my house Fast-castle by sea, or to send your Brother; I should have
the house very quiet, and well provided after your Lordships advertisement. And
no others shall have access to haunt the place, during your being here. And if
your Lordship doubt of safe landing, I shall provide all such necessaries, as
may serve for your arrival, within a flight-shot of the house. And persuade
your Lordship, you shall be as sure and quiet here, while we have settled our
Plot, as if you were in your own Chamber. For I trust, and am assured, we shall
have word within few days from them your Lordship knows of. For I have care
to see what ships come home by. Your Lordship knows, I have kept the Lord
Bothwell quietly in this house in his greatest extremity, in spite of King and
Council. I hope if all things come to pass (as I trust they shall) to have
both your Lordship and his Lordship at a good Dinner ere I die. Haec jocose. To
animate your Lordship, I doubt not but all things will be well: and I am
resolved thereof, your Lordship shall not doubt of any thing, on my part: Peril
of life, lands, honor and goods; yea, the hazard of hell shall not affray me
from that; yea, though the Scaffold were already set up. The sooner the Matter
were done, it were the better. For the King's Buck-hunting will be shortly, and
I hope it will prepare some daintier cheer for us to live the next year. I
remember well my Lord, that merry sport which your Lordship's Brother told me,
of a Nobleman at Padua: for I think that a Parasceve to this purpose.

My Lord, think nothing that I commit the secret hereof to this bearer: for I
dare not only venture my life, lands, honor, and all I have else on his
credit; but I durst hazard my soul in his keeping: I am so persuaded of his
fidelity. And I trow (as your Lordship may ask him if it be true) he would go
to Hell-gates for me, and he is not beguiled of my part to him. And therefore I
doubt not, but this will persuade your Lordship, to give him trust in this
matter as to my self. But I pray you direct him home again with all speed
possible; and give him strait command, that he take not a winck sleep, till he
see me again after he comes from you. And as your Lordship desires in your
letter to me, either rive or burn this letter, or send it back again with the
bearer: for so is the fashion I grant.

Restalrig.

Which letter writ every word with the said Robert Logane's own hand, was also
so subscribed with this word, Restalrig.

And albeit by the contents of the aforesaid letter, you know perfectly the
truth of the said most treasonable conspiracy, and the said Logane his
foreknowledge, allowance and guilt thereof, like as you were assured of the
same by his receiving diverse letters sent by Gowry to him, and by his returning
letters to Gowry for the same purpose, and by sundry conferences ferences
betwixt Logane and Bour, in your presence and hearing, concerning the said
Treason, as well in July preceding the attempt thereof, as at diverse other
times shortly thereafter: as likewise by Bour his revealing thereof to you; who
was upon the knowledge and devise of the Treason, and was employed as ordinary
Messenger by Logane to Gowry; whereby your knowledge, concealing and guilt of
the same was undeniable.

Ye^ for further manifestation thereof, about July 1602. the said Logane showed
unto you, that Bour had told him, that he had been somewhat rash, to let you
see a letter which came from Gowry to Logane, who then urged you to tell what
you understood by the same. To whom you answered, That you took the meaning
thereof to be, that he had been upon the council and purpose of Gowrie's
Conspiracy: And that he answered you, what e're he had done, the worst was his
own: But if you would swear to him, that you should never reveal any thing of
that matter to any person, it should be the best sight that ever you saw. And
in token of further recompense, he gave you twelve pounds of Silver.
Nevertheless, albeit you know perfectly the whole practice and progress of
all the said Treason, from the beginning to the end; as also by your Conference
with Bour and Logane, during all the days of their lives, who lived till the
year 1606. or therabouts: and so by the space of 6. years you concealed the
same, and so you was and is art and part of the said Treason, and of the
concealing, and so you ought to suffer under the pain of High Treason. To the
token, that you have not only by your depositions subscribed by you, and
solemnly made in presence of many of the Lords of his Majesty's Privy
Council, and the Ministers of the Borough of Edinburgh, of the dates of the
5.15. and 16. days of July last past, and 10. and 11. of August instant,
confessed every head, point and article of the Indictment abovesaid, but also
by diverse other depositions subscribed by you; you have ratifyed the same, and
sworn constantly to abide thereat, and to seal the same with your blood, Which
Indictment being read openly, before Sprot was put to the knowledge of Inquest,
he confessed the same and every point to be true; And therefore the Indictment
was put to the Inquest of the honest, famous and discreet Persons, that is to
say,

William Trumball of Ardre. William Fisher Merchant and Burgess of Edinburgh,
Rob. Short there, Ed. Johnstone Merchant Burgess there, Harb. Maxwel of Cavens,
Ja. Tennent of Linchouse, Will. Trumbill Burg, of Edinburgh, Geor. Brown in
Gorgy Mill, Joh. Hucheson and John Jews Merch. Burg. of Edinburgh, Ja.
Somervill, and Will. Swinton of the same, John Crunison of Dirlton, Th. Smith
and John Cowtis Burg. of Edinburgh.

Which Persons of Inquest sworn and admitted, and reading over the same
Indictment again in his and their presence, the said George Sprot confessed the
same to be true. Whereupon the said Sir Thomas Hamilton, his Majesty's
Advocate, asked act and Instrument; and therefore the Inquest removed to the
Inquest-House, and elected Harbert Maxwell to be their Chancelour or Foreman.
And after mature deliberation, they all re-entred again in Court, where the
said Foreman declared the said George Sprot to be guilty, filed and convict of
Art and Part of the said Treason; for which cause the said Justice by the mouth
of the Demster of Court, by sentence and Doom ordained, the said George Sprot
to be taken to the Market. Cross of Edinburgh, and there to be hanged upon a
Gibbet till he be dead, and thereafter his head to be stricken off, and his
body to be quartered and demeaned as a Traitor, and his head to be set up upon
a prick of Iron upon the highest part of the Talboth of Edinburgh, where the
Traitor Gowrie and other Conspiratours heads stand, and his lands and goods
forfeited and escheat to our Sovereign Lord the King's use.

Extractum de Libro Actorum Adjornalis S. D. N. Regis per me D. Johannem
Coburne de Ormeston Milifem, Clericum Institiarii ejusdem generalem. Sub meis
signo and subscriptione manualibus. And so was George Sprot conveyed to a
private house, remaining at his Meditations; and afterward conferred with the
Ministers, confessing all aforesaid with extreme humiliation and prayer.
Afterward ganging up the ladder, with his hands loose and untyed, he was again
put in mind of the truth of his Confessions. He for the greater assurance
thereof, performed an act marvelous; promising by God's assistance to give them
an evident Token before the yielding up of his Spirit; which was, when he had
hung a very good while, he left up both his hands a good height, and clapped
them together three several times, to the wonder of thousand Spectators, and
so dyed.

For more Confirmation of the before Narration, there was present George Abbot,
then Doctor in Divinity, and Dean of Winchester, after Arch-Rishop of
Canterbury, who was present both at his Examination and Execution, and has
made the same writing and observance even almost verbatim, as all the before
specified Relation intends; which I can produce also.

And more one -- Dr. of Divinity present also, says as much; which no doubt is
sufficient satisfaction to all reasonable Men, that there was such a Conspiracy
and not fained. Earl of Essex his Treason.


And now we come to remember the Earl of Essex; the universal Love of whose
memory, was but of such whom he formerly caught, by his affected Popularity; or
of others, that followed his Treasonable practices, which were gross enough to
be sore apprehended, by every faithful Subject, especially, being prosecuted
against the Person of that glorious Sun, his obliging Mistress, Pamp. 10
whom a little before, our Pamphlet commemorates with much Passion, till now,
that he comes to Ireason; a small fault, belike, and pardonable in Essex. For
he says, that King James hated Sir Robert Cecill: it seems, for but
prosecuting amongst other Councelours and Peers a Traytor's death. Intimating
no doubt the King's impatient desire to inherit these Crowns by any Treason.
But he spares no Invectives against any of worth or honor, that comes in his
way.

This Earl was eldest Son to Walter Devoreux, Robert E. of Essex.
(of a Norman family) Viscount Hereford, and Bowrchier; Lord Eerrers of
Chartley: and by Queen Elizabeth created Earl of Essex, and Ewe; Anno 1572.
and Knight of the Garter.

He was sent into Ireland, Lord Marshall against the Rebels; and as if but
sent of an arrand, he presently falls sick, and dies at Dublin, 1576. His body
brought over, and entombed at Carmarthen in Wales.

This Robert succeeded his Father's Honors; and was looked upon in Court, by
all with pity, through the Sacrifice of his Father: But by the Queen with
great affection; whom she advanced (his fortunes being low), with many gifts
of grace and bounty. At his Arraignment, accounted to the Lord Treasurer Dorset
to be 300000. l. sterling, in pure gift for his only use; besides the fees of
his offices and the disposition of the treasurein his Armies. Of all which he
soon became a bold ingrosser both of fame and favor.

And first in Anno 1585. he receaves Knighthood. In 1588. Knight of the Garter.
In 1589. he had command in chief; in an Expedition into Portingal against
Lisbone. In 1595. sworn Councelour of State. In 1596. he was sent with a Navy
to the Isle Cadiz in Spain; and presently after made Lord Marshall of England.
In 1597. he commanded in another Fleet, to the Islands Sercera's; his
Contemporaries who stood in Competition with him for fame, were, Sir Charles
Blunt, afterward Earl of of Devonshire, and General Norris, Blunt late E. of
Dev.
his near friends; and yet whom he envied, the last to his ruin; Men, of
greater merit and truer value. And after the destruction of Norris; He takes
upon him the Expedition into Ireland; the place of Exercise for the best of the
Militia.

And who durst oppose him? Though the Queen had an eye of favor upon Blunt,
often saying, That She presaged him, the Man, to end Her cares in that
Kingdom. And She was a true Prophetess, though not in Her time, but in Her
Successor, King James.

This Blunt was a Gallant Gentleman, and learned, on whom She bestowed a Jewel
for his behavior at a Tilting, which he wore after, tackt with a Scarlet
Riband, upon his Arm; and for no other cause, Essex must needs fight with him,
and was run through the Arm, for his labor.

But Essex got Employments from them all; offering the Service evermore, at
less charge of Men and Money, then others his Competitors.

And over he goes, Deputy of Ireland and General.
Deputy of Ireland, and General of all the forces there: with Commission
strickt enough, to imbound his Popularity with the Soldiery, and his own
family, which followed him in Troops, either to devour or undo him.

No sooner landed, but ere he drew sword on the Enemy, he dubbs Knighthood upon
seven Gentlemen, Volunteers; which honor, he had very lavishly bestowed at
Cadiz; and was therefore soundly chidden by the Queen.

And now restrained by his Commission, with much a do, unless to Men of known
Merit, and those after Battle.

For this first Act, the Queen swore he began his Rant: Of which he had
present Intelligence from his dearest Friend and Uncle, Sir Francis Knowls, a
Councelor of State, Sr. Francis Knowles his Correspondent.
and Controwler of Her Household, and after Earl of Banbury: Who spared not his
advise and Council at all times. And between them there passed Intelligence,
with every dispatch; whose letters and papers, Principal from Essex, and
Copies to him I have seen; by which there appears, even from the beginning of
that Employment, a very plain and Intentional resolution in Essex, to make
himself Master of his own Ambition, and by this way and means to effect it;
grounding all his discontents and dislikes, that the Queens ear was open to
his Enemies at Court. And therefore it behooved him, to guard himself; which he
resolved to do, by help of his Friends and fate; And indeed having fallen into
remarkable offenses, together with the Treaties with Tyrone the Arch-Rebell,
without Order from England, and without acquainting his Council of War, with
whose advise he was limited to act.

It Is true, Treats with Tyrone.
he advanced against the Enemy, and soon accepts an Invitation to a Treaty
accompanied with his Council of War. But coming to the brinck of a River;
the place assigned, he plunges his Horse to the Midde stream, alone; and there
meets him Tyrone on Horseback; where their private discourse gave sufficient
Caution, to all that looked on a-loof-off, that Essex meant no fair play for
his Mistress. For which fact, and no blow stroock in all this time, Men and
Money wasted; He was soundly blamed by the Council at home; and no more
letters from the Queens own hand, which he usually received before.

In great choler, Returns home.
as to Dispute or Revenge; and without leave from hence, he leaves his Command
to a Lieutenant; and comes over with a hundred Gentlemen, his best Confidents;
hastens to Court, ere it was known to any, but to his deer Uncle, to whom he
writes, Deer Uncle, Receiving your last, at my entering on Shipboard, Ireturn
the accounts thereof, at my Landing; being resolved with all speed, (and your
Silence) to appear, in the face of my Enemies; not trusting afar off to my
own Innocence, or to the Queens favor, with whom they have got so much power
etc.

At sight of him, with amaze to the Queen, She swore, God's death my Lord, what
do you here? Your presence is most unwelcome, without Tyrone's head in your
Portmantle. But he, falling more to a Dispute, then any Excuse: She, in
disdain to be taught, but what She pleased to do: Bid him begone, his boots
stunck.

And so was he presently commanded, is committed and censured.
and committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury to Lambeth; where not long
after, he was convented before a Committee of the Council, and Correctionem,
not ad destructionem. The Queen very gracious, hoping his offenses might
discern favor. for according to his Examinations then, and the merit of his
cause. I have seen his Uncles papers, breviates, (who was one of his Judges)
intended as his Censure, to condemnation, and so fitted for further Trial. But
the day before, they had other direction from the Queen, saying, he was young
enough to mend, and make amends for all.

And so their Censures, showed him his Errors, and left him to Her grace and
mercy; only restraining him to his own House, against Saint Clements. Not
without daily letters from Knowles; with advice to be rid of his ranting
followers; Captains and Swordmen of the Town flocking, and Encouraging him,
to a Revenge on his Enemies.

It was not long that he could contain; Saying, His rebellious rising
he was engaged to go on. And on a Sunday morning, the Council sat; (which was
usual, until the late Archbishop Lawd in honor of the Morning Sacrifice,
altered that course, to the Afternoon. Then the first flame brake out.

To him, Imprisons the Clerk of the Council,
they sent their Clerk of the Council, to know the reason from his Lordship,
of the meeting of so many weaponed Men at his house; But the Messenger not
returning, being kept Prisoner, the chiefest Councelours commanded by the
Queen, came to him; and no sooner entered Essex house, but the Gates were
clapped too, all their Train kept out, the Courtyard full of Gallants. Some
cried kill them; Imprison them; and the Lords of the Council.
To the Court; seize the Queen, and be our own Carvers. Essex comes down with
all reverence, ushers them up, resolving to detain them Prisoners, and pledges
for his Success.

Indeed in this hurly burly of advice he took the worst. For leaving them in
safety with Sir Ferdinando Gorges; He with the Earl of Southampton, in one
boat; and some others in other boats, took water at his Garden stairs; and
landing near the Bridge, went on foot, up the streets, with such straggling
company as came in their way; To whom he protested, that the Queen should have
been murdered, and his, and other good Counselors lives, in peril, by
enemies of the State, that forced a power from the Queen, to the emiment
destruction of the Kingdom. These speeches with their swords drawn, took
little effect with the people, who came running out of the Churches, being
Sermon-time; without weapons, or any offensable assistance, contrary to his
expectation.

But on he goes to Sir Thomas Smith's, where he kept his Shreevealty near
Fan-church, his confiding friend; by whose countenance he hoped to work with
the Multitude. He being absent, at Paul's Cross Sermon, Essex staid no longer,
then to shift his shirt; and so passed through Cheape-side to Paul's west end;
where he found his first opposition by some forces got together, by the Bishop
of London, and the trained band. And after Proclametion, That Essex and
Southampton were Traitors, and all those that followed their faction: Many
dropping from the Crowd, there was little defense by his party, though some
were killed; and himself forsaken of the wisest. He retires back to
Queenhithe, and so to Essex-house by water; where finding the Birds flowen, the
Counselors released, by their Keeper; who in hope of pardon, accompained them
to the Queens presence; discovering so much as he knew, concerning his Lord;
who finding himself too weak, to withstand the force of a piece of Cannon,
mounted upon the Church, to batter his House; He and Southampton yielded
themselves Prisoners to the Tower; Arraigned and executed.
where being arraigned and condemned, Southamton had repreeve, and after
pardon; But Essex the reward of his merits, and Executed in March 1601. upon
the Inner Hill in the Tower; to the regret of None either wise or honest:
Leaving behind him one only Son, the last of his Line.

William Cecill, Cecils. Pamp. 10.
illustrate from the family of Cecils (who suffered persecution in the times of
Henry 8. Edward 6. and Queen Mary) he was knighted by Queen Elizabeth, so soon
as she was settled in her Crown, then Secretary and Councellor of State.
Afterward created Baron of Burligh. Then made Lord Treasurer of England, and
Knight of the Garter: and died Chauncellor of the University of Cambridge, Anno
1598. Entombed at Westminster, leaving two Sons. The elder Thomas, was then
Lord President of the North; And afterward created Earl of Exeter by King
James, and privy Councellor of State. He died Anno discreet and honorable,
whom the world could never tax with any taint.

The other son Robert, Sr. Robert Cecill.
was the second; But a true Inheriter of his Fathers wisdom, and by him
trained up to future perfections, of a Judicious Statesman: after his
Knighthood, the first employment from Court (for he was not at all bred out of
it) sent him Assistant with the Earl of Darby Ambassador to the French King.
At his return, the Queen took him second Secretary with Sir Fr. Walsingham,
after whose decease, he continued Paincipal, and so kept it to his death; Not
relinquishing any Preferment, for the Addition of a Creater. A remarkable
Note; which few men of the Gown can boast of. His Father lived to see him
settled in these preferments, and after Master of the Wards and Liveries. These
he held to the Queens death: Being in all Her time used amongst the Men of
weight, as having great sufficiencies from his Instruction who begat him. Those
offices here in public, with perpetual Correspondence by Emissaries of his own
into Scotland, might no doubt make him capable of Reception with King James,
who was to be advised by him, how to be received here of his people. Without
any necessity, then, to make use of Sir George Hewmes or his Initiatiation
afterward, with any juggling tricks, Pamp 13.
his merrits certainly appeared to the King, who not only not diminished his
forformer preferments; But often added to them, even to the day of his death.

As first Baron of Essenden; then Viscount Cranborne; after Earl of Salisbury,
and Knight of the Garter; and lastly Lord Treasurer of England.

He was a Councellor of singular merit. A very great discoverer of the late
Queens enemies abroad, and of private Assinations at home: For which She valued
him, and the Papists hated him; which they published by several Manuscripts,
(which I have seen,) and printed Libels; and that most pestilent against his
birth and honor, threatening to kill him, which himself answered wisely,
learnedly and religiously, Extant in English and Latin Adversus Perduelles.

Indeed, It behoved the King to bestow upon him the weight of the Treasurers
Staff. The Cofers then in some want; which the King was not likely soon to
Recover, but rather to increase in debt: having the addition of wife and
children to boot. And being now come, with common opinion into the Capacity,
(by his additional Crowns) to reward his old servants; and to appear obliging
unto new Ones.

The world wondering at the worth of this great Councellor, I know not upon
what score, our Pamphleter should endeavor to scandal his memory.

Which he rancks into Numbers of ill Offices to his Nation; Pamp. 12.
as the burning of a whole cart-load of Parliaments Presidents; which no man
can be so sottish as to believe, that knows the strict concerving of those
Records by sworn Officers.

As for the Baronets, Baronets.
It was the earnest suite of two hundred prime Gentlemen of Birth and estates
to my knowledge; for I copied the list before ever it came this Lord. And as
true it is, That this Lord's Reception thereto, was in the same words which our
Pamphlet puts upon the King, That it would discontent the Gentry; to which
themselves replied, Nay my Lord, It will rather satisfy them, in advance of
Dignity, before others; who now, come behind those Meaner Men, whom the King
was forced to Knight for his own honor, and some merits of theirs, having no
other Reward, or money to spare: and therein not much to blame, to oblige them
that way.

As for that supposed juggling, Pamp. 13.
which the Duke of Bullion should discover: As it was never known to wiser men;
So we may take it, a devise of his, who in these, as in other such like, of his
own, may truly merit that Character which he bestows before [On the good
Gentleman.] Pamp. 9.


I desire pardon, if I speak much and truth, in the memory of this Noble Lord;
being somewhat concerned, to speak my own knowledge.

I know, that this Earl of Salesbury, declining his health, with continual
labor for the good of this Nation, both in the former, and in this his
Sovereign's Service; And am willing to give some light thereof, to such as are
pleased to read these particulars, being an Account of his concernments.

For first, Salisbury his service to the State. Manors, Lands.
he found the King's Manors, and fairest possessions, most unsurveyed, and
uncertain, rather by report, then by Measure. Not more known, then by ancient
Rents; the Estate granted rather by chance, then upon knowledge.

The Custody-Lands, Custody-hands.
(anciently termed Crown Lands) much charged upon the Sheriffs; yearly
discharged by annual pensions. A Revenue which seemed decayed, by descent of
times, and worn out of all remembrance: these he evermore revived, by
Commissioners of Asserts.

The Woods, Woods.
were more uncertain then the rest. No man knew the Copices, Number of acres,
growth or value; nor of Timber Trees, either Number or worth. So as truly he
might well find himself in a Wood, indeed. The Trees wasted without controwle,
because no Record kept thereof. These he caused to be numbered, marked and
valued, easily to be questioned, when thereafter missing.

The Copyhold Lands, Copyholds.
where the arbitrary sines ceased, by the discretion of the Stewards; and did
seldom yield the Parsons part; and that also vanished, in fees and charges.
The State was then after like to raise of these Natures, the true values; and
to receive equal benefit, with the rest of the Subjects; if the Book had bin
since observed, which he caused in print.

And for the Copyholders of Inheritance, who by many Records, prove their
fines certain; they did hereupon, offer for their freedom 20.30.40. and 50.
years purchase, where they could show probable Records, without sine; to free
themselves. The Wastes and Commons, were tender Titles; Wastes and Commons.
full of murmering and Commotion; which truly he never durst offer to enclose;
Nor to urge the Tenants to become Suitors themselves; with whom Commissioners
were to be appointed, to compound for a part; and so he made a good President
for the rest.

The Casual fines, Casual fines.
due to the King, out of the private possessions, (as other Lords have by their
Courts of Leets, Court Barons and such like) and out of public offenses, as
the King was Parent of the Commonwealth; unto whom belonged and praemium and
poena. These being natures, left for the King's bounty, he commended them also
to Commissioners, for a better Revenue, to be raised; being till his time
utterly neglected and almost lost.

As for the extended Lands; where the Officers became indebted to the Crown;
and made it an Art, to have their Lands extended, at easy rates; He caused the
most of these to be surveyed; commended the Improvement to Commissioners, and
commanded the Tenants to appear before them.

The Improvements of the Customs, he advanced from 86000. l. to 120000. l. and
from that to 135000. l. by the year.

He bargained, for the Riverwater to be brought to London, River water.
and so to the driest parts, which brought a great yearly value.

He always encouraged all Industry of Manufactures. Manufactures.
Such Inventions as the Statutes admit and countenance. As home-making of
Allome; Salt by the Sun; Busses for fishing; Salt upon Salt, by new fires and
Inventions; Copper and Coperas of Iron, and of Steel; That the Subjects at
home, might be set on work; and the small Treasure of the Nation kept within.

It concerned him as Secretary to have Intelligence from all parts of the
World; Intelligence.
and Correspondence with all Em bassadours and Foreign States; not to be
neglected at any hand; which he did at his own cost. So did all parts grow
confident of such a Councelour. And so he kept Rules with the united Provinces
whose Friendships he would say, much concerned this State.

I may not forget his Christian care, Ireland improved.
for poor Ireland; Plantations there, and transplantations of the Natives; to
advance the Customs there, and to abate the charges of the Garrisons. And he
did endeavor, and in manner did effect an universal course of Law and
Justice, in the most barbarous and remote parts of that Nation.

And now concerning the Court of Wards and Liveries; Wards and Liveries.
By constitution of this State, all the lands of this Nation, are holden by two
Tenures: By Soccage or by Knights Service. By the Plough to feed us; or by the
Sword to defend us. And who so died, leaving an Heir within age, unable to do
this service, his Heir and Lands, fell both to the Protection of the Sovereign.
And this in ancient time, was promiscuously carried, in the Court of Chancery;
until the middle time of Hon. the 8. when this Court of Wards, was first
erected. Since which time the Masters thereof, by favor of the Sovereign, did
accustom (as a bounty of State) to grant unto Noble Men; the King's Servants
and their own followers, both the marriag of the body, and the lease of the
Lands for a third penny, of their true worth.

But in all humility, his Lordship finding the estate in a Retrograde
Consumption, did with all obedience present his Patent, at the Kings feet: and
so the whole benefit became the profit of the Crown.

Thus, he wrought in the Mine of the State-affaires, and wasted his Carcass
with desire, to have done better Service, in these his offices of Treasurer,
Secretary and Master of the Wards: And yet these were sufficient, just and true
merits; Without Friends, Wit, or Wealth, to raise him so much, in his Master's
esteem: Or without ill offices done by him, to this Nation, as our Pamphlet
will make us believe, in many absurd particulars.

And truly, Pam. 11.12.
his studious labors in the State, brought him the sooner to sickness, a
Consumption of the Lungs; wherein he wasted some years, and at last, by advise
for cure at the Bath; he took leave of the King, who came to visit him at
Salisbury-House; and with tears, at his parting, protested to the Lords
attending, his great loss of the wisest Councelour and best Servant, that any
Prince in Christendom could Parallel. Of whom one says,

Tu Pater and Patriae Princeps, Prudentia cujus Extulit immensum Reges,
Populosque Britannos.

His time at the Bath was short; being spent to extremity, ere he came
thither; and returning back by the way, he was taken out of his Litter, and put
himself in his Coach, and died afterward at St. Margarets, in the House of
that worthy Gentleman Mr. Daniel, in May 1612. My Lord Viscount Cramborne, now
Earl of Salisbury, and the Lord Clifford, Sir Robert Manton and many more
Gentlemen of quality then present, whom I saw there: He was Imbalmed, and after
Entombed, at his Princely Manor of Hartfield. Pamp. 14.
A fairer Corpse then any brazen face, that belies his disease. His death was
extreme sadness to the King, and to all his friends, and others of worth and
honor. For in spite of the Pamphleter, Pamp. 14.
he will be valued, as he does confess

Never came a Better.

The next we meet with is Henry Earl of Northampton. Henry Howard Earl of
Northampton.


The Ancient and Illustrous family of the Howards, were here more Eminent, then
any other, that ushered the King to his Additionall Crowns.

This Henry Howard was Brother unto Thomas Duke of Norfolk; who suffered for
his attempt of marriage with the Queen of Scots, whilst she was Prisoner here
in England. Which might be some Motive to induce the King to consider the
advance of that family, though they were endued, with large possessions from
their Ancestors.

The Duke left two Sons Philip Earl of Arundell and Thomas Howard Earl of
Suffolk afterward Lord Treasurer.

Henry Howard their Uncle, Pamp. 15
was more wedded to his Book, then to the Bed: for he died a Bacheler; and so
had the less occasion, to advance his fortune, by Court-flattery, or
State-Imployment: nor indeed was he ever any Suitor for either.

He was accounted both wise and learned; and therefore out of the Kings great
affection to Letters, especially when they are met in a Noble Person, he was
advanced, in his Creation of Baron of Marnhill and Earl of Southampton; then
Pryvy Councelor, Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and
Knight of the Garter. He had very plentiful for his single life, and to spare
for his friends.

In his expense not over frugal; maintaining his Port, the most remarkable
(like the Ancient NOBLE MAN) in his family and Dependants; of any other Lord
then, or since his time. He assisted his Nephew the Earl of Suffolk by his
designing and large contribution, to that excellent Fabric Awdley-end. He
built the Noble structure at Charing-Crosse, from, the Ground, Northampton
House and presented it a New-years-gift to the Lord Walden, Suffolkes eldest
Son, and now called Suffolk-House: and yet left his other Nephew, the Earl of
Arundell, the rest of his estate; so to appear to the world, his equal
distribution to such even kindred. He was Religious, and gave good testimony
thereof in his life, built that handsome Covent at Greenwich, and endued it
with Revenue for ever, for maintenance of decayed Gentlemen a sufficient
number; and for women also considerable. He died in Anno 1613. full of years
and Honorable fame: though Our Pamphleter will not know so much; Pamp. 16.
and yet no doubt must needs be Iutimate with his Person: for he tells us his
thoughts; That he had assuredly promised to himself the Treasurers staff.
Although we can produce this Lord's Letters, and other testimonies, employing
all his own and his Friends Interest, for that preferment, upon his Nephew
Suffolk, and excusing himself, of the burden and weight of that Office, by
his known Infirmity of Stone of the which he died.

Indeed; James Hay Earl of Carlisle. Pamp. 18.
It is no matter upon what Score, that the King gave his affection, to this
Favorite James Hay.

The Scots were never very eminent, with Neighbour-Princes; what credit they
had, came by the French, to keep balance with England and them. The beginning
might then be hoped, when their Union with these Crowns, should afford the
means, to set them forth.

And it was prudentiall in the King, to pick out one of his own to splendor
that Nation, in our way of peace and Court-ship: Especially when all was done
at the Master's cost. For Hay was poor, unless what he got by his first Match,
with the Lord Dennis heir, for by his last he had nothing; the great spirit of
Pearcy Earl of Northumberland, disdaining the Marriage, and refused to afford
a Groat, to a beggarly Scot, as he called him.

And now this Lord (for so was he soon made Lord Hay, His vain (...) spences.
then Viscount Doncaster, and Earl of Carlisle) did most vainly prodigallize,
what he often begged. And in truth, he had it granted for no other purpose; to
put down the English Courtier at that vanity. And which, both abroad and at
home, was often paid for, by the King's Privy Purse. As that feast at
Essex-House, Pamp. 19.
and many his Masqueradoes at Court (for he meddled not with the Tilt-staff, as
being no Sword-man) but in the other, and such like, he never escaped, to act
One part.

And these expenses, famed him with little credit; how erche appears to our
Pamphleters Judgment; who cries up, Pamp. 21.
the bounty of his Mind, beyond the Moon at least; who in truth, was never
good, to Man or beast.

His Embassies, His Embassies to Germany.
were not so weighty when he posted so long through Germany, to find out the
Emperor; who afforded him the Wild-Goose-Chase, as knowing his Arrand, before
he came at him. Which in truth was purposely so designed by the King; only to
spend time, and to amuse men's expectations (who were wild after a War) to
beget a Treaty, concerning the lost Palatine. The effects whereof, (as the King
wisely prophesyed,) would produce distemper, through all Christendom, if not
destructive to his Son in law.

He went into France Extraordinary; France.
it was to treat with that King, in favor of the Hugenots (the Religion as
they account it) being risen to a Civil War, by management of the Duke
d'Rohau, Count Sobeeze, and others; to a dangerous consequence, in several
places, almost over France: which to allay, that King had raised a great Army;
resolving with countenance of his own Person, to give end thereto: But King
James, being invited by several troublesome Commissioners, their Agents, to
implore for their cause, and take upon him their protection, which he (a wise
Prince in that) declined, yet not to neglect them; and the rather to satisfy
some of our People, of the like Gang, meddled thus far to mediate by Embassy
of Hay; who as in that of Germany, did nothing with effect, but went up to
Montaban, and so come home again.

It Is true, he went into Spain, Spain.
with a message to our Prince; with no more matter, then others that came
after, to wait on him in that Courtship. For there as in other Kingdoms, his
Scots vanity must also be blazoned.

And for his last Embassy in France, about Our Match with that Daughter, and
our Queen; Again into France.
he came not into Commission, till the Treaty was confirmed, and the Marriage
concluded, by Embassy, only of the Earl of Holland; and Carlisle put in
afterward, to dance out the Measures; His name, being used in the Proxy, for
that Ceremony; and at this time, the Earl of Holland, Earl of Holland.
had some color for his expense which he lavished without reason, to the
weakening of his unsettled fortunes; being forced to follow the other then, in
all his fashions. And which Infection, by after-Custome, became his disease
also, and almost if not overmastering, yet over-shadowing his Natural, eminent
parts, with which his inside was habited, and perspicuous to such as knew him.

But I am not delighted, to urge out this story of the Earl of Carlisle: as not
willing to speak ill of any; unlike our Pamphlet that spares none, but Him. For
I should know; that virtue and vice, are Inherent in Man. And as it becomes us
to tell truth, when we speak their virtue: yet with modesty and compassion to
discover their vices: either being Examples for the future; that, to imitate;
this, to shun. And I cannot but with Compunction remind, That the monstrous
excess of the belly, and the back, by his first President, became then the
Mode of those times, for great Persons (the most part) to follow, and for the
Common People to this hour to practice.

And truly, a wise and a good Man, ought justly to have hated his condition in
this without suspicion of malice or envy; Pamp. 21.
as it is said Northampton did, who yet, as may be remembered, took leave of
this life, ere Hay was settled on horsback.

And that other mark of Reproach also, may without partiallity be taken often
the Score from that Noble Northampton; who on my conscience (for I knew him
well) disdained the Guilt in that frivolous story of Sir Robert Mansell. Nor is
it material, to credit the rest of that Rant, in his Vice Admiral voyage.

The Second Remark of the Preface, Second Remarke. Pamp. 30.
falls upon the Treason of Sir Walter Ralegh, which the Pamphlet calls an
arrant trick of State; and Cecil the Imenire facias thereof.

Sir Walter Ralegh was a Gentleman of good alliance, Sr. Walter Ralegh.
in the west of England, and very well descended. He began his Improvements, by
the University, and Inns of Court; the latter was always the place of esteem
with the Queen which, she said, fitted youth for the future. But he staid not
there. And as his fate would have him, of the Sword first; so his destiny drew
him on, to have a mixed reputation, with the Gown: For he was often called to
Council but never sworn. He was twice in Expeditions of Land-service into
Ireland, under General Norris and Gray, a Volunteer in either, as also in the
Low Countries, and a voyage at Sea ere he was known at Court.

And such ways as these, were his Introductions (the best hopes of his
rising:) some Natural parts he had, a good wit and judgment; but his best
weapon was his tongue, which gave him repute to be learned then; but after he
improved to a great value, in his future troubles; the best School to a wise
man.

He had a quarrel with Gray in Ireland, which being referred to a Council of
War, it had like to cost him his life: But by reference came afterward to
repetition, at home before the Lords. Gray had the better cause, but Ralegh the
advantage in pleading; who so took them, especially Lester, that the Queen was
told the tale; and somewhat more of him. And no sooner he came to be known to
Her, but She took him, to grace. In whom (as in other of the like form) their
always meet oposites, Enemies of greater rank, and they kept him under,
sometimes in, sometimes out, which when it fell out to be so, he would wisely
decline himself, out of the Court-rode. And then you found him not but by
fame. In voyages to the West Indies, Gueana, New Plantations, Virginia, or in
some Expeditions against the Spaniard: Against whom, his and other the like
success, of Drake, Candish, Forlisher, Hawkins, with other Island-voyages,
near home, confirmed Ralegh, a grand Opposer of the general peace which King
James brought in with him; and that brought Ralegh to his ruin.

And for all these his good parts, he rose to no more, then Governor of Jersey,
Lord Warden of the Stannaries in the West, and Captain of the Guard to the
Queens person; which last place, brought him to esteem in the Court, but not in
the State at all.

Yet busy he had been heretofore, to speak his mind, of the General affairs;
and therein he pleased his late Mistress. For then his inclination went with
the humor of those times of War; But now, his Council came out of season. For
at the entrance of the King; He was presented by Ralegh with a Manuscript of
his own, against the peace with Spain. It was always his table talk, to beget
the more esteem, which took accordingly. And the way to make him the contrary,
was the work of the Spanish faction. Either to buy him out of that humor, or
to abuse him into a worse condition which was thus effected.

And indeed to mould this Treason, His Treason.
there was a medly of diverse conditions; but the contrivers were two Priests,
Watson and Clarke and count Arembergh, Embassedor Extraordinary for the
Archduke, who brought in the Lord Cobham; and he, his brother George Brook;
and he, Parham; and these, the Lord Gray of Wilton. Then came in Sir Walter
Ralegh, the wisest of them all; who dallied like the fly with the flame, till
it consumed him. Willing he was (it seems) to know it, and thought by his wit,
to overreach the confederates; whom he knew well enough; though none but
Cobham, for a good while, dealt with him. And with him, Ralegh played fast and
loose, till himself was caught in the Gin.

There was one Matthew De Lawrencie, here at London a Merchant of Antwerpe; with
whom Cobham held Intelligence, for many years before; and for some reasons of
State, connived at, by the late Queen and her Council. This Man, was the
property, whom Arenbergh made use of, to Cobham; who now was much discontented.

These 3. made the first step to the contrivement: And it has bin my
jealousy, that Lawrency betrayed it, to this State: for I never, could be
assured, how it was discovered; though I have bin often present with Sir
Walter, in his Imprisonment, when he privately discoursed hereof.

But being ripe, they were severally examined, and resirained; first to their
own homes, not without watchful eyes, on either of them; then to Imprisonment,
and lastly, to their Trials at Winchester; whither the Term removed, out of
this evermore Pestilentiall City.

And on the 17. November 1602. His arraignment
the day of Arraignment for Ralegh, and the Jury called to the Bar. Against
whose Persons he did not except; nor could: for they were the most able
sufficient, in Middlesex, (where the fact had its scene.)

I shall name them. Sir Ralphe Conisby, Sir Thomas Fowler, Sir Edward Peacock,
Sir William Roe, Knights. Henry Godwin, Bobert Wood, Thomas Walker, Thomas
Whitley, Thomas Highgate, Robert Kempton, John Chalk and Robert Bromley
Esquries.

The Indictment was managed, by the King's Attorney Sir Edward Cook, Sergeant
Heal, and Ser. Philips; and drawn from the 9. Iun. 1603. The accusation was
double, against the King, and the State. The personal, had 2. parts, first
against his life.

Secondly to disable his title to this Crown.

To the first, was read Brooks confession; That his Brother Cobham used these
speeches, That it would never be well, till the King and his cubs were taken
away, and said, that he thought it proceeded from Ralegh.

To this Ralegh answered, That Brooks was his enemy. It was replied, but
Cobham was ever your friend; and it would seem, a strange malice in Brooks, to
ruin his brother, to undo you.

To the second part, there was produced a Book, (which I have read) a defense
of the Queens proceedings, against Mary Queen of Scots; which Cobham confessed
Ralegh had delivered to him, and he to Brooks, and Brooks to Gray, upon
Cobhams discontent.

Ralegh acknowledged, that it contained matter of scandal to the Kings title.
And that he had leave of Sir Robert Ceill, after his Fathers death, to search
his study, for Cosmographicall Manuscripts, of the Wests-Indies, and so lighted
on this Book.

Sir Robert Cecill then present upon the Bench acknowledged this lease: and
said, He would then as really have trusted him, as any man; Sir Robert Cecils
words.
though since for some Infirmities of Sir Walter the bonds of affection were
cracked; and yet, reserving his duty to the King, which may not be dispensed
withal, in this his Masters service, he swore by God, he loved him; and had a
great conflict in himself, that so complete a member was fallen from this State.

And this passage, needs no soothing, to excuse Cecill either for the Father or
the Son. For I have heard Sir Robert Cecil, when he was Salisbury, say
publicly at his own table, That he had intercepted and kept all the
considerable Libells, against the late Queen and this King. But though
Justifiable in them as Councelours of State; yet it was a crime in Ralegh, who
never was any. And this Book, as I remember, was of one Bragg or Stagg a
Jesuit. But Sir Walter excused it; That there was nothing acted thereby, to
the Kings prejudice; for the Book was burnt.

But to insist hereupon; Cobham had confessed, That Rale g had agreed; That
Cobham should treat with Aremburgh for 600. thousand Crowns, to the intent,
to advance the title of the Lady Arabella, to this Crown. That Cobham under
pretense of traveling should prosecute this design, in the Lowecountries,
France and Spain; and to carry 3. letters from her, to the Archduke, Duke of
Savoy, and to the King of Spain, and to promise toleration of Religion, and
her Marriage to be disposed of, by them. That at his return, he should meet
Ralegh at Jersey the place of his command; and there agree, to dispose the
money to discontents. And Ralegh should have 7. thousand crowns from
Arenberge, for himself.

And further confessed, that Ralegh had Instigated him to all these Treasons.

And that Ralegh should say; that he thought the best way to trouble England,
was to cause division in Scotland.

To this, only of Scotland, he answered and confessed the words; and that he
had so thought, these 20. years. It seems by the sequel since he was not in
staken.

Lawrencie confessed that he and Cobham and Ralegh being together, he delivered
a letter to Cobhane, from Arembergh; and presently Ralegh went with Cobham in
private, to confer thereof.

To all these confessions, Ralegh craved that Cobham might appear, to accuse
him face to face.

I may not omit one passage acted heretofore, which comes in properly here to
be considered. When the confederates had suffered under some Examinations, and
were restrained to their several houses: And Ralegh knew well that Lawreney was
then suspected, but not examined; then did Ralegh discover in a letter to Sir
Robert Cecil, where Cobham was with Lawrency; and that then was the time, to
apprehend Lawrency, and so to intercept their Intelligence, ere matters were
ripe.

What Ralegh's design was herein, I must confess, my conceit is very blunt.
But this use was made of it to Raleghs ruin. For after that Cobham, had denied
much of the former stuff, upon his first Examinations; this letter was showed
him, under Ralegh's hand, and upon mature and often deliberation, to be
assured, that it was his hand: Then Cobham in an Ecstasy, calling Ralegh
Villain, Traitor; delivered his positive Accusation of Ralegh, as aforesaid:
and added, That Ralegh, after his first Examinations, before the Lords, had
writ to Cobham, that although he had bin examined of many things, yet that he
had cleared Cobham of all, when (as the Lords protested) he had not at all,
been examined concerning Cobham. And thereby this was inferred by the Council)
to confirm Cobham to deny all, when he should be examined; Sir Walter said,
That Cobham had not signed his accusation, and that he was at the worst but
singularis Testis. To which my Lord Chief Justice gave it for law, that it was
not necessary, to sign, nor to have more then One witness: after much
pleading herein; and Ralegh alleging law and Scripture, for not admitting a
single witness, to condemn one, yet the Court was satisfied therein, by the
Judges to the contrary.

Ralegh said, Then prove it by One witness face to face, and I will confess
my self guilty: but the Judges were of opinion, that it was not to be permitted
by law: yet Ralegh insisted hereupon, with many stories which took up much
time: Then being asked, if he would be concluded thereby if Cobham would now
justify his accusation, under his hand. To this it may be observed that Ralegh
made no answer at all but consented that the Jury should go together.

Then was produced Cobham's letter to the Lords, writ but the day before, in
effect thus.

That Sir Walter, had writ a letter to him wrapped in an apple, and cast in at
his window ten days since, in the Tower, to entreat him for God's sake to
write to him, under his own hand, that he had wronged him in his accusatious:
and odvised him to be constant in denialls, rather then to appeal to the King.
And now (writes Cobham) It is no time to dissemble; and therefore protested
before God and his Angels, that all and every part of his accusation, of Sir
Walter Ralegh, was substvntially true. And added; That Ralegh had dealt with
him, since the King's coming to procure him a pension from Spain, for
Intelligence etc.

Then Ralegh, railing against Cobham, confessed this letter was in an Apple, to
which Cobham returned an answer; which Ralegh produced, and desired that it
might be read. But the Attorney opposed Sir Robert Cecil's consent thereto. To
whom Cecil replied: Sir, you are more preremptory then honest, come you hither
to direct us? And so read it. Which in effect was a confession that he had
wronged Sir Walter, and that he was Innocent. This bore date 10. days before.
And here Ralegh confessed, That Cobham had offered to him a Pension, from
Spain, to the effect before confessed: And that he had concealed it, as loath
to ruin Cobham.

Then the Jury went out, and returned in half an hour, with their Verdict;
Guilty. So was Sentence, as in Case of Treason. And he was returned, to the
Tower of London, and there lay upon Reprieve 2. years, and 3. years after was
executed in October 1618. Observations upon this Trial.


And because this Second Remarke in the Pamphleter and this Prefacer, sticks
in their stomachs, with which they endeavor to choke the Readers; I have
theresore bin the more prolix; Pam p. 35.
that thereby the whole world may judge, with the Jury, of his guilt or
Innocence. Vide page 35.

Ralegh's rise of preferment, was occasioned upon a contest with the Lord Gray
in the Queens time, which they were to plead face to face: Where indeed, but
not in truth, Sir Walter had the better by the tongue, telling his tale to
advantage; which took the Queen, who took him from that instant into favor
as before remembered. Belike he expected the same providence at this time, when
so often he desired to plead face to face, Pamp. 35.
with Cobham.

How could Wade the Lieutenant of the Tower (as is surmized) tamper with
Cobham, to write his name to a blanck, to which Wade framed the accusation
against Ralegh. When it appears, Cobham never signed at all, to his
Examinations; which therefore was so much insisted upon, at his trial, for his
advantage.

But in truth; besides the confession of Cobham, the fatal evidence was
Cobham's own voluntary last letter of accusation, or confession over night,
writ every whit with his own hand.

The King commanded (as the COURT was assured at the trial) that upon any
examination, there should none be rackt, which made Captain Kemish (who was
the Instrument of messages and letters between Ralegh and Cobham) often to
protest, in my hearing, That in truth, he was threatened with the Rack, which
was showed to him, but had he tasted thereof, he said, that he should have bin
enforced, to tell an odd tale, meaning of discovery.

Sr. Walter was admitted a chair, pen, Inck and paper for his memory. And truly
he rather ty^ed the Court and Jury, Repree^. ed.
with Impertinences.

And thus was Sr. Walter Ralegh reprieved to the Tower, and many years of
Imprisonment in that liberty, till his future merits, and fame of learning,
begat many to pity his sufferings; So that at last, by means of the French
Ambassador, with others of our own Lords, he had freedom, to repair for his
health, to his House at Saint James, and after a year or two, he procured a
Commission, to make a Voyage to Gueana in the West Indies for the return of
Gold Oar or Mine. But was expressly limited, not to trench upon the Spaniard,
to the breach of Peace.

His landing was at St. Tomaz, a Town of the Spaniards, upon the opening of the
Great River Orenoque, in America. Where he killed many of them, and there lost
his eldest son Walter, under the Walls. Then sends he Captain Kemish, his old
Servant, (upon whose confidence it appears this voyage was resolved) up this
River, to the foot of a Mountain, where heretofore, and also during Ralegh's
Imprisonment, he had been sent, and returned, with wonderful Remarks of a rich
Mine, or rather Madre-del-Ore. But now comes from thence. And all the account
came to no more, but that the Mountain was fled away, he could not find it.

Upon this, the whole sleet 4. or 5. sail, mutiny forces him home again as a
Prisoner: in the return, Kemish kills himself, in his own Cabin, and so no
tales could be told.

Ralegh's ships were first, cast upon the south of Ireland: then they land in
the West of England; where warrants were ready to apprehend him Prisoner to the
Tower. In the West, he is discovered to deal with a French Master of a ship, to
steal away into France. Then in his journey to London, he combines, with a
French Mountebanck, who assisted him with Ingredients, (which he desired) that
would without danger of life, bring him to break forth into Blanes: Purposely
done, by this means to get longer time, to work opportunities to save his
life; which he knew he had so deeply forfeited.

Then being delivered into the hands of Sir John Stukely, Lieutenant of the
Tower he deals with him for a sum of Money, part in hand being paid, to join
with him in Escapeboth of them, into France. Stukely yields to all, and
accompanies him by water, in the way to Gravesend; where (by design of
Stukelie's treachery, in that, and so it prospered with him, being hanged
afterward, for clipping of Gold) they were seized and brought back to the
Tower. From whence, very speedily, Ralegh was commanded to the King's-Bench-bar
at Westminster, before the Lord chief Justice Mountegue; where the Records of
his former Sentence only were read; and hedemanded, why Execution should not be
done?

Sir Walter acknowledged that Sentence, and the King's Mercy for his life thus
long: And that he hoped, seeing he had bin employed by Commission, with power
of life and death, over the King's Lie ge People, it did make void that former
sentence.

He was told to the contrary, and that his time of Execution was the next
morning: and so the Sheriff of Middlesex, took him into custody to the
Gate House, and to Execution the next day, in the old Palace yard, at
Westminster; where he had the favor of the Ax. which he said (smilingly
touching it) was a sharp Medioine, but a true Physician, to cure all diseases:
and so it proved to him, at this very time in his Ague. sit.

At his death, himself endeavored; to clear some points, (which it seems
our Pamphleter knew not of otherwise he would have done it for him.)

To have had often plots with France, which he denied, but confessed, that he
had bin solicited thence; and endeavored to escape thither at twice. That the
French Agent, came often to him, with Commission from that King to him; But he
returned the Commission.

That he should speak disloyally of the King: his accuser, he said, was a base
runagate, Frenchman, and perfideous, whom he trusted; being sworn to secrecy,
which he betrayed; much he said in these particulars, which he did not deny,
but traversed.

So then there were, other business of charge, to which he was liable to a new
Trial. But the prudence of the King would not hazard further proceedings,
having a sufficient upon the old score. Pamp. 38.
And now for that additional tale of the Pamphleter concerning Sir Walters
recovery of Queen Anne; for which he begged the boon, viz. for the Examination
of the Lord Cobham by 4. Earls and 2. Councelors.

I never heard nor read thereof before, nor can believe it. For this I know by
several relations of those great Ladies of her Bedchamber; and of her
Chirurgians and Physicians now living, That She was never cured of her disease,
but by death, that ends all Maladies. It follows in the Pamphlet, That after
he has ranted his Stories of Mansell and Monson, and of the peace, ratifyed
and sworn; He makes Cecill the chief Ringleader of the King by the Nose.

But to say truth, The King was always brought up to his ease, though the
forepart of his Reign in Scotland, proved troublesome enough to his Council.
And therefore now, he was to follow his affairs, in peace, and his own
Inclination, in a Sportfull life. The rather; He being much Subject to
unwildines or weakness in his Limbs, and which because of his extreme
dis-affection to Physic, he was advised to the best Air, most agreeable to the
Nature of Scotland, fresh and bleak: and for that end, he chose Roystan, and
Newmarket.

Without, that Scandalous Intimation, of leaving his Queen, without any love or
liking.

We are forced to fall upon One Lake, Sir Tho. Lake. Pamp. 54.
whom we find to be that learned Gentleman Sir Thomas Lake, apted in his youth
with rudiments of the Book, to attend Sir Francis Walsingham (that subtle
Secretary of State to Queen Elizebeth) as Amanuensis to him: And after good
experience of his deserts, he was recommended to the Queen, and read to her
French and Latin. In which tongues, she would say, that he surpassed her
Secretaries, and was so employed to her death; for he was reading to her, when
the COUNTESS of WARWICK told him, that the Queen was departed.

But not long before; and merits
she received him Clarke of her Signet. And he was chosen, by this State in
that place to attend the King from BARWICK. And so sufficient he was, that the
King made use of his present service, in some French affairs, after he came
into England. Which indeed Secretary Cecil had reason to resent, as too much
trenching on his Office. And therefore craved leave of the King, that he might
not attend beyond his Month to prejudice the other Clarks Which was excused,
and he kept still at Court.

These Sufficiencies of his, enabled him in those times of gaining, with much
repute, and direct honesty, to purchase large possessions.

After Ccils death, the Place of Secretary, as secretary.
was joined in two Principals. And not long after he was one of them, and so
continued, with Honorably esteem of all men; until that Malice and Revenge,
two violent passions, overruling the Weaker Sex, concerning his wife and
daughter, involved him into their quarrel, the chief and only cause of his
ruin. He had by his Wife, His Engagement with his wife and daughter.
sons and daughters. His eldest married unto the Lord Baron Rosse (in right of
a Grandmother) the son of Thomas Earl of Exeter by a former venture. And upon
the credit of Sir Thomas Lake, he was sent Ambassador Extraordinary into
Spain, in a very gallant Equipage, with some hopes of his own, to continue
Leiger, to save charges of transmitting any other.

In his absence there fell out an extreme deadly fewd (it is no matter for what)
between the Lady Lake and the Countess of Exeter. Against the Countess of
Exeter.
A youthful widow she had bin and virtuous; and so became Bedfellow to this
aged, gowty, diseased but noble Earl. And, that preferment had made her
subject to Envy and Malice.

Home comes the Lord Rosse from his Embassy, when being fallen into some
neglect of his wife and his kindred; I conceive, upon refusal of an increase of
allowance to her settlement of jointure, which was promised to be completed at
his return.

Not long he stays in England, but away he gets into Italy, turns a professed
Roman Catholic, being cousened into that Religion, by his public confident,
Gondamore.

In this his last absence ( never to return) the Mother and daughter, the
accusation.
accuse the Countess, of former Incontinencie with the Lord Rosse, whilst he
was here, and that therefore, upon his wives discovery, he was fled from hence,
and from her Marriage. Bed, with other devised Calumnies by several designs
and contrivements, to have poisoned the Mother and daughter.

This quarrel, was soon blazoned at Court, to the King's ear, who as
privately as could be, singly, examines each party. The Countess, with tears
and Imprecations, professes her Innocence, which to oppose the Mother Lake and
her daughter, counterfeit her hand, to a whole sheet of paper; wherein they
make the Countess, with much contrition, to acknowledge her self guilty,
craves pardon for attempting to poisonthem, and desires friendslsip with them
all.

The King gets sight of this, as in favor to them, and demands, the place,
time, and occasion, when this should be writ. They tell him, that all the
parties met, in a visit at Wimbleton, (the house of the Lord of Exeter) where,
in dispute of their differences, she confesses her guilt of attempting their
poison. And being desirous of absolution and friendship, (being required
thereto) consents, to set down all Circumstances therein, under her own hand,
which presently she writ, at the Window, in the upper end of the great Chamber,
at Whimbleton, in presence of the Mother and Daughter, the Lord Rosse, and one
Diego a Spaniard his confiding Servant. But now they being gone, and at Rome,
the King forthwith sends Mr. Dendy (one of his Sergeants at Arms sometime a
domestic of the Earl of Exeters, an honest and worthy Gentleman) post to Rome,
who speedily returns with Rosse, and Diego's hand, and other testimonialls,
confirming, That all the said accusation, and confession, Suspicions and
papers, concerning the Countess, were notorious false and Scandalous, and
confirms it by receiving the Host, in assurance of her Honor and his
Innocence. The King well satisfied, sends to the Countess friends and
trusties, for her Jointure and Estate; who comparing many of her letters, with
this writing, do conclude it counterfeit.

Then, He tells the Mother and Daughter, that this writing, being denied by
her, and their testimonies being parties, would not prevail, with any belief.
But any other Additionall Witness, would give it sufficient credit. To which
they assure him, That one Sarah Swarton, their Chamberesse stood behind the
hanging, at the entrance of the Room, and heard the Countess read over, what
she had writ: and her also they procure, to swear unto this, before the King.

To make further trial, the King in a hunting journey, at New Park near
Wimbleton, gallops thither, viewes the Room; observing the great distance of
the Window, from the lower end of the Room, and placing himself, behind the
hanging, and so other Lords in turn; they could not hear one speak a loud, from
the window.

Then the Housekeeper was called, who protested those hangings had constantly
furnished that room, for 20. years; which the King observed, to be two foot
short of the ground, and might discover the woman, if hidden behind them. I may
present also, the King saying, Oaths cannot confound my sight.

Besides all this, the Mother and Daughter, counterfeit another writing, a
Confession of one Luke Hutton, acknowledging for 40. l. annuity, the Countess
hired him to poison them; which Man, with wonderful providence, was found out
privately; and denies it to the King.

And thus prepared, the King sends for Sr. Thomas Lake, whom in truth he very
much valued; tells him, the danger to imbark himself, in this quarrel; advising
him, to leave them to the law, being now ready for the Star Chamber. He humbly
thanked his Majesty, but could not refuse: to be a Father and a Husband, and
so puts his Name with theirs, comes to Hearing in Stur; chamber.
in a cross Bill. Which at the hearing, took up 5. several days, the King
sitting in Judgment. But the former testimonies, and some private confessions,
of the Lady Rosse, and Sarah Wharton; which the King kept in private, from
public proceedings, made the cause, for some of the days of trial, appeared
doubtful to the Court, until the King's discovery, which concluded the
Sentence; and was pronounced upon several Censures. Sr. Thomas Lake and his
Lady fined 10000. l. to the King; five thousand pounds to the Countess; 50. l.
to Hutton, Sara Wharton to be whipped, at a Carts tail, about the streets, and
to do penance at Saint Martin's Church; The Lady Rosse for confessing the truth
and plot in the midst of the trial, was pardoned by the Major Voices, from
penal Sentence. and sentenced.


The King, I remember, compared their crimes, to the first plot of the first
sin in Paradise: the Lady Lake to the Serpent, her daughter unto Eve, and Sir
Thomas to poor Adam; whom he thought in his conscience, that his love to his
wife had beguiled him. I am sure, he paid for all, which as he told me, cost
him thirty thousand pounds; and the loss of his Masters favor, and offices of
gain and honor; but truly with much pity and compassion of the Court.

Our Pamphleter. Pamp. 57. concerning the Scots.
enters upon the Scots, pa. 57. and would cosen us, to credit their Story,
where he begins a division, between the English and them at Court, and goes
smoothly on, to the middle of these last times, Pamp. 58.
when it seems he writ this: And, as he says, saw all our happiness
derivative, from their favors, by their own valor, and bravery of spirit.
Good Man! He believes, what he thought he saw; But wanting the eye of faith to
forsee this great Alteration, which he lived not to find; but We, now to feel:
Our late good Presbyterian Brethren, turn false Loones, and become the
traitorous Rebels to that reformation, which not long ago they professed, and
he, and others believed, and so disunited the union of all our quiet, and
happiness. Pamp. 60. Scandal. upon E. of Salisbury.


He tells us of a trick, that the Earl of Salisbury had, to compound with the
Scots Courtiers, for their Books of Fee-farmes, which they bought at 100. l.
per annum for a thousand pound. Then would he fill up these books with prime
land, worth 20. thousand pounds.

A pretty trick indeed to make himself Lord Para-Mount, of the best lands in
England; but it had bin a gainful trade of our Author, to have turned Informer
to the State, in the particulars of these Tricks; and so the return of these
lands so deceitfully got, would prove now as hard a bargain to his son (as the
Lord-like purchasers of Debenturs have done latly) and to his son, that may
succeed him.

We are come to the consideration of the third Remark in the Preface; Remar. 3.
Pamp. 61. Robert Carre and Sir Tho. Overbury.
and so we fall into the History of Rob. Car, after E. of Summerset, and
intermixed with that of Sir Thomas Overbury.

To. Car, was a Scottishman, of no eminent birth, but a Gent. and had bin a
Page of honor, to the King in Scotland. And in truth, he became the first
Favorite that we find; that is, one whom the Ki. fancied, merely for his
fashion: upon no other score, nor plot of design. His Confident, was one Sr.
Tho. Overbury, a man of good parts, whom our Author, has well characterized;
and his policy, was to please the English, by intertaining them his Domestiques.

There was amongst other persons of honor and quality in Court, a young L. of
great birth and beauty, Fra. the daughter of Tho. Howard, then E. of Suffolk,
and L. Treasurer of Eng. married in under- age, unto the late and last E. of
Essex.

Of him, common fame had an opinion (grounded upon his own suspicion) of his
insufficiency, to content a wife. And the effects of this Narration, with the
sequel of his life and conversation with his second wife, is so notorious, as
might spare me and the Reader our sever all labors, for any other convincing
arguments. But with his first, when both were of years, to expect the event and
blessing of their Marriage Bed; He was always observed, to avoid the company
of Ladies, and so much to neglect his own, that to wish a Maid into a Mischief,
was to commend her to my Lord of Essex: Which increased the jealousy of such
Men, whose interests were, to observe him; That he preferred the occasion
himself, to a separation. And which indeed from public fame, begat private
disputation, amongst Civilians of the legality thereof, wherein those Lawyers
are boundless.

This Case followed the heels of a former Nullity, fresh in memory, between
the L. Rich, and his fair Lady, by mutual consent. But because the E. of Dev.
married her, whilst her Husband lived, the King was so much displeased thereat,
as it broke the E. heart: for his Majesty told him, That he had purchased a
fair woman with a black soul. And this is a known truth, That before Viscount
Rochford (for so was Carre lately created) had made any address to this Lady,
her own friends in Justice and honor to her birth, exposed her to the plaint of
her Husband, and to the severest trial in a Course of judicature.

And it is as true, that the King knew hereof, our Pamphlet says: [ A party in
this ^^udy businesse] for, what was legal for the meanest Subject, Pamp. 77.
could not in justice be denied unto Her: Which in fine, sentenced them both,
by Divine and Civil Canon, loose from their Matrimonial bands.

And, because the Nullity gave freedom to either, and so the means to the
Countesses after- Marriage, with the sad occasions of all the sequel mishaps,
and suspected scandalls, so untruly expressed by the Pamphlet; I have with some
diligence, labored out the truth, precisely and punctually, as it was acted,
and proceeded by Commission Delegative; not easily now otherwise to be brought
to light.

Upon Petition of the Earl of Suffolk and his Daughter Francis to the King.
Proceedings of Nullity.
That Whereas his Daughter Francis, Countess of Essex, had been Married many
years, unto Robert Earl of Essex, in hope of comfortable effects to them,
which contrariwise, by reason of certain latent, and secretemperfections, and
impediments of the said Earl, disabling him in the rights of Marriage, and most
unwillingly discovered to him by his daughter; which longer by him to conceal,
without remedy of Law, and the practice of all Christian policy, in like cases,
might prove very prejudicial.

And therefore pray the King,

To commit this cause of Nullity of Matrimony, which she is forced to prosecute
against the said Earl, to some grave and worthy persons, by Commission under
the great Seal of England, as is usual, etc.

Which accordingly was granted unto four Bishops, two Privy Counselors
learned in the Law, and to four other Civil Lawyers; with Clause to proceed
Cum omni, qua poterint, celeritate, and expeditione, Summarie, ac de plano,
sine strepitu, ac figura Judicii, sola rei and facti veritate inspecta, and
mera aequitate attenta. And with this Clause also, Quorum vos praefat.
Reverendissimu^ patrem Cant. Archiepiscopum, Reverendissmum patrem Land.
Episcop. and Iul. Caesar. Mil. Aut duos vestrorum, in ferenda sententia,
interesse volumus. But for some exceptions concerning the Quorum by the
Commissioners in the words sententia esse, not interesse, A second Commission
was granted and adjoined two Bishops more, with this Quorum. Quorum ex vobis
praefat. Re. Pa. Georg. Cant. Archiepis. Ioh. Land. Episc. Tho. Winton Episc.
Lancelot Eliens. Episc. Richard Covent. and Lichs. Episc. Ioh. Ross. Episc.
Iulio Caesare, Tho. Parry Mil. in ferenda sententia, tres esse volumus.

Upon this the Lady procures Process against the Earl to Answer her in a cause
of Nullity of Matrimony. The Ladies Libell.


The Earl appears before the Commissioners, by his Proctor, And She gives in
her Libell, viz.

That the Earl and the Lady, six years since, in January Anno Dom. 1606. were
Married, her age then thirteen, and his fourteen, and now she is 22. and he 23
years old.

That for three years since the Marriage, and he 18. years old, they both did
cohabit as Married folk, in one bed naked and alone, endeavoring to have
carnal knowledge each of others Body.

Notwithstanding, the Earl neither did, nor could ever know her Carnally; he
being before, and since, possessed with perpetual incurable Impediment, and
Impotency, at least in respect of her.

That the Lady was, and is apt, and fit, without any defect, and is yet a
Virgin, and Carnally unknown by any man.

That the Earl has confessed often times to persons of great credit, and his
nearest friends, that he was never able Carnally to know her, though he had
often attempted, and used his utmost endeavor.

And therefore prays the Commissioners upon due proof hereof, to pronounce
for the Invalidity and Nullity of the Marriage.

The Earl by his Proctor, denies the said Contents, Contestatio Litis negative.

His Answer is required by Oath, by second Process, where, His Answer u^ Oath.
in open Court his Oath was administered, with so great care, and effectual
words, to mind him of all Circumstances, as the like has been seldom
observed.

The Earl confesses the Marriage, Viva voce.
and Circumstance, (as in the Libell.) And were not absent above three months,
the one from the other, in any of the said 3. years.

That, for one whole year of the three, He did attempt diverse times, carnally
to know Her. But the other two years, he lay in bed with her nightly, but found
no motion to copulation with Her.

That in the first year, She showed willingness, and readiness thereto.

That he did never carnally know Her, but did not find any impediment in
himself, but was not able to penetrat or enjoy Her.

And believes, That before and after the Marriage, he found in himself ability
to other Women; and has sometimes felt motions that way.

But being asked, Whether he found in himself a perpetual, and incurable
Impediment toward Her? He answered, that in 2. or 3 years last, He has had no
motion to Her; and believes, He never shall, nor that She is apt as other
women: And that She is Virgo integra and incorrupta.

And confesses, That He has often, before Persons of credit, confessed thus
much.

Notwithstanding this his Oath, She produced sundry Witnesses of the Marriage,
Time, Age, Cohabitation at Bed and at Board; as before in the Libell, etc.

So then that period of time, limited by the Civil and Canon Law, proved his
Cohabitation, and Condormition, for consummation.

The next was, That notwithstanding, She remained Virgo integra, incorrupta.
But, because the Earl believed not the Lady to be fit and apt for copulation,
Therefore her Council desired, Matronas aliquas probas and honestas, fide
dignas, and in ea part peritas, per dominos assignari, ad inspiciendum Corpus
dictae dominae.

Whereupon it was decreed,

That six Midwives of the best Note, and ten other Noble Matrons, fearing God,
and Mothers of Children, out of which themselves would choose 2 Midwives and 3
Matrons; and out of which the Delegates did select 5. ut sequitur.

Tune Domini viz. Arch. Cant. London: Eliens: Coventry and Lichf: Caeser,
Parry, Dun, Bennet, Edwards, habita inter eos privata deliberatione, ex numero
Matronarum praedict. eligerunt, The Lady Martha Terwhite, wife of Sir Ph:
Terwhite, Baronet; the Lady Alice Carew, wife of Sir Matthew, the Lady Dalison,
wife of Sir Roger. Et in supplimentum Casu earum impedire. The Lady Anne Waller
Widow, and ex obstetricum numero, etc. Margaretam Mercer, and Christianam
Chest. Et assignarunt procuratorem dictae dominae Francis. ad sistendum
cujusmodi Inspectatrices, coram Reverendissimo patre Land. Episc. Iulio Caesar,
and Daniele Dun, etc. Inter caeteros nominat. islo die, inter hor as quintam
and sextam post meridiem, juramentu^ in hac part subdituras, atque inspectione
facta fideliter relaturas; earu^ judiciu^ juxta earu^ scientia^ et
experientia^, etc. Cora^ dictis dominis, delegatis, sic ut praefertur,
assignatis, quam cito fieri possit, ante horam quartam, post meridiem diei
Iovis prox. alioquin, ad comparendum, hoc in loco coram Comissariis, dicto die
lovis, inter horas quartam et sextam post meridiem ejusdem dici earum Iudicium
in hac part, tunc relaturas, et interessendum diebus, hora and loco,
respective praedict, ad videndum Inspectatrices praedictas, Iuramento in hac
part enerari. Necnon quibuscunque aliis diebus, hora and loco per dictos
Dominos Commissarios nominat, dictis inspectatricibus ad referend, earum
Iudicium assignatum.

Accordingly, between the hours of five and six in the afternoon that day, were
presented before the said Delegates, London, Caesar, et Dun; the said Lady
Terwhite, Lady Carew, Lady Anne Waller, Margare^ Mercer, and Christian Chest
Midwives, sworn ad Inquirend. and Inspect.

1. Whether the Lady Francis were a Woman, apt and fit for carnal Copulation,
without any defect that might disable Her to that purpose.

2. Whether she were a Virgin, unknown carnally by any man.

Whereupon, they went from the presence of the Commissioners, into the next
room, where the Lady was, accompanied then with the Council of both sides;
into which room was no entrance but at one door, whereout the Council came
forth, and only the Lady left with the said women, who after some convenient
time returned their report under their hands; the Commissioners having first
sequestered from their presence, the Council of the Earl and Lady, who had
been present in all these passages, and all other persons except the Register,
that so the Ladies and Midwives might more freely deliver their secret reasons,
etc. though it was not fit to insert them in the Record.

And this is their sum of their relation, viz.

1. That they believed the said Lady fitted with abilities to have Carnal
copulation, and apt to have Children.

2. That she is a Virgin incorrupted.

And to coroborate all this, the Lady in open Court produced 7 women of her
Consanguinity;

That, in as much as the truth of all was best known to her self, She might by
virtue of Her Oath should be no further regarded, than it was confirmed by the
oaths of these her kinswomen.

The Law presuming that such kindred should be best acquainted with the inward
secrets of their kinswoman.

In order hereto, the Lady Francis, in open Court, had an Oath administered to
her, with all the like grave admonition, as before to the Earl.

And so She affirmed;

That, since the Earl was 18-years old, for three years, He and She had diverse
times layn naked in bed all night; And sundry times there, the Earl had
attempted, and indevoured to consummate Marriage with her, and She accordingly
yielded, and willing thereto, and yet he never had Copulation with Her.

And then these seven Noble Women, viz. Katherine Countess of Suffolk,
Francis Countess of Kildare, Elizabeth Lady Walden, Elizabeth Lady Knevet,
Lady Katherin Thinn, Mistress Katherine Fines, Mistress Dorothy Neal, her
Kinswomen, being charged by the Court to speak without partiality what they
believed as to the Ladies deposition, they did all depose, that they believed
the same to be true.

1 And in particular. That post plenam pubertatem utriusque, they both
endeavored Copulation.

2 That notwithstanding this Cohabitation, and ability on his part per
Inspectatrices, she remained a Virgin incorrupted.

3 That the Earl had Judicially sworn, that he never had, nor could, nor
should ever know her carnally.

And this the Law being, That Impotentia coeundi in viro, howsoever, whether by
natural defect, or accidental means, and whether absolute toward all, or
respective to his wife alone; If it precede Matrimony, and be perpetual, as by
Law is presumed, when by 3 years continuance, after the Man's age of 18 years,
there having been nil ad copulam, the Marriage not consummated. the Law
allowing the said proofs, etc. was abundantly sufficient to convince the said
Earl of Impotency.

Because, Canonum Statuta custodiri debent ab omnibus; and nemo in actionibus,
vel judiciis Ecclesiasticis, suo sensu, sed eorum authoritate duci debet.

The said Reverend, and grave Judges Delegates, gave this sentence unanimously,
as follows.

Idcirco nos Episcopi, etc. in dicta causa Iudices, Delegati, and Commissarii,
Christi Nomine (primitus) invocato, and ipsum selum Deum, oculis nostris
praeponentes, et habentes, deque et cum consilio Iurisperitor cum quibus in hac
part communicavimus; matureq, deliberavimus, praefatum Domi. number Comitem
Essex, dictam dominam Franciscam, ob aliq uod latens, and incurabile
impedimentum perpetuum; praedictum contractum, and solemnizationem, praecedens,
citra solemnizationem, et contractum praedictum, nunquam carnaliter cognovisse,
aut carnaliter eandem, cognoscere potuisse, aut posse, et eundem dominum
Comitem qu^ad carnale copulam, cum cadem domina Francisca, exercend omnino
inhabilem, et impotentem fuisse, et esse: Pronunciamus, decernimus et
declaramus praefatum praetensum Matrimonium, sic inter praedictum virum
Robertum Devoreaux, Comitem Essex, Et praedictam praenobitem faeminam,
Franciscam Howard, de facto contractum, et solemnizatum, Omniaque exinde
sequentia, ratione praemissorum, omnino invalidum, ac nullum, nulla fuisse, et
esse, viribusque juris caruisse, et carere debere; atque nullo et aullis; et
invalido et invalidis; ad omnem Iuris effectum, ettamque pronunciamus,
decernimus et declaramus, dictum matrimoniumpraetensum, omniaque ex inde
sequentia, cassamus, anullamus, and irritamus; Memoratamque Dominam Franciscam
Howard, ab aliquo vinculo, huiusmodi praetensi Matrimonii, inter Eam, and
dictum dominum Robertum Comitem (ut praefatur) de facto contracti, and
solemnizati, liberam, and solutam fuisse, and esse. Et sic tam liberam, and
solutam insuper pronunciamus, decernimus and declaramus. Eademque dominam
Franciscam, ab eodem domino Comite Essex, quoad vinculum Matrimonii praetensi
praedicti, omniaque ex inde sequentia, liberandam and divortiandam fore debere,
pronunciamus, and sic liberamus, and divortiamus; eosdem quo ad transitum ad
alias nuptias, conscientiis suis, in domino relinquere per hanc nostram
sententiam desinitam, sive hoc nostrum finale decretum, quam si ve, quod
secimus, and promulgamus in his scriptis.

And these Records extant, do mention the proceedings (you see) modest and
legal; parallel with any former of the like kind, though our Pamphleter with
his baudy tale, pleases himself to defame those Reverend Bishops, whose
dignities gave them place of Judges; acting no more, or otherwise, than the
Ecclesiastical Canons in such cases prescribe. Nemine contradicente.

Yes says He [Archishop Abbot, Pamph. 78.
who was therefore excluded the Council Table, and so dyed in disgrace of that
King, though in favor with the King of Kings.]

The truth is otherwise. For the Archbishop (providence permitting) aiming with
a Crossebow to strike a Dear, killed his Game keeper; for which Act, having
His hand in blood, by the Canons of the Church, he cannot be admitted to
officiate at the Altar; and so, He not being admitted to the full use of his
spiritual calling; Himself forbore the Council Table, as He told me in these
words. [Since they will have it so, that I am incapable of the one, I shall
spare my self the trouble of the other.]

But he enjoyed the benefit of that See, whilst he lived, and retired in that
time (most constant) to his Palace at Lambeth.

Much displeased he was (as I well remember) with the Court and Clergy; and
upon that Score. And, forsooth, to justify, that his Function was not weakened,
by his Mischance, quarrelling with the Canons, he fell upon downright Puritan
Tenants; which gave occasion to many Discontents of our Church and State, to
visit him so frequent, that they called themselves, Nicodemites, and his
Disciples.

And I observed very often, perhaps therefore, (for I could not meet with a
better reason) that the Archbishop, constantly with Candell light in his
Chamber and Study, made it Midnight at Noon day.

And here he began to be the first Man of Eminency in Our Church, a Ringleader
of that Faction, for I can name those, then his private Disciples, which lately
appear desperate Proselites. And thus He lived, Pamph. 1^5.
but [died not in displeasure of King James] for the Phamphlet persuades us
afterward to believe [him to be the Kings confessor] living long after in the
late Kings time, from whom no evil Resentment could pass in relation to this
former Story; it being buried in Oblivion to Him and all good Men, till that
Our Pamphletter, rakes in the Embers, to light His own Candel.

And thus, after all the former proceedings, and the Nullity pronounced, a
Marriage was solemnized, with Viscount Rochford then Earl of Somerset.

And truly, here I should be unwilling to prosecute this Story; but our
Pamphletters foul mouth leads me back to Master Copinger, Pamph. 6^ Mr.
Coppinger.
whose birth, breeding and behavior deserves no less of fame, than to leave
him quiet in the silent Grave. [But He knew Him otherwise deserving.] I am sure
many men now living know, that Our Author may give himself Copingers
Character; faces about, and in truth you have Him to a hairs breadth.

Master Copinger had been heretofore, Master of a larger fortune, which yet,
fell not so low, [as to turn Baud for want of better maintenance] Indeed he
was entertained a Dependent on Rochford, a favorite, and Lord Chamberlain,
and so no dishonor, for Him, or other Men, of better Rank, and Birth, than
Our Authors family, to be near attending so great a Person, as Gentleman of his
Bed Chamber; and thereby, the more proper to be trusted, with the Secrets and
Civilities of his Masters lawful Affection, and address to so great a Lady;
which might then, well become Him, or any other honest Man to advance; and I
may believe, he afforded the convenience [of His own house for their meeting
and consent of Marriage] which was not long after solemnized with much honor
and magnificence. Sir Themas Overbury.
And Sr. Thomas Overbury, congratulating the Ceremony, with as public
profession as others in Court expressed. And it concerned this great Favorite,
to look upon Him with respect of preferment; and as he failed not the meanest,
so it became Him, to advance his Confident Overbury, most eminent. Pamph. 65.
(Whose Character Our Pamphletter has more deservedly hit upon, than any
other.)

And therefore, it was his own seeking, as best fitting his excellent parts,
Kings Person in Embassy to France, which to my knowledge he accepted and
seemingly prepared to advance.

Conceiting, perhaps, that the power which he usurped over Somerset; and the
Interests of eithers affection, (which Overbury knew best how to Master) could
not endure absence, without much regret, which accordingly had for some time,
the true effects, as Overbury intended.

But when Somerset had wisely considered, that there would be no great loss of
so loose a friend; Then Overbury would not go; no, though I know his
Instructions were drawn, and Additionalls thereto, by his own consent.

And this was a just, and true ground, for the King and Council, to punish so
great Insolency, with Imprisonment in the Tower, which Somerset heartily
endeavored in due time to release.

But Overbury (to shadow his own demerits,) devised the reason and cause, from
his disaffection of the former Marriage, and which he published, with much
dishonor, though not the tithe which is studied in our Pamphleters Libell. For
which, the Malice of Women, (as it often meets) sought Revenge by Poison, to
punish him, to the death. And for which Fact, they were arraigned, and some
suffered death.

In prosecution of which, it behoved the Kings Piety and Justice, to be severe
and serious, without [any King-craft.] And therefore needed not such an
additionall falsehood [ as to kneel down to the Iudges] when then, as usual he
gave them their Charge, upon their Itinerate Circuits.

For then, the truth of Overburies poisoning was but suspected; And therefore
it was not unnatural nor wondrous [for the King to take his leave of his
Favorite and friend, with expressions of great kindness] who yet in Justice he
exposed to Persecution.

And truly, in this much forced story of our Author, take him at his own
dimension, an ingenious good Nature, may find out much struggling in the King,
to make Justice and Mercy, kiss each other.

I was present at their Arraignments, and the [Pictures, Puppets, for Magic
spells] were no other, but several French Babies, some Naked, others Clothed;
which were usual then, and so are now a days, to teach us the fashions, for
dress of Ladies tyring and apparel.

And indeed [Foremans Book was brought forth] wherein the Mountebanck had
formerly for his own advantage and credit, sawcily [inserted the Countesses
name, so of many others that came to seek Fortunes] which she cleared by her
own Protestation, and Foremans confession, that she was never with him.

Sir Thomas Monson was brought to the Bar, Sir Thomas Monson.
and began his Trial, but was remitted to the Tower, with as much Civility, as
is usual to other Prisoners.

And Sir Geo. More then Lieutenant of the Tower, took him from the Bar, and
both together were carried in his Coach to the Tower. I say the truth, for I
saw it.

But I cannot pick out the meaning, why [so much pains is taken to tell out
Monsons tale] was he Guilty, or No? By the story, he had hard measure. So
perhaps had some of the others; for He was a Creature of that Family. And yet
for some (no doubt) private respects of our Author (for he was his Companion)
He is in, and out, and out, and in, and in, and out again.

And now comes Somerset, Pamph. 115.
who he says [being warned to his trial, absolutely refused, and was assured
by the King, never to come to any] when was this assurance? For he tells us,
[At their parting at Royston, they never met after] but we must conceive it by
Message.

And why for this, must [More a wise man be at his wits end?]

The warrant for Trial came over night late; and it is so usual as it never
fails, that the Lieutenant of the Tower has freedom of access [to waken his
Soveraign] at any hour.

The importance of his Place and Trust, having that consequence annexed. And in
special to give Knowledge of Warrants, either of Trials, or of Execution of
Prisoners. And this, of Course he did. [When the King in tears, is told a tale
in his Eares] that none knew, but he that was furthest off.

[A trick of wit brings him to the Bar, and a desperate plot by two men
placed at his Elbow, with Clokes to clap over him, made him calm at his Tryall]
And thus it was, that the Lieutenant on his right, and the Gentleman Iaylor on
his left hand, with Clokes on their backs, [but not on their armes] might
color our Authors conceit.

It had appeared a mad President, when a Prisoner at his trial, upon Life and
Death, has Freedom to speak for himself, in public Course of Justice, [to
be snatched from the Bar, and from the power of the Judge, at the pleasure of a
Iaylor.] But to make out this Monument,] the King rewards him with 1500 l.]
Pamph. 119.
And for a truth [ More tells all this to the Author, of whom (himself
confesses) he had no assurance of his honesty] nor I beseeve any body else.

The Conclusion of all is, That due execution was done upon Sir Iervice
Ellowayes, Mrs. Turner, Weston and Franklyn. Mo^son cleared, the Countess and
Earl reprieved, [our Author and most men clear him of the Poison, and condemn
him only in the high point of friendship, for suffering his imprisonment] which
he could not release, And the Countess only guilty of connivance.

And now comes this.

Our Prefacers 3. Remarke to the Judgment Seat for sentence. Let him pick out a
greater President in any History, more Remarke, than this of the King, to make
good this His former Protestation, wherein by the way He may take leave, to be
allowed, His own even Conscience, for Justice and Mercy both.

Which no doubt, has found acceptance at Gods Tribunal, in behalf of Him and
His, His own death being Ordinary, not forced by any Poison. And His posterity
in due time, by our Saviors merits, shall be gathered up in the mystery of
everlasting salvation.

But by the way how smoothly we are told a Story of the Pitiful Palsgrave
[how He Married a Kings Daughter, with much joy, Pamph. 82 Palsgrave
and great misfortune to all the Princes of Christendom; but failing of that,
and all the rest, how He was cast out, He and His, to beg their bread, But had
His Father-in-law been half so wise, (with our Authors good Counsel to boot)
and had He bought swords, with a quarter expense of words, He had bin -- ]
What? As his Son that succeeds him; Palsgrave.

But we hasten; Prince Henry.
having much matter to meddle with, confusedly put together in our Pamphlet;
The 4th. Remarke in the Preface.
which we must take leave to separate, for each single story: and Re-mind
back, the death of that Heroic Prince HENRY (in the midst of Somerset's
Greatness) [Who had he lived to have bin King would no doubt (with our Authors
leave) have been so gracious as to leave alive, Pamph. 85
one HOWARD, to piss against the Wall.] When as with reverence to His Memory,
it was a notorious truth, that He made Court to the Countess of Essex before
any other Lady then living.

But He is dead, [and poisoned too, as we shall have it in his following
discourse] and yet speaks not one word more of Him afterward.

Prince Henry was borne in Scotland, at Striveling Castle, in February 1594.
the first son unto King JAMES and Queen ANNE.

His breeding, apted his excellent Inclination, to all Exercises of Honor, and
Arts of Knowledge, which gave him fame, the most exquisite, hopeful Prince in
Christendom.

In the nineteenth year of his Age, His Sickness.
appeared the first Symptom of change; from a full round face, and pleasant
disposition, to be paler and sharp, more sad and retired; often complaining of
a giddy heaviness in his for-head. Which was somewhat eased, by bleeding at
the Nose; and that suddenly stopping, was the first of his distemper, and
brought him to extraordinary qualms, which his Physicians recovered, with
Strong waters.

About this time, several Ambassadors Extraordinary, being dispatched home, He
retired to his House at Richmond; pleasantly seated by the Thames River; which
invited him to learn to swim, in the Evenings after a full supper: the first
immediate pernicious cause of stopping that gentle flux of blood, which thereby
putrefying, might engender that fatal Fever that accompanied Him to his
Grave. His active Body, used violent Exercises; for at this time, being to meet
the King at Bever, in Nottinghamshire, he rode it in two days, near a hundred
miles, in the extremity of heat in Summer. For he set out early, and came to
Sir Oliver Cromwells near Huntingde^, by ten a clock before Noon, near 60
Miles, and the next day bet mes to Bever, 40 Miles.

There, and at other places, all that Progress, He accustomed to Feasting,
Hunting and other sports of Balloon and Tennis, with too much violence.

And now returned to Richmond, in the Fall of the Leaf, He complained afresh of
His pain in the Head, with increase of a meager complexion, inclining to
Feverish; And then for the rareness thereof called the New disease.

Which increasing; Takes His Chamber,
the 10th of October. He took His Camber, and began Council with His Physician
Doctor Hammond, an honest and worthily learned Man. Three days after He fell
into a looseness (by cold) 15 times a day.

Then removes to London, to St. Iame's contrary to all advise. And (with a
spirit above his Indisposition) gives leave to His Physician to go to his own
home.

And so allows Himself too much liberty, in accompanying the Palsgrave, and
Count Henry of Nassaw, (who was come hither upon Fame to see him) in a great
Match at Tennis in His Shirt, that winter season, his looks then presaging
sickness. And on Sunday the 25 of October. He heard a Sermon, The text in Job;
Man that is born of a Woman, is of short continuance, and is full of trouble.
After that, He presently went to White Hall, and heard another Sermon before
the King, and after dinner being ill, craves leave to retire to his own Court,
where instantly he fell into sudden sickness, faintings; and after that a
shaking, with great heat and Head^ach, that left Him not, And His Bed.
whilst He had Life.

Instantly He takes His Bed, continuing all that night in great drought and
little rest; The next day Head ache increasing, his Body costive, pulse high
His water thyn and whitish.

Doctor Mayern prescribes Him a Glister; After which he rose, played at Cards,
that, and the next day: But looked pale, spoke hollow, dead sunk eyes, with
great drought.

And therefore Mr. Nasmith should have let him blood by Mayerns Counsel. But
the other Physicians disagreeing it was deferred; yet He rose all this day, had
His fit, first cold, then a dry greatheat.

On his 4th. day comes Doctor Butler, (that famous Man of Cambridge) who
approved what had bin ministered, gave hopes of revery, and allowed of what
should be given Him.

Mayern, Hammond and Butler, desired the assistance of more Doctors; but the
Prince would not, to avoid confusion in Counsel. His Headache, drought, and
other accidents increased.

This Evening there appeared 2. hours after Sun set, A Lunar Rainbow, directly
cross over the House, very ominous.

The 6.7. increasing His disease.

The 8th. His Physicians bleed the Median of his right arm, 8. ounces, thin and
putride: After which He found ease, with great hopes; and was visited by King,
Queen, Duke, Palsgrave, and Sister.

The 9th. worse than before; His disease
and therefore, Doctor Atkins, assisted their opinions, That his Disease was, a
corrupt putrid Fever; seated under the Liver, in the first passage. The
Malignity, by reason of the Putrefaction, (in the highest degree) was venomous.

The 10th. increasing Convulsions, greater ravings, and Fever violent. And
therefore Mayern advised more bleeding: But the rest would not; but applied
Pigeons and Cupping glasses, to draw away the pain.

The 11th. small hopes, All accidents violently increasing, no applications
giving ease. His Chaplains continuing their daily Devotions by His Bed side.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, and Doctor Melborn, Dean of Rochester, and
others, with whom He daily prayed.

The 12. No hope. The King with excessive grief, removes to Kensington House.

There were added Doctor Palmer, and Doctor Guifford, all imaginable helps,
Cordialls, Dia. phoretick and Quintessentiall spirits; and a water from Sir
Walter Raleigh Prisoner in the Tower: all these were by Consent administered;
without any effect.

And so He died at 8 a Clock at night, Friday the 6. His death.
of November 1612.

The Corpse laid upon a Table, Corpse laid out,
the fairest, cleerest and best proportioned, without any spot or blemish.

The next day was solemnly appointed, for imbowelling the Corpse, in the
presence of some of the Counsel, all the Physicians, Chirurgions,
Apothecaries, and the Palsgraves Physician.

And this is the true Copy of their view, And viewed by Certisicate.
under their hands as follows.

The Skin, as of others, Blackish, Skin,
but no way spotted with Blackness, or Pale marks, much less purpled, like
Flea bites, could show any Contagion, ^r Pestilenticall Venom.

About the place of His Kidneys, Kidneys.
Hipps, and behind His Thighs, full of redness; and because of his continual
lying upon his back, his belly somewhat swollen, and stretched out.

The Stomach whose and handsome, Stomach.
within and without; having never in all his sickness, been troubled with
vomiting, lothing or yelping; or any other accidents which could show any taint.

The Liver marked with small spots above; Liver.
and in the Lower parts, with small lines.

The Gall Bladder, Gall.
void of any humor; full of wind.

The Spleen on the top, Spleen.
and in the lower end, blackish, filled with black heavy blood.

The Kidneys without any blemish. Kidneys.


The Midrise, under the Filme or Membraine, Midriffe,
containing the Heart (wherein a little moisture) spotted with black leadish
color by reason of the brusing. Heart.


The Lungs, the greatest part black, Lungs.
the rest all spotted with black, imbrewed and full of adust blood, with a
corrupt, and thick Serocity, which by a vent made in the Lungs, came out foming
in great abundance. In which doing, and cutting a small Skin, which invironeth
the Heart to show the same, the Chirurgian by chance cutting the Trunck of the
great Vein, the most part of the blood issued out into the Chest, leaving the
lower Veins empty; upon sight whereof, they concluded an extreme heat and
fulness; and the same more appeared, that the windpipe, with the Throat and
Tongue, Throat.
were covered with thick blackness.

The Tongue cleft and dry in many places. Tongue.


The hinder Veins called Piamater, Piamater.
in the Inmost Filme of the Brain, swollen, abundance of blood, more than
natural.

The Substance of the Brain, Brain.
fair and clcere; but the ventricks thereof, full of clear water, in great
abundance, which was engendered by reason of the Fever Malign, diverse humors
being gathered together, of a long time before. He not being subject to any
dangerous Sickness by Birth.

The other part, Without poison.
by reason of the Convulsions, resoundings and benummings, and of the
fulness, choking the natural hear, and destroying the vitalls, by their
Malignity, have convayed Him to the Grave without any teken or accident of
Poison.

His admirable patience, in all his sickness, might deceive the Physicians
never dreaming danger.

The Urines showed none. And the unknown state of His greatest grief, lay
closely rooted in His head, which in the opening was discovered.

But the Picture of Death by a strange extraordinary Countenance, from the
beginning, And vainly surmised.
possessing him, has been the cause, that some vainly rumored, that He was
Poisoned.

But no Symptom appearing, By sent.
it is surmised, that He might be Poisoned by a Sent.

But indeed, He died in the Rage of a Malicious Extraordinary Burning Fever.

The seventh of December, He was Interred at Westminster 1612.

His Motto's Fax mentis, Honestae Gloria.

Juvat ire per Altum.

He was comely tall; Description,
five Foot eight Inches high; Strong and well made; somewhat broad Shoulders; a
small Waste, Amiable with Majesty. and
His Hair Aborn color. Long Faced, and broad For-head, a pearcing grave Eye;
a gracious Smile; but with a Frown, danting.

Courteous and affable; Character.
natural Shamefast and modest. Patient and slow to Anger. Merciful and
judicious in punishing offenders. Quick to conceive, yet not rash. Very
constant in resolves. Wonderful secret of any trust, even from his Youth. His
Courage Princelike, fearless, noble, undaunted; saying that there should be
nothing impossible to Him, that had bin done by another. Most Religious and
Christian, Protesting His great desire to compose differences in Religion.

In a word; He was never heard, by any body living to swear an Oath, And it was
remembered at his Funeral Sermon by the Archbishop, that He being commended by
one for not replying with passion in Rlay, or swearing to the truth; He should
answer, That He knew no Game, or Value to be won or lost, that could be worth
an Oath.

To say no more, Such and so many were His Virtues, that they covered Sin.

We are told by our Pamphlet [that his death was foretold by Bruce, Pamph. 85
who was therefore banished] And if so, he deserved rather to be hanged.

But in truth, He was not banished at all, but wisely removed himself into
Germany, where his Profession of Prophesying gained most profit. And from
whence all Christendom are filled with such lying foretellings. But in this
particular he needed not much Art or Devils help to say [That Salisburies
crazy body should yield to Nature before Prince Henry's.]

And this true story of Prince Henry, Pamph. 86
may answer the fourth Remarke in the Preface, that he came not to untimely
death.

Sir Arthur Ingram, Sir Arthur Ingram. Sir Lionell Cranfield.
and Sir Lionell Cranfield, our Pamphlet couples upon the score of Merchants;
though the latter being of merit and was ranked with the Peers.

Ingram was bred a Merchant, and for his wit and wealth employed as a Customer:
and afterward came to that esteem, as to be preferred Cofferer in the Kings
house; and with much Reason and Policy, so to be. For the vast expense of the
State, kept the Treasury dry; Especially, the needful disbursements of the
Court, divided into Severalls, of King, Queen, Prince, Princess, and Palsgrave,
and Duke. And at this time also of the Marriage, and, who more proper to assist
(the Revenue failing) but such able men as these; who could, and honestly
might, discover the cunning craft of the cosening Merchant. And it was high
time so to do, or the Customers had Ingros'd all the wealth of the Commonweal.

Though our Pamphlet bestows on them the Characters [of evil Birds desiling
their own Nests] what is our Anthor then? Pamph. 87
who desil'd the Court that gave him breeding, defamed the King that gave him
hread?

And this I know, That the King most prudent, put this course in practice at
Court (somewhat differing I confess in the Line of Ascent, to the Household
preferment, which rises by Order and Succession.)

This Man Sir Arthur Ingram a stranger in Court, stepped in to discover the
concealments of the Green Clo^h also, and when this Tide had its Ebb, it
returned again to its wonted Channel. And it is true, that the King shifted the
fault upon his Favorit. An ordinary fate, which of ten follows them, to bear
the burden of their Masters mistakes. Which yet was but an Experiment, proper
enough for the Lord Chamberlain to put in practice.

He being laid aside, Sir Lionell Cranfield.
Sir Lionell Craufield came into public, upon such like Design, but in a
nobler way.

I find him of an ancient Family in Glocestershire, as by their bearing of Arms
in the Heralds office appears.

This Gentleman, a Brother unto Sir Randall Cranfield, who inherited his
fathers possessions there, and in other Counties, of good value; And in Kent;
Neighboring Our Authors habitation.

He was bred, a Merchant Adventurer, in London, and by his extraordinary
qualities, and the blessing of God upon his endeavors, in that most
commendable way of Adventure, (besides his great understanding in the affairs
of the Customs) became useful to the State.

And first, had the honor of Knighthood; then the Custody of the Kings
Wardrobes; afterward Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries; and lastly
succeeded Suffolk, in the place of Treasurer of England; and in that time,
created Earl of Middlesex.

In all which Offices of Trust; I never knew then, nor can find sithence, any
suspicion, unless in that of the Treasury. The ground whereof is hinted unto
us by our Author. Pamph. 166.
But in truth, in this He has but Scumm'd the Pot, to clear the Broth. For
indeed, who more fit (for the reasons I have showed) than this man of
experience, in Stating the Accounts, for the Revenues of the State, which I
know he improved, and not unlikely thereby, purchased Envy for his Eminency.
And to say truth, according to his Place, He did endeavor to Husband the same
to piece out with the expense, which the Princes Journey into Spain, had
wonderfully and unnecessarily exhausted; as by the Printed account thereof
lately divulged by Parliament, does manifestly appear. Then which no better
Evidence can be produced to acquit the Treasurer, together with what the
Pamphletter publishes as a supposed crime, Pamph. 166.
[His refusal to supply that journey and Buckinghams folly and prodigality;]
and this [He did deny] as the duty of his Office required, and which He well
understood, as being [of Counsel and acted as a Counselor in that
undertaking] to My knowledge; and as indeed being then the Statesman at the
Counsel Table.

But his refusal of supplying Buckingham, upon that Score only, wrought him
(no doubt) at his return home, the Treasurers great enemy.

And whom He opposed [a small accusation might serve the turn, to turn any
Man out of all] as He did, Him.

And yet to the Honor of his Memory; though they raked into all his actions,
and racked all men's discoveries, to the height of Information, the power of
Buckingham could never produce any Crime, (though mightily attempted) against
his exact accounts, in that boundless trust of the tempting Treasury.

And in spite of Malice, though they divested him of that Office, yet He lived
long after in Peace, Wealth, and Houour; And died since these times of inquiry,
leaving to his Heir, his Honors untaint; with a plentiful Estate to all his
Children; enabling them to bear up the worthy Character of their Fathers
meritts.

And thus, having digressed in our matter beyond our time; we return to the
first appearance of our new Favorite, George Villiers, 89 His descent.
George Villiers, who was of an Ancient Family in Leicestershire. His Father
Sir Edward Villiers, begat him, upon a second Wife, Mary Beomont, of Noble
birth; whom for Her beauty and goodness He Married. He had by Her three
Sons, John Viscount Purbeck, George Duke of Buckingham, and Christopher Earl
of Anglesey; and one Daughter, Susan Countess of Denbigh.

Our Pamphlet tells us. Page. 90.
[That He came over by chance, from his French Travells; and sought his
preferment in Marriage with any body, but mist of his match, for want of a
hundred Marks Ioynture.] And so pieces him for the Court (like in the Story of
Dametas Caparisons) borrowing of every one piecemeal, to put him forward for
the Kings Favorite.

The truth is thus, His Mother a Widow, was lately Married unto Sir Thomas
Compton, second Brother to the Lord Compton; who by chance falling upon a
wonderful match (for matchless wealth) with Alderman Sir John Spencers
Daughter and Heir.

And his Father then lately dead, this Lord was Master of all, which was of
more than credible; and so might be enabled bountifully to set up a Kinsman,
without help, or alms of the Parish.

And it was plotted long before, and Villiers sent for to the same purpose. And
this indeed, was done by practice of some English Lords.

And I can tell him the time and place. There was a great, but private
Entertainment at Supper, at Baynards Castle, by the Family of Herberts,
Hartford and Bedford, and some others; By the way in Fleetstreet, hung out
Somersets picture, at a Painters Stall; which one of the Lords envying, bad his
Footman sling dirt in the face; which he did: and gave me occasion thereby, to
ask my Companion upon what score that was done. He told me, That this meeting
would discover. And truly, I waited near, and opportune, and so was acquainted
with the Design, to bring in Villiers. And thus backed. [Our new Favorite
needed not to borrow, nor to seek out many Bravo'es to second his Quarrels,]
which at first, I confess he met with.

For, having bought the place of Cup bearer to the King, his right was, to have
the upper end of the Table, at the reversion of the Kings Diet; only during his
monthly waiting. But he, not so perfect a Courtier in the Orders of the House,
set himself first (out of his month) when it was not his due; and was told of
it, and so removed: which was not done with over much kindness; for indeed,
the Other was Somersets Creature.

But not long after, this party by chance, (rather than by design) spilt upon
Villiers clothes, as he carried meat to the Kings Table; and returning to
Dinner, Villiers gave him a box on the Ear; For which the Custom of the Court
was to have his hand cut off, and which belonged to Somerset, as Chamberlain,
to prosecute the Execution, Favorite.
as he did. And here the Kings merciful pardon, without any satisfaction to
the party, made him appear a Budding Favorite.

And now we are fallen upon a story [of fooling and fidling] sometime used for
Courtlike recreations I confess; Pamph. 91.
but always, with so much wit as might well become the Exercise of an Academy;
Not Gerbiers.
which our Author misconstrues, and calls [a Brothelry] to usher in the New
Favorite, and to out the Old One, (whose Misfortunes with his Lady, brake out,
even now as we have told of before.

And now indeed, Pamph. 124.
all the browse boughs cut down, or removed, to plain the Stemm; our Favorite
appears, like a proper Palm.

His first step into honorable Office, was in the Admiralty, Admiralls.
to succeed a good and gallant Old Lord of Nottingham, who being almost Bed
ridd, made suit to the King, That himself might dispose his place, as a Legacy,
in his life time upon Villiers: which was so done; and who, to my knowledge,
went in Person to acknowledge the Kindness, and presented his Young Lady, with
a very noble and valuable reward, which my Lord Compton paid for, and besides a
Pension therefore, during his life. And all this was done with so much love and
liking, that I have often observed Villiers his great Civility to him ever
after, at each meeting to call him Father, and bend his knee, without the least
regret of the Lord, that gained more than he lost by the bargain, and did not
cost the King a penny.

And because Sir Robert Mansell (a dependant of Nottingham) had the place of
Vice Admiral at pleasure only; Villiers (for his Lords sake) continued him by
Patent, during life.

For which Courtesy, the good Old man came himself to give thanks, (as I
remember) the last Complement his age gave him leave to offer.

And thus was this Office of Honor and Safety to the Kingdom, Ordered from the
Command of a decrepid old Man to a proper young Lord, and strengthened with the
abilities of an experienced Assistant, Pamph. 124.
without deserving the least quarrelling Item, of our Carping Pamphleter.

The next in our way, Chancellor Egerton.
is that of the Lord Egerton, He was Chancellor of England, a man very aged,
and now with sickness fallen on his aeath-bed. Pamph. 125.


The Term come, and the Scal to be disposed, In order thereunto, the King sent
Secretary Winwood (not Bacon) for the Seal, with this Message, That himself
would be his under keeper, and not to dispose it whilst he lived, to bear the
name of Chancellor. Nor did any receive the Seal, out of the Kings sight, till
Egerton was dead, which followed soon after.

Sir Francis Bacon succeeded him in the Chancery. Chancellor Bacon.
He was Attorney General, and as others by that Place, and the usual way of
preferment (time without memory) come to high Office of Judicature, either in
Chancery, or to the other Benches, so did he rise.

He was a man of Excellent parts, of all other learning, as of that of the Law;
and as proper for that place as any man of the Gown. His merits made him so
then, which in after time his vices blemished, and he justly removed to his
private Studies, which render him to the world full of worth: and with the
small Charity of our Author, might merit the Bays, before any Man of that age.

And so we shall spare our labor, to observe his entrance into that Honor; by
the idle Message from Buckingham, Pamph. 127.
made up only by our Authors mouth. [Who tells us of his growings, height and
pride. Particularly intimated afterward to the King in Scotland, Pamph. 131.
by Letters from Winwood, which the King read unto our Author.] At which [he
says, they were very merry.] Good God! The King opens his bosom to him, at
that instant (not usual to any of the Green-cloth) when this Man, so vilely
studied, and plotted his Sovereigns, and that Kingdoms dishonor? Vide Preface.
for which he was turned out of the Court. Was the King so gracious to him, and
he so graceless, then, and since, in the Pamphlet to defame him, and his
Posterity? He that eats of his bread, lifts up his hand to destroy him.

And afterward we are told his downfall: which he says, at last humbled him to
a Horse boy.

He did (as became him to do to the House of Peers) prostrate himself and sins,
which ingeniously he acknowledged, craving pardon of God and Them, promising
with Gods mercy to amend his life; which he made good to the worlds Eye. Those
excellent works contrived in his Retirements, dee manifest.

And let me give this light to His better Character; from an observation of the
late King, then Prince; returning from hunting, He espied a Coach, attended
with a goodly Troop of Horsemen, who it seems were gathered together, to wait
upon the Chancellor to his House at Gorembury, at the time of his declension.

At which, the Prince smiled; Well! do we what we can, said He, This Man
scorns to go out like a Snuff. Commending his undaunted Spirit, and excellent
parts; not without some regrett, that such a Man should be falling off. And all
this, much differing from Our Authors Character of Him.

Those times are complained of. Pamph. 129.
[What base courses our Favorite took to raise moneys for advance of his
beggarly Kindred.] Heretofore we are told, that the Great Men mastered all: and
now, the affairs are Managed with beggarly fellows; and concludes against
himself, that Riches make Men Cowards, and Poverty Valiant.

It Is true, Plenty makes Men Proud, and Industry brings a Man to Honor. Had
our Author lived to these our days, and observed as much now, as he pried into
then; He must have spoke other Language; unless (as likely He could) hold with
the Hare, and run with the Hounds.

We all know the Duke of Buckingham had many Kindred, for his Family were
Ancient. And dispersed by time, into several Matches with the Gentry; who no
doubt, did address to the Favorite for preferment. And what strange, or new
device was it in Him, to raise them, that were near in Blood, by Noble and
worthy ways, as he did; and if our Author had liked, to lick after the
Kitchen-maid, had it been handsome for a Kinsman, to have kicked at his
kindness? Pamph. 129, 130.


Good God, what a Summary Bead-roll of Pensioners are listed in our Authors
Account; Sure He became Register, to the Revenue of that Rabble. Chancellor,
Attorney, Deans, Bishops, Treasurers, Rich and Poor, raking upon the rates of
Offices, Bishoprics, Deaneries with Fines and Pensions. Otherwise he says It
had been impossible that three Kingdoms could have Maintained His Beggarly
Kindred.

Oh, Pamph. 7.
but He must tell us, He made them all Lords, which. got him much haued. He did
so, and he did well. He made his two Brothers Peers, his Mother and Sister
Countesses, the rest of his kindred, by his Countenance, got means to live like
their Birthrights, being a Race Handsome and Beautiful.

And yet let me tell him, I have been often present, when it has been urged as
a Crime to this great Man, the neglect of his own; when the discourse has
been pressed, for preferment of his Friends. And this I know, for I acted
therein. The Late King in honor of Buckinghams Memory supplied the necessities
of his Kindred, which his untimely death left without support.

As for the base Observations, through and through the Pamphlet, though I lived
in the shadow of the Court reasonable years, to see many turns of State; Yet I
confess, my time other ways diverted, than to rake after so much Ribaldry,
and beastly bawdery, as now to question this his peeping, pimping, into each
Petticoat Placket; and for his sufficienency therein, he might have been made
Master of the Game.

In Bacons place, Pamph. 139. Doctor Williams Lord Keeper.
comes to preferment Doctor Williams (by the title of Keeper of the Seal,
during pleasure, which the Chancellor has for life.) He was also Dean of
Westminster, and Eishop of Lincoln; brought in (says he) [to serve turns, to
do that, which no Layman was sound bad enough to undertake.]

Former Ages, held it more consonant to Reason, to trust the Conscience of the
Clergy, with the Case of the Layman they best knowing a Case of Conscience.

And anciently, the Civil Law was always judged by the Ministers of the
Church: and the Chancery, and Courts of Equity, in charge of a Divine Minister.

So ran that Channel, till Bacons Father had it from a Bishop, and now a
Bishop has it again.

And had King James lived to have effected his desires, the Clergy had fixed
firm footing in Courts of Judicature, (out of the rode of the Common Law.)

And this was the true Cause of Williams Initiation thither. How he fell from
that, and other his ways since, from worse to worst of all, we leave him, if
he be living, to lead a better life, and make a Godly end, Amen.

It Is no new matter to tell us, Pamph. 143. Spanish Match. Fifth Remark.
That the Spanish Jesuit is more than our Match in the intricate way of Treaty,
being enabled to Out-wit us and all the world besides. Of which we made trial,
upon trust of our Emissaries, and now the King was minded to put it to the
touch.

And so resolved, That the Prince, with Buckingham and Cottington, and a
domestic of the Dukes, should hazard a Journey into Spain; Being invited
thither by secret Intimation of Sir Walter Aston, Ambassador Extraordinary,
with the Earl of Bristow, Leiger. Which was to put period to that business of a
Marriage, that had lasted long enough in Design, to weary both Parties. Nor was
it held such a Ranting journey by wise Men, that knew more perhaps, than our
Author would make us believe he did.

For the great business Inclusive with the Match, was to get Render of the
Palatinate, which this way, or none, was to be expected.

And it appeared afterward, That though the Spaniard did pretend it, yet he
had other Overtures with the House of Austria, as a double bow-string.

All which, we suspected before; and therefore it was a Prince-like boldness,
to bring it to issue by himself, or to break the Bonds asunder. Which at his
being there, he soon discovered, and so returned.

Wherein, Bristoll, a suspected Pensioner to that State, did not so timely
unmask the Spanish Counsels, to the Princes advantage, as he might and ought
to have done. For which neglect, it had like to have cost him his life, when he
came home to the true Examination.

But evermore we must expect a bawdy tale in our Authors stories. Pamp. 146.
Which, to all Men that know the retired custom of the Spanish Wives (much
more of the Grandees Ladies) from conversing, or sight of their own, either
kindred, or friends, (much more of strangers) must needs discredit this Tale of
Buckingham, with Olyvares Countess, as absurd and feigned.

Nor has our Author, either Courtship or Civil breeding otherwise to
understand, what the Princes behavior should have been, toward so great a
Person as the Infanta of Spain: but to allow him, his cap cap on his head, and
prevacy in her Cabinet.

But above all the strains of impudency, Give me leave to mark out the Insamy
which he endeavors (oh horrid!) to cast on King James; as of many other which
he asperts him, so this Sans-parell; intimating thus much, [ That, not glutted
with the blood of his dear, Pamph. 149.
and eldest Sen (that most incomparable) Prince Honry, for whose death he
should cunningly dissemble with a feigned sorrow. So now to add to that, and
for hatred to Buckingham (whom the world know he could have blasted with his
breath) He should think it no ill bargain, to lose this Prince, his only Son,
and Successor to all his Crowns.

And to illustrate the Kings weariness of Buckingam, Pamph. 150.
he tells us a Tale of the Lieger Spanish Ambassador Marquesa d'Innocossa, and
a Spanish Confessor, Padre Maiestre, which he says, was sent to reveal to the
King, what he had received under seal of Confession, and on pain of damnation
never to utter) which was, (or no body at all.)

Then, The Kings passion hereupon,

And then, That the Duke being challenged with the truth, durst not fight in
his own defense; which certainly, had he bin so wicked to design, the Devil
might have assisted him with courage to have countenanced it.

Indeed, Complaint sent to Spain, by advice of the whole Council here, to
demand of that King, how far he had Commissioned his Ambassdor in an affair of
Consequence, which Letter was enclosed and returned to him, with peremptory
command, to give satisfaction to the Prince and Duke: or to be subject to worse
Construction. Which to my knowledge the Ambassador did recant, (for I copyed
the transactions;) and with much ado, begged favor of the Prince, to be
reconciled, upon sulmission; which the Prince in Honor was pleased to accept,
or it might have cost Innocossa his head, at his coming home.

The former story is interlaced, How Bucking hamshifted from trusting the King,
as knowing his desire to be rid of him. And so the Duke wrought himself into
the Princes poor spirit, with much regret of the old King, and every body else,
Especially, when he should rather have called to mind, the bravery of his
brother who hated the whole Family, although, he says, none of them had ever
offended him.

Certainly, Euckingham was not in being, when Prince Henry died; And if he
were, he was more brave indeed, than to hate the Family that never did him
hurt. But sure our Author meant, Somersets Ladies Family Howards; For he tells
us before, That Prince Henry would not leave one of them to piss against the
wall (the Male ones he means.)

And taking occasion before, to smell out something of suspicion of Poison in
Prince Henry's death; we are promised in his page 84. that his discourse
following will tell you the truth thereof, and yet he never speaks word of him,
no more, nor otherwise than in this place.

Our Author proceeds, and says, Now that we have heard, what made the King hate
Buckingham, we shall know the reason of Buckinghams extreme hatred to the
King, which is believed to be the cause of his so speedy death.]

More poison yet?

But first we proceed to the story of Yelverton.

Sir H. was Attorney General; Sir H. Yelverton. Attorney Gener all.
and by his place of Employment, it was his duty to manage the charge of
Impeachment against Somerset, or any Subject whatsoever, without dispute: which
he refused, as receiving that place by his Favor; and this contempt to the
Kings service, (not without suspicion of concealment of some passages
concerning Overburies death) He was for those Reasons, (and deservedly) by the
whole council, committed to the Tower, close Prisoner.

Where (we are to be persuaded [ the Lieutenant Balfore, admits the Dake to
treat with him in priva^e, and then, to piece out a Peace between them.

Certainly Yelverton had Law to teach him, or any other Prisoner of Reason,
that this was treason in Balfore, and in the Duke to attempt. And therefore to
clear it, Balfore himself has vowed to a Prisoner, sometime under his Guard,
that there was never any such act done by the Duke, or by his permission to any
body else.

But afterward, upon Yelvertons humble submission, for his former fault; and
his Innocence cleared in the other suspicions; he was set at liberty. And in
truth, according to the merit of the Man, other ways, he was afterward
trusted with the Judgment Seat.

And what was this secret information, which we are told he should tell the
Duke, [ Forsooth, That which the King spoke in Parliament [not to spare any
that was dearest or lay in his bosom, by which he pointed to you; (meaning the
Duke.)]

And must Buckingham adventure his, and the Lieutenants head to learn this
News, which no doubt the Duke heard before, being then at the KING's Elbow.

digression (or great secret) he discovers (which none ever dreamed of) a
wonderful [ failing of the Spaniards both wisdom and gravity] And why?
gravity?) forsooth. [ That (which had bin against all Humanity, Comerce and
Custom of Nations) the Spaniard mist of the advantage, to imprison the Prince]
a sure pledge (no doubt) for the Spaniard, to have gotten the Heir-dome of
England.

And this he tells us for truth, [out of their own confessions] But they were
caught with a trick [having the Princes faith, and his Proxy to boot, remaining
with Digby, which might cosen them into this kindness, to let him come home
again] Where at a Conference of both houses of Parliament, Bristoll is blamed,
and (it being truth) the Prince owns it, and Bristoll is sent for by authority,
(otherwise it had bin petty Treason in him to return home from his Commission.)

The King of Spain (he says) disswades Bristolls return, as doubting the
success, (as well he might, knowing him to be his Pensioner) who for his sake
is like to suffer.

But, he being come, and convented before the Parliament, endeavors to clear
himself, with a single Copy of a Paper (and a bawdy tale to boot) against
Buckingham, but forbore to tell it out, for offending their chaste Ears.

In this, what a horrible wound, Bristoll gave the Prince or Buckinham? and yet
by his Confelsion the wisdom of the House committed Bristoll to the Tower, but
some days after (not the next day) he was set at liberty, nor durst any bring
him to further trial.

He was committed for his contempt, and might have lain there longer, Prisoner;
But the Duke made means for his Release, lest it should move a jealousy, that
it was his design thereby to delay the Trial. Which, to my knowledge, was
earnestly pursued, by the Duke, and had that Parliament lasted, might have been
a dear bargain for Bristoll.

In this Parliament, the Princes early hours to act by, where (he says) he
discerned so much juggling, to serve his own ends, that being afterward come
to be King, he could not affect them.

A notable Note, he calls that Parliament Iugglers, and gives it a reason, why
the late King must needs disaffect all other Parliaments that succeeded.

Then have we a discovery of our Authors own making, as a caution to all
States men, with a singular Commendation of the wisdom of the late Earl of
Salisbury, (whom before throughout his Pamphlet he loads with singular
disgraces.)

He tells us of a Treaty heretofore with Spain, for a Match with Prince Henry,
where the juggling was discovered, that there was no such intention. And that
the Duke of Lerma, the Favorite of Spain, leaves the Spanish Ambassador here in
the lurch to answer for all; who in a great snuff, against those that sent him
hither, prostrates his Commission and letters of Credit, (under the King his
Masters hand and seal) at the foot of our Council Table; and so returns
home, (and yet was not hanged for his labor) but lived and died, bonus Legatus.

And thus, our author having hunted the King hitherto; blows his death at
parting; Pam. 171. King James's Sickness.
which he says [began with a Fever; but ended by a poisoned Plaster, applied
by Buckingham. For which being questiond the very next Parliament, it was
hastily dissolved for his sake, only to save his life.]

In the entrance of the Spring, the King was seized with a Tertian Ague; which
to another Constitution might not prove Pestilentiall.

But all Men then knew his Impatience in any pain, and always utter Enmity to
any Physic. So that nothing was administered, to give him ease in his sits.

Which at length grew violent, and in those Maladies, every one is apt to offer
advice, with such Prescriptions as have been helpful unto others; and in
truth, those as various, as the disease is Common.

So it was remembered (by a Noble, virtuous, The Plaster.
and untaint Lady, for Honor and Honesty, yet living) of a present ease, by a
Plaster approved upon several Persons, which, because the Ingredients were
harmless and ordinary, it was forthwith compounded, andready for application;
not without serious resolution, to present it to the Physicians consent.

But the King, fallen into slumber, about Noone the Physicians took opportunity
to retire, having watched all Night, till that Time.

When in the interim of their absence, the King wakes, and falls from a change
of his Fit, to timelier effect, than heretofore it usually happened; which to
allay, this Plaster was offered, and put to his Stomach.

But it wrought no mitigation, and therefore it was removed by the Doctors. Who
being come, were much offended, that any One durst assume this boldness without
their consents.

But by Examination, they were assured of the Composition, and a piece thereof
eaten down by the Countess that made it; and the Plaster it self then in
being, for further trial of any suspicion of poison. Which, if not
satisfactory, it must, and ought to lodge upon their score. Sir Matthew Lister,
Doctor Chambers, and others, who were afterward examined herein, with very
great satisfaction, to clear that calumny, and are yet living, to evince each
ones suspicion.

It was, indeed, remembered the next Parliament following; and whereof the Duke
was accused, as a Boldness unpardonable; But in the Charge, (which as I
remember, Littleton Managed, at a Conference in the Painted Chamber,) it was
not urged as poisonous, but only criminous.

But [ ere the King dyed, Pamph. 174.
it is told us, That Buckingham was accused to his face, by an honest servant
of the Kings, (name him if you can) who valiantly tript up the Dukes heels
(that his pate rung Noone) for which, he called upon the gasping King (no body
being by) for Justice. And though speechless, we are told, what he would have
said, viz. Not wrongfully accused.]

And here observe; Pamph. 175.
he makes Archbishop Abott the Kings Confessor at his death; who before, he
says (page 78.) lived in disgrace, and excluded the Counsel Table. And dyed
in disgrace of this King on Earth, 175.
but in favor of the King of Kings. [Bishop Williams, then Lord Keeper, was
the other Confessor] and in the mouths of two Witnesses consists the Truth.
What regrett and jealousy remains then in our Authors heart? that some
Mischief should lie hid in the secrets of the Sacrament of Confession; which he
could not learn, to outlive the Honor and Fame of his Sacred Sovereign?

How has our Author patched up a Pamphlet of State Notions, picked up from the
Gleanings of some Smell-feast Guests, at his Table Diet, afforded him by the
bounty of his Sovereign Master? and which, this Man has as a Rapsodie, mingled
with Misconstruction, Incertainties, Improbabilities, Impossibilities, In as
much he can to poison the Memory of His Majesty, and blanch the Government of
the State, and Court. Wherein, his Forefathers, and Himself took Lise and
Livings, in the advance of his Family, with some repute and Fortune, to be what
they are.

But he is dead; Peace be upon his Grave.

Conclusion:
ANd thus have we done, with our Pamphleter, and his Book, My pen being dulled
with disdain, to deal with such a subject, were i^ not to enlighten good Men
with the knowledge of a Truth; before that either age, or longer time had wasted
with too much Oblivion, or that the negligence of others, (of any) (more able I
confess) had given but too much way to confirm the ignorant.

What I have don, may seem defective in some part to some Persons; whose
Eminence in Court, and years of Experience, could have limm'd the Originalls
with a bolder Pencill.

However, I have adventured upon this Copy; not to discoulour Truth, by any
Concealment.

A hard Task, I confess; When Modesty forbidds the defacement of Persons,
departed to their Graves of Rest, whom living, we should not dare to look in
the Face; And whose Posterities enjoy the merits of their Parents Virtues.

To them I submit; craving pardon, that without their leave, I have bin bold to
speak in their Cause; which might better become greater Abilityes to plead.

THE CHARACTER
IT may merit dispute, whether I shall Quarrel with the Character of King
James, or let it alone, as the Pamphletter has described Him, which (he says)
Is easier to do, than to take his Picture; and he gives the Reason for it, His
Character was obvious to every eye, I am sure His outward observations are so;
infering that His Picture was Inward; It Is true indeed, His best Piece was His
Inside, which wise men admired.

Was ever Prince thus Limn'd out to Posterity, by His quilted Doublets, and
full stuffed Breeches? who reads His Court, needs none of this Character; so like
they are in belying. But I spare the Author, and pity the Publisher. -- The
deficiency of the One, could not make out the Other. For it becomes the Wit of
Man, in truth, to apprehend King James, whose wisdom in His Sovereignty, had
esteem beyond any Contemporary Potentate, with His Reign. Take Him in His turn,
who had to do with all about Him. For at his entrance into His Inheritance, He
was engaged to go through with the difficulties, in Order as He found them, Or
to make Bargain with All, the better to conserve it.

Had He not done so, He might have sound little leisure, to live in Peace, and
to enjoy His Realms as He did, with as much quiet as ever any King upon Earth,
since the Story of Solomon, Who bent all his Counsels and endeavors to
promote that now exploded Motto of Beati Pacifici.
and yet (in the like Example with us) fell to distraction in his Son that
succeeded. Compare them together, and find me a Parallel with more even
conclusion.

I know it were to be wished, That in evil effects we could find out the true
Cause; But like blind men, we grope, and catch hold of the nearest; not looking
up to Him who ballanceth Counsel with His Hand, and disposes the Success in
the future, not always by the failings of the former.

In the Government of His Birthplace at home, what wisdom was there not, to
preserve Himself from jealousy of His Predecessor, of being too hasty an
Inheritour here? what Jesuiticall plots in the many against Queen Elizabeth, as
Defender of the Protestant Faith, which because Providence protected Her to the
last, was not revived with more cunning designs upon Him, who was to act over
Her part, with disadvantage against fresh plots to oppose Him?

What Emissaries, and secret dispatches by several Princes addressed to
prepare and gain Him, as an advance to eithers Interest?

With what amaze to all Christendom? how He could so easily enter His
possessions, and then to amuze them all, how to deal with Him?

How He was welcomed, and caressed, by Ambassadors of each Potentate, upon
several designs of their Own?

What Contracts were made, and to be made, amongst His Neighbors, upon sundry
Overtures in Case He should do, even any thing but what He did, with what
difficulty to any other, He maintained Himself in Peace against the Envy of
them all.

How was He by Consanguinity imbroyl'd in His Son in Law's too hasty Accession
to the Kingdom of Bohemia, when as a wise King He forewarned, and prophesied
His destruction, and Christendoms distraction?

What Ambassies public, and Messengers priva^e He wisely disposed, for
advantage of His and the Peoples Interest?

How he managed the General affairs of the Church Protestant, as a wise
Patriarch, against the plots of the Pope?

How far His Reputation, reached out, to Foreign Princes far off?

How from abroad and at home, He enriched His Subjects, and increased His own
Revenue?

What did he not do without the Pike, if not with his Pen?

How He preserved Himself with friendship of all?

And thus in particular to put down in print, is the work of a weighty Pen.

But to take His true dimension, we have no Scale.

Nor can it be done without much dishonor, to patch Him up in a petit Pamphlet:
We shall remit it to mature deliberation.

And for the present, leave Him so great a King to His continued Memory, by His
own excellent Impressions in Print, that same Him to Posterity; whom we did not
value, because we could not comprehend.

FINIS.

