DIVINITY NO ENEMY TO ASTROLOGY: Intended to have been delivered in a Sermon to
the Students in that ART, but prevented by the Sickness of the AUTHOR T.S. D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J.G. for NATHANIEL BROOK At the Angel in Cornhill. 1653.

TO THE READER.
IF thou art Man, Gentleman, Scholar, I fear not thy Censure; under such a
one, whether I stand or fall, it displeases me not.

If thou be Beast, and biased by Fancy; if thou be barbarous, and ruled by
passion; if thou be humorous, and led by popularity, I care not for thy Censure.

It is Astrology I seek to maintain, and the Question is, not

1. Whether Juggling be lawful? It is, I confess, Deception, and against
Society: nor

2. Whether Witchcraft be lawful? it is, I confess, Diabolical, and against
Divinity: nor

3. Whether Calculation of Princes Nativities be lawful? it is, I confess
Curiosity, and against the Law of Man.

But the Question is, whether Astrology be lawful? and that thou may resolve
thy self in this, I propose these Queries, which when thou have revolved, it
may be thou will resolve with me, Astrology is lawful.

1. Whether the End, for which God created things, be lawful?

2. Whether God created not the Sun, Moon, and Stars for this very End, to
know the Times and Seasons?

3. Whether the knowledge of Times and Seasons can be had by any means, but
Astrology?

If thou give a Negative to these, thou shall be answered with the silence of
him who is of another opinion, and acknowledges his name to be

THO: SVVADLIN.

DIVINITY NO ENEMY TO ASTROLOGY, etc.
MAT. 2.2. (...).

We have seen his Star in the East.


AStrologers make their Ascension from one Planet to another, from Luna which
is omnium infimus, the lowest of the seven, to Mercury in the 6. place, to
Venus in the 5. to Sol in the 4. to Mars in the 3. to Jupiter in the 2. to
Saturn which is superiorum altissimus, the highest of them all.

Divines observe the same degree in the Ascension of their Luminaries; from
Natura ad legem; from lex ad prophetiam; from prophetae ad Evangelium; from
Evangelium ad Gratiam; from Gratia ad Consolationem; from Consolatio ad Gloriam.

1. Nature is Luminum limpidissimum, the dimmest of our seven lights; and yet
as Mephibosheth, though lame was of the Kingly Race, because he was the Son of
Jonathan; so is Nature regia proles, of the Blood Royal, as dim as it is,
because she is the Daughter of God; and therefore is called by Solomon,
Candela Domini, Prove. 20.27.
the Candle of the Lord; and by the light of this, if thriftily used, we may
see the way how to fulfill that universal Law; Quod tibi vis fieri, alteri
feceris; Do as thou would be done unto.

2. From this we ascend ad lucem legis, to the light of the Law, so Solomon the
wise calls it; lux lex, The Law is a light: Prove. 6.23. Ps. 19.8.
and David the Father says, Thy Law is a light unto my steps, and of this, if
we make an holy use we shall not stumble at any straw of sin.

3. From hence we ascend ad lucem propheticum, to the prophetical light; 2
Pet. 1.19.
which St. Peter calls lucernam splendentem in loco obscuro, a Light shining in
a dark place, and this will cure any pharisaicall Eye, that he may clearly see
the inward lust as well as the outward Act forbidden; wishing of Murder, and
shedding of blood equally prohibited.

4. From hence we journey ad lucem Evangelicam, to the light of the Gospel,
which St. Peter calls Lucem admirabilem, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a wonderful light; and deservedly, for it brings us from the wonderful
darkness of sin, by the wonderful Eye of Faith, to see the wonderful
mercy of God in the forgiving of our sins, by the wonderful death of Jesus
Christ, because both God and Man.

5. From hence we pass ad Lucem Gratiae, to the light of Grace; 2 Cor. 4.6.
which St. Paul says is a light that shines in our hearts, to give us the
light of the knowledge of the Glory of God.

6. From hence we ascend ad lucem consolatoriam, to the light of comfort, as
King David calls it; Ps.
There is a light sprung up for the Righteous, even joy and gladness for such
as be true of heart.

7. And from hence we pass ad lucem gloriosam, to the Light of Glory, the
Presence of God, which St. Paul calls the inheritance of the Saints in light.

And hitherto they agree, in their several degrees, by their several
Ascendents. They from their Luna to their Chronos, their Saturn, who is said
to begin with Time; we from our Minerva, to our Thrones, to our Eternity, to
our God, with whom all Achrones are alike, and who is without all distinction
of Times, Et a part ante, and a part post, having no more Ante-meridian
before him, then he shall have Pomeridian after him.

Whether they are compatible, and may live together, without deposing or
Excommunicating one the other in other things, we shall see in the dissection
of these words, by the disquisition of these Quaeries, as the Members of the
whole body.

1. Who these Videntes were, not only qui, but also quales, and cujates; who,
what conditioned, and what Country men they were?

2. Whether this visum were a common, and preexistent, or a new created Star?

3. Whether by the Stars any knowledge could be had of Christ's Birth?

4. Whether the study of Astrology be law full?

5. Why God directed them by a Star, and notby a Prophet, not by an Angel?

1. Pars 1.
First, for the qui, quales and the cujates: who, what, and what Countrymen
they were?

1. 1a. 1ae.
And of all first, qui, who were they? as we have received it by Tradition,
(and better proof we have none;) they are called by name, Gasper, Melchior,
Balthazar; and this Tradition, though we embrace inter pia credibilia, amongst
harmless credulities, yet the other Tradition upon this depending

Gasper fert Myrrha^, thus Melchior, Balthazar aurum:
Haec tria qui secum portabit nomina regum,
Solvitur a morbo, Christi pietate, caduco.
Gaspar with his Myrrh begun,
These presents to unfold:
Then Melchior brought in Frankincense,
And Balthazar brought Gold.
He that of these holy Kings
The Names about shall bear,
The falling ill, by grace of Christ,
Shall never need to fear.
This Tradition we expunge inter impias frauds, amongst banefull deceipts,
and send them back from whence they came, as a very foolish Charm, to cure the
Epilepsie, or Falling sickness.

And, as I conceive Astrologers give it no more credit, then do Divines, we may
without offense to Faith or Charity, imagine their names to be as I have
delivered them, Gaspar, Melchior, Balthazar, and this shall suffice for the
qui, who they were.

Secondly, for their quales; 2a. ae.
what manner of men were they? It is again received by Tradition, that they
were Kings; Kings for their quality: which howsoever it may be admitted, for
the Antiquity of it as not liable to any demonstration for the contrary; yet
that other Tradition, which depends upon this, That they lived and died in
Judea, and were there b^^ied, and afterward translated by Queen Helena, the
Mother of Constantine, to Colen, whence arises the 3. Kings of Colen, a
precious and adored Relic with the Novices of Rome, we explode, and remit
again, as being clean contrary to the Scripture, which says, They returned
back into their own Country another way.

Their own Country! and therefore Judea none of their Country; Thither they
returned; and therefore in Judea they lived not, they died not.

But then 3. Cujates, 3a. 1ae,
what Countrymen were they? why in the resolve of this, Expositors are divided
in their opinions; I shall name some of them, and make my choice of the
likeliest.

1. Some think they were Caldeans, so says Remigius; The people of which
Country worshipped a Star for their God; and their God falsely so called,
was made an instrument by the true God, to bring them unto Christ.

But this to me carries an Inverisimilitude, because Caldea is commonly spoke
of as North from Jerusalem; whereas these came from the East; for as I take it,
vidimus, and venimus, in this Text, have both one Terminus a quo, they came
from, and saw his Star in the East.

2. Some think they were Persians, and this Opinion has some verisimilitude;
because (...), or Magi, the word in this Verse, is a Persian word, and amongst
them, Wise men, i. e. such as could give a reason in Philosophy of every thing,
were in so great account, Honor, and Veneration, that no public matters were
transacted without their Counsel and Advise, nor was any thing thought to be
well done or lawfully, which was not done by their approbation, or without
their consent.

But yet to this Opinion, I adhere not, because Persia as well as Caldea, stood
Northward from Jerusalem.

3. Some think they were Persians, and of the posterity of Balaam, and this,
in my thoughts is the most likely, both for the Situation, and Fructification
of the Country, as also for the direction which they followed.

1. For Situation, Arabia the County of Balaam, which is Siria, is not above
six or seven days journey from Jerusalem, and stands Estward from it,
south-East.

2. For Fructification, the Native fruits of that Country, were Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh: Gold and Myrrh, I confess, might be had from other
Countries, but Frankincense no part afforded, but Arabia.

Lib. 4. Fast. Hence, Ovid calls them Thurilogos.
Non modo thurilogos Arabas, modo suscipit Jndos.
Hence Mantuan calls them Thuriferos.
Thurifero Arabas Syriae Bipatentibus alis.
Hence Pamphilus calls them Odoratos.
Vicit odoratos Arabas: Pline puts it beyond question, saying, Thura praeter
Arabiam nullis.

And the Psalmist says the same, for there was Gold, and decides it
irrefragably, if that Psalm were Penned prophetically of Christ, unto him
shall be given of the Gold of Arabia.

For the abundance of Gold, Arabia is called Faelix; and for the excellency of
Frankincense, it was called Sacra; for both, Tibullus calls it terram divitem.

-- Urantur odores
Quos tener a terra divite mittit Arabs;
Nor do I remember any other Country to be Epithetically spoken of
Frankincense, save Egypt, and that is but once by Statius, where he says,
Thus Niliacum; and that, I conceive he speaks, in reference to the situation,
Arabia lying betwixt Egypt and Judea; and Tibullus tells us, that is Eastward,
saying: Eosque Arabas, dives and Assiria.

3. Add to these the direction which they followed; and that puts it as home,
Number. 23.17.
out of Jacob shall come a Star. Out of Jacob, did I say! what is that to the
East may you say? Why it is thus much; Balaam and his Posterity were of Kin to
Jacob by the second Marriage of Abraham to Peturah, Genesis 14.
who sent his Children by that venture Eastward.

But be they what they will, Caldeans, Persians, or Arabians, it makes not much
to our Faith or Manners; sure I am, they were Gentiles, and that commands me to
speak the Application thus.

Appli. 1. Were these Videntes, Kings? It may be they were, we have Tradition
to tempt our credulity that way; and if they were so, then we are bound in a
greater obligation of thankfulness to Almighty God then were the Jews; For
but a poor few of the Jews came to Christ at his Birth, mean Men; but of the
Gentiles, the richest and the best sort, with all their train.

And why so, but that the Holy Ghost did hereby show, That but a few beggarly
Jews should receive and believe in Christ, but the best sort of the Gentiles,
Kings and Nobles, with all their Courtiers and Attendants should by the Son
of God, be made the Sons of God.

Hard for a rich Jew to follow Christ; but easy enough for a rich Gentile, if
he will but part with his Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, as these Gentile Kings
did, to Christ.

2. But secondly, if they were not Kings, for we build not upon that, because
we have but Tradition for it; yet they were Magi; This we build upon, because
we have Scripture for it; Magi, whom the Jews call Scribes, the Indians,
Gymnosophists; the Egyptians, Prophets; the Assirians, Calde; the French,
Druides; the Romans, Sapientes; and our Translation, Wisemen.

Why then we may be confident, we shall find Christ by our Wisdom, though
we cannot by our power, Magorum est, non Magnorum; and they understood this
mystery by their knowledge, not by their might; by their Art, not by their
Arms; Plus valet testimonium sapientium quam militum. The Gospel was first
published, by Wisemen, not by strong men; by Scholars, not by Soldiers; and
that Religion which is seldom restored by the power of an Army, when it is
unjoynted, may first or last be regained by the Wisdom of a Council; what
Herod with his Men of War could not obtain, Gasper with his men of Wisdom
atcheived, the favor of Christ.

3. And thirdly, because they were Gentiles, and therefore great sinners, and
yet came to Christ; we therefore, though the greatest sinners in the world,
have no necessity, no fatal necessity to despair.

Not the Griping Usurer; If he will go to Christ upon the bountiful Feet of
Restitution, he shall find Christ ready to receive him in the bountiful Arms
of Salvation; we have the example of Zacheus for it. Luke 19.


Not the shining Adulteress; If she will go to Christ upon the sorrowful Feet
of Contrition, she shall find Christ ready to embrace her in the comfortable
Arms of Compassion: we have the example of S. Mary Magdelen for it.

Not the specious Persecuter of the Saints; If he will go to Christ upon the
painful Feet of Obedience, he shall find Christ ready to entertain him in
the pleasant Arms of Acceptance: we have the example of S. Acts 9.
Paul for it.

Not the high-towring Astrologer; If he will go to Christ upon the careful
Feet of Oblation, he shall find Christ ready to welcome him in the cheerful
Arms of Acceptance; we have the example of these Wise men for it.

And it is a true and faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy
1.15.
That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, the chiefest sinners,
the Lionlike Userer, the Goat-like Adulterer, the Bear-like Persecutor, the
Pantomartian Gentile, if they will seek for Christ, though but by the help of a
Star, which brings me to my second Disquisition.

Whether this Visum of these Videntes was a Common and prae-existent, Pars 2.
or a new created Star? And of this there are several opinions; I shall name
some of them, and make my choice of the likeliest.

And yet before I do this, I shall first decide One question raised by the
Church of Rome, viz.

Whether this were one Star, or a company of Stars? And they tell us from
Albumazar, That that Sign in the Zodiaque which is called the Vigine, is an
heap of such Stars, that you may read in them, Virginem gestantem inter
brachia filium, a Virgin bearing an Infant in her Arms; and some of them have
said that to be this Star.

And they seek to prove this opinion from Sibylla Tiburtina, who showed
Augustus, when he boasted of his heavenly descent, Virginem in coelo, etc. a
Virgin in heaven bearing a young Child in her Arms, with these words, Hic
puer te major est, ipsum adora, This Infant is greater then thou, worship thou
him.

And they fortify this again, with an authority fathered upon Saint
Chrysostom, Ep. imperf. hom. 4. in Math. 2.
speaking thus: This Star appeared unto them, having in it the form of a
little Child, and above him the similitude of a Cross.

But as I take it, the word of my Text is neither Astrum nor Sydus, a Knot, or
a Company, or a Composition of Stars; but (...) in the Original, and Stellam
in the Translation, a Singular and an Individual Star; (...), Vidimus ejus
stellam, we have seen his Star.

1. Some imagine that the Holy Ghost, who at Christ's Baptism, appeared in the
form of a Dove, appeared now at his Birth in the shape of a Star. Mat. 3.


That this might be so, I dare not deny; because the Holy Ghost has appeared
as well in the form of Inanimates, as of Animates; so to the Apostles upon
Whitsunday in the form of Fire. And if this were so, Acts 2.
it makes much for the Legality of Astrology; because the Holy Ghost never
did, never will appear, in the shape of any thing that is unlawful, or unholy.

But that he did now appear in the form of a Star, I dare not affirm.

2. Some are of opinion, That the same Angel which appeared to the Shepherds
in his own Luster, appeared to these Sophists in the shape of a Star.

And that this might be so, I dare not deny; because sometimes the Angels are
called Stars, both the Angels of the Church triumphant, Apoc. 2.
and also the Angels of the Church-militant.

But that this was so, I do not believe, because I do believe it was a real
Star; and believe withal, it was no Ordinary, no pre-existent Star, none
of them which God created in the beginning; but an Extraordinary, and
new-created Star; and the reasons of my belief are these:

1. Had it been a Common Star, likely it would have gone the common way of
the Stars, from East to West.

That is the Natural course of the Stares, the course that Nature has
appointed them; and Nature transgresses not her own Constitution; But this
Star went from the East into the South, Jerusalem standing South from Arabia.

2. Had it been a common Star, likely it would have done as Common Stars
do, have lost her light in the day, the Sun being a greater, and more
transparent light, obscuring the light of the Stars.

As the light of a Candle gives way to the light of a Torch, so the Stars,
which are but Candles in respect of the Sun, strike Sail, and veil Bonnet,
when the Sun appears.

The Stars in the night have their glory, but when the Sun like a Giant,
appears to run his course, then these Dwarfs hide their heads.

But this Star shined equally day and night, and for ought I, or any man
knows, was brighter when the Sun was brightest, Psalm. 19.
both having the same errand, To declare the glory of God, and therefore no
common Star.

3. Had it been a Common Star, it would have shined in the Night continually,
but this Star did intermit: Exodus
just as the Pillar of Fire was to the Israelites in the Wilderness, when they
stood still, it stood still; so this Star shined all the way, and guided the
Wise Men to Jerusalem; but when they came to Herod, it withdrew; and when they
set on again, why then, lo, Mat. 2.
the Star which they saw in the East went before them again; and therefore
no Common Star.

4. Had it been a Common Star, it had been placed in the Common Region of the
Stars, the upper Region of the Air; but this in the lower, otherwise how
could they have known the Cottage where Christ was, since a Common Star in
his own Region, by reason of distance, seems equally over one house with
another, within a great compass; but this Star went and stood over the very
house where Christ was; and therefore no Common Star.

And so much is intimated by our own Countryman; Nova coelum stell a
depingitur, Houd lib. 1. Christian. quater. 38.

Dum Sol novus in terris oritur:
The Earth is blessed with a new Sun, and therefore the Heaven is beautified with
a new Star.

But what makes this discourse of Stars in a Pulpit? Acts 17.
why just as Saint Paul from the Altar to the unknown God, brought the
Athenians to the knowledge of the true God; Apoc. 22.16.
so God from this blazing Star brought the Gentiles to the knowledge of the
bright morning Star, Jesus Christ: and so I draw this second Disqu. sition
into an useful Act of Divinity, thus:

When any balzing Star or Comet shall arise in the cloudy Firmament of their
accusing Consciences; Appl.
when the sins which you have committed, like Meteors, shall appear to the
Eyes of their remembrance.

When some Ministers in the Pulpit, like Dog-stars, bark at their Actions.

When others, like the Star Wormwood, speak bitterly against their
transgressions.

When others, like Lucifer, shine bright in Life and Doctrine; o then hearken
you to these visible clamours: They are not Thunders to astonish you, but to
awaken you; they are not Lightnings to blast you, but to beautify you; they
would not drive you from, but draw you to Jerusalem, that you may enquire after
Christ; to Bethlehem, where you may see Christ in the Cradle; to Calvarie,
where you may see Christ on the Cross, and their sins there cancelled, and
their souls thereby saved, that their selves may one day shine like Stars in
the Kingdom of Heaven.

But if you will turn back to this Sun, if you will shut your Eyes to these
Stars, and go back from these Lights, and will none of their Directions: then
take heed, that these Magi rise not in judgment against you; for upon the
sight of a Star they came to Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that is born
King of the Jews? for we have seen his Star in the East.

Why, Pars 3.
could there be any knowledge of Christ's Birth by the Stars?

This is my third Quaerie, and thus I look into it.

Petrus Aliacus gives it thus, Ep. 30. in Genesis
The Birth of Christ might be known by the Observation of the Stars; but not
so certainly, if this new Star had not risen to declare him, where me thinks
he seems to speak thus:

The general Observation of the common Stars might give some general
knowledge; and this Star did give a certain knowledge of Christ's Birth; and
thus he backs his opinion:

Coeli and astra suo Domino quasi famulentes, ejus ortum in dicere potuerunt,
qui est supra omnes coelos; The Heavens and the Stars being Gods Servants,
might show the Birth of Christ, who is above both Heaven and Stars.

And furthermore he confirms it again, saying, Six years before there was a
great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, which in the judgment of Astrology
portends a great alteration in Religion; and at the very time of his Birth, the
eighth degree of the Sign called Virgo was the Horoscope, it beginning then to
arise; whereupon Albertus Magnus from Albumazar has left it thus recorded, In
the first appearance of that Sign, a certain fair and honest Virgin
ascended, and nourished a Child, whom the Jewish Nation calls Jesus.

But with his favor, for all his great learning, I may not adhere to his
opinion; Happily some general Conjectures may be made upon such
Constellations: but hereby to collect the Birth of Christ in my thoughts,
exceedes all humane skill: and my reason is,

That knowledge which comes by Astrology is only Natural; and that too of
such things as have formerly been; Experience being the chief Mistress of
this Art.

The Astrologer can draw no Conclusion, I think he cannot, but from alteration
of former Events, upon such and such Constellations and Conjunctions.

But there was never any Experience of Christ's Birth; and therefore what Sign
soever appeared in the Heavens, it was impossible for any man living, by his
own skill, to tell it, without some Extraordinary revelation of it from God.

So S. Augustine; Sermon. de Epiphan.
How did they know that this Star appeared to manifest Christ? why certainly,
says he, some good Angel of God told them so, saying, The Star which you
see leads you to Christ; go, and learn hereby what manner of Person, and how
Great he is.

And so much the late great Assertour of Astrology, Sir Christopher Heydon,
acknowledged in his Answer to an Objection of Mr. Chambres, upon this very
point; The Objection stands thus, What needed this New Star to guide them,
if there were Stars enough before?

And the sum of his Answer is this, Christ's Birth might be known by this New
Star, and yet not be subject to the rest of the Stars; since this Birth was
supernatural, and therefore not to conclude against the operation of the
Star in Natural Births and Generations; and from them both I apply this
Disquisition thus:

When you come to gaze on the Stars that lead you unto Christ, Appl.
resolve beforehand, they cannot do it of themselves: 1 Cor. 3.6.
No, Paul may plant, Apollos may water, but God only give the increase.

So, Psalm. 19.1.
the Heavens declare the glory of God; yet that we are thereby stirred up to
glorify God, it is of his Grace; and therefore pray before you come hither,
That the light which you receive from the Stars may be effectual to bring
you to the Star of Light, Jesus Christ.

Ascribe not that to the Stars, which is due to the Sun, nor ascribe that to
the created Sun, which is due only to the creating Sun.

That Common light External, which we have from the Sun in the Day, and from
the Stars in the Night, we are beholding to them for it, but as Instruments
only, thereof God is the Author; much more or that special light Internal
whereby we are brought to Christ.

A new created Star may help to it Instrumentally; but only the Ancient of
days, the Star from everlasting, and the Star which is everlasting, can
only efficiently bring us to himself.

But if the Stars can do any thing this way, what then think you of the study
of Astrology? Is it lawful, or is it unlawful?

It is my fourth Disquisition, Pars 4.
and thus I discuss it:

I have read some, and those no mean ones, who give this Question the Check in
a Negative Resolve, telling us, That as God forbids all Idolatry, and
worshipping of Images, either in Heaven, Earth, or under Earth: so likewise he
forbids all Divination, both Hydromantia, by Water; and Pyromantia, by Fire and
Chyromantia, by the seames in the Hands; and Necromantia, by the Dead; and
Ariomantia, per secures; and Cataphromantia, per specula; and Cacanomantia, per
pelves; and Sciomantia, per umbras, and Capnomantia, per fumum; and
Astronomantia, by the Stars: For all, save the last, I believe they are
sins or vanities, and therefore sins because vanities.

But why they say, That which is called Divination by the Stars is forbidden,
I shall examine in the reasons of their Assertion, which they take a Nomine,
Traduce, and Fine: from the Name, the Root, and End of Astrology.

1. For the Name, they are called (...) Magnonemim, which comes from Guanan,
which signifies a Cloud; and they give their answer under a pretense of the
Clouds.

Again, Judicial Astrology is called Haijdgnoni, (...) which the LXX.
translate (...), which signifies ventriloquium, and is Clavis Magiae, the Key
to all Magic.

Once more, Astrologers are called Hachozibakokabhim, Isa. 47.13.
(...) Intuentes stellas, or Stargazers, which signifies to see, and foretell
things contingent.

Yet once more, Deuteronomy. 22.
They are called Asaphmi, which comes of Nasaph, Twilight, because in the
Twilight they marked the Heavens most.

2. For their Root, It came from Idolatry, and therefore, Jer. 18.2.
says the Prophet, Learn not the way of the Heathen, neither be afraid of the
signs of Heaven.

3. For the End, It is injurious to God, and it is injurious to Man; To God, as
taking away his Providence, and tying all things to a fatal Necessity, taking
away his Omniscience, and ascribing to the Stars the Prediction of things
contingent, which is proper to God only: To Man, as taking away from him, the
liberty of his Will, in Moralls, which he has from Nature, and in Divines,
which he has from Grace.

This, and somewhat more I have read, and part of it I have heretofore
believed; but I retract, because I find not the Astrologer either an
Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar spirits, or a
Wizzard, or a Necromancer.

Some men there be that shroud themselves under this Art, that do practice some
of these things; and that I once saw it, and did not in limine reprove it, I am
heartily sorry, and beseech him that did it, to repent of it himself.

But the true Astrologer meddles with no Magia demoniaca, and other Magia I
read of none, but what is called Divina, or Mathematica, or Physica; none of
which, I conceive, any wise man will say is unlawful; and therefore I give my
Vote for the legality of Astrology; and the Reasons that induce me, are the
very same which persuaded me to the contrary.

1. Their Name; The Hebrews call the Stars, 2 Reg. 23.
Massaloth, of Nazal, (...) which signifies Influere: and the Rabbis call them
Meharim of Sheret, which signifies Ministrare; (...) whence comes that Axiom
allowed by all men, Astra non necessitant, sed inclinant; The Stars compel
not, but only they incline, and therefore by the Stars may the Astrologer
predict man's Inclination and Manners; which, if good, may be heightened by a
holy Ambition, if bad, may be prevented by good Education; for Sapiens
dominabitur astris, is allowed by all men, by Astrologers and all.

2. Their Root, It was not Idolatry, but Innocence; Adam in Paradise was the
Father of this Art; and had he as well observed the Star of Knowledge, for
the direction of his Will, as the Tree of Knowledge for the pleasing of his
Fancy, he had not yet been banished.

It was not Idolatry, but Obedience, upon which this Syen was grafted, when the
Tree was almost withered. Abraham the Friend of God, and Father of the
Faithful, was no Stepfather to Astrology, if we believe Antiquity.

It was not Idolatry, but Wisdom, from which this Art got life, after it had
long lay bleeding; Solomon the wisest of men was the best Astrologer the world
ever entertained.

And why were the Priests of Egypt forbidden the study of all other Arts, and
yet permitted the study of Astrology? and why do the Arabicks call their
Astrologers Cachiu, which comes of Cohu, which signifies a Priest? Surely it is
to tell the Astrologers that though the Presbyter may be his Enemy, yet the
Priest may be his Friend, and allow his Art lawful, not only for the Root of
it, but also for the End of it.

3. Which cannot be injurious to God, because the Astrologer confesses,
Sapiens dominabitur astris, and admire Gods Omnipotency, Omniscience, and
Providence, who has so powerfully disposed of all Inferior bodies to the
inclination of the Superior, and yet given the Inferior power, Maugre the
Stars, to be honest, to be holy, to be happy.

Nor can it be injurious to Man neither, For still Sapiens dominabitur astris;
nor only does the Allwise God command the Stars, but also the Meanwise Man
may countermand the Stars.

Venus does not compel a Woman to Wantonness, nor Mercury a man to Theft; the
Inclination they offer may be withstood and resisted by sanctified reason.

He that writes most for Astrology, allows it no more then an Art, which
teaches by the Motions and Influence of the Signs, Stars, and Celestial
Planets, to prognosticate of Nature all Effects ( Natural, not Contingent,
Natural, not Supernatural;) It is Ptolomies in his Quadrapartite. Lib. 1.


The Astrologers Speculation is in the knowledge of the motions of the Stars;
his Practice is in the Effects of those motions; and when he keeps himself
within these Bounds, and the Boundaries of the Law under which he lives, I see
no reason why any reasonable man should gainsay the lawfulness of Astrology;
and the rather, because God was pleased to bring us, who were Gentiles, in our
Predecessors, by Astrology, by a Star unto Christ.

It is my fifth and last Disquisition; Pars 5.
Why did God direct them by a Star, and not by a Prophet, not by an Angel?

Saint Chrysostom proposes the Question; Why did not God send some Prophet
unto them, as unto the Jews? why not an Angel, as unto the Shepherds? why did
he not speak unto them by some voice from Heaven, as he did when Christ was
baptized? why none of those, but a Star to direct them? And thus he answers
it:

By a Star did God direct the Gentiles, not by an Angel, not by a Prophet,
not by a Voice from Heaven, because he would now condescend to their weakness,
and teach them by such things as they were most acquainted with, and draw them
from a low to a higher, and more worthy degree of Philosophy.

And from hence will arise very excellent Acts of Divinity for us all, for my
self and Brethren of the Clergy; for you Gentlemen, who profess your selves
Students in Astrology, and for all others, who are here assembled.

1. That we of the Clergy, in directing men to Christ, should use these means
for persuasion, which are most familiar to the Hearers, and so by things known
and easy, bring them to understand things more difficult, and yet unknown.

Thus Saint John Baptist, that he might bring the Jews to the Baptism of
Christ, Mat. 3.
and fit them for his people, used the Baptism of Water, a thing they were
well acquainted with.

Thus Saint Paul takes occasion from the Altar to the unknown God, Acts 17.
to speak of the true God.

Thus Christ, when he intended to make Fishermen Fishers of men, he took them
in their own Trade, and by a great draught of Fishes, caused them to follow
him.

And here, because these Arabians were Astrologers, and well versed in the
Stars, he calls them to himself by a Star.

And the day upon which this portion of Scripture is read, is called not only
Epiphany, because that day Christ showed the power of his Deity, at a wedding
in Cana of Galilee, John 2.11.
by turning their Water into Wine; and so called Wine-drinkers to himself by
Wine.

Not only Theophania, because that day there was a Manifestation of the
Trinity, Math 3.16.
the Father in a Voice, the Son in the Water, the Holy Ghost in a Dove; and
so calls Antitrinitarians to the acknowledgement of a Trinity in the Creator
by a Demonstration of a Trinity in the Creatures.

But also Epiphania, because that day Christ appeared to these Astrologers, or
Magi, or Wise men, and caught and taught them in their own Art, by the
direction of a Star.

So it is thought by some Clerks, and those no mean ones, That upon Twelvthday,
though in diverse years, those three Miracles were wrought, and particularly by
Bishop Maximus, saying, Hom. 1. de Epiph.
Hodie stella Magos duxit ad praesepium; Hodie Aquae vertuntur in vinum; Hodie
baptizatus est Christus; This day Christ turned Water into Wine; this day
Christ was baptized by Saint John, and this day Christ led the wise men to
himself by a Star.

2. And this secondly to tell you, Gentlemen of this Art, that you must-pitch
your Thoughts higher then your Eyes, and from the starry heaven which you gaze
on, reflect sometimes into the Allegorical Heaven of and in your selves, and
sometimes mount up to the Empyreall heaven of God and his Angels.

-- Unaquaeque anima est Coelum, Every soul is a kind of Heaven, says St.
Bernard, having the greater and lesser Light within himself to govern him,
the one in the Day, the other in the Night; the Sun of his Understanding to
govern him in the day of his prosperity, by way of providence, and the Moon of
Faith, with the lesser Stars of other Graces, which are the fruits of Faith,
to govern him in the night of Adversity, by way of Confidence and Dependence.

Only let this Sun of your Understanding continue bright, and not be clouded
with any sullen or sinful passion; let this Moon of your Faith wax, and not
wane into any panick or servile fear, and those Stars of other Graces be fixed,
and not fall or err.

Let these Lights in thee, the Allegorical Sun, Moon, and Stars, do to men
what the Literal Lights in Heaven do to thee, shine before others, that they
may be stirred up to glorify thy Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 6.6.
and then you need not doubt but God will glorify you, for they that be wise
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, Dan. 12.2
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.

When you consult your Ephimerides about your next Eclipse, take heed, that in
the mean time, there be no Eclipse upon thy Soul. The Eclipse of the Sun is
caused by the Interposition of the Moon, and the Eclipse of God by the
Interposition of thy sins: Pray therefore with David, Psalm.
Lord, show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant.

When thou beholdest any blazing Star, Comet, or prodigious Sign, remember
the world shall one day be burnt with fire; and take thou heed thou kindle not
Gods wrath with more fuel of thy sin, lest thou be burnt with the world.

In a word, when thou contemplatest the beauty of the Stars, and delightest
thy self in the sweetness of thine own profession, take one pitch higher, and
say, Si talis in Creatura, qualis in Creatore, if there be such beauty in the
Stars, that are but Creatures, what beauty is there in God that made them all?

There, there settle your Souls, and that your Souls may there be settled:
settled there now by a Contemplation, and settled thereafter by Possession:
follow one Rule of your own Astronomy, and follow another Rule of our
Divinity, and so happily may we and you agree together on Earth, and dwell
together in Heaven.

1. Your own Rule is Opticall; and it is this, The higher you go, the greater
you know the Stars above, and the lesser are things below: Now you are below,
and practice no more knowledge then them that are below you, how like
Mole-Hills, like Moates, like Nothings seem the Stars? and the Earth like
Mountains, like Rocks, like Worlds? but when you are above, how like a World
feemes every Star, and this World like an Atome?

Proportionably is Grace; is every Grace of God great and glorious in the
Perspective of thy Faith? Is Sin, is every Sin vile and contemptible even in
the Optic of thy Sense? Is the favor of God in the pardon of thy ^ins, and
the hope of everlasting life glorious and wonderful in thy Apprehension? why
then thou art become a Divine Astrologer, and thy Stars have led thee unto
Christ, and there I leave thee, and that I may not leave my self behind thee,
I give thee

2. Secondly this Rule of Divinity, and it is Practical; He that ascended is
the same that descended. Ephesians 4.9.


Your Rule is probable and conjecturall, this is certain and experimental;
Christ has tried it, and Saint Paul confirms it, and we can give
Demonstrations for it, One I offer you.

No Rule so sure to convey water to the top of an high Tower, as to let it fall
at first exceeding low; so if ever you will have your good Stars lead you
unto Christ, let first your bad Sins lay you very low, that God may come to
you, to your humble souls, The humble soul being that Bethlehem which God
chiefly delights to dwell in.

This is the first foot of Jacobs Ladder, and let it be the first foot too of
your Jacobs Staff; Patience the next step; the next round be Charity, and the
upmost Faith.

But let all these be fixed like the Stars; not wandering, like the Planets.

Let not any prosperous wickedness, got by Mars, turn the Basis of your
Humility.

Let not any reproachful language, though from the Dog-starre of Obloquie and
Detraction, move your Patience.

Let not any action of Unkindnesse or Demerit, though from the Vulture Star
of unthankfulness, break your Charity.

Let not any Transgression of Drunkenesse, or Uncleanness, or whatsoever else,
though from the merry or melancholy Star of Jupiter or Saturn, shake your
Faith.

Keep these fixed, and you shall be fixed; fixed in a Heaven upon Earth, by
Sanctification, and fixed in the Heaven above Earth, by Glorification: Both
which I wish you, you, and my self, and all.

3. And that we may all be here and there fixed: One word more I speak to you
all.

Behold these Magi, these Wisemen, these Astrologers, laden with Gold,
enflamed with Myrrh, and hallowed with Frankincense; and go you, and do
likewise, offer unto Christ the Gold of your Love and Charity, the Myrrh of you
Tears and Repentance, and the Frankincense of your Prayers and Praises.

Or, as S. Augustine has it, Adorate corporibus, veneramini officiis, honorate
Muneribus; Adore Christ with your Bodies, worship Christ with your Souls, and
bless Christ with your Goods.

With your Bodies, because he is a King, with your Souls, because he is God,
with your Goods, because he is Man.

So most of the Fathers have glossed upon these words, L. 2. in loc.
Aurum Regi, Thus Deo, Myrrham morituro, sive viro, says S. Ambrose, They
offer him Gold as a King, they offer him Frankicense as God, they offer him
Myrrh as a Man that was to dye for all men.

Ut Regi aurum, ut morituro Myrrham, Dohum. Christi Genesis
ut Deo thus obtulerunt, says S. Basil; By the oblation of their Gold they
acknowledge him a King, by the oblation of their Frankincense they acknowledge
him to be God, and by the oblation of their Myrrh they believed in him as, and
acknowledged him to be the Mediator betwixt God and Man.

And so Hilarious, In auro Regem, In thuro Deum, Can. 1. in Mat.
In myrrha hominem confitantur; and all the Fathers, nemine contradicente,
without the exception of one say the very same: All whom I may sum up in the
Christian Poem, Aurea nascenti fuderunt munera Regi,
Thura dedere Deo, Myrrham tribuer sepulchro.


Did these Astrologers go to him with full hands, confessing his Regality by
their Gold, his Divinity by their Frankincense, his Mortality by their Myrrh?

And shall we, that are Christians, Deuteronomy. 16.16.
go to him empty handed? Absit, for shame! Thou shall not appear before me
empty, was Gods command upon the Jews; and the morality of it binds us
equally with them, and if we are Divites in Crumena, we must not be pauperes in
Conscientia; if we have rich Purses, we must not have poor Consciences; wealth
in our own houses must send Charity into the poor men's Boxes; as God has
offered to us, so we must offer unto God.

Say not, These Astrologers had the advantage of you, for they could go to
Christ in his Cradle, but you cannot reach your Gifts unto him, because he is
in Heaven; for you may as well offer unto him as they did.

You see him, or you may see him with as clear eyes as they did, In minimis, in
the distressed Members of his Body, wanting relief; in the meagre Infants of
his Cradle, starving for want of food; in the naked Limbs of his Body, poor
Soldiers shivering for want of rags to cover them; in the innocent parts of
his Soul, ignorant silly people perishing for want of instruction.

Nor let any of you say, I have no Riches to relieve, I have no Wisdom to
instruct, I have no Knowledge to inform; For God requires not of thee what
thou have not, but what thou have.

If thou have Wealth, offer the plentiful Gold of thy Charity, if thou have
Wisdom, offer the wholesome Frankincense of thy Admonition; if thou have both,
offer both; if thou have neither, yet thou have the Myrrh of thy Tears and
Repentance to offer.

Pro Myrrha lachrimas, Auro cor porrige purum,
Pro Thure ex humili pectore funde preces:
Offer to God, instead of Gold a pure Heart, instead of Frankincense a pure
Devotion, instead of Myrrh a pure Repentance.

So King David, Psalm. 141.2.
Let thy prayer be set forth before him as Incense.

So King Solomon, Cantic. 5.5.
Let thy Eyes (like the Hands of the Church drop down sweet smelling Myrrh.

So the King of Kings, Prove. 23.26.
and God of Gods, My Son give me thy heart, (that is as good as Gold.)

With these Offerings thou will make the Angels to rejoice, and fill them with
Joy: For, there is joy amongst the Angels for one sinner that repents, and
thou shall be filled with joy thy self, here in the peace of Conscience, and
hereafter in the peace and presence of God. Which the God of peace grant you,
for the Prince of peace his sake, Jesus Christ. Amen, Amen.

To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory now and
for ever Amen.

FINIS.

