THE JESUIT THE CHIEF, If not the only State-Heretique in the World.

OR, The Venetian Quarrel.

Digested into a DIALOGVE.

BY THO: SWADLIN, D. D.

Bernard, Epist. 256. Quale est hoc, Principatum tenere, and Ministerium
declinare?

Printed in the Year, 1647.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, My very munificent Friend, Sir GEORGE GRYMES.
Noble Sir,
IN the following Papers (which are but a Translation of Eight Propositions, as
they were canvased by two learned Roman Catholics) you will meet with some
Primitive Learning under the name of Orthodox, and that will delight you; you
will meet with some Modern Learning under the name of Hetrodox, and that will
not displease you: In both you will find the business of Secular and
Ecclesiastique Power at full discussed, which will be no great burden for you
to read; and a great happiness to my self, that the world may therein see J
am neither Popishly affected, nor ingratefully infected, since these lines
walk under your Protection, (no friend to Popery, a great friend to Piety) and
are Dedicated to you as a Tithe of that Gratitude, which is necessarily due
from,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, T. S.
London, Nov. 19. 1646.
THE FIRST DAYS CONFERENCE UPON The first PROPOSITION. HETRODOX.
IS the wind in that door Orthodox? Are you become so deplorately blinded, and
yet honored with the reputation of a wel-founded Roman Catholic? Is it
possible that any Roman Catholic can swallow the sweet Pill (but most deadly
poison) of heretical Pravity, to assevere so distinctly as you have now done,
and to believe withal so confidently as you now pretend, the power of secular
Princes, or of our Holy Father himself, as a temporal Prince, does claim a
kind of Birthright by lawful derivation, Immediately as it were from the
Almighties throne, and without exception?

Orthodox, The wind blows where it lists Hetrodox; But whether I be now
transformed into a Baertimeus, or turned blind as a Beetle, in this
Theological Argument, whether I have taken down a drachme, or so much as only
a drop of heretical poison in this dogmaticall assertion; I neither intend to
show my self so selfe-conceited, neither purpose to look so big upon the
tip-toe of my own private spirit, as to deprive your critic faculty of any
fair and free liberty, to censure the verdict of my Position at parting when
the Sun sets.

Hetrodox, Fall then roundly and closely to the main of the first Proposition,
I bar all manner of byes.

Orthodox, Your will be done Hetrodox: Then first I take this for granted, that
all Dominion and Servitude, that all Power in the Prince to command, and all
obligation of Subjects to perform with promptitude all due and requisite
obedience unto the just and lawful behests of their lawful Princes, by the
law of nations, is grounded and built upon one of these four Bases; Election,
Inheritance, Donation, or Law of Arms; I mean Sword-Law, and right by valiant
Conquest; So that all Princes advanced to the glorious Throne of sacred
Supreamacy, or supreme Principallity, by any one or more of these four Bases
of State, are condignly to be enrolled and registered in the most noble Canon or
Calender of lawful Princes: And all such Princes (I religiously profess) in
my conscience are crowned with Authority and Power immediately from God, to
command, to enact Statute Laws, to exact due Tributes, to hear and determine
causes, to inflict capital and other corporal punishments, to impose
Pecuniary Mulcts of penal Statutes, upon all their natural Subjects without
exception.

Hetrodox, By these last words, without exception, whether mean you exception
of Subjects, or exception of Power, or exception of Cause? If the first, surely
your Proposition is erroneous; For what Power can secular Princes carry over
Clerics, exempted (as you know right well) from temporal power, at least by
man's law, as it is held by all Catholic Authors; yea, by Gods Law also, as
before our parting I hope so materially and substantially to verify, that you
shall be enforced to confess your error, to cry Peccavi, and glad withal, to
deliver me your weapons in this Field.

If you mean exception of Power, your Proposition is Heretical; For no Power
of any Christian Prince or Monarch, can be free from subjection (in some sort)
unto the power of Christ's Vicar, thr universal Pastor and Head of all
Christians, whether Princes o-private persons. If you mean exception of Cause,
your Propositir on does smell very strong of like pestilent contagious heresy;
Fot it is the doctrine of sacred Scripture, and holy Councels, That spiritual
causes are not summonable, nor bound or tied to there Courts of Layics, not
compatible of trials in the King's Bench, or Court of Common Pleas, but in
Consistorian Courts, and before Ecclesiastical Tribunals alone; in which point
all the Doctors, as well Divines as Canonists, with unanimous consent do jump
and accord.

Orthodox, Not so Hetrodox, saving your deep, and, as well may be avouched,
your infinite reading: D. Medina for one dissents, and holds hard for the
contrary; yet a Doctor Marshaled in the rank of solid, Catholic and
Classical Authors, He delivers for positive doctrine, that exception or
exemption of Ecclesiastics in temporal crimes and causes, is not commanded or
prescribed of Almighty God, in the whole volumne of the Bible; Medin. de
Restitut. q. 15.
His express and formal words be these, Videtur oppositum esse verum etc. The
contrary assertion seems to go forth, and bravely to march with flying Colors
of truth; for the purpose; That after abolishing of the old Law, there is not
found any one obligatory precept in Gods word, for the exempting of Clericks or
Ecclesiastics from the power of the secular arm and sword; I rather choose to
affirm and maintain, that in former ages Clericks have obtained, and for the
times present with great happiness do enjoy their exemption by the munificent
Grants, by the gracious Charters, by the indulgent privileges of their noble
Princes* again, Denique hac ratione unica, etc. To conclude, this one argument
hits the Nayl on the head, drives it home, and hits the Bird, like a Bolt in
the right Eye: we can profess and justify no point of doctrine to be grounded
upon Gods Law or word, except it can be warranted by some authentical
testimony of the same divine law or word; Exempting of Clericks has no clear
warrant passable or triuable in the law of God: ergo, Couar. lib. pract. q. C.
1^. conclu. 2.
etc. Couaruvias also stands as firm like a Colosse for the same assertion. In
rebus temporalibus et in criminalibus quae spiritualia non attingunt, etc. In
temporal matters and in criminal causes, having no correspondency with
spiritual cases, the persons of Clericks and their possessions or estates, are
not by Gods word exempted from the jurisdiction of their secular Princes.

Hetrodox, You know Couaruvias is challenged by Cardinal Bellarmine of
partiality for the jurisdiction of the most Catholic King.

Orthodox, And you know Cardinal Bellarmine is no less partial for the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; It serves my turn, and makes much for my
purpose, that Couaruvias holds both touch and weight, with other sound and
Catholic Doctors, that he passes current coin for an Author that builds not
only upon the strong foundations of most solid and valid arguments, Inno. de
major. and obed. C. 2.

Ferrar. in pract. tit. de confess plenam Col. 1.

Bellar. lib. decler. cap de immunitatib.


but also upon right authentical testimonies of diverse famous writers;
Victoria and Sotus have sung the same note with Medina and Couarruvias
pre-alledged; yea, Cardinal Bellarmine himself harps now and then upon the
same string: But what need I to make muster of many Authors, when your self
Hetrodox (howbeit I suppose full sore against your will) have sufferred no
less, and the very same to drop and slip out of your own learned lips before?
Namely, that Clericks are exempted, at least by man's law, as it is held by all
Catholic Authors; in which words you grant and acknowledge by a kind of
tacit and implicit confession, that all Catholic Authors hold exempting of
Clericks, not warrantable by Gods Law: with all the former Authors Chrysostom
concurres, or to say better, he precurres them all, Manifestum est quod ista
omnibus imperentur, etc. Who does not see that all sorts and degrees of
Subjects, (not only Seculars but also Regulars and Priests) are included
within the circle of this Precept, and must come under the Lee of this
Apostolical Rule? So that neither God himself, nor his divine Appostle who
treats of Secular Power from the mouth of God, has exempted or excepted any
sort or degree of Subjects from the lawful power of secular Princes; But what
quarrel have you to pick, or what exceptions can you take to the word
immediately?

Hetrodox, Not few Orthodox, and more perhaps then your Ears are well able to
brook, or your Stomach to digest: For this word may be taken two manner of
ways; First, it may signify, that Princes as they are Sovereigns and
Superiors, have a superlative and absolute power immediately from God, to
command their Subjects; that is, the commandment of Subjects due obedience to
their lawful superiors and liege-lords, is immediately descended or derived
from God himself; Now this I grant is true, and of no good Christian to be
denied or gainsaid: For how can he be Supreme Lord of Subjects, who has no
lawful power from God to command his People, or he a Subject, who is not
liable to the bond of due obedience? This duty the Lord himself commands in
holy Scripture. The light also of natural reason clearly shows the same duty,
that every Subject should render and yield entire obedience to his own lawful
Superior; But now again Orthodox, the same word immediately may import and
bear this other signification, that secular Princes challenge this or that
People for their own People and Subjects, by the immediate grace and gift of
God. For example, The most Christian King does, or may challenge the French in
this latter sense; The most Catholic King does, or may lay claim to the
Spanish in the same con-construction; The most illustrious Re-publique of
Venice does or may pretend the right of Domination over the Venetian, in the
same signification of the word: So that by consequence, all the said three most
renowned States, are invested immediately from God, with absolute Power over
their several Subjects and native People: Now this latter construction of the
word, is dipped in a deep die, to carry a base tincture of manifest falsehood; I
appeal herein Orthodox to some of your own premises, for in the opening or
dilating of your Proposition, you fairly affirmed before, that Principalities
and Kingdoms fall to great men's fortunes and shares four several ways,
namely, by Election, Inheritance, Donation, Law of Arms, or right of Conquest;
Now these Titles (all men know) are not divine or of God, but humane or of men.
If any one therefore shall aspire and ascend to the summity or sublimity of
temporal dominion and power over this or that People by the steps or degrees
of those Titles, the said power falls not as it were into his lap, or to his
lot immediately from God, with some (...), but by mediate proceedings and
actions of State, namely by means of Election, as in the case of German
Emperors, and Kings of Polonia, or by means of inheritance, as in the case of
Spanish and French Kings; or by means of Donation, as in the case of Princes
holding their States in Fee, or by means of just War and Conquest, as in the
case of Duke Godfrey, and other Christian Princes, Conquerers of the Holy Land
by the dint of Sword. If the most Christian King were now questioned, by what
right he holds the Crown and Kingdom of France, would he answer, by right from
God? No verily, but by right of hereditary succession. If the Venetian Duke
were interrogated, by what right he claims the Government of that most
illustrious Principality and State, would he answer, by divine right? No such
matter, but by election of the Senators; And herein lies the difference between
the Ecclesiastical Principality of our holy Father, and all other secular or
civil Principalities: the Pope has power over all Christians, not only by
the universal right of Gods holy ordinance, whereby superiors have right of
rule and command over their Subjects, but likewise because by the immediate
gift of God he is Lord of all Christians, as of his right and proper vassals;
And howsoever he is advanced to the sublimity of St. Peter's Chair, by the
immediate suffrages and election of the most illustrious Lords the Cardinals:
yet his power is not derived from the said Lords (as water is derived from a
Spring by Pipes or Channels) but immediately from God, the perpetual and
inexhaustable Spring or Fountain of all Power, who said to Peter, Pasce Oves,
feed my sheep: the reason, because the Pope may go whistle for any the least
power to alienate any one Province, or City, or individual person, from his
Apostolic Primacy; neither is it possible for the Pope to be true Pope, and
not superior to all degrees of Christians, as Christ's Vicar; the reason,
because the Title of his power is divine.

On the other side, Kings and secular Princes may be deprived of their Subjects
in whole or in part, it is in their own power, hand, and free liberty to make
alienation of some City or whole Province, to bring the same under some
foreign Prince his yoke, and thereby to strip themselves of all power over
the said City or Province; The reason, because they have no just and true title
to their power from the immortal God, but only from creatures of mortallity.
In like manner, no mortal creature, no sublunary power, is able to pull so
much as one feather out of the Popes powerful wing: It is neither the College
of Cardinals, nor general council, nor Pope himself, that can derogate, or
diminish, retard or impair the least portion of Papal power; The reason,
because Papal power proceeding immediately from God, is totally and
universally free from Subjection to the will of creatures. In secular
Principalities, experience teaches us many times the contrary events: the
point of their power is now and then rebated by rebellious insurrections of
their own Subjects, or by cunning practices and hostile acts of some more
potent Princes, yea, sometimes Monarchical Principalityes are changed into
free States: and on the contrary, free States into Monarchies, because their
power has no immediate derivation from God, but mediate from the consent and
assent of men.

To be short. If Secular Princes be not gifted with Power and Authority from
God Immediately over the persons of pure Laics, how much less are they armed
with power over Ecclesiastic Estate, exempted from the said power by the Law
of God and Man? whereof I hope to make before our parting evident
demonstration. Your Proposition therefore might have been better couched and
put down in these terms: Secular Princes are not girded with any Sword of
power immediately from God over their Laic Subjects, but only by means of
some lawful Title from their people; and against Clerics or Ecclesiastics
within their Dominions, they have not so much as a short dagger or a small
bodkin of Power and Authority to draw forth, neither from God nor Man.

Orthod. With great authority and confidence, Hetrod. you have taken the pains
to utter and say just nothing: The word Immediately, against which you take so
great a stitch, is used by Navarrus, a most grounded and Catholic Doctor. In
the Definition of Secular Power, comparing the same with Ecclesiastic, as you
have now done, he is positive in these words, Cap. Novit de Iudi. Notab. 3.
Potestas Laica praedicta, etc. The said Secular power comes immediately from
God, for this reason, because men are furnished with Natural Reason engrafted
by God himself; and this Natural Reason concludes Power to be due and
requisite over man, propter bonum regimen eorum, as tending and availing to
their better, more formal, and more orderly Government. Navarrus for this
opinion, or verdict rather, cites and produces Durandus, Johan. Parisiens.
Almanius, Gerson, with some other Catholic Authors, and then draws the whole
to this fair head: As the Precept against Murder is by the Law of Nature
Immediately from God, so the Authority of Secular Princes against all
Delinquents, to inflict upon them capital penalties according to the merit of
their cause, for the tranquillity and better Polity of the State or
Commonwealth, is immediately from God alone.

True it is, that some before others are mounted to the Chair of Sovereign
State, as it were upon the backs and shoulders of men, I mean, by humane
means; as either by Inheritance, by Election, by Donation, or by the Law and
Right of Arms, as I have laid it down for an overruled Case and Principle in
Common Law; And now I avow punctually for the purpose; The very same principle
can be no cross or over-thwart-barre to the abatement of any honor in the
arms of a secular Prince his power, or to hinder his power from being the
immediate gift of God; neither can it be any forcible instrument or Engine to
make the said power the immediate act or work of man.

Romans 13.
First, not of men, as you pretend, because all power is of God, as S^. Paul
affirms in express words: But authority of Princes is a power; item no
mortal creature (I speak not now of supreme Princes) has power to bind the
conscience of any other unto the precise keeping of his commands, whereas the
supreme secular Prince is invested with power to bind the consciences of all
his own Subjects, to the due obedience of his Decrees, Laws, Acts, or
Statutes; The secular Prince therefore is not armed with authority by mortal
men, but by the immortal and eternal God himself: St. Paul frames the same
argument and reason, Whosoever resists the Power, resists (the Apostle says
not man's Ordinance) the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.
and they that resist, shall receive to themselves judgment.

Now then, to take you up at your own weapon; As Papal power is immediately
from God (says Hetrodox) howsoever the Popes election is acted by the
suffrages and votes of Cardinals, who are but men, so howsoever the means or
manner, whereby the Prince is assumed or exalted to his throne, be humane or of
men, his power also (if the Popes be so, or any such at all) must needs be of
God.

An example in Philosophy will make this point clear; The reasonable soul is
not infused or inspired of God into man's body, before the same body be fitted
and accommodated with all the organs or instruments, and with all natural
dispositions, of nec ssity required to make the body a fit receptacle for the
soul: Now all these abilities and means are termed by Philosophers Conditio
sine qua non, the condition without which the body at no hand can be framed or
built for a convenient House, Tent, or Tabernacle, for the immortal soul.
This notwithstanding* shall any man's boldness abuse his reason so far, as to
make him affirm, the reasonable soul is not created and infu^ed in man's Body
immediately of God, but mediantibus dispositionibus, by means of the corporal
dispositions first fitted and prepared in the body? Far be it from any
Christian tongue to utter so great blasphemy; In like manner, howsoever the
means by which a Prince is mounted to his throne, are but humane, or of men,
(and that is the condition without which the Prince is not installed in his
throne) yet his power to rule and govern the Stern of State, is immediately of
God.

But I must here take you Hetrodox at your word, as one convicted by the power
of truth it self, and acknowledge (so that Habemus confitentem reum) the word
immediately may be taken (as you contend) in two several senses, and this for
the first, Princes have immediate power from God to command their subjects,
that is to say, the precept or law that binds to the obedience of Princes our
lawful Superiors and Lords, is immediately from God; and this I grant is true;
now albeit you here seek to confound the word Power, and the word Command, yet
according to your own sense and acceptance of the words, they both do signify
the same thing, to all intents and purposes; And in very deed, the word Power
would be better expressed, by the word authority, or jurisdiction; For so the
original (...), which directly signifies authority to command, would be
translated and turned, for the avoiding of equivocation.

Briefly; The doctrine by me propounded in these two words, immediately, and
without exception, is not only Catholic and sound, but likewise justified by
verdict of your own mouth; And howsoever you pretend (to what purpose I cannot
see) to mark this doctrine with a black coal, yet by the just judgment of
God, you leave it neither stamped nor smeared in face or front, with any kind
of odious impression and stigmaticall reprehension, but rather give it a kind
of stronger back, and more pithie, with your own approbation.

As for the long parallel, or (to give it a better title) the large comparison
which you frame between the Layic and Ecclesiastic power, it is altogether
extravagant, needless, and from the purpose; for whosoever contends for the
Layic power to be immediately of God, and without exception in temporalibus,
does neither directly, nor by consequence deny Ecclesiastic power to proceed
immediately from God, and to be without exception in spiritualibus, which we
Roman Catholics must affirm, and are bound to uphold.

Hetrod. Whatsoever you dream of my approbation, you shall never draw me to the
bent of your Bow, nor work me to any good persuasion of your doctrine, with
all your persuasions, uttered (as before) by wholesale and in gross; except
you shall deal with me now also by retayle, and shall nick up some error
(keeping a kind of tallie) in the several joints and branches of my last
passage, making my said Errors in particular, not only visible, but also
palpable.

Orthod. I refuse not the Exception, and therefore will presently nick up (to
use your own term,) or point out your errors one by one.

1. Whereas two contradictories are not possible to be true both at once, in
one and the same respect; you have given and granted the honor of truth to
both: For first you affirm that Princes, as higher powers and superiors, are
invested with power immediately from God to command their Subjects; Then as one
presently, even in the turning of a hand, repenting himself, and falling from
his Tenent, you sing out and warble these notes of a contrary air: If the
power of secular Princes over Laics be not immediately from God, much less
over Clerics; and a little after, The Proposition therefore would stand more
firm, it would go more straight and bolt upright in these terms; Secular
Princes have no power over their Layic Subjects immediately from God: Now
either the one of your two Propositions must be true, and the other false, or
else Hetrodox who holds them both for true, must needs be tainted with a
visible and palpable error.

2. You confound title of power with power it self, which are directly
distinct, both for matter and word; Title is Conditio sine qua non acquiritur
Potestas. It is the condition, without which power is not settled in the Prince;
Power is that authority and jurisdiction wherewith Princes are invested
immediately of God so soon as they are entitled thereunto by man: This was
manifestly declared before, by a similitude taken from the reasonable soul;
and your self Hetrodox have been forced to grant it against your will, for you
pass it current and uncontrouleable in the Popes case, and affirm that
howsoever his Holiness is elected and advanced to the Papacy by the votes of
men, yet he receives power to sit in Peter's Chair, and to govern the Ship of
the Church immediately of God.

3. You condemn it as heretical, to hold, that secular and temporal power is
not ordained and made subject by God himself to spiritual power: But hear me
good Sir with patience, you can allege no text of holy Scripture, you can
produce no definitive Sentence or determination of the Church, which may stand
for a clear and indubitable Oracle, that Princes, as they are Princes, are in
any degree of inferioritie and subjection unto the Pope; but only (to speak
in the sense and phrase of us Roman Catholics) as they are Christians: when the
world was not so happy to be honored with Christian Princes, but was governed
and commanded wholly by heathen Lords and Rulers, doubtless no Prince then
regnant was (in regard of Princedome) the high Bishops Vass^ll, or in state of
subjection to the Pope: But as Chrysostom testifies, the chief Bishop was
then Lorded of pagan, or infidel, and heathen Princes, to whom (like a
Freeholder or Copie-holder) he ought both suite and service, as to his Lords
paramount in temporalties; Etiamsi Apostolus, etiamsi Evangelista, be thou
Apostle, or be thou Evangelist, neque tamen pietatem, id est, religionem
(according to the greek word (...)) subvertit istae subjectio, howbeit by such
estate or degree of subjection, true piety, that is to say, true Religion, is
neither subverted nor yet undermined; Laic power therefore shall not put either
head or hand (like an Homager) under the girdle of Ecclesiastic power, ratione
potestatis, as it is a power; For the layic Prince, (I speak still as a Roman
Catholic) is only so far forth subject unto the chief Bishop in
spiritualities, as the said Prince is a christian; in which case the Prince and
every private person are equal, or in one and the same condition; And
therefore layic power, as it is a power, is not subject or subordinate unto
Ecclesiastic power, save only so far forth as the said layic power is
exercised by one that is a christian Prince, as every other christian is a
christian. This makes the power of the Grand-Seignior, of the great Cham, and
of the Persian Monarch, to have not so much as the least dependency upon the
Popes power; And yet I trow, you know it is a power, and that an absolute
power; to which cause (if I take not my mark amiss) you crowded and slily
shuffled in the word christian, when you said, the Pope had power over all
christians; wherein you speak this language, this in effect and no more; That
all are subject, not ratione potestatis, in respect of power, but ratione
christianitatis, in respect of christian profession; and so you speak not ad
idem, to the point which you undertook to prove.

4. A Prince (you say Hetrodox) being demanded by what right he holds the
Regal Scepter, and possession of his Crown and Kingdom, will never avouch the
law of God in his defense thereof, but either his right of inheritance, or else
his right by the law of just war, and of lawful Arms, or of election, or of
donation; from which you infer, that his power is not immediately cast upon
him by Gods gracious gift; I must now be bold to re-joyne, and come upon you
with an express negative. The Prince (be you Hetrodox well assured) will never
suffer so lame, so loose, and so dishonorable stuff to escape his noble heart
or lips: but if any shall be more bold, then observant and respective, to
board his Highness with such a question, how came you Sir by that Sovereign
power and authority to govern and command your People? He would readily and
peremptorily shape him this religious and Prince-like answer, I received it as
the immediate gift of God; and asked or interrogated again, who gave him the
title and investiture of such power? his answer (to stop the interrogators
mouth) will be this in a word, I received it of men.

5. All Subjects that live (say you Hetrodox) within a Kings dominions, are not
his lawful Subjects, immediately by Gods holy ordinance; but all christians
are immediately the Popes vassals: Now you know (and no man better) that
Correllatives are simul natura, in a condition of relation by their proper
nature the one to the other; If therefore the secular and laic Prince have any
power to command his natural Subjects to live in the state of Subjects
immediately from God, then Obligation of all his natural Subjects to yield
their due Prince all due obedience of lawful Subjects, is in like manner
imediately from God: And as the title of a subject to this dominion, or
breaking of some penal Statute, or committing some notorious offense within
this dominion, makes me subject unto my Sovereign Lord the King, or the State:
So the character of a christian makes me a subject unto the Pope, at least as
we Catholics believe and teach: And as this man is not my King or Prince but by
his inheritance, election, etc. So none can be saluted and styled Pope, but by
Canonical and authentical election of the Cardinals. Now then as the
character of Baptism (say we) marks a man for the Popes lawful Subject, in
spiritualibus; Even so for a man to be born, or to break a penal Statute, (for
example) within the Venetian dominion and State, marks a man for the Venetian
Republics lawful Subject; and to be born, or to break a penal Statute within
the Kingdom of France, marks a man for the French Kings lawful Subject.

6. Again you have put down and vouched one point for positive and certain,
which is by catholic Doctors held to be dubitable and questionable, namely,
whether the Popes power and authority, when he is gone the beaten way of all
flesh, does rest in the Church, or whether the Church remains void of such
authority and power so soon as the Pope breathes out his last gasp? Surely
those who stand tooth and nail for the Romish opinion (that I may take up the
Style of Navarrus) C. Novit.
will have all power whatsoever in the Roman Bishops, to be wholly derived from
the Pope, so that when the Pope dies, all the Bishops are at a stand, or
nonplus rather, not able to break, nor so much as once to bend or bow the
point of this pressing consequence, ergo when the Pope dies, the Prelates of
the Roman Church are cut off and barred of all their former authority:
whereupon they wheel and go round about the Bush, maintaining with might and
main (as if Hanibal the Carthagenian General were ad Portas, in Leaguer before
the very gates of Rome) that in the Church the foresaid Power is not inherent,
and yet is inherent in the Church, which is to utter and pour out dark
riddles or Delphian oracles, and to broach mysteries not intelligible; Yea it
is clear that Cardinal Bellarmine holds very firm and stiff, that when the
Pope dies, the said power vanishes like smoke out of the Church, for he
contends, that when the Prince dies, the regal authority lives and rests in
the community or whole body of Peers and people, at least for those Princes who
are mounted to Kingdoms or other States by election; but when the Pope dies,
then the papal authority lives not in the Cardinals by whom the Pope is
elected, nor yet in the Church: This opinion, howsoever defended and maintained
by Cajetane and those of Rome, is encountered and crossed with a contrary
opinion, held tooth and nayl by the Parisians, by the whole Sarbone in
general, and in particular, by Johan. Mayor, Ja. Almanius, Gerson, Cap. Novit
de Iudi. Notab. 3.
as it is testified by Navarrus; yea Navarrus himself marshals this opinion in
the rank of doubtful Assertions, howsoever Cardinal Bellarmine there sets
it down for certain, whereas in other passages he leaves it as doubtful.

7. You stand much for the word pasce oves, feed my sheep, as expressly and
personally spoken to Peter alone, and not likewise to the Church, or by name to
the rest of the Apostles. But I must now tell you Hetrodox, that many Doctors
do stand not only for the said words pasce oves, feed my sheep, but also for
the words dabo claves, I will give thee the Keys, to be spoken both alike
without all question unto Peter, howbeit in the person of the whole Church, as
the Parisians do both strongly and perspicuously prove. Nor can it be a good
consequence, that because feed my sheep, and I will give thee the Keys, were
both spoken to Peter, therefore the same words were not spoken to the rest of
the Apostles; for it is generally confessed and granted of all, that all the
Apostles were of equal authority, howsoever Peter for his faithful confession
made of Christ, as also for bearing a most remarkable excess of love and
affection to the person of Christ, might seem perhaps to deserve some title of
preheminency and prerogative of dignity above the other Apostles. The plain
verity hereof appears by that famous passage in the Gospel, where Christ
having most gracious and heavenly communication with all the Apostles together,
Mat. 18.
and as it were in a knot, vouchsafed to use the very same words unto them all,
that he had used unto Peter before, Quaecunque ligaveritis, whatsoever ye
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; Lib. 1. de Romans pont. C. 12.
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; of which
passage the most illustrious Cardinal Bellarmine himself has advisedly been
pleased to afford this fair exposition; est igitur communis, etc. It is the
common exposition of S. Jerome, Anselmus, Hilarious, with diverse other writers
upon this passage, Tract. 22. and 49. in Ioh.
as also of S. August. that our Lord there speaks concerning the power of the
Keys, whereby the Apostles and other successors of Christ do bind and loose
sinners; which power a little after the same Lord Cardinal affirms to be
understood, both concerning the power of order, Mat. 18.
and also concerning the power of jurisdiction, promised to the Apostles in the
foresaid passage, but fully and actually given to all the Apstoles by Christ,
when he said to them all, Joh. 20.
Peace be unto you; As my father has sent me, so do I send you, whereas the
power of order was given in the last Supper.

Now that pasce oves, feed my sheep, and tibi dabo claves, I will give thee
the Keys, when both were spoken to Peter, Tract. 50. in Joh.
were in like sort addressed to the Church; S. Augustine makes it manifest, by
his luculent authority, and testimony worthy of all credit, Si in Petro non
esset Ecclesiae Sacramentum, etc. If the Church was not in Peter sacramentally,
for certain the Lord Jesus would never have said to Peter, I will give unto
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven; And if these words were personally
spoken to Peter alone, then the power and use of the Keys rests not in the
hand of the Church; the action of binding and loosing is no action belonging to
the Church; but forasmuch as this power is exercised, and this action is
lawfully used by the whole Church; therefore Peter signified the Church, when
he received the Keys, and then he received the Keys, when Christ said unto
him, pasce oves, feed my sheep.

S. Augustine takes up the same conceit again in the very same Tract, And Leo
expounding the passage of I will give thee the Keys, concurres with S.
Augustine, transivit in alios Apostoles, etc. The virtue and efficacy of this
power was conveyed unto the rest of the Apostles, it was past over in Peter to
the principal and chief rulers of the Church. S. Cyprian hits the bird in the
right eye, Erant and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, etc. De simpl. Praelat.
The rest of the Apostles had equal share and portion with Peter in the
participation as well of dignity as of power; but because every beginning
springs out of unity, the honor of precedence or the primacy, was therefore
conferred or cast upon Peter, as upon one for all, to declare the unity of the
Church, or the Church to be but one. By all these passages, with many more in
the ancient Fathers and Catholic Doctors, it is clear concerning the authority
given to S. Peter, that in a like and equal degree it was conferred upon all
the Apostles, and the Church.

It shall suffice thus briefly to have touched, that you argue not upon a
certain and infallible ground, when you have thrust upon us the words pasce
oves, to have been spoken only to S. Peter, and not also to the Church, because
as well the promise of dabo claves, I will give the Keys, as the fulfilling of
the promise in pasce oves, feed my sheep, is no less applyable and
appropriate unto the other Apostles, and unto the Church, then unto Peter
himself, in the judgment of the Fathers; But I proceed to point out more of
your palpable errors.

8. The Pope (says Hetrodox) has no power to alienate any one Province from
his Papal and spiritual jurisdiction. Why sir, the Pope is not Lord over the
people of this or that Province, as they are Inhabitants of the said Province;
he is only their Pastor as they are Christians: In regard whereof he has no
power to alienate any one province, or anyone single person. First, because all
provinces are not belonging to Christians, neither in Freehold tenure nor in
sockage tenure, nor in any other lawful tenure. Secondly, because howsoever a
large part of Christendom takes knowledge of the Pope as of their superior,
and lives within the vergerie and precinct of his papal power, nevertheless
that superiority of the Pope is not founded nor grounded upon any right of
dominon; And where no dominion, there no alienation; I speak of such Princes as
are not subject unto the Pope in Temporalibus.

And is the chief Bishop no Lord, when he parts stakes with Christ himself
in the honorable Title of our Lord, and without addition is called our Lord,
even as Christ himself is called our Lord? No doubt, he is a great Lord,
according to the opinion, sense, and service of his devoted creatures: But let
his height and elevation be taken by the staff of that common Title, and
ordinary style, that he honors himself withal in his letters pontificiall,
when he writes himself Servus servorum, the servant of those that serve God,
and where then is his Lordship, or what is then become thereof? What dominion
in the servant of servants? No; we are to hold and believe the contrary,
because our sweet Savior Jesus has delivered and taught us the contrary: Said
he not unto his Disciples and Apostles, once upon a time at contention, Luke 22.
which of them should be the greatest, The Kings of the Gentiles do reign
over the Gentiles; but amongst you my Disciples there shall be no such matter;
but let him amongst you that is greatest, be as he that serves; To the same
purpose he said to his Apostles, John 20.
As my Father has sent me, so send I you: and how that? forsooth not in great
power and pomp, not in any altitude or excess of high majesty (as he shall
appear himself at his second coming) but in great humility, as himself came
at first, as Saint Bernard speaks. Ser. de Ad.
Yea S. Peter himself teaching the office of Pastors in the Church, commands
them to feed the flock of Christ which depends upon their charge, caring for
the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.
not by constraint, but with a willing mind, not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind, not as Lords over Gods heritage, but as fair ensamples to to the
Flock of Christ. Upon which passage, Ad Eugen. p. p.
that good Father has built and founded this Aphorism, Apostolis interdicitur
dominatio, indicitur ministratio; The Apostles are prohibited to lord it over
the Flock, and are expressly charged to walk in the state or quality of
servants to the Flock. Hence it is, that when the Lord Christ spoke to Peter,
he said not, Pasce oves tuas, Feed thy Flock, but Pasce oves meas, Feed my
Flock: For Christ alone is the chief Pastor, the only high Priest, having, as
the Apostle speaks, Heb. 7.
an everlasting Priesthood; He alone is the sovereign Judge, There is but one
Lawgiver and Judge, who is able to save and destroy. Jac. 4.
As for the Pope himself, and other Ecclesiastical Prelates, they are
dispensers or disposers of the secrets of God; 1 Cor. 4.
the Pope therefore who has nothing of his own, and proper or essential to
his Chair, Jure pontificatus, only and simply as Pope, or in right of
pontifical Priesthood, has no power at all to make alienation of any thing
whatsoever, but rather, forasmuch as his power is a spiritual power, and over
souls, he can make no alienation of souls from the dominion of Christ, who is
the head of the Church, but by making them Apostates and Run-agates from the
faith of Christ; for the Pope has none other power over souls, but spiritual
power, to convert and to direct souls unto life eternal. Which kind of
superiority, howsoever it is of spiritual jurisdiction, and of the greatest
eminency, yet forasmuch as it is not endowed with dominion, the Pope for that
reason, and in that sole respect (if there were no more) has no power to make
alienation of any one Christian soul or sheep, belonging to the Fold of Christ:
whereas the secular Prince has power to dispose of his own Teritories, Crown,
Lands, Demeasnes, and other possessions, by way of alienation; because he holds
them as things alienable; howsoever he has no power to take any such
extravagant and exorbitant courses in cases of hault importance and
consequence, Nisi in evidentem utilitatem, etc. except it be for some evident
benefit, and most honorable acquist unto the Crown and State.

9. You contend that secular Princes may suffer loss of their Subjects,
whereas the Pope lies not obnoxious or obvious to hazard in that kind. Oh that
I could here truly say, There speaks an Angel; but see, see, how many
Countries, Nations, Tribes, and Kindreds, have quitted their obedience to the
Roman Church. A word shall suffice, that most beautiful, flourishing,
nobilitated and renowned Cedar of Libanus, which in former ages has spread it
self both far and wide over the face of the universe, is now reduced to such
pight and pickle, that she hardly has two or three Arms left growing, to ward,
much less to beautify the whole aged Trunk.

10. Your tenth error lays it self open and perspicuous in a most
pernicious, nice, and tickle assertion; That neither by the General Council,
nor by the whole Corporation and body of Cardinals, the chief Bishops power
can suffer the least diminution; and yet by the Subjects, the secular Princes
power may be plumed of the bravest feathers. Touching the former branch of this
assertion, I have signified my mind before, that I have no humor to draw into
dispute, whether Papal power, when death seizes upon the chief Bishop his
mortal body, does remain in the Church, or whether the Council be above the
Pope: only this I hold to be indubitable, that In causa haeresis est supra
Papam, in case of Heresy the Council is above the Pope; and that in case of
scandalous offenses the Church never wanted requisite and convenient remedies
for the maintenance of her own rights and privileges against Popes themselves.
But what shall I say to the other branch of your assertion? Let us measure the
truth thereof by the standard of common reason: tell me then, what People has
power to crow over the authority and power of any Sovereign and absolute
Prince? Surely none, for by what authority? Who dares now show himself upon
the Stage, to broach and to draw the vessel of such pestiferous and scandalous
doctrine? What? Is there a power in any people to depose their lawful and
Sovereign Prince? To pare the nails of his power? To make a Sovereign Prince
In esse, no Prince De facto, but a mere Subject? To pull the Imperial Crown
from his head, the royal Scepter out of his hand, the purple robe, or mantle
royal from his shoulders, and to kick him after a sort, or to tumble him down
from his Regal Throne? Can there be a more desperate device, more dangerous
and forcible Bellows to blow the coals, and to kindle the flames of most
detestable rebellions, of odious and insupportable Seditions, of dreadful
conspiracies, of Absolom-like, or Judas-like treasons in the very bowels of the
State? I am loath to be a medler or a stickler, and to have any hand in choking
or drowning the venomous seeds, or in quenching the pestilentiall sparks of
these horible combustions with ink of Pen; It is for noble and heroical
Princes themselves, in these cases interested In Capite, to rowse up their
brave spirits, and (if the matter must needs come to blows) to draw the Sword
in defense of their own so just and honorable a quarrel: I must confess, it
sorts well with a Princes honor, to rule out his absolute power by his grave
Council of State, and the wholesome Laws of his Realms and Kingdoms, as it
concerns and beseems the chief Bishop himself, no less to square and to
compass out his power by the council of his Cardinals, provided they be no
way interested or engaged and overborn with passion, but still have an eye to
reflect upon the good of the Pope, and the good of the Church; always directed
by the laudable Canons, and the venerable Council. For howsoever the absolute
Prince perhaps, Non tenetur suis legibus quoad obligationem, is not liable to
the conserving of his own laws by plain terms of obligation, tenetur saltem
quoad directionem, yet without perhaps or peradventure, he stands bound to the
conserving of his own Laws, at least for the office and duty of direction.

11. You assume, or presume rather, that Monarchical Rule of Laic Princes, is
changed sometimes into free States, and free States of Laics, are sometimes
changed into Monarchies: But as for the Church, you affirm that she is not
subject like the Moon, unto the like mutation and change.

First, if the case be put concerning Christ himself, who is the supreme and
sovereign Pastor of the Church, there is no question but his Monarchy shall
stand, remain and endure for ever, without all change; Because of his Kingdom
there shall be no end; which comes not by reason of Title or no Title, (as you
seem to infer) but by reason that Christ himself is not subject unto the
least inward or outward violence, the proper cause of all such mutation and
change.

But make the case to concern Christ his Ministers, and who can deny the Church
was governed at the first after the form of a republic? Let men read the
fifteenth of the Acts, there Peter proposes the case, he puts down the
Proposition, he makes the Declararation: Simeon has declared as proloqutor,
then James gives the sentence or determination, as President of the Council;
wherefore my sentence is: Lastly, the Decree is ratified in the name of the
whole Assembly or holy Convocation, The Apostles, Elders and Brethren, unto the
Faithful, send greeting; It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, etc.

Whether S. Peter was then installed in the primacy, like the Venetian Duke,
who holding a most honorable pre-eminence and rank in that most illustrious
and renowned State, is nevertheless restrained and kept in a State of
Subjection to the whole body of that Republic; I leave the matter to be
discussed and sifted, by those whom it may or does chiefly concern. It
sufficiently makes for my purpose, that whereas Decrees were published in the
Primitive Church, under the name of the republic, or whole Assembly; now
edicts and constitutions are published under the name and authority of one
alone: And whether any mutation or change is imported thereby, speak your self
Hetrodox, by whom it has been denied before.

12. Your last error is palpable in inferring this for a reason of difference
between the two powers: The rule of the one is immediate from God, whereas the
title of the other has no such immediate derivation: here I say you miss the
mark, and err from the sense two manner of ways: For if by Title you mean
the Power, there is no such matter; because neither is the Title the power, nor
the power the Title. And if by Title you understand the means or manner of
reaching to the height or top of power, the one is no less humane or of men
then the other: The Conclave it self shall never be able to prove me a liar in
this point: but I here put on a step further.

The power Ecclesiastic is not in so precise manner, or direct degree immediate
from God, as the power secular: The reason, Because it is in the man Christ, or
in Christ as man; to wit, as in the Head of the Church, Joh. 22.
to whom alone it is immediately communicated of God; All Power is given to me
in Heaven and on Earth. So that all Ecclesiastic power, which the chief
Bishop challenges and assumeth to himself, is at best hand but a Delegate
power, communicated and committed to him by Christ: For Christ being that
Mediator between God and man; as the Apostle speaks, it must follow by good
consequence, that God gives the superiority and power Ecclesiastic to the chief
Bishop, not immediately without means, but mediately, or by means: id est,
Per Christum mediatorem, by the Mediator Christ, or by the means of Christ;
and this mediate power of the Pope is no Sovereign or Princely power, but a
Vicariate or deputed power; it imports not Dominion and Sovereignty, but rather
Service and Ministry. And hereupon the chief Bishop takes it for no
disparagement, for no vility, for no abatement in his high and honorable
Style, to be titled the servant of Gods servants, a Pastor, a Bishop, etc. All
which titles imply Ministry rather then Lordship, and humility rather then
greatness: Mat. 11.8.
For dominion and grandene are not suitable, not sortable, not compatible with a
chief Bishops house, as he is a Bishop, Luke 7.25.
but with Kings Courts.

Hetrod. I find Orthodox, that you have the Prince of Philosophers Eleuchs at
your fingers end; but withal that you are superlatively positive in your new
doctrine.

Orthod. Soft good Sir, a little more of your patience; neither my Doctrine
Hetrodox, nor new doctrine; It is no piece of my coin, but comes out of S.
Paul's Mint; yea rather it bears a right stamp of the Holy Ghost, speaking with
S. Paul's tongue, or at least writing with S. Paul's quill: The Apostles words
are thus couched and extant in the text; Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, Romans 13.1.
for there is no Power but of God: which text is expounded by Chrysostom in
these express terms, Facit hoc Ap. etc. The Apostles purpose and intent is
to show in these words, that Christ has not brought his divine Laws and
Ordinances into the Church, of any such intent and purpose, as to undermine and
subvert politic Regiments and civil States, but for the better establishing
and reforming of humane governments; And there the Apostle teaches withal,
that all Subjects and inferiors are bound to the due performance of his
Apostolical precept and charge; not only seculars, but also cloistered Monks
and Priests; for so much is testified and verified in his first words, Let
every soul be subject unto the higher Powers, be thou Apostle, Evangelist,
Prophet, or of any other degree, condition, or quality in state of a Subject;
Neque tamen pietatem subvertit ista subjectio, howbeit godliness by this kind
of subjection shall never come in danger to be subverted. Thus far
Chrysostom.

Hetrod. You go too far Orthodox; I neither can bear in my self, nor forbear
you any longer; The passage which you allege and quote out of Paul, treats of
power in a generallity, and teaches obedience of Subjects to their lawful
Sovereigns and Superiors in gross, or to Superiors of every sort and degree,
and of every calling, to be by Gods own Ordinance; It does not directly show,
that such and such persons are subject in their callings to the secular Prince,
by the immediate Ordinance of God. It is not denied that all power is of God,
but some power is immediately of God; Such was the authority of Moses and
Aaron, such also now is the Popes authority and power. Some other power is
likewise of God, but mediatly, as by means of succession, or of election, or
of some other humane title. And as for Chrysostoms testimony upon S. Paul's
passage, it is thus to be answered; The holy Father affirms not in his
testimony, that Priests and Monks are bound by S. Paul's precept and authority,
to render obedience unto secular Princes, but rather unto their own Superiors
whomsoever. It is no less true, that Ecclesiastics are bound to keep and
observe all such Laws politic and civil, as are not repugnant unto
Ecclesiastic Laws, and such as are necessary for common commerce between
Ecclesiastic and Laic persons: For in the course and carriage of temporal
affairs (as Pope Nicolaus writes unto the Emperor) the Church makes good use
of the Laws Imperial: Howbeit, Ecclesiastics are not bound and tied to such
observance of secular Princes Laws, by way of any force, but only by way of
direction: that is to say, Vi rationis, non vi legis, by virtue and right of
reason, but not by virtue and right of Law: Let me give this instance for
example, The temporal Prince commands a tax to be set upon the price of corn;
in this case Ecclesiastics are bound to buy and sell at such price: not because
they are bound to the said law, but because they are bound to buy and sell at a
just and lawful price, and because in reason of State, as also in common
reason, the price taxed by any lawful Prince within his own Teritories, must
pass the muster of lawful prices. Howbeit, say it comes to pass, that some
Ecclesiastic breaks the said law, yet can he not for such delict or
transgression of the Law, be fetched Coram nobis, before the civil Judge or
Magistrate by Sub paena, or by any other of the Kings Writs, nor can he be
punished by the Laic Prince, to whom he is not subject, but by process out of
his own Ecclesiastical Superiors Court.

Orthod, Let me have leave Hetrodox, to give you the stop in your full careere,
know you Hetrodox what you say? Is the Apostles text, Let every soul be
subject to the higher Powers, to be understood of power in general, and not of
secular Princes power? The best is, you avouch it with a bare affirmative, you
send it forth but bare and naked, without any upper Garment, not so much as a
Waste-coate either of double or single stuff, I mean, without any one reason
of proof at all. But how can it be possible, that Paul there speaks of power
in general? Is it not his full and whole scope in that Chapter, to stop the
mouths of those, who slandered the Christians of that age and time, to be
seditious routs, to profess very scandalous and pernicious doctrine? to wit,
that Christians were not bound to the obedience of secular Princes, but were
exempted from all secular jurisdiction? S. Paul then speaks to the point, and
says, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, i. e. to seculars of
eminent place and high charge; yea, the very epithet Sublimioribus, higher, is
a plain term of restraining the word Power; And that S. Paul did foster and
fancy none other conceit or meaning, I appeal to the judgment and authority
of Chrysostom, of Thomas, of Augustine, of Theophilact, expositors of the same
text, who agree not in consent like harp and harrow, but jump and accord all
in this one clear exposition, that Paul there speaks of subjection to secular
Princes: What mean you then Hetrodox, to deny this Orthodox exposition, and to
contend that S. Paul there speaks of power in general, and of papal power in
particular, which in S. Paul's time was hardly crept out of the shell, at least
not crept up to any degree of sublimity, but lay lowly couched, and louting
after a sort, (if it was then at all) in the person of one poor, one simple,
one lowly Apostle. Moreover, if S. Paul there speaks of power in general, how
can these words following in the same context, (Give tribute unto whom ye owe
tribute, for he does not bear the Sword for naught) be dexterly and aptly
applied or fitted to power in generals? The husband I trow has power over his
own Wife, the father over his own child, the pedant over his own Scholars;
what? Have these also power to exact lawful tribute, and to condemn their
Subjects unto corporal death?

Our Savior, to show that his Kingdom was not of this world, as he spoke to
Pilate, and that his power was none of those higher powers, meaning no terrene
or worldly Power, was pleased to use this argument: Joh. 18.
If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my Ministers fight without all
question; but now, because my servants fight not in my quarrel, that I might
not be delivered to the Jews, for certain my Kingdom is not from hence.

Exacting of tribute, and bearing the Sword to take vengeance on those that do
evil, is directly so proper to the secular Prince, and to his Ministers, that
by no means it can or may be applied to any other power: S. Paul therefore
speaks there in particular, and not in general; And howsoever it may seem,
that some things there spoke and taught by the Apostle, may by Allegory and in
a spiritual or mystical sense be applied to the spiritual Prelate; as by
name, that he bears the Sword, viz. of Gods word, or the Sword of
Excommunication; and that he exacts tribute, viz. of Tears and repentance; yet
whenever any dogmaticall point is handled, it is needless to seek a knot in
a rush, needless to hunt after Allegorical constructions and senses, most of
all needless to pick out contrary senses, as in our present case. This
doctrine makes very much for the firm establishing of the secular Princes
authority through all Christendom; and therefore in this argument or subject,
we neither ought nor need to run and fly unto allegories, but are to stand
firm, and to hold us fast by the proper and litterall sense of Scripture.

Hetrod. Hitherto you have argued and wrought upon the matter by reason; I will
not say how good or how strong: Let me now see how you can back and strengthen
the same point with solid authorities.

Orthod. The interlinear gloss upon the former passage of S. Paul, thus;
Potestatibus sublimioribus, id est, Secularibus bonis vel malis, To the higher
powers, i. e. To secular powers whether good or evil: A little after, thus, In
hoc quod sublimet, id est, mundanis, to higher powers, i. e. to worldly powers.
Irenaeus thus: Non diabolus determinavit hujus saeculi regna, etc. The
Kingdoms of this world are not disposed by the devil, but by God; for the
Kings heart is in the hand of God; Prove. 8.
By me Kings reign. S. Paul thus, Be subject to the higher Powers: Thus far
Irenaeus.

Tertullian thus, Quod attinet ad honores regum, etc. Lib. de Idolol. c. 25.
Touching honor due to Emperors and kings, we are commanded to carry our
selves in obsequious obedience at all times, according to the Apostles rule, Be
subject unto Princes and Magistrates.

S. Augustine thus, Quod autem ait omnis anima, etc. In expos. quar. propos. ep.
ad Bon.
And whereas S. Paul says, Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers,
for there is no power but of God: He therein deals and works by holy and
wholesome admonition, that none be puffed up with pride in this regard, that God
has called him to Christian liberty, that no man be persuaded to run out of
his rank, and to quit his assigned station, in the peregrination of this life;
that none be of this false belief, that he ought not stoop to submit his neck
unto the yoke of higher powers, ordained for the time to bear the chiefest
swaie in the mannaging, ordering, and governing of temporal affairs. For
whereas men consist of soul and body, so long as we continue in this life
temporal, and have use of temporal things, as good stays and supporters of
this life: We ought in matters pertaining unto this life, to be subject unto
powers, that is, unto men by whom humane affairs are ordered and administered,
with some degree of honor: thus far S. Augustine. In which passage I observe
these three things.

The first, S. Paul as he is there expounded by S. Augustine, speaks for the
particular of secular Princes, and not for the general, as you pretend. The
next, S. Augustine himself, a Bishop, of Episcopal authority and jurisdiction,
there says, Nos, We, even we Bishops must be subject unto the powers. The
last, S. Augustine uses an emphasis in the word Oportet, we ought, which word
implies a necessity of subjection.

By all the fore-alleadged authorities it well appears, how great difference
and large distance there lies, between your assertion, and the doctrine of the
holy Fathers, and by name of S. Augustine, the very light and bright shining
Sun, of all Divines. And what say you to that of Thomas? Circa primum, etc.
Touching the first, we are to consider, that some Christians in the primitive
Church denied (at least in word and assertion) subjection to terrene powers:
They pretended and stood upon their Christian liberty, obtained and purchased
in Christ, according to those words of Christ himself, If the Son shall make
you free, you shall be free indeed; Now the liberty granted by Christ, is that
spiritual liberty, by which we are freed from sin, as it is written, The law
of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus has freed me from the law of
sin and of death: whereas the flesh yet remains in bondage, and under the law
of sin. The man therefore once freed by Christ, shall never be obnoxious to
subjection, either spiritual or carnal, when Christ has delivered up the
Kingdom unto God, even the Father, and has laid aside or put down all rule,
with all authority and power; In the mean time, so long as we are clothed with
corruptible flesh, we must be subject unto Lords carnal; as it is written,
Servants be obedient unto your Masters according to the flesh, which is the
very same that S. Paul says, Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers.
Now higher powers are men placed in high and honorable dignities, to whom by
law and order of justice we owe subjection; Submit your selves to al manner of
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them which are sent of God. And whereas S. Paul says,
To the higher powers, it is a kind or manner of speech indefinite; meaning that
we must be subject unto all such persons, Ratione sublimitat^ officii, in
regard of their high office and place, though the men themselves are evil.
Servants be subject unto your masters, not only to the good and courteous, but
also to the froward. Thus far Thomas Aquinas, a Religious; who for all his
religious orders, made no bones to say, Oportet nos, etc. We must be subject.
His words do neither admit nor need any comment or gloss, he speaks not with
a Bar in his throat, but with a clear voice, and like himself: the Prince
of scolastick and catholic Doctors.

And who dares deny S. Chrysostom to be a catholic Doctor? His clear verdict
upon this passage of S. Paul is extant with general aprobation and applause:
Facit hoc ideo, etc. It is the Apostles purpose here to teach, that Christ has
not brought his Laws into the Church, of any intent or purpose, to repeal, to
reverse, to annull, or abolish the laws and rules of politic government; but
rather to reduce the order and frame of civil government unto a better form
of institution. S. Paul therefore speaks there of politic or civil power, not
of all power in general, (as you Hetrodox are pleased to avouch, comprehending
therein the Popes power, and I wot not what powers besides) but only of secular
power. And how foul an error it is, to expound holy Scripture according to a
man's own private spirit or fancy, yea contrary to the unanimous consent of the
Fathers, I refer you to the council of Trent, Session 4. And whereas you
strive for the Popes power to be immediate from God, and not mediate by
election of Cardinals; but in a certain correspondence to the immediate power
of Moses and Aaron from the Lord; If you can show and prove that God at any
time has spoken to the chief Bishop, elected by the Cardinals, face to face
in a fiery-bush, or in a rod, as he has spoken of old to Moses and Aaron; it
shall be subscribed and confessed for my part, that not only the Popes power,
but also his election is immediately from God. But if God in former times has
spoken, and yet speaks to the chief Bishops, when they are elected (as you
Hetrod. would bear us in hand) let me be answered to this one question: How
then are the Conclaves necessary? What need so many ambitious plots and
practices? What need so many hot and vehement canvases? What need mighty
Princes by their Agents to intercede, to mediate, to shuffle and cut with
Cardinals for the election of some one or other of their own Subjects,
Patriots, Favorites, or Creatures? What need many other strange devices and
stratagems to be so pragmatically and preposterously coined, as instruments to
hasten the untimely birth of many partial and precipitate Elections? In a
word, what an idle and superfluous convocation of Lord Cardinals is that,
wherein the Popes election is made, when his Holiness is immediately elected
of God, just to an hair forsooth, as Moses and Aaron were elected? What new
doctrine is this? Almighty God, as the prime and supreme cause, permits the
second causes to act and work in their kind, and according to their efficacy.
And howsoever in the election of Popes and other Princes, he is assistant after
a more special and particular manner, for a common and general good; yet he
never violents or enforces the liberty of elections. Nay, rather he expressly
shows and makes known (I speak of Gods ordinary course, Quando de revelatione
non constat, when there is no manifest and apparent revelation) that his divine
will and pleasure is, to have this or that individual person to win the
spurs, and to prevail in the election, before all others, as it pleased him
to provide and take order in the case of Moses and Aaron: yea sometimes for the
punishment of our sinners, Almighty God suffers a wicked Prince, and as wicked
a Pope (if not much worse, and more wicked) to be advanced by course, and order
of election: but when the election is once consummate, God then gives the Pope,
(as we Catholics profess) a Vicars power of Christ's own institution, and
gives the Prince that power which was instituted by the author of man's nature,
with nature it self; nor can I here see any such difference, as you Hetrodox
do seem to infer, That Princes are elected by men, and the Pope is not
elected by men, but by God, as Moses and Aaron were elected.

And whereas Chrysostom speaks clearly of Princes and politic Magistrates, of
whom also S. Paul himself speaks, (which I have sufficiently explained
before) you spare not Hetrodox (which is your next gross error) to affirm,
that Chrysostom there handles not power of the said Princes and Magistrates in
particular, but speaks only of power in general. Now Sir, can it stand with
any probability or possibility, that where S. Paul himself treats of secular
Princes, and their power in particular, there S. Paul's most faithful
expositor does make the subject of S. Paul's discourse to be of power in
general?

Secondly, those powers whom S. Paul terms higher powers, Chrysostom through
his whole Sermon calls by the name of Princes and Magistrates; I mean such
Princes and Magistrates as enact politic laws, bear the weighty burden of
the Common wealth, to whom Tribute is due, and by the Apostles precept is to be
given, upon what ground of reason? Forsooth because they are the chief workers
and preservers of peace and plenty to the whole land; they make and maintain
wars in the Subjects defense; they see and cause due punishments to be
inflicted upon all seditious and disordered breakers of the Kings peace,
debaucht and wicked persons: Tell me Sir, who are those by whom th^se worthy
works, and the like are done, but secular Princes and the civil Magistrate?

Thirdly, Does not Chrysostom directly testify, that whereas the Apostles were
famed and defamed rather to be seditious, to preach disobedience unto Princes,
and to the common laws? S. Paul therefore by way of precept has delivered all
the dogmaticall points couched in the said Chapter.

Fourthly, Chrysostom affirms, that as well here, as in other places S. Paul
commands every subject and servant in the whole State, to be subject no less
unto his lawful Prince, then servants in Families are subject unto their
private masters.

Fifthly, what means Chrysostom by those words, Facit autem hoc ideo, etc. It
is the Apostles purpose and scope to teach, That Christ has not established
his laws in the Church, thereby to nullify civil States and Regiments, but
rather to ground and establish them upon a more perfect and rectified form:
these words do plainly testify, that he speaks of secular Princes in
particular, unto whom all Subjects owe their obedience, according to the
politic laws of the State.

Lastly, Chrysostoms conclusion so stops up all passages, that you are not able
to take your heels, and make any fair escape, Ostendem quod ista imperentur
omnibus, etc. S. Paul does teach, that all sorts or degrees of Subjects, not
only seculars, but also Priests, and Monks are liable to this Apostolical
charge; yea, so much is punctually set by the Apostle at his first entrance
into the matter, when he says, Let every soul be subject, Supereminentibus
potestatibus, unto the higher powers; And who those higher powers be, (over and
besides all that has been delivered by him before) the same Father declares,
in tearming them sometimes Princes, and sometimes Magistrates: At last, he
doubles his files, re-inforces the argument, and pays it home, with etiamsi
Apostolus, etc. Be thou Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, or what may be else; for
such condition, degree, or state of subjection, is no engine to work the
subversion of piety or christian religion. Thus Chrysostom, to stop the mouth
of all such, as conceived in mind, or gave out in speech, that obedience to
secular powers and Princes was out of the square, the rule, the level of
christian professors; where the holy Father does not affirm, that Princes are
in any state of subjection to the Apostles In temporalibus, and yet makes no
bones of the matter, he is nothing squeamish to determine, that the Apostles
(who were all in one and the same height and altitude of power) were in state
of subjection to secular Princes.

And let me ( Hetrodox tell you more) to prove that subjection to lawful
Princes is exceeding profitable unto all sorts of Subjects, the same Father
after his usual manner and method of teaching, makes demonstration to this
purpose; that generally subjection of inferiors to their superiors is never
without special benefit, and singular fruit; As for instance, and by name; The
subjection of the wife to her husband, of the son to the Father, of the
scholar to the instructor, of the younger People to their elders; of which
remarkable profit and benefit, not only the Fowls of the air (which fly
after one guide, as he comes in his vicissitude and turn to make the flight)
but also the Fishes in their streams, are partakers after their several
kinds: And it is not unworthy of observation, that whereas the holy Father in
the said enumeration might have taken into his tale the Subjects unto
ecclesiastical Prelates, yet he advised himself to leave them out of his list:
perhaps thereunto induced, upon the same ground of S. Bernard, inspired by the
holy Ghost, Apostolis interdicitur dominatio, indicitur ministratio, the
Apostles are forbidden to exercise rule, and enjoined to serve: Howbeit
Chrysostom takes not up the said enumeration, to show that S. Paul there
treats of power in general, (as you Hetrodox are pleased to give it for
indubitable) but only to signify, that subjection of inferiors to their
superiors, being so profitable as appears by all the former particulars,
forasmuch as the Prince is the superior, and the Subjects are his inferiors;
the Prince is faithfully to be served and obeyed of his own Subjects in all
things: You aleadge that Clerics are not bound Vi legis, by force of law, but
only Vi rationis, by force of reason, to yield subjection and obedience unto
secular Princes, or unto their wholesome laws: But how great untruth lies in
this your distinction (which as it seems you have borrowed of Cardinal
Bellarmine) let S. Paul be judge in these words, Whosoever he be that resists
the power, he resists the ordinance of God: then do well, and thou shall have
the praise of well doing; but if thou do evil, fear, For he is the Minister
of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. Here S. Paul speaks of all
Subjects, without exception of any one; whereas you quit and free from
subjection whom you list, as if you had a better patent or warrant from
Almighty God, then the divine Apostle Paul himself: but for my part I give
more credit (hear me with patience) to S. Paul, to the tongues and Pens of
the holy Ghost, then to all other Penmen and Writers in the world.

Produce but one clean authority out of the holy Evangeli, or out of the
canonical Epistles, or out of any other like Books and writings, for the
disobliging of Clerics in temporalls from due obedience to the Laws of civil
Magistrates, where the said Clerics have not first obtained some privilege of
exemption from the civil Magistrates, (as I have in a manner stricken you
stone blind with a clear and punctual text of S. Paul, to the same sense
expounded by S. Chrysostom, by S. Augustine, by S. Thomas, and others: that is
to say, Clerics are bound to such obedience, as they all affirm and teach) and
dabo manus, and I will yield up my weapons, with open confession, that you have
driven me, not like a right bred Cock of the game, but like a rank bastard or
dunghill Bird out of the Pit. That Clerics are to be freed and exempted in
spiritual and ecclesiastical causes, we Catholics do maintain it stands with
reason; but in secular and civil causes, I see not with what force of reason
it can be born out: Is it because Clerics have received the Clericall and
Priestly character? Surely no such matter; no more then a man that receives the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the caracter thereof is thereby freed and quitted
from the subjection of his Prince, a pure Pagan, or a man who standing in the
state and condition of a slave, is freed from subjection and vassallage due to
his absolute Lord: so that a fortiori, all such as are naturally born, or
otherwise Ratione delicti, for some notorious crime or grievous offense
committed, become as it were accidentally the Subjects of some Foreign Prince,
are not loosed and set at large from their subjection, by any reason, or in any
regard of their clericall character: For this old axiom stands without all
control, Si non de quo magis, ergo neque de quo minus, where the More is not
consequent and firm, the Less is never good and valuable: The reason whereof
is grounded upon these words of Chrysostom, Neque enim pietatem subvertit ista
subjectio, This degree and state of subjection is no Ram or other Engine to
batter and beat down the Walls or Bulwarks of Religion: It stands moreover
without check upon the former doctrine of Thomas; That Christian liberty is
altogether spiritual, and against Sin; it is not carnal, or of the flesh, it
is no freedom or exemption from secular jurisdiction: But be it said, though
not granted, that Cleries owe subjection and obedience, not by force of Law,
but by force of reason: I now press you Hetrodox, to express what you mean by
force of reason, I suppose you understand with Bellarmine, and all other
Authors, the law of reason to be the law of nature: This now supposed and
granted to be their meaning and yours, Thereupon would very fain learn, what
need so many monitories? To what end so many thundering Cannon-shot of
excommunication? Wherefore some few years past have not many Priests and other
Ecclesiastics of the Venetian state stooped, and yielded obedience unto the
particular demonstrations, Laws, and reasons of State, published by that most
illustrious and renowned Republic, which all Christian Princes have judged and
approved no less reasonable then honorable? The law of nature is a far
stronger binder, then the laws of Magistrates; and therefore it neither will,
nor can brook and admit any kicking or spurning against the due obedience
thereof: but you say, In case the Law be transgressed, it is not for secular
Princes to rake any cognizance of Clerics faults, and to rake in the sink of
their facts, but all transgressions or delicts of Clerics are punishable only
by the power and authority of the Keys: Now I answer, This cu^s not off the
power of Christian Princes and Magistrates, to enact and establish Laws
Politic, which may bind Ecclesiastics to the good behavior, in the politic
and civil Government by the sword: For in your verdict, Clerics are bound at
least by force of reason to keep and observe the said politic laws. And to
wade yet somewhat deeper into these waters, what ward have you Hetrodox for
this blow? He that has power to give life, soul, and being to any Law, has no
less power, as the supreme and Sovereign Judge, to punish every transgressour
of the same law: how think you Hetrodox, is it not so?

Hetrod. Very good Orthodox, be it so.

Orthod. And who, if not secular Princes have power to make Laws, which may
bind Subjects of any calling, condition, or quality, both in temporalls and in
conscience besides? The secular Prince then is armed with power to judge, and
with a Sword to cut off, or to bring in all sorts of Subjects, who like
Outlawes and Rebels forsake their assigned Quarter, and fly out of the pale of
lawful obedience: A Cleric of any Order, by the character thereof is made
subject unto his Prelate (say we) in all duties essentially annexed to his
holy Order and Function: But for a man born a Princes natural and lawful
Subject (so soon as he has gotten any degree of holy Orders on his back) to be
made free and exempted from the subjection of his Prince; That, in my
understanding is a very Monster, and prodigious creature, not in Evangelicall
doctrine alone, where humility and subjection are prized and valued at a very
high rate, but also even in the light of nature, which (were all written Laws
in the world, for ever lost, and the light of the same totally extinguished)
would perpetually stand and remain to us a positive law: Romans 2.
But suppose your assertion in this point is grounded upon invincible truth;
tell me now Hetrodox, wherefore is it not consonant and agreeable to Gods law,
that Clerics may not live in wedlock? Would you have it rest in the Popes power
to slate in these days the roof of that old Fabric or frame, which Boniface
8. projected and attempted in the height of his Papacy to erect and raise, not
sparing nor fearing to remove every Stone for the purpose? You know he declared
by his Bulls and Breeves, that all such as had received the first sharing and
shaving, with all others entered into the four inferior Orders, should stand
in subjection to the Church as his vassals, though they had assumed the state
of wedlock: a constitution of such a dangerous and exorbitant strain to supreme
States, that all christian Princes by the vigor and rigor of their most holy
and wholesome laws, have prudently and politicly labored to quash and nip it
in the crown: For as then it might have been to Boniface, so now it might be to
his Holiness, a fit silver stirrup, whereby to mount into the golden Sadle of
perpetual patronage, dominion, and lordship of all Christendom, even in
temporal estate: How so? Forsooth by causing all degrees of People to be
sheared. or else to undertake some one or other of the four inferior Orders.
This liberty Hetrodox is removed and distant all the degrees in the Zodiac
from Apostolical subjection; I mean from that state of subjection, which the
Apostle S. Paul has described and prescribed: To make short work; Howsoever
the Levites in the old Law had their high Priest, Aaron by name, nevertheless
in temporal matters, causes, and judgments of Court, still they remained under
the authority of Moses their temporal Prince, as right well is proved by
Couaruvias.

Hetrodox, How now Orthodox? A fling at Moses too? Cap. 31. qq. Pract. council.
2.
Rob Moses of his right, of his honor? Was not Moses high Priest, even
together with Aaron? Was he not by Gods own Ordinance and extraordinary
disposition greater then Aaron? I know Couaruvias descants upon this plain song
with unperfect cords, yea, with flat discords; I therefore do esteem his music
not worth a blue point: I credit divine Scripture and holy Fathers far above
Couaruvias by great odds, who in matter of jurisdiction is carried with full
sails of partiality: But hear me a little.

Psalm. 98. Exodus 40.
Is it not extant in fair and faithful record, that Moses and Aaron were among
his Priests, even the Lords Priests? That Moses offered incense unto the Lord,
which was the high Priests principal office and chief charge? That Moses as
high Priest, and in quality of high Priest, consecrated his brother Aaron, made
the Sons of Aaron Priests, and offered sacrifice at their consecration? That
Pen to a most learned Hebrew, honors Moses with style of high Priest, King,
and Prophet? That Gregory Nazian: styles Moses Priest of priests, and Prince of
princes? That Augustine avertes how both Moses and Aaron were high Priests?
That Hierome comes not an ace behind all the forenamed Authors? That before all
these Fathers and writers Dion. Areop. leads the dance, and sings the same
note? So that Moses being high Priest, it is no marvel the Levites, who were
the only chief Ecclesiastics of those times, were subject unto Moses, as unto
their own proper Head and peculiar Judge.

Orthod. You need not Hetrodox to put your self in so great a heat, when you
deal with any well grounded Catholic, to prove by the authority of Fathers,
that Moses was either Priest or high Priest, Levit. 8.
and (before himself was in the order and calling of high Priest) invested
Aaron in the office of high Priest, viz. That he might the better apply
himself to the exercise of the civil government: surely this point is not
denied, neither by Couaruvias himself, nor by the Author whom I defend, whose
word is (Rimasero) the Levites remained subject unto Moses, etc. But
Couaruvias, with many catholic Doctors, does avouch, that doubtless it is an
evident sign and strong presumption, that in temporal matters and in civil
judgments, the Levites were not subject unto the High Priest, but unto the
temporal Prince or Judge: Because when Moses, by a kind of mean conveyance and
resignation (as Catholics would have it) transmitted or transferred his whole
authority of high Priest, and his attendance upon the sacred service unto
Aaron: yet by no means did he then deprive, or divest himself of authority to
judge the Priests and Levits in their temporals. And from hence it is evicted,
that such authority was not knit by any essential connection to the office of
the high Priest, for had it been connexed in such a manner, no doubt Moses
would never have so wickedly robbed and cozened Aaron of such a collop, as the
moety, or one half of his authority: First of all, lest he should be noted to
wrong his brother Aaron in so high a degree, namely, by stripping him of no
less then a whole moety, or one half of his entire charge: again, because
exemption of Clerics, being as you pretend, so grounded on Gods Law, Moses was
to leave the whole course, exercise, and execution of judgment, in the hand of
Aaron their ordinary and competent Judge: lastly, because Moses thereby should
have gained the more free scope and greater liberty to serve in other politic
employments and affairs. But howsoever Moses was both Priest and high Priest
before Aaron (if so much must needs be granted) yet sure it is a flat Non
sequitur to infer: Therefore at one and the same instant, two high Priests
concurred, Quoad exercitium, both at once executing and exercising one and the
same office. For wheresoever the Scripture makes mention of the high Priest, it
never points out Moses for the man, but Aaron: as Paul speaking of the high
Priest, Hebr. 5.
says not, Who is called of God the high Priest as Moses was called, but as
Aaron was called.

As for the Fathers whom you cite and allege, adorning Moses with all the
foresaid titles, I dare take upon me to affirm, they witness the state and
condition of Moses, only before the time of Aarons consecration; but none of
them all do qualify Moses high Priest Quoad exercitium, in point of executing
of the high Priests Office, after Aaron himself was once made and consecrated
high Priest: For the Church with two heads in spirituals, had then bin a very
Monster; withal, the unity of the Church and of Christ himself, had been
thereby very poorly and weakly represented: but in case you are so certain
(as you seem) That Levits were exempted from all power and judgment of the
temporal Prince in temporals, what meant you to be so far overseen, as to
allege not so much as one testimony, divine or humane, in demonstration
thereof? As I and my Authors have produced two, this of Moses for one, and that
of Solomon 1 Reg. 2. for another? Howbeit had you produced any one such
testimony; yet for so much as the Ceremonial and Judicial precepts of the old
Law are now abrogated, I see not how they could make any thing, or stand you in
any stead at all for your purpose, because I require and stand upon precepts of
exemption, drawn from Evangelicall, and not from legal grounds.

Hetrod. What man? It seems then you purpose now to infer, there was no
distinction of Court in the Primitive Church.

Orthod. You have it right, in very deed there was no distinction of Court
before Justinians time; he was the first, who upon the humble Petition and
suite of Menua, Bishop of Constantinople, granted that Ecclesiastics might be
judged in civil causes by their Prelates, Nov. constit. 83.
Ipso tamen non impedito; provided always that his imperial prerogative
thereby were not any manner of way impeached: In which case, and in case of
criminal Delinquents, he leaves Ecclesiastics under the power of the temporal
Prince and of his Ministers.

Hetrod. I think you dream Orthodox, at least I believe you are groslly
mistaken: S. Paul averres the contrary, that in the Primitive Church the Bishop
had his peculiar Tribunal, and in his own Court gave judgment or sentence
upon his ecclesiastical Subjects, I mean his Clergy: Against an Elder, says
Paul, receive no accusation, but under two or three witnesses; that is to say,
admit none to put in a Bill, or to prefer Articles against any Priest before
thy Tribunall-seat, except it be Billa vera, or articles verified by the
depositions of two or three witnesses.

I can dazzle your eyes with a huge cloud of Councels, but I am very loath to
impair your sight, a few shall suffice: The Council of Agatha in Provence
thus, Conc. Canon 32.
Clericus ne quenquam praesumat, etc. A Cleric shall not presume to sue any man
before a secular Judge; and in case a Cleric be sued in any such Court of
Record, he shall not put in his answer to the Declaration in any criminal
cause, before a secular Judge.

Conc. 1. Canon 9.
The general Council held and celebrated at Chalcedon in Bethinia, before
Justinian was hatched, has decreed in these express words, Si Clericus
adversus Clericum, etc. If one Cleric shall have an action against another, the
plaintiff shall enter his action and prosecute the suite before his own
Ordinary, and not before any secular Judge.

The third Council at Carthage in Africa, more ancient you know then the
former at Agatha, Canon 9.
about some 130. years before Justitian peept out of the shell, thus, Item
placuit, etc. Furthermore it is decreed, that if any Bishop or Presbyter,
Deacon or Cleric, shall decline his own competent Judge and peculiar Court, or
cause plea to be entered or made in any other Court of judicial audience and
preceding, he shall forfeit his Ecclesiastical dignity, or other his
pastoral charge, if the action be of any criminal nature or quality, though
the sentence does pass for the plaintiff; and in case it be a civil action,
he shall then pay cost and damage, yea he shall forfeit whatsoever he has
evicted by sentence of the said Court.

The Milenitane Council, of like antiquity to that of Carthage, Can. 19.
thus, Placuit ut quicunque, etc. We decree, that whosoever shall petition the
imperial Majesty to take cognizance of his cause, for Oyer and Terminer
thereof; in any of his Majesty's imperial Courts, he shall be deprived of his
ecclesiastical Dignity.

Now then, Orthodox upon what ground, what authority, what warrant dare you
affirm, that in the Primitive Church there was no distinction of Court, and
that Justinian was the first by whose constitutions it was ordained and
provided, that Ecclesiastics were privileged to have their trials and
sentences before their Prelates?

But in plain truth (at least if you can abide to hear the truth) because
Justinian was a Prince, who by usurpation of more then competent authority,
sought indeed to hear the causes of Ecclesiastics, and thereby intruded
himself to cut as it were their spreading Combs; for that reason Menua in all
submissive humility petitioned Justinian to leave the cognizance, at least of
civil causes, unto the Bishop: to which Petition the Emperor was pleased to
give both gracious care, and princely grant.

How true it is, that Justinian usurped excessive authority, it is evident by
his practice; for he both shufled and cut the cards, he intruded himself to
bridle the Clergy, to tie and hold them short unto the stake by his Laws, as
well in spirituals as temporals: who so lists to read the titles De sanctit.
Episcop. and de sacro sanct. Ecclesiis, may clearly see the same with half an
eye: but more pregnant and positive for the purpose is the Nomocanon of
Photius: Howbeit you know Orthodox, it is the doctrine of all Divines, and
Canonists, yea of Couaruvias himself too, that by Gods own word the judgment
of spiritual causes belongs only to Bishops, and to the highest Bishop, as to
the supreme Judge: whereupon both before Justinian and after, the sacred
Councels have debarred and restrained the clergy by express and peremptory
inhibition from procuring any trials before secular Judges, as in the council
of Toledo (besides diverse other Councels) it is more then manifest: Perhaps
Toulouse in France Can. 13.
And that all the world may see the foundation which you have laid, (I mean
that novell-constitution 83. of Justinian) to be but a rotten foundation, it is
much considerable, that Justinian himself in the very same constitution has
decreed, it shall not be lawful for the secular Judge to punish an
ecclesiastical person, except first he be deprived by his own Ordinary, of his
Clericall dignity, and thereby brought under the whip or lash of the common
laws. Now if ecclesiastics be not found within the compass and power of the
common laws, before they be degraded by the Bishop, how shall they be judged
and sentenced by any secular power, so long as they are still invested with
clericall dignity, and holy Orders? In the same constitution it is professed by
the said Emperor, that his laws imperial think not scorn to follow and come
after the sacred Canons; whereas then by the said Canons it is well and wisely
decreed, provided and ordered, that Ecclesiastics are to be judged by their
own superiors, how can the said constitution stand in force, and be observed,
which determines the clean contrary?

And now to draw the Arrow up close to the very point of the head; the
inconvenience of this decree made by the Emperor Justinian, seemed to the
judgment of Frederick the second, to be of so dangerous a strain and
consequence, that he repealed the foresaid law of Justinian, with all other the
like laws, repugnant unto the liberty of the Church: for it is found in
Fredericks first constitution thus recorded, San^ infideliam quorundam, etc.
the pravity of certain miscreant and unjust Princes has so disborded and
over-flown the Banks, that now, contrary to the discipline of the holy
Apostles, and to the name of sacred Canons, they make no bones to contrive new
Statutes, and to frame new laws against Churchmen, and Church-liberty. A
little after, Statuimus ut nullus, etc. We decree that none shall presume to
sue any ecclesiastical person before a secular Judge, in any criminal or
civil cause, contrary to the imperial constitutions and canonical decrees:
and in case any suite shall be otherwise commenced or entered, we decree the
plaintiff to lose his cause, and to take no benefit of the Judges order, or
sentence, as also the Judge himself to be put out of the commission for
Judicature. Likewise the Emperor Basilius long before Frederick, repealed a
law made by the Emperor Nicephorus, against ecclesiastics liberty, with
asseveration, that infinite calamities, like epidemicall diseases, or public
ulcers and botches, had run over and infected the whole body of State and
common wealth, with poison of the said pestiferous and unwholesome laws: let
Balsamon upon the Nomocanon of Photius be consulted and viewed, where he
expounds the first Canon of the first and second Councels celebrated at
Constantinople: and thus much touching the authority of your great Justinian.

Orthod. I am not ignorant, Hetrodox, in whose goodly Vivaries or fresh Ponds
you have taken so great pains, to fish for this dish of dainty Mullets, as you
suppose: but saving his savor, with whose heifers you have thus plowed up the
goodly field of the Emperor Justinians 38. Novel, the said Novell comprehends
three distinct parts: the first is, that upon petition of Menua, this noble
Emperor sealed a patent, and passed a most gracious privilege for the
Clergy, of this fair tenure and tenor, that in matter of pecuniary causes,
called after the common style, civil causes, Churchmen might be tried and
judged by their Prelates, Non ex scripto, without some formal drawing of Bills,
Books, or pleas, except both parties agreed to have some necessary,
essential, and material points of the case, formally drawn, couched and put
down in writing; and in case the knot or difficulty of the matter, would not
bear and suffer such summary decision, then it should be free and lawful for
the complainants to take the benefit of civil Courts, and to commence their
suites before the ordinary secular Judges. The Emperors own words lie penned
thus, Peti^i sumus, etc. Menua beloved of God, Archbishop of this most
flourishing City, and universal patriarch, by humble Petition has moved our
imperial highness, to grant unto the most reverend Clergy this gracious
privilege; that if any shall have just and lawful occasion to sue Churchmen
in a pecuniary cause, he shall first repair unto the Archbishop, beloved of
God, as unto his Diocesan, within whose jurisdiction he then lives and
inhabiteth, and shall require the Archbishop to take information of the cause,
whereby he may merit his judgment, Ex non scripto, by summary proceeding,
without drawing of Books, or breviats: And in case the Archbishop shall
undertake to proceed in such form, the Cleric shall not be molested nor drawn
into any Court of civil Audience, nor driven to intermit the exercises of his
holy Function; but rather without damages, the cause it self shall be
thoroughly canvased and sifted Ex non scripto: Howbeit withal the said cause
may be cou^hed in written form, if the parties be willing and condescend both
alike to require that course, and to relinquish the other; but in case for the
quality of the cause, or for some other emergent difficulty, the Bishop,
beloved of God, shall not be able by any means possible, to make a full and
final end of the matter, then shall it be lawful to bring the said cause
before civil Judges and Magistrates, and (all privileges granted to the right
reverend Churchmen preserved) it shall be lawful to implead, to take
examinations, to make a final end of the suite and contention in the civil
Court: thus far Justinian.

In which first part of the Emperor Justinians Novel, I may not pass diverse
points untouched: this for one, That Menua is glad to come on his knees, and to
make humble suite for this privilege: then surely his Churchmen had no such
exemption before from God himself, or Iure divino by Gods law: for had the
good Patriarch had that string to his Bow, by Gods holy Ordinance or
constitution, doubtless his humble begging and earnest Petition for this
humane privilege, had been by his leave and yes too Hetrodox, no better then
direct and voluntary rushing into sin: This for another, that Justinian
grants not Menua the Court in any absolute strain or term; but only allows
him to give judgment or sentence without any clamorous noise, and without any
formal instruments in writing; a course clean contrary to modern practice in
our Ecclesiastical Courts, where commonly more clamor and noise, more
Advocates, Proctors, Notaries, more Offices and Ministers, more chargeable Fees
are paid for Transcripts, breviats, Books and such like instruments, then are
in Courts of secular justice: This for a third, that Justinian puts down the
reason whereby he was induced to grant such privilege, to wit, that Clerics
not disquieted nor disturbed with clamours and noises of Courts, might more
diligently and freely attend upon their divine offices, and Ministerial
Functions: This for the fourth and last, Justinian grants no absolute, but only
conditional privilege.

The second point observable in the Novell, that in criminal causes of civil
nature and kind, merely temporal, without any smack or relish of spirituals,
(which Couaruvias expounds in these words, Quae spiritualia non attingunt, such
as touch not the hemne of the spiritual garment) Churchmen within the City of
Constantinople, shall be tried and judged by competent secular Judges; and
through the whole Empire besides, by the Prefects or L. Presidents, in their
several Provinces; and that moreover with a certain limitation or stint of
time, nam^ly, that within the term and space of two months, the matter shall
be drawn to a head, and shall come to a final issue or end, and that sentence
being once sped or passed against a Cleric, by the L. President of any
Province, the President shall not proceed to execution, before the said Cleric
is degraded, and quite divested of his priestly, or sacerdotall dignity by the
Bishop, according to the laudable custom and usual manner in such cases. The
Emperors own words are thus directly couched in the Novell; Si tamen de
criminalibus conveniantur, etc. but if a Churchman be convented or brought
Coram nobis, upon some criminal cause of a civil nature, that is to say, such
as no way has dependence, or correspondence with Ecclesiastic Regiment or
Church Discipline; in such a case he shall come to trial (within this
imperial City) before competent Judges, and in all the Provinces before the
most honorable Presidents of the same; provided the suite depend or hold not
above two months after the Actor has put in his Declaration, and the Reus his
Answer or defense, that so the suite may have the shorter cut, and the more
expedite dispatch. And in case the President shall find the party impleaded to
be guilty in the action, and thereupon shall adjudge him to undergo and suffer
the punishment ordained and inflicted by Law; then the party so judged, shall
first be deposed from his Priestly Orders, and Church dignities, by the Bishop
beloved of God, and after that, he shall come under the hand, or suffer the
penalty of the Laws.

In which words likewise, diverse points are to be observed; viz. That some
offenses criminal are merely civil, merely politic, no way within compass
of spiritual respect or consideration; that crimes and offenses of such nature
are tryable and punishable by temporal Magistrates; that Churchmen for the
said offenses may be sentenced and condemned to death by a temporal Judge;
that Justinian binds not himself, or his LL. the Judges within the City of
Constantinople, to cause a Priest or Cleric first of all to be degraded and
after to be transmitted over into the hands of civil Ministers of justice: but
in such case he binds only the provincial Presidents, himself as the
Sovereign, and the Judges in Constantinople as his Commissioners, Delegates, or
Subaltern Magistrates remaining exempt and free from such obligation, to give
order for the degrading of such Delinquents before execution; that sentence of
the secular Judge must precede, and then degradation is to follow before
execution: for Manus legum, the hand of the laws is the executioner of haut
justice: from whence it is directly to be deduced, that Hetrodox has drawn but
a sinister, left handed, untoward and perverse construction of Justinians
Novell, in bearing us in hand, that Churchmen for offenses and crimes of this
nature are first forsooth to be judged, and withal to be degraded by the
Bishop, and after to feel the weight of the secular arm: for faith Hetrodox,
Et t^nc sub legum fieri ma^^, and then to undergo the deadly stroke of the
law; whereas without all ambiguity, the great and learned Emperor speaks in
perspicuous terms, and says, that a definitive sentence of the secular Judge
shall prec^de, degradation by the Bishop shall second, execution of the
sentence shall follow in the Rear; and yet withal, that such course of
proceeding shall be only held in the Provinces, and not in the imperial City.

The third point, or branch of the said Novell, that in case a Clerics offense
be of Ecclesiastical nature, namely, such as requires and calls for justice
by some ecclesiastical censure or penalty, th^n the punishment shall be
inflicted, and the penalty awarded according to the divine and sacred rules or
Canons; which in such cases the laws imperial do not hold it any abatement or
dispar^gement of their honor to follow: The Emperors proper words run
precisely thus, Si vero Ecclesiasticum si^ delictum, etc. But when the offense
is merely Ecclesiastic, such as requires the censure and correction of the
Church, then shall the Bishop beloved of God, take due contemplation of the
nature, quality, and merit of the offense; the right honorable Judges residing
and exercising their charge in the several Provinces, shall bear no hand, and
strike no stroke in the business, neither as head nor foot; for it is not our
pleasure or mind at any hand; that civil Magistrates take any cognizance at
all of such cases, because they are to be sifted, scanned, and tried by
ecclesiastical proceedings, and the faults of delinquents in that kind, are
corrigible only by Ecclesiastic censures, according to the sacred Canons, which
our laws imperial do not disdain to imitate.

In which branch or context of the Novell, these few heads come in like manner
to be observed; that some offenses are merely ecclesiastical, and annexed to
the clericall order: that when the holy Canons and sacred Scripture make it
lawful for Prelates to inflict and award the said penalties, they always
intend it of ecclesiastical offenses: that such judgments and penalties are
to be passed without st^p or impeachment by any corporal voices, and to
reflect or to tend only to the reformation of delinquents Per Paternam
correctionem, by a fatherly chastisement or corr^ction, (a kind of ecclesiast^c
censure) and by such like penalties, which are not corporal: Now Sir, for as
much as this distinction of delicts, faults, offenses, judgments, punishments,
and Courts, is not read in written Monuments before Justinians time, upon this
ground I have affirmed (and am persuaded that herein I have not played the blind
and unskilful Cobbler, in seeing beyond my Last and Latchet) that no such
distinction of Court, for which you fight, and contend with so much heat and
alacrity, had got any the least footing in the primitive Church: And because
this word Court intends or implies the civil Court, it is very certain that
before Justinian granted this gracious privilege to the Patriarch Menua, no
man had recourse (in the foresaid cases) unto Prelates as unto public
Magistrates, but only unto secular Judges: It is high time now to lay open your
palpable errors.

Hetrod. Well remembered, hold you to your method, and therein use your best
skill, to turn my Argent into Subtes, my Whites into Blacks.

Orthod. My chiefest aim shall be bent unto none other white: Is it not first
a gross error to wrest S. Paul's words written to Timothy, with a wrench of
wrong and idle supposition? For you suppose that godly Timothy Lorded it in
some public Tribunal or solemn seat of judgment, sitting upon offenses
that were not ecclesiastical and spiritual; whereas you cannot choose but
know, that Paul there treats not of any judiciary form, but only of
ecclesiastical and paternall correction: his words are evident, Against an
Elder receive no accusation, but under the testimony of two or three: Again,
Them that sin rebuke openly, that others may fear, where the word rebuke
arms not young Timothy with any authority to attach the body, to lay in close
prison, to send into banishment, to condemn either to the Galleys or Gallows,
but only to give private admonition for private offenses, and public reproof
for public scandals. The text is expounded by S. Augustine (according to the
gloss) after this manner, Aliquando debes corripere, etc. sometimes thou shall
rebuke him that sins betwix your selves in private; sometimes thou shall not
spare to pay his coat as it were, and to chastise him with open rebuke, that
others may be the more afraid, to run or to chop into the like snare: S.
Paul therefore in that place speaks not of any Tribunal, (as you very fain
would make us believe) but of ecclesiastical correction, proper to an
Evangel^st, and to no Judge, according to the same Apostles words; Improve,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine; do the work of an
Evangelist, make thy Ministry fully known. Howbeit I do not deny, that men's
qualities, degrees, and the enormities of their offenses, being weighed in just
and equal scales, it is lawful for those, unto whom authority for such
purpose is deputed and committed, to practice Ecclesiastical correction, cum
omni imperio, with all Majesty and power, that is, without all fear, as the
same Apostle speaks: But whosoever shall so bear himself in his lawful
authority, has need to be endowed and furnished (besides the former qualities)
with all those abilities, conditions, and complements of a good and rightworthy
Prelate, which are mustered and rancked by the same Apostle; Oportet autem
Episcopum esse irreprehensibilem, etc. A Bishop therefore must be
unreproveable, etc. For between one that fits upon the seat of just^ce, as a
Judge upon the Bench, and one that has authority to rebuke, here lies the main
odds: The sentence of the Judge is profitable, though the man himself be as
bad as Barabbas; but he that reproves or gives verbal correction, seldom or
never works any deep impression or good effect in his hearer, if he teach that
a man shall not steal, and yet steals himself.

2. By witnesses you understand, such as are juridically to be sifted by
examination, deposition, and such other juridicall courses of Court; whereas to
give a fatherly admonition, or paternall correction, who does not know, that a
Bishops bare and simple word for such purpose is held sufficient, and will
serve the turn; to the end he be not induced to pass against a Priest by way
of correction; but when with great reason his conscience is duly certified and
informed, that the accusation or presentment has been materially confirmed,
and substantially veryfied by the testimony of two or three: Thus Ambrose in
the gloss to the same purpose, Quoniam vero non facile, etc. And because
accusations against Priests are not hand over head, to be admitted with easy
credence, the crime or accusation pretended and objected must clearly be
proved: or in case the matter be manifest otherwise, that a Priests deportment
or demeanor in his orders, has been very scandalous, and notoriously
unreverend, the Apostle lays his charge upon Timothy, to rebuke the party,
before the face of others, that others may fear to run the like scandalous
and unreverend courses: which manner of proceeding is very profitable, not
only for such as are in orders, but likewise for the common sort of People,
when they shall see one of the long robe, a man of such Priestly mark and
rank, so roundly taken up for his misdemeanors; by which the holy Father S.
Ambrose means, offenses of a conversation, mis-becoming the estate, condition,
and calling of a religious person: all this tends not in any wise, to point at
any Court, much less at any distinction of Court; but bears a reflecting eye,
and gives aim with a kind of nod, and bending of the head, only to paternall
correction.

3. You argue upon a vain supposition, that even by Paul's own testimony there,
it is necessary for Churchmen, (in all temporal causes and offenses) to have
recourse and refuge, unto the ecclesiastical Judge: that were doubtless to
approve a distinction of Court: But be not you Hetrodox, wilfully blind, to
close or to seal up your own eyes, from beholding the clear light of truth:
For (...) Canon, by the help of your own spectacles, and none other.

You maintain, that by the same Canon, Churchmen are barred from the benefit
of recourse unto secular Judges, whereas the Council presupposes the contrary;
viz. That Clerics may take the benefit of that course, howsoever not before
they have put in practice the means to have the matter taken up, and ordered
by their Prelate, whom the Council (even by the averrement of your own mouth)
terms the competent Judge of their cause, whereas in the text, or body of that
Canon, Point des paroles, not one such word.

6. The Council held at Agatha (upon your supposition, that Clerics for
criminal delicts fled for their lawful relief to the secular Tribunals, as
plaintiffs or defendants in criminal cases) inhibits Churchmen to run that
course, to the end they might avoid the danger of running into the state of
irregularity, Non permittente Episcopo, when the Bishop gives no way to the
said course: This practice I grant is still in use, and to this day goes
current: But what force, what vigor, what sinew is in this modern practice,
to prove distinction of Court in the Primitive ages and times? Nay, it rather
inferres the contrary, that doubtless then there was not any other Court
authorized (besides that of the secular and temporal Magistrate) unto which,
in as much as Churchmen were to have recourse in criminal cases, for fear of
incurring irregularity, the said Council has taken due care and order for the
Bishops good care and free consent: And this jarres not with my doctrine, but
jumpes with it hand in hand: besides; the said ancient Councels were called and
held always with consent of the secular Prince; and yet all this here spoken,
is no demonstrative proof of your pretended distinction.

7. The C^non of the third Council held at Carthage speaks not in your
language, affords no such matter as you insert and infer, makes no
distinction of the judicial Court; It lays inhibition upon Bishops and
Churchmen (after the controversy once is on foot, before secular Judges, or
christian Arbiters) at no hand to cast off, and relinquish the said A^biters,
but rather to labor for the deciding and knitting up of such controversy,
(without seeking to any other competent Judge, not agreed upon by both parties)
to rest in their final determination and arbitrament, for the better averting
and avoiding of scandal or offense. For the better conceiving of this Canon,
it is to be understood, that Christians in the Primitive Church came to
agreement, in certain controversies growing betwixt parties, and with
reciprocal or mutual consent made choice of Infidel, or unbelieving
Arbiters; a fault, for which the Apostle Paul somewhat roundly and sharply
took up the Corinthians in these words, Secularia igitur judicia, etc. If then
ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set up such in the
Church as are contemptible, or at loast esteemed, to give judgment; I speak
this to your shame, is it so, 1 Cor. 6.
that amongst you of the Church there is not one wise man? Not one that can
judge the causes of Brethren? These words are not very many, as all men see,
and yet do minister diverse matters to be considered: As, that Paul here
speaks of secular business, and temporal causes, item of such Judges, as by
any one might be chosen and appointed of ind^fferent arbitrators, men without
any Presidentsh p, or commission in tribunals or Courts; for he says, Hes
constituite, set ye up such, etc. Item the Apostle speaks not of choosing and
setting up Bishops in these cases, but of such as were of no great ability, or
sufficiency for the discharging of the said good office, men whom there he
calls Contemptibiles, men of no special regard or estimation: of which
Apostolical text Chrysostom has given this excellent exposition: Apostoli
talib^^ non vacabant, etc. The Apostles themselves never troubled their heads,
never busied their brains, they were at no leisure to deal or to take any
pains about litigious occurrents between party and party, or about secular
judgments, their whole Ministry was employed and spent altogether in
travailing through all Nations, and teaching in all places where they went; but
men of the more discreet sort and rank (howsoever otherwise they were men of
the meaner condition, and lesser merit) had the managing or working upon things
of that nature: And so S. Gregory according to the gloss, Terrenas causas
examinant, etc. I advise that men of discretion in outward matters may fifth and
bolt out causes of worldly nature; as for men of endowment with spiritual and
heavenly gifts, of another element, and more transcendent efficacy and power,
they are not by any means to entangle their minds, or to be taken (like wild
and untame Dear) in the strong toils of terrene matters, too far out of
their proper element: Item S. Paul (what power and authority soever he was
armed withal, and by some it is thought with Papal power) says not, I set
up, or I appoint; but referring such matters to the parties interessed
themselves, he says, see that ye set up; be it your own act and ordinance:
Nor speaks he of Priests, or of priestly orders, or of Bishops; but in a
general comprehension, he speaks of the faithful, who had no exemption from
the Princes Tribunals; at least seculars, according to the opinion of all, were
not exempted: Now this was practiced in Africa; but whereas many Prelates,
Bishops, and Church men, when they first practiced this course, commenced a new
course afterward by recourse, to secular and competent Judges, the Council
therefore to meet with so great a mischief, made that ninth Canon, by you
cited before, in this tenor and style; Item placuit ut quisquis Episcoporum,
etc. We moreover appoint and ordain, That whenever a Bishop, Deacon, or
Cleric, charged with any crime, and sued in any civil cause, shall decline,
and forsake the Court ecclesiastical, or shall seek to purge and quit
himself in any other Court of public judgment, he shall then be deprived (yea
though he carry the cause, and win the day by sentence) of his dignity and
place, if the judgment be criminal, but in case it be civil, he shall then
loose the cause, if he mean to preserve and keep his dignity: For he that has
free liberty to make choice of his Judge, where he lists himself, and best
likes, declares himself to be unworthy of the rank and fellowship of
Christian brethren, when he carries a sinister, partial, and prejudicate
opinion of the Church, not forbearing to crave the help and favor of secular
judgment, whereas the Apostle commands the causes of private Christians to be
brought to the cognizance of the Church, and there to have both full and final
determination: which words make evident demonstration of diverse points; First
of all, that you Hetrodox, have slily sought to put out mine eye, with a text
or Canon of this council, which you make but a plain Curtall, with a Man^
undecently shorn, with a ^^it nose, and cropped ears, as if it had stood upon
some Pillory, lime and limping besides of the ne^re l^g before: Secondly, That
in this Canon there is no mention at all of any public Court, of any competent
Judge, or of any Prelate, but only of Arbiter Judges, of seculars, and of
private judgment: Thirdly, That by the said Council it is carefully provided
and ordained, that whenever Churchmen shall give any public offense, or open
scandal, then they are to be punished with deprivation and loss^ of their
Freehold: Fourthly and lastly, that in the Canon there is couched no express
precept or direct charge, for choosing the said Arbiters; when the parties are
once drawn into that course, it orders them to steer altogether by that
compass, and to stand to the tacklings of their determination: Now I would
gladly learn of you, Hetrodox, what makes all this for distinction of Courts,
or to prove there were two distinct Courts, two ordinary and competent Judges,
one for seculars, another for the Civil and criminal causes of Churchmen,
before Justinians constitution?

8. You allege the authority of the Milenitane Council, wherein it is
commanded (according to the Apostles council, that Bishops are to accomodate
civil causes between themselves) that no Bishop shall by Petition demand of
the imperial Majesty, a Judge in public judgments; but in case he obtain of
the Emperor some ecclesiastical Judge, then he shall not be impeached or
contradicted: I will here for the purpose allege the Canon it self; Placuit
ut quicunque, etc. It is decreed that whosoever shall Petiton the imperial
Majesty to have his cause come to cognizance and trial in public judgments,
he shall be deprived of his dignity, but in case he shall solicit the Emperor
for Episcopal judgment, that shall be no maime, no loss, no blot, no
blemish, no diminution to his estate: In which words, first, a Bishop is
inhibited and restrained from seeking of public judgment before seculars; but
is not inhibited to make appearance, in case he shall be summoned and served
with one of his Majesty's writs to that purpose: Secondly, he is permitted to
petition the Emperor that his cause may be tried and judged by the Bishop, as
has been showed before; From whence the plain contrary to your pretense and
assertion may aptly be collected; that in those times there was no distinction
of Court; but all causes, whether of Churchmen or seculars, were to be tried,
neither in public nor in private judgment, unless the Emperor himself did
give way by special permission and most gracious license: Nay the very same
Council ordaines, Can. 16.
that petition shall be made to the most glorious Emperor to be graciously
pleased, that certain Judges by their imperial authority, might be commanded
to appoint and assign for Churchmen certain Advocates, who might protect,
defend, and plead the causes of the Church, before the said secular Judges: It
is therefore very manifest by this Canon, that Churchmens causes were then
handled before the imperial Judges.

9. You blush not also to babble, that Justinian usurped excessive or more then
due and lawful authority, to frame, pen, and publish those his
Constitutions: But I must here be bold to tell you, Hetrodox, even to your
face, the judgment of infinite Councels, and pontificiall Fathers, more
especially, and by that name of Adrian 4. (as hereafter shall better appear)
carries a great overweight in the scales or balance of sound judgment, in
comparison of this your new and late upstart censure, of a most christian and
learned Emperor: They never once dreamt of such a partial verdict as you
(like a bold foreman of a corrupt and frontlesse Jury) have now presumptuously
blurted forth: No Sir, no, Justinians Constitutions and those likewise of many
other Christian Princes, in the Primitive Church and age, have been ever most
cordially caressed with great and special humility, even in ecclesiastical
matters, and other occurrents of like nature: and to what purpose? To what end?
That sacred Canons confirmed by imperial authority, might go forth with flying
colors, to work the deeper impression of due observance, in the minds and
hearts of all People: I pass over many examples, and wish men to peruse but
one Epistle of Pope Leo, wherein he Petitions the Emperor Martianus, to
confirm the Chalcedon Council, and obtaines his Petition of the most gracious
and noble Emperor: when the pontificiall BP. and Church of Rome carried that
respect, and humble observance toward Christian Princes, which to their
imperial Crowns and Scepters appertains, in those times the Popes and the
Church were held in great veneration, and admiration withal: But so soon as
the Church grew to vilipend the R gall authority of Christian Princes, into how
great and grievous calamities has she not fallen and tumbled, has she not
precipitated her former glorious estate? What eclypse of her ancient luster?
What spots and stains to her Primitive and Native beauty, h^th she not
suffered and endured? Let men peruse the life of Boniface 8. of Alexander 3. of
Gregory 7. of Julius 2. of Sixtus 4. of Clement 7. of Paul 4. and they shall
see without help of spectacle or perspective glasses, that by vilifying of
Christian Kings and Princes, the Church may put all her winnings in her eye
(like an unfortunate and unthrifty Gamester) and see never the worse: Thus much
I wot well, that Justinian was deeply and excellently studied, superlatively
learned in the Laws, followed and frequented by men of incomparable knowledge
and learning, and the whole world has pitched his authority at a higher price
and rate, then the shallow judgment given out against his more then eminent
gifts, by whomsoever without exception, Canonist or Cardinal, Prelate or Pope.

10. By Manus legum, the hand of the Laws (for so I like to turn it for this
turn) you understand the secular Judge; whereas before it has bin showed to
be the lawful execution of a sentence.

11. You affirm the laws imperial think not scorn to second the sacred
Canons; and this you pronounce in the general sense and comprehension; whereas
the Emperor speaks of causes merely ecclesiastical and spiritual: Besides
you contend, that the due practice of Justinians Constitution, and the practice
of sacred Canons cannot concur and stand together, wherein also with your
leave, your self stands not in the right: For doubtless the sacred Canons (as
we hold) are to be duly observed, howsoever they bear nor sway nor weight of
authority, Nisi ex priviligio principum, but by the force and virtue of
Princely privilege: And in case they be grounded upon so stable a foundation
and firm authority, as you vaunt, wherefore have you been so greatly overseen
to make no demonstration thereof, by some clear text of holy Scripture? For to
transcend the walls, or to pass the bounds and limits of Princely power,
without consent of parties interessed, is neither acceptable to God, nor
pleasing to man.

12. You counter-poise a Frederick (one living but yesterday in a manner)
against a Justinian, a Prince who reigned when piety with Discipline flourished
in the Church like a green Bay Tree: You parallel an Emperor of ordinary
capacity, and small knowledge, with an Emperor, the most complete legist in
all ages of the world, a low shrub (in such regard) with a tall Oak, or the
goodliest Cedar in Libanon: a Frederick with a Justinian, a Frederick, who
framed his foresaid constitution out of a cunning counterfeit or disgiused
humor; whereas never any Prince has more abased the liberty of the Church,
and has more brought it down as it were upon the knees, then that Frederick
has; whom for the same cause Gregory 9. was provoked to censure with
Excomunication, Deposition, and deprivation of his imperial Crown and Robes,
at least as we Catholics would have the world to believe: Such a Frederick
you put in the balance to make weight against such a Justinian; of whom Adrian
4. gives this honorable testimony, Ep. ad Fr d. 1.
Filius noster incedat, etc. we would have our Son (so he writes to Frederick
1.) tread in the same steps which Justinian, and other Catholic Emperors have
taken before: for by their example well imitated, our son Frederick shall heap
up all treasures of honor in earth, and eternal felicity with all glorious
happiness in heaven. See you not here, Hetrodox, how Pope Adrian himself has
testified, that Justinian was not only a Catholic Prince in his life, but now
lives a Saint in heaven? This Epistle of Adrian is both cited and approved by
Cardinal Bellarmine.

13. Be it granted that Friderick 2. had an humor to derogate or detract from
the virtue, vigor, and validity of Justinians constitution, and was graciously
ple^sed to affect and honor Churchmen with all gracious privileges possible;
be it likewise granted, that Basilius, or whosoever beside, after Justinians
time, has declared himself no less gracious to the Church in the same kind;
tell me with what reason you c^n hence infer, that before Justinians time,
there was in the Primitive Church any such distinction of Court, as Justinian
has constituted in his Novell.

14. Albeit Basilius passed his Act In odium Nicephori, either in some spleen
against Nicephorus, or to draw Nicephorus into some hatred of others; yet in
reversing or nullifying the law of Nicephorus, he gave pith and strength to the
Law of his own father and Grandfather, much more prejudicial to the Church
and Churchmen, then was the Law of Nicephorus himself. Moreover, Emanuel
Conmonus (as Nicetus has left upon authentical record) annulled the said
revocation of Basilius, and confirmed the other foresaid law of Nicephorus;
which puts me into a marvel, that your self, Hetrodox, a man so much
delighted, and so greatly conversant in the spacious field and file of all
history, have not as it seems, once vouchsafed to touch the same: the Tract of
Nicetus is couched thus at some length: Templum D. Irenae, etc. Lib. 7.
after that Emanuel had taken in hand to re-edifie the most spacious and
beautiful temple of Irenae, a structure built at first by the Emperor
Martianus, and after consumed by fire, having raised certain eminent parts
thereof, even from the foundation* he gave over that goodly work, and so left
it unperfect in the ruins and relics of combustion: then he founded and
built a Monastery in the mouth of Pontus, at a place called Catescepe, in the
name of the Archduke Michael: In this Monastery he planted and settled certain
Monks of most eminent worth for their gi^^s and reputation, there to lead a
solitary and a quiet life, free from all the thorns, and sharp vexations of
worldly cares: for seeing right well, that Monks in those times, endowed with
great earthly possessions, and entangled in the snares of worldly solitude,
fell either shamefully, or unhappily, from the happy state of internal
tranquillity, neglecting also the worship and service of the Almighty; he
therefore assigned or laid out neither Vineyards, nor Lands, nor Demesnes, nor
yearly poss^ssions to the Fraternity, or Brotherhood of this Monastery; which
things their holy profession did neither well admit, nor greatly require: what
did he then? He only appointed and apportioned a certain stint of allowance,
and certain Pensions to be yearly paid out of his treasury or exchequer, to
wit, such poor pittances, as were necessary, and might serve only Ad victum et
Cultum, for diet and atrire: It seems this noble Emperor much misliked other
Princes his Predecessors in their immoderate desire to found or build
Monasteries, and was pleased by his Princely pattern to inform all Posterity,
how Churches and Temples were to be instituted and erected; as also what strict
rules, and orders, and courses of life should be proponed or prescribed to
poor Hermits, abstracting and sequestring themselves from the heavy burdens,
Legs, and Clogges of terrene affairs: yea so far was he from commending or
affecting their courses, who making profession of Monastic life do swim
nevertheless in the sweet waters of worldly wealth, and are more distracted
with multitudes and whole worlds of cares, then such as are daiely fed with all
the delicacies and sweetest morsels of this life; that he revoked (as it were,
from dishonorable exile) the sanction of Nicephorus Phocas, that most valiant
and single hearted Emperor, formerly abolished; whereby Monasteries were
inhibited all augmentation, and suffered likewise some abatement, or paring of
their yearly revenues or demesnes: Nor was he any whit meal-mouthd to forbear
or spare his own father, Grandfather, or any other of his Royal stock and
blood, by whose princely bounty and largess, the said Monasteries had been
endowed with Manors, Farms, and yearly revenues of no mean value or size:
And this he did, not because they consecrated the said portion of their
treasures unto the Lord, but because they were misled in the mannageing and
executing of their pious project: For whereas Monks were to be provided of
Habitations, and Cells in Deserts, recluded and abstruse corners, in Dens and
Caves of the Earth, or upon the crowns of high hills, and were to shun the
glorious light of Constantinople, the imperial City, as the Syren-songs: their
common practice walked not in the old and beaten way of their ancient and first
institution, but mounted aloft, and flew a far higher pitch: For being
tickled with a pleasing itch of vain glory, they erected Princely Sepulchers,
and Tombs of diversified Marbles, engraven or impost, stately Monuments gilded
and enameld, or at least pargered and laid all over with rich rough-cast of
Parvis lapis, to the common view and vulger aspect of all comers: yea, they
would be seen after they were dead, lying ad rned in their Tombs, with Crowns
or Coronets on their heads, as it were with a vive aspect or countenance of
living creatures: they built Monasteries in Market places, and other public
passages, in which (without any respect unto gracious gifts and virtuous
endowments) they harbored and shut up as it were in Cages, or like Hawks in
their Mewes, many such as were without any express marks or representations
of religious Monks, except it were a shaven crown, an exchanged habit, a stuff^
and strutting paunch, and a side beard: For these causes and reasons, either to
underprop monastical sanctimony, then as it were nodding, and loose in all her
joints, ready to fall in pieces; or (to speak in more true and avouchable
terms) then laid on her back upon the bare ground: or else fearing to be
famed, or defamed rather, to fall into the same errors, which in other Princes
he had reproved, this glorious Emperor Emanuuel Co^menus, forsaking the course
and way of his Ancestors, fairly and nobly addressed himself to follow
another tract and better path.

Now in this large discourse diverse things occur and concur worthy of
observation, in favor of the point which I here maintain: The first by name,
that Emanuel is honorably commended and highly praised by Nicetas, for a most
noble and pious Prince. The next is, that for the reformation of monastical
discipline he revoked the repealed and annulled Act, or law of Nicephorus;
which was not done out of passion, or out of any envious or venomous humor
against the Church, but only out of a religious disposition, to work and
effect a timely reformation of the Church. The third is, that Emanuel renewed
the law of Nicephorus, annulled by Basilius, because Nicephorus was directed
and guided by most prudent consideration to enact and establish the same Law;
which because Emanuel did set on the own first feet again, therefore Nicetas
gives him the honorable adjunct and style of Cordatus Imperator, an Emperor
of an upright, right courageous and right sincere heart. The fourth is, that
never any man opened his mouth to complain or to declare himself grieved-or
offended against Emanuel, for the re-establishment of the said law. The last
is, that as well by this Act of Emanuel, as by the Acts of Nicephorus,
Basilius, and other christian Princes, it is lawful and free for christian
Princes (as it is now practiced in act) at pleasure to establish, and
re-establish the like laws; and that immunities whether passant or dormant, do
grow and flow Ex privilegio principum, from the sweet spring of Princely
privileges. I pass over diverse matters, Hetrodox, as namely, that you pick
out of Authors, and scrape any thing together, which may but seem to make for
your purpose, and omit or leave out all that makes against your cause; as also,
that you build and work upon texts of no weight or importance, upon
privileges cassed and annulled; in like manner, that you disclaim and reject
authorities of the most noble and christian Emperors, their most holy Laws
and privileges, never yet annulled, neither by custom, nor by any superior
power.

Hetrod. I fear Orthodox, you will break your wind, or at least run your
self out of breath in this argument, if you may be suffered to have your own
swinge, I will therefore take down and cool the heat of your discourse, as it
were with a sprinkling or two of holy water: Answer but one example, and you
shall give me more then mean satisfaction: when certain Processes were
preferred and presented on a time to Constantine the Great, against sundry
ecclesiastical persons, what was his gracious and Princely response? Vos a
nemine, etc. No mortal man has power to judge you of the Church, but you are
to be judged by God alone.

Orthod. What aim you to infer upon this one instance?

Hetrod. That Clerics or Churchmen are not subject unto secular Princes.

Orthod. You shoot both too far short, and too far wide of your mark: That
Princely response was only a kind of excess, wherein the noble Emperor
endeavored to demonstrate an over-weight of his exceeding benignity and piety
toward the Church: the gracious eye of his internal judgment looked another
way then you seek to infer: For if that response had been true, and
according to his inward persuasion or belief thereof, then Clerics without all
question might not be judged by their own Prelates: For Constantine there
says, Ad Dei judicium reservamini, you Churchmen are exempted by the benefit
of reservation to be judged by God alone: which doubtless is a blurre to your
learning, and a gross Non sequitur to infer.

Hetrod. Believe me Orthodox, you labor to crown the great Emperor
Constantine with garlands of homely praises and perfumes, when to make him
renowned and glorious for his benignity and piety, you paint him forth, as a
masqued and cunning liar: But Sir, to the end you may plainly see in what
height and elevation of the Pole, Hist Eccl. lib. 10. c. 2.
the words of Constantine deserve to be placed, have patience whiles I turn
word for word, what Ruffinus has recorded.

Constantine said to the Bishops, Almighty God has given you the Order of
Priesthood, with power to judge us Princes; we therefore of right are to be
judged of you Priests, and you may not here below be judged of men; stay then,
wait and expect (in suites commenced by men of your own Coat and Order) the
time when you shall be judged by God alone; keep your suites to be tried and
quarrels to be decided at his Bar; are you not given to us of God, as Gods on
earth? Is it not a great and a shameful fault for men to (...) and to judge
their Gods? Is not he alone to hold the great assizes for their trials, of whom
it is written, Deus stetit, etc. God stands in the Assembly of Gods?

Where it is to be noted, that as temporal and secular Princes are Gods in
respect of their People, so Priests are Gods in respect of Laics, though they
be Princes, as Constantine sticks not here to affirm: and upon this foundation
the great Emperor very safely grounds his conclusion; that Priests have power
to judge Emperors, but Emperors have no power at all to judge Priests: Now if
this great Emperor of the world has acknowledged, that he held Priests as in
the rank of Gods, that he could be no judge of Priests, and yet might himself
be judged by Priests, how much more ought other inferior Princes and States
confess the same in word, and acknowledge the same in fact? Nor does it follow
in right consequence, that Priests cannot be judged by their own Prelates, but
rather the contrary: for ever and at all times the superior judges in Gods
name, from whom he receives authority and power: Nay rather God himself then
sits in judgment by the mouth of his lawful Minister for the exercise of
judgment: So when a Bishop judges some inferior Ecclesiastic, or when the
Pope himself judges a Bishop, it is God that judges by the Ministry, or
mediate work of his appointed and approved servant: This was therefore great
Constantines belief and persuasion, that Bishops, who in respect of Laics are
Gods, cannot be judged by Laics who are but men, and not Gods, in respect of
Priests: Again, that, it rests in God alone to judge Clerics, viz. by the
interposition or mediat act of his great Vicar; as in like sort secular Princes
who in respect of their secular People and Subjects are Gods, cannot be judged
by the said People, being but private persons, but only by God, by means of
his Vicar the Priest, who in that regard is called God, to wit, in regard of
the secular Prince: In that only sense the Lord said to Moses, I have made thee
Pharaohs God, namely to judge, to chastise that cruel King with my rodds, my
sore judgments. And for some good proof of Constantines belief, that power
to judge and censure Bishops is in the hand of the Pope, it is to be clearly
seen in Constantines own practice against Caecilianus the Bishop of Carthage,
whose cause (being accused and promoted by the Donatists) Constantine himself
durst neither sift nor touch, but only ordered that Caecilianus and his cause
should be transmitted to Rome, and there should undergo the censure of the holy
Father, who then was Meltiades: this was the practice of Constantine, to
confound the Donatists, with an intention or mind to crave pardon of the
Bishops for thrusting his crooked Sickle into other men's harvest, and intruding
himself into a business of that spiritual nature, Optat. lib. contra.
parmen. Aug. Ep. 48. and 162.
as forced or drawn thereunto by the violent necessity of the said cause,
witness Optatus Milenitanus, and S. Augustine in diverse of his Epistles.

Orthod. I never knew nor heard before this day, that excess of love and
superlative praise, in any sort or fashion whatsoever to a good end, should
merit the distastefull name of a lie: Has not Cardinal Bellarmine himself
expounded the Canon Quicunque of Theodosius in the very same phrase and style?
By name, that certes Theodosius framed that Canon in the excess of his piety:
But let us pass that circumstance, and come to the maine of your last passage:
it will not be denied, that as in secular Causes temporal Princes may be
called Gods, even so Priests in spiritual causes may have the honor of the
same name: howbeit with your leave, that text, Deus stetit, God stands in the
Assembly of Gods (by Hetrodox late alleged) is understood of secular Princes,
and not of Priests, as you Hetrodox would insinuate: But seeing that Ruffinus
(you say) has recorded, that Constantine took it in your sense, Valeat
quantum valere potest, be it of what force or credit it may or can: most
certain it is, that neither Ruffinus, nor Constantine himself with all his
greatness, can hold water or weight with expositors of sacred Scripture:
howbeit from hence there can be made no firm and solid inference, that
Constantines words ( ad Dei judicium, yea are doubtless reserved to Gods
judgment) are thus to be understood, id est, Prelati, to the Prelates
judgment, because he exercises Gods judgment: For Constantine there speaks
without any terms of ambiguity: wait you for the judgment of God alone,
reserve your causes and quarrels to trial at his l^st and great Assizes; for
you are given unto us of God as Gods, very unmeet it is that men should presume
to judge Gods, but he alone of whom it is written, God stands in the Assembly
of Gods.

In which words first I observe, that here Constantine has an eye only to
spiritual causes, for so much as here he speaks of Ecclesiastics, not as men
but as Gods, by virtue of their spiritual power to bind and loose: Secondly,
that he meddles not here with any humane judgment, but expressly with the
last judgment of God; Thirdly, that he speaks not of any God which makes the
whole number of the Assembly, but of the God who stands in the Assembly of
Gods; even of that God, who is the supreme and Sovereign Judge: This of
Constantine therefore is a kind of speech in excess, as before has been said:
And as for your anticipation, (that when the Prelate judges, God himself then
judges by the Prelate, and therefore not man, but God himself is the Judge) I
must be bold to tell you, Hetrodox, it lacks just weight, and therefore may not
be allowed to go current. For by the same reason it shall hold good and strong,
that when the secular Magistrate sits in the seat of justice, it is not man
that gives judgment, but God himself; because the Magistrate is Dei Minister,
Gods Minister to take vengeance on such as do evil: Moreover, for so much as
all Prelates, yea, the highest Bishop himself may err, (says Cardinal
Bellarmine in many places) which likewise is the common opinion; yea, and many
times has actually erred In judiciis facti, in judgment of the Fact: it is
therefore not absolutely to be held, that when they judge, then God himself
judges; because it is impossible for to err, as it is to lie: upon this
exposition of Constantines words, (whether his own, or the words of Ruffinus)
uttered by a strain of excess in things not intelligible, you run into
diverse errors.

1. First, be it in some sort granted, that Priests are not lawfully to be
tried by the temporal Magistrate or secular Prince, in such causes wherein
Priests by Constantine are called Judges; yet can it not be inferred without
error, that in temporal and secular causes (wherein Priests, will they, nill
they, are and must be Subjects) they ought not to be judged by the same Prince.

2. Secondly, To affirm that God made Moses King Pharaohs Judge, because he
said to Moses I have made thee Pharaohs God, what can it be but an erroneous
misprision and a violent wr^sting of the holy text? For God gave Moses no
authority to be Pharaohs Judge in any sort whatsoever, least of all was he
armed with such authority as in the quality of a Priest: But say that Moses was
a Priest (as we Catholics believe and teach) yet he was but Priest unto the
Hebrews, Gods own people, he had no authority over King Pharaoh, an Egyptian
and Idolater: But because Moses with a Rod in his hand, wrought so great
miracles and wonders in the sight of King Pharaoh, not possible by any Saint or
devil to be done, but only by the finger and power of the true Almighty and
eternal God, therefore it was that God said to Moses, I have made thee
Pharaohs God.

3. Lastly, you affirm, Hetrodox, (wherein I wish you to take some sight and
knowledge of your error) that Pope Meltiades had lawful power to judge the
cause of Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage, because Constantine turned him over to
the Consistory and Chair of Meltiades at Rome: I will not deny that civil and
criminal causes may come to judgment before Consistorian Judges, but when?
Forsooth when Christian Princes are graciously pleased by their Charters,
Commissions, Grants, and special Graces or privileges, to lay open such Gaps,
and to give such ways: Much less will I deny, that in causes merely
ecclesiastical, the Pope is to inflict and fasten correction upon Bishops, and
Bishops to take round courses against such as do stand within the reach of
their Episcopal Verges: but I must confidently affirm, and stand to it like a
man when all is done or said, that in civil and criminal causes merely
temporal, the Prince has lawful power from God to judge ecclesiastics, when
he has not disarmed himself of his lawful authority, by some former gracious
grant: And this I confirm, even by the very same act of Constantine, which
your self have produced and alleged: For Constantine you say transmitted (an
act of power and authority) the cause of Caecilianus unto the Pope, and
afterward himself sat upon Caecilianus in place of judgment: All
Ecclesiastics therefore, no less then Laics, are subject unto the secular
Prince; Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers: As none is exempted
from the obedience that he owes to God, so none is exempted from the obedience
that he owes to his lawful Prince; For all power is of God, as the Apostle
there subjoynes: This was it which moved the Kingly Prophet, and prophetical
King David to style Kings and secular Princes Gods, with a Deus st^tit, God
stands in the assembly of Gods, he judges among the Gods: For as it is truly
and religiously avouched by King Jehosaphat, secular Judges do not execute the
judgments of men, but of God himself; the very same former text of David, our
Savior Christ speaking of secular Princes and Judges, has cited in the
Gospel, and there makes it good, that unto them does belong the name of Gods,
If he called them Gods unto whom the word of God was given; as Cardinal
Bellarmine has learnedly noted and observed.

Hetrod. If you had in this manner drawn your conclusion to a head,
Ecclesiastics therefore, and seculars too, are not by Gods Law subject unto the
secular Prince, but seculars by man's law, and ecclesiastics by no law at all
neither of God nor man, then your conclusion had been aptly deduced from your
premises: For it has been proved before, that Princes attain to Sovereignty
over their people, not by divine title but olny humane: If it be otherwise. I
pray let me have it well proved by some plain passage of Scripture, that for
instance the LL. of Venice are Jure divino, the LL. Paramount of Padua, Verona,
with other like Cities, and if any question should grow concerning the Kingdom
of Cyprus, what fair title would the Venetian State allege for the same? Some
goodly Charter of sacred Scripture? Surely no, but either some title of
donation, or ancient possession, or some other like humane title: Now then, if
they shall fall short in proving their title over the Laics of Padua, Cyprus,
etc. by divine authority, when will they prove their pretended title over
Clerics by the same authority? I dare pass yet a whole degree further, namely
to maintain, that all degrees and sorts of Laics, yea, that Sovereign Princes
are by Gods Law in the state of subjection to Priests, and that by the same Law
of God, Priests are quitted and freed from subjection to secular Princes* My
reason, because according to Gods holy writ and word (the positive law of God)
priests are pastors or shepherds to feed, and Laics, though never so great
Princes are sheep to be fed; Priests are Fathers, and Laics are sons: Now
according to the light of nature (the law natural of God) the sheep are under
terms of subjection to the Shepherd, and the Shepherd is bound under no such
terms to the sheep; as the son also lives in state of subjection to the
Father, whereas the Father owes no duty of that nature to the son: moreover,
the comparison made by Gregory Nazianzene between ecclesiastical and secular,
is most excellent, and usually taken up of holy Divines: as in man's nature
there is reason and flesh, of which two united, the whole frame and composition
of man does consist, so in the Church their ecclesiastical or spiritual
power, and secular or temporal power, of which two the mystical body of the
Church is aptly composed; and as in man reason has superiority over the flesh,
and the flesh is never superior over reason, except it be in some fit of rage,
and fury of Rebellion; Again, as reason directs, rules, commands the flesh,
and sometime brings her to a kind of rack, I mean does chastise the flesh, and
puts her to a certain penance of long fasting and watching; whereas the flesh
never directs, rules, commands, nor lays any hard laws of punishment upon
reason; even so the spiritual power has a superiority over the secular, by
virtue and force whereof, it both may and ought also to give direction, to
rule, to command, and punish the secular power, whenever it kicks, or
spurns, or proves refractory, or makes any breach into the enclosures of
ecclesiastical Regiment; whereas the secular power is not superior to the
spiritual, nor can it direct, rule, command, or punish the same De facto in
cases of Rebellion and Tyranny, which by Heathen Princes, or by Heretics has
been sometimes put in practice: true it is, that all power is of God, but how?
either immediately, or else by means: And as none is exempted from obedience
due to God, so none is exempted from obedience due to the Prince, provided
always that a man be the said Princes vassal or Subject, and in cases
likewise wherein he owes vassalage or subjection to the said Prince: It is no
less true, that Princes (as Princes) are Gods Lievtenants, and therefore to be
honored, yea served with due obedience, as God himself, in such causes and
matters as lie within their power, Servants be obedient to those who are your
masters according to the flesh, even as unto Christ: And whereas you say
Cardinal Bellarmine has averred in writing, that secular Princes in Scripture
are called Gods, he was (you must understand) induced so to write, of purpose
to confound heretical Anabaptists; who teach, that neither secular Princes,
nor tribunals, nor judgments, nor other like politic and civil regiments are
to be tolerated in the Church of God: But as that Cardinal has written and
witnessed, that secular Princes are Gods in respect of their Subjects; even so
he has justified, that priests are Gods in respect of secular Princes: If you
therefore Orthodox, like a good Roman Catholic would have trod in the steps
of that Cardinal, you should have taken up his weapons, and should have made
use of them against Heretics, not against our mother the Church, nor should you
like the Spider have sucked such poison from the same flowers, out of which the
Be sucks and gathers honey.

Orthod. I am not able to reach the bottom of your deep conceptions: would you
have your own conclusions to be drawn out of my premises? If I had been
inspired with a spirit of divination, and by the gift of Sooth-saying could
have foreseen, that your self or Cardinal Bellarmine was to be the Champion
that would undertake to cudgel my coat, I mean, so subtly to trounce me, and
to play such trumps in my way, I would have directly drawn two distinct
conclusions; the one true and built upon my own true, certain, and infallible
premises, the other false, obliquely derived from your premises, or those of
his illustrious Lordship: but for as much as the spirit of divination does not
harbor in my breast or brain; I must only shape and lay in this answer for my
self; that from the same premises which I have now framed, I would wish none
other but mine own conclusion to be inferred, and from your premises, and those
of the Lord Cardinal, your own, or his own conclusions to be inducted: for as
my conclusion is true, because it rises out of true premises, even so your
concluon, or his Lordshrhs (which you please) is false, because it is inferred
upon false premises, that is, drawn from a fufty vessel of unwholesome doctrine,
which the one of you two has broached, the piercing or at least running
whereof I have now, as you see, endeavored to stop with a handsome Faucet.

1. Will you now be pleased to see your errors? to make men subject unto their
lawful Prince by Gods law, you hold it needful, that for the right and title
of their subjection, some text of holy Scripture be produced, remember it has
been declared before, that power and title to power are two different heads,
that power is from God, and of necessity follows or comes after title: The
French King rules and governes in France, not by law of inheritance, but by
virtue of authority received from God: The Venetian Prince, I mean the
Republic and body of State (howsoever you have learned of Cardinal Bellarmine,
with great artifice and skill to seal up the eyes of your own knowledge in the
matter) bears not command and rule over Padua, by such means as they first
attained to the dominion thereof, but because being impatronised or made Lords
of Padua by humane means, they have it now in command (and ever had from the
time of their first occupation and possession) by virtue of the power and right
received from God himself: And herein what difference can you find to lie
between Prince and Pope? For if the Pope shall be asked, wherefore he is Pope,
this will be his answer, because I have been Canonically elected by the
Cardinals to the Popedom: and for that purpose he will never study or stand to
produce any testimony of Scripture: but ask him, by what authority he gives or
grants his indulgences, etc. surely he will answer, because God has given him
power to forgive sins.

2. To prove that Princes are subject unto priests by the law of God, you cut
out and frame a silly sheepish argument from sheep and shepherds, Gods law
(say you) is the law of nature; by natures law the sheep is in state of
subjection to the Shepherd, by Gods law therefore the Laic Prince is in the
like state of Subjection to the Priest: I answer, the Prince is no sheep of the
Shepherd priest, but of the great Shepherd Christ; for Christ said not to
Peter, Feed thy Sheep, but, Feed my Sheep: So that your Argument (if it
conclude any thing at all) concludes, that Princes are subject unto Christ, and
not unto the Priest: Nay, the Priest as a sheep in temporal causes and matters
is rather subject unto the Prince: David gave the term and nomination of sheep
to all his people and Subjects, Ego erravi, isti qui sunt Oves, quid focerunt?
It is I that have sinned, what have these my sheep done? S. Paul's words are
pungent and peremptory; Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers: If
then your argument has any sinews to evince, that Subjects are bound by Gods
law to yield obedience unto their Superiors of highest power; then all priests
likewise (who are Subjects no less then others) are directly bound by Gods law
to the due obedience of their temporal Princes penal or Statute Laws, at
least in temporal matters.

3. The father you say is not subject unto the son, if Hetrodox (his own
Father yet living) were now elected King or Pope, should not Hetrodox his
Father, as a man and a Christian be subject unto Hetrodox his Son, whether
King or Pope? Howsoever young Hetrodox the son should bear due respect and
reverence to old Hetrodox as to the Father? Again, the Father a Laic may
receive absolution of his own son a priest, and the son a priest may receive
correction, by the authority and command of his Father a secular Magistrate: if
men would not be intrapped in the snares of error, they must learn to
distinguish between titles and persons: a Prince in spirituals being a son,
in temporals may be a Father.

4. Touching the similitude of body. and soul; howsoever I grant it may be true
in part (as in this point by name) that a temporal Prince his power is ( Per
se, of it self) over the body; and the spiritual priests power is over men's
souls; yet your similitude wants weight of truth in some other part, and halts
down right: For temporal power (save only as it is exercised by a Christian)
is not subordinate to spiritual power, no not in ecclesiastical and
spiritual causes; on the contrary, the subjection of priests in temporal
causes is plainly subordinate unto the temporal Prince: Arguments thus framed
are not worth a rush: temporal power is over men's bodies, and spiritual power
is over their souls; as the body then is directed and ruled by the soul, and
the soul not by the Body; so he that is armed and authorized with temporal
power must be directed and ruled by such as are invested with spiritual power:
I say again, such reasons are not worth a rush; for body and soul together do
make one whole compound creature, which is man, whereas corporal power, and
spiritual power make not one body, but rather two bodies and two heads: These
two powers (as both are powers) are different in all things, and without
subordination; as either of them is a power: neither does Nazianzen teach the
contrary, much less teach your affirmative, as whosoever will read Gregory
himself, shall readily find: For thus much Gregory writes in effect, and no
more, that as the soul is more noble then the body, so the spiritual power is
more noble then the temporal, which for my part so long as I go for a Roman
Catholic, I dare not deny.

5. You are much overseen Hetrodox, to charge me with making use of this
doctrine to the hurt of the Church, when I should rather whet and scour my
weapons against heretics: And herein you resemble me to the spider, that sucks
poison from the same sweet and oderiferous herbs or flowers, out of which the
industrious Be sucks honey: Have you not herein much forgot your self? He
that delivers the truth, neither fights nor speaks against our mother the
Church, but against such as harbor settled and secret pretensions in their
breasts, to usurp more then appertains to their persons, callings, or degrees:
Again, the Church is the Kingdom of heaven; and you speak (in your whole
discourse) of none but earthly Kingdoms, in which, without all question, the
Church can have no share nor interest; nisi per accidens and ex donatione
fidelium, but such as comes upon the By, (as we say) that is, by casual
means, or else by frank donation, or free gift of the faithful, the grandeur
of all which earthly Kingdoms and of all other temporal States the Church
does establish: Thirdly; the use of this doctrine tends and serves, not only
for the confuting and extirping of heresies or heretics, but likewise of all
such as maintain and broach any other untruth, be it heresy or error;
howsoever I am directly of this mind, it is flat heresy to stand upon terms
of contradiction against so clear a text of the divine Apostle Paul: And
lastly, know this Hetrodox, that man is a spider who weaves a spiders web to
catch flies, and poisons the springs or fountains of wholesome doctrine with
venom of his own corrupt and false exposition: know you moreover, that
Orthodox (who now like the Be, sucks from the sweet flowers of Saints and
chief pillars of the Church, the most delicious honey of truth) will never
take pepper in the nose, to hear himself blam^d on this wise: sometimes your
sweet honey Hetrodox, turns to bitter wormwood, yea to deadly poison, to make
false and erroneous doctrine burst all her bowels.

Hetrod. Well Sir, have you any more gall to spit up, any more to say in
confirmation of your first Proposition?

Orthod. It is not I that will say the rest, but Paul the Apostle, who thus
proceeds and subjoynes in the sacred text: Romans 13.
Whosoever he be that resists the Power, the same resists the ordinance of God:
here is clearly to be seen the authority of secular Princes to make laws in
any matter, cause, or subject whatsoever, laws obligatory, to bind all degrees
and sorts of persons: Quicunque, whosoever he be, etc. in full conformity to
the words of God himself speaking thus in his own person: By me Kings reign,
and lawgivers or Princes decree justice: From hence have sprung (as from the
prime root) many laws in the Code made by Justinian and Theodosius, most
christian Emperors, concerning Ecclesiastical persons, their lands, goods,
etc. All which laws the Apostle commands to be obeyed without resistance, for
so much as all that resist, shall purchase and receive to themselves
condemnation: they run and tumble into mortal sin, wherein if they shall
finally depart out of the body, without repentance in this life, they shall be
adjudged and condemned to eternal flames of hell.

Hetrod. Where did Paul ever write or witness, That secular princes have power
to make Laws in all matters and causes? Laws to bind all sorts, conditions,
and qualities of people? what? shall Princes make Laws for the manner and
form of saying Mass? for binding Laics to say Mass, and to make the vow of
chastity? for binding Priests to marry, and instead of a Breviarie and a
Portuis, to wear a Fauchion, a Skaine, or a Sword? Shall not all these be
bound to show and perform obedience, if Princes have authority to make Laws
in all causes and in all matters, yea binding Laws for all persons i^ when
Laws were enacted by Heathen or unbeleeving Princes, that all people, Nations,
Tribes and Kindreds should renounce Christ, and offer sacrifice to Idols; were
they not bound then under the penalty of mortal sin to obey the said
Heathenish Laws and Ordinances? They were doubtless to my understanding,
though all Princes then were Infidels, when Paul commanded the said obedience
to Princes: And yet Orthodox, according to your new interpretation, from Paul's
precept, or Apostolical Canon, it is forsooth to be collected, That secular
Princes have authority from God to make Laws in all matters, and laws to bind
all persons: It may seem your wits are gone on wool-gathering, that you
perceive not how many errors flow from the source of your last speech and
passage: And yet you stick not here to come in with a strange and uncouth
addition, That your doctrine has due and requisite conformity with King
Solomon's verdict in the Proverbs, not discerning that Solomon there nips your
new device in the crown, or rather strikes it stone dead: For he there bringing
in the wisdom of God, using these words, viz. By me Kings reign, and Princes
or Lawmakers decree justice, does manifestly declare and show, That none but
just Laws do proceed from the wisdom of God, and that other Laws, many
times enacted by Princes, in matters which nothing at all concern their
dignities and imperial places, or established against persons not subject unto
their secular authority, or otherwise unjust laws, are but like puddle waters,
which run from the corrupt fountain of their own brain, and so not flowing
from the spring which rises in Gods bosom, neither are the said laws
approved of Gods divine wisdom. To the other addition which you make, that
Justinian and Theodosius enacted laws concerning ecclesiastical persons, their
goods, lands, Church Government, or discipline, it has been already answered:
that in such their practice they exceeded the terms and limits of their power:
and whereas you affirm, the Apostle commands obedience to their laws, you
affirm a most large and no less manifest untruth or falsehood: for the Apostle
there speaks in general, that he would have Subjects obedient to their
superiors, and whereas a little after the Apostle brings in the example of
secular Princes, he speaks of Princes who in his time were Infidels, and is not
so to be taken or understood, as if he did advise and teach Christians to obey
such Princes, I mean in laws that concern the service and worship of God, or
the discipline of his Church, but in civil and politic laws alone, and in
temporal matters, which laws it was necessary then for christians to obey,
for the preservation of peace and unity; as also to the end the Gentiles might
not be carried away with mis-credence or false belief and persuasion that
Christian laws, or the laws of Christ, are opposite and repugnant unto the
rules and reasons of civil or State government.

Orthod. You thought my wits were gone a gadding, and now I think your mouth
runs over; but I will stop the Fistula, or the running issue of your mouth,
with a tent or two: My meaning is this, That Princes have power to make Laws
in all causes and matters Temporal, but only for the Public and Civil good
and benefit; provided always their Laws be just: For it is always
presupposed, That obedience is never due nisi justa praecipienti; but when the
Prince, or State, or other Superiors command things just and lawful: So that
your late Consequences grow from a certain misprision, or wrong conception of
my project, purpose, position, and proofs: For when I teach, That a Temporal
prince has power to make Laws in any or in all cases, I mean such Laws and
such cases as are just, conformable, and agreeable to his power; as also after
the pattern and practice of his predecessors, and other just Princes. This was
ever my meaning. As for your exception taken to Justinians Laws, and those of
Theodosius, it shall suffice thus to answer in a word: Their Laws are sacred,
and have ever been reputed irreprehensible; they were contrived and penned,
partly upon temporal grounds and subjects, partly for the more strict
observance of spiritual Canons and Orders, partly for public benefit; and yet
did never any chief Bishop or High priest so kick and spurn against either of
their Laws, as you Hetrodox have now done with much disgrace and contempt. As
to that which you say, touching the cause for which Christian subjects were
bound to obey Infidel and unbeleeving Princes, I will content my self to make
use of Saint Paul's words, for a sufficient and full answer thereunto: You must
be subject and obedient, not only because of wrath, but also for conscience
sake: Romans 13.
Item, Whosoever resists the power, he resists the ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves condemnation. In so clear Texts and
passages of Scripture, what need you or any other fly to the shifts of any new
expositions, with danger to fall into infidelity, or mis-creance and notorious
Heresy, especially when Chrysostom has decided the matter before, by so
strong an argument from the less to the greater in this form? If the Apostle
enjoyneth obedience to Heathen and miscreant Magistrates, how much more ought
we to perform and yield all due obedience unto believing and godly princes?
Thus Chrysostom.

Hetrod. The Sun is now declined many degrees, and now ready to depart out of
our Horizon: Are you Orthodox as near to the period of your first days labor
and task, as the Sun is to the full end of his Journall or Diurnall motion?

Orthod. I am indeed, as you shall presently perceive. Saint Paul commands all
men to pay Tribute unto their lawful Sovereign, because he that discharges
such duty, makes good payment unto God himself: Give Tribute unto whom you owe
Tribute; Custom unto whom Custom; f^r they are the Ministers of God: This
passage is expounded by the Angelical Doctor, the great Master of Divines, and
only Sun of the Catholic School: This great Clark says (you know full well)
That in case Clerics be free and exempt from payment of Tribute, doubtless
they are endowed with such freedom and exemption, not by Gods Law (as by
diverse it is thought and taught) but by special grace and privilege of
secular princes, who bear not Gladium, the sword for naught, seeing they are
Gods Ministers to take vengeance, etc. See you not here the authority of
Secular Princes to punish poena sanguin^^, with loss of blood, or with
corporal death? Now the same authority Ecclesiastical Prelates have not from
God; and therefore when they have once degraded a Cleric for some capital
crime, or scandalous and notorious offense, whereby they declare the party
criminal to be divested of his Clericall degree and holy orders, they take no
course nor care at all for any further proceeding to his execution, but for
punishment by death, tradunt brachio saeculari, they refer and poast him over
to the secular power. And to the end it might not be conceived, that Paul's
words are not uttered by way of precept, but only of counsel, Behold, to make
good his assertion, he strengthens the same words with a very substantial
sinew, Ideo necessitate, etc. Wherefore ye must be subject, not only because
of wrath, but also for conscience sake. So then we are bound (by Saint Paul's
holy doctrine, as it were with a forcible chain of necessity, O portet, ye
must) to serve and obey the secular Prince in all such matters and cases, as
have been discussed and insisted on before.

Hetrod. How now Orthodox? play the lazy Poet? Fail, flag, and faint in the
last Act of your first days Conference? Coin, or at least corrupt Scripture
at your pleasure, and for your purpose? where find you this word in S. Paul,
For they are the Ministers of God, Ad tributa, to receive tribute? or this
word, For he is the Minister of God, Ad vindictam, to take vengeance? The sense
of the latter words, I grant, is found in the Apostles Text; but whenever men
cite the words of Scripture (which indeed are Gods own words) it is but a
sacrilegious trick to chop and change the right words, especially when the
genuine sense proclaims it self to every mean capacity. For example, in the
first sentence, For they are the Ministers of God to receive tribute; Paul does
not say, That Princes are Gods Ministers to receive tribute, but rather by all
means to provide for, and to procure the tranquillity of the whole body: So the
words are expounded by Chrysostom, and other holy Fathers, Ministri Dei sunt
in hoc ipsum servientes, For they are the Ministers of God to the very same
purpose; that is, to provide for, and to procure the tranquillity of Gods
people. Yea the same Thomas also, whom you so highly magnify, and upon whose
testimony (as you think and suppose) you build so sure, is of the very same
judgment or mind: For he reckons and ranks Tributes in the nature of Salaries
given to Princes, for the laborious task (surmounting the twelve labors of
Hercules) which they daily undertake for the good and happy government of their
Subjects: And who does not know that no salarie can be given to God? Princes
therefore are not Gods Ministers, Ad tributa, to receive tribute, but rather to
bring their subjects unto a stat^ of blessedness under a good and happy
government. Again, touching Thomas Aquinas, whom you quote for another
purpose, namely, to prove, That Ecclesiastics have been freed from payment of
tribute* by the most gracious charters, and special privileges of Princes, it
is in good sooth the assertion of Thomas, and conformable to Historical Truth.
But you impose and father upon Thomas more then he sets down, to wit, That
Ecclesiastics are not so endowed and privileged by Gods Law, whereas Thomas
affirm^ the clean contrary: For thus he says, Princes by gracious privileges
have exempted Ecclesiastics from tribute, because it stands and agrees well
with natural equity; He means, that Princes in so doing, confirm the law of
nature, which doubtless is the Law of God.

To be short, whereas in your last point you deny the power of the Church to
punish by death; I know not where you have pulled that wild and sour grape,
except it be in the Deserts of certain Heretics, as the Vald^nses, Hussites,
Marsilius of Padua, or the like, who denied the Church to have any right unto
the power of both swords. True it is, the Church never strikes with any
material sword, nor does punish criminal malefactors by death: But wherefore?
what? is it because the Church wants power in that case? No verily, but because
it seems neither convenient nor suitable to Ecclesiastical meekness; in
regard whereof the Church is well contented and apayed to leave all such
criminal offenders in the hand of secular justice: Vterque igitur Ecclesia,
etc. Both swords therefore, the spiritu^ll and the ma^eriall, of right belong
to the Church; the material to be unsheathed in the Churches defense, the
spiritual to be drawn by the Churches arm: the spiritual to be used by the
Priest, the material by the Soldier: but yet when the Priest holds up his
finger, and the Emperor commands or sends out warrant for the purpose. This
doctrine of S. Bernard was afterward made authentical by Pope Boniface. Now
the last clause, or closing up of your discourse, is to this purpose: That
where the Apostle teaches obedience to Princes, he speaks by way of precept,
not of counsel. Very true, he does so indeed: but what is Paul's meaning?
Doubtless, that Princes are to be obeyed of such, as by lawful title are in
the state of their subjects; as also in causes or matters, to which the
authority of the said Princes does stretch and extend. From whence it follows,
that Churchmen are not bound to honor secular Princes with any such
obedience, because they are exempted; but Laics alone are comprised within the
said bond, albeit in civil causes only, and such as impugn neither God
himself, nor his Church; whereby the Christian world may clearly and evidently
see, how deeply and highly the Venetian Republic Anno 1606. offended the Divine
Majesty, not only in committing Ecclesiastics in prison, but also in using
force and violence to compel as well them as Laics, to infringe and contemn
the holy Fathers interdiction, a censure purely spiritual and ecclesiastic^ll.

Orthod. I was never yet found a falsarie, no coyner, no corrupter of holy
Scripture: it is your self that patch up my garments with your own rags, and
mar the Text with an Aurelian gloss: I have not said before (as you now lay
to my charge) That Princes are Gods Ministers Ad tributa, to receive tribute.

Hetrod. But you know, and need not dissemble, the shop and forge where th^se
tools were hammered.

Orthod. You mean the Author of the 8. Propositions.

Hetrod. The very same.

Orthod. They are none of that Authors words, but are suppositions, or
surreptitions foysted into his Text with a false finger of the Printer, or of
some other; and yet are they justifi ble by the most clear exposition of our
great Master, Thomas Aquinas, whose words be these, Pro ipso recipiendo
serviente:, Princes are Gods Ministers to take up and receive tribute; the very
same with Ad tributa. But I rest confident, it was an error of the press: for
to that Authors purpose it sufficed to say with Paul, Princes are Gods
Ministers; the word Ad tributa, neither mars nor mends the Authors meaning or
S. Paul's: In reason therefore it may not be conceived, that ad tributa was of
any set purpose added or sowed to the piece by the workmans needle; neither
need it seem strange, that ad tributa has crept in there by the window,
through the oversight, or negligence, or false play of the Printer, or (as well
may be suspected) by a sly trick of cunning and skill: F^r the LL. Card. and
Commissioners in the Index printed at Rome, Anno 1606. have made declaration,
That many words have been shuffled and crowded in by the Printer through error
on his part: Cum in Appendice, whereas in the Appendix of the second Classis
under the letter I, these words are found: (The Demonomania written by Joannes
Bodinus borne at Aniou, is expressly and totally prohibited for ever; but his
Book De Republ. and his Methodus are prohibited with a limitation, by name,
until they shall be purged and put forth by the Author himself, with
approbation by the Master of the sacred Palace) it is b^leeved that all the
said words enclosed here by Parenthesis are crept in through the error of the
Printer. Now if so long a thread of speech might drop or chop in per errorem
Librarii, through some error of the Printer; it may be thought with more
verisimilitude, and with greater probability, that ad tributa (which makes but
one poor single stitch) was nimbly and slily drawn by the Printers error into
that learned Authors Proposition: As for the words, Ira and vindicta, wrath and
revenge, or vengeance, they are in effect all one: but because the word
vengeance comes nearer to S. Paul's purpose and sense, as also because the same
Vindicta, vengeance, is a word used by many holy Fathers, I therefore have the
more willingly made choice thereof.

1. You are also bold to affirm, That no tribute is given to God; there is one
of your errors: For I affirm with confidence, that whatsoever is given to his
Ministers, is given to himself: of alms here given to the poor, our Savior
Christ will pronounce in the day of judgment, Quod uni ex minimis meis, Mat.
25.
whatsoever you have given to any one the least of these my brethren, ye have
done to my self: And says not God himself in the same or like manner of
alms and sacrifice, Misericordiam volo and non sacrificum, I will have mercy
and not sacrifice? To the same purpose is it not in Saint Hierome, Per hoc quod
illis tributa datis, Deo servitis, In giving tribute unto your Princes, you do
service unto God?

2. You grant that Aquinas is on our side for this point; That Clerics are
exempted from payment of tribute by the special privileges of Princes, who
graciously confer their said privileges upon a certain equity, and yet you
affirm Aquinas to hold, that Clerics pay no tribute, not because they are
exempted by humane privilege, but by divine law: To what purpose has Thomas
testified they pay no tribute by the privilege of Princes, if they be exempted
from payment by the law of God? Was it not sufficient for him to say, they pay
no tribute, because they are freed from all taxations by the law of God? But
for so much as Thomas there cites the 47. Chapter of Genesis, where we read,
that King Pharaoh exempted the priest of Egypt from tribute (who without
question was not exempted by Gods Law, because they were Idolaters) he
concludes a pari, that Clerics are now exempted from tribute by the privilege
of Princes, and not by the Law of God: Iustine Matyr is positive in the same
article; that payment of tribute is due to the Prince by divine precept,
Vestigalia tributa, etc. the customs and tributes imposed by your imperial
Majesty in all places, and before all other Subjects, we endeavor to pay, as
we are taught and commanded by Christ himself, for being asked whether
tribute should be given to Caesar, he made this answer, Give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's: For this reason S. Ambrose Bishop of Millan, writing
to the Bishop of Vercelli was moved to make this good and godly profession; Si
tributum petit, etc. If our Lord the Emperor be pleased to demand tribute, we
will not presume to deny, to withstand, or to refuse his imposition; the
Church Lands must bow and stoop (if there be no remedy) to pay down upon the
nail; if the imperial Majesty proceed to require the said lands, it lies in
his power to make challenge thereunto; let him take them from the Church, if
his mind and pleasure be absolutely and resolutely bent so to deal: For my
part, with my good will I have no purpose to give them away unto his Majesty,
yet may I not deny or contradict his prerogative and royal pleasure: what
would S. A^bose now say for those Princes, who take nothing away from the
Church, when he grants and yields the Prince a power, to take away and make
appropriate unto himself at his pleasure, the lands of that Church, whereof
himself was Archbishop, or chief Prelate, and grants this obedience is to be
yielded unto the Emperor at his pleasure, and without all resistance on his
part? In a word, the Church at all times, and in all ages, has been so far
sensible of the public good and tranquillity, even to the great loss, and
many times to the excessive expenses and exorbitant charges of Ecclesiastics,
that in the Lateran Council we read these words, Tamet si Clericus a tributo,
etc. Albeit Clerics are discharged and exempted from all payment of tribute,
yet in cases of necessity, and times urging, pressing and enforcing thereunto,
they shall make no spare of their proper means and private estates, to provide
for the safety of the present State and Common wealth.

3. But what mean you Hetrodox, to arm the Pope with a material sword, yea,
with a naked and drawn sword, was not Peter himself reproved by Christ with a
Mitte gladium put up thy sword into the sheath? Item, wherefore would not
Almighty God give way that David should build the Temple? Was it not because
David had been Vir sanguineum, one that had spilt much blood, and put many
souls to the sword? whereas the Lord made choice of Solomon to build the
Temple, because he was a peaceable Prince, or a man of Peace: This was to let
us understand, that certes the drawing and exercising of the material sword,
has no manner of congruity, nor holds any due correspondence with
ecclesiastical profession; and again, that such ecclesiastics as challenge to
themselves the swaying or weilding of the same sword, re-in state of
irregularity; and again, that for this reason the little shepherd, young David,
a type of every true Christian, might not go in the complete Armor of Saul on
his back, to fight against Goliath that mighty Giant, and uncircumcised
Philistine, but with a sling and a few pebble-stones in his hand or scrip,
which is the word of God: And for this purpose makes not a little not only the
common practice of Christians, approved by your self Hetrodox, Tradatur
brachi^ seculari; let him be passed over to the secular power; but also that
Godly speech of S. Ambrose, Dolere potero, well I may afflict my heavy soul
with sorrow, well I may utter the voice of lamentation; well I may mourn like a
Crane or a Pellicane in the wilderness; well I may send forth grievous groans
against goatish soldiers in Arms; my weapons are bitter tears, a priest has
none other weapons or Arms for defense; I neither can resist, nor ought in any
other manner to make resistance; where the word, Nec debeo, nor ought, strikes
and pays home, as a word of great force and efficacy.

4. At last Hetrodox, you raise a strong Bulwark, with a suitable Parapet and
main flankers, for the strengthening of your cause, (and yet but imaginary
Castles and Forces) out of S. Bernards text; which methinkes, is a great
disadvantage and weakening to your mock-building: That holy Father there speaks
of the Church in counter-point strains and t^rmes, I mean, by the Figure
Antithesis: Namely, As the Church is compounded of seculars and priests, of
soldiers and Clerics; or as it has an opposite composition of imperial and
temporal power with Papal and Spiritual power; Now says S. Bernard,
Vterque, etc. both swords material and spiritual, belong to the Church,
albeit both swords are not for every one to handle, neither do both belong to
every one: How then? Hic quidem, the one (by name the material sword) pro
ecclesia, is to be drawn in defense of the Churches privileges, liberties, and
rights; Ille vero, the other, that is, the spiritual sword, is to be taken up
and shaken ab ecclesia, by the Church it self; this by the hand of the priest,
and that by the hand of the soldier: So the priest bears not in his hand the
material sword, which nevertheless is used ad nutum sacerdotis, when the
Priest has once given a beck, or a sign, and jussum Imperatoris, and when the
Emperor has once given the command. These two distinct words here stand in a
kind of opposition, and serve to show, That he who commands execution or
putting to death, is not sacerdos* the Priest, but in very deed the Emperor,
who therefore has Potestatem gladii, the power of the sword, which the Priest
may long seek, and never find: So that ad nutum, when the Priest gives a nod,
does not signify or import ad jussum, when the Priest commands. How then?
Forsooth it imports, that when the Priest has once degraded a criminal
Delinquent or malefactor, by delivering him to the secular power, he gives the
world to understand, what deadly punishment the merit of his cause has justly
brought upon his head, according to the Law. As for Boniface, (who as you say
has made Bernards doctrine more authentical) if he teach no more in this
article then Saint Bernard himself, who gave Boniface this light for his hint
or qu^u, it shall ever like me well to give him the right hand of fellowship
for this matter. But whether S. Bernard or S. Ambrose be Heretics; whether the
Arguments and Scriptures produced before for proof and confirmation of my first
Proposition, be heresies, I leave it (howsoever you are more famous for a great
grounded Catholic of the right stamp and hair) to your own judgment, reduced
to the terms o^ ^ight and sound information: To be short; whereas the LL.
Ecclesi^sticall stand very st ffe, and make a strong head or party for a larger
size and greater ex ent of authority, then in truth may stand proportionable to
their degree and calling; in case any such au^hority f^r the material sword by
them to be drawn and put in practice, were essential to their State and rank,
or therewith compatible, doubtless they might and would bring the same into
common practice, and therefore it belongs not of right unto their spiritual
function and profession: This Argument is framed and taken by seculars, and in
very deed is full of pith: Frustra est potentia, etc. Vain and idle, and of no
efficacy is that power, which is never nobilitated with any act or practice at
all, especially by those who boast and pretend themselves to be armed with such
authority.

Now Sir, to end this first days quarrel, I have sufficiently argued for my
first Proposition, to prove the doctrine thereof Catholic, sound, oecumenicall,
and uncontrouleable; so that you have not been able to supplant it with all
your Engines, nor to blow it up with all your Mines and Fire-workes.

Hetrod. I never thought (I must confess) that any rank heretic, whom like a
Roscius or some other famous actor, you have so cunningly personated in this
days conference, was able to act and play his part, or handled his weapons,
like a skillful master of defense, half so well: you have indeed (to deal
plainly and truly) puzz^ld my wits a little, and put my reading perhaps to some
stagger: If you can play the man, and lay about you as well in the other seven
Propositions (for the second whereof in token of challenge I here cast down my
glove as the Appellant, calling for your personal appearance to answer the
challenge in this place to morrow by sunrising) you may perhaps work more with
my present opinions beginning to waver, then you are aware.

Orthod. I refuse not your challenge, but in sign of acceptance I take up
your glove, and will not fail to be in the field at the hour assigned.
Interim I wish you good rest for this night, and sharper weapons for the next
morning.

The second days Conference upon the second Proposition.
Het. A Good morrow to you Orthodox, worthy Champion Defendant, you come well
armed I make no doubt at all pieces.

Orthod. The same salutation to you Hetrodox, noble Champion Appellant, whose
arms I wish to be more pungent in the conflict of this day, then I could find
them in our late former skirmish.

Hetrod. Be pleased then without further delay, and more loss of time, to lay
forth your second Ground or Proposition.

Orthod. Nothing pleases me better: Then mark well the words and contents
thereof. Christ our Savior, as the Son of God equal to the Father, is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and yet all the time that he was clothed with our
mortal spoils, not only before his bitter death, but likewise after his most
blessed and glorious resurrection, he never exercised the least power of a
secular and temporal Prince.

Hetrod. Make that good, and you shall win the spurs, or carry away my weapons
out of the field.

Orthod. Then sure it shall go very hard, but I will here leave you unarmed in
the place. For Christ our Savior was never invested or inthronised in any
temporal Kingdom: Pilate makes the question to Christ, Art thou a King?
Christ gives the answer, Thou say I am a King: But know, O Pilate, howsoever
I am a King, yet my Kingdom is not of this world, that is, not a temporal
Kingdom. When that multitude of people who had been miraculously fed and sated
with five loaves and two fishes, were minded and purposed to make him King, he
stepped aside, that he might not be taken by them, and so made King. He never
took upon him to sit as Judge or Umpire in any man's cause, Tho. Aqui. in ep. ad
Roman.
but answered those who required him to give sentence in a certain litigious
matter. Who made me a Judge over your persons or your causes? Yea, he directly
acknowledged Pilate, Caesar's deputy or Governor, to be his lawful Judge, Thou
could not have any power over me, if it were not given thee from above.

Hetrod. This your second Proposition seems to shoot and have a fling at
matters of State in present question, and no mean garboyles: But in sooth, it
does not so much as touch the same; for they treat not of temporal Kingdoms,
but of Ecclesiastical affairs; so that your Proposition serves only to
bewray your own bad affection and erroneous conceit.

I therefore must give you thus much to understand; Very certain it is, that
Christ as he was Man mortal, did never exercise any power of a temporal
Prince in this world; For his coming into the world (it is his own testimony)
was to suffer, to serve, to teach men contempt of worldly wealth and honor, as
also by his humility and obedience, to chalk out and make plain the way or
path, which leads to the celestial Paradise, before the face and eyes of all
proud and rebellious or disobedient people. The Son of Man came not to be
served, but to serve, and to give his life for the redemption of many. Mar.
20.28
The Son of Man has not whereon to lay his head. Learn of me that I am
meek and lowly in heart. Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, Luc. 9.58.
Mat. 11.29. 2 Cor. 8.9. Phil. 2.8.
that he being rich, for your sakes became poor. He humbled himself, and
became ebedient to the death, even the death of the cross.

But your Proposition should carry this one joint or branch more, That Christ
even as man (in case he had been so minded) might have assumed to himself the
dominion of all temporal causes or matters, and made himself a King or an
Emperor, Jam. 11. Heb. 1.2.
which of the two he would: The Father has given all things into his hands and
has made him heir of all things.

Again, It should not have been put down in your Proposition, that Christ
after his Resurrection exercised no power of a temporal Prince, without
addition of this clause, that Christ after his Resurrection, even as he is man,
has obtained the government of the whole would, not as a temporal Prince, but
as an Eternal Prince, Reve. 1.5. Mat. 28.18.
far superior to all temporal Princes, as the first begotten of the dead,
and Prince of all earthly Princes; and to whom all power is given both in
Heaven and in earth: Which power is not properly temporal, because it is
eternal, and yet is above all things both temporal and eternal.

But now again, that Christ acknowledged Pilate for his Judge, as you affirm;
I must be bold to tell you Orthodox, It smells somewhat rank of error; For
Christ, even as man, was the High priest, with power of excellency, yea he was
the head of men and of Angels; so that he had no superior upon the face of
the whole earth, neither could he be judged of any other, I mean de jure, by
right; Philip. 2.8.
(howsoever perhaps de facto, by fact, he might be brought coram nobis, upon
his own sufferance and permission:) For it was he that humbled himself, viz.
because he would be so humbled by the death of the Cross: And as for his words
to Pilate, Thou could have no power over me O Pilate, if it were not given
thee from above, (where Christ seems to take Pilate for his Judge) this answer
I make, By power in those words is meant Permission; and so the sense of that
passage results to this reckoning, That Pilate had never been able to stir
either one foot or finger, if it had not been by Gods permission. In the same
sense are these other words to be taken, Luc.
This is your hour, and the power of darkness: And this is the answer of the
holy Fathers, Chrysostom and Cyril, in their Expositions upon the 19. of John.

In 13. ad Romans
But whereas Thomas understands the same place of John, of the power that
Princes have from God; it likes me well to confess and say, that Pilates power
(as the Minister of Caesar) was from God, from whom all lawful power descends.
Howbeit (with your favor) that such power in Pilate was extended and stretched
over Christ, it grew out of Pilates ignorance, who never knew the
super-excellent dignity of Christ, and gave sentence against Christ as against
a private person of the same Country or Territory, whereof then under Caesar he
was L. President or chief Governor. As if a Priest in these days, under the
name of a Laic, and in a Laic habit, should be brought by warrant before a
Secular Magistrate or Judge, he might be judged by the same power whereby he
judges all other Laics; yet does it not follow, that Priests are to come under
the judgment of Laics, or that Christ was to submit his neck under the yoke of
Pilates judgment.

Orthod. You deny that in the present garboyles (at which you wrongfully charge
me to aim) there is any reference to the temperoll Kingdom; and yet because
you needs will draw me to the scanning of that point, I say it is most
notorious, that in a manner the best Freehold of all temporal Kingdoms is
thereby drawn into debatement. I let pass your Thesis, and will stand upon the
Hypothesis. Say the Pope now sends forth prohibition to any Christian King, or
temporal State, that he or they shall not meddle with judging Ecclesiastical
persons, running into delicts of nature merely temporal, and no way reflecting
upon spiritual matters. Again, that he or they shall not frame particular
Provisoes or Laws, concerning Lands not hitherto acquired or accrued to
Ecclesiastical dominion: (In quae bonae nondum ipsis est jus quaesitum) I now
demand, By what authority the Pope sends forth any such prohibition? I hope,
not by any authority of Temporal Princes or States; for he is not Lord
Paramount in Temporalls of their Dominions and Territories. By like then he
does it by his authority of universal Pastor. Now because that authority of
Universal Pastor (as we hold) he holds as the Vicar of Christ; it was not
impertinent or superfluous for me to show, but necessary to demonstrate, what
authority Christ himself exercised in temporal causes. For Christ's authority
must be the only rule of the Popes authority, witness the words of Christ's
own mouth, As my Father has, even so do I send you forth. Joan. 20.
In which words, Christ communicated the authority of jurisdiction to Peter,
and the rest of his Apostles, as by Card. Bellarmine himself it is confessed.
And moreover, for so much as the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
servant above his Lord, Luc. 6.
it serves to draw from those words, Pase^ oves, Feed my sheep, That as Christ
himself was no Pastor in Temporals, but in Spirituals, in like manner the
Pope, Iure Pontificatus, in his right of Popedom, has do authority or
dominion in temporal matters, and in particular, when the laws temporal, Non
impedunt cursum ad vitam aeternam, are no hinderance in the way to life
eternal, but establish a civil peace, are directed and leveld to the
maintaining and preserving of that State, of that Liberty, of that Dominion,
wherein particular profession is made of Christian Religion, and of Piety, as
also to the conserving and upholding of publ que justice: Now then, if I to
bring proof of all this, have labored in the first place to show what power
our Lord Christ himself exercised in temporal matters, then sure I have
spoken home to the point, and nothing from the purpose, as you cavil: Now I
will have a bout or a course at your errors; not as in a May Game or light
skirmish, but with Champion-like devoyre.

1. You confess, that Christ never exercised any temporal power in this
world; and it is all that I either have affirmed, or can desire to be
confessed. Nevertheless you take upon you to teach, that I looked not before I
leaped, because I should have subjoyned, that Christ, if it had been his good
pleasure, might by his power have exercised the said temporal power: Now as I
freely canfesse and acknowledge that in this point you are not our of the right
way, that if Christ had been so pleased, he lawfully might have exercised the
said power, because he was not only man, but also God, natures being united in
one person (and actions according to that rule in philosophy, Sunt suppositorum
and idiomata communicantur, according to that rule in divinity) nevertheless
whereas you pretend, that all I have delivered of this point before is to little
purpose, and from the purpose; you are to take this for a short, but yet for a
sufficient and full answer, that our present question is de facto, a question
of the fact, non de possibili, not a question of what might be, or what was
possible to be done: Forasmuch as the Popes authority being founded upon
Christ's example, the supreme Pastor, it sufficed to show what actions Christ
himself used for the feeding of his little flock, and not meddle with another
new question, what actions he was able to do, if he had been willing: For
doubts any man, that Christ was able by extraordinary power to work the
conversion of the whole world? To sanctify the whole stock and race of mankind
in the twinkling of an eye without shedding one drop of his precious blood? Is
there any thing impossible with God? Luc. 1.37.
But well assured that arguments drawn from possible to fact, are of no force,
therefore I would not be so idle before to talk of what Christ was able to do
in temporal matters, but what he has done in very truth.

2. This again you have supponed, that our Lord Christ as mortal man had
lawful dominion in temporal matters: But Moldonate a learned Jesuit of your
own Order, in his exposition of these words, My Kingdom is not of this world,
In cap. 27. mat.
has learnedly and effectually proved the contrary: it may by some perhaps be
collected, that Christ had the temporal dominion of the world three ways, as
he was man, 1. By right of inheritance, 2. By right of creation, 3. By
authentical testimony of Scripture, where in many places he is called a King,
and that as he was man, which in effect is thus much; That Christ was King of
this world, either jure naturali, by the law of nature, that is by the right of
inheritance, or jure humano, by man's law, that is by right of election; or jure
divino, by Gods law, that is, by authority of Scripture: But first, by right of
inheritance, I say Christ was no such King, for albeit he was descended from
the royal stock of Judah, yet we know that Kingdom (according to the
fore-threatning of Almighty God) ended and came to the last period in Jeconiah,
and was a kind of particular reigning, neither was Christ lawful heir
apparent unto any other King: Next, he was no King by election, for it is not
known that ever he was chosen King by the People, but rather that he gave them
the slip and went aside, when he knew they intended to make him King: It
remains then, that by authority of Scripture he was a temporal King, albeit
he never exercised his temporal power: But in holy Scripture not a word of any
such temporal Kingdom, but only of his spiritual Kingdom: Thus the great
Father S. Augustine, and thus Maldonate, Tract. 115 in Joan.
agreeable to the opinion of al Divines of the best rank; whereupon he
concludes in this notable manner: Qua vero part Christus homo erat, non erat
universi orbis terrarum temporalis Rex; ut and Augustinus eo loco quem modo
nominavimus and omnes boni Theologi sentiunt: Aut enim naturali, aut divino,
aut humana jure rex esset; naturali non erat, quia regis filius non erat, quod
est naturalem esse regem: Divino non erat, quia omnia sacrarum literarum
testimonia quae de ejus loquuntur regno, ut August a^t, et omnes boni theologi
affirmant, de spirituali intelliguntur; humano non erat, quia non fuit orbis
terrarum consensu res electus, et cum Iudaei vellent eum rapere ut regem
facerent, aufugit: So that Christ as mortal man, then having no temporal
dominion, he could never exercise the same: For, Non est actus, ubi non est
ulla potentia ad illum actum, no exercise, where no power to bring forth such
exercise: This must be understood of Christ as he was man, and mortal man: For
as God, no doubt (as before has been said) he was King of Kings and Lord of
Lords: As for the eternal power of Christ our Lord (for so you call it) which
was given him after his resurrection; there was no need to make any speech or
motion thereof, because the present question is of temporal Power, and not of
eternal; which eternal power for certain Christ our Lord has not given and
left unto his Vicar.

3. Your third error lies in a mis-interpretation of two several texts, this
for the one, knowing that his Father has given al things into his hands; and
this for the other, whom he has made heir of all things: For you understand
them both of his temporal power, whereas Maldonate by the authority of S.
Augustine, and of all the best Divines affirms they are to be understood (as
they ought in very truth) of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, which in the Gospel
is called the Kingdom of heaven: Joan. 19.
For if the said words might be understood of Christ's temporal Kingdom, then
Christ himself had not forborne (which God forbid) to rap or breathe out a lie,
when he said, My Kingdom is not of this world, and again, My Kingdom is not
from hence: For he had by that means denied what holy Scripture had affirmed he
was indeed, that is, a temporal King: But say still, that Christ as man had
temporal dominion, yet still it remains good, that he did never put such
temporal dominion in practice or execution, which as you have already
confessed, so it is sufficient for my purpose.

Joan. 19.11.
4. That place in S. John, Thou could have no power over me, except it had
been given thee from above, you say is not understood of the Judge or Lord
Governors ordinary power, but of a permissive power: In good time Sir; but
were it so as you interpret, surely then Christ had proved himself but a bad
Logician to answer the governor clean from the purpose; for Pilate spoke of
his judiciary power, Joan. 16.
when he said to Christ, Know thou not that I have power to loose thee? etc.
Secondly, not Pilate alone, but likewise all the Jews had the same permissive
power, of which permissive power your text before cited is to be understood,
this is your hour, and the power af darkness, which for this reason is
called the power of darkness, because It is not given from above, 20. Jac. 1.17.
even from the Father of lights: Thirdly, permissive power, cannot be called a
power given, but rather a power not denied, or not let and hindered from
above; Non data, sed non negata, vel non impedita desuper. Fourthly, that is
called permissive power, whereby God permits and suffers a sinner to fall into
sin, but God gives no such power from above; for if he give it from above,
then he himself concurres with sin, and is the author of sin; which
doctrine is even as false as God is true, and as truth is no lie: S. Thomas
therefore says, and you Hetrodox confess, the words are understood of the
Judge Pilats ordinary power, as the Minister of Caesar, yea, S. Augustine upon
the same words thus, Discamus ergo quod Christus dixit, quod and Apostolum
docuit, quia non est potestas nisi a Deo, quidquid sit de actu male utentis ea;
and quia plus peccat qui innocentem occidendum potestati livore tradit, quam
ipsa potestas, si eum timore alterius potestatis majoris occidit, talem quippe
Deus dederat illi potestatem, ut esset etiam sub Caesaris potestate. Learn we
then says S Augustine, (as first Christ himself said in person, and after
taught his Apostle Paul) there is no power but of God, be the act of the
person, by whom the said power is abused, what it will: And learn we withal,
that he commits the greater sin, who for envy delivers up the innocent unto
the higher power to be executed, then the Magistrate himself commits, who for
fear of some other Power higher then himself, puts the innocent unto death:
For God gave Pilate such power, as might be many degrees under Cesars absolute
and supreme power: And here I will touch another of your errors, a twig of the
same branch, in attributing that unto Pilats ignorance, which Augustine with
all the rest have ascribed to his fear, of purchasing to himself Cesars heavy
displeasure and indignation: To my purpose I have this also from Saint Bernard,
Romani presidiis potestatem Christus super se quoque fat^tur fuisse ordinatam,
In Ep. ad Archiep. Senoven.
Our Savior Christ was not ashamed to confess, that over himself the Roman
President had lawful and ordinate power. And in the same Epistle to the same
Archbishop, Quid secularitatem contemnitis? Secularior n^mo Pilato, cui Dominus
astitit judicandus; Non haberes in me potestatem, nisi tibi datu^ esset
desuper; Iam tunc pro se loqu^batur, quod post per Apostolo^ clamavit in
Ecclesiis, Non est potestas nisi a Deo: Wherefore set you so light by
Secularity? who ever was more secular then Pilate, before whose Tribunal, and
at whose Bar the Lord Christ himself stood indicted, to receive judgment
and sentence of death from his mouth, Thou could not have any power against
me, (says Christ) except it were given thee from above. Even then and there
Christ was his own Advocate; even then and there he pleaded his own cause;
even then and there he had sensible experience of the same thing in his own
person and case, which afterward he proclaimed in the Church by the ministry
of his Apostle, There is no power but of God.

5. S. John, Chrysostom, and S. Cyril, whom you have alleged, do not deny
that Christ speaks of ordinary judiciary power; They only affirm, that
whereas Christ might have avoided that judgment, either by hiding himself,
(perhaps as he did when the Jews would have stoned him to death) or by
commanding (as he was God) twelve legions of Angels to come down from heaven
for his aid and rescue; yet he did not decline, retard, or any way hinder the
course of the said judiciary power and proceeding. From whence no argument is
to be drawn, that such power was not of God, but rather the contrary; And this
our Divines understand, not of Christ's ordinary, but of his absolute power;
quia oportuit Christum pati, Luc. 24.46
for ought not Christ (as he speaks himself) to have suffered these things,
and enter into his glory?

6. Again, you bring the same for a reason, which is in the question; The Pope
being High priest, cannot be judged forsooth in temporalls by any temporal
Judge: therefore Christ being High priest, could not be judged by Pilate in the
fact of usurped jurisdiction, imputed and laid to his charge. What shall I call
this manner and form of reasoning, but a sophisme or fallacy in a bold
begging of the question? For it should rather be thus reasoned and argued on
the contrary; Because Christ our Lord has not shunned the judgment of the
temporal Prince, but said, that his power was given from above, and yet by all
means was the High priest; therefore the Pope or High priest of Rome ought not
in like cases to renounce or disclaim the judgment of the temporal Prince;
for Christ's actions must be a rule to the actions of the Roman Bishop, not his
actions a rule to the actions of Christ.

You put upon Thomas an exposition of his words clean contrary to his true
meaning and right sense of the same, an exposition altogether unworthy of that
Angelical Doctors doctrine; and here I am bound to fight for my Country, for
my Master and Compatriot, whose Catholic Doctrine in all Theological
disputes; and in this by name, I am resolved to hold. His words be these;
Quicquid communiter de Deo and de creaturis dicitur, a Deo in creatur as
derivatur: Potestas autem de Deo and hominibus dicitur; Job. 39
Deus potestates non abjicit eum ipse sit potens; unde consequens est, quod
omnis humana potestas sit a Deo. Dominabitur excelsus in regno hominum, Dan. 4.
Joh. 19
and cuicunque voluerit dabit illud. Non haberes in me potestatem ullam, nisi
tibi datum esset desuper. Whatsoever is affirmed in common, both of God and the
creatures, the same is derived and sent from God to the creatures. Now power is
affirmed of men, as well as of God; for God who is most powerful himself,
exalts Powers by his power; whereof it follows in right good consequence,
that all power is of God: The most High rules in the Kingdom of men, and
gives it unto whom he will: Thou could have no power against me, except it
were given thee from above. So that we see, Thomas there treats of judiciarie
power, affirmed in common both of God and the creatures, and speaks not of
Permissive power.

You please your self in producing the example of a Priest, stepped into a Laic
habit, and presented before the secular Judge: This man knowing himself to be
a Priest indeed, and not a Laic, as he shows, pretending and standing upon his
exemption, would never (as you bear us here in hand) say thus unto the Judge,
My Lord, You have power against me from heaven; but rather thus on the
contrary, your Lordship has no power against me from above: So that Christ
himself not so speaking, but rather the contrary, has not marked or pointed
out any such pretension: Where it is to be considered, that you bring into the
Play and upon the Stage, a Priest attired like a Laic di stuc^^; one who
pretending Priesthood, is not able to say that he is a Priest, nor to produce
and present his faculties: but I know the contrary practice. For in some
States, where the Prince has granted exemption from his power unto Clerics in
criminal causes, many to shun and escape the secular judgment, have made
themselves capable of Orders and Clericship by false and counterfeit faculties
or breves: whereas you, Hetrodox, are of another mind, as it seems; namely,
that a Priest who is graced and privileged with such exemption in very truth,
may not say so much, nor show the same to the secular Judge; but rather should
confess the contrary, to wit, That doubtless the Judge is authorized and
strengthened against him with ordinary power. Now these things Hetrodox not
only are false, but also stand next door to things incredible.

Hetrod. Have you done with my errors, or have you any more good and sound
stuff wherewith to bombast your 2. Proposition?

Orthod. I have no more to say of your errors, but now I long to see how deep
your challenging sword can cut in this one shield of brass: Our Lord Christ
commanded tribute to be paid unto the secular Prince, that is, unto Caesar, Give
unto Caesar the things that are Cesars: The truth of this Proposition is opposed
by some, who say, that howsoever Christ paid tribute really unto Caesar, both
for himself and for Peter; yet withal he professed and said, he was not bound
to the payment of such tribute; Nunquid filii debent solvere tributum? Are the
children bound to pay tribute? Herein, say these men, the Lord Christ pointed
out as with one of his fingers his own authority of a temporal Prince, no way
in terms of obligation to be assessed and laid as a Tributarie. To this doubt,
Answer is made, That (according to some Doctors) all that were natively of the
Country, bred and borne therein, who were called by that name of children, were
not bound to pay the said tribute; and because both Christ himself, and Peter,
were of that Country, bred and borne, therefore Christ affirmed they were not
obliged to any such payments; or else, to speak in a better and higher sense,
he thereby pointed (...) his own most holy Divinity, and said, That as the
Son of God he was not bound to pay: But because the rendering of that reason
was too deep and too high a mystery, whereof the public ministers or officers
for the exacting and collecting of tribute were altogether incapable, he
therefore said further, sed ne scandalizentur, lest we should cause them to
stumble at some offense or scandal. Where we may see, what special account
and reckoning our Savior Christ made of not scandalizing the Ministers of
Secular Princes, the Collectors of Tribute or Poll-money, alleging so true and
real an exemption, howsoever by the said Toll-gatherers it was not understood.

Hetrod. Is this your sevenfold- Ajax shield, which no sword can cut or
pierce? what say you then to this one stoccado? It is true, that Christ
commanded tribute to be paid unto Caesar; but it makes nothing to the purpose:
shall I tell you the why so? forsooth because it is denied of none, That
Poll-money or Tribute is due to Princes, and ought out of all question to be
paid by those who are bound to such payment, as Paul says, ^om. 13.7.
Give to all men their due, tribute to whom tribute, etc. But now touching the
tribute which Christ paid for himself and Peter, it seems thou have sipped at
least of Marsilius poisoned cup (I mean that Marsilius of Padua's Heresy) who
was not ashamed to affirm, That Christ paid the said Tribute, not by
condescension, but by compulsion, as thereunto constrained by necessity. His
Heresy was condemned by Pope John XXII. For thou have alleged none other
exemption, to prove that Christ was not bound to pay the said tribute, five
only because he was native of the soil, and the native people were called the
children; and because he had the Divinity, according to which being the Son
of God, he was not bound: The first reason is wholly frivolous and vain; for
not only those of the soil were not exempted, but in very deed they only
were bound to pay the tribute: And this we find in Moses Law, where Lays,
Exodus 3^
Levies and Tributes were imposed and charged upon the Children of Israel; that
every one should pay half a sicle, which makes two drachmes: which Tribute was
afterward taken up and received by the Romans, Lib. 7. d^ bell. Jud cap. 26.
as Josephus writes.

The second reason exempts Christ as God, not as man, and therefore as man
(according to thy words) he was bound: that was the assertion of Marsilius the
Paduan; the very same is gathered from thy discourse, for thou go about to
prove, that Christ was no temporal Prince: this to make good, thou bring in
for thy last and best reason, that Christ commanded to pay tribute unto the
secular Prince, which reason has not so much as one grain of pith or force,
if thou add not another grain, that Christ himself really paid the tribute:
And for so much as herein rests the whole force of thy Argument, therefore thou
com^st in with an objection against thy self; that some by way of opposition
do teach, that Christ was not bound to pay tribute; and yet paid it down, lest
he should give offense to the Tollers appointed for that purpose: Now this I
demand, whether was Christ as man bound or not bound to pay tribute? If thou
say he was bound, then thou make thy self brother-heretic, or fellow-heretic
to Marsilius of Padua, condemned for an heretic: If thou shall say, that Christ
was not bound, then by thine own confession, thy reason is made to be of no
force, and to no purpose: The plain truth of the point is this, that Christ
even as man, and his Apostles also, were not bound to the payment of the said
tribute: and wherefore? Because Christ as a man, was no humane but a divine
person, and no adoptive but a natural son of God, King of all Kings, and so
not bound to pay tribute unto any King: And for so much as when the Prince
himself is not bound to pay, his Family much less is bound to that service or
duty, therefore the Apostles who were the Family of Christ, were in like manner
not bound to come off to the said payment: (...) cap. 17. ^at. lib. ^uest.
E^ng* q. 23.
From hence both S. Jerome and S. Augustine have rightly framed this collection
and conclusion, that Clerics are not bound to pay tribute unto secular Princes,
because they are of Christ's own Family, and exempted from all such payments in
honor of Christ: I forbear to relate the rest of thy words touching this thy
Proposition, because they are points of light stuff, and small moment,, and
also because (not making against our cause) they need not our answer.

Orthod. Nay Sir by your patience, the reason by me last alleged, is to good
and special purpose: For had Christ been a temporal King, he would never have
commanded to pay tribute unto Caesar, but rather would have said, Reddite mihi,
give tribute unto me, because I, and not Caesar, am your temporal King: But I
hasten to have your errors by the ears.

1. First it is an error in point of creance, or common courtesy and civil
carriage, at least it is a sl^p of your tongue, to give a man the thou at every
word: you do it not I persuade my self, for lack of good manners, or because
you are to seek in the terms of civility, or by way of disparagement, but in
some angry humor, and passionate mood: So it comes many times to pass indeed,
that men falling to some friendly quarrel or contention in cold blood, begin
with you, and after when the blood is up, and the quarrel grown to some heat,
they end in thou: true it is, that no man should suffer himself to be overcome
with wrath or anger, or any other like disordinate or distempered passion, but
should show himself conformable to the Apostles words, ^hil. 4.
Let your moderation be known to all men: howbeit I need not marvel, that you
are pleased to thou a man, whom being none other then a good Catholic, you
needs will mark and stamp with an heretics brand, not in his Fist, but in
his Forehead.

2. Again, Marsilius of Padua professed (some say) that Christ paid tribute,
as compelled by necessity: You lay to my charge that I affirm the same; and
yet I affirm the clean contrary: namely, that Christ not being bound (as the
son of God) to pay tribute; paid the same nevertheless with a willing mind
and a free hand, lest otherwise he should have left some block, at which the
Ministers of the secular Prince might have tripped at least, if not stumbled in
their way: He that makes this affirmative, does not affirm that Christ paid
tribute as constrained by necessity, but of his own condiscention, that is,
lest he should offend.

3. Again, you are absolute and positive, in putting down the tribute whereof
we now speak, to be the same which God commanded to be paid unto the Temple;
Exodus 3^
and that in Exodus to be the same taxation by Poll or head, which Augustus
imposed, and was exacted in the time of Christ our Lord: To make this good, you
cite Josephus, whereas Josephus writes not of the tribute imposed by Augustus,
lib. 7. c. 2
but of that which was imposed by Vespasianus; and that imposition was many
years after the death of Christ, and of Augustus.

4. Again, Doctors doubt what tribute this was; whether it was the tribute of
the temple, according to Hilarious, or the tribute of Augustus, according to
modern Authors, or the tribute of the Firstborn, according to Chrysostom; or
the tribute imposed* upon strangers or foreigners, and not upon those of the
City, according to Titelmannus: You resolutely affirm this tribute whereof we
now speak, was the tribute of Augustus, but you give us no reason of your
assertion; and yet besides you seek to put out mine eye with a false text of
Josephus, with a reiteration, that Augustus his tribute was the tribute of the
Temple: Again, I buckle my self to the true exposition; that Christ was not
bound to pay tribute, because he was the son of God, and sons use to pay no
tribute, required or exacted in the name of the King their Father: But you
Hetrodox, from this my negative, against all the rules of Logic will draw the
affirmative, and charge me to hold, that Christ, as man, was bound to pay the
said tribute: Now Sir, If any affirm the People of Rome ought not to withstand
the commands of his Holiness, as he i^ Christ's Vicar, of this will you infer
and conclude, the people of Rome ought doubtless to withstand his Holiness, as
he is a temporal Prince? The very Pesant of mean and common capacity would be
ready to hiss the conclusion out of the Laic Schools, Qui unum negat, alterum
non affirmat, he that denies one thing, does not forthwith affirm another,
when the said things are not contrary, but only dispared, as in our present
case: but I very well perceive your fetch Hetrodox, it was to fetch in
Marsilius of Padua, and you have fetched him in with a witness, for you have
pulled him into the Stage by the ears, and out of all due time: sufficient it
is for me to allege the reason alleged by Christ himself, (that as the Son
of God he was not bound to pay any tribute) to untie the knot of the argument
produced to the contrary, not by me, but by others; and nevertheless I do not
affirm, that Christ our Lord was bound as man, to pay the said tribute.

6. Again our Savior Christ stands upon this reason, to prove his exemption
from tribute, because he was the Son of God: But you Hetrodox, do take a
stride, nay more then one stride further, and stick not here to affirm that S.
Peter also was exempted, because he was of Christ's own family, who was the Son
of God; but Christ as all m^n know, there spoke not a word of the family, but
only of the Son; and Christ kept no servants, he was only followed by certain
Disciples: And howsoever the servants of the Kings son should be exempted
from tribute, so long as they are employed in his service, yet doubtless the
Disciples of Christ, were not servants of Christ, Non dixi vos servos, sed
amicos, non veni ministrari, sed ministrare, I have not called you servants but
friends, I came not into the world to be served, but rather to serve others:
And moreover the exposition which you here set down Hetrodox, is directly flat
against the text: For the Publicanes presupposed, they took it for granted,
they put it out of all hunger and cold, that S. Peter was liable to tribute for
his own Poll, and therefore they only asked Peter (not whether he himself)
whether his master was in the check-roll of tributaries for his Poll, whereupon
Christ forthwith gave order, that Peter should make present payment on the
nail for them both; for himself, that he might give no cause of scandal to
the Publicans, and for Peter, because he was liable to the law of tribute:
wherein first I observe, that Peter then was neither Priest nor Pope; Secondly,
that in case of necessity, even ecclesiasties exempted (says Thomas Aquinas,
privilegio Principum, by Princely privilege) ought in duty to pay tribute,
because Peter found the Statere or Sicle, wherewith he paid tribute, in a
fishes Belly; to notify, that men ought (by way of Subsidy and ^id to their
Princes) to pay tribute of those goods, which they have got and received of
fishes; that is, by the alms of charitable and faithful Christians.

7. Again, you are not pleased nor disposed Hetrodox to apprehend the pith and
force of my argument: For to prove that Christ never exercised any temporal
dominion, it sufficed to affirm, that Christ himself said, Give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars: But because there are some who frame that argument, not
against the words, Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, but against the
whole discourse in general; to prove, that Christ was a temporal King,
because he said, that he was not bound to pay tribute. I therefore answer, that
Christ spoke not so in regard that he was a temporal King, but in regard that
he was the Son of God: For this Hetrodox you forsooth would have me reputed
an Heretic; such a mavelous desire you and some others do show, (...) Luke
16.
to have us burnt for this heresy. Ex abundantia cordis ^s loquitur, the mouth
speaks out of the abundance of the heart. Nauseat anima eorum super cib^ isto
l^vissimo, Number. 21
their soul loatheth such light bread, and yet my Religion to me is a heavenly
Manna: But surely we are not such, and by the grace of God we will never be
found such, as you and some other do seem to desire.

8. Again, you play false in citing S. Jeroms Text; for you shall find his
words clean contrary, and thus in true terms; Dominus noster secundum carnem,
and secundum Spiritum filius Regis erat; vel ex Davidis stirpe generatus, vel
omnipotentis verbum patris: ergo tributa quasi Regis filius non dababat; sed
qui humilitatem carnis assumpserat, debuit adimplere omnem justitiam; nosque
infoelices Christi censemur nomine, and nihil dignum facimus tanta majestate:
Ille pro nobis crucem sustinuit, and tributa reddidit; nos pro illius honor
tributa non reddimus, and quasi filii Regis a vectigalibus immunes sumus? Our
Lord was the Son of a King, both according to the flesh, and according to the
Spirit; either as bred of the stock of David, or as the Word of the Omnipotent
and Almighty Father; and therefore, as a Son descended and borne of Kings, he
did owe no kind of tribute; but he who took the baseness of our nature, was to
fulfill all righteousness. We wretched creatures (mark how he reckons himself
in the number, then being a Priest, and according to some Authors a Cardinal)
are inrowled in the censorian tables of Christ, and yet we work nothing of so
high majesty and honor. He for us has born the Cross, and paid tribute;
shall not we then for his honor pay tribute, but as if we were free born, and
the Kings natural sons, escape altogether Scot-free from all manner of tallage,
poundage, customs, tributes, aids, and subsidies? In this place we see S.
Jerome not only does not affirm, that immunities are De jure divino, by Gods
Law; but he also grievously complains (as Iansenius testifies) that
Ecclesiastics did not pay the required and imposed tributes for the honor of
Christ; as if they were the Kings eldest sons, that is, exempted by the Law
of God: Who sees not here the great and notable discrepance between the spirit
of godly Saints, and the blanched pretensions of our times? But most of all it
grieves and afflicts my mind, to see and hear, how men impose one thing upon
the learned Saints and ancient Fathers, when they teach another, and the clean
contrary. Iansenius in this place affirms, That Exemption is Privilegium
Principum secularium, and non jure divino, the privilege of Secular Princes,
and not by Gods Law.

9. You run Hetrodox into the same error, in citing the words of S. Augustine,
whose words be these: Quod dixit ergo liberi sunt filii, in omni regno
intelligendum est libe^os esse Regis filios, non vestigales; multo ergo magis
liberi esse debent in regno terren^ filii illius regis, sub quo sunt omnia a
regna terrae; whereas therefore Christ has said the children are free, it is
to be understood, that in every Kingdom the Kings own children are no
tributaries, to pay any Subsidies, Rents, or Pensions: How much more then
should the sons and children of that King be free, in a terrene or earthly
Kingdom, under whose footstool all the Kingdoms of the earth are couched? S.
Thomas expounding this passage, uses a very direct and perspicuous answer, Qui
facti sunt Filii Dei per gratiam, liberi sunt in quolibet regno, secundum
mentem, a servitute scilicet peccati, non autem liberi a servitute corporali;
In every Kingdom the sons of God by grace, are free as touching the mind,
namely, from the bondage of sin, but not free from service of the body: And
here three things are to be noted, 1. that S. August. speaks not of
Ecclesiastics, (as Card. Bellarm. pretends) but of all Christians: 2. That he
speaks not of any liberty or immunity from corporal charges or burdens, S.
August. and Tho. in 13. ad Rom
but speaks of spiritual liberty and freedom from sin. 3. That from this
place Thomas collects we have no liberty, no immunity from God, whereby we
are exempted from the dominion of temporal Kings in temporal causes.

Jansenius brings a better and more literal exposition of S. August. words,
for he says S. August. reasons from the plural number, as Christ himself
argues from the plural; nevertheless it is to be understood of the singular
number, that is, of Christ alone: As for example, suppose a son of the French
King should say, if in every Kingdom the Kings children be free from tribute,
much more then in the Kingdom of France ought all the sons of the King be
free; and therefore I ought; So says S. August. that Christ spoke unto Peter,
Jn omni regno liberi sunt regis filii, etc. In every Kingdom the Kings
children are no tributaries, but free; then much more ought all the sons and
children of that King be free in a terrene Kingdom, to whom all the Kingdoms
of the earth are in subjection; and that is, I ought much more to be exempted
from paying tribute or Poll-money, but lest we should scandalize these
Publicans and toll-gatherers, or Collectors, etc. And this doubtless is the
true exposition of that place, wherein who can be so blind as not to see your
ninth most manifest and palpable error?

Hetrod. No doubt Orthodox, if some of your heretical Sect where here now in
place, they would bestow upon you a ringing plaudite for acting your part so
well, in the defense of this days Proposition.

Orthod. I confess Hetrodox, that after the way which you call heresy,
touching this days Proposition, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing
all things concerning this Article, which are written in the Law, in the
Prophets, in the Apostles, in the holy Fathers writings, not blurred nor abused
with erroneous expositions, and false glosses, Errare possum, Haereticus esse
nolo, subject I may be and am to errors as all men are, (your self Hetrodox
not excepted, with all your deep Clark-ship) but you shall never find me
wilfully to persist, or stick in any error, as heretics do, by the grace of my
God, as I said before: It seems by your falling to reproachful terms, that
you have no more Petarres to blow up the strong gates of my second Proposition,
or other Engines and Pieces of great Ordnance to batter the Walls and Flankers
thereof: will your courage and heart serve you to play with your Artillery to
morrow morning, and to give a brave assault upon the Fort of my third
Proposition?

Het. In the word of a General it shall be done, assuring my self of honor
and victory in the action.

Orth. The hour.

Het. At Sunrise.

Orth. Agreed Sir.

Het. At your service Sir.

The third days Conference.
Orthodox. THe hour is j^stly kept of both parts; Is your g^t Ordna^ce placed?
Then let us hear it ^ay: Time you know is precious.

Hetrodox. It shall presently roar and thunder to the raising of the Fort,
vainly fancied to be impregnable, if you dare first give me leav^ to take some
view of your third Proposition.

Orthod. Dare Hetrodox? I dare, and I do; Here is the true model or
plat-forme to less then a hair: Take a full view thereof at your good
pleasure.

Hetrod. O strange! what do ^here set? First it purports that our Lord Christ
never exercised any authority of a Temporal Prince.

Orthod. I perceive Hetrodox, there is neither Beam, nor Pin and Web in your
eye; Indeed it purports no less: and thereupon it inferres; That Christ never
left any such authority to St. Peter and his successors, whom we Catholics
call his Vicar; For the Vicar is never advanced to a higher degree of Dignity
and Power, then the chief and principal Commander himself even purchased and
possessed before: Lib. 1 sent. De auct. Papae.
Sotus and Cardinal Bellarmine looking into this matter through clear
Christalline Spectacles, do much wonder to see the boldness of our Canonists,
who have the face to maintain without any reason, or authority of the
New Testament: That Papa est Dominus totius orbis direct in temporalibus, the
Pope in all temporal causes is the direct Lord of the whole World; a Doctrine
for certain full of scandal, and built upon a sand^ foundation: Some Authors
(besides the Canons which will never hold weight in concurrence with Scripture)
do avouch Thomas of Aquine, De Regim. Princ. c. 10. and 19.
That Papa est Dominus totius orbis in Temporalibus and Spiritualibus, the Pope
is Lord of the whole World, as well in Temporals as in Spirituals: But by their
good leave, Thomas never had neither head or hand in the inditing or penning of
that work: I appeal herein to Card. Bellar. himself: De potest. Papae.
Besides diverse others of his most certain conjectures, this one is of strong
sinews, and thereby carries the greater force: He sets down the Emperor
Adulphus for the next successor to Rodulphus, in the year Mccxcii. and the
Emperor Albertus for the next successor to Adulphus in the year, Mccxcix.
whereas St. Thomas walked the way of all flesh in the year, Mcclxxiv. Moreover
they cite another text of St. lib. 2. Senten. Did. 44.
Thomas, Esse in summo Pontifice apicem utriusque potest^tis, Temporalis and
Spiritualis, That our holy Father the Pope is top and top-gallant both of
Temporal power and Spiritual power: But let St. Thomas his text be viewed
with a clear eye, and it will soon be perceived that he was of a contrary
opinion; For after he had taught that in Temporal matters we are bound to obey
the Temporal Prince rather then the Spiritual, and in causes merely
Spiritual, the Spiritual rather then the Temporal, at last he concludes,
That were he not Pope (who in the P ovinces of his command is armed with the
double Sword of both Jurisdictions) he Subjects are bound to honor him with
due obedience equally both in the one and in the other kind.

Hetrod. Is this your strong Fort Orthodox? Is it no better manned? Has it no
stronger Barricadoes? Then hear, n t yet my Basilisco or double Canons, but my
Demi-Canons and Culvering play.

Your third Proposition is like the second; neither bar^ell better herring: It
neither sorts nor suits with your principal scope, it s^rves only to bewray
the spiteful humor, and little sincerity in alleging of the Authors by your
self alledg^d.

First, It jarres with your Scope and purpose; For your whole intention tends
to set up a Flag or Banner of Defiance against our Holy Fathers sentences of
Excommunications and Interdicts, thundered against Christian Princes and States
in cases of contumacie, as one that charges the said sentences and censures
with Invaliditie and mere Null^tie: To which purpose you might as well affirm,
that our Holy Father the Pope is not L. Temporal of the World; as if you
should affirm the Fr^nch King cannot condemn and send any man to the Galleys,
because the French King is no Bishop. For to the thundering of a sentence
Excommunicatorie, or of an Interdict, no Regal or Temporal Authority, but
only Papal and Spiritual Power is required; as the Spiritual Power is not
required for the sending of a man to Chains and Oars in the Galleys, because
the Temporal has sufficient Autho ity for that Judgment.

As for your little Sincerity in citing of Authors; let Sotus let Bellarmine
be perused with indifferency of Judgment, and and it will soon be found;
That neither the one, nor the other does use any such terms of immodesty as
you have laid to their charge; namely to affirm, they wonder at our
Canonists, who had such brazen faces, to affirm without any reason, or without
any Authority of the New Testament, that Popes are direct Lords of all the
World in Temporals; a Doctrine in truth full of scandal, and built on the
Sands of the Seashore. That wonder which is come out of your own Forge, will
never be found in the writings of Sotus and Bellarmine; much less that either
they or we have termed the Doctrine of Canonists a scandalous doctrine, and not
grounded upon any reason: We have rather affirmed, it is not absolutely the
Doctrine of Canonists; because we are not ignorant, how far the Canonists
dissent one from another in their opinions: Sotus alleges for himself
Johannes Andreas; and Bellarmine produces for his opinion the Card. de
Turrecremata and Navarras: Cap. Novit. de Judicii.
He might likewise have alleged Pope Innocentius the IV. and the Gloss in the
same place; where the distinction of Direct and indirecte is apertly couched:
The difference between these Authors stands in giving or taking Supreme Power
from the Pope in Temporal causes; For so much is granted of all Writers except
Heretics; but rather it consists in the Manor. For by some Authors it is
resolved, that Popes are armed with Supreme power in Temporals, in like manner
as all secular Princes are: Other Authors contend, that Papal power properly,
and in it self is merely Spiritual; but in ordine ad Spiritualia, in a
certain order and refl^x to Spiritual matters, it may distraine and seize
with all full and absolute authority upon things Temporal. lib. 3. c. 11. 13.
So St. Thomas in that small treatise de Regim. Principum, divinelie makes
demonstration, at least if that little work was of his penning: For Bellarmine
denies not, in any absolute strain, the said little work to be the Artifice
of St. Thomas, but only reports that some, not without cause, have drawn the
matter into doubt; because in that petit volume there is record of an History
that succeeded after St. Thomas death: And Bellarmine himself affirms, it is
no false Latin to conjecture, the said H^storie was nimbly conveyed after the
death of Thomas, into the Libret by some other: And yet, not building upon so
weak an Answer, that the said Book was none of those works which were framed
in St. Thomas his shop, he subjoynes another more solid and much better
soldered answer, namely to clear and explain one sentence of the said Book
by other sentences thereof.

But how can your great and g^osse ^eme^iti^ be suffeerd in speaking to harshly
of the holy Canons? I know (these are your own word^) that some all^dge the
Canons, which as humane Laws in concurrence or paragon of Gods Word, come
short in maki^g the weight of ^qua^l Authority; They cite (as you also
affi^me) St. Thomas, etc. O how great disparagement, nay how great despite is
herein uttered against our sacred Canon? was ever the like heard from the mouth
of any Catholic? You seem to take no care at all, whether your Doctrine be
confirmable or contrary to the sacred Canons, and not so much as vouchsafe to
answer the opponent by whom they are alleged and propounded, as if they were
of no weight and authority at all, when they come to be tried by the common
standard and beam of Gods Word: For you term them absolutely humane Laws, as
if they had not been f^amed and indicted by the assistance of the Holy Spirit;
wherein you fa^l, and fall from the accustomed phrases of the H^l Fathers, by
whom the Canons are continually styled, Sacred, Holy, and inspi^ed of God; Will
you be pleased to hea^e what L^o says, writing to Anat^lius? Nimis haec
imoroh^, ^imis prava suat, quae Sacrat^ssimis Canonibus inveniun u^ esse
contraria; O in how high a degree of p avity and wickedn sse is that Doctrine
rankt which teaches positions adverse and contrary to the most Sacred Canons?
Lastly, whereas you contend, that sac^ed Canons, in concu^rence with Gods
Laws, come so short of matching them in equal balance of Authority; you
plainly show, that Canons in this Argument are contrary to Gods Word, and so
to be reputed of no reckoning or account: And in so doing, what do you else,
but reprove not only the first Authors of the Sacred Canons, for such as have
contrived and penned Constitutions contarry to Gods Word, but likewise the
whole Church that holds the said Canons for most reverend, as holy Rules given
by the Holy Ghost, howsoever they first came from the heads and hands of Popes
or sacred Counsels.

Orthod. If ever that Latin P^^ve^b had any truth, Tuo te gladio jugulas, the
man has cut his own throat with his own knife, it will surely prove more
then true in this occurrence: For you Hetrodox will be found murdered with
your own murdering shot, I mean, refuted if not confounded with your own
example, which is Cardinal Bellarmine: you affirm, that in case the French
King shall adjudge and commit a man to the Galleys, he does it by his Temporal
power, and not by virtue of Spiritual power, whereof he is clean void, like a
Foul when she is bared of all her Feathers: Now I d^mand; in case the Pope
shall serve his Inhibition upon some ab^olute P ince or State, prohibiting them
to make wholesome Laws for the more godly and peaceable government of their
Li^ge-P^opl^: By what power shall the Pope send forth such B^ll? S^^^l not by
virtue of any Spiritual power; because the Spiri^^^^l power has no manner or
measure of extension to Temporal Judgments, or Temporal goods; Then sure he
shall do i^ by virtue of his Temporal power: But by his Holiness good leave,
he is not invested with any such Te^porall power; and therefore he ^a not by
his B^lls and Inhibitions disanull or cause the foresaid wholesome and godly
Laws: And as the King sends to the Galleys because he is King, not because he
is Pope; so the Pope, as being Pope, and no Temporal King, of any absolute
Prince, or States Territories, cannot put down and repeal many Laws that his
Holiness^ prohibits; and while he takes that violent course and is not obeyed
therein by any absolute Prince or State, the disobeying Prince or State runs
into no sin, because the Pope has no mandatory power in such cases: your
particular Errors in this Article are palpable.

1. You interpret my scope and en^d in this Proposition at your pleasure, and
say, I speak nothing o the purpose intended: True it is, that my Principal
end is to prove, the censures of our holy Fa^h^r the Pope in a certain
hypoth^sis, to be altogether invalid, and of none eff ct: But for as much as to
make some proof thereof, it is first necessary for me to p^ove, that in such
cases the absolute Prince or State commits no sin, seeing the censure
thundered against one who does not sin, is of no force or effect; I have
therefore drawn this Proposition, wherein I make demonstration, that where the
Pope has no authority to command, there neither Prince, nor State, nor People
are within the terms of obligation to yield obedience, and that not obeying in
that case, their conscience is not defiled, not wounded with any sin.

2. You are of opinion, that my drift is to prove the said censures to be of no
force or validity, Ex defectu Authoritatis Spiritualis, by reason of some
lamenesse or weakness in the Spiritual Authority; But you are very far
wide of my purpose: For my purpose and endeavor is to make this good and
unmalleable by any of your greatest hammers: That all censures in that kind and
nature are in quality of mere Nullitie, because no absolute Prince or State
commit any sin, when they use all good and lawful means possible, to hold
fast, and to defend their own right and lawful Jurisdiction, which makes a
defect in the Pope, not of Spiritual Authority (as we Catholics maintain)
but of Temporal: The Spiritual Authority gives him the power of the Keys to
excommunicate; but defect of Temporal Authority makes the censure meerlie
void, and no censure, because there is no obligation which inforceth or
constrains obedience to him that has no Authority over the party, because
in their not obeying they commit no sin, and because in committing no sin,
they run not into any kind of censure.

3. You cannot deny, that in re and upon the matter. I hold and maintain and
truth in this thi^d Proposition, howsoever you twitch or give some jerke at my
drift and citation of Authors; you therefore cannot justly charge me with any
corrupt affection of mind herein: That man has a corrupt and perverse heart,
Prove. 27.
who rises by night, and in deceit blesses his neighbor with a loud voice; but
howsoever Maledicenti similis erit, he shall be like one that curses: For as
Gold is tried in the Furnace, and silver in the fire, so is a man tried in the
mouth of him that praises: For this reason at last, it is better to be
reproved by a wise man, then to be deceived by the flattery of fools: It is
better therefore to utter a truth, and to be reproved of men, then to practice
flattery, Gal. 1.
and to be punished of God; witness the Apostle, si adhuc hominibus placerem,
etc. If I should seek to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

4. You count, and call and wonder, immodestie; and so you found the wonder of
Sotus with an Epiphonems of my proper Art; For those words, that such Doctrine
is full of scandal, and built on a sandi^ foundation, are neither the words of
Sotus not of Bellarmine, but my own words; and they are flowers of praise, if
they be put in the balance with your words uttered of my Doctrine: Howbeit you
reprove both me and my doctrine in the Concrete, whereas I propund the doctrine
in the Abstract, and in that sense of the Abstract, my doctrine is not denied,
but granted: For what scandal can be greater, then, whereas our Savior has
said of the perfect men, If thou will be perfect, Man. 19.
go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor; the Disciple is not
above his Master, to determine on the contrary, that he (I mean our holy
Father the Pope) who above all other B shops is most bound to the state of
perfection, and to the imitation of Christ's poverty, should be Lord of the
whole world in Temporal aff^i^es? Besides, can that Doct ine stand upon any
other but a sandy foundation, which is contrary to the very words and example
of poor Christ himself?

5. You deny that Sotus wonders at our Canonists, and yet as you cannot be
ignorant) he cites Augustinus Triumphus, Did. 23. qu. art. 1.
with Silvester and Panormitanus, whom he calls Juris-perito^s, great learned
Legists or Canonists, and term their opinion of the Popes power direct in
Temporalibus, commentitious, that is, a very fable, an invention, whereof they
are the Patrons (as he speaks) and the great Champions: In particular he much
complains of Silvester, and wonders that he has swerved from the opinion of
his Master St. Thomas, being the opinion of the best Divi^es: The Lord
Cardinal Bellarmine himsefe not only cites Sotus, but in his Man^^cript
Lectures, and in his first Books the words of Sotus are both found and read; If
now being of another mind, he be not pleased to acknowledge and grant us the
same, and would have us to bel^eve that he has not written what I now avouch
and aver, the matter is not of any great consequence; In his Books we see
infinite alterations, choppings and changings every day. Sotus by him cited
has left it upon Record, and that serves my turn: And howsoever, it imports
but little to the principal question, whether he will have it so uttered by
the tongue and pen of Sotus, or no; that puts me to no manner of trouble, so
long as I find it extant in the writing of Sotus himself; whose Doctrine,
whose phrase, nay, whose very words the learned take notice to be in great
request with his Lordship, and not a little pleasing to his appetite.

6. You practice no small subteltie of refined wit, when you show, that you are
so unwilling, to have that opinion which is taught by many Canonists, called an
opinion of the Canonists, where is in the same company a Divine the same
opinion; and that an opinion of the same may not be called an opinion of
Divines, when one Canonist is of their side, and holds the same Tenet: But
every Novice in Theology knows, that Appellatio and Donominatio fit a majori
part, things have their Appella^ion and Denomination from the greater part;
yea Bellarmine himself works upon this distinction, and the title of the
question, using this Argument, Probatur opinio Theologorum, ergo contraria
opinio est Canonistarum, the opinion of the Divines is approved, and therefore
the contrary opinion is the Canonists; amongst whom, albeit in these last
impressions, he cites Navarrus a Canonist, and not a Divine, nevertheless, for
the reason before alleged, it is of no import: The opinion of those, who
affirm the Pope to be Lord in Temporals, is called the opinion of Canonists,
because it is not founded upon any Autho^i^ie of Scripture, but only upon
certain Canons or Laws Registered in the Decrees and Decretals; and the
contrary opinion is that of the Divines, because it is built upon Gods Word in
the holy Scriptures.

7. The Supreme Power Temporal (you say) is by all Authors (except Heretics)
granted to the Pope: If that be so, then doubtless Navarrus (take him for one
amongst many other) is a notorious Heretic in this formal conclusion; In
cap. Novit.
Quare dicendum est, Papam nullam habere potestatem, laicam, neque supremam,
neque mediam, neque infimam. The Pope therefore stands in no degree at all of
Laiorck Temporal power, neither in the highest, nor in the middle, nor in the
lowest Region of Temporal power: For my part, I call that opinion Heresy, and
so I count it, which in explicit and implicit sense fights against holy
Scripture; and such is the opinion of all those, who affirm the Pope to have
Supreme Temporal Authority: Our Lord Christ says, Mat. 16.
Tibi dabo claves Regni coelorum, I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; and the Pope says, Regni terrarum, of all Earthly Kingdoms, Christ
says, Mat. 20. Mark. 10. Luke 22. Joan. 19. Joan. 20.
Reges Gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic, the Kings of the Earth
bear rule over them, but so shall not ye, and the Pope says, vos autem sic,
and so shall ye; Christ says, my Kingdom is of this World, and the Pope
says, nay, my Kingdom is of this World; and over the whole World: Christ
says, as my Father has sent me, so do I send you my Disciples, and the Pope
says, not as the Father has sent me, so do I send you: There be two Supreme
Powers, two Heads of all Christians, Professors of Christian Religion; Terrena
potestas caput Regem, Spiritualis potestas habet Summum Pontificem; Hug. de
Sanct. vict. l. 2. de Sacr. p. 2. c. 4.
the King is the head of all Earthly and Temporal power, the Pope of all
Spiritual power; Pope Gelasius in an Epistle to the Emperor Anastasius; Duo
sunt Imperator Auguste quibus principaliter mundus hic regitur, Auctoritas
Sacra Pontificum, and Regalis Potestas, This World, Decr. did. 96. Caud^o sunt.
most noble Emperor, is chiefly governed by two Supreme Powers; the Sacred
Authority of Popes, and the Temporal Authority of Kings, Innocentius III.
held this Article for so certain and indubitable, that he made no scruple to
affirm, Cap. Novit.
Regem in Temporalibus neminem Superiorem recognoscere, that in Temporal
causes the Kings of the Earth do acknowledge and take no mortal creature to
have any Superiority of Power, or any right, any reason, to crow over their
Crowns: How then can there be any truth in the L. Cardinals affirmative,
Pontificem recognoscit, the King does acknowledge the Pope, for that is to say;
the Pope is dignified and endowed with Supreme Temporal power; with which
words I must confess that I am plunged in a deep pit of astonishment: For
those Authors who grant an indirect Authority to the Pope, break not forth
into this unreasonable and exorbitant excess, but use a certain mitigation of
the word indirectlie, as that it is Spiritual, non per se, sed per accidens,
not in it self, but by occasion and accessarilie, to write, in case of
necessity, and most of all with consent of the parties interested: But for any
to affirm, the holy Fathers power to be Supreme and Temporal, fateor
scandalum est mihi, to me I must confess it is a scandal or stumbling block
and stone of offense, so long as not only the true doctrine, but also the
Doctrine of the Lord Cardinal Bellarmine can hold up the head and stand in
full force.

l. 5. de Romans pont. c. 3. and 4.
8. I have not charged the Lord Cardinal to hold the foresaid Book was never
of St. Thomas his penning; I have only alleged, that his Lordship has made
so good and so clear demonstration of that point, that never yet any answer
durst peep abroad to contrad^ct his Lordships demonstration; As for your
subterfuge, that the said History was perhaps afterward primed or popt into
the foresa d Book; that carrie^ no show of pro^abilitie, seeing you produce
not any one conj^cture, not any one reason to fortify the same: For to what
purpose had any man a mind to patch up the said History in so good, so fair a
W^b, as the foresaid Book? to what end? how long time since? He that dares
take upon him to affirm these things, shall make the credit of all Histories
to shrink and shake. The Lord Cardinal Baronius flies to the same Answers, as
to his best refuge: When he is put hard to his trumpes, and shifts, how to
untie the knot of an Argument drawn from Historical Authority; straitwaies
he thinks to take up men's lips, and to dazzle their eyesight with, such and
such words are chopped and stolen in since: The fo^esaid Book has been
extant, and read above 300. years, and yet never any man has taken upon him
such temerarious boldness, a sober advice to affirm the same words have been
strained or inserted into that Book by any other fingers: Howbeit now you
Hetrodox from Cardinal Bellarmine, to aggrandise the Popes authority and to
make it Supreme in Temporals, without any reason or conjecture at all, have
borrowed a spirit of boldness to pronounce they are inserted, and as it were
postnated after their true parents decease.

9. Howsoever you bring to the words of St. Thomas an Exposition, which ore
proprio you call the soundest; nevertheless that answer does not make the Book
to be a Bird of St. Thomas his brood; nay it is altogether needless; For it
sufficed to say, that the Book was not of his writing, or none of his works,
to make good proof, that St. Thomas was not adverse or contrary to himself.

10. You call that an irremissible temeritie, not worthy of any pardon, which
in case it be temeritie, Can. quicunque litem. Can. quaecunque contentionem.
11. quaest. l. 5. de Romans pont. cap. 5.
certain it is one of his most illustrious Lordships temerities: For the
Canons brought upon this Argument are two; These two are alleged by the Lord
Cardinal, and yet first he styles them not Sacred, and then he thus takes them
down with terms of diminution and abatement: Respondeo, ex illis Canonibus
priorem esse Theodosii Imperatoris, qui ex pietate, non ex debito, id honoris
Eccelesiae: I answer, the first of these two Canons proceeded from the grace of
Theodosius, by whom out of his most Christian piety, and not out of any debt
or duty, the Church was then so highly honored: The very same for cloth and
color which I speak before of Constantine, and was then by Hetrodox
handsomely basted for my labor: A little after, Quem jam esse abr^g^tum per
alios Cannones, Glossa ibidem asserit, which first Canon the Gloss in the same
place confirms to have been abrogated by other Canons: And yet I must now
tell you Hetrodox, the said Canon is not well cited out of Gratianus; because
that which the Canon contains, was not granted by Theodosius: Posteriorem
Canonem perspicuum est non esse alicujus Principis qui posset leges condere;
and touching the latter Canon, it is clear the same was not established by any
Prince that had power to make Laws: Now because I having spoken in my own
phrase and style, do not give these Canons the high adjunct of Sacred; you
therefore Hetrodox fare like one bestraught of his wits, and will have my
manner of Speech to be a fault irremissible, as if it were the sin against the
Holy Ghost: Such exaggerations tend and serve only to rob men of their Credit
and Authority.

11. Again, your self refutes the Canons, as the Lord Cardinal does, and you
are not afraid to affirm they are framed by the assistance of the Holy Ghost.

12. You pretend the Canons ought never to be named but with title of Sacred;
and yet your self affirming the Canon Quicunque was abrogated per alios,
Canones, by other Canons, do send them forth like a Bird bared of all her
Feathers, and leaving the Epithet Sacred, speak no more but Approved.

13. The Epithet Sacred is no less attributed to the civil then to the Canon
Laws; and therefore as it is oftentimes left out, when we name the Civil, so
it is often not remembered when we make mention of the Canons; yea the Canon
Quicunque is not cited with you adjunct Sacred, but nakedly called the Canon
Quicunque.

14. The Decrees of Councels, and of the Church, which (as we teach) cannot
err de fide in point of Faith, are verily Sacred, and made with assistance of
the Holy Spirit, yet can we not affirm without error in fide, that infinite
other Canons concerning particular matters and cases, are compiled without any
assistance of the Holy Spirit: Joan. 16. de potest. Romans Pontif.
For the Spirit of God teaches us all truth; whereas Popes in particular
Canons have many times erred and may err; whereof we need to make no doubt,
and the Lord Cardinal often grants it in his learned works.

15. I have p^oduced such Canons as are usually brought by the Defendants of
the contrary opinion, as the foresaid Canons and the like; but you affirm and
would make me believe, that I speak of all the Canons, and every matter.

16. You call Concurrence, Contrariety, and thereby make a confusion of both,
for Duo Iura possunt concurrere, two Laws may well concur, and yet may not
be contrary the one to the other, I give you this for example; The Precept for
hearing Mass concurres with the Precept of keeping and tending a sick body; I
observe not the first for hearing the Mass, that I may the better observe the
second in attending upon the sick Patient, according to that commandment of
Christ, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice; Is the one of these Precepts
contrary to the other? Will a very sot say so? In like manner, there be many
Canons, which it will be well done to keep, when they may be kept without any
detriment unto some greater obligation, I mean, without infringing the Law of
God, and the Law of Nature; but when that cannot be done, then the Canons must
make room and give place to Natures Law, and that may not be called
Contrariety but Subordination.

17 Lastly, You call the Canons (without any difference at all) Rules given by
the Holy Spirit, by godly Popes and holy Councels, and this you stick not
Hetrodox to affirm without any distinction of the Canons, as I said: Herein
good Sir, make you not all the Canons indifferently of equal Authority to the
holy Scripture which is inspired of God, as also to the Determinations of the
Church, which cannot err de fide? Nay, do you not give the Canons this
honorable Epithet? Have there not been found Errors in many of the Canons?
Have they not been revoked and repealed? He that makes the Canons, has not he
power to unmake the Canons? Whereas in the holy Scripture, and in the
Definitions of the Church de fide, can you find any such defects or impotencies
there? Can they be bettered? Can they be repealed? Is there any other passable
reason thereof besides that which I have alledg^d? That holy Scripture is
inspired of God primo loco, and the foresaid Definitions de Fide, secundo loco;
whereas the Canons, which either do or may contain diverse errors, are but
humane Laws: He that dares broach a doctrine contrary to this, I dare
pronounce is no friend or Well-willer to the Catholic truth: Thus have I
painted forth your Errors; shall I with your Patience and favor proceed to
some further matter touching this third Proposition?

Hetrodox: Take what liberty you please; you shall have indiff^rent hearing.

Orthod. To weaken the sinews of this our third Proposition, some go about all
they can to put out our eyes with Pope Alexander VI. who divided the Indies
between the Kings of Spain and Portugal, because he was the natural Prince
Temporal thereof, as the Vicar of Christ; and with Leo III. who frankly (by
their saying) made a free deed of gift of the Western Empire to Charles the
Great for the same reason; that is, because Leo was Christ's own Vicar: These
Authors are very far out of the right path: For Alexander, not as Lord, Patron,
and Pr^prietarie of the Indies, but as a compromissary Judge, chosen by the
said Kings to assuage and utterly to quench the flames of their discord, by his
holy sentence umpiered, and awarded the Seas to be divided, whereby the Navy of
the one might make Navigation by one of the said Seas, and that of the other
might Navigate by the other: He likewise determined, that what acquist soever
they made Iure belli by right of War, should remain for ever to the Acquistor
and Conqueror, according to the tenor, true intent, and meaning of his
Division; as it is recorded by Historians of that age: It is true that Leo III.
hunted by the people of Rome out of his Papal Seat, like a Fox unkennel'd and
bolted out of his Earth, was reinstalled therein by CHARLES the Great:
Whereupon Leo wrought and procured the People to proclaim and salute CHARLES,
Emperor of the West, as Platina has related: Which act sometimes the
Historians ascribe to the Roman people, who finding the Empire not gloriously
governed by the Greeks, elected another Emperor more antiquo: Sometimes they
say, that Charles having once seized the state, bought and purchased the title
thereunto of Irene and Nicephorus the Greek Emperor: Sometimes that Irene and
Nicephorus were well pleased and contented to give way unto such division of
the Greek Empire: In brief, be that matter as it may, most certain it is, the
Pope who had been chased out of his Papal Seat, and had no possession at
all, neither did give, nor could give the possession of the Western Empire unto
King Charles, who had already griped it in his Princely talans, and was now
become Lord thereof Iure belli; by right of War: Besides it is not yet
certain and clear, but in some question, whether Leo absolutely gave Charles
the title to the Western Empire, or no: But as well in this case as in some
other, which may be alleged against our Proposition, it is to be answered;
That for so much as the Pope never had any Authority from Christ in Temporals
(as we have already showed, and intend clearly to demonstrate in the next
Proposition) If the Pope at any time has exercised the said Authority;
either he used that practice with consent of parties interessed, or else
because he is armed with some Temporal power by one of the foresaid four
ways, and thereby nevertheless it is not proved, that ever the Pope had any
Authority directly in Temporals from Christ our Savior: Besides, many acts
are done by some, whereof in case a man should ask by what right such acts are
passed, it would prove no easy task to find out such right.

Hetrodox, I can hold my tongue, yea hardly my hands no longer: As the
Proposition it self makes nothing to the present purpose, no more do the
Arguments Pro and Con: you say that Alexander VI. divided the Sea between the
Kings of Spain and Portugal, and that he determined whatsoever they won by
Right of War, ^b. Quaest. in lib. Joshua qu. 10.
should be their own. Here if by Right of War you understand a just War,
which always presupposes some injury received by those against whom the
War is moved, as luculently St. Augustine declares, then you say very well.
But if your meaning be, that war may be moved against the Infidels of the
Indies, when they offer no manner of hurt or wrong to Christian^, and only to
make a Conquest of their Countries, your judgment is erroneous, and you strive
against the stream of the best Divines, as Cardinal Cajetanus, Cajet. in Com.
in 2. 2. 9. 66. art. 8. Sotus 5. de Just. and Iur. q. 3. Art. 5.
Vincentius, etc. For they and many more are of this opinion, that Infidels of
the Indies are the true Lords of their own Countries; For by the Doctrine of
Thomas, Fides and Gratia non destruunt Naturam, Faith and Grace destroy not
Nature; and therefore they never deprive any People or Nation of that which
they had before they received ^he Faith; neither is it lawful to go and make
a Conquest of Provinces, as men go forth to hunt Wild Beasts void of humane
reason: And this moved Sotus to affirm, that Pope Alexander VI. did not give
the Indies to the Kings of Castile and Portugal, but only granted, that
whereas Preachers were to travail into those newfound Lands and Countries,
the two Kings might send Soldiers in Arms, to defend as well the Preachers,
as also the new Christians: To this I subjoyne, that Pope Alexander, as the
head of all Christians, seeing the danger of War like to ensue between these
two Christian Princes, for free trade and Traffic into the Indies; was
pleased to determine, the King of Castile should have the honor of Navigation
to the West Indies, and the King of Portugal to the East: you touch a little
after, Orthodox, the Translation of the Empire made by Leo III. and knowing
full well the controversy of this matter between Matthias Illyricus a
Lutherane Heretic, and Cardinal Bellarmine, it seems good in your eyes (as
men always tie themselves and adhere to the worse part whether of things or
persons) to follow the steps of the Heretic in his erroneous opinion: And
thereupon you presume to affirm, that Charles the great obtained the Empire by
gift of the Roman people, or bought a Title thereunto of Irene and Nicephorus
Emperors, or else that Irene and Nicephorus were well contented with such
parting of stakes and sharing in the Empire; and to be short, you say, it is
most certain, the Pope gave not the Empire to Charles the Great, and yet you
know, Cardinal Bellarmine proves by the Authority of 33. Historians, of ten
Emperors of all the Imperial Electors, of seven Popes, and by evident reasons
besides, (after he has well sifted and scanned all the Titles that belong to
the Acquist of an Empire) that Charles the Great was invested and inthronised
in the Empire by Pope Leo III. the Bishop of Bishops: So that your opinion
(which makes you seem but a new Divine) according in unison with Illyricus, may
well be termed an Historical Heresy, or an Heresy in History, and a
Temeritie in Divinity, because it gives a soar Counter-b^ffe to all
Historians, Cap. Venerabilem. de Elect.
and Sacred Canons: To pretermit all other places, these be the words of Pope
Innocentius III. Romanum Imperium in personam magnifici Caroli Seeds Apostolica
transtulit ad Germanos; The Apostolical See translated the Roman Empire from
the Greeks to the Germans in the person of the Magnificall Charles the Great:
In clement. Rom pontif.
Pope Clement V. and joyntlie the General Council of Vienna repeats the same:
Is not he then temerarious, that dares give two Popes and one Council the
lie? Neither can it be true, that Platina has any record to the contrary:
For Platina does no more but affirm, that by decree and request of the Roman
people, the Pope created Charles Emperor of the Germans: So that all that
Platina has avouched, in effect is thus much and no more, that the people of
Rome decreed the Pope should be sued unto and petitioned, that he would be
pleased to install Charles in the Western Empire; that Charles in like manner
did win the Garland of the Roman Empire, it cannot be true; because he never
made War against the Romans, less true, that ever he purchased any Title of
Irene and Nicephorus: These are only the fictions of Matthias Illyricus,
without any one yard or foot of good foundation: Much less true, that Charles
took the Imperial Dignity by any power in the Roman people to confer the
same: For all the ancient Roman Emperors were chosen by the Army, or else by
the next precedent Emperor: And therefore Maximus and Balbinus, both elected
Emperors by the Senate, were very soon after slain by the Soldiers, who
disdained and scorned to accept or acknowledge any Emperors set up by the
Senate, Herodiact. 8.
or by them advanced to the Imperial Dignity: St. Hierome also is an
authentical witness, that Roman Emperors were elected by the Soldiers: Ep.
85. ad Eva.
Lastly, whereas you say, that when Charles the Great was invested, then Pope
Leo had no possession of the Empire; that is but a poor shift, and no bar at
all to the Popes gift; For the Pope gave not Charles the possession, but the
Title only, and the reason by means whereof he became the lawful Prince of
those Countries, which the Western Emperors were accustomed to govern, and to
have the same Dignity and Prerogative, which the said ancient Emperors had
possessed and enjoyed: Which that he might do, it was not needful for the
Pope himself to be possessor of the Empire; sufficient it was that he was
Pope, and consequently had Apostolical power, by which power (in case it be
profitable or necessary for the state of Christendom) he may lawfully
dispose of Christian Kingdoms and Empires, as appears by the manifold
practice of our former Popes, to have been done in former ages.

Orthod. I have said once before, and I doubt not but you bear it in
remembrance, that jure Pontificatus, by Right of Popedom, the Pope has no
power to exercise Temporal Dominion, because the Vicar can have no greater
power then the Principal; and again, because the actions of Christ our Lord
must be a Rule to his Vicar of all their actions: Upon the firm ground of
those Reasons, I have lately brought in and built (greatly to the purpose if I
be not greatly deceived) two Arguments of the Adversaries, drawn a Facto from
the Fact, to impugn the true Doctrine in Iure, in case and point of Right; the
one of Alexander VI. and the other of Leo III. which two Popes (it may at least
so seem) have exercised Temporal Dominion; For the one divided the Indies
between the Kings of Spain and Portugal, the other translated the Empire
into the West, or (to utter my mind better) declared Charles the Great Emperor
of the West: These two Arguments I have answered before, with one Reason thus;
That Iure Pontificatus, by right of their Popedom these acts were not done;
Then I rendered a Reason of the said Acts, Non ex propria Sententia, not as out
of mine own Judgment, but according to the writings of Historians; whether
this be to the purpose or no, I leave the consideration hereof to your self,
when you shall be in a better temper: In the mean time take notice of your
particular Errors.

1. You fall into a Digression of just War, and the way to be taken, or
course to be followed; in converting the Indians to the Faith and knowledge of
Christ: Surely this Digression might very well have been spared; or else
upon as good ground, and with no less reason, you might have made another
Digression of Navigation: For I have only affirmed, that Pope Alexander VI.
made the former Division, that neither of the two Kings might be any
impediment or hinderance to the others Navigations and acquists: Whether the
Kings of Spain and Portugal have made lawful Acquists of those barbarous
people and Countries or no, that nothing at all concerns our present
discourse; especially because it should be far from us once to harbor a
thought of those Catholic and most Christian Kings undertakings, but upon
great reason and good conscience; we now treat only of Pope Alexanders
Division; I have presupposed, that as well the Navigations, as the Acquists
were lawful, as purchased Iure belli, by Right of War; as in very deed they
were, and to cast any doubts in certain cases, it is mere folly; which I
trust is lawful and free for me to utter in defense of the Catholic King of
Spain, Philip III. my Natural and Liege Lord, who now holds the possession of
the said States Iust^ titulo, by j^st and lawful title.

2. You stand and stick stoutly to this Division of Alexander VI. but you tell
us not, whether he made such Division de Jure or de Facto, with good warrant of
Right, or only by way of bare Fact; you only affirm that he made the
Division as the Head of all Christendom: But every Christian (we hold and say)
has two Heads, the one in Spiritualls, let him be the Pope, the other in
Temporals, and he will be (whosoever says nay) the Natural, the lawful
Prince Temporal of this or that State: Now that Division was not made by
Alexander VI. as a Temporal Prince, Ergo, as a Spiritual: but as a Spiritual
Prince, (as has been already showed and proved) he could not be invested with
any such power; and had he then been so invested, the Indies were no
Countries of Christians, but of Infidels: His Fact was therefore to be excused,
as I have excused the same according to diverse Historians, that he made the
Division as Compromissarie, and Judge chosen by the parties: I confess this
judgment was to be put and referred to Alexander VI. rather then to any other,
because he was Christ's Vicar, and Superior Head to the said Kings in
Spirituals, and herein his Indirectlie, granted by some Divines, is not denied:
For that Indirectlie does not import any Authority or absolute Jurisdiction
in Temporals, except it be accidentally, by chance, by council, by
admonition, by reproof in all patience and instruction: Therefore when the
great Canonist Navarrus, and all other Doctors well grounded, Cap. Novit. de
judiciis.
take upon them to handle these and the like Acts of the Roman Bishops, (in
which Indirecte miscuerunt se negotiis secularibus, they have thrust a hand up
to the Elbow in wordly affairs) they always require and stand much upon the
parties interested, upon which point doubtless the Principal Authority to
exercise Dominion in any Temporal matter does lean, and not upon jus
Pontificatus, not upon any right of Pontifical power.

3. You affirm, that Alexander made such Division, as Head of the whole
Christian World; but so speaking against the common opinion, concerning the
same Act, you bring us no proof at all of your bold Assertion: Besides, to
divide and share the Countries of Infidels has no congruitie or correspondence
with your supposed Head of the whole Christian Church: For Quid ille de bis
aqui foris sunt judicare, what great privilege or warrant has our Holy
Fathers (above Paul himself) to judge those who are without? For he was Head
in Spirituals, not in Temporals.

4. I have most sincerely and faithfully cited what is written by Historians,
concerning the Act of Pope Leo III. and you tax me for an Heretic in
History, because I touch upon a string of Illyricus Harp: Behold herein your
error: First, what Heresy can there be in a profane History, which neither
smacks nor smells of holy Scripture? Next, wherein have I approved the Doctrine
or opinion of Illyricus, whom I have not vouchsafed so much as once to name?
Lastly, How can yon make it good, that I have alleged the Answer ex propria
sententia, as out of mine own Judgment; but only to make proof by
Demonstration, that what was done by Leo, was not acted by any Right of
Pontificiall Authority, seeing the Historians therein are not all of one mind.

5. Tract. de transl. Imperis.
You make supposition with Cardinal Bellarmine to have proved, that Leo his
Act was authentically done Jure Pontificatus, by Right of his Pontificiall
power, and yet you see, the Historians produced by your self, and by his
Lordship, the words of all his Emperors and all his Popes have not a word of
the Right, but only of the Fact: Besides, a great part of the same Historians
(that I may not so speak or think of all) may well be understood of the
Unction or Anointing, of the Coronation, of all other Ceremonies and Sacred
Rites performed by Sacred persons at Kings Coronations: The Archbishop of
Remes by ancient Privilege sets the Regal Crown on the most Christian Kings
head; but by that Act of Coronation he properly neither creates nor makes him
King of France: The Patriarch of Constantinople crowned the ancient Emperors
of the East, yet no man ever affirmed, that he made them Emperors: Besides, be
it said that Leo concurred with all the Roman people to call and salute
Charles by the name of Emperor, and, which is more, to give Charles the Title
to the Empire; yet can it not be concluded, that Leo did these things de jure,
or by any proper Authority of his own, so to do: Concerning which point in
the case, it shall be lawful for me I hope, to lay open my mind in all
sincerity, very certain it is that Leo was full bent, and had spirit enough
withal to shoot the Emperor of Constantinople in the head, and to take from
him the Title of Western Emperor, for the greater good and benefit of all
Christendom, as the Lord Cardinal pretends that Leo did without jesting, and
in great earnest: But ought not Leo first Canonicallie to have given the
Emperor admonition, and to have cited the Emperor viis and modis, by all the
ordinary ways and means? Was any such Canonical and Legal course ever
taken with the Emperor? Secondly, was it not needful for giving the Title to
whom he pleased, that Leo himself should first be possessed of the same
Title? And verily that was he never; For as Pope, and in right of the Popedom,
he was never Patron or Lord of any such Titles; and none of his Predecessors
had ever made incursion, or breach into the safe enclosures of so high and
civil affairs: Thirdly, was it simply necessary for the better maintenance
of Christendom, to give CHARLES the said Title? Nothing less; For to make him
a mighty Ruler and worthy Governor of Christendom, sufficient it was for him
to be the greatest Monarch, and highest Catholic King in all the West, as he
was before: Besides, the Title makes not a King to govern his People and
Subjects the better, but his Power, his Prudence, and his Religion: Fourthly,
had Leo any power to take away the Title from the right and lawful Emperor,
to whom in all right it properly appertained? Far be it from any man so to
judge; For non eripit mortalia qui Regna dat Coelestia, he that gives us
Heavenly Kingdoms, takes not away by violence the possessions of mortal men:
It remains that Leo when he saw (as all men did) that Charles was already
become Lord of the West, Iure belli, by the Law of Arms, (because he was
obeyed by all, howsoever he had not stood in terms of open War and
Hostility with all Nations) when he perceived in particular, that it was
determined for a final conclusion Scito Populi Romani by full and effectual
Decree of the Roman People; then upon request of the people he crowned and
anointed CHARLES Emperor of the Romans: This was Leo induced (says Platina
with other Authors) Sut^ Populi Romani and Precibus, by the Roman Peoples
Decree and earnest request: But howsoever this was done by Leo for all these
respects, yet I hold that King Charles himself was not in conscience thoroughly
settled and secured, nor yet possessed* the said Title de Iure, by any good
Right, until about some twelve years after this Act of Leo, he was called
and acknowledged Emperor of the West by Letters patent of Michael Emperor of
Constantinople, who in the said Letters freely, voluntarily, and without all
other mediation or Intercession, resigned and transferred over all his
pretensions to CHARLES: Whereas Michaels antecessours, before this time, had
given to Charles none other Title but only of King: Now then; If this Reason
without any the least strain or breach of Christianity, of Justice, or of
Law, may aptly be alleged for this translation of the Empire; what need men
to run to mendicate or beg any strange and extravagant Doctrines? Neither
need men to marvel, that in the beginning of this Translation, the ways of
Justice took not such effect as was convenient: For all beginnings of Empires
and Temporal Titles, when they are transferred Invitis Dominis; against the
Will and liking of the right Lords and owners, are usually found to be
blemished and stained with such defects: For all which nevertheless there be
wholesome Remedies, as either by peaceable possession, or by consent of such as
are interested therein: But whether afterward, that Resignation or Cession of
Michael, was any Declaration, that from thenceforth in all after times and
ages, the Pope, or the Roman people, or any other, should be invested with
power to create the Emperor of the West, I see no Reason to argue upon that
maine point, in this place or at this instant.

6. You lay to my charge, that I utter contradictions to the sayings of Popes,
and the Decrees of Councels, yet you know there is no such matter; I only
aver, that Leo did what he then did, not by any Right annexed or inherent in
his Pontificiall Power, whereas the said Popes and the Council speak de Facto
of the fact it self, and perhaps de alio jure human^ of some other humane
Right, whereof I make no manner of mention.

7. You made no bones to affirm in your former objections against my first
Proposition, that Authority to choose the Prince in case of necessity, rests
in the Subjects or People; and now you deny the Roman people had any power to
choose Charles for their Emperor.

8. You stick not also to approve the Election of the Emperor made by the
Army and Roman Militia, which was a violent Election: Augustus was honored
with power of Tribune after Caesar the lawful Prince of the Romans, he was
not elected by the Army, but by the People, from whom he obtained the consular
Power, though he was afterward confirmed therein by a violent Election of the
Army; to which the Roman People, not of Power then to beard or brave the
Army, were glad to give fair Aim, and to make way by condescension: As for
St. Jerome, by you cited Hetrodox, he speaks only of the Fact, he does not
affirm that way, and none other, was the lawful way of choosing their
Emperors: And this, I must now tell you Hetrodox, is most certain, that
Vespasian had no humor to be elected, but by the votes and suffrages of the
Roman People, with the very same power of Augustus; I appeal to that famous
Marble in the Capitol, with title of Lex Regia, etc.

9. You give approbation to the violent Fact of the Soldiers in Arms, who
show Maximus and Balbinus, because they had been elected by the Senate,
whereas the Election was fastne by the Laws, and sowed to the peoples arm,
because the Roman Government was Democraticall.

10. Platina with diverse other Authors, has testified, that Charles the Great
was only declared Emperor by the Pope with a loud voice, and that Leo crowned
him Scito and precibus Populi Romani, by Decree and upon the suite of the
Roman People: Now to the same D^cree you bring this fine interpretation, that
doubtless the people did not decree that Leo should publish, proclaim, and
crown him Emperor, but only they should request Leo to do it propria
authoritate, by his Papal authority: A man that looks not well into this
quaint device and sly trick, may think and say the Roman people passed the
same Decree, in a certain conceit or dream, that such power was devolved to
them in case of necessity, and not otherwise by Right: But you against reason
and right sense of the words, will have the Fact attributed to the Pope, who by
right of Popedom could work no such effect, and so you forsake the ordinary
ways for approbation of the Fact, seeking the refuge of extraordinary ways
not intelligible.

11. You produce that for a Reason, which rests in the Question: For (as you
pretend and contend) to translate Empires and States, it is enough for one to
be Pope: This you confirm, because some Popes (though but a few) have had the
spirit and face to work such f^ats, and to play such prankes. The most of
those few have indeed given the attempt, but I beseech you Sir, with what
success? And albeit some few, but very seldom, have not missed of their
mark; this makes no proof, that any Pope either does it or can do it, as he
is Pope: For Arguments drawn from the Fact to the Right, are not worth a blew
point, especially when the right is contrary to the Fact: For the
Pontificiall See, as it is the Pontificiall See, not having the exercise of
any such Dominion annexed thereunto, neither by the example of Christ our
Lord, or of all the Popes for many hundred years, nor by any Text of holy
Scripture; whenever the Pope has exercised any such Dominion, to render a
Reason thereof, it shall not be needful to run or fly to the Popedom, but
rather to some humane constitution, or violence, or Title.

12. Last of all you declare a strange vain of distemper, in telling me, this
Doctrine, that no exercise of Temporal Dominion is annexed to the Popedom by
Gods Word is an error in Theology, and an Herefie in History: You must now
be contented if I pay you in the same Coin, that for any to say the contrary,
it is an Error in History, and nothing conformable to Theology, as before
has been declared: Have you now any new tire of Ordnance to discharge?

Hetrodox. Not against your third Proposition, Orthodox. But have at your
fourth to morrow morning.

Orthodox. Agreed Hetrodox.

The fourth days Conference, upon the fourth Proposition.
Hetrodox.WEll met valiant Champion Defendant.

Orthodox. And you mighty Champion opponent: Are your Pieces for battery
ready to discharge?

Hetrodox. At first sight of your Sconce.

Orthodox, Here it is in all Dimensions and Delineations: That Authority,
which Christ our Lord promised to St. Peter under a Metaphor of Keys, is
merely Spiritual; I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, he
says not of any earthly Kingdom: For in what manner the Temporal Kingdom
and Monarchy should be governed, the Plat-forme was drawn, and the Foundation
was laid from the beginning of the World, by God himself great Monarch of the
universe: So that Christ our Savior never founded the Temporal Monarchy, it
remains then, that he was the Founder of the Spiritual: And that is most
evident in St. John's Gospel: Joan. 20.
For after he had said, all power is given unto me both in Heaven and in
Earth, Joan. 20.
at any hand he would give the same to Peter and all the rest of his Apostles
with a certain limitation: He breathed on them all, and said, receive the Holy
Ghost, to whomsoever ye shall remit sins, they shall be remitted, and whose
sins whosoever ye shall retain, they shall be retained: From whence it is to
be gathered, both by the Act of Christ, and by his words, that all the
authority of the highest Bishop is merely Spiritual, over sin, and only over
the Soul; which power, as has been said, is a limited power: Qui beato Petro
animas ligandi atque solvendi Pontificium tradidisti, who have given Peter the
Dignity and Power of Pontificiall estate, to bind and loose innumerable
Souls: Mat. 18.
Thus the Church you know in her Orisons, yea, the Authority to excommunicate,
given to Peter himself, is tied to a condition: If thy Brother shall sin
against thee, and shall not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a very
Ethnic, and as a Publicane, where our Savior gives Authority to
Excommunicate, but with a supposition of sin, and of obstinate persisting in
sin.

Hetrodox. Verily Orthodox, you seem to pair the nails of Pontificiall power
so near, that you give me just cause to suspect you believe, that our holy
Father the Pope is but simple Priest or Curate, without any lawful
Jurisdiction; and that he can do no more, but exhort to the obedient keeping
of Gods Law, as every ordinary Preacher does, or Baptize and confess the
people, as every common Curate does: And so it seems you seek to revoke, and to
renew the Heresy of the Valdenses or Lionists, of Wickliffe, Mansilius of
Padua, and John Huss, which blind and pestiferous Heresy is caressed or
embraced by all modern Heretics: But I must come to a more narrow sifting of
your words.

First, You say the Popes power is merely Spiritual: To what end serves your
meerlie? was it not enough to say, it is a Spiritual power? was it not better
to say, it is principally Spiritual? Navarrus, whom you so highly commend,
Cap. Novit. de judiciis.
and exhort all men to read with diligence and great attention, says v^ry
well, that surely the Popes power is not merely Temporal, but he never says,
it is merely Spiritual, as if the Pope could not in any sort shuffle and cut
the Cards of Temporal affairs: Nay, he further terms it a most eminent
power, which in it self being Spiritual, and by consequence far Superior to
the Temporal, both can and ought also to set the Temporal strait, when it
grows crooked, or goes out of the right path: And whereas our Savior Christ
said, I will give thee the Keys, not of any Terrene Kingdom, but of the
Celestial Kingdom, or the Church of Christ has said, he that gives the
Celestial Kingdom, takes not away Earthly Kingdoms; or your self Orthodox
has said, the Temporal Monarchy was founded of old from the beginning of the
World, surely none of all this makes either for the fortifying of your Sconce,
or to the weakening of my Camp: For herein you affirm thus much, and no more;
The Kingdom of Christ, whereof Peter the Apostle received the keys, is no
Temporal Kingdom, which one cannot acquire, but some other must lose, but it
is a Kingdom which governes all other Kingdoms without spoiling any man of
that Dominion, which by good, just, and lawful right he holds: Otherwise you
might say as well, that God himself has no power over Temporal matters;
because God himself the giver of Heavenly Kingdoms, is no robber and spoiler
of men's Earthly Inheritances.

Again, you say, Christ gave his Apostles and Peter a power, but yet
restrained, Joan. 20.
and not without limitation, that is, a power over sins; because he breathed
on them all, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. This, you cannot be
ignorant, is the Heresy of those who rob the Pope and the Church of all
Jurisdiction; an Heresy condemned by Christ himself in the very same place, a
little before the words now cited: For before the words Quorum remiseritis,
etc. whose sins ye shall remit, shall be remitted, he says, Sicut misit me
Pater, as the Father has sent me into the World, so do I send you forth; in
which words he gave them absolute power, and without limitation, to govern the
Church in his own room: Hereupon Divines teach, that in these words he gave
the power of Jurisdiction, in the other, the power of Order: And when afterward
he said to Peter in the Chapter next following, Pasce oves, feed my sheep,
doubtless he restrained not power to Absolution from sin, but he gave a
most ample power to rule and govern the whole Church: For the word Pasce,
Feed, is the very same in the Greek language (wherein St. John did write his
Gospel) which is used in St. John's Revelation, he shall rule them with a rod
of Iron, Apoc. 19. Mich. 2.
as also in the Prophet (as is translated by the Septuagint) Ex te mihi erit
Dux, qui regat populum meum Israel, out of thee shall come a Captain unto me
that shall rule my people Israel: Mat. 16.
So that by the usual phrase of Scripture, to make St. Peter a Shepherd or
Feeder, was to make him Ruler, Governor, and Prince of the whole Church: So
when Christ said to Peter, whatsoever thou shall loose or bind, he restrained
not the power unto sin, nor unto the persons; for he said not Quemcuuque but
Quodcunque not whomsoever but whatsoever thou shall bind or loose: His meaning
was to signify and express an universal power of Binding and Loosing; that
is, of commanding, of making Laws, of Dispensing, as it should be found
needful for the leading and bringing in of the Faithful into the Kingdom of
Heaven; with most full and ample authority to enjoyne every man what he should
believe, and likewise to labor, and to remove all the rubs, blocks, and
impediments, whereby they might be crossed in the way of Salvation, as
Cardinal Bellarmine has declared at great length.

You give me thirdly to understand, that our holy Father the Pope has power
only over Souls; and this you draw from that Prayer of the Church Deus qui
Petro animas ligandi, etc. O God who have given Peter the power of Pontificiall
Dignity, to bind and to loose the Souls of men: If this Reason has any force,
then secular Princes must have no power, but over the Souls of their Subjects,
because Paul says, Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: And so,
either you make your self too simple, as one who does not consider, that in
Scripture the soul is taken for the whole man; or else you seek to catch the
simple with words of holy Church not right understood: And therefore perhaps
the Divine providence (to take away the like deceitful sleights and fly
shifts) has inspired the Reformers of the Breviarie, to lib and geld the said
Prayer of the word Souls, which of old neither was found in the said Prayer,
nor ought at all there to be read, because that Prayer was founded and formed
upon the foresaid words in the Gospel, whatsoever thou Peter shall bind, and
whatsoever thou shall loose.

Last of all you contend, that power to excommunicate is conditional,
presupposing sin, and obstinacy in sin: This Doctrine is both new and false,
you are not able to produce any Author that ever so taught: Sin, I confess,
must be presupposed; for Excommunication is a punishment, and the most
grievous, the most dreadful of all other; so that, no sin committed, no
punishment by Excommunicarion can be inflicted: Disobedience also, otherwise
called contumacie, is (I confess again) presupposed a sin, and to
Excommunicate, every sin gives not sufficient warrant, but only that sin
which is clothed or clogged rather with Contumacie: For Christ says, Si
Ecclesiam non audierit, If he will not hear the Church: The censure therefore
of Excommunication cannot be denounced against any man, because he is a Thief,
or an Adulterer, except first he be admonished, and then he wilfully denies
obedience: But between disobedience and obstinacy there is a great
difference; For a man may stand stubborn and obstinate in some sin whereof he
has never been advised, never admonished by the Church: This man, for all his
obstinacy, cannot be stricken with a Thunderbolt of Excommunication: On the
contrary, a man may be disobedient, and for his disobedience may be
Excommunicated, albeit afterward he persist not obstinate in Disobedience: The
words of Christ, if he will not hear the Church, do signify disobedience, and
(to speak properly) not obstinacy,

Orthodox, Fie, Hetrodox, that a man of your deep learning, should be so
shallow (I will not say idle) in a matter so serious; So clear is the light of
this fourth Proposition, that I much wonder, how you have devised and raised
any matter against it whereby to make opposition; Now to frame the sounder
answer, it will be necessary to make some Explication of the Proposition it
self: I speak not here of all the powers which Peter had from Christ our
Lord, as his Vicar in Earth, for they were two, the one of Order, the other of
Jurisdiction; In this place I meddle not with power of Order, I only define
the power of Jurisdiction, and this power I say is merely Spiritual: First,
because Christ our Lord never practiced any Temporal Jurisdiction; but this
jurisdiction which Christ gave to Peter, is part of the same Jurisdiction which
was practiced by Christ himself: Ergo, it is no manner of way Temporal, but
merely Spiritual: The Major (as it is called) has been proved before at
large, the Minor is clear by the words of Christ himself, As the Father has
sent me, so I send you; the consequence therefore or conclusion remains
indubitable, Joan. 20.
that this Jurisdiction is no manner of way Temporal.

Secondly, This Jurisdiction or Power is not all that Power which Christ
himself had, as Head of the Church: For he never (according to all the
Doctors) communicated to his Apostles the Power of his Exc^llencie, much less
the power of his Spiritual Kingdom, which by Cardinal Bellarmine is called
his Power Eternal (yet such as had a beginning though it shall continue and
last for ever) with which Power by secret means he governes his Church: For
that power he practices and exercises in Heaven by himself alone: It is
therefore a Branch of that power, whereof our Savior says, Data est mihi
omnis Potestas, All power is given unto me, the power of Christ whether as high
Priest, or as King, is merely Spiritual; Joan. 20.
(as it is proved by the Authority of St. Augustine and of all the best
Divines) the Branch therefore of the same power, namely that Branch which was
given to St. Peter, is merely Spiritual.

Thirdly, The power given to Peter is to Loose and to Bind, that is, to
absolve and not absolve sin, the power to absolve or not absolve sins is
merely Spiritual; Ergo, the power of Binding and Loosing given to Peter is
merely Spiritual.

Fourthly, He that defines a Habit from the end thereof, draws the best
Definition; Thus has Aristotle defined virtue, virtus est quae ^onum faecit
habente^, virtue is that which betters her owner and possessour, the end of the
Popes power (according to all) is life eternal; and that end is merely
Spiritual; Ergo, he that affirms the Popes power is merely Spiritual,
produces a right affirmative, because he defines the Popes power by the right
and proper end thereof.

Lastly, If the power of Jurisdiction which Christ gave unto Peter, had not
been merely Spiritual, but Temporal, doubtless he would have taken up
material K^yes, and would have said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles,
take ye these keys, whose sins, etc. But Christ having done that Spiritual
work, breathed on them all, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, and saying
these words, receive ye the Holy Ghost, or the Holy Spirit, he undoubtedly
declared, it was no Temporal power that he then bestowed, but a power merely
Spiritual: And this, Hetrodox is that which before I have pronounced, that as
well by the Act which our Savior did, as also by the words that he spoke, it
is aptly gathered, that for certain the said power is merely Spiritual: Now
I purpose to draw a Picture of your particular Errors.

1. You argue from the Genus to the Species in this manner; The Popes power (as
Orthodox affirms) is merely Spiritual; Orthodox therefore hardly believes
the Pope to be some simple Priest, or common Curate; just as if I should frame
this Reason, Hetrodox affirms that a Lion is a creature, therefore Hetrodox
affirms, that a Lion is a little Ant or Pismire, or this Argument, Hetrodox
affirms, the power of the most Christian King is Temporal, therefore Hetrodox
affirms the most Christian King is the Father of a private Family, with power
oeconomicall: were it not a very abusive strain, a wrong intolerable, if I
should make Hetrodox the Father of so ridiculous Ergoes, worthy to be hissed,
knocked, and stamped out of all Theological and Philosophical Schools? If
Orthodox pretends and avouches that Papal power is merely Spiritual, he does
not forsooth thereby avouch, that Papal power is restrained to a private
Family, and without all Jurisdiction, like the power of every simple and
common Curate; but Orthodox grants it is a power over all the Souls that are
subject unto the Popes power.

2. Again Sir, you are pleased to term it Heresy for any to affirm, that
Papal power is merely Spiritual, and I must make bold to tell you Hetrodox,
the contrary Doctrine has no great conformity or congruity with divine
Scripture, and by name is not conformable to that fair Text, Sicut misit me,
etc. As my Father has sent me, Joan. 20.
so I send you my Apostles, the power which our Savior himself, being sent of
his Father, exercised in this world, was merely Spiritual; Ergo, the Popes
power being a Branch of the same power which Christ himself exercised, is
likewise merely Spiritual: True it is, that his power (as we must hold)
extends and spreads it self, Jure Divino by Gods Law, over all his own
Subjects, which Article being denied by the foresaid Authors whom you have
remembered before, they were thereupon condemned; but not because they
maintained the Popes power to be merely Spiritual: For it is one thing to
maintain, the Pope has no Jurisdiction, and another thing to affirm, that
his Jurisdiction is merely Spiritual.

3. You allege Navarrus to this purpose; That Papal power is not merely
Temporal, as if he had said, the Popes power is Temporal, but accessorily
Spiritual: Thus much is noted by these words, is not merely Temporal: But
know Hetrodox, that Navarrus was never so much overseene, to suffer so gross
an Error to drop out of his learned brain, or painful quill; Navarrus
affirms the full contrary, take the file of his words as we find it spun and
woven by his own fingers.

Credimus Romanum Pontificem, quatenus solum est Romans Pontifex, and Vicarius
Christi summus, nudus ab omnibus Privilegiis and donariis humanis, nullam
habere Potestatem Laicam, neque Summam, neque Mediam, neque infimam, neque
Actu, neque Habitu, habere vero Potestatem Ecclesiasticam, none a Christo
Serva^ore nostro institutam, qualis nunquam ante illius institutionem in orb
fuit, quaeque est Species Potestatis distinctae a Laica and long nobilior ea,
ut Aurum est Species Metalli distincta a Specie plumbi, and ^a nobilior,
quaeque direct solum amplectitur super-naturalia, indirecte vero eatenus
naturalia, quatenus sunt necessaria ad consecutionem finis supernaturalis ob
quem sunt instituta.

In which Text of Navarrus, the longer it is, the more points are observeable:
As first of all, that where you charge Navarrus to affirm, that Papal power
is not merely Temporal, he gives not so much as the least suspicion of the
said pretended and imputed affirmation; he rather stands out and holds out for
the clean contrary assertion: Then secondly, that what Laick power soever is
annexed to the Pope, he has got it by the Privileges of noble Princes, and by
the Donaries (if I may take up Navarrus his own word) of Magnificent
Personages, but not as Christ's Vicar: Then thirdly, that as the Vicar of Christ
he has not a hands breadth, not an Inch of Laick power, neither in the highest
degree, nor in the middle rank, nor in the lowest region: Then fourthly, that
he has neither the Act nor the Habit of Laick power, whereby he may be so much
as enabled to exercise the same, though he should never put it in practice, but
keep it up close like a Be in a Box, or as men say, like a Sword always in
the Scabbard: Then fifthly, that his power is Ecclesiastical, the same that was
instituted by Christ our Lord, a power never heard of in the world before
Christ's institution: Then Sixthly, that his Ecclesiastical power has nothing
at all to do with Laick power, but is directly distinct from the same in
Specie, as the Species of Gold is directly distinct from the Species of Lead,
so that as Gold is not Lead, and Lead is not Gold, even in like manner Papal
power is no way Temporal, and Laick power is no way the same with Papal
power: Then Seventhly, that Papal power directly stretches out his arms to
embrace things that are Supernatural; as Grace by name, given by his Holiness
through the means of holy Sacraments, as Catholics believe; and the same
grace is merely a thing Supernatural: Eighthly and lastly, that Pontificiall
power indirectly makes use of things natural, instituted by Christ for a
Supernatural end, as water to baptize, oil for that action which we call
Extreme, or last unction, 1 Cor. 19.
and silver for Alms, ordaining besides, that he who serves at the Altar
should live by the Altar; and that no mouth of any Ox which treads out the
corn be at any time muzzeled, according to Christ's institution, for the better
obtaining of the Supernatural end: This is the power whereof Navarrus affirms
(as you seek to bear me down) that forsooth it is not merely Temporal:
Does Navarrus there speak of Temporal power? Nay, does Navarrus once dream
thereof? For albeit he speaks of the use of natural things, yet he calls them
neither Secular, nor Temporal, nor Civil, but only natural; and restraines
them to those things which were instituted to a Supernatural end, and not so
far forth as they are natural, but as they are Spiritual, that is to say, as
they are clothed and apparelled with goodness of the Supernatural end,
according to Christ's own institution: How then can that be true, which you
charge Navarrus to affirm, that Papal power is Layick and Temporal,
howsoever not merely Layick and Temporal? and that as Pope he may intrude
himself into the exercising of Temporal Dominion and Jurisdiction? But with
you Hetrodox it is no new or strange thing (as often it has been known and
seen) to cite Authors for some opinion, who teach a clear contrary Doctrine.

4. You stand for the Popes Kingdom to be a Kingdom that governes all
Kingdoms: Then belike he steers the huge Argonfie of the grand Signior, and of
the mighty Tartarian, and the most potent Monarch of China too: But I believe
he dares not once presume to set his foot in any of their powerful A^kes: No,
no; the Pope is no Governor of Kingdoms, but Pastor of Christians, it is more
then high time to pull up by the roots all such thoughts, purposes, and
projects to sway the Scepter of secular Princes, Kings, and States, Non est
Discipulus super Magistrum, the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
servant above his Lord.

5. Item. You make the chief Bishop a God (as God was taken of the old
Philosophers) that is, to be causa prima, the first cause of things: For thus
you say; As God governes all Kingdoms, and takes not away from Kings the
Kingdoms ruled and governed by his omnipotentarme, so the Pope governs all
Kingdoms, and takes them not away from the true owners, to whom in right and
reason they belong, so far exorbitant is this your comparison, and opens so
great, so wide a gate unto Idolatry, that I cannot, I dare not pass by the
gate thereof, but with a wary foot: What? Is the Pope then omnipotent,
omniscient? Vbique per Essentiam, praesentiam, and potentiam? Is his Holiness
every where by his Essence, by his presence, by his power, for as much as he
immediately governes all Kingdoms, as they are governed by God himself? I
know not Hetrodox how it is possible, that so vast, so exorbitant imaginations
have taken root in the Intellectual Faculty of any Christian man.

6. Again, to give but not to grant you thus much; (I mean, to give it for
courtesy sake, though not grant it for a verity) that our Popes govern all
Temporal and Earthly Kingdoms, as they are governed by God himself, yet all
the learned know, that God suffers the second causes to work, and himself is
only concurrent with all their operations; with all that are good he concurres
Positive by position: with all that are evil, Permissive, by permission. Then
for example, when the operations of the most Christian King are good, wherefore
should the Pope not suffer him still to be in such action? Here I would have no
man step in with a frivolous answer, the Pope will not suffer the King so to
do, because the Pope is persuaded the Kings operations are wicked, and
therefore he will take order for the remedy and reformation thereof: For if
the Pope should undertake the attempt and enterprise to reform all wicked men,
first he should be nothing like unto God, who many times permits wicked men to
range in the ways of their own will: Secondly, he should have a holy design
to attempt and enterprise the hardest labors of all other; as to tumble the
great Turk down from his Imperial Throne, to pull his Regal Crown from his
Royal Head, or to convert all the Indies, or to reduce the whole World to the
unity of the Church, and such like matters of the highest stuff; which because
the Pope neither will nor can perform, it is easy for all men to judge, that
his Holiness, for all your sayings, does not govern all Kingdoms as God
himself does.

7. Moreover, you feign would make men believe, that as God governes all
Kingdoms, not depriving any of their Freehold, whether it be Kingdom or
Power; so the Pope governes Kingdoms, and takes not power from Kings; First,
because those words of the Church are spoken of Christ man, and not of of
Christ God (as the Lord Cardinal says) of whom Herod was afraid that he would
spoil him of his Kingdom; Hosts Herodes impie, Christum venire quid times? O
ungodly enemy, King Herod, what ails thee to be afraid of Christ's coming?
Then Secondly, because no man is to busy himself like a Polypragmon with
exercise of Temporal power within the Dominions of any other Prince, as a
Prince Independent, neither can any man exercise the said power therein,
without robbing the said Prince of his lawful power within his own Dominions,
what man ever enriched himself without impoverishing of some other?

8. Again, you make it a crime no lesseheinous then Herefie, for any man to
teach the power of Jurisdiction given to the Apostles, is the very same power
which Christ himself gave: My reading tells me not a word of any other Text,
where our Lord Christ has given his Apostles the power of Jurisdiction; Joan.
20.
yea all the Doctors, nay Christ himself does not furnish me with any other
Text, but in the same he teaches us three things; the first is, Data est mihi
omnis potestas in Coelo and in terra, All power is given to me both in Heaven
and in Earth; And this he speaks to teach, that his good will and pleasure was
to communicate some part of his entire and absolute power unto his Apostles:
The second, Sicut misiit me Pater, and ego mitto vos, As my Father has sent
me, so I send you; that is, my Father sent me to take away, to cancel all
bonds for sin, and to work all that which Hetrodox and Cardinal Bellarmine
has produced and alleged conatrry to the foresaid second Proposition, and in
like sort I send you now, O my Apostles, to do and perform the said works;
In which words our Savior Christ made not his Apostles entercommoners with
himself in his whole Spiritual Power ^ No, no such matter, for he
communicated not unto them the power (say we) to absolve without Sacraments,
nor power to institute Sacraments, etc. nor the power of his own Spiritual
and Heavenly Kingdom, so that Sicut, the word As, must be taken in a limited
sense, and not without some dooles and bounders of Limitation: The third, that
Christ breathed on the Apostles, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose
sins ye shall remit, etc. There our Savior Christ likewise limits the word
Sicut, As: That is to say, I give you Spiritual Jurisdiction over Souls, and
over sins, O my dear and faithful servants: Can there be any doubt or
question hereof? No verily; For here the promise is fulfilled: What promise?
The same that Christ made to Peter and the rest of the Apostles under the
Metaphor of Binding and Loosing, of locking up in Prison with Keys, and of
delivering from Prison by the same Keys: This runs current, and so shall run
so long as the houre-glasse of old Father Time has a drop of water, or a crum
of sand to let fall; That for certain the servitude or bondage from which we
are delivered by Christ, is the slaverie of sin; so that our liberty must
needs be the liberty of Grace; Mat. 18.
And that is the reason wherefore the promise of Christ made in Metaphorical
Speech, is expounded in these plain and proper terms, whose sins ye shall
forgive, Joan. 20.
etc. For to lock and to deliver with Keys, to bind and to let loose, to
forgive and to retain sins, are phrases of Speech importing and signifying
one thing, partly according to proper, and partly according to Metaphorical
Construction.

9. You maintain that Pontificiall power is unlimited; but I cannot see your
Assertion backed with any Reason or Authority, neither can I find with what
Legs it walks, or upon what stumps it stands* For the Lord God alone is
clothed and armed with unlimited power; The Principal himself is invested
with unlimited power, but so is not his Vicar or Vicegerent: And besides, to
speak out of the teeth (be you never so loath to hear it) I cannot see how it
is not repugnant unto Christian Faith, to affi^me, the whole power that Christ
had hims^l^e as Head of the Church, and that now he retains in Heaven, he
has communicated to the Pope; which doubtless whosoever affirms (if your
self be the affirmant) he affirms, who affirms the Popes Power is without
limitation. Joan. 20.


10. Again, You have heard me only stand for the power of Jurisdiction, which
our Savior gave in these words, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; and you now urge
the word Pasce, Feed; which word wraps in both powers, not only the power of
Jurisdiction, but also the power of O^der.

11. I have not restrained the Popes Power to this or that kind of Subjects,
but have only spoken in general, and have yielded to the Pope all that
Spiritual Jurisdiction: By like, Hetrodox, you think that you talk and
confer with a man of Wood, with a stock, that has not so much as the least
spark of Discourse, or of Religion upon the Subject now in conference: But you
shall find your self deceived, and that you have to deal with an Antagonist
neither stock-like, nor block-like.

12. Without any occasion you pass over the River to the Pastures; I mean to
the word Pasce, Feed; and here you say, that in the original Greek it
signifies, Peter, govern and rule my Lambs: Now Sir, I do not deny, that
Christ is the Spiritual King and Pastor of the Church, or that as Temporal
Kings in Scripture are called Pastors, Feeders, and Shepherds in Temporals,
even so Christ himself the Pastor is likewise King in Spirituals: Nor do I
deny the Pope to be Christ's Vicar, and viceroy with a limited Power in
Spirituals, a power every way most eminent, as extending over Christian souls:
But from this can you Hetrodox well collect and gather, that our Holy Father
the Pope is a Temporal King? much less a Spiritual King, as Christ is
himself; and least of all, that he has any Temporal Power by right of hi^
Pontificiall Dignity and Authority: St. John takes up the Greek word (...)
twice, and the word (...) but once: He thereby expounds that one word with two
words, which without all doubt signify Pasce, Feed: Nay, the word (...)
properly signifies to feed, and by a Metaphor to rule and govern, as in the
aforesaid Text, as in this Text of St. John's Revelation: All this makes much
against you Hetrodox, and nothing at all to favor your cause: Will you now
give me leave to make good my Exposition of the word Pasce, Feed, with
Authority of the holy Fathers.

Hetrodox. Proceed at your pleasure.

Orthodox. Ter dictum est, Pasce, etc. Three times over the Lord Christ
repeated the word, Feed, to St. Peter: And wherefore thrice? Forsooth to
intimate that all such as are charged with cure of souls, are bound to feed
their People triplici Pastu, with a threefold Diet; namely with the Food of
Gods heavenly word, with Food of good Example in life, and with Temporal Aid,
so far as their means are not wanting: But alas, this threefold Feeding is
now adays changed by unconscionable shepherds into a threefold polling and
pelting of their Flocks, by pilling and pinching their Subjects with
intolerable burdens of exactions, without any due regard at all to the said
threefold Feedi^g: Thus Chrysostom. Hom. 87.


Perpende verba, Pasce agnos meos, etc. weigh these words of Christ well, Feed
my Lambs; that is, Feed my faithful Flock not thine; use them not as thy
proper Possession, but as mine; I therefore asked, if thou love me O Peter,
because I have a purpose to recommend my little Flock to thy Feeding, and to
be kept of thee as mine own Goods and Cattells, that love which thou bear
my self in profession, I would have thee show and practice toward my tender
Lambs, Fat not, pamper not up thy self, like those unfaithful Shepherds, of
whom the holy Prophet cried, Ezech. 34.
Vae Paestoaibus, woe to the Shepherds of Israel, that have fed their own
bellies; That man that feeds himself, who gapes after his own gain, who
hunts after his own glory, who removes every stone for his own commodity,
never s^eking for the benefit of the Faithful over whom he bears rule, never
aiming at Gods glory in exercising the state and office of a Ruler: Tract.
132. in Ioann^m.
Thus far St. Augustine, Qui hoc animo pascunt ones, etc. Such as feed the
Flock with a mind to make the sheep their own, and none of Christ's, doubtless
bear no love at all to Christ himself; St. Augustine again:

Ibid.
Sicut oves meas Pasce, non sicut tuas, Feed the Flock as my sheep, and not as
thine own Cattle, in them seek my Glory, my gain, and neither thine own
gain, or thine own glory.

This Peter himself has also taught; Feed the Flock of God which depends
upon you, 1 Petr. 5.
caring for it not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind, not as if ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be
examples to the Flock.

These be the exercises of the true Shepherd, and thus the words, Feed my
Lambs, are to be understood; and not, that the Popes Feeding should be a
Temporal reigning over all Temporal Kings: The holy Fathers, you see
Hetrodox, teach the contray; namely, that he ought carefelly to shun and avoid
all filthy Lucre, Acquists, Glory, Dominion, etc.

13. Again, by Quodcunque solveris, whatsoever thou Peter shall loose, you
understand every thing; And by this means the Pope shall have power to untie
all kno^s, to set open all prisons, to transfer all Kingdoms, to deliver all
the slaves in Turkey at his pleasure, nay, to solve all difficulties in all
matters whatsoever: What man does not perceive the f^lsity of this Doctrine?
Our Lord Christ come to deliver Souls from sin, and as the only Redeemer;
So teach all Divines: The Pope by like shall work the same effects; he shall
cooperate in this great work of Redemption, he shall bind and loose the sins
of (...); you have no reason Hetrodox to cast such colors on your false
opinions, whereby to make the Pope Lord and Patron of every thing with a
Quodcunque whatsoever; For ^^ere is no such matter as you conceive in your
dreams.

14. Again, the word Soul, is understood and taken, sometimes for the whole
man, and sometimes for the Spirit of man above, according to the matter
handled: Now your Argument is drawn from one place to another; For St. Paul
speaks of Temporal Dominion: The word Omnis anima, every Soul in understood
of power over men's bodies, and in Temporality; But because our Lord Christ gave
Spiritual Power to Peter, the word Animas, Souls, which is used in the Prayer
of the Church, does signify the Spirit or Soul of Man, and not his Body, in
Spirituality forsooth; and not in Temporality.

15. Those who wiped the word Animas out of the Brevi^rie, were inspired (as
you believe) by the Holy Spirit of God; I never yet read or heard, that Gods
own Spirit is the Author of Dissension, strife, or Discord: But well I wot,
Peace is one of the Gifts or Fruits of the Holy Spirit: The makers of the
foresaid Prayer aimed at the Exposition of these words, Quodcunque ligvaeris,
whatsoever thou shall bind, by the word Animas, and by that other Text, Quorum
remiseritis peccata, whose sins ye remit, as a just exposition of the word
Animas, because all sins (to speak properly) are bred and hatched up in the
Soul, not in the Body: And this they did to a special end and purpose;
namely to drive certain Opinastres from their Tenent or hold, That Popes are
Domini in Temporalibus and Spiritualibus, the absolute Lords over men's goods,
their Bodies and Souls, with a power to bind and loose all things; as it
seems, your self Hetrodox is of the same opinion: This Exposition they made
by the word Animas, and by the same exposition they produced an excellent
remedy against all Discords, which might grow between the Pope and other
Princes about Meu^^ and Tuum, about Mine and Thine, whereas on the other side,
those who last spung'd the Breviarie by taking away the word Animas, have
ministered new Tinder and Match to kindle the Coals of great contention,
discord, and litigious quarrels: Besides, it is not unknown to the World, that
in the Books of the Councels, of the Canons, and of other Doctors, yea down
so low as to the very Breviaries, and Missals, many matters recorded and
registered in favor of Layick Princes, have been blotted and still are scraped
out of the ancient Rolls; and all to make experiment, if, after long travail
and sore labor, that huge mountain of opinion, de illimitata Potestate
Pontificis in Temporalibus, touching the unboundable power of the Pope in
Temporals, might be brought forth, reared up, and established in the Church of
God: Confer the Books printed in 30. and 50. with Books printed in these
days, as well the Books of Councels, as of others, and the notable evidence
of a goodly vintage will manifestly appear, so as it may be reckoned for a
wonder, that after so great a vintage there be found some few clusters or
bunches of Grapes, which make for the honorable Rights and Titles of our most
gracious Princes: This way, if it shall be followed long, will prove the high
way to crack the credit of all Scripture, and to bring the whole Church of God
to final Ruin.

16. Again, In the text of the ancient Breviaries, you tell us the word Animas
was never extant: These eyes of mine have seen Manuscript Breviaries of more
then 200. years antiquity, with some Breviaries printed, of more then an 100.
The word Animas is extant in both; and were it not extant, yet I say it ought,
for the removing of all occasions of discord, there to have a place.

17. Last of all, you confound the word of Disobedience with the word of
Obstinacy: This I hold for a certain Position, the man that disobeyeth a Law,
cannot incur the censure of Excommunication; This likewise for no less
indubitable, the man obstinate in sin cannot be excommunicated, when he has
not been admonished of his fault or offense before: But I never so much as
dreamed to affirm the one or the other of these Positions: I have hitherto
only affirmed, that for the enwrapping of any man within the most sore bands
of Excommunication, two things are of necessity to be presupposed; the one,
that he has fallen into some sin, the other, that being admonished thereof
diverse and sundry times, he has not repented; And what else is that but
obstinacy in sin? For if any man shall commit some sin, and afterward
being thereof admonished shall truly repent, he ought not at any hand to be
Excommunicated, but for his persisting, after he has been duly admonished, he
may and must bear the most heavy Censure of Excommunication; So that obstinate
persisting in sin is the last cause of Excommunication; of which obstinacy
it is a manifest sign, that being admonished, he has not been reformed and
become a new man: So that all Disobedience is not a material cause of
Excommunication, nor yet all obstinacy, but only that obstinacy which
presupposes Admonition: Of this I speak, of the same speak all the Doctors;
and therefore this Doctrine is neither new nor false: But now Hetrodox, t o
insist over long upon matters most clear and manifest, it is but a manifest
folly; let us for this time part good friends after so sharp a fray, and
prepare for the next encounter to morrow morning.

Hetrodox. It pleases me right well.

The fifth days Conference, upon the fifth Proposition.
Orthodox.
YOu are later arrived this morning, worthy Hetrodox, then at any of our former
meetings.

Hetrodox. Not in any weakness of Spirit, want of courage, or disposition of
mind to avoid this days combat, but as constrained by extraordinary
impediment, and unexpected restraint: For in good and sober sadness my fingers
have itched ever since peep or break of day, to have your fifth Proposition
by the ears.

Orthodox. In good time* you shall have not only your Fingers but also your
Hands full of skirmishing this day, and yet shall not be able to draw one drop
of the blood of my fif^h Proposition, though I know you to be a most expert and
skillfull master at the sh^rpe.

Hetrodox. Well Sir, let us leave complementall prefacing, and fall roundly to
the matter: Your fifth Proposition goes upon these same legs, if I well
remember the terms: That a^^^it some Authors (you know not upon what good
ground) be of opinion, that as well the persons as the goods of Ecclesiastics
are by Gods Law exempted from the secular Princes power; nevertheless the
contrary opinion, that such exemption is grounded upon man's Law, is the
sounder, the more agreeable and consonant unto Divine Scripture, unto the
writings of the holy Fathers, and to the file and thread of Histories.

Orthodox, I have no reason to except against your memory; you have hit the
nail on the head, my fifth Proposition runs in the very same strains and form
of terms: What exception have you to make against it in whole or in part?

Hetrodox. If you did bear the least spark of reverence to holy Church, you
surely would never have this used lavish and absolute affirmative, that as well
the Persons as the goods of Ecclesiastics have obtained Exemption and Immunitie
from the S^cular arm only by man's Law: Sess. ult. cap. 30.
In the General Council of Trent it is clearly declared, That Immunitie of
the Church, and of all Ecclesiastical Persons, was instituted by Gods
Ordinance, and by Ecclesiastical Decrees: What Christian is he that dares give
the affront, or contest against so high, so sacred Authorit e?

Par. 9. cap. 20.
Before the Tridentive, the Council of C^l^y'^ declared the same in these
words; Ecclesiastical Immuni^^e pleads upon terms of great Antiquity, and got
good footing in the Church Jure divino pariter and humano, as well by Gods Law
as man's Law.

Sess. 9.
In the Laterane Council, under Leo X. it is determined, that Laics have no
power over Ecclesiastical persons, neither by Gods Law, nor by man's Law, which
words are directly and properly contrary to your Assertion, that Layick Princes
by man's Law have power over Ecclesiastical persons: Must not you Orthodox be
some new Goliath, who in the height of your ten^erity dare set your face and
foot against so many Squadrons of the Lords Army, that is, against so many
Universal Councels.

Cap quamque de Consibus.
Before the said Counsels, Pope Boniface left in good Record, as a matter
notorious, and of none denied, that Churchmen, and Church-goods are not within
the Circle, but free and exempt from the reach, yea from all touch of Secular
Power, and that even by Gods own divine Ordinance.

Before Boniface John VIII. has testified, That Priests and other Cleries
might neither be admitted into Orders, Gratia. Did. 96. Ca^. si Imperator.
nor judged by any Secular Power, but only by Popes, according as Almighty God
himself had appointed and ordained: And the very same that John left written
of the persons, Pope Simmachus long before, together with all the III. Council
held at Rome in his presence has witnessed of their goods.

That which I tell you Orthodox, has not any stitch of Inconformitie with
sacred Scripture; The Patriarch Joseph exercising the Office of Vicar General
to King Pharoh, Genesis 47.
exempted the Priests and freed them from the burdens, which the rest of the
people were enjoined and enforced to bear: 1 Es^r. 7.
Artaxerxes King of Persia exempted likewise all the Priests of the Hebrews,
because the light of Nature, which immediately shines and comes from God,
plainly declares it is a thing most convenient: Pope Alexander III. upon this
ground uttered this worthy Sentence in the Later an Council; Cap Non minu s de
Immun. Eccl.
It can be no seemlie thing to make the Church of God less free in the Reign
and Government of Christian Princes, then she was in Pharohs time: Let us now
see and examine the reasons which you bring for proof of your first
Proposition: For you pretend and allege, That Exemption of Ecclesiastical
Persons and their Possessions, is only established and granted by man's Law;
and that your opinion in that point is more conformable to sacred Scripture, to
the holy Doctors, and to the Histories of the Church, then the contrary
opinion.

Orthodox. You demand the reasons of my Doctrine in very good time H^trodox;
For in truth we are now come to the golden Key that opens the Closet and
Cabinet of my Catholic Doctrine: Howbeit Sir, before I shall allege proofs
of his Doctrine, First it will be needful to declare by certain Propositions,
in what points your opinion d^ff^^s from theirs, who are commonly cited under
the name of Heretics; which to be plain, i^ likewise my opinion.

1. There is a great difference between these two terms, not Subject and
exempt: For the man is not subject unto any Prince, Propositions fore^aid for
grounds of the defense following.
over whom the power of the said Prince does not extend and stretch: Take this
for Example; An English man usually and commonly dwelling in England, is not
subject unto the French King: For the French Kings power extends not over the
English, who have their common habitation in the Realm of England: But in case
an Englishman dwelling in England shall not obey the King of England and his
Laws, and shall not be conformable to the Statutes of England; it must not be
said that he is a Refractory, because he is not subject unto the King of
England, but because he is exempted either by Almighty God the Lord of all, or
else by the King of Englands most Royal and gracious Privilege: So that,
whereas I affirm, that Ecclesiastic Exemption and Immunitie is not in force
de Jure divino by Gods Law, my meaning is not in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
causes, cases, or delicts; For in cases of that nature and kind, we cannot say,
that Clerics are excempt from the power of their lawful and natural Prince,
but we only pronounce they are not subject unto the said Prince; Then it
remains that my meaning is, in such Goods, in such Causes, in such Delicts, as
properly fall within the terms of Princely power, not only to take due
cognizance thereof, but also to set and appoint due order in the same; and what
can such things but merely Temporal and Political matters? This has begot
and bred the Error in some writers, and your Error Hetrodox in particular; In
that whereas I contend, that Clerics are not exempt from the power of their
Natural Prince by Gods Law, you in all have infer thereupon; Ergo, Princes
have power to make Laws for saying Mass, and for the marriage of Priests!
Certes Hetrodox this consequence has no weight, like a scive that holds no
water; they are not exempt from Temporal Power: Ergo, in Spiritual Delicts
and causes they are subject: Such equivocating Arguments of double sense and
construction, which are and ever have been the precipitating of many simple
spirits into erroneous conceits, ought by all means in so grave and weighty a
subject, both carefully and curiously to be avoided: When I therefore speak
of Exception, Exemption, and Immunitie from Secular power, I must of necessity
be conceived and taken to mean, in such Causes, in such Goods, and in such
Delicts, wherein without all privilege both Divine and Humane, of God, or man,
a man should of necessity be subject unto the Secular Prince.

2. There be four opinions laid to the charge of Heretics, and rejected in
this Argument, as condemned and cursed with Bell, Book and Candle: The Fathers
of the first opinion are Marsilius of Padua, and Jandunus; These are charged
and challenged by some to teach, that Christ paid Tribute Necessitate coactus
as one enforced by necessity: The next is Calvin's opinion; He dreams that
Clerics are subject unto the Temporal Prince Ex debito, in all Causes, except
only such as are merely Ecclesiastical: The third opinion calls Peter
Martyr, father; He makes no bones to p^ofesse, that it rests not in the hands,
it lies not in the power of Princes to grant any such Privilege of Exemption
unto Clerics, and in case they shall grant any such Privilege, they shall run
into the snares of sin, because every such Grant is repugnant and contrary to
Gods Law: The fourth is the opinion of Brentius, and Philip Melancthon, they
contend, that Clerics are subject unto the Secular Prince even in causes merely
Ecclesiastical: All this verbatim is taken out of Card. Bellarmine; Lib. 1.
cap. 28. de Clericis.
It was therefore either out of affected Ignorance, or else out of Supine
Malignitie that one has charged my Doctrine to be sprinkled or dipped in
Brentianated, Calviniated, and Marsilianated holy water: For I neither affirm
with Marsilius of Padua (if nevertheless Marsilius was culpable of any such
condemned opinion) that our Lord Christ paid tribute as enforced by necessity;
but only to shun the rock of giving scandal: Neither do I teach with
Calvin, that in all Causes and Criminal Delicts, Clerics are subject and ought
so to be; but in such only, wherein they have not been exempted, which
Exemption stands not in force by Gods Law, but by Princes Privilege: Neither
do I contend with Peter Martyr, that Princes can grant no such Exemption; but
rather the contrary, that such Exemption may be granted: Neither do I lastly
maintain with Brentius, that Clerics are subject in Spiritual Causes: For I
distinguish the two Powers, the Temporal and the Spiritual; And when I speak
of Subjection or Exemption of Clerics, I speak only in Temporal matters,
over which the said power extends and stretches out her mighty arm, and not in
mere Ecclesiastical matters and Spiritual, save only by Accident.

3. My opinion is this, that Clerics are not exempted from the power of Secular
Princes by Gods Law, but only by Princely Privilege, either expressed, or at
least in tacit grant; I mean, after Canons lawfully published and received, as
also after many laudable and approved Customs for such purpose: Now that my
Doctrine herein is Catholic, it is confessed by Cardinal Bellarmine himself,
in the place last cited: For in his last Edition he holds, that Exemption is by
Gods Law; forgetting by like, what he had taught (like a Doctor out of his
Chair) in his other Books, to the contrary; of the same subject: As where he
writes of Medina and Conarruuias, two Catholic Authors, and both of them
resolute in my true opinion for this point: For he takes them down in a round
Censure, terming them bold and hardy speakers in these words; Sed operae
pretium erit, C de Restit. q 15.
ad eas objectiones breviter respondere, quas Didacus Conarruuias, and Joannes
Medina (qui liberius aliis locuti sunt) in medium protulerunt; objiciunt enim
primo, nullam extare legem divinam, qua Clerici eximuntur a Jurisdictione
Principum laicarum, etc. It shall not here be amiss, to frame some brief
answer unto the Arguments produced by Conarruuias and Medina, who have suffered
their tongues to walk and range more freely then other writers: For they first
allege, that Exemption of Clerics from the Jurisdiction of Laick Princes, is
not warranted by any one tittle of Gods Law, etc. The L. Cardinal answers
their Arguments, as Arguments of Catholic Doctors; and otherwise, by his
leave, he suffers the knots of their Arguments to hold untyed, and without any
Doctor-like resolution: And i^ is no marvel, that our side is not
overshadowed with any great cloud or heap of authentical witnesses; because
likewise the Authors, who stand for the contrary opinion, are very thin sown;
Besides, this doubt is but new crept into the Schools; and again, if any man
write with a free and full pen upon that subject, he is put unto his
Recantation, like the Lord Cardinal, or that which is written to purpose, is
cancelled and rased, or else he is charged with sore threatenings: Sotus indeed
had freely delivered his mind of this matter; but in the end, subjoyning a
certa^^^ cas^le without any foundation, which marred all that upon a good
foundation he had built before, being not able otherwise to avoid some blow, he
concluded the whole, with Servum (...) multa decet sentire, and pauca loqui,
men that stand obvious to the lash of the whip, may debate of many matters in
their judgments, but should not be too free of their tongues: And for my
particular, I had never taken the liberty so freely and so fa^ to imbarque my
pe^ in the fair ship of these eight Propositions, but as Necessitate coactus
propter evidens periculum ^^^^iarum, as enforced by necessity in a desperate
case of most evident danger of many Souls, and in the lawful defense of my
most Catholic and lawful Prince his quarrel. In times of peace ^any things
are shut up under the hatches of the tongue, which in times of contentions, and
quarrels learned men are enforced to write, if they have any spirit or courage
to defend the truth: And howsoever I have now followed the free'st course, both
in writing and speaking my mind to the full, though I be reproved and hated by
such as your self Hetrodox, who ^^ve deeply interessed and engaged themselves
in the maine, yet I shall never by Gods grace repent me of my pains, as if in
so doing I had committed any evil; that of the Comicall Poet will ever stand
good and true; Obsequium amicos, veritas odium p^ri^, Obsequious Flattery finds
many friends, but plain-dealing Truth may go shake her Ears.

4. My opinion is the better founded, the more true, and the more infallible;
because it is confessed by Cardinal Bellarmine, that no Scripture, no
Council, no Canon, and none of the holy Fathers hold the contrary, as in the
Defense following it shall well appear; and as before has been showed out of
Thomas, Augustine; and Jerome, cited for the contrary opinion, which indeed
has no approbation, but only of some few Canonists; who, howsoever they
affirm and maintain, that Exemption of Clerics is grounded upon Gods Law, do
not understand Gods written Law, and less the Law of Nature; neither by
necessary consequence, but only by a certain probability: As thus King Pharoh
exempted all the Idolatrous Priests of Egypt from all Tribute, and Artaxerxes
freed the Priests of Israel from the like burdens; It may therefore seem in
probability a Simili, from the like, agreeable to Decency, That Christian
Princes ought in like manner to exempt Christian Priests from payment of
Tributes, and other Taxations of like nature: This Argument, I must confess,
is drawn from holy Scripture, which is Gods Law: But it strongly makes against
our Adversaries in their Tenent, because it concludes, that Secular Princes,
and not God himself, ordained the said Exemption, the very Assertion, which I
maintain; Besides, Arguments drawn from a similitude are of small force, or
none at all: For by the same reason it might be thus argued; In the old Law,
which is Gods Law, Priests were permitted to marry; Ergo, it is by Gods Law,
that Priests are now married in the Evangelicall Law: And that de Jure Divino
by Gods Law, is understood by the forenamed Authors, according to this my
Exposition. I appeal to the Lord Cardinal Bellarmine himself in the place
before alleged.

5. The new opinion of the Lord Cardinal, and newly brought into the Church,
without any reason or authority, concerning this matter, hold by three strings.

1. That Exemption of Clerics from Secular power is not built upon Gods written
Law, because it is no where commanded in holy Scripture; much less upon the
law of nature, or the law moral, which Divines likewise call the Law of God,
as the Docalogue, or ten Commandments, etc. wherein the Lord Cardinal Medina,
Conarruuias, and my self do all agree.

2. By Gods Law again, he understands a certain Decency and Conformity with
the examples of K. Pharoh and K. Artexerxes, and from their Examples he
collects, that Christian Princes are t do the same, but dares not say, they are
bound to that strain of Benignity; whereupon he confesses in a manner, that
doubtless it appertains unto Princes to grant such Immunity or Exemption;
but yet Princes are not bound to show such Grace by those Texts of Scripture,
for as much as in the said passages there is not so much as the least umbrage
or shadow of any such obligation to be seen or found.

3. By Gods Law, is as much to say, as by the Law of Nations; A new device, and
never heard of before; And that his Lordship proves thus: The Law of Nations is
derived from Gods Law natural; Ergo, it is Divine or the Law of God: Then
again, that it is by the Law of Nations he assumes, that all Nations have
exempted their Priests; but shows not in what matters, whether in their
Tributes, or in other Causes; nor proves the universal, nor is able to prove
the same, that all Nations have exempted their Priests; for that is false, nor
alleges for his opinion any one Doctor, that by Gods Law, signifies by the
Law of Nations; nor finally shows, that Exemption is grounded upon the Law of
all Nations: Lib. de Cler. cap. 19.
Let him be searched.

This opinion as new, and hanging by loose gimmals, is ready to nod, to totter,
and to ruin of it own accord; yet shall it not be amiss to touch in brief
diverse things concerning the same.

1. There is great difference between Gods Law written, the Law of Nature, and
the Law of Nations: For howsoever the Law of Nations is a Secondary Law of
Nature, according to the great Master Thomas Aquinas, by reason it is derived
from Principles both of Natures Law, and of Gods Law, as in like manner the Law
Civil is; nevertheless it is not Divine, but only National and Humane Law,
neither has any man ever thought it was Divine.

2. Every thing done by some Nations, cannot be called the Law of Nations, and
consequently Divine; For it is a common and ordinary Custom of Nations to
seek, and to exercise Revenge; and yet Revenge has no ground, no warrant from
Gods Law; nay it is directly prohibited by our Lord Jesus Christ himself:
Audistis quia dictum, etc. you have heard how it has been said to them of old,
Mat. 5.
thou shall hate thine enemy; but I say unto you, love your Enemies.

3. Albeit some Princes have granted such Immunity or Privilege in some
particular case, as in the exempting of Priests from Tributes; nevertheless
the Exemption in all cases is not in force by Law of Nations, because most
Nations neither have practiced, nor do this day exercise any such course of
Benignity: For example; In the Law of Nature all the First borne (according to
the common opinion) were Priests; shall it hereupon be concluded, that all the
Firstborn in the world were exempt, at least from Tribute? The Lord Cardinals
Argument proves not a hairs breadth more; which to me seems an answer little
beseeming a man of his Lordships incomparable learning.

4. If his Lordships Argument had any force at all to prove, that Exemption is
by the Law of Nations; it should only work this conclusion, that Princes ought
to exempt Priests from Tribute; But our question turns not upon that hindge:
No, the main question consists in this point; Whether Ecclesiastics are exempt
in all Temporal matters and causes, without special and gracious privilege
of their Princes?

5. That is called Jus Gentium, the Law of Nations, which ever was from the
beginning of the world unchangeable, and shall so continue unto the worlds end;
as that of just Dominion and Servitude; That of Marriage for the perpetual
preservation of mankind; That which all Nations indifferently have observed,
and still observe to this day, Turks, Pagans, Christians, Jews, etc. But for
Christian Priests to be exempted, it cannot stand by the Law of Nations;
because they were instituted by Christ; and besides, All Nations have not
exempted their Priests.

6. To conclude: Whereas Christ our Lord has so deeply charged all Christians
to practice Humility and Subjection; whereas also St. Paul on his part has
absolutely commanded every Soul to be subject unto the higher Powers; though
Exemption had been by the Law of Nations, that is observed of all Nations;
Wherefore might it not be abrogated, or at least derogated, by Divine Law
Positive? As Christ was able to repeal and disanull that Custom of Nations,
concerning the revenge of Enemies, with a new Law?

Hetrodox. If you have now sufficiently fore-layd all your grounds for this
present matter; it is time that you apply your self to your best Defense, and
to trace out my particular Errors.

Orthodox. Well remembered; you shall see me trace them out one by one in my
defense, as men use to trace Hares in a Snow.

Two things I have affirmed before; the one, that Ecclesiastics and their
Possessions or Goods are not exempted from Secular power, meaning (as has been
said) in such Cases and Causes unto which the said Secular power does properly
extend; for so much the word Exemption signifies: The other, that Ecclesiastics
enjoy no such Exemption by the Law of God, but by man's Law, without growing or
descending to any particular; whether the said man's Law be the Law of Nations,
or the Civil, or the Canon Law: Howbeit my opinion is the same that Medina
holds, and other Authors alleged for this purpose; That Exemption goes by
Privilege of Princes: Now to your Errors in your late and last opposition,
which I find to be Eight.

1. The sacred Council of Trent (you say) has determined, that immunity of
Clerics is by Divine Law: Sess. 25. cap. 20.
But in the said Council and Session which your self have cited, I can read
no such Determination: The Council there treats only in general of
Ecclesiastic Immunity and Liberty; adding this Adjunct or Epithet, Divina
ordinatione constitutam, appointed by Gods Ordinance; It does not say,
whosoever shall affirm that such Immunity in Temporals is not by Gods Law, let
him be Anathema, let him be accursed: Nor does it determine, it is by Gods Law;
but speaks in a generality, including that Immunity or Exemption which is in
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual causes: And how those words, Appointed by Gods
Ordinance are to be taken or understood, I appeal to the Gloss; unto which
the Doctors are always referred, whenever Exemption in Temporals is avouched
to be appointed by Gods Ordinance, or by the Law of God: For the Gloss it
self says, Est de Jure Divino, id est, deducitur ab exemplo, etc. It is by
Gods Law; What is that? It is drawn from the example of the Patriarch Joseph
and Artaxerxes the Persian King: Where the Gloss does not mean, it is from
Gods Law, as by any way of Precept; but rather, that by Princes it is granted
by reason and occasion of those two Examples, read in holy Scripture, which is
Gods Law: But I deny not Hetrodox, that by these Examples it is decent for
Princes to grant by Patent or or Charter such Exemption from Tributes; or that
Princes having once granted the same by the said Examples, for the Tributes in
particular (whereof we now entreat, and of none other Subject) should revoke,
repeal, and nullify the said Grant of Exemption, Extra casum necessitatis,
except in cases of necessity: I only maintain there is no prec^pt, neither in
Scripture, nor in the Divine Law of Nature; T^^t either the persons of Cleries,
or their Good^ and Possessi ns as Freehold can be exempted, except only the
Prince be pleased out of his Royal Grace and Prerogative to seal such
privilege of Exemption: Then Sir, with your favor, the Council having
determined no more then is by the foresaid Canon cited, must have and carry
this construction; That first of all the Council grounds no Determination:
Secondly, That it provides for Exemption in Spiritual Causes: Thirdly, that in
case it speaks of Exemption in Temporal, it speaks only per quandam
decentiam, probabilitatem, and similitudinem, by way of Decency, Probability,
and Similitude, as the Gloss and other Doctors avouch, whom I neither dare nor
purpose to contradict: For I speak of Gods Law, not by way of Similitude, but
in propriety of terms: This, Hetrodox, is the reason, wherefore neither
Medina, nor Iansenius, nor Conarruuias, and others (who printed their works
and writings after the Council of Trent) never said they held any opinion
against the Council, and yet are directly of my opinion: Sess 25.
Moreover, the said Session was dispatched in Post-hast and Precipice (if I may
take up the Diaries own word) when the French Prelates were departed from the
Council, and the Spanish for their part had put in Protestation, that matters
were precipitated, and hudled, and shuffled and cut by the nimble fingers of
cunning Gamesters: The Acts of the said Council are not in these days to be
cited with like integrity to those of the ancient Councels; which foul Defect,
by the godly-wise and learned, is justly attributed to the disgrace and
disaster of our times: And for this reason I am persuaded, the holy Fathers in
that Council assembled subjoyned the foresaid words; That in case any
difficulty should grow and arise in future times about the Determinations of
that Council, the Pope might have full power to procure and work sufficient
redress and remedy thereof; either by convocating the learned of those
Provinces, where such difficill and intricate questions did spring and grow; or
otherwise by calling a General Council, or else might by some other means
provide for the Quiet and Peace of the Christian Commonwealth: So that first I
say, those words of the Council are cited amiss both by the Lord Cardinal
and your self; For the Council says not, Ecclesiae and personarum
Ecclesiaesticarum Immunitas in Temporalibus est instituta ordinatione divina,
That Immunity of the Church and of Ecclesiastical Persons in their Temporals
is appointed by Gods Ordinance: but only says, Princes ought not permit
inferior Magistrates to infringe and violate the Immunity of the Church, or of
Ecclesiastics, howsoever it be appointed by Gods Ordinance; whether merely
Ecclesiastic, or Temporal (as the Gloss runs) granted by Princes, according
to those Examples Registered in holy Scripture: But all this while the Council
does not deny, that such Immunity is granted by Princes, in Temporals,
howsoever after the Examples of King Pharoh and King Artaxerxes; Then I say
again, that for so much as no such Exemption is found in any place of
Scripture, but rather the contrary written by St. Paul; therefore the Sacred
Council is to be expounded, as it is expounded by the Gloss; Romans 13.
for otherwise the Council had maintained an Error, which we Catholics are
bound at no hand to admit or acknowledge.

2. The Council of Coleyne which you allege, was not General, but
Provincial; It Decrees nothing by Determination, it delivers no more then the
Gloss, but speaks less in the teeth, and more clear then the Council of
Trent: For it does not say, that such Immunity is commanded by the Law of God
and man, but only rather introduced or brought in by Gods Law after a sort;
namely because P^inces have been moved and incited by the Examples of Pharoh
and Artaxerxes in holy Scripture (which is Gods Law) to grant Privileges unto
Ecclesiastics, or unto some others, for not payi^g of Tribute, not because it
is commanded in any Text of Scripture, but as taking that good Example in holy
Scripture, of their own accord.

3. The Lateran Council, which you also produce, is not accounted General,
(as the Lord Cardinal himself has not sticked to acknowledge in diverse
places,) and so it wants weight of Authority: Besides, that which the said
Council affirms, is not held for indubitable; And if the Counc^ll mean, that
Princes have no power over Clerics in matters merely Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, upon the matter per s^ in it self they hold a truth: But if
they mean, that Clerics are exempted in Criminal causes and Temporal matters
(which Privilege Clerics enjoy not by Gods Law as has been proved) then the
Council is not in any wise to be followed: Besides, the Council cannot
understand it otherwise then according to the Gloss; and that is denied of
none.

4. You are pleased to cast upon me the reproachful name of Goliath, whom you
might better liken to David; because I fight Pro castris, and non contra castra
Dei, for the Hosts of God, and not against his Hosts; that is, for the Doctrine
of the Apostles, for the holy Scriptures of Christ our Savior the highest
Priest, and for the holy Fathers; neither do I aver any thing (as has
been declared) against any one of the Sacred oecumenicall Councels,

lib. 1. de Cler. cap. 28.
5. The Canon of Bonifacius is understood according to the Gloss, and so much
is testified by the Lord Cardinal.

6. Pope John VIII. and Pope Symmachus are to be understood in Causes merely
Ecclesiastical, after the manner before declared, and not otherwise: But of
these two Popes more shall be spoken to purpose in another place; It is very
certain they have not determined any thing against our Tenent, as will easily
be perceived by him that shall be pleased to take a fight of their
Determinations.

7. Your own two Examples do rather weaken and pull down then build up and
fortify your Tower, in two respects: First, you allege that Pharoh and
Artaxerxes granted their Priests free Charter of Exemption; I can ask no more,
for I affirm the very same, and no more; viz. that granting Privileges of
Exemption belongs to the Prerogative of Princes: Then again you say, that
Princes have learned this lesson immediately from the light of Nature; whereas
elsewhere the Lord Cardinal tells us, that Exemption is not immediately taught
by the light of nature, but by the Law of Nations, Et per quandam
Similitudinem, and by a kind of Resemblance or Similitude.

8. Things taught by the light of Nature, it is to no purpose for P^inces to
g^ant by Privilege; And whereas Clerics are exemp^ed in particular (as it is
avouched by St. Thomas) by the Privilege of Princes Propter naturalem quandam
aequitatem, in respect of a certain natural Equity; his words are to be taken
in a sound sense: And how? That such Privilege is founded upon the rule of
Reason, which is called natural Equity, upon which rule of Reason or natural
Equity, all the grounds and rules of the Law Civil are established; but hereby
St. Thomas does not conclude, they are established by Gods Law natural, but
are civiil, revokeable, etc.

Hetrodox. Now you have tickled my Eight Errors, is there yet any more to be
said for your Defense?

Orthodox. There is more: For beside all that has been declared in my first
Proposition, that under the old Law Priests were subject unto their natural
Prince; 1. Reg. 2.
and besides that Solomon deprived Abiathar, and exauthorised him from the high
Priesthood of the Jews; In the Primitive Church until the Reign of the
Emperor Justinian, there is not read or found in the whole body of the Law
any Privilege of Exemption granted to Ecclesiastics.

^ Hetrodox. And have not I made evident Demonstration, when I refuted your
first Proposition, that under the old Law the Priests and Levites were subject
unto the Prince Ecclesiastical? And whereas you have affirmed, that Moses was
a Political or Civil Prince, have not I proved by testimonies of Scriptures
and holy Fathers, that Moses was invested in the Authority of high Ptiest?

To your Example of Solomon I make this answer, that Solomon exercised and
ex^cuted a power against Abiathar, as the Minister of Gods Divine-Will, who had
made known before that he would bring the posterity of Heli to a final end,
for so the Scripture has subjoyned, ut impleretur sermo Domini quem locutus
est super domum Heli, that the word of the Lord might be fulfilled which God
had spoken touching the house of Heli in Siloh; Besides, the Acts or Deeds of
Princes go not for Laws.

But now Sir, that before Justinian there was no privilege of Exemption in the
Church; that is I would have you know is apparently untrue; For the Emperor
Constantine who reigned more then 200. years before Justinian, and was the
first Emperor that clearly made profession of Christianity, presently
declared Ecclesiastics to be free from the common burdens of the
Commonwealth; as we read in Constantines own Epistle to Avilinus, E^l.
Histor. l. 1. cap. 7. Cod. Theod^s. cap. 31. Quaest. Pract.
recorded by Eusebius: But besides this Privilege of Constantine, there be
many other Privileges of Emperors, more ancient by odds then Iustinianus, as
your own Darling and Minion Conarruuias by you cited makes report.

Orthodox. I last alleged certain Examples, which I now perceive have put
your learning to some plunge: For hitherto your Discourse has been only from
Exemption of Tributes; and such Exemption you say is taught in Scripture by the
example of Pharoh and Artaxerxes; But whereas you dare to make good proof and
clear Demonstration, How Clerics are exempted in Criminal Causes, from which
they are not exempted, no not by Justinian himself in the Novell, I find you
puzzel'd, perplexed, and (as we say) in more then a peck of troubles; as
appears by these your particular Errors:

1. You tell me, you have proved in the first Proposition, that Moses was high
Priest: Surely this I have not denied; But I have affirmed, that howsoever
Moses did withdraw, and retire himself from the exercise of the high
Priesthood, and settled Aaron in that high Office, nevertheless he still
judged the Levites: And this argues he did it as a political or Civil Prince,
and not as high Priest, because if it had appertained to the high Priest, no
doubt, Moses would have committed that charge to Aaron, who was the type of the
high Priest of the Church, and not Moses.

2. He that will read the Text shall clearly see, that Solomon proceeded
against Abiathar, Via ordinaria by the ordinary way, and not by any particular
Revelation, and yet as the Minister of Gods Justice: For every secular Prince
is Minister Dei in iram ei qui male agit, the Minister of God to take vengeance
on him that does evil.

3. You expound these words after your own fancy and to serve your own turn
( ut impleretur Sermo Domini, that the word of the Lord might be fulfilled,) as
if the Lord had bound Solomon by especial charge and particular precept so to
thrust Abiathar out of his pastoral charge: But you must not be suffered to
dazzle mine eyes with any such slubbered Exposition: For the wisdom of God
reaches from one end to another, Wisd. 8.1.
and comely does she order all things; that is to say, by ordinary ways and
means, quando de extraordinaria Revelatione non constat, when there is no full
assurance and certainty of extraordinary Revelation; to allege Examples and
Anthorities after this manner, is to fly unto those answers whereof the Poet
says, Nisi Deo dignus vindice nodus inciderit, Except some difficulty shall
grow and arise, which requires not man's wit, but Gods Wisdom to unriddle.

4. The Acts of Princes, you say, are no Laws: No more be the Acts of Popes,
especially of such Popes as have come too short of Solomon's Wisdom, when he
judged Abiathar, which doubtless was before Solomon fell into his Apostacy or
Defection: But besides, it smells very strongly of Error for any man to
affirm (as you seem to do) that Solomon who was endowed with a Spirit, not
of Angelical, but of Divine Wisdom, and in particular, to give right
Judgment of all matters, did stumble by erroneous Judgment in Abiathars case.

5. Lastly, Whereas I according to the matter, as also from antecedent and
consequent examples, do treat of Exemption from the Court, and of all
Ecclesiastics; you turn it into the general: I do not deny, that
Constantine, and some other Emperors before Justinian; have granted
previledges of Exemption unto Ecclesiastics, because it appertains unto Princes
to grant such privileges, But I speak of Exemption from Courts and public
Judgments, with a Distinction of the said Courts by a Law In corpore Iuris, in
the body of the Law, as has been showed in the first Proposition, which was
never acted by any Emperor before Justinian: And for this point, having read
the Code not in a slight or superficial course, I trust I may affirm without
ostentation, that I cannot be deceived in so clear a matter.

But leaving these you^ E^r^n^s, I now proceed: St. Paul says, Act. 25.10, 11.
I stand at Cae^a^s Judgment Sc^^e; I ^ppeale unto Caesar: And to p^ss^ (...)
Example^; In the li^e of the most Christ^an Empe^our Otho I. We read, that
Otho, Authoritate propr^a, by his own Au ho^i^y d^posed Pope John XII. because
he was notori^usly wi^^^d.

In Summa sua. lib. 2. cap. 96.
Hetrodox. This Argument iv^^n^ed and framed by certain Heretics of old, i^
we l taken off by the Card. de Turre cremata; namely that S^. Paul w^
constrained to appeal unto Caes^r, and to ^gn^z^ him for his J^ g^ de F^cto,
non de Jure, in Fact, but not in Right; because ^he power of Peter in those
times was neither believed nor known: And therefore if St. Paul then had
answered, that he knew no other Judge but Christ's Vicar, he had moved the
Jews b^ whom he was accused, Act. 28.19.
and the Gentiles by whom he was judged, to break forth into some loud
laughter, Paul himself says, coactus sum, I was constrained to appeal unto
Caesar.

As touching the History of Pope John, and the Emperor Otho, I observe a
double falsity and error in your brief relation: First of all, those two
words, Authoritate propria, by his own Authority, are most false both for the
Fact and also for the Right: In point of the Fact how? Because Otho well
knowing, that himself being Laick had no power at all to judge an
Ecclesiastical person, he referred the matter to the Council then assembled
in Rome, to determine what was therein to be done; Sancta Synodus quid
decernat, edicat, let order be set by the Sacred Councels Decree; Thus Otho to
the Council, so that Otho deposed not Pope John by his own Authority, but by
the Councels Authority and Decree.

Likewise for point of Right; because you find not in any Catholic Author,
that Popes can be deposed by Emperous, but on the contrary, that Emperors may
lawfully be deposed by Popes, as Otho IV. by Innocentius III. and Frederick
II. by Innocentius IV. In Summa. l. 4. p. 3. c. 37.
Henry IV. by Gregory VII. So that in this your opinion you err and wander
without any guide or companion, but certain ancient and modern Heretics,
and in particular, Marsilius of Padua for one, as it is testified by the
Cardinal de Turre Cremata.

N^y more, the Pope cannot be judged by the Council, except in case of
Heresy, upon which point and Article all Catholics are agreed: And herein
lies your second falsitie; For Pope John XII. was not found culpable of
Heresy; but only of scandalous and inordinate life, in which case he could
not be judged: Besides, that Council by which Pope John was deposed, was no
lawful Council, but a Conventicle, Schismatic, and without a Head,
whereupon it was abrogated and cassed not long after, who so desires to know
the truth of this History, may read the X. Tome of Cardinal Baronius, or else
(to make a shorter cut) the Addition of Onuphrius.

Orthodox. This argument has been propounded by many Catholics, and
howsoever it is likewise taken up by Heretics, they make use thereof to
another end then Catholics use the same: But without all question or doubt,
de Turre Cremata, nor Bellarmine himself does untie the knot, and therefore in
brief I must uncase your particular Errors herein.

1. It is the Doctrine of St. Paul, that Christians must submit, and leave
themselves to be judged by Secular Painces, and most of all in Causes of
Appeal; wherein the party Appealing complains of the inferior Judge, ad
redimendam vexationem, for a redress of his grievances or wrongs, yet behold,
you contend (I cannot choose but marvel at your boldness) that St. Paul's
Appeal was not de Iure: Tell me now, good Sir, did St. Paul appeal contra Jus
against Right? If so, then you must needs think and believe, that St. Paul
sinned in the act of his Appeal? But howsoever concerning other men it may be
spoken de Facto of the Fact, and not de Iure of the Right; yet so to reprove
the holy Apostle St. Paul of sin of nothing (as you seem to do) I see not
how you can avoid a great blot, at least of blame,

2. The word Coactus, Constrained, you take in other sense, then it was taken
by St. Paul; For the Apostle uses the word Constrained to this purpose and
sense; That for so much as Festus an inferior Judge had not done him right and
justice, therefore ad redimendam vexationem, for the repairing of his wrong and
loss thereby received, he was constrained to make his Appeal unto the
Superior Judge; (as Appellants use commonly to speak:) whereas you tell us
that St. Paul said, I was constrained to appeal, that he might not make men
burst out into great laughter, if he had appealed unto St. Peter.

3. You say St. Paul appealed not unto St. Peter, least he should make both
Jews and Gentil^s to laugh: Well fare you Sir for this merry conceit and
pleasant device in the edge of an Evening: I demand, in that St. Paul appealed
not unto St. Peter, whether was it well done, or ill? If well; then Exemption
is not founded upon Gods Law; If ill, wherefore did he so? What? was it perhaps
that people might not laugh? Why then Sir, to the end that people may not be
put into a fit of laughter, is it lawful for one to do ill, or to forbear
speaki^g the truth? and in particular for that chosen vessel, that holy
Apostle; who says, we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews even a stumbling
block, and unto the Grecians foolishness: And what, 1. Cor. 1.23.
I beseech you Hetrodox makes men laugh more then foolishness: But St. Paul
abstained from preaching never the more, because his preaching was by the
Gentiles accounted foolishness; No, he took and reputed that imputation for a
special Reputation, ascribing the same to the greatness, to the wonderful
virtue and power of his preaching Ministry: To tell you the plain truth; I
can by no means, and at no hand brook or endure to hear, that for the
firming or founding of an opinion, which is delivered without all probability,
and without any show and shadow of Precept in holy Scripture, any man should
talk his pleasure of holy Paul and sacred Scripture, in so free a strain or
vein of liberty.

4. To know the History of Pope John and Otho, you refer us forsooth to
Card. Baronius, and Onuphrius in his Addition to Platina, of the Lord Cardinal
Baronius what shall I say? He is an Historian, and living still to this day;
His works are suspected in the matter of immunities; yea, as one that has not
a tongue to speak, or a pen to write otherwise, he denies all the ancient
Historians; and in case by good hap he admit some one or other, still he takes
the words which make for his turn; and as for those words which make against
his own purpose, he still seeks to blind the world and to make the Reader
believe, they are supposititious and thrust into the webb of that History by
foul and forcible intrusion; And even thus he deals in this History,
denying the Authority of Intiprandus approved in the Church by the space of
Dcc. years, and other Writers of the same times: So that now his Annals not
finding such account or consideration in the World, as no doubt he dream of
and believed, as also for as much as a Book entitled Errores Card. Baronii,
The Errors of Cardinal Baronius, is in good forwardness to be speedily
printed (in which Book are particularly laid open more then 20. Errors by him
committed in denying this most ancient History of Pope John) it is not worth
while or whistling to speak of his Authority.

As for the Addition of Onuphrius; first I say, he is very modern, and in a
manner new, then I answer, that in the said Addition there is nothing that
makes against my Position, but rather on my side, and is written in favor of
our Tenent, at least if the Election of Leo be admitted to pass for a lawful
El^ction.

5. You pretend the Emperor Otho could not de Iure depose Pope John for his
Criminal Delicts; and that Popes have de Iure deposed Emperors: Hitherto the
contrary has been proved, and ever de Iure: Namely that in Temporal matters
the Pope has not Ius auferendi Regna jure Pontificatus, that his Holiness
has neither dram nor drop of right to take away Kingdoms in right of his
Pontificalitie; and that by Gods Law none is exempt from the Secular Power in
Criminal Delicts: But you draw a reason from contrary sense, and I know not
upon what ground o^ Foundation the said Reason is built.

6. You grant, and indeed you are forced so to do, the lawful Deposing of
Pope John, I say lawful, because by virtue of John's deposition, Leo was
elected and taken for lawful Pope; say Ciacconius what he list or can to the
contrary, of whom if I shall pronounce that in the ancient Poet, Quicquid
delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi, when Kings do a^^isse, the people smart, I
trust in this case to be pardoned: Well then, one of these two points come here
to be granted; Either that Pope John deposed himself, and that has no truth,
or else that he was deposed by the Council, and that is denied by Cardinal
Bellarmine, or your self, or both; or else (to make the reason go upon three
legs) that he was deposed by the most Religious Emperor Otho, after the
Example of Solomon, by whom the seditious high Priest Abiathar was deposed and
condemned, and that is the point which I maintain: And in case this was
lawfully practiced by Otho, (as by the lawful succession of Leo after John it
appears it was done) then it must needs follow, that what was done by Otho, he
did the same Authoritate propria by his own Authority; Pope John by his own
enorme Delicts having driven and forced the good Emperor to do that Act,
which none would ordinarily have the boldness to do, in respect of the
Reverence due to that holy See: And howsoever O^ho wrought herein by counsel
and advice of the whole Council, whereupon he said Sancta Synodus edicat, the
holy Synod shall set down the Edict; yet as the Historians of those times
bea^e w tnesse, Otho gave the Definitive sentence with his Placet, it is our
pleasure.

But no more of that, or of your Errors: What say you to this Example? If
Exemption stands by Gods Law, what meant Pope Adrian I. to take such care and
order, that Charles the Great should have the whole Authority to make Election
of the Roman high Priest, Cap. Hadrian. l. 63. Can. in Synodo.
or Bishop? The same was likewise done by Leo VIII. in favor of Otho I. as men
may read in the same Distinction.

Hetrodox. You make me to mervaile much at your strange acuteness in this
Argument: I beseech you Sir, what has Exemption of Ecclesiastics to do with
nomination of persons to the Pontificiall See? Are not Ecclesiastics in France
exempted in these days, because the King now nominates men to Churches, to
Benefices, to Ecclesiastical promotions when they become void? And wheresoever
Ius Patronatus is in force, is Exemption there lost, because there the Patrones
have the right of Nomination, when they are for the most part Laics? For a time
then the Emperor Charles, by the Popes Privilege had power to nominate some
to the Papal See, when it became void; The Emperor for all that did not give
the Pope any Authority, and less could he take it from the Pope; For, as has
been said, God himself gives Papal Power to the Person once nominated or
Canonically elected, by which Power the Person so nominated, by Gods own Law
and Ordinance becomes the Superior, the H^ad, and the Pastor of all
Christians, whether Princes or private persons.

Of the Privilege granted by Pope Leo to the Emperor Otho, I might pronounce
the very same sentence, if the said Privilege had not been altogether void,
vain, and without effect; which is by me so affirmed, under supposition, In
Cap. Hadr. and in Synodo.
that Gratianus in the Canons before cited, has written the truth, and no more
then truth.

But our most Illustrious, and no less learned Cardinal Baronius gives forth
clear and manifest evidences, Tom. 9. Annal. page 323.
that Gratianus was deceived, and that such Privilege to choose the highest
Bishop, was never granted unto any Emperor; And so this your whole Argument
falls in pieces to the ground, because the Consequent is rotten, and the
Antecedent false.

Orthodox. Of the Lord Cardinal Baronius it has been spoken plain enough
before, that in the case of Immunities his Authority lacks weight; I have
likewise heard it avouched, that as until this time he has given himself an
ample privilege and liberty to correct Fathers, Canons, and Histori^ns; in
like manner he pretends to correct and amend the Councels, to his own humor
and to his own end: But in case he shall assume and usurp any such license
(which God forbid) for certain he shall never mend the Text of St. Paul, St.
Chrysostom, St. Thomas, and others: Why then should we give any credit,
liking, or ear to the Novelties of the Lord Cardinal Baronius, but rather
give some answer to your Errors?

1. Nomination to the Popedom (you say) is even as Nomination to Benefices;
That Sir, with your good l^ave, is false, to use your own terms: For the
Popedom is not a Benefice, but a Supreme Spiritual Dignity, instituted and
ordained (as Catholics belie e) by our blessed Savior; and in case it be a
Benefice; then the Right of Nomination thereunto belongs to the Emperor, and
none other.

2. If Exemption of Ecclesiastical persons be de jure divino, surely no
Ecclesiastical person can come under submission to Secular Princes, and least
of all he that is of so high Dignity; For none can draw them into that state
of Subjection without great sin; Ergo, Exemption is not by Gods Law: Of this
Argument Cardinal Baronius has taken some sight and knowledge, which puts him
on with all his force, might, and maine, to deny the foresaid Canons: Thus the
Argument holds firm and true, both for Antecedent, and for Consequent, neither
ought so ancient Canons to be denied: You likewise deny that Leo was true and
lawful Pope, when the lawful Election of that Leo has been approved by
another Leo, namely IX. and by the rest of the Popes to these present days and
times.

And shall I now go further with you Hetrodox; The Doctrine for which I now
stand, is not only the Doctrine of St. Paul, Sotus. lib. 4. Sent. did. 25.
Conar. cap. 31. pract. Quaest.
but likewise maintained by St. John Chrysostom, by Thomas Aquinas, by Sotus
that most excellent and famous Divine, by Conarruuias, who cites for his
purpose Innocentius III. Alciatus, Ferrarese, Medina, with some others: And
these two Doctors, by name Sotus, and Conarruuias, are in this particular point
so much the more to be regarded and esteemed, because they both have written
since the time of the Tridentine Council.

Hetrodox. Hold a while Orthodox, St. Paul and St. Chrysostom do not meddle
with Exemption of Ecclesiastics; but only teach, that all men are bound to
obey their lawful Superiors, as before I have proved.

St. Thomas denies not Exemption to be grounded upon Gods Law, howsoever he
affirms it stands upon the strong Pillars of man's Law; For it may be fixed,
nay it is fixed upon the Bases both of Divine and Humane Law, as the Sacred
Canons have not only testified, but also justified.

As for Sotus: Albeit he denies Exemption to be warrantable strictly by Gods
Law, yet he affirms it is agreeable to natural Reason, yea he subjoines, that
no Prince, nor all Princes together, can derogate from the said Exemption: So
that directly and clearly the Doctrine of Sotus is contrary to the present and
modern practice of the Venetian State, which dares so many ways violate the
said immunitie, as if it rested in their power to make such Derogation when
they please: Besides, that Sotus did write since the Council of Trent; it is
nothing so: For howsoever he was present in the first Sessions then celebrated
under Paulus III. yet he died before the Council ended; and so he could not
see that last Decree, wherein is declared, that immunity of Churches and
Ecclesiastical persons was brought in by Gods Ordinance: For if he had seen
the said Decree, doubtless h^ durst never have opened his mouth, nor set his
pen on work by way of contradiction to the said Decree?

Conarruuias has ever showed himself (as has been touched before) more then
partial in defense of Regal Jurisdiction: And nevertheless even he himself
has ^aught a Power to be in the Pope, whereby he justly and lawfully can free
Ecclesiastics from the Secular power, and that no Prince (be never so absolute
and Supreme) can pull the least h^ire from the Crown of this immunity: By this
i^ appears, that Conarruuias himself condemns the Actions or doings of the
Venetian Lords; so that in advertising us how much these two Authors,
Conarruuias and Sotus are to be regarded and esteemed, you know not Orthodox
what you speak and affirm.

Lastly, whereas you draw in Conarruuias alleging for his opinion Innocentius
III. that point must not be past over in silence: For here two Errors come to
be discovered and reproved: Of the one your self Hetrodox is culpable: Of the
other Conarruuias: You are first out of the right way, because Conarruuias
never cited Innocentius III. for his Patron in this cause, knowing full well
that Innocentius goes against him in the quarrel, and stands against him in
the gap: Then secondly, Conarruuias is in the wrong path, or in a wrong box,
because he alleges for his opinion Innocentius IV. whereas Innocentius IV.
affirms in the very same place, In commen. cap. 2. de majorit. and obed.
that Exemption granted by the high Bishop with consent of the Emperor is not
full, and therefore it is to be confessed, that Ecclesiastics are exempted from
the power of Secular Princes by God himself: It was not possible for
Innocentius IV. to affirm in clearer terms that Exemption of Ecclesiastics is
grounded upon Gods Law, and yet Conarruuias has face enough to affirm, that
Innocentius IV. denies the said Exemption to stand by the Law of God; whereupon
Pan^rmita^us writes, that Innocentius IV. holds Exemption of Ecclesiastics to
be tenable by Gods Law: Have you any more to say?

Orthodox. No Sir, not for proof of the Proposition, I will therefore now
address my self to handy strokes and blows with your Errors.

1. St. Paul, and St. Chrysostom, you say, do speak in general; But I have
evidently proved already that both of them have treated in the particular.

2. St. Thomas you say holds Exemption to stand in force by Gods Law: But I
have clearly showed, that St. Thomas holds it is by the privilege of P^inces,
and founded upon Principles or grounds of Reason, upon which all humane
Privileges and Laws are grounded, as also that St. Thomas was not the Author
of the Book De Regimine Principum.

3. Sotus and Conarrunias affirm (you say) that all Princes joined together are
not able to derogate one hairs breadth from those immunities which they have
once granted, or have accepted and received by the high Priests Canons: And in
this point your Speech is absolute; whereas the said Authors write with terms
of condition, that is, Ordinarily: For Sotus affirms in particular, that ad
vi^ vi repellendam for the repulsing of force by force, in certain cases the
Privilege of Exemption, may be disabled, removed, and taken away: Thus
Conarruuias and Medina likewise are to be understood, according to the opinion
of all the Doctors in the matter of Privileges; which indeed cannot be
derogated, but in case of necessity, et propter finem superiorem, and for a
higher end or purpose; As the Pope every day derogates from the Privileges
granted by his Pontificiall Chair.

4. You reprove the State of Venice for violating the Privileges of Church
immunitie: you wrong that most illustrious and flourishing State; For they have
always judged their Ecclesiastics (time out of mind) in heinous and atrocious
delicts and offenses; And in so doing they have observed the contents of
Justinians Novell, in points to them seeming good and convenient, not because
they are tied to that Novel^, but because they have thought and judged it good
to maintain in their Dominion and State, that which in the eye of Justinians
great wisdom, learning, and judgment, seemed good to be observed and
maintained in his Dominions.

Touching the Laws made by the Lords of Venice, about Church-mens goods, it
has been answered, that all such Laws are de Temporalibus quae nondum
pervenerunt in Dominium Ecclesiasticorum, they are concerning things Temporal
not yet belonging to Ecclesiastics as just Lords and true Proprietaries of the
same; and hereof in the opinion of all men there is no doubt: And that Law
which was made Anno 1333. they might afterward justly ampliate by the same
Authority, by which they first made the same, which never yet was contradicted
by Ecclesiastical persons.

As for other immunities, which the said Lords of Venice have granted to the
Ecclesiastics of their Dominion, either by Privileges, or by Canons received
and approved, or by custom continued, the said Lords maintain them all as pure
and chaste Virgins in violated and untouched; yea, according to the sacred
Council, they are protectors of the said Immunities, neither will they at any
time after any privilege, except it be ad vim vi repellendam for the driving
out of one nail by another, et ad redimendam vexationem for the repressing of
wrongs, which all the Doctors permit, and propter bonum commune evidentissimum,
and for some most evident benefit of the public.

5. Innocentius IV. holds that the Emperors consent is to be sought for in the
matter of immunities; and for that purpose Innocentius is alleged by
Conarrunias.

6. You charge me with error in citing Innocentius III. for Innocentius IV.
Sir, it was the Printers error not mine: And in the Answer is not read Third,
by letters ^f Alphabet (as the Lord Cardinal Bellarmin^ has caused to b^
printed of purpose to make the Error more inexcusable) but by numbers, in this
manner, III.

7. Sotus (you say with a nice distinction) did not write after the Council,
but in the midd time of the Council; my meaning is, that Sotus was personally
present in the Council, and his Book was printed after the Council, so did
Conarruuias, Medina, and others write after the time of the Council, and yet
were never prohibited by any Authority, as writing any thing contrary to the
Council, which makes me to collect and conclude, that in affirming the said
Council has determined Exemption to be grounded on Gods Law, you are clean
out of the truth; For had the Council made any full Determination to your said
purpose, without all question the foresaid Authors had been prohibited by
Authority.

But I must now tell you plainly Hetrodox, they show very good and great Cards
for their game, I mean, their Demonstrations are not fectlesse, but full of
efficacy: For besides the affirmative authority of St. Paul, of St.
Chrysostom, and of St. Thomas, besides the common use and custom of the
Primitive Church, they produce likewise two negative Arguments most effectual:
The first, If Clerics themselves, and the Goods of Ecclesiastics be exempted by
Gods Law, where is that Law recorded and read? In what Gospel? in what
Apostolical Epistle? in what Book of the New Testament, or of the old? The
Second, That no Secular Prince Christian carrying a watchful eye to the
tranquillity and honorable government of the State, does stand upon this
point, but only permits Ecclesiastics to enjoy such Exemption as to himself
seems best, and such as he dislikes, he will not suffer them to reap any
fruit or benefit from the same; And howsoever by the Law of man, some
understand the Canon, yet by so much as may be gathered from the Doctrine of
the first Proposition, we are to understand the Privilege of Princes, and the
Custom dissembled by the said Princes, or the Canon received, which Canon
cannot be above Gods Law, so that if Secular Princes have lawful power over
their Subjects by Gods Law, I cannot see how this their Power can be diminished
or taken away by the Canon, which is but a Law of man; it is a common rule of
the Legists, Quotiescu^que concurrunt duo jura, minus debet cedere majori, when
two Laws are in terms or in point of concurrence, the rest ought ever to
stoop and give place unto the greater.

Hetrodox. The Affirmative Arguments have been answered before; what need you
make so many repetitions of one and the same matter? Now to your first negative
Argument; This point has been discussed at large by many Catholic Authors,
both Divines and Canonists; The grounds of their opinion are to be sought in
their writings; and my self have briefly before pointed to certain passages,
as well of the old Testament, as of the New; and this for one, Ergo liberi sunt
filii, therefore the Children are free; Genesis 47. 1* Esdr. 7. Mat. 17.
where by Children are meant Ecclesiastics, it St. Ierome's and St. Augustines
Expositions be not rejected of Divines.

Again, you are not ignorant Orthodox, that by Gods Law is understood not
only the holy Scripture, but also the light of Nature, or (to speak in other
terms) Reason and Natures Law: lib 1. de libert. Christ. cap. 9.
Thus John Driedo: Exemption of Ecclesiastics holds by the Law of God, for so
much as it is dictated and taught by Reason and by the Law of Nature; because
all men by the light of Reason and Nature understand, that persons and goods or
things consecrated to God, are proper to God himself; and therefore no Reason
that Secular Princ^^ should exercise any power over the said persons or things:
And that this point is a light of Nature, it is easy to be known, because in
all Religion, Exodus 30. Numb. 1. Genesis 47. Arist. l. 2. Caesar. l. 6. de bello
Gall. Plut. in vita Camilli.
whether true or false, this Law of Exemption is observed: Among the Hebrews
the Levites were exempted, and among the Egyptians the Priests were exempted,
and among the Grecians the Priests were exempted: The same is recorded of other
Gentiles, in Caesar, in Plutarch, and in other Authors, for brevitie sake here
pretermitted.

To the second Negative Argument I return this Answer: We find it not in Sotus
nor yet in Conarruuias; It is doubtless a Fiction of your own brain, and
besides it is no Argument, no Reason, but a mere Cavil and Calumniation
invented against all Princes, as if all Princes were Machiavials Disciples, and
granted or took away Exemption from Clerics, as they find it profitable or
unprofitable to Reason of State; But we know that in the Church of God there
be many Religious and pious Princes, who fear God as they ought: But in case
it were so in truth (which must not be granted) that many Princes give neither
place nor way to Exemption any further then it is profitable to Reason of
State, what art, what skill of Reasoning shall I call this? Many Princes permit
not Exemption; Ergo, Exemption is not by Gods Law? As much in effect for form
of Argument, great skuls, whole troops of Christians give themselves to
robbing by the highway side, or to luxurious uncleanness in dark corners, or
to bear false witness in open Courts; Ergo, these Precepts of the Di^alogue,
thou shall not steal, thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not bear
false witness, are not by Gods Law. It should have been proved that such
Princes as permit not Exemption otherwise then to their own liking, do well,
or do not ill; and then the Consequent would not have come in amiss; Ergo,
Exemption is not by Gods Law; But from the simple Fact, or to say better, from
the simple prevarication of a Law it cannot be concluded, that the said Law is
contrary to Gods Law.

Your next discourse after, about man's Law, as whether it be Canon Law, or
Privilege of Princes, or Custom, is idle and altogether in vain; for besides
that Exemption of Ecclesiastics is by Gods Law, it is every way by man's Law;
because there be many Canons, many Civil Laws, and a must long continued
Custom, which make all for this Exemption; This neither will nor can be denied
of any, but such as are of no reading at all.

Finally, that conclusion which you make of Secular Princes power over
Ecclesiastics, that it can be neither taken away nor diminished by any Canon,
because the Canon is by Man's Law, and the power of Princes by Gods Law, is a
false Conclusion, drawn from a false Principle, and repugnant unto all
Catholic Doctors, as well Divines as Canonists: False, because it is contrary
to many Decrees of Councels, Popes, the Laws Imperial, and the light of
Nature: Drawn from a false Principle, because the power of Princes over Laics
is not grounded upon Gods Word: Against all Catholic Doctors, as well Divines
as Canonists, because both Sotus and Conarruuias, compted the chief Pillars of
those who maintain that Exemption is not warrantable to Ecclesiastics by Gods
Law, have not stuck to testify by their learned pens, that Popes have plenary
power to exempt Ecclesiastics, that all Princes are bound to uphold and
maintain the Popes Exemption, as also that no Prince, (no not all Princes
together) has one dram of power to annihilate or disanull, or in the least
measure to diminish the said Papal Exemption.

Thus much is affirmed and witnessed by Sotus and Conarruuias, in the very same
passeges by your self Orthodox produced and alleged: It hereupon follows,
that you have now broached a new, an erroneous, a scandalous, a schismatic
and a seditious Doctrine: If this notwithstanding, you shall affirm it is no
new Doctrine, you shall be sure to find none other Authors, Fautors, and
followers of this Doctrine, but Heretics, and in particular Martyr a Lutheran
upon the 13. chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans.

Orthodox. I have made no long Repetition, but only a short remembrance of
some former speeches; what need such a hot reprehension for putting you only in
mind what I have said before? Now then Sir your Errors.

1. In defense of your opinion de Iure divino, you find no place of Scripture
to warrant your assertion; whereupon you fall into this new and strange
Doctrine, that Exemption holds by the Law of Nations, and that Law of Nations
is Law Divine, or the Law of God: No marvel, for I suppose you have spoken
this (to please your self and flatter others) against one who of late has
written according to the Doctrine of the best Authors; In such a mind how could
you do less then fall into such a Noveltie?

2. You affirm, the Doctrine of repealing and revoking Privileges in case of
necessity is not approved by the foresaid Authors: By your leave Hetrodox it is
not only by them approved, but likewise by all that handle the matter of
Privileges, and yet are not so to be ranked and reckoned with Machiavelists,
which Sect is more dispersed and scattered in other Cities and States (I will
not say in Rome) then it is in Venice, where the Lords aim at none other
mark, but public Tranquilities, Religion, Justice, and in case of necessity
to repress force by force and strong hand; All which things and actions are
permitted by God himself, by Catholic Authors, and by the Law of Nature,
which, in case all the writers in the world should bind their pens to the
Peace, and condemn them to perpetual silence, would (...) unto us a Law. Romans
2.14.


3. Y^^ ^eject and reprove the Division into the Law of Nature, Canonical,
Privilege of Princes, and Custom; whereas all Authors make the same Division
to the very same purpose; and in very truth it is very necessary.

4. Whereas the Text of St. Paul is manifest; All power is of God; Romans 13.^^
Sap. 6.1.2.3.
and that other o^ Solomon: Here therefore O ye Kings, etc. for the r^le is
g^ven you of God, and power by the most High: All this notwithstanding you do
not blush to affi me, ^ha^ (...) have proved, the power of Princes over their
Laick Subjects is not by Gods Law, but by Man's Law, and much less their power
over Clerics; It is not possible to speak of Exemption in such broad terms,
and not speak against Scripture inspired by the Holy Ghost.

5. You say, the Power of Princes may be taken away and dimin^shed by the
Canons, I take this to be false de Jure, and never taught by any judicious
Divine: The Pope (will some Divine say) may admonish and exhort a Prince to
admit and receive his Canons of immunitie, but I never yet read in any Divine,
that Popes have Power to force Princes, when the Canons treat of matters
neither Spiritual nor just, yea St. Bernard reproves Pope Eugenius with a Quid
alienos fines invaditis? si vol^s utrumque, perdes utrumque; Why will you
thrust your sickle into another man's harvest? If you will flourish with both
Swords, you shall bear neither of both.

6. True it is, that Popes have power to make Canons concerning Exemption, and
other matters; Howbeit no Canons can challenge or carry any force where they
are not lawfully published and rec^ived: For all Canons are Laws of men
according to all the Doctors, which to bring in and impose obligation, do
necessarily require the twofold condition, of lawful publication, and
general acception: Therefore the sacred Council of Trent binds not in some
Provinces, because it was neither lawfully published, nor admitted and received
in the said Provinces, as other Canons in some other Provinces: Hereof none of
the D^ctors (to my knowledge at least) has ever doubted: Sotus, N^varrus, and
Conarruuias require beside the Canon the consent of all that are interessed:
The reason; Because when the P^p^, not being otherwise Dominis totius orbis in
Temporalibus Jur^ Divino, Lord of the whole World in Temporals by Gods Law,
makes any Canons prejudicial to L^ick Jurisdiction, it is n^c^ssary (to make
them stand in any force and ver^u^) for the said Canons to be protested by the
content of him that is Lord of the said Jurisdiction; otherwise there would be
found in the said Canons a mere Nullitie: This Doctrine is held for most
certain by Conarruuias, by Sotus, by Navarrus, by Medina, Navar. cap. Novit.
and all those who treat of this matter upon the safest and firmest
foundations.

7. You contend, that Princes cannot diminish the Authority of Canons received:
True, so teaches Sotus and Conarruuias; but here is to be understood this word
Ordinarily, and because they have given their consent for the admitting and
recei^^^g the said Canons, it is not fitting for every light cause and ^rifling
occurrent, to deprive them of Privilege: Howbeit none denies, that in case of
necessity the Privilege may suffer derogation and admit diminution; yea Popes
themselves daily use to derogate from their own Privileges.

8. Lastly, you come on with a false and crooked inference, and be sprinkle me
with villainous waters, or at least mine Author, and me in him: In which vein
of reproachful terms I forbear to follow your Example; and will only
conclude, that my Authors Doctrine is true in the Superlative, Catholic,
grounded on holy Scripture, and Fathers of the Primitive Church, whereas your
Doctrine. Hetrodox, and your Masters Cardinal Bellarmine, merits those
Epithets, which the Judicious no doubt will mark and brand it withal, if ever
this my Defense may be so happy to come in their sight.

Hetrodox. By this full conclusion it seems Orthodox, that you have done with
all your Propositions in Thesis.

Orthodox. You guess right Hetrodox; But have you any humor to hear the
Doctrine of the rest in Hypothesis, at large confirmed?

Hetrodox. I have in earnest; for so hideous is their aspect at first sight,
that I am almost astonished therewith, and am wrapped with a kind of wonder to
think what can be well spoken in their Defense.

Orthodox. I purpose to dispatch them all three to morrow in one day: Be
stirring early; for we will make no more days, and spend no longer time in
Conference.

The sixth days Conference upon the sixth Proposition.
Orthodox. I Am glad to see you Hetrodox thus risen with the Lark: We have
three large and long courses to run in this one day; And therefore I will
presently set forth E. carcoribus.

Hetrodox. Be it so, and I will run close, so long as my breath shall hold
without breaking my wind. Prop. 6.


Orthodox. Then hear the sixth Proposition: The Venetian Prince is the lawful
and natural Signor of the Venetian S^^e; He never knew any Superior in
Temporals, but God himself; He makes Laws touching the Goods and Possessions
of Ecclesiastics within his Dominions: He punishes Ecclesias^^^ll persons in
grievous and atrocious cases; He disposes of (...) before they are past over
by mean conveyance unto Ecclesiastical persons; And this he does by that
Authority which ^^ ^^mediately receives from God, and whereof he has never
been deprived, either from Privilege granted or by Canon received: He has
continued in possession of this Authority, by cust^^e continued (I say not for
many years, but for many Ages, or hundreds of years,) And in doing all these
things he does nothing amiss, he runs no course of sin.

The reason; He that does nothing against any Law, doubtless does no sin,
much less he that keeps the Law: And more, He that holds and maintains his
own Dominions, sins me, neither should he be forced to follow their
opinion, who ^o^d Exemption to be derived from Gods Law: For every Christian is
free and at his own choice, to follow that opinion which likes him best,
always provided, that his opinion be Catholic, yea, to follow one Doctors
opinion grounded upon sound reasons, though it be against a full tide and
current stream of Doctors, (...) pralud.
is no sin; which point is right well proved by Navarrus: It can therefore be
no sin to follow the Doctrine of St. Paul, and of so many famous Doctors of
great marks alleged in the first and fifth Proposition; And to speak truth,
I cannot excuse those who hold the opinion, that Ecclesiastical Exemption is
authorized by Almighty God: For to my understanding, they seem sometimes to
speak as not well founded, sometimes as ill advised, sometimes as men running
a race of too great hazard, and sometimes as too much the servants or slaves
of Adulation.

Hetrodox. Now at last you discover to the full your intention, hitherto
cunningly concealed; But because you have no grace or gift in speaking without
jumbling and mingling all kinds of Errors together, you so point out in your
discourse the Prince of Venice, as if he were some absolute Monarch; For you
make him the natural Signor and Lord of the Venetian State: Now Sir if that be
so, then the Republike of Venice ^^th lost her liberty, and cannot in Right be
called a Republic, ^^^^use it has a Lord, and a natural Signor or Lord: A
Lord ^^one that can dispose of his own at his own pleasure; He can give,
sell, lay to gage or pawn, and make it over when, how, and to whom he lift or
thinks good: And a natural Signor or ^^rd is one, that has Dominion by
Herison, by Succession of blood, by Birthright, not by Election or Donation:
But whether it be convenient for the Duke of Venice to be the Natural Signor
of the Venetian State, I refer my self upon the matter to the judgment of
every man, or of any one, that knows the state and affairs of that noble
and illustrious Republic.

You say moreover, the Prince of Venice knows no Superior in Temporals, but
God alone: Do not you hereby make him a Lord no less absolute, then Supreme
and Sovereign Kings, to whom the Commonwealth has past over all her power?
But if the Republic be a true Republic, and free indeed as it pretends,
doubtless it has not past over and transferred all her power to the Prince,
but has only communicated and conferred upon him such part of her power, as
to herself seems good: She can augment or make little enough, or take it
away altogether; She can make the Prince shorter by the head, whenever he
shall attempt to practice or make himself the Head, Lord, and Patron of the
Republic, which was her practice of Justice and Power upon the person of
Marinus Fallerius; And so by consequence the Duke ought to know for his
Superior, not God alone, but likewise his Republic, or the Grand Counsel: But
pass we from these Errors; For if they do not pinch the Venetians, they need
the less to pinch strangers; Let us then come to the point and knot of the
controversy.

Both your Author and your self Orthodox affirm, the Duke of Venice has not
sinned in making Laws prejudicial to the Church, and in committing
Ecclesiastics to prison, for which Acts he has been reproved by the Pope, and
after that in defect of his obedience, has been censured with
Excommunication: That he has not sinned, you prove by three reasons: First,
because the Duke has power immediately from God over the Persons and Goods of
Ecclesiastics; Secondly, because the Pope was never despoiled of the said
power, neither by Privileges granted, nor by Canons received and admitted:
Thirdly, because the Duke has still held possession (and yet holds the same to
this day) time out of mind: Your first reason is false by your own affirmation
in your last Speech, and by evident experience: For you affirm in your last
passage, that the Duke of Veni^e has power to punish Ecclesiastics in grievous
and atrocious Delicts or crimes; your own affirmation therein is a manifest
sign^ that his power is not immediately from God derived, but from some other,
by whom the said power was granted with some limitation; For if the Duke had
power over Ecclesiastics immediately from Gods Law, then he should have it in
all cases, both grievous and light, both atrocious and not atrocious: Likewise
you affirm, the Duke has power to dispose of all Goods, not yet made over and
transferred to Ecclesiastics: What can you mean by this Limitation, but only
that he has not absolute power over Ecclesiastic Goods, and so has it not
immediately from God? For were it so, he might not be limited by any other, as
the Popes power is not limitable, because his power is immediately from God:
Besides, I demand whether the Republic has power to diminish and increase the
Dukes Authority, and whether it can depose him from his Magistracy, when he
bears not himself therein according to the Venetian Laws? Out of all
question the Republic has power so to do: The Duke then has not his power
immediately from God, but from his Republic, and so the Dukes power is an
Humane power, limited, and subject unto a higher Power, which is also Humane.

Your second reason stands in like degree of untruth: For if (...) Duke or
Prince has not despoiled himself of his power by ^no^ledges of his own grant
unto Ecclesiastical persons, that ^^y hold true, because he never can be
despoiled, who never was ^^^sted: Now the Prince of Venice was never invested
with ^^e such power; For the Venetian Republic took his beginning, when
Ecclesiastical persons were before exempted from (...) power: It may be
further alleged, that when a Laic changes his coat and turns Ecclesiastic,
then the Prince is despoyled of the power that he had before over the same
person: But how (...) spoiled? Forsooth by Divine privilege granted to
Ecclesi^^^^, and also by many Canons received through all Christen^^^^ in such
manner and form, that no Prince, nor all Princes together can derogate from
the same: So Sotus, and so Conar^^^^^ as before: But suppose, Si quis suadente.
q. 4.
we were destitute of all other ^^^^es and Authorities; That most famous Canon,
which excommunicates all such as lay violent hands upon Clerics or (...), may
be sufficient, the Absolution in which case is reser^^d to the Apostolic See,
without exception of any Princes or (...) Lords; This Canon was never yet
revoked to this day: (...) when Martin V. in the Council of Constance was
inclined (...) p^derate the sharp censures of Excommunications, and to (...)
order that it might be lawful to have conversation with Excommunicate persons;
nevertheless he excepted all such as (...) declared Excommunicate by process
of Quorum nomina, withal those who notoriously do lay violent hands upon
Ecclesiastics; For without all further declaration it was his will and
pleasure, that conversing with all such persons should be avoided, and that his
foresaid moderation should not at any hand extend to the benefit of such, as by
violence had laid up any Ecclesiastic.

Your third reason drawn from possession time out of mind, is refuted by the
words of the Venetian Lords themselves; For they in Anno 1605. renewed a Law,
enacted in Anno 1536. That Goods Immovable might not be given to the Church,
for none other cause and reason, but only because it had never been observed
to that present year, as by themselves it is confessed: Besides, against
Justice, no possession or Custom (...) stand in force; It is therefore a
notorious falsitie to say the Duke of Venice has not sinned in making the ^^id
Laws and in (...) up Ecclesiastical persons; But wh^^soever sees or hears
th^^ day the most grievous and horrible acts of Excess done by the Venetian
Duke in committing Priests and those of Religious Orders to prison, in
compelling and forcing Ecclesiastics (contrary to their conscience) to violate
and break the Apostolical Interdict, in filling Monasteries with Soldiers,
and last of all, in raising of public persecution against Churches and
Religions, (as in fo^^^er ages Valens an Arrian Emperor, and after his ^^^s
Hi^uricus King of the Vandals an other Arrian has done) ^ow can that man
profess the Duke does not sin, if he be not ^^^ether blinded with passion, and
given up, as the Apostle (...), unto a reprobate mind? I pass over your words
which (...), that he sins not who does nothing against the Law, (...) that
keeps the Law, nor he that follows the Doctrine of St. Paul; These points are
too well known, and fitter for ^^^low and light-witted children, then for
solid and (...) vines.

But your last Censure, that such as (...) in Ecclesiastical Exemption to be
fixed upon the Pole of Gods Law and (...), seem to you not well founded, or
ill advised, or over (...), or gross flatterers, is not a censure given
against men (...) Blasphemy pronounced against the Holy Spirit; For the (...)
which we maintain is the express sentence of the La^^^^ and Tridentine
Councels, both general; So that if we acknowledge, according to the truth,
that the sacred Councels, most of all the General Councels, are assembled in
the name of the Holy Ghost; and if we be able to say with that first Council
h^ld at. Jerusalem, Visum est Spiritui Sanct^ and nobis; it has seemed good
into the Holy Ghost, and unto us, then it follows, that you make the holy
Ghost sometimes not well founded, sometimes ill advised, sometimes too
venturous; and sometimes too full of flattery.

Orthodox. These two positions have been sufficiently made good before, the
one, that the power of Temporal Princes comes immediately from God, howsoever
the m^^ne of attaining unto the said power is by the means of men, and that
Almighty God has not exempted any one Subject from the just Laws and
commandments of the said power, the other, that the Popes power, albeit
Spiritual, cannot curb or bar Temporal power from the exercise of their
just Dominion over their own Subjects; From these Principles proved point by
point, in my last passage there is drawn this necessary consequence; That when
the Pope by his Spiritual power inhibits the Prince of Venice to exercise his
Temporal power over his own Subjects, then the Prince of Venice is not bound
to obey the Pope therein, and that in case of such disobedience the Prince
commits no sin or offense: This Hetrodox I trust is no fetching about by the
bow full bent, but going to the matter in a strait (...) by the string of the
bow; Now for so much as you charge (...) mine Author to be men who cannot
speak without inter^^^ing all kinds of erroneous materials, it is necessary
for me to (...) off this aspersion of Calumny and reproach, and to let you see
(...) a Crystal Glass, the Errors couching in your own oppo^^^ns, Errors
without all doubt so much further from excuse, as they are so audacious and
shameless to reprove other men's (...) and sound Doctrine for Error.

1. The most illustrious Republic is the natural Prince of his own (...), in
all my Authors Propositions he never speaks word of the Duke; He names the Duke
not so much as once, but still speaks of the Signorie, or of the Republic, or
of the Prince: Whereupon you Hetrodox do nothing but confound the word Prince
and the word Duke, and with the word you also confound the power of the
persons; So that by the Prince of Venice you understand the Duke, who is only
Head of the Republic, and she only the Prince: So manifest is this your first
Error, that all ^^n take fight and knowledge thereof: This one Error marres
your Market, for it ^^ps the force and authority of all your other oppositions
concerning this matter in your head.

2. You seem to have so base a conceit of me and my Author, that you
presuppose we cannot distinguish the Prince when he signifies the Republic,
and when the Duke, who is but a particular person, though the first and
chiefest in the Republic, or else that all those, by whom the Authors work was
revised, were so close muffled, as they could not descry so manifest an Error;
you seem so desirous to find Thorns amongst flowers, that I do not marvel
you see sometimes one thing for another, and call virtue her self by the name
of Error.

3. Whereas in my Authors answer no mention is made at any time of the Duke,
but of the Republic, of the Signorie; and whereas the Author treats not but of
her Dominion and power, it was your part Hetrodox to understand, the word
Prince is General, signifying as well Emperors, and Kings, as Republics, or
Commonwealths, and that in this place it did not signify the Duke, but the
Republic: Besides, the Authors words admit none other sense: For the Prince of
Venice (as this Author speaks in plain and express terms) never knew any
Superior in Temporals but God alone; will any man understand this to be spoken
of the Duke, who so long as he was Procurator of St. Mark, acknowledged the
Duke for his Superior, and now being Duke does acknowledge his Republic for his
Superior.

4. Whereas again in the Answer no mention is made, neither of the Word Duke,
nor of his person, nor of the least matter to him or his Dignity appertaining,
you not only make use of the word Duke for your turn, but besides (albeit
against all reason) you draw the D^^es person into your Discourse, and so does
Cardinal Bellarmine: This has moved some of our contemplative Spirits to
argue, and not without good ground, that his Lordship rashed not into his
Error by chance, but of set purpose, partly that he might have the fitter
opportunity to draw the Author of these Propositions into hatred with a
Republic right jealous of her liberty, in saying that he made the Duke her
Lord, and partly so to tri^ (or to t^^^ice rather) the person of the Duke, that
he might breed and stir up in the minds of the whole Republic some sinister
conceit, either of Potencie affected: or of Religion corrupted: This the Lord
Cardinal ^pp^^ently shows in his Discourse, who has none other time or
scope, but only to sow Discord, Evil will, and Sedition.

5. You lay to our charge that we affirm, the Duke has made Laws of the
State, we have delivered neither by word, nor writing any such wicked
assertion; It is the Prince of Venice, that is, the Republic, which makes
Laws; we never made any mention of the Duke.

6. You say moreover, that in the State of Venice diverse Laws have been passed
prejudicial to the Church; Bring but one Text or Scripture, produce but one
definitive sentence of the Church, tanquam de Fide, to prove the Laws enacted
by the Venetian Republic, that Ecclesiastics may not be committed to Ward for
Secular Delicts, or the Pope in right of Pontificiall Dignity may thrust his
hand into matters and affairs of such nature, and then you shall have us ready
to confess, the said Laws are contrary to the Law of God: But for so much as
the Prince is invested with Temporal Authority from God, and the same an
absolute Authority, (according to St. Peter, St. Paul, the holy Fathers, the
Definitive Sentence de Fide of Pope Nicholas I.) which Authority cannot be
restrained by the Pope in matter of Temporal Delicts, as has been proved; In
Epist. ad M^chaelem.
and of which Authority the said Prince has never been bared or deprived, his
Actions are not prejudicial to the Church, whiles he walks within the Circle
of his own Confines, and goes not out of his own Bounds: It might rather be
conceived and alleged, that his Holiness ranging and roving far from the
Terrier of Spiritual power, may perturbe the peace and quiet of Temporal
Princes: Nay more; It would be requisite for his Holiness oftentimes to bear
in mind the words of the devout and godly Father St. Bernard, Apostolis
interdicitur Dominatio, indicitur Ministratio; Petrus quod non habuit, dare non
potuit; the Apostles are barred from all the Degrees of Lordship, and commanded
to walk in the state and calling of Servants; What Peter himself never had,
Peter could never give to any other; The same Peter, who said, Gold and Silver
have I none, but I give thee what I have to give; Likewise to remember that
other of St. Bernard, Quid alienos fines invaditis? Si voles utrumque, perdes
utrumque; Wherefore do you rush into the several enclosures of other men? if
you presume to be Lord both of Spirituals and Temporals, thou shall be saluted
neither Lord Spiritual nor Temporal: And when men discourse to his Holiness
of this immunity, it were also requisite for them to look unto the Root whereon
it grows; whether it be grounded on the Scripture, on the Fathers, on the
Privilege of Princes, or on use and Custom, and to remember the Customs and
privileges of Countries, are much different: And finally, seeing the proper
end of the Venetian Lords is excellent good, not only not contrary to life
eternal, but rather conformable thereunto, for the better maintaining of a
Christian and Catholic Republic in her entire strength and power, as also for
the better execution of Justice, and for the better brideling of Clerics, when
they know the Laws have provided for the mature and severe punishment of their
Civil Delicts, to approve the Actions and Laws of the said Venetian Lords
with silence: For even the very same Authors, who give the Pope Authority to
intrude himself sometimes indirectly in Temporals, do give him the said
Authority in case of extreme necessity, and when the people are stopped in the
right course to life eternal; Now, for so much as the Actions and Laws of the
Venetian Lords are not only no hinderance to their Subjects in the course to
eternal life, but rather make the way more facile, and bring the same as it
were to a shorter cut, what necessity can his Holiness have, whereby he should
be moved to restrain those public Laws, which are out of his own Element,
and not under the Lee of his Jurisdiction?

7. It is your manner, and a sly trick of your cunning to make show, that you
do not see the force of our Argument, we draw not our Argument from that power
which the Prince has from God in the general: but from that power the lawful
exercise whereof the Prince never lost, neither by Privilege granted, nor by
Canon received, nor by long Custom; which is a Law to prove, that his Acts
done conformeable to his power are good and lawful: Now you Hetrodox from
these particular Acts of the Pr nce, would prove the Prince has none other
power from God at all; The Prince has power from God over all Temporal
matters, but his power is exercised in some, and not in other; because he has
exempted some from his power by Privilege, and not some other: Now this does
imply or signify, that his power is not granted from God with a certain
limitation, as you contend, but rather that he himself limits his own power by
his Privileges granted; For the Temporal Princes power in Temporals, no arm
of flesh can limit, provided it be not a Tyrannical power, (neither has it
any Superior but God alone) much less when it is exercised ad optimum finem
to the best end.

8. You make us to affirm, the Duke has power to punish, power to dispose,
power to make Laws, we neither take up the word Duke, nor the word power for
this matter, we only speak of the Prince, that is, of the Republic, that he,
the Prince, or she, the Republic, does punish, does dispose, does make Laws,
there is great difference, you know, between Act and Power, between power to
enact Laws and enacting of Laws.

9. You harp much upon this one string, that we sp ak still of the Duke, it is
nothing so, we tell you again, we speak only of the Republic, which only has
the Authority, and the same in Temporals which the Duke has not; For it is the
Republic which executes the Jurisdiction of the Prince in Venice, and not the
Duke.

10. You say the Authority of the Republic over his Subjects i^ derived from
men, and the Popes Authority from God, Romans 13. Sap.
this Error has been dashed out of countenance before by the express text of
St. Paul, and other Scripture.

11. You affirm, the Republic taking his beginning, when Ecclesiastics were
exempted before, she could not be divested of that wherein she was never
invested: In this point Hetrodox you should have drawn some plain
Demonstration, that Ecclesiastics were exempted in those times of the Republics
birth; Whereas you allege but one privilege of Frederick II. not worth
whistling, but a new upstart instance in a manner of two days old, and such as
with Ecclesiastics does not deserve to bear any sway: For after the said
Privilege he was excommunicated and deposed from the Empire by Gregory IX.
and so by consequence all his Constitutions were annulled: But Sir, the Lords
of Venice have run still at all times by the File, and have cut their cloth by
the thread of the most holy Emperor Justinian, whose Novell was de-cryed, like
false and adulterous Coin, and never spoiled Ecclesiastics of any Exemption
which they formerly enjoyed, but rather endowed them with other new Privileges.

12. You affirm again, that vi characteris, by virtue of the Character due to
the order of Priests, the Prince is deprived of his Authority over his own
Subjects; Touching which point I answer thus much, and say no more; If the
Character of Baptism has no virtue, Quaest 15. de Restitu Cap Novit de
judiciu. Notab. 6.
no force or power to free any man from Subjection to his lawful and natural
Prince, much less the Character of Clericall Order: You know this valide
Argument of Medina, which you also know Navarrus holds to be insoluble.

13. You pretend that Scripture, the Law of God, Canons and Councels have
granted Exemption unto Ecclesiastics: I answer, it is not commanded in Divine
Scripture, nor taught in the Law of Nature, which is likewise Divine; No such
matter is defined by the Councels, nor by the Canons tanquam de Fide, as before
has been declared: As touching some other Canons of Exemption made by Popes, I
acknowledge that (where they have been lawfully published and received) in
those Kingdoms, Countries, and States, they stand yet in their full force, and
that (except in case of extreme necessity, to speak in the terms of Sotus and
Conarruuias) by any ordinary means, or for any ordinary cause, they are not
sufferable of Derogation, or thereunto liable, as has been defined in matter
of Privileges; But Sir, this makes nothing to the purpose of our present case
touching the Venetian Lords, who never yet received any Canon, which was
contrary to Laws of their own making in these present days and times.

14. You produce the Canon Si quis suadente, etc. If any through the Devils
instigation shall offer violence, and lay violent hands on a Cleric, and here
you presuppose (without either grant or thanks for your pains) the Venetian
Lords by Satanicall persuasion have with violent hands attempted and assaulted
the persons of Clerics: But you must be answered with a godly resolution to
your Diabolical presupposition. The said Lords have not done any such
Execution by the suggestion of Satan, but by the persuasion of God, and of
honorable Justice; As for your famous Canon, that speaks of private wrongs
and offenses: Otherwise the Ecclesiastical Judges themselves in like manner
should be fetched within the power and penalty thereof: So that in the Venetian
Territory the Canon is duly observed; For in case a private person by the
Devils instigation shall cast violent hands on a Cleric, and thereby tumble
into the strong Net or Toil of Excommunication, his Absolution is procured.

15. The Republic (you say) is not in the possession of the Judicature that she
exercises, or of the Laws that she causes to pass in public; The most
learned Father Paulus in his Considerations has most excellently proved this
Assertion to be most untrue; Two things only will I here annexe; The Law named
upon this matter was first made in Anno. 1333. and not in Anno 1536. as you
have alleged: Secondly, the Prince has Authority to enact Laws, to renew
Laws, or to dilate Laws, but not because Laws are sometimes not observed;
For the same authority whereby a Law was made at first, gives the Prince
sufficient power to renew, to dilate, etc. the said Law.

16. You attribute unto the Duke, that which is the Order of the whole
Republic; For only the Republic has such power ad vim vi repellendam, to
resist force by force, and to provide that by Heresy the State be not
infected: And therefore, both because the Republic stands upon a sure ground of
certain knowledge, that the Popes present Censures are in the condition of
mere Nullity, (whereof she makes not so much as the least doubt) as also
because it pleads possession time out of mind, she justly pretends the
interdict has never been observed in her Dominion.

17. It fills not Monasteries with Soldiers, as you object; That Is but an old
wifes tale, whosoever is the Reporter, much more a mere fable, that she
exercises public persecution of the Church: No surely; What she does is done
in favor of the Church; If it be not so Hetrodox, tell us what one Heresy by
name is protected or so much as never so little countenanced by the Republic,
which pretends none other matter, but only to defend and maintain her own.

18. Moreover, you have matched the Republic with Arrian Princes; Even so do
the Cardinals Bellarmine and Baronius* I cannot forbear to tell them and you
once for all, you think to scarre us like little Children with I wot not what
Bugs, I mean, with Epithets of Heretics and Schismatics: The World knows
what Heresy, what Schism is well enough; And might we once be so happy, to
have a general Council called of the whole Church which cannot err, it
should soon manifestly appear who is an Heretic, who is a Schismatic; In
the mean time, the Republic is neither the one nor the other; and that for this
time shall suffice.

19. Again, you confess the Lateran Council is not general, and the
Tridentine treats not of that Exemption which is maintained by the Authors of
the contrary opinion, and neither the one Council nor the other has come in
this case to any Definitive Sentence de Fide, with what face then have you
affirmed, the said Council are of equal Authority to that Canon, whereof it
is written, visum est, it has seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and unto us, etc.

20. I have not given the former Epithets to such as hold Exemption in large
manner of Construction (that is by way of comparison and similitude) to be by
Gods Law; But only to such as affirm it is by Gods Law as commanded in holy
Scripture, Expressis verbis, by perspicuous terms, or by Gods Law Natural or
in any other manner: To all such doubtless any former Epithets will be found
agreeable.

The first of our three Races is now run, let us rest for some few minutes,
if you please, that we may gather the more breadth, for the better performing
of the other two courses.

The sixth days Conference upon the seventh Proposition.
Orthodox. SO long as the Signorie of Venice is not culpable, and commits no
sin, howsoever the State stands now and lies under the Censure of
Excommunication by the high Bishop, or Pope Paulus V. in the Breve of Censures
published by his Holiness; howsoever the sacred Temples and holy places lie
now under the Interdict; nevertheless the sentence of our holy Father the Pope
is of no force, to no effect, and as no Sentence; First by the Law positive,
because the order prescribed by the Canon has not been observed duly and
Canonically, as we read in the manifest: Secondly, by the Law Divine, Can. de
Senten. Excom. in 6.
because all Authority to Excommunicate stands tied to a condition, with a Si
peccaverit, etc. if thy Brother sin against thee, etc. So that where no
sin, there no place for Excommunication, and the sentence fulminated against
one that has not sinned, Nulla est ex defectu materiae, becomes no Sentence
for Defect or want of due matter; And I would not have any man's wit so blasted,
to think that howsoever the Signorie has not offended, (as has been proved)
nor does offend in holding their own Right, nevertheless they offend in
showing their disobedience to the Pope, and persisting in their opinion; For
Constancy in a good opinion is not Obstinacy, and he that has not offended
should not be termed obstinate or disobedient; For as he that keeps the Law
does a most holy and meritorious work, so he that is not obedient in matters
which cannot be commanded or enjoined him to perform, commits not any sin or
offense at all.

Hetrodox. In this Proposition you are bold to affirm two things; That our
holy Fathers Excommunication and Interdict is a sentence of Nullity, both by
positive Law, and also by the Law of God: By positive Law, because the order
prescribed by the Canon has not been observed in this case: A notorious
falsitie; For in the Title De Sententia Excommunicationis in 6. there be only
three Canons by which the Judiciarie order is determined: In the first Chapter
the sentence is commanded to be put down in Scriptis, in the Chapter, Solet, it
is commanded, that no man shall be Excommunicated, after he has appealed: In
the Chapter, Statuimus, it is commanded, that no man shall be excommunicated,
except first he be Canonically thereof advertised by three Admonitions: And
albeit every Defect makes not a sentence to be no sentence, yet in the present
case we need not fly unto this excuse; For the sentence of our Lord the Pope
was given in Scriptis, and with all the three Admonitions of eight days for
the first Term, eight for the second, and eight for the third: No Appeal
interposed, nor could be interposed, where the Pope is the Supreme Judge; So
that with all exactness the Judiciarie Order commanded by the Canons De
Sententia Excommunicationis in 6. has been duly observed, it was your part
Orthodox to produce the Canon, and to demonstrate in which of these three
points it has not been observed, but alas you could not as it seems, and
thinking it sufficient by like to beguile the ignorant, you pass it only in
general terms.

By the Law of God the sentence of our Lord the Pope (you say) is without any
validity and no sentence, for want of matter, because Excommunication is a
punishment which may not be inflicted without some precedent offense; and for
as much as the Signorie of Venice has not offended, the Lords of that State
could not be subject unto Excommunication: This has been answered before,
where I have showed how the Signorie has most grievously offended.

First, In making unjust Laws against the Church, and in committing
Ecclesiastical persons to prison; then again, in being disobedient unto the
high Bishop, and refusing to be reformed by his Holiness in their evil ways:
But were it a matter of doubt, whether the Signorie has sinned or no; it is
most certain that doubt is to be put out of doubt and resolved, not by the
judgment of the Signorie, but of our holy Father the Pope, the Supreme Judge
in Christ's room and place; If the Pope then be the Judge over sin (which
point you have confessed in the fourth Proposition) then the Pope, and none but
he, has power to discern, whether a thing be sin or no sin, that is his proper
office: A figure whereof we have in the old Testament, where it was the Priests
office to judge, whether one was infected with Leprosy, or free from that
infection; Now the Pope, the Priest of Priests, has judged the Duke of Venice
to have grievously sinned, to be all-over-run with a Spiritual Leprosy of
great Malignitie and Contagion; whereupon (...) Holiness, by sentence of
Excommunication, has separated the Duke from the company and fellowship of the
Faithful: How can the Duke be defended or excused in this case? It is true,
that constancy in a good opinion is not (as you have well said) to be counted
and termed obstinacy; provided the question remain and long in a doubtful
balance: But when the question is once judged, and ended by the Judge, to whom
all men are bound to give credit (as in this case) then the opinion of all such
as maintain the cause of the Venetian Signorie, is no longer an opinion, but
an Error; and then constancy therein is obstinacy.

Orthodox. Your oppositions to this our seventh Proposition have been
effectually reproved before, as touching matter of Right: It only remains to
give your Errors by tale, Bona Emphytheotica, et ager Emphytheoticus i.e.
vestigalis and macer. Nam Emphytensis est genus locationis, quo inculti ac
deserti agri colono alicui ea lege in perpetuum locantur, et quamdiu
praestituta merces solvatur, nunquam ad Dominum revertatur.
in your Exposition touching matter of Fact.

1. Before his Holiness denounced sentence against the Lords of Venice, he
Canonically gave them Admonition (you say) three several times. I would feign
know how that can be, when his first Monitorie was no Monitorie, but only a
Declaratorie and a Definitive Sentence, without any Monitorie at all going
before; Again in the third Monitorie the cause of Emphytheaticals (as they are
termed in Rome) not once mentioned in the first and second Monitorie, is
interserted: This one point (were there none other) draws the sentence into
Nullitie; Besides, when Monitories are no Monitories, but sentences (like those
of his Holiness, for want of Juridicall citation they have that inexcusable
Defect, which makes every cause void, every Sentence no Sentence: But of this
matter I forbear to speak any more, presupposing it is most evident, as a
matter tossed from one to another in every Venetians mouth; Howbeit I build not
so much upon this foundation; because I have this answer of Rome at my fingers
ends; When the Pope does any thing against the Canons, that is, the Pope is
Supra Canones, he is above the Canons; How this can hold water or weight with
truth, I leave to your consideration; For that Canon is grounded upon the order
of Brotherly correction, prescribed by our Savior himself, the alteration of
whose Ordinance is too far out of the Popes reach.

2. The ^^^^^ce of our holy Father the Pope (you say) is not a void (...)
^^nce, of nullified by Gods Law, and that you have sufficiently proved the
Venetian Lords have most grievously sinned; I do not deny, that you have in
Affirmation charged the noble Lords with I worcester not what grievous offenses; But
Sir, that you have made any Demonstration of your bold Assertion according to
your stout pretense, that you must give me leave to deny again and again:
Will you have my Reason? It is indemonstrable that such as go not against any
Law do fall into sin; That such as tooth and nail do stand for defense of
their ancient Rights and Possessions do fall into sin; That such as obey God
rather then men fall into sin; That such as resist violence do fall into
sin: Such are the lawful and laudable Actions of the Venetian Lords, and
therefore they do not fall into sin, as to effectual purpose has been
declared before: Whereas your oppositions against this Doctrine have not one
myte of probability (no not in appearance) much less of certainty or
Demonstration, as you pretend.

3. I have confessed the Popes power extends unto Spiritual matters, and is
over sin, you hereupon do infer, that the Pope has power at all times and
in all causes to judge, what is a sin, and what is no sin; This your opinion
smells of Durandus his Chimnie and smoke, an opinion of all men reproved; but
your opinion is much worse; For Durandus does not profess, that in every sin
we should stand to the Popes judgment, whether it be sin or no, for that is
not necessary; He only affirms the Pope has power to judge all Christian
People, ratione peccati, for sin, at his pleasure, and to draw all matters
into his Court; Whereas you Hetrodox pass a whole degree further: For if the
Pope shall judge an action of virtue to be sin, though I be never so certain it
is no sin, you forsooth will have the Popes judgment shall make it sin: This
persuasion contains intolerable Errors.

1. The first whereof is, That in judiciis Facti in judgments of the Fact, our
holy Fathers judgment is infallible: False; for in cases of the Fact he may
err, and has oftentimes erred; So teach all the Doctors in the Fact of Pope
Stephen, and Pope P^^^osus, with other Popes of whom Platina writes: This
Doctrine is held for most certain in the Church; The Pope then may err, in
affirming a thing to be sin which is no sin, so the Pope can be no infallible
Judge.

2. The second; Howsoever in a doubtful case, whether a thing be sin or no,
recourse may be had to the Popes Judgment, or some other Doctors, yet in cases
which are certain and certainly known, such recourse to the Pope for his
Judgment is not necessary: For example, I know for certain it is a sin to
steal such a rich Jewel, or such a piece of Plate: again, I know for certain,
it is a virtue to defend my Life, my Land, my Leases, and to serve God; Shall I
give credit and faith to the Pope, ^he should affirm the contrary to that
whereof I am so certain, and no way doubtful? Those Authors who grant all
Authority to the Pope, and judgment between Leprosy and Leprosy, that is,
whether it be Leprosy or no Leprosy, do grant it only in doubtful, b^^ not
in certain cases; For in matters clear, evident, and certain, either the light
of Nature, or the sacred Scripture, or the common estimation and account of all
men, is unto us a Law; vox Populi, vox Dei.

3. That in the present case and assures of the Venetian Lords, to make the
world believe they sin, it is all sufficient for the Pope to speak the word,
and to say, the Venetian Lords do grievously offend and transgress the Laws
of God, of the Pope, of the Church, etc. Whereas you know Hetrodox, it is the
perverse, the froward, the wicked intention that makes a thing to be fin,
according to that of Bernard, Toll voluntatem, and Infernus non erit, if a man
be clear from all wicked intention, he shall be clear and free from Hellfire
for ever; because according to St. Augustine, Peccatum est dictum, factum,
concupitum contra legem, sin must be something spoken, or acted, or coveted
against the Law of God; If one therefore has a good intention, he goes not
against Gods Law: Howsoever the Pope shall say he sins, yet he sins not;
which according to all the Doctors (as has been said) must be understood in re
certa; Now because the Venetian Lords are certainly assured, they have not
sinned or offended, and carry a clear conscience f^^e from any sinister and
evil intention, this knowledge is their sufficient warrant, without running to
the Pope for his judgment, in such a cause especially, wherein his Holiness
makes himself both Judge and Party.

4. The Supreme Judge (you say) has judged the Duke of Venice to be covered
all over with Leprosy from head to foot; the Duke is therefore unclean all
over: Why good Sir, the ancient Priest under the old Testament judged not of
any man's Leprosy: He only said, thou art an unclean Leper, and therefore I
will not suffer thee to enter into the Temple; Now this judgment belongs to
all Physicians, and indeed to all other men, when the Leprosy is manifestly
seen, and when every man knows the party to be smitten with Leprosy:
Besides, if it be doubtful, whether a man be leprous or no, men may run to
the Priest, or go to the Doctor to be certified of the truth: But when a man
is already assured and certain, that he is not rotten but sound, not run over
with knots and knubs, but of a clear and smooth skin, what needs he run or send
his Urine to the Physician for the matter, except his Phantasticon be like unto
the immaginative apprehension of one, who being Infra limits sanitatis (as
Physicians use to speak) as whole as a Fish, when his Physician told him he
had an Ague, in his Fantasy so deeply made impressions of the Physicians
words, that he was in a trice surprised really of an Ague, and thereof soon
dyed: To be short; If Christ Jesus the Supreme Judge indeed who cannot err,
should say contrary to the judgment and assured knowledge of the Venetian
Lords, you sin in these your Actions, when the Lords are certain and sure their
Actions are not sinful, doubtless the Lords would stand to his Judgment,
because it is Divine and infallible Wisdom: But for as much as his Vicar may
err, and has actually erred in judiciis Facti, in certain and evident
matters, who doubts there is no standing to his judgment? No man ever affirmed,
the Popes judgment concerning sin, whether a thing is or is not sin, should be
interposed in certain matters; but only profess, that in matters doubtful
men should stand to the judgment of their Superior: And who that Superior may
be according to the diversity of occurrences, I refer myself to the
judgment of the Doctors.

5. The question in controversy between the Lords of Ve^^^^ and the Pope, you
say, is dubitable; It is not dubitable to the Lords for matter of Fact, but
certain: And albeit some Doctors should hold the contrary, that nevertheless
does not make the question doubtful unto the Lords; For ita prabent assensum
um parti, and ommino denegons alteri parti, they in such wise give their assent
unto the one side, as they make sure work to keep it back from the other side:
And this makes the opinion certain, at least probable and not doubtful; For
every authority or apparent Reason does not make an opinion doubtful, but
^^^ly such Authorities and Reasons, as are thought and esteemed marchable to
the contrary Reasons, and grounded upon (...) common Doctrine of Conscience:
Now because the Reasons produced and brought against the opinion of the most
illu^^^^s Republic are not able any way to make it a doubtful opinion, it
shall be needless to run unto the judgment of any other Superior: One pause
more Hetrodox for a short rest, and so to the third Race.

The sixth days Conference upon the Eight Proposition.
Orthodox. HOwsoever it goes for a true Rule or Principle of St. Gregory the
Pope, Sententia Pastoris justa sive injusta timenda, the Sentence of the
Ecclesiastical Judge or Pastor, be it just or unjust, is to be feared; yet
does it nothing serve the purpose in this case; For there is a great difference
between the unjust sentence of an Ecclesiastical Judge, and a sentence which
is no sentence: Navar. de censuris Eccl. cap. 27. Sotus 4. Sent. Did. ^2.
Thus Navarrus, thus Sotus, and that an unjust sentence is to be feared, but a
No-Sentence is not to be observed: The Censures therefore published by our Holy
Father Paulus V. being of no force or virtue, but vain and void, as has been
declared before, because they are like a man^ writing in the Water or in the
Air, I am in this opinion service, that Ecclesiastics in Venice ought not in
conscience to (...) the same Censures, not to innovate any thing in their
Church; For albeit Navarrus discoursing (in the place left (...) and alleged)
of Excommunication which has no v^^^^ty, ^^^t ^^pure nullity, has pronounced
in these (...); Se^^^^ti ^^^^lida se^ nulla, nihil aliud operatur in for^ (...)
i^^ quam quod obligat Excommunis at^^^ ad (...) a^^um (...) qu^^d Populus sibi
persuad^^t vel pers^ad^re (...) cau^as nullitatis propter Scandalum; the
invalid and void sentence (he means of an Ecclesiastical Judge) is of no
force to work any effect, either in the secret Court of Conscience, or in the
open Court of Judicature, but only to bind the person Excommunicated to the
observation of the said Excommunicatorie sentence, until the people be wall
persuaded, or at least should be persuaded, touching the nullitie thereof, and
that for the avoiding of public scandal, yet for certain this Doctrine of
Navarrus ^^^es very strongly for our present Cause: And wherefore? Forsooth
because the Reason of the Nullitie has been made manifest unto all the
Venetian people: And suppose it is yet not manifest unto some, they ought
doubtless to have taken it for manifested, by that course which the Venetian
Prince has taken for the manifesting thereof unto all men in all their solemn
Edicts and public Proclamations; So that in this case there is no public
scandal to be feared. I go further, and say more, that some Religions by
Order can by no means be excused, who erring perhaps by their little
knowledge, or perhaps out of some other sinister affection, have chosen to
leave the City rather then to persevere in ministering the holy Sacraments, and
celebrating the Divine Service, as for the good of Religion and of the
Commonwealth, by their Prince his Ordinance they were enjoined; wherein they
have offered scandal unto all, because Ipsi sibi fuerunt Lex, they have been a
Law unto themselves, and have not followed the example of the Cathedral
Church, of all other most holy and most ancient Religions, as like wise of all
the other parish Churches; To which Religious persons in a strain and fit of
godly zeal, I say with our Savior Christ, it had been better that a
Millstone had been hanged about their necks, (I forbear to say the rest, and
they cast into the bottom of the Sea) then to have given so great a scandal
unto any of these little ones: Besides, to defend the liberty of their natural
Prince, the maintainer, preserver, and upholder of Peace, Liberty, and Religion
to all the people, is a Principle grounded upon the Law of Nature, that is, Law
Divine, or the Law of God, whereas all Ecclesiastical sentences are grounded
upon the Law positive, which ought always to give place unto the other, and
most of all, when (...) have a Constat of the Nullitie; Some therefore deceive
themselves, who take this controversy to be de Fide; for it is only a Moribus:
And if any thing be expressly set down in holy Scripture, which makes this
Controversy to stand in matter of Faith, it is the opinion of the Signorie,
which they have grounded on the express Doctrine of St. Paul.

Let me here freely deliver my mind, most learned Hetrodox; I could wish, and
would exhort all the Clergy of the Venetian S^^^ (if they were now present)
not only to celebrate Divine Service, and to communicate or administer the
Sacraments, but likewise to perform all other Ecclesiastical Duties, which,
before the publication of these late Censures, they have been accustomed to
practice in their Church, both for that I am in good hope they are all fixed
already upon that Resolution, and likewise to avoid scandal; not only because
Sententia nulla minime est observanda, cum constat de nullitate, a void
Sentence binds none to the observation thereof when the Nullity is apparent,
but also because they ought at no hand to rend themselves from their Head (the
Prince) without any reason or cause in controversies of Jurisdiction; yea, I am
of opinion, for the same reason, there all such as shall not hear Mass (at
least upon Holy days) during the time of this Interdict, shall commit sin,
because they refute so to do without any lawful cause and reason, the
sentence being void, and the Mass being celebrated in all the rest of the
Churches: I would not have men to fear where no fear is, nor cause to fear;
nor to give any cause, why those, who always have been faithful to their
Prince the most illustrious Republic, should draw upon their own heads any such
imputation as this, Filii matris mea pugnaverunt contra me, the Sons of my
mother have fought against me; but I would wish them rather to fight and
strive, how they may best obey that Apostolical Precept, let every soul be
subject unto the higher Powers, Romans 13.15.
not only because of wrath, but also for Conscience sake; I make no doubt at
all of their constancy, for I rest well assured, they are almost ready to lay
down their life for their Prince: The Lords of Venice have ordained on pain
of death, That all the Religions in the City shall keep their Churches open,
and shall celebrate Divine Service, as they have done before: Have the Lords
made this Decree out of any fear, least such of the Religions to whom they
stand well-affected, who both know and follow the true Doctrine (as in a manner
they do all) would now do otherwise than they have done, or would not go on
to celebrate and exercise all the Offices of their Ministry? No sure;
wherefore then was that grievous penalty ordained? Forsooth only that none of
the said Offices might be intermitted in that City which ever has stood
Catholic, and now professes to continue Catholic more then ever: Whereupon
she will not suffer any change at all to be seen in the exercises of Piety, or
^^e intermission of the said exercises to be unto any an occasion of their
Precipitation; For which mischief the Prince for the Churches behalf and for
her benefit, by Gods Law is bound to provide a Remedy by all means possible:
Last of all, I commend to the Religions the Doctrine of Navarrus, as a most
safe haven, Cap. Novit. de judiciu, Notab. 3. and manu. cap. 27. de Censuris.
wherein they may ride without all danger; and this it is, That what Exemption
soever they enjoy, the same they enjoy not by Gods Law, but by the Privilege
of their Princes, who have power to retract, diminish, dilate, and amplify the
said Privileges when and how they please, according to such new reasons as
rise, and as good occasion shall be represented for the doing thereof to the
common utility and public benefit or advantage of the Dominions under their
Subjection; For the same power the Pope exercises in the privileges of
Indulgences, and other matters depending upon his Spiritual Authority, which
by him sometimes are annulled, sometimes diminished, and sometimes augmented.

Hetrodox. From false Principles you infer a false conclusion; That for so
much as the sentence of our holy Father is of no validity, therefore it ought
not in any wise to be feared, and that by consequence the Priests of Venice and
through the whole Venetian Dominion, are bound in conscience to celebrate all
Divine offices, as if they had not been interdicted at all.

First you affirm, That according to the Doctrine of Navarrus, the Sentence of
the Pope, when it is Nulla, is to be feared and observed, until the people
shall be thoroughly persuaded of the Nullitie, to the end there may breed and
grow no scandal; Then you subjoyne, the Venetian people are fully and wholly
persuaded of the Nullity of the Popes Excommunication, by the Dukes Edict, as
much to say, when the Judge affirms his Sentence is just and in full force,
and the Malefactor sales it is unjust and of no force, when the Malefactor
should be credited, and the Judge not believed: What Sentence at any time shall
go current for just and in force, if the Malefactors word and credit may be
taken?

Next you affirm, That certain Religious persons are inexcuseable, for
choosing to depart out of the City, rather then to celebrate Divine Offices; and
that very many thereby have been scandalized: Alas good Sir, the said
Religious have no need of your excuse, and if any other have been scandalized
by their obedience to the holy Father, the words of our Savior to the
Pharisees will serve well to remove and take away the scandal, Sinite illo^,
they are blind leaders of the blind, Mat. 15.
let them alone.

Then you affirm, it is enjoined by Gods Law to defend the liberty of their
Prince; whereas Ecclesiastical Sentences are enjoined by man's Law, and that
ought ever to give place unto the Law of God: At every word you take the Divine
Law in your mouth, no mervaile your Argument runs in this divine form: To
defend the Princes liberty is by the Law of God: Ecclesiastical Sentences are
by the Law of man, the Law of man gives place unto the Law of God; Ergo, the
Priests ought to despise the Popes Excommunication and Interdict, and to defend
the Liberty of the Venetian Duke: But hear you Sir my answer; If it be by Gods
Law to defend the Liberty of an Earthly Prince, much more it is by Gods Law to
defend the liberty of the Church, the Spouse of the Heavenly Prince.

I say moreover; The liberty which the Duke of Venice pretends now a days, is
a liberty to clap up such in prison as are none of his Subjects, and to make
Laws against Justice and Piety, and therefore it is according to Gods Law, not
to defend, but rather to impugn such a Liberty: And I yet subjoyn, that
Ecclesiastical Sentences (as touching Power) are by Gods Law established, Mat.
10.
and founded on the Gospel.

And again you affirm, That some are deceived in thinking this present
controversy to be de Fide, when it is only de Moribus, and that if any thing
be expressed in Scripture which makes this business to be de Fide, it is the
Republics opinion, expressly taught by St. Paul: I answer; The Principal
controversy is not de Fide; Nevertheless, those who have undertaken the
defense of the Venetian Cause, have in their discourses mingled certain Errors
in matter of Faith: And whereas in your accustomed way, of Wisdom, no doubt,
you tell us the opinion of the Signorie is expressly taught by St. Paul, your
wisdom does not mark, That such things as are expressly taught by St. Paul,
cannot be called opinions; For then it should follow, that some doubt might be
made of St. Paul's Doctrine, because opinions are ever doubtful and uncertain;
The truth is Hetrodox, the opinion of the Signorie is not found in St. Paul's
Epistle to the Hebrews: Obey them that have the oversight of you, Hebr. 13.17.
and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account for your Souls: Now against this Doctrine, which goes not in the
Church for an opinion, but for a most certain Article of Catholic Faith,
your Lords of Venice deceived by such as your self, no DD. but Seducers, are
precipitated in these days, and carried headlong as it were down the stream.

Moreover, you affirm that Priests ought not in any wise to make a rent or
separation from their Head the Prince; What can a Protestant Heretic of
England say more? Who ever heard, that a Secular Prince is the Head of Priests,
and consequently Head of the Church, but since Henry VIII. turned Rebel to
the Pope, and caused himself to be styled Head of the English Church? for all
this you Orthodox dare tell us, that in these Treatises there is handled no
matter of Faith, but only of Manners.

Besides, you highly extol the Ecclesiastics of Venice, in being most ready to
lay down their life for their Prince: Surely they must needs be a new and
strange kind of Saints, that are so willing to spend their life in the cause
and quarrel of a Prince, by whom they are compelled to commit Sacrilege, and
to disobey the Vicar of Christ; The Saints, till now, have been commended in
the Lyturgie, to be Triumphatores, qui contemnentes jussa Principum mernorunt
praemia aeterna, to be valiant and Triumphant Champions, who contemning the
Precepts of Secular Princes, have merited Eternal rewards: From henceforth by
like, the Hymn shall have need to be altered, that we may sing, Isti sunt
Triumphatores, qui contempserunt Deum, ut servarent justa Principum, These are
the valiant and Tryumphant Champions, who have contemned God, to keep and
observe the Precepts of Princes; at least if we shall believe these new
Doctors.

Again, The Lords of Venice (you affirm) have commanded the Religions upon
pain of death to keep their Churches upon, and to celebrate all Divine
Offices, that vain fear might not cause nor bring them to be intermitted in
that City, most Catholic in all former Ages, and now professing to continue
Catholic more then at any time heretofore: You shall receive no answer to
this point from the lips of Hetrodox, the Holy Ghost shall give the Answer by
the mouth of Samuel: 1 Samuel 15.22.23.
Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, as when the
voice of the Lord is obeyed: Behold, to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to
hearken is better then the Sacrifice of Rams; for Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and Idolatry: If you shall reply,
that Samuel there speaks of obedience to God; hear what our Lord says in the
Gospel: He that hears you hears me, Luke 10.
and he that despises you despises me: The Venetian Republic therefore may
be well assured, that such Divine Offices and Sacrifices, as are offered
against obedience to Christ's own Vicar, can not be pleasing unto Christ
himself, they cannot appease and pacify, but incense and kindle the wrath of
God against all those by whom they are offered, and all those by whom the
Priests are compelled to present any such oblations.

Again, you puts us in mind to peruse the Doctrine of Navarrus, and are bold
to affirm, That Navarrus makes for your side in all that before has been
declared: At last, you fall upon a course of exhortation, that all men would
retire themselves unto the secure port of this Doctrine, that such Exemption as
all Ecclesiastics now enjoy, are not enjoyed by Gods Law, but by Privilege of
Secular Princes, in whom there is full power to retract, diminish, dilate, and
amplify the said privileges at their pleasure: I answer; Herein Orthodox does
unjustly defame, and undiscreetlie blemish the reputation of Navarrus, as one
that favors and bolsters Orthodox in so many Errors as Orthodox hitherto has
taught and uttered in this Defense: But for so much as Navarrus his works are
extant in print, and read of all men, I refer my self to the Readers
judgment: But Sir, that Secular Princes by any power of their own, may
retract or diminish the Privileges of Exemption granted to Ecclesiastical
persons; that is a Doctrine so false and so new, that by Conarruuias himself,
an Author of all other least favorable to Ecclesiastical Exemption, it is in
Specie reproved and condemned; Thus have I fully satisfied, if I be not greatly
deceived, all your Objections in your own conceit, worthy to be highly prized,
and had in great Estimation, if not Admiration.

Now comes my turn to advise, to exhort, and to beseech (as with my best heart
I do) the most noble Republic, and her most excellent Prince, deeply to weigh
and consider in their most grave and incomparable wisdom in what Doctors and
Teachers they repose their trust: In Summa. cap. 25. nu. 16.
What? Is Navarrus wholly on their side, when he pronounces it is a sin, to
constrain or command Ecclesiastics not to keep and observe the Interdict?
When he pronounces Clerics and Monks are exempted from the power of Secular
Princes, Cap. Novit. de judiciu. notab. 6. nu. 30.
by Gods Law, as touching Criminal and Spiritual Causes, with others of the
like nature, annexed to Clericall Order? and after when he subjoines this to be
the common Sentence of Divines and Canonists? So that according to the Doctrine
of Navarrus, the Prince that casts either Clerics or Monks in prison, or
presumes in a Criminal cause to judge either of both, sins against Gods
Law, he sins likewise against Gods Law, when he commands Clerics or Monks to
say Mass or Divine Service, because these things are Spiritual: and lastly he
sins against Gods Law, if he attempt to annull, or to diminish Exemption
granted to Clerics or Monks by Almighty God: Thus the Lords of Venice may
see, how falsely they have been instructed by some of their own Doctors, and
how under the name of Navarrus they have been deceived: The same fraud and
imposture has been put as a trick of cunning upon the said Lords by all such
as to this day have given themselves the reins of liberty to put in print
certain Librets or small Pamphlets of like matter and stuff, but all farced
and stuffed with Novelties and lies; Again I exhort and beseech all
Ecclesiastics to think that none can bear more ardent, sincere, and indulgent
affection to the Child, then the natural Parents, Father, and Mother, that
howsoever they have (as Paul speaks) many Paedagogues, Teachers, or
Schoolmasters, yet but one Father: Their Mother is the holy Roman Church,
their Father is the High Priest or chief Bishop, by whom (in Christ's place)
they have had their Nursing and Education, until they are now grown great, and
capable of the Inheritance of the Celestial Paradise; They are therefore to
presuppose this Mother, and this Father wish and work for their building up in
Faith, in Truth, in all wholesome Doctrine, much more then these Paedagogues,
who teach them Rules and Lessons backwards, by that order commonly called
Arsie-varsie; Last of all, I exhort and beseech, not only the said Lords, but
all Ecclesiastics in the Venetian Government and Territory, well to consider
and think upon Gods Judgments, which many times he brings the highest and
stoutest Princes to feel even in this life.

Pope Gregory VII. for the sins of King Boneslaus interdicted the whole
Kingdom of Polonia, excommunicated the King, and deprived him of the Regal
Title; The King persisted indurate and impenitent; God punished the King; first
by making him underprised or despised by his own Subjects and abhorred by
strangers: This potion wrought not upon the King: God sent a second scourge, by
raising Rebellion in some part of the Kingdom, with great dissentions and
seditions in the rest; This Medicine also took no effect; God sent a third
scourge, made the King run as it were out of his wits, wander through Woods
and wild Forests of Chase with his pack, or kernel of hounds at his heels,
fall down suddenly dead, and suddenly to be devoured by his own dogs: Such
was the horrible end of this King for despising the Excommunication and
Interdict of Christ's Vicar, though the King never had the heart, never presumed
to command the Interdict should not be observed by his people or Subjects: The
Emperor Ludovicus Bavarus made the same end: He despised the Censures of Pope
John XXII. and after that of Pope Benedict XII. His own horse upon a time fell
upon his body by mishap and at unawares, and so he suddenly dyed, without any
time to be absolved of his sins, and from the said Censures; The same God is
now that was then, and of the same Omnipotency which then he had: So that if
Almighty God has so severely and rigorously punished those, who forced not
others to despise the Discipline and Censures of the Church, but only have
themselves in their own persons despised the power and Authority of the
Keys; What marvel, if in these times present he shall punish those, who not
only themselves despise the said Censures, but likewise by threatening of
death, compel and enforce their Subjects to despise the same; Let us therefore
be obedient to the voice of the Holy Ghost in the Psalms: Psalm. Ps. Ps.
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, and elsewhere,
Touch not mine Anointed; and yet elsewhere, Be wise now therefore ye Kings, be
l^^^ed ye Judges of the Earth; lay fast hold on Instruction, least he be angry,
and ye perish in the way.

Orthodox. There speaks, not an Angel, but indeed the Spirit of God; If you
Hetrodox will lay hold on this Instruction; you should be sure not to perish in
the way: But my Proposition you say is false, because it is drawn out of false
Principles, which you have battered with your Pieces down to the ground: No
such matter Sir, they stand as firm and steadfast as ever they did; There is no
necessity to make repetition of my former Defense, and therefore I will hasten
to make Demonstration of your Errors.

1. You confound two several Actions of great Disparitie, the Action of a
Superior Judge; who in the Tribunal Seat of Justice, does judge the Sentence
of another Judge, inferior and subject unto himself, to be void and of none
effect; and the action of a private person, who thinks and holds the same
sentence of the same Judge to be of no validity, because he judges it such by
certain evidence and assurance concerning the Nullitie thereof: The first
Juridical Action cannot be exercised, but by one to whom the foresaid
Authority and Superiority does properly belong: the other Action may be
exercised by any one of mean and common judgment: Now Sir, the Prince of
Venice does judge, esteem and hold the Censures of his Holiness to be
forcelesse and fectlesse, not as Judges Superior to the Pope in Causes of that
Nature, but as those to whom it is lawful and permitted by the clear and
manifest evidence of the Fact it self, to hold and esteem them for no better:
This being lawful for all private persons, must needs be much more lawful in
Princes for the conservation of Liberty, Peace, and Religion in their several
States.

2. Whether a Sentence be unjust and in state of mere Nullitie or no, credit
(you say) should not be given to the Delinquent or Malefactor, but rather to
the Judge: I have not affirmed that either the one or the other should be
credited; For both may be interessed and blinded with passion: But I only
affirm, That he should be credited, who discovers and manifests the truth of
his Assertions by certain and evident reasons; And in so doing he does not sin
or offend, because he does not any thing unlawful or unpermitted: Neither can
any power whatsoever control or curb his judgment, and restrain his free
opinion, from affirming a thing to be certain, whenever by the certainty and
evidence of strong reasons he is induced to affirm and hold the said opinion,
nor the judgment or free opinion of those, to whom the said certainty and
evidence is apparent, from affirming and holding the same opinion; I say
moreover, that howsoever those upon whom any unjust Sentence is executed with
force and violence, cannot shun or avoid the execution thereof, nevertheless
they may in public declare their grief and sorrow for such injustice, and yet
shall remain quit from any merit of blame: No more are those to be blamed,
who lay open to the whole world the Nullity and Injustice of a Censure
published, when it is lawful for them, not only to hold and affirm the said
Censure to be invalid and unjust by the clear evidence of the Fact, but also to
refrain from the observation of the said Censure.

3. You presume to say, the Religious of Venice by departing out of the City
and abandoning the same, have not given any scandal to the Church, or State,
or other private persons: you shall not now hear anything of mine own
invention, Head, or Brain, but only wha^ with mine Ears I have heard the
scandalized people not mutter and mumble between the teeth, but manifest in
bread terms of Speech; The people say that some few Religions in the City
should not prefer and prize their own judgment above or before the
Cathedral Church, the observance whereof was given to the Religious by the
sacred Canons for a Rule of observance in the matter of Censures, and should
not by their Example condemn others, no less learned and Religious then they
presumed or persuaded themselves to be: Secondly, that little handful of
Religious forsook the City, as men ambitiously gasping after Chapters and
Bishoprics, to gain and purchase grace at his Holiness hands, and not as men
thinking and in truth persuaded the cause to be just on the Popes part:
Thirdly, that whereas the Religious had been always before defended,
protected, and succored in all their necessities by the Prince, they did ill
to declare themselves wanting in Loyalty and Fidelity to the Prince in a
Temporal cause, and wherein the Prince himself wanted neither good ^or
important Reasons of State: Fourthly, their profession was nothing agreeable or
correspondent to their Fact; For they made profession to go into the most
remote Regions and Countries, amongst the Indians, and Heretics, (partly
Ethmics, partly Excommunicate) to reduce and bring them unto the lap of the
Church, and now, behold they departed from the Faithful, unjustly
excommunicated and interdicted: Fifthly, that if all the Religious had followed
the example of those few in abandoning their Pastoral charges, the Venetian
Dominion should have been left for a Country of Paganism, without any
Priests, that Woolves at pleasure might have run together on heaps to woorrie
and to glut their paunches with the blood of the silly sheep and Lambs of
Christ: Last of all, the occasion of this great scandal was augmented by some
temerarious, and over-confident Bravodoes in speech, cast out by the said
Religious, that his Holiness the Pope is the Monarch of Christendom, and
ought in all things, whether Temporal or Spiritual, to be obeyed by
whomsoever: These are scandals (to speak truth) inexcusable; which in case
they do not spring from the blindness of those by whom they are given, it may
well and truly be averred, their Actions are so much the more culpable and the
more to be condemned.

4. You grant obedience to the Natural Prince, and concurrence in his Defense
is by Gods Law, and the holy Fathers sentence by man's Law; and nevertheless
without any reason, you deny the consequence, that Subjects have done well and
taken the right course in obeying their Prince, rather then the Sentence of the
Pope: The instance which you induce is of no more force or weight then your
first Answer: For thus you infer; If it be according to Gods Law for Subjects
to defend the Liberty of their Natural Prince on Earth, much more it is
according to Gods Law to defend the liberty of the Church, the Spouse of the
Prince in Heaven: It is a true Inference I confess, but nothing pertinent or
proper to the present case, because the Lords of Venice never pretended to rob
the Church of any Right or Liberty whatsoever: For the Lords leaving all
things in their entire strength, do enact most just Laws and ordinary
judgments, touching Delicts and Goods which are subject unto their power; This
they have always done time out of mind, and yet never any of this present
Popes predecessors has taken stomach against our Lords for such their Acts,
but rather by connivance or tacit silence has yielded gracious consent to
their just operations: So that in Venice there being none that goes about or
seeks to deprive the Church of any Liberty, how can the Ecclesiastics there
have any occasion to defend the said Liberty?

5. You again confound the word Duke, and the word Prince; The Duke does not
any thing of him self in the Venetian State, the Prince, that is, the
Republic sets down all Orders, the Prince makes all the Laws: To what purpose
then should you seek to draw the person of the Duke into any odious hatred by
putting the Duke to be the Author of those Acts, which are to be attributed
unto the whole Republic, as unto the true Father and Mother of the said Acts.

6. You affirm, the Prince of Venice commits to prison such as have ho rank
amongst his own Subjects; The contrary has been already proved, that Clerics
in grievous Delicts, which touch not so much as the hemme of Spirituals, are
not exempted, so that by consequence they are in the rank of Subjects, as also
it has been showed before, that the liberty left by Christ our Lord unto the
Church, is the liberty of the Spirit, and from the bondage or slaverie of
sin.

7. The Laws now in question, made by the Lords of Venice, you say are against
Justice and Piety: For this Opposition I will turn you over, and refer all
indifferent Judges to Antonius Quirinus, a most noble Senator of the State, in
his Aviso, and to F. Paulus of Venice in his Considerationi.

8. You put us in mind, that Ecclesiastical Sentences, as touching power, are
by Gods Law; This will not be denied or gaine-said, so long as they marshall
themselves within their own bounds and territories; but when they fall to range
out of their own Religion or Limits, and to lash those who justly stand upon
the practice of their own Temporal and lawful power; then they are not
only by Gods Law in respect of their power, but directly opposite unto the
Law of God, and flat against all reason.

9. You grant and confess the present Controversy stands not in point of
Faith, but in matter of Manners; Then you subjoyne that, which neither your
self nor any other has not proved, nor shall ever by Gods grace be able to
prove, that in the Books written by such as hold and maintain the opinion of
the Republic, there are to be found sundry Errors in Faith: An Error in Faith
is, when one affirms a point of Doctrine, contrary either to sacred
Scripture, or to the definitive judgment of the Church, which cannot err
tanquam de Fide; This no man living shall be able to prove, has at any time
been taught by such as have defended, or now do maintain the cause of the
Republic: When matters are debated of so great importance, it is not lawful to
hang a Priest in generals; If the Disputant seek or think men should give him
Faith and Credit, without all hesitation, he must come to the particulars; In
the mean time, so long as the parties offended are reproved by others, and no
just cause at all showed of the said Reproof, they have reason to believe the
said Reproof will result and turn to their favor.

10. You confound the Principles and the Conclusion, which is virtually
contained in the Principles: The Principle from which the opinion of the
Republic is derived, is touching Faith, and in St. Paul, Omnis anima, etc. Let
every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers; but the Conclusion is a certain
opinion grounded upon all that has been said before: I have not said, the
Principle taught by St. Paul is an opinion, but have only said, that opinion
is most certain, which is grounded upon a Principle of Faith, taught by the
Divine Apostle; And so the sharp subtlety, or subtle sharpness of this your
opposition vanishes like smoke in the vast Region of the Air.

11. St. Paul's text, Obey them that have the over-fight of you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account for your
Souls; you understand to enjoyne obedience unto Spiritual overseers in all
things or matters whatsoever; whereas the Apostle (by whom this lesson had been
taught before concerning Temporal Princes, Let every Soul be subject unto the
higher Powers) to the end he might not go cross or speak in terms of
contradiction, that former Principle is understood by all writers on that place
to the Hebrews, to treat of Spiritual power, and over Souls: This appears
by the account which the said Prelates must render unto God, namely an account
for the Souls of the people, not for their Goods or other Temporal matters.

12. I never speak of the Head in Spirituals, who is the Pope, but of the Head
in Temporals, who is the Prince; to whom the Subjects are obliged by more then
many Titles and Ties: Let men read over the 23. Homily of St. Chrysostom
upon the Epistle to the Romans: But Protestants tell another tale, and sing in
another Keye; Namely, that a Prince Temporal is likewise Head in Spirituals,
but I for my part dare not go so far: The end of any operation (which makes
the operation good and laudable) is over the principal, not secondary and
consequent, according to the common Doctrine of Divines: For Example; Our Lord
Christ desired to dye, and voluntarily exposed himself to death, even the
death of the Cross; This death could not follow, if Judas, Pilate, the Scribes
and Pharisees had not sinned; This notwithstanding, no man must or dare
affirm, their sin was the end of Christ's death or suffering, and that his
work of immense love did merit any blame at all, for and in respect of their
wicked and sinful action: For to determine the goodness and justice of an
Operation, then reckoning must not be drawn from the secondarie, but only
from the Primarie and Principal end: In like manner say I, the Subjects end is
to perform obedience unto his Temporal Prince in those things which may
justly and lawfully be commanded by the Prince; The Subject cannot perform
such duties enjoined by his Prince, without renouncing his obedience to the
Popes invalide and void Sentences: In this case it must not be said, the
Subjects Action is to despise the Pope, or to contemn his Papal Authority;
For the Subjects end is to obey him, whom he is bound to obey, and by whom he
is lawfully commanded; his end is not in any wise to despise the Holy Father,
and his Censures, which nevertheless upon a necessary consequence he does not
observe, as one preferring the Superior and Primarie end before the Inferior
and Consequent.

13. I have not affirmed, that Subjects laying down their life in obedience and
for the defense of their Natural and lawful Prince, are holy Martyrs, but
only that in so doing, they do not ill, but rather well; neither can it be
said of such good and faithful Subjects, These are the noble and tryumphant
Champions, who have contemned God to keep the commands of Princes, but rather,
These are the victorious and tryumphant Conquerors, who to keep Gods
commandments have obeyed their Princes.

14. You confound the name of God with the name of Man; Samuel speaks of Gods
name, Hebr. 5.
who cannot err; I speak of man's name, qui circundatus est infirmitate, who
is compassed about with infirmities; And in that sense are those words
understood, He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me, that is, when Prelates deliver things just and conformable to
their own power, then they are to be heard, then to be obeyed; St. Paul
himself otherwise had strayed from the right way when he withstood St. Peter
to his face, who then was to be blamed: Galat. 2.11.
And in case this were universally true; then such as had embraced the Doctrine
of John XXII. had not done amiss; and yet his Doctrine was manifest and
notorious Heresy; For he affirmed the Souls of the blessed Saints did not see
the face of God so soon as they departed out of the Body, but were to expect
and stay for the sight of God until the last Judgment: John XXII. held this
Heretical opinion, as Pope Adrian VI. and Gerson have directly delivered:
Lastly, to what purpose do the Summists affirm, That invalide and void
sentences ought not to be observed, if the Popes voice, Gers. sermon. de Assump.
or the voice of inferior Prelates can justly challenge to be observed in all
things? yea, our blessed Savior would have the Doctrine of men to be well
tried like Gold, and well fifted like Meal; A fructibus, ye shall know them by
their fruits: yea, St. Paul giving* touch of the times to come, Mat. 7.
when Prelates would not attend to wholesome Doctrine, but would suffer
themselves to be led and carried away by their own humane fancies of new
Doctrine does admonish Timothy his Disciple, that he should not be like unto
those Teachers; All Teachers therefore are not to be heard, and in all matters,
but only such as teach Doctrines agreeable to sacred Scripture and holy Truth,
as also conformable to the example of Christ, and of his Saints.

15. You call that Doctrine of Diminishing and Ampllating of Privileges a
false and new Doctrine: It is nothing so; you know that Popes every day do the
like, by their Spiritual power: What shall then let a Temporal Prince to do
the same by his Temporal power? Conarruuias and Sotus are to be understood
with the word Ordinarily, and out of the case of necessity; For in case of
necessity, for Example, To rebutte and repel force; (for so speaks Sotus)
or in other cases of necessity (and so speak all those who treat of
Privileges) my Doctrine and Assertion is uncontrouleable and undeniable, most
ancient as well for the Right, as for the Fact.

16. Navarrus frames this Argument, Plus differt Christianus a Pagano, quam
Clericus a Christiano; There is a greater difference between a Christian and a
Pagan, then is between a Cleric and a Christian; but a Christian remains
subject unto the Lay-Prince; Ergo, much more a Christian, entered once into
Clericall Orders remains subject unto the Lay-Prince: This Argument (
Navarrus is resolute) stands insoluble, and not possible to be dissolved, but
by confessing, That Exemption is grounded upon man's Law. Thus Navarrus, from
the number which you Hetrodox have cited, until the Reader comes to the
Corollarie.

17. It is very true, That when Subjects are prohibited to keep a valide and
effectual Interdict, it is a sin; and this point Navarrus himself does
directly avouch: But we now speak of an invalide interdict of no force, no
interdict at all; And treating of such an interdict, we should have recourse
to the Doctrine of the said Navarrus himself, reduced to these Propositions
following:

Prima, Nemo tenetur nostra aetate servare interdictum aliquod, nisi
denuntiatur: In this our Age, none is bound to keep and observe any interdict,
except it has been denounced.

Secunda, Neque tenetur servare interdictum, quando est nullum in se, and
nullitas est sufficienter publicata, exceptis Religiosis, qui debent illud
observare, si Ecclesia Matter id observat: No man is bound to keep an
interdict, which in it self is void, and when the Nullity thereof has been
sufficiently published; except religious persons, who are to keep and observe
the said interdict, if it be observed by the Mother Church, the Cathedral
Church.

Tertia, Interdictum est nullum regulariter in eisdem Casibus in quibus est
nulla excommunicatio; An interdict is regularly none in it self, and utterly
void, in the same Cases, wherein Excommunication is of no validity or force.

4. Quarta, Excommunicatio est nulla sive invalida, quando continet
intolerabilem Errorem, quem habet illa quae datur contra aliquem, ex quo recte
aliquid fecit; Excommunication is none, or of no force, when it contains an
intolerable error; and such is that Excommunicatory Censure, which is
denounced or given against any man for well-doing, or after he has executed
some good Act, or done some good work.

5, Quinta, Excommunicatio invalida seu nulla nihil operatur in foro interiori
sive exteriori, etc. Invalide or no Excommunication works none effect, neither
in the inward, nor in the outward Court, save that it binds the excommunicate
person to the observation thereof, until the people may be really persuaded of
the nullity thereof, for the avoiding of scandal.

6. Sexta, Idem dicendum de suspensione, and interdicto nullo, quod dictum est
de Excommunicatione nulla, The same is to be pronounced of invalid suspensions
and interdicts, that has been asserted and averred of invalide
Excommunications.

Now the Venetian Prince having commanded an Action of virtue; namely, the
non-observing of a non-interdict quod vergebat in periculum Divini cultus and
Religionis, which tended to the manifest hazard and danger of Gods Worship and
Religion: Surely, they have not sinned, but have observed the Doctrine of
Navarrus to a hair.

18. None of us deny the Pope, or chief Bishop, to be the Vicar of our Father
in Heaven for Spiritual Causes: but we say moreover, The Prince is the Father
of the People in Temporal Causes; and withal, That as the Son has reason to
disobey the Father, who seeks to deprive him of his own particular goods and
portions, to him appropiated, either by reason of Dowry, or otherwise. Even so
the Prince ought not to obey the Bishop, (howsoever, he goes for the Princes
Father in Spirituals) when the Bishop pretends to deprive him of his Temporal
Goods and Jurisdiction.

19. The Lord Cardinal Baronius has assumed, and presumed the Venetian
Republic to be decrepit, and in that consideration, a blind Buzzard, or
dreaming Dotard: And you Hetrod ox from the Lord Cardinal Bellarmine, have
learned on the contrary, to call the Venetian Republic so young a Child, as it
has need of Paedagogues. I tell you Sir, the Republic is not decreipt, or an
old fool; much less a child to be taught his Primmer; she is the Queen of
Cities, a Prince of perfect age: When this Prince collective determines any
matter, case, or law, they do it with great and singular wisdom, they always
aim at Justice and Piety, they have no need of any to teach them lessons in
Temporal Affairs, or in the Government of their States and Subjects; they are
over all Christendom not only reputed, but also renowned for most wise and
prudent Senators: What is written by some Authors on their behalf, is written
by the said Authors, of their own simple and voluntary accord, in defense of
the truth, and the just cause of their Prince.

20. You confound the name of Paedagogue with the name of Doctor; whereas by
Cicero in his Dialogue de Amicitia, they are distinguished: For, the name of
Paedagogue notes a servile exercise of such as attend and wait upon Children:
the name o^ Doctor signifies a liberal and noble exercise, in teaching Ex
Cathedra, out of the Doctors Chair. I know not one Paedagogue that has set
pen to paper in the defense of the Republics cause; but many famous and eminent
Doctors, with whole Colleges, have taken the pains to write in their favor.

21. The example of King Boneslaus is nothing apt, nor accommodated to the
case; King Boneslaus was an impious and most wicked person, infamous and
notorious for many foul crimes: The Republic is a Pack (if I may so speak) or
an united and uniform knot of pious and Catholic Senators, great lovers of
Justice, and renowned Zelators of Religion.

22. If all that have not observed the Interdict, and have prohibited the
observation thereof, should have so miserably ended their days, as King
Boneslaus dyed, or should have been so unhappily poisoned, as Bavarus was (not
dying of any sudden death as you pretend.) I wonder how the most Christian
Kings, Philip the Fair, and Lewis XII. could escape the like miserable deaths
and unfortunate ends: nay, how their whole Kingdom did not perish in like
manner: Now, that not falling out in the same unfortunate manner, it is a
manifest sign; That all those by whom the observation of the Interdict is
inhibited, or not observed in their own persons, shall not be taken away by the
like miserable and sudden death.

23. Now I come to the conclusion of this my Defense, with two other Examples
of Popes; for as much, as you Hetrodox have been pleased to gall us (as you
imagine) with two Examples of Temporal Princes: what can you say for John XII.
He excommunicated the Bishops, by whom his cause had been discussed, by
Commission from Otho 1. Emperor: The Bishops did not obey, they declared the
Nullity of his Excommunicatory Sentence. Have you read at any time, that any
one of that Council perished by a miserable death? And have you not read, how
the said Pope came to a death so infamous, and so miserable, that I think it
neither fit nor lawful to story the same; first wandering (no less then
Boneslaus) for some space of time, through the wild woods, with wild and savage
Beasts. The other Example is of Pope Boniface VIII. He excommunicated the
French King; Philip the Fair, and interdicted his whole Kingdom: the King
scorned the Popes Bull, or Breve of Excommunication; The Pope thereat ^o stamped
and stormed, so far took pepper in the nose for a medicine, that it burnt up
and consumed his Entrails (as may be supposed) his Bowels, and his very Heart;
so that he dyed at last a miserable death: of whom Platina thus; Moritur hoc
modo, etc. Thus dyed Boniface; He, whose care and study was to tame and trample
upon Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations, and People with terrors, rather then
to teach them holy Religion; He, that presumed to give and to take away
Kingdoms at his discretion; He, that went to drive men out of their
habitations, and to bring them back again; He, that above measure thirsted
after gold and treasure, ransacking the Coffers, and ripping up the Bowels of
all Exchequers. Let all Princes therefore learn by his example, as well secular
as religious Princes, not proudly and contumeliously (as this man of whom now
we speak) to rule their Clergy and People, but in a holy and modest manner of
Government, as Christ and his Disciples, with all other his true and faithful
followers ruled, and choose to be loved of the people rather then feared, which
will justly be the down fall and break-neck of all tyrannous Princes: So that
by these two Examples, you may see Hetrodox, that your Argument ab ex^mpl^:
drawn by name from the example of Boneslaus and Bavarus, is of no force, but
weak as water. First, because your comparison of the Princes is impertinent and
in^pt. Secondly, because I would have you know; that if some Princes
interdicted and excommunicated have met with a miserable death, some Popes in
like manner, Interdicters and Excommunicators of others, have drunk of the same
cup, and have been scourged with the same whip of a miserable death.

By all that has been hitherto dilated in our six days Conference,
concerning the Doctrine of eight Propositions, five in Thesis, three in
Hypothesis; the same Doctrine is manifestly declared to be found, Catholic, and
tr^e, conformable to divine and holy Scripture, to general Councels, to sacred
Canons, to imperial Constitutions, to the example of holy Popes, of most
prudent Kings and Emperors, to the Doctrine of the holy Fathers, I and of
those Catholic Doctors, who have written and printed since the sacred Council
of Trent, by name Navarrus, Medina, Couarruvias, Victoria, Sotus, and
Cornelius, Jansenius.

That all those three Propositions, which make up the main of the controversy,
are most certain and true, Catholic and most firmly founded, as extracted from
the sweet Fountain of holy Scripture, from the goodly great Rivers of General
Councels; of sacred Canons, of Imperial Constitutions, of unreproveable
Histories, of worthy Saints, and of Catholic Doctors. The three Propositions be
these.

1. The chief Bishop, Nudus a Donariis and Privilegiis Principum, and jure
Pontificatus, as Navarrus writes, and St. Barnard; that is to say, stripped and
left naked of Princes, Donations, and privileges, and only measured by the
right Pole of his Pontifical Priesthood, or high Priestly Dignity, nullam
habet laicam Potestatem, can claim or challenge no kind of Laic-power, neither
in the highest degree, nor in the middleward, nor in the lowest rank, neque
actu, neque habitu, neither for Fact, nor Habit.

2. In temporal matters, and in other Delicts Temporal, quae Spiritualia non
attinent, having nothing to do with Spirituals (for that phrase is used by
Couarruvias) Ecclesiastics are not exempted from the secular Prince his power,
in the whole, or for the whole, and by the Law of God, but only for some
Delicts, and in some cases, or matters, and that either by the privileges of
Princes themselves, or by Pontificial Canon, which the said Princes have
received and admitted, or else by custom long approved.

3. That a void and invalide Sentence, when there is a clear Constat of the
Nullity, ought neither to be observed, nor so much as feared; So that of all
the former Doctrine in this whole Defense, that may be averred of the Venetian
Republic, which the Holy Ghost has spoken of the white Dove in the Canticles,
Et macula non est in te, and thou art without spot; most of all in those her
two wings, I mean in the defense of her Catholic Religion, and of her liberty;
which two Prerogatives proper to her self, and to this day pure Virgins, we
hope and trust so much in the favor of our Lord God, that he will be
graciously pleased to conserve in their Virginity without spot for ever.

The Sun is now setting, the three Races run, and high time to repair to
lodging and rest; Glad would I be to understand Het. how you rest satisfied
with my Defense of these eight Propositions: but however, in your approbation
of my Discourse, or my contrary resolution, I am resolved to rest ever at your
service.

Hetrodox, know this to be my resolution Orthodox; I must be, I will be semper
unus and idem, ever one and the same; I depart in the same belief, wherein I
came the first day to this Campe-fight, or single Combat: Howbeit, common
civility commands to render due thanks for the merit of these Discourses and
Christian Charity, much more commands Hetrodox, or Card. Bellarmine (which you
please) the Champion of Rome, even to wish nothing, but good and happiness to
Orthodox, or Ioannes Marsilius Neapolitanus, the worthy Champion of Venice, and
yet with a Salvando la querela, with a saving this learned quarrel,
conference, or contention.

FJNJS.

