A SYNOPSIS, OR CONTRACT VIEW, Of the Life of John Armand, Cardinal of
RICHLIEU, great Favorite and Minister of State to LEWIS the 13th. King of
FRANCE.

To be Engraven on his Tomb.

First written in Latin, and now verbatim rendered English.

Quis leget haec? --
Vel duo, vel nemo.
PERSIVS. Printed in the Year, 1643.

Cardinal RICHLIEU his Epitaph.
THe first thing requested of thee (O Passenger) is, that thou would bless
Almighty God, that in France thou may now read these lines securely.

Next, wonder, that He whom the Earth was too angust, for when he was alive,
should be imprisoned in so small a space of ground, now he is dead.

When he had commoved Earth, he aspired to rule even Heaven it self; as
appears by his arrogating to himself this Symbolum, or Motto. MEN'S SIDERA
VOLVIT.

And that thou may understand what kind of Intelligence this was; know that
he was of a sagatious industry, but unquiet; an Enemy both of the Public, and
of his Privare tranquillity.

In a great Wit, by many revered, not a few that knew him, found a great
mixture of madness.

He had a mind that was made worse by every thing; bettered by nothing.

He stood thus long; not so much through favor, as his power with a mighty
King: and was happy in the event of things, rather then in a prudent manage of
them.

Only, he was unhappy in the dis-favour of Almighty God: For having
continually conflicted with noisome diseases, he was ignorant of the seat of
happiness, which yet, to the rendering both himself and others unhappy he sought
after.

Nor did he ever seem happy even in his own eyes, as not honest in the eyes
of those who called him happy.

He was vexed with two great tormentors of life, Choler, and Melancholy. In
the flames of the former, and the fumes of the latter he continually suffered.

So that venom which he spit out to the perdition of others, he could not
keep in without hurt to himself.

He outwent most men in Covetousnes, all men in ambition. A Waster of the
Royal Exchequer, but a niggard of his own Purse. Cruel if offended; but more
cruel where he offended others.

By the conferrings of the Queen Mother he was made rich, by her plottings
preferred, and by her power made more potent. Yet her did he deprive of the
Kings favor, of her liberty, of her estate, of France, and at last of her
life, she being an exile at Colleine. And lest he should spare her when she was
dead, he nulled her last will, and caused her corpse to lie five months (at the
end of which, himself followed her) in her chamber unburied.

The honor of Monsieur the Kings Brother he violated, and endeavored to
supplant even his Person.

King of France.
He not only withdrew the affections of * Son from Mother, and of * Brother
from Brother; but of * Husband from Wife.

Mariliack he caused to be beheaded by the greatest wrong. Montmorancy by the
greatest right, Cinkmart partly by right, partly by wrong; M. de Thou, whether
by right or wrong no man knows.

Some Noble men he condemned to perpetual imprisonment, more to banishment:
but those he drove from Court were innumerable.

He proscribed many, least they should hinder his designs. Nor did milder
France ever behold so frequent Punishments.

Building upon the power of a great King (whom with a great deal of art and
study he deceived) and suppeditated with the wealth of a most fruitful
Kingdom, he spent an infinite number of Arrows in aiming to hit the maine
Mark which he had missed.

A continual working and agitation of mind, backed with many mad attempts,
together with a rigid severity, and an all-trying boldness, produced a few
fortunate issues. But he had soon been supplanted, if among foreign
Enemies he had found some more wary, or among French men (scarce any of whom
but were averse to him) had met but with one Adversary.

It well besteaded him that hardly any body knew him, or believed those that
did.

He was so fortunate, that those of the Nobility, as well as of the Army, whom
he had irritated, did yet for his honor, shed their own and others blood,
whilst himself mingled his with the Kings.

He had perished in the same design in which Sejanus once perished, had he not
taken out of the way (O grief to think on) the Royal Count of Soisson.

Germany, Spain, Italy, and the Low Countries, but especially France, will
hardly be able in a whole Age to efface the bad impressions of so hurtful an
Authority.

Taking pleasure in the miseries both of the Citizens and Suburbers, that he
might fleece these, he lanc'd the very entralls of those.

Nor did he any whit indulge to the sacred health of of the King, but disturbed
that, whilst with anxieties and various Passions of mind he wore out his own.

The Divine justice first ulcerated his arm which he^ ^ad stretched out
against heaven. Next it took from him the use of his right Hand, which had
subscribed to unnecessary wars. His arm eight months before his death
rotted, by reason of which his hand withered.

And yet (which is a sad thing) he that so plainly felt God an avenger, would
not plainly enough acknowledge him.

This appears in that he more hotly exercised his fury upon his private
Enemies.

In that, Death approaching, rather out of a politic Prudence, then a
Christian Piety, he commended his Favorites to the King, more then his Soul to
God.

In that, a few days before the Catastrophe of his Tragic life, he caused a
Play of his own devising (which he called Europa Triumphata) to be Acted in
the most Royal Pomp that could be (though himself could not behold it.)

In that, being a Cardinal, he afflicted the Church, being a Priest, he Shed
Blood, being a Christian, he forgave no injuries, and being a Man, he yet would
not remember himself to be mortal, even when the worms crawling out of his
many Ulcers did admonish him to how frail and noisome a mortality he was
obnoxious.

When by all ways (the most impious not unassaied) he had for the space of
eighteen years prosecuted his private ends to the undoing of the Public,
he at length arrived to the ordinary end of Men, by a death to appearance
peaceable, but more lingering then that of many, whom he had sent before him.

He died at Paris, where he had been borne fifty seven years and three
months before.

Forsaking France and his own house, he seemed to endeavor the combustion of
them both; of that, by an extorted Declaration against the Kings Brother of
this, by a will framed to a woman's fancy. The Duchess of Eguillon.


For the rest, nor did the Kingdom of France (being opulent) ever deal with
any so bountifully; not (being of a Genius impatient) did it ever bear with
any so continuedly; nor (affecting quietment) did it ever part with any so
gladly.

I assert these things openly which thou (o Passinger) did priviely suspect,
and in wisdom keptst to thy self.

If thou encounterest any one who still doubts, entreat him not to give credit
to abused men, nor to corrupted flatterers; but rather to Me who speak nothing
but truth, and that out of a conscientious sincerity.

And I would have all men persuaded, that the least justice is more acceptable
to God, than the greatest power: that a name is to be esteemed, not for being
far and wide diffused, but for being good, that to trouble and unsetle many
things, is not to do much, but being unsettled, to compose them; more, to keep
them from being unsettled, most of all.

Prosperous wickednesses are by the multitude accounted for virtues: but do
thou (on the contrary) think nothing more wretched, then such thriving
impieties.

This egregious Artisan of cheats (Richlieu) deceived many for a while, and
himself happily to eternity.

Who (alas) shall reduce to order that infinity of things which he has
confused? who deemed of Peace, because it suited not with his turbulent brain,
that it was disagreeable even to his fortune. From whence sprang those many
evils which for these last fifteen years have so oppressed the Christian
World.

Pray, that God would not eternally avenge it upon the Author; who needed much
mercy and many of Gods compassions, amid his many and great crimes.

Do thou (O Christan seriously perpend, what a Nothing that is, which is
subject to a momentary vanish, * None of those whom thou see clad in Purple,
Seneca.
is therefore happy, no more than they whose part in a Comedy allows them a
Robe and Scepter; who having buskind and on tip-toes strutted it before the
staring spectators, as soon as they come to their Exit, are un-pantoffled, and
return to their own stature.

Furthermore, see how small an ash heap he now is, who once was so great a
Fire: how fetid a stream he now sends forth, who lately darted a splendour so
coruscant, that every ones eyes were thereby dazzled.

I wish he prove not a Firebrand to himself in another world, who was so to
Europe in this.

Poor Europe now hopes for Peace, the fuel of her wars being extinct.

I should entreat thee (o Passinger) to pray for Pe^ce to this so mortal an
enemy even of his own peace: but that I fear thou would but trouble him, in
wishing a thing to him which he so greatly hared. Yet Pray notwithstanding; in
that thou are commanded to live thy enemies. If the Peace thou prayest for,
reach not Him, it will return unto thy self. Such was the Commandment of our
Savior; Luke 10.
in whom I wish thee Peace whilst thou live, that thou may sweetly rest in
him when thou dyest. In the mean time, Farewell.


