A Succinct Narrative Of the Bloody Murder of Sir EDMONDBURY GODFREY By the
PAPISTS, October. 12. 1678.
With the various and Wonderful Circumstances of the Motives, Manner, Time,
Place, Persons, etc. relating to the said Murder, Faithfully collected out of
the several respective Depositions given upon Oath before the House of Lords by
Captain William Bedloe, and Mr. Miles Prance, to the Amazement and Horror of
all True-Protestants.
Capt. Bedloe's Depositions. Mr. Prance's Depositions. Lords Journ.
THe Papists, because Sir Edmondbury seemed to be an obstacle to Them, and had
taken the Information of Oats and Tongue about the Plot, resolved and
contrived to take away his Life. Lords Journ.
1. THe Papists, because Sir Edmondbury seemed an Enemy to the Queens Servants,
and would not consent to discharge one Gerald from Parish-Duties, (as another
Justice did) resolved and contrived to take away his life. Ibidem
2. Pursuant to which Design, they hired for 4000 l. Le Phaire, Walsh, Atkins,
Pritchard, the Deponent, and some Jesuits, to do the Fact. Ibidem
2. Pursuant to which Design, they hired (for what Reward the Deponent does not
know) Hill, Green, Kelly, the Deponent, Gerald and Berry, to do the Fact. Ibidem
3. Accordingly, the abovenamed Persons Trepan'd Sir Edmundbury into
Somerset House about five a Clock at night, on Saturday the 12th. of October.
Ibidem
3. Accordingly the abovenamed Persons Trepan'd Sir Edmondbury into
Somerset House about 8 or 9 a Clock at night: But the Deponent does not well
remember the Day. Counc. Journ.
4. This Trepan was effected thus; The Deponent was told by Le Phaire, that He,
Walsh and Atkins met Sir Edmundbury near the Kings-Head-Inne in the Strand, and
decoyed him into Somerset House, under pretense of apprehending some Plotters.
Lords Journ.
4. This Trepan was effected thus; Green gave the Deponent notice that He and
Gerald had set Sir Edmondbury in St. Clements; And Hill decoyed him down the
Watergate, under pretense of parting a Fray between two Fellows quarrelling in
the Yard. Lords Journ.
5. When they had him in the upper great Court of Somerset House, They thrust
him into a low Room, put a Pistol to him, threatened him if he made a noise;
then stifled him between two Pillows; And finding him still alive strangled him
with a long Crevat in the Room where he lay. Ibidem
5. When they had him near the Rails by the Queens-Stables, Green strangled him
with a twisted Handkerchief; Then finding him still alive, rung his Neck quite
round, and punch'd him with his Knee in the open Yard; Which done, they dragged
him into Doctor Godwin's Lodgings. Ibidem
6. On the Monday following precisely between 9 and 10 a Clock at night, the
Body was shown to the Deponent by Le Phaire, in the Room, or the next to it
where the Duke of Albemarle lay in State in the upper square Court; There it
was by the help of a Dark Lanthorn the Deponent saw the Body in the presence of
Le Phaire, Walsh, Atkins, and Two other Persons. Ibidem
6. On the Monday following, precisely between 9 and 10 a Clock at night, the
Body was shown to the Deponent by Hill, Green, and Gerald, in a Room in the
back Square-Court below Stairs next the Garden. There it was by the help of a
Dark-Lanthorn the Deponent saw the Body in the company of the said Hill, Green,
and Gerald, who were only present. Lords Journ.
7. On the same Monday at 9 a Clock at night the dead Body was carried out
through the great Gate by certain Chair-men (Retainers to Somerset House,)
whose Persons were unknown to the Deponent; These persons carried him in a
Chair to the corner of Clarendon-House, and from thence conveyed him in a Coach
to Primrose-Hill, where they made a Wound in his Body, and laid his Sword by
his side. Lords Journ.
7. On the next Wednesday after about 12 a Clock at night, the dead Body was put
into a Sedan, and carried out by the Deponent and Gerald into Covent Garden,
where Green and Kelly took him up, and carried him to Long-Acre; There the
Deponent and Gerald resumed their Burden, and carried him to the So-hoe; from
thence he was conveyed astride on Horseback before Hill into the Fields, where
they thrust his Sword through his Body, and cast him into a Ditch.

A Twofold Protestation of Mr. Miles Prance, concerning the Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey.
His Protestation made first before Capt. Richardson in Newgate, and then
before the King and Council, soon after his first Discovery in December 1678.
Reduced into Form. His Protestation made in Solemn manner, April 14. (82.)
being Good Friday, immediately preceding the Feast of Easter, wherein he
received the Holy Sacrament, at his Parish Church. WHereas by the Suggestion of
the Devil, Worldly Interest, and my own Malice, I Miles Prance most wickedly
devised an horrid Story of the Murder of Sir Edmonbury Godfrey, wherein (being
beforehand sufficiently secured both of His Majesty's Pardon for the pretended
Crime, and of Reward for the Discovery,) I feigned my self a Party, the better
to gain credit to my Damnable Forgery. WHereas some bold and Ill Men have
several times by various but different Suggestions, and particularly, more
openly of late, pretended they are able to Disprove an Account I have given
from my personal knowledge of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, wherein
with unspeakable grief (though yet not without a firm belief of forgiveness
from Almighty God upon unfeigned Repentance, as well as the grant of His most
Gracious Majesty my Earthly Sovereign's Pardon) I acknowledge my self most
wickedly drawn in, and concerned. Now I the said Miles Prance, do with
unspeakable grief (though yet not without a firm belief of Forgiveness from
Almighty God upon sincere Repentance) hereby in the presence of the All-seeing
and Heart-searching God, and of all Holy Angels and Good Men, Solemnly and
Sincerely declare, that whatever I deposed upon Oath, relating either to my own
Knowledge and concurrence in the said Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, or to
any other Person or Circumstance touching the same, is, in the whole, and every
part thereof false, and the mere groundless product of my own Devilish
Invention. Now I the said Miles Prance, do hereby in the presence of the
All-seeing and Heart-searching God, and of all Holy Angels and Good Men,
Solemnly and Sincerely avow and declare, that whatever I formerly deposed upon
Oath, and set forth touching the manner and Circumstances (as far as the same
fell within my knowledge) of the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Murder, is most
punctually and Religiously true. For all which my detestable wickedness as with
(...) repentant heart I crave the mercy of God, so do I humbly beg Pardon of
the King, and Forgievness of those whom by my Hellish Malice, I have so
hainously and unjustly Accused. And as to all and every part of this my Solemn
Protestation, as I do hereby under my hand most seriously aver and avow it, so
in farther confirmation of the Truth thereof do I resolve (with Gods Help and
Permission) to receive the Holy Sacrament.

Printed for the Use of Miles Prance, 1683.


