A SERMON LATELY PREACHED AT WESTMINSTER, BEFORE SUNDRY OF THE Honorable HOUSE
of COMMONS.

By Joseph Symonds sometimes Minister in Ironmonger-lane, London, Now Pastor of
a Church in Roterdam.

-- Rejoicing, and beholding your order, Col. 2.5. (...). Naz. Nullibi gravius
peccatur quam in politicis. Dan. pol. pr^aem. LONDON, Printed for Luke Fawn,
and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Parrot in Paul's
Churchyard. 1641.

To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House of
Parliament, now Assembled.
IT was a quick answer of him to a Painter, who showing his Picture, said he
made it in a few hours, That he wondered he made not many such in that time.
But its not a vain covert of my weakness, or idle hunting after credit, but a
just expression of truth, if I say the time of my preparation of this Sermon
for you, was a time of no small distraction to me. Indeed as I judged my self
unworthy to speak in such an audience, so I wonder that any in it should so
approve what was spoken, as to think it worthy of a longer life, then it had in
the Pulpit. But since it must live longer then I intended, having nothing in
this matter to satisfy me, but my respects to those to whom I owe so much, I
humbly present it to your honorable acceptance. And shall still pray him, who
is wisdom and Counsel, to lead you into all truth, that as great and
stupendous works (wherein by the Vote of God and man, a large share of of
honor is allotted to you) have been done by you his Instruments; so you may
happily proceed, till your wisdom and zeal have crowned our hopes, and
perfected your glory, that we and the generations yet unborne, may rejoice in
you, and bless God for you, whom he has raised to be the terror of his
adversaries, and Savior of his people. Go on and prosper unparalleld Worthies,
you have a a noble cause, and a confluence of encouragements from God, and man.
See what you have done already, and mingle your streams of joy with the floods
of all your Saints ere while drowned in tears and sorrows, but now floating in
joy and triumph. Behold the Faces of the Saints, whose tears you have wiped
away, and see in the light and cheerfulness of their vissages the blessed
fruits of your goodness, wisdom, justice and courage. Let their reviving
add still to your living Spirits? What can be more solatious to a Christian
Spirit, then to see the dying Saints reviving, and insolent oppressors dyi^g?
What better then at once, to see our Kingdom enhappied, and Christ advanced?
Let your hearts feed themselves to fullness in these things, to you belongs a
double portion. Its better to do good then to receive: we are but the Cesterns,
you have the honor to be our living Springs, yet we most honor the Sea of
goodness, who issues through you upon us.

I am ready for the things which I have already seen to say, as Jacob, when he
received his son, as from the dead, I have enough. And doubtless, if our
eyes shall be so blessed, as to see the Churches of Christ in their right
order, and shining in their proper beau^y and power, we shall be as those that
dream. Oh that our want of love to Christ, and to each other may not deprive us
of this Crown of our rejoicing. And oh that in much love and singleness of
Spirit, all that are the real friends of Christ, would with mutual embraces,
and conjunct hearts, heads and hands help to give birth to this glorious work.
He were better be in his grave, who in such a season as this, is either an
impediment or a shadow.

Different opinions are no just excuse of dissenting affections, opinions
should not be quench-coales of love, which are not destructive to life. And its
ill service to augment differences beyond necessity, or to aggravate them
beyond equity. The Wisdom which is from above, is peaceable; and surely love,
and meekness, would do much to one-nes. He that will exclude all that meet not
punctually in his judgment, must discard himself. Let us rather devise how
far we do, or may concenter, then studiously to stand at a distance: We shall
never be wholly, one with all in all; Yea, we are very diverse from our selves.
And true peace arises not so much from enforced uniformity, as from a Candid
unanimity. He that disturbeth order, and corrupts truth, is unfit for a
Christian fellowship. But all that embrace godliness and truth, and serve the
peace of the Churches, may happily be copartners in each others privileges. If
this be the time of our deliverance (which I pray and hope) he that is Truth
and Love, will teach and meeken us; and he that is Almighty, will prosper you,
that this morning of hope, may rise to a clear day of joy, which is the prayer
of him, who is your Honors to serve you.

Joseph Symonds.

A Sermon Preached before sundry of the Commons House of Parliament.
1 CHRONICLES. 28.10. Take heed now for the Lord has chosen thee to build an house
for the Sanctuary. Be strong and do it.
THis Chapter and the next following are a Copy of the last speech of the best
King that ever was: 1 Chro. 23 27.
the speech was David's to Solomon his son, and to the state of the Kingdom.
I shall only treat of that part of it, which respected Solomon. The subject of
it, is an house to be built for God. The occasion of it was this. When David,
by the good hand of God with him, had peace on every side, a calm after many
storms, he did fall asleep in the lap of peace; but as mercies and receipts
from God, are wont to work in the Saints thankful returns, so he now devises
what to do for God, that had done so much for him, ver. 2. 2 Samuel 7, etc. The
time of this speech has a double mark upon it.

1 It was in t me of Parliament, in a solemn assembly of the Princes of
Israel, and the Princes of the Tribes, etc. v r. 1. David's end was to draw them
to put their hands to this great work, which appears by those words, ver. 21.
which are an expression of his desire, with confidence of their readiness, and
in their hearing. Also the Princes and all the people will be wholly at thy
commandment. Zeal will cry for help of all hands.

2 It was in the end of his days, When he was old and full of days, 1 Chronicles.
23.1. Good men do good to the last, yea are best at last, as natural bodies
are quickest and strongest in their motion, when they come nearest to their
center.

The sum is. David would have built an house, but though God accepted his
good intention, yet by Nathan told him that he should not do it, 2 Samuel 7.5.
but his son should, ver. 12.13. Therefore David summons this great assembly,
and before them bequeaths to Solomon the honor of the Kingdom and of this
service.

In the text 1 Preface to the speech. 2 matter of the speech.


The preface in this word Take heed. Its an item both strong or spiritous, and
pregnant or comprehensive. Now take heed i.e. if ever thou did attend hear
now, and if ever thou did seriously mind and intend any thing, take what I
am saying into thy most ponderous thoughts, and most vigorous resolution, as a
business of greatest concernment and importance which ever did or can come
under thy hand.

The matter of the speech is 1 A commission. 2 A charge.


The commission, The Lord has chosen thee to build, etc. This is the
enforcement of Solomon to this work. warrant of Solomon to this work.
encouragement of Solomon to this work.


He may, he must do it because commanded, and has This to encourage 1 He is
chosen to it: its a choice favor. 2 By God. Here is the highest co^missio^.
best security.
3 To build him an house: it was the most honorable service that could be.


My purpose is to speak chiefly of the charge, In which two things are
required of Solomon, 1 resolution. Be strong. 2 execution. Do it.


The first is Resolution. The word expressing it, imports a vigorous and
magnanimous will, a will intensely and courageously bent to the business, so
set to it, that no disswasions, slowth, fear, policy, covetousness,
fickleness, nor any other thing might cause either diversion, or cessation, or
interruption. So we have David's own comment upon his own words: Be strong
and of good courage, dread not, nor be dismayed, 1 Chronicles. 22.13. and verse 20.
of this 28. Chapter. Be strong and of good courage, and do it, fear not, nor
be dismayed, for the Lord God will be with thee, he will not fail thee nor
forsake thee, until thou have finished all the work for the service of the
house of the Lord.

David in his zeal and wisdom endeavors to beget a fixed resolution in his
sons heart.

For, 1 Resolution is the life of action. 2 We are apt above all works to be
slack in Gods 3 The nature of the work required resolution. 1 Gods work. This
requires our best strength. 2 Great work 1 Chr. 29.1. careful. painful.
chargeable.
3 A new work. And new works are often entertained either with fickleness.
fearfulness.




The second part of the charge is execution, Do it.

Which has in it a tie to 3 things. Do it 1 presently. 2 fully: the word is,
perfice. 3 regularly.


The house must not be built after his fancy, but Gods model: David gave to
Solomon his son the pattern of, etc. ver. 11. the pattern which he had by
the spirit, ver. 12.

Matters of worship are never left to man's liberty. God only appoints the
matter, manner, and means of his worship. And these are like a connex
proposition, whereof the denial of one part is the denial of the whole: Though
we offer true worship for the matter, if yet according to man's will or reason,
God does not own it. Es. 1.12, 13, 14. Esaias 58. If a man order his Tailor to
make him a suit, though he bring the garment for kind according to order, but
for fashion and size otherwise, its not allowed.

That which I commend out of these words is, that they that are chosen of God
to do great things for him, should resolve and do them.

First of the resolution: This must be when any thing is committed of God to us
to be done for him. Reasons.

Josh. 1.6.7.9.18. Deuteronomy. 31.6. 1 Samuel 4.9 1 Chro 22.^9. 2 Chro 15.7. Hag 2.4.
1 Where no resolution is raised upon a matter proposed, there is either
reluctance, which clearly ought to be far from us when God commands: or
pendulousnesse of heart, This also has no just place in this case. For the
heart is never rationally pendulous and wavering but in things dubious. Now all
doubts which give a stop or bar to the will, are either from Conscience or
Prudence.

If the question be in the conscience, it must be concerning either the
lawfulness of the thing, in respect of the substance or circumstances; in
which case its impossible but that the heart by how much the better it is,
should be in a wavering and trembling state, being dubious, (q^ad duas vias) as
a man at two ways not knowing which to choose. But in things committed of God
to us, here can be no such quaeres, because he is supreme, the Lord, Judge,
and rule of all.

Or else the question is whether the thing be necessary. And indeed often,
things come with warrant without command. In which case men have a latitude,
and may, and do, act or not act sometimes out of mere liberty, sometimes upon
intercurrent reason.

But when God appoints, here is no room left for such agitations, but the case
is clear, all things commanded are necessary: Gods command is the rule and
spring of necessity.

Sometimes the question may be in prudence: humane prudence is an intruding
medler in Gods matters: and it is of use when it follows the rule, and so
leads the action.

But there be two evils, which usual fee carnal wisdom to be of their
counsel: 1, Earthly affections and respects. 2, Unbelief.

1 So far as any thing in this world is a man's end, he is apt in every
business to ask; what will it profit? what advantage does it bring to me? great
men say, if the Churches be so or so ordered, what compliance will it have with
our honor, power, wealth. Unprofitablenesse is a strong plea with men; Haman
knew the force of this Engine, when he to oppose the Jews, said, There is a
certain people, scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the
Provinces of thy Kingdom, and their laws are diverse from all people, neither
keep they the Kings laws, therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer
them, if it please the King let it be written that they may be destroyed. Hest.
3.8.9. The like arrow did they sharpen and discharge against his people. Ezr.
4. from 11. to 16.

The people also have the like spirit, weighing all by this rule of gain, and
earthly advantage. Job 21.15. What profit should we have if we pray unto him?
and the Prophet accuses them of his time, Ye have said it is in vain to serve
God, and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinances, Mal. 3.14.

And certainly the argument is good when well applied; for nothing is good but
what is profitable; and every way or order of Churches which is indeed
unprofitable is worthy to be refused. God uses arguments of like importance
against their devised worship: What profits the graven image? Hab. 2.18.

But now none can plead unprofitablenes in the things of God, For what ever is
of him, is profitable to all, and does not include any hurtful quality or
power of it self to any sorts or ranks of men in the world: godliness is
profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. The word is (...), which properly
signifies right worship. This is profitable to all things, to the honor,
strength, wealth and peace of all men, (but I urge not much the etymology.)

Let no man think he shall lose when Christ gains; yet I hear men complain,
if this be the way which some aim at, and if the old Fabric stand not, I
shall lose much of mine honor, another cries I shall lose my power, another I
shall lose my revenewes: But let men distinguish betwixt losses real and
imaginary; it is not always loss to part with what we have enjoyed, 1. When we
had no propriety, or just title. 2. When the things did us good in show, but
hurt in truth. 3. When the thing is changed and made better. 4. The supposed
loss is recompensed by a greater good. I will not apply these now.


What? if things go on thus, or thus, must needs learning die for want of
relief? Shall contempt and poverty indeed cloth the Ministry? and cannot Gods
house and the Kings stand together? Did not the Temple and the Palace agree
well in Jerusalem? certainly Religion is the greatest gain and strongest
pillar of the State: For this puts all into their due order, and order gives
beauty and strength, and makes things most vigorous and lasting.

Therefore here is no just cause for carnal prudence to complain, or the
truly prudent to demur: but when God commands resolve and do it.

2 Unbelief comes in and will be heard; and this cries it is impossible: and
indeed if it can be made good that a thing is indeed impossible, the attempt of
it is unreasonable. This was Saul's plea to David to take him off from
encountering with Goliath, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine, to
fight with him, for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his
youth. 1 Samuel 17.33. And it is Christ's counsel to compare our power and our
work: Which of you intending to build a tower, sits not down first and
counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it, lest happily after
he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish, all that behold it,
begin to mock him. Luke 14.28, 29.

It Is good when men go to build an house for God, to see both their strength
and their weakness, you will thus find the work possible, and you may find
it difficult. But difficulties should add heat and height to Christian spirits:
Gods work is not to be sold for ease. If you think it impossible, you cannot
move with quietness, and vigor of intentions and endeavors. Number. 14.1.2. We
find the people in their travels, weeping, crying, murmuring, But for what? We
have the cause, Cap. 13.32. the spies cast the block of impossibility in their
way, for they said, We are not able to go up against the people, for they are
stronger then we.

Let it be considered how impertinent and unreasonable it is to object
impossibilities to Gods command.

2 Reason. Consider what resolution is. It Is a firm efficatious will, to
prosecute some thing as worthy and necessary. For where worth and necessity do
not enforce, the will is not bent.

Hence I infer, 1 That where men resolve not on Gods work, the vote of their
mind and thoughts is, that it is needless and worthless. And he cannot be
good that commands not good, so it amounts to a rejecting of God.

2 As resolution is from reason, so non-resolution, and reluctance; therefore
when God prevails not in his demands, something is at that time of more weight
with us then God.

3 When men purpose not, they want root to give life to their endeavors. For
resolution is the efficatious spring of action. A work undertaken without
resolution will want a twofold excellency:

1 It will not be complete; an arrow weakly shot, will fall short of the mark.

2 Nor constant: weak things are short lived.

3 Reason. God looks more at the will then the work.

For so much will, so much strength, and so much truth. What is obedience but an
act of the will? and by how much our actions exceed our wills, by so much the
more we are hypocrites in the things which we do.

Therefore I conclude this first branch of the point, that resolutions are
necessary to such whom God chooses to do his work.

The second branch is execution. This also is necessary when God calls to work,
it is not enough to resolve, but we must do it.

Reason 1. Else resolution is not only vain but hurtful, increasing our sin.
1. Because here, sin is against much light: the command must needs come with
much evidence when it wrappeth the will into such an height.

2 Against much engagement: For a resolution upon a command has the force of a
covenant. The covenant of eternal life is made by the tacit and inward working
of the will, which is the answer of a good conscience toward God. 1 Pet. 2.21.
By internal acts we speak to God, those silent motions are the language by
which we converse with God, as by words with men: men may pray when they say
nothing. And so they may promise to God when they only purpose, the yielding
of the heart to the command is speaking in effect: that in 1 Kings 5.5. I
purpose to build an house, is in the Hebrew, and in the margin, I say. So that
not to fulfill our purposes is to falsify our word with God. Purposes are
expressed by cleaving: Acts 11.23. Resolution in the things of God, is the
wedding and betroathing of the heart to them, therefore after to desert them,
is to be guilty of an unjust and violent divorce.

Reason 2. Not purposes, but actions are recompensed. Indeed where we have
after our purposes for God, either a discharge or a prohibition from God either
by 1 Word, or 2 Providence.

Leaving the thing clogged with impossibilities, there good purposes are
accepted though they be not acted: so it was in David's case. 2 Samuel 7. But
where we can, there, except we obey the command even to execution of it, God
will not recompense our purposes. Yea, we cannot make up our loss by
resolution, which we sustain by not acting. Therefore we when we resolve, must
perform the doing of it, that as there is a ready mind to will, so there may
be a performance also. 2 Cor. 8.11.

Reason 3. God purposes and does perform to us: Blessed be the Lord that has
given rest to his people Israel according to all that he promised, there has
not failed one word of all his good promise which he promised by the hand of
Moses his servant. 1 Kings 8.56. See how constant and punctual God is, and
what a perfect harmony betwixt his word and work, what he purposes he
completely performs. Joshua expresses it yet more fully: Not one thing has
failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you, all
are come to pass unto you, and not one thing has failed. Chap. 23.14.
Therefore we also should walk toward God with truth, aequablenesse, and
certainty.

Reason 4. What we purpose is either due to God or not; now there is no
question of the debt when God demands: and if it be due, it is injustice not to
perform, and its dangerous to run into debt when we have to pay. Therefore we
should say as David, I have sworn and I will perform it, etc. Psalm. 119.106.

Thus having run over the point, by demonstrating the necessity both of
resolution and execution, when we have a commission and charge to do for God,
I come to application.

I will take up this charge which David gave his son upon you. Its a like
season. A time of Parliament and solemn assembly as then; here is a like work
lying in your hands, that an house be built for the Lord; and you also have
commission; for the Lord has chosen you to build him an house, be strong
therefore and do it.

Suffer me here to speak a little of the work; Solomon was to build an house
for God, but that house was but a type of that which is now to be built. Your
work is to help that the Churches of Christ may be rightly framed and formed,
each Church is called an house of God. 1 Timothy 3.15.

God has three houses. 1 Celestial, built for the Saints by himself, Heb.
11.10.

2 Mystical, invisible, built by himself for himself. Ephesians. 2. etc.

3 Instituted, visible, built for himself and the Saints, that in it they
might enjoy each other.

This is compared to an house, in respect of constitution. end.


1 For constitution: as in an house there is 1 qualification of matter. 2
Combining and knitting it together;

So in a Church there must be 1 matter qualified, and prepared for such ends
to which a Church is appointed: it must be of that nature as may be apt to knit
with the building, and to contribute something to it. Its preposterous and
unreasonable to heap on promiscuously stones and straw, stubble and timber,
without judgment of the fitnes of the matter to conduce to the common frame.
When at the temple, the materials were prepared before it was brought thither,
so that there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the
house while it was in building. 1 Kings 6.7. so in this spiritual Temple, the
building should consist of persons fitted for it, they should be living stones,
1 Pet. 2.5.

All societies are composed with choice, the members of them are such as agree
in the same common nature, and in the same fundamental laws of that society.
So ecclesiastical bodies are to consist of congruous matter; it is the rule of
all other bodies, whether natural, or civil. Not that Churches have a power
of infallible judgment, not infallibility but wisdom with love is required
in their judgment of persons to be admitted: they must be such of whom we may
be able to say of them as the Apostle of the Philippians, of whom he said, It
is meet for me to think this of you all. Phil. 1.7.

2 A Church is a combined company: for many without conjunction are a multitude
not a corporation. As many stones and timbers are a heap, but not an house
except they be fitted and joined together: as a natural body is a multitude in
which the members by conjunction become one, so is the Church: from the head
all the body is by joints and bands knit together, Col. 2.19. And in Christ the
Church is said to be built together to be an habitation for God. Ephesians. 2.22.

These bands are either such as tie to Christ the head and the foundation,
faith and the spirit. This makes members of the Church Catholic, which is
called the general assembly, Heb. 12.23. consisting of all Saints in heaven
and in earth, Ephesians 1.10. which is called the whole family in heaven and earth,
Ephesians. 3.15.

Or they are such as tie the Saints among themselves, as in a building the
materials are not only knit to the foundation but to themselves. These ties
are (1) such as constitute a Church, i. e. consent to live together in
communion. There is no other way imaginable by which diverse persons can be
either one family, or one City, or one kingdom, which never were one, but by
consent; and how should diverse persons who before were free, come to have any
justly exercising any power among them, but by consent? This therefore must be
the bond to knit diverse Saints into one body. And a Church must be knit
together, else it will be but a casual loose company without order and rule.
When it is orderly gathered and composed, it becomes an house to Christ, for
his instituted worship, though not only as the mystical Church is for natural
worship. (2) Such as do conserve; i.e. mutual love, which is the bond of
perfectness. Col. 3.14. This preserves the unity, peace, and order of a Church.

Secondly, as the Church is called the house of God in respect of constitution,
so also in respect of the end.

1 For his dwelling. In Christ ye are knit together for an habitation of God
through the spirit, Ephesians. 2.21. Though he fill all places, yet his presence is
with the Churches with more complacence; The Lord has chosen Sion, he has
desired it for his habitation, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for
I have desired it, Psalm. 131.13, 14. He dwelt in Jerusalem the shadow of these
Churches, out of choice, and with a doubled desire, I have desired it, I have
desired it.

And as he dwells here with complacence, so with beneficence; I will abundantly
bless her provision, I will satisfy her poor with bread, I will also cloth
her Priests with salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy. ver.
15.16. Plenty and safety is promised to Churches, so much as to cause the
greatest joy. In these societies it is where God commands the blessing and
life for evermore, Psalm. 131.3.

2 For his honor: poor men's houses are for necessity, but great men and
Princes have houses for honor also: Kings have 1. houses of judgment, where
they exercise justice and judgment. So is the Church, the place of the power
and judgment of Christ: it is called his throne, Jerem. 3.17. which is the seat
of honor and majesty.

2 Kings have their treasuries, Esaias 39.2. In which they keep their treasure,
which is the glory of Kings. And the Church is called the house of Gods glory.
Esaias 60.7. The place where he lays his precious treasures.

3 They have their armories; the Church also is Gods military house: here are
those spiritual weapons which are mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4. His Saints
have here those arms by which they defend themselves in their spiritual
warfare, and obtain great conquests against the world, against their lusts,
and Satan's power.

Much should be said concerning the order and government of this house, but
time fails.

This then (oh ye worthies) is the house which must be built, you are chosen
of God, and us all, to put your hands to this great and desired work; take
heed what you do, because you are in stead of the nation, so that what you
do is national. I shall speak to you in the words which Jehosophat spoke to
the Judges. Take heed what you do, for you judge not for man but for the Lord,
who is with you in the judgment, wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be
upon you, take heed and do it, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Take heed that no model be
commended or commanded by you, but what you have from the Lord. It was a
gracious commission and license which Artaxerxes gave the Jews. What shall
seem good to thee and to thy brethren, that do after the will of your God,
Ezr. 7.18. Whatsoever is commanded of the God of heaven, let it be diligently
done, for the house of the God of heaven, for why should there be wrath against
the Realm of the King and his sons? ver. 23.

You see your work, resolve therefore and do it. But let me tell you what
kind of resolutions you must have.

1 Firm. I have great boldness to press this, for we have rich and joyful
experience of your courage, patience, and long suffering. And you have showed
more zeal for God then ever yet appeared in all your predecessors. And we
cannot but say with Ezra, Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put
such a thing as this into your hearts to beautify his house, Cap. 7.27. We
are free from fears of you, that it should be with Christ's servants as it is
said of some, that they are men in the onset, and women in the mayn fight; as
rash spirits use to be, like some creatures which quickly lose their sting and
grow dull. Maintain your resolutions. You have cause; for,

1 The work is great. It is for God, and for the erecting of the house and
throne of Christ, and for the redeeming of captivated truths, captivated
ordinances, and captivated Saints. Men venture hard for great things. You
cannot have greater things to cause you to quit your selves like men. Ulysses
went back to the Cyclops den to fetch his cap and girdle; put on courage to
redeem from the Cyclopean power that which is the glory of Christ, the blessing
of the Land, the crown of Majesty, and the joy of the Saints. The Heathen
were very zealous for their Country and their Gods. Aeneas left his goods, yea,
his father, to carry out his gods in a time of danger, and for this had the
name of Pius Aeneas. When once the Capitol was in danger by a siege, because
their bows wanted strings, the women to preserve their gods, cut off their
hair to make strings. Is not our God better then these? Shall we not be as
stout for Christ as they for idols? The peace and welfare of many thousands
depends upon your resolute prosecution of this matter. And not only we that
now live, but succeeding ages shall bless you, your names shall be as a
precious ointment to the children, yea, the childrens children yet unborne.
According to that in Psalm. 102.18. This shall be written for the generation to
come, and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

2 Your and our adversaries were resolute in their season, no relation, worth,
entreaties, mediations, submissions, laws, nor any thing could mollify their
spirits, or stop the torrent of their cruelties; they went on without fear.
And now consider, had not they a harder pull then you, that did work against
God and man? what is their fruit but shame? but the recompense of your
faithful service shall be your eternal glory with God and man.

3 Its high time to resolve. Are not things bad enough yet? Then stand still
and see the sad remains of religion, and your brethrens lives utterly consumed
before your eyes. Cast your eyes upon the house of God among us. What
darkness, what pollution, what tyranny dwells here? Look not with a general
but a distinct view on this house: Behold,

1. The matter of it. Is it not an uncomely confused heap, of stubble, and
straw, and wood, and silver, and gold? our own houses are built with more
judgment and choice. I have feared lest our judgment should have been that
of the outward Court, Apoc. 11.2. to be left out, and given to the Gentiles to
be trodden under foot, for we have been like it, all sorts have been received
without difference.

2. Behold the order of the house, shall I speak of this before you? Then see
1 the rulers. Their conversation is in your eye and hand, but take in their
Commission also. Who sent them? see if those arguments which we use against
the papal power, turn not as darts into their breasts. Certainly their title
is best at lowest. Its safest for them to claim it from the earth, lest by
letting that go to claim it from heaven, they prove to be like Icarus, who by
soaring too high did melt his wings, and was drowned in the Deeps. Camelus
cornua quaerens amisit aures, The Camel seeking horns lost his ears. And they
cannot justly complain if they fall in the suit, because they rely upon a
forged title.

2 See their government. Has it not been like the Sive or Bolter which
retains the Branne, and works out the flower? are not the best things, and
persons cast forth, and the worst retained? yea, and because we had not evils
enough (which yet did grieve and press the spirits of thousands) what
superinductions of evil upon evil have we had? altars, bowings, etc. Yet all
were brought in with color of order, decency, devotion. But they were like
those Mice, and Emeraulds of gold which the Philistines offered with the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.4. I assure you I love not invectives, nor is any thing more contrary to
my spirit, nor would I say this, but that if we be silent, their dead
inventions would outcry us and condemn us.

They pretended Religion in all, and zeal for God, and obtruded them as if
they had had the broad seal of heaven for them; As Rabsecah called those
idolatrous Altars which Hezekiah took away, the Lords altars, Es. 36.7. The
Jews Groves were called Ashera, a name importing happiness, but its an
antiphrasis, as the Oestrich is called Chasida, Job 39. And as lucus a non
lucendo, mons a non movendo: I should not speak but that I am constrained. Dant
animum ad libere loquendum ultimae miseriae, Live. Extreme miseries make men
not afraid to speak freely. Be not always (oh ye worthies) spectators and
partners in these calamities. Is it not time to lay it to heart, and to keep
it there, till the full sense of these evils cause you to be sick, and to
vomit them up for ever? Is the house of God right, where oppression is in
power, superstition in credit, luxury and idleness in favor, ignorance
loved, pride fostered, profaneness allowed, negligence harbored,
covetousness cherished? How think you? will our God longer abide such an
habitation, where his servants, children, ordinances are cast out? Me thinks
the voice of our great ones has been like that of the heathen, Exeant
Christiani, exeant Christiani, let the Christians go out. As it is said of
Jeroboam, so it is true of them, He drove Israel from following the Lord, and
made them sin a great sin, 2 Kings 17.21. Avolare fecit, He made them fly
away from the Lord. Oh what sin has been by their counsel, example, hires,
fears, laws? Others that would not fly from the Lord, have fled from their
Country, to seek that in a strange land which they could not, but ought to
have had at home. Hagar the bondwoman, and her children were in possession, but
the free woman and her children either in persecution at home, or in exile
abroad. And was that trash which they have brought in, a fit price for the
peace of our consciences, the sweetness of our estates, friends, and Country?
Will you then in zeal for God, and pity to your brethren and to your selves,
take up a resolution to vindicate our injuries and their insolences? Be strong
and do it.

2 As your resolutions must be firm, so they must be spiritual. From higher
principles then humane prudence. Our evils are sore grievances indeed, yet
more afflictive to our consciences then to our senses. Look on them not only as
pressures on us but as sins against God, ease us by righting him; lest you be
found to work for your selves and not for him; Then men serve Christ indeed,
when they make him, not only the exemplary cause, but the final. Do what you
do not because you must only, both in prudence and in conscience, but do it
for his glory: as David and Solomon in building the house intended the name of
the great God, 1 Kings 8.17. 2 Chronicles. 2.1, 4. Spiritual ends are most noble
and most strong.

3 They must be willing: it is true there can be no resolutions simply
unwilling: But acts of the will are either mixed, or mere. Mixed are such wherein
upon different respects the will hangs both ways; so a man may upon some
reason resolve on that which he fully abhors, as in a gangraene to endure
the excision of a limb. But to resolve thus for God, is rather to be patients
then agents for him, its rather to be sick of God then true to him. Labor for
David's spirit, who set his affection to the building of the house, 1 Chronicles.
29.3.

Be not only subject to God but zealous for him. It was David's temper who was
the type. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up, Psalm. 69.9. And Christ's
temper who is the substance, Ioh. 2.17. work as friends. If it be only in
your heads it will vanish, but the impressions of love are deep: Say with
Moses, The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation, he is
my God and I will prepare him an habitation, Exodus 15.2. Zeal will make you
men of might, and your counsels and endeavors as an arrow shot from a strong
arm which returns not empty.

4 Speedy. For,

1 It Is the greatest work you have to do. Therefore give it priority. quick
dispatch.


I know you are wise, I prescribe not an absolute order. Important things are
often respectively such: A less thing in it self may be at some time of
greatest importance, and of right should be first admitted. Do what you can.
Christ will be content to stay till you can do his business. But still mind
this, and aim at this, and do all in order to this. I may say to you as David
to Ahimelech, The Kings business requires haste, 1 Samuel 21.8. Do things in
Christ's order, Seek first the Kingdom of heaven. You may mind your own
houses, but not too much, say with David, See now I dwell in an house of Cedar,
but the Ark of God dwells within curtains, 2 Samuel 7.2. God stands much upon
time, and expects to be first served. Therefore he chides the Jews, and sorely
punishes them for breach of this order. Is it time for you, oh ye, to dwell
in your seiled houses, and this house lie wast? Hag. 1.4. It Is an angry speech.
Other causes may and must wayt, say to them as Nehemiah when he was building
an house for God. I am doing a great work so that I cannot come down, why
should the work cease while I leave it and come down to you? chap. 6.3. I
confess, that things that are first in intention are last in execution, but
then they are still moving till they come to perfection.

2 Delays are dangerous. For, 1 affections may cool, the best may and the
rest will. Some men are hot as fire, others as iron, rather heated then hot,
take the season and strike while the iron is hot. God sometimes for some
opportunity of service gives a fervor of spirit, but if the lock of opportunity
be cut off, you will as Sampson lose your strength and become like other men
Judge. 15.5.17.

2 Rubs rise by delays. A subtle enemy, if he have but the only advantage
of time, will gain much even in a desperate cause. And they say the bitings of
dying beasts are most deadly.

3 We are speedy with God: Lord heal her now, says Moses, Numb. 12.13. And
David cries for haste, Oh my strength haste thee to help me, Psalm. 22.19. And
God does make haste to our good, Es. 16.5. For love is quick.

4 God has stayed long.

5 Unanimous. Let there be none adverse. slothful. unfaithful. fearful.


You have the honor, and we the happiness of a blessed conspiration of your
hearts and hands hitherto. Be still one, and more one; That you may meet as
many streams in one channel, and prove a conquering torrent. Sands are small
things, yet being united they can break the proudest ships.

Christ is among you, and knows whose hearts are with him, he sees and
hears all your counsels, motions, debates, and votes. He will say to the
faithful, Well done good and faithful servant; but to others, had it not been
for thee, such a cause of mine had prospered, such servants of mine relieved,
my house had been built but thy hand was against it. By how much the greater
you are, by so much the more you owe; let it not be said of you, others were
willing, but their nobles put not their necks to the work of the Lord. Nehem.
3.5.

I draw to an end. To quicken you to the work, Consider. You may do this
thing. Christ may have his house built. You have power of 1 Ability. 2
Authority. You cannot think our present discipline is by divine law, then you
may remove, except you think it most convenient. But how is that convenient,
which Ministers, good men, bad men, almost all men have complained of? You may
by your power make it necessary, but it will never be convenient, and how ill
will the oxen draw when their yoakes gall them? You have seen the experience
of this discipline, these rites and orders for many years.

You may do worthily for God and for your brethren; you are the fountain of
law. When a beast knows his strength he will not serve but rule, our
adversaries did so. Do you see now, Say as Maximinus, by how much the greater
I am, by so much the more I will do. They say there is a fish that has a
sword but no heart; but I hope better things of you.

The work is not so hard as many either out of needless fear, or craft do
pretend.

1 You have many friends. The Saints at home and abroad that wast themselves in
prayer for you, that bless you with Judah his blessing, Let his hands be
sufficient for him, and be thou an help to him from his enemies. Deuteronomy. 33.7.
Yea, God is with you. As Moses said of Acher, There is none like unto the God
of Jeshurun, who rides upon the heaven in thy help. ver. 26.

2 Matter is ready for the building: when Solomon built his Temple, he sent for
his precious stones from Arabia, for Cedars from Lebanon, for gold from Ophyr,
for spices from Sheba and Arabia. But here is all ready: England is as Lebanon,
your Cedars are at hand ready hewed, and want only laying into the building.

3 You shall be at no charge. Solomon's Temple was very costly, you need part
with nothing for this work; we shall be no losers in any thing but sin and
sorrow. It may be the fall of the old frame may hurt some, as the house which
Sampson pulled down which killed some of the Lords of the Philistines, Judge.
16.30.

Truly they have put you to grind their grist, but they have not put out your
eyes, you need not to be led to the pillars of their house. Therefore do
valiantly for your selves, your people, and your God. Expect their anger;
Luther found it, Erasmus gives the reason, for he meddled with the Popes Miter
and the Monks bellies.

In a word, as you may do it, do it for it is expected; of God, of man, good
men, your friends, your friends afflicted long and sore. Let me add but these
two Counsels.

1 Do it well. Do your work thoroughly. Let the building be complete, Cast out
all the rubbish, for we may say as they, There is much rubbish, so that we are
not able to build, Nehem. 4.10. Ordinances are best when purest: aim high,
Altius ibunt qui ad summum nituntur. Hitherto the work has been done by the
halfes. Our forefathers intended that which is reserved for you. Better our
burdens were increased then only eased, for extreme evils enforce relief.

2 Do it now. For,

1 It has bin long expected, with prayers, tears, groans, and if Gods house
be now built, we shall be as those that dream; and say wondering as he, What
has God wrought, Numb. 23.23. We shall joy in our God as they when the
foundation of the temple was laid, Ezr. 3.10, 11.

2 God shakes the old building, by discovering the abominations thereof, and by
a miraculous turn upon the peoples spirits; Do not they cry, down with it,
down with it? And vox populi est vox Dei.

3 God has built your houses: they did not long since shake as in an
earthquake, you know not what batteries were laid against them, but you are now
in peace.

4 You may want another season; and may never see Gods house nor enjoy your
own: remember Christ's words to them, when he saw the City and wept over it,
Saying, if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace; but now are they hid from thine eyes. For the
days shall come upon thee that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee,
and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side; and shall lay thee
even with the ground, and thy children within thee, and they shall not leave in
thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not the day of thy
visitation. Luke 19.41, 42, 43, 44.

5 This is the time.

1 Gods time is the present time.

2 A season of mercy. God is doing good, take therefore the opportunity. Say as
David, He that has delivered me from the Lion and the Bear, shall deliver
me out of the hands of this uncircumcised Philistine.

3 It Is like now the set time of God is come for the fall of Babel, and the
reformation and deliverance and enlargement of the Churches of Christ. In the
12 of Dan. we have a Prophecy of the deliverance of Israel: The time of it is
in ver. 11. From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
abomination that makes desolate set up, There shall be a 1290 days, i.e.
years. This seems to be in Julian the Apostates time, who about 360 years
after Christ, would have had the Jewish Temple built, which is the abomination,
and the abomination of desolation: for God did destroy it with terrible
storms, and fires, with the builders, And the Jews were after in greater
calamity then before. There is no time so like to be the time which Daniel
meant, as this; For we know no memorable thing of this kind among the Jews,
but in Antiochus his time, and in Titus Vespasian his days; but if you add to
those times the number of 1290 years, the days are long since expired;
therefore it must be a time which may with addition of these numbers make the
thing yet to come. And so with this way of account Master Brightman and others
also do accord; for if you add 1290 to 360, in which time the abomination of
desolation was, it casts the beginning of the accomplishment of this Prophecy,
upon the 1650 year: so that the time of their deliverance is not far off. But
Rome must fall before that. Therefore I conclude, that this is an hopeful
season. Take heed of delays. God was angry because they said, The time is not
come, the time that the Lords house should be builded, Hag. 1.2. Therefore they
could not prosper; but as soon as they began, then God said, From this day
will I bless you, Hag. 2.19.

I will now say no more but what David said to Solomon, Be strong and of a good
courage, and do it. Fear not, nor be dismayed, for the Lord God, even my God,
will be with thee, he will not fail thee nor forsake thee, until thou have
finished all the work for the service of the house of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29.20.

FINIS.

