A LETTER FROM Captain RICHARD SVVANLEY, TO The Right Honorable, THE EARL OF
WARWICK.

BEING A full Relation of the taking of the Town and Castle of Cardigan in
Wales, by Major General Laugharne, with above an hundred Commanders and common
Soldiers, and all the Arms and Ammunition therein.

ALSO The taking of the Irish Commissioners at Sea (that were going from the
King in to Ireland) by Capt. Coachman, who are to be sent up to the Parliament;
a List of whose names are here inserted.

Published by Authority.

LONDON Printed for John Thomas. 1645.

A Letter sent to the Right Honorable, the Earl of Warwick, from Captain
Richard Swanley.
Right Honorable,
SInce my last of the 20. of November by Captain Green in the Doggerboat, Major
General Laugharne keeping the Field, with such Forces as the indigencie of the
County gave a possibility of subsistence, pretending for Carmarthen, lying
still, working by double policy, to draw the hearts of the inhabitnnts of
Cardiganshire to the State, and the Force of Carmarthen with their adherents,
into the said town, for their defense, and the indemnity of their adjacent
Garrisons, opportunely rise and advanced from his Quarters to the town of
Cardigan, where the Country, formerly invited, made a party to assist the
General, to complete the design in agitation, and the town (faced at
distance) willingly surrendered and complied; the Castle (being a considerable
place, ably manned, having the ordnance of the Convert-Frigot, there
shipwrackt) most obstinately held out, til a Demi-Culverin of brass, belonging
to the Leopard, was mounted, and played three days upon them, forcing a
breach, which was gallantly entered and made good by our party, and the Castle
stormed, wherein were 100. Commanders and Soldiers, with their Arms and good
plunder; not forgetting the Converts Ordnance, returned by divine providence,
and works of mercy in a Commander, adding honor to acts of chivalry, invited
the General to give the Steward life, who contemned quarter. The town and
castle reduced, and the Country in the major part (as conceived) well-affected,
our Army are advancing toward Newcastle, the enemies next Garrison, which (as
conceived) will be slighted or acquitted by the Enemy, and that County brought
to a right understanding of their duties, and Parliamentary just and honorable
proceedings: to God be rendered the due praises of his mercies. Vessels of late
have been designed to the well-affected Garrisons in Ireland, but none (in regard
of contrary winds) returned; and Shipping to ply up the channel as high as
Miniard have also been commissionated to give intelligence and assistance to
our Forces in those parts: Sir THOMAS MIDDLETONS Magazine of Ammunition since
disposed of to Leverpoole. Nothing that integrity and action may add life to
the public good, shall by Gods assistance, be wanting, and my faithful
endeavors shall comply with your Honors great trust, whose happiness shall
ever consist, my very good Lord, to be

1. Jan. 1644. Your most humble, and faithful servant, Rich. Swanley.

Postscript.
My Lord,
IN the night of this date, arrived Captain Coachman, in the True-love, from
Leverpool, Colonel Moors Letter from thence directed to me J have herewith
presented, who brought in the Content-prize with the passengers, as per list: J
have included a paper that from Dublin came to hand, to whom J can yield no
compliance, for want of Ammunition. Pray take present order to supply me with
Ammunition, and all stores, otherwise J shall burden the State, and be disable
to do service.

A List of tie Passengers names, taken in the Content-prize bound for Dublin,
by Captain Coachman in the True-love.
The Lord Brabison. Sir Henry Tichborne. Sir James Ware. M. Thomas Wakefield.
M. Robert Price. M. Thomas Williams. M. John Smith. M. Alexander Nugent. M.
Richard Holland. M. Patrick Pue. with their servants.
All which are to be sent to the State, in the Honor, by Captain Seaman,
being of considerable force, with the first convenience.

FINIS.

