THE SVCKLINGTON FACTION: OR (SVCKLINGS) Roaring Boys.
Much meat: cloth gluttony produce.
And makes a man a swine --
But he is a temperate man indeed
That with a leaf can dine --
He needs no napkin for his hands
His fingers for to wipe
He has his kitchen in a box
His Roast meat in a pipe


HEre sits the prodigal Children, the younger brothers (Luke 15. 12.) acting
ye parts of hot-spur Cavaliers and disguised ding-thrifts, habiting themselves
after the fashions of the world, as one that is to travail into a far
Country. Nisi hominibus placuerit Deus, non erit eorum, Deus. Because his
father humors him not, with the Idolatrous Ceremonies to follow Popish
Innovations, he becomes an errand Peripateticke, flying in a dudgeon and
discontent from Gods household, and consequently from the Almighties direction
and protection. Not having God for his guide, he has the Devil to his
conducter, walking now not only after the lufts of the flesh, and of his mind,
fulfilling the desires of both; but after the Prince of the air, the spirit
that now works in the children of disobedience. With the debaucht Gallants of
these lascivious and loose-living times, he draws his Patrimony through his
throat, bequeathing the creatures to consumption for consummation of his
intemperate voracity, delicate luxury, and wastfull prodigality, spending all
either upon his belly or his back, following the proud, apish, anticke, and
disguised fashions of the times, to present himself a painted Puppet on the
stage of vanity.

Alia, vina, Venus, tribus his sum factus egenus. What with wine and women,
horses, hounds, and whores, dancing, dicing, drabbing, drinking, may the
prodigal man say: I am brought unto a morsel of bread, yea unto the very
husks of Swine. Pride of spirit makes him to scorn an Alehouse, and therefore
with greater eagerness he daily haunts Tavernes: where sometimes he sits by
his liquor, and blood of the Vine, and the spirits of the Celler, exhausting,
and infusing them unto mad ebriety: thus drinking ad modum sine mensura, whole
ones, by measure without measure, like the Elephant through the juice of
Mulberries, he is enraged unto blood, and most damnable resolutions and
designs, terminated in the death and destruction of the next man he meets,
that never did, neither thought him harm. Or having a noise of renegado
Fiddlers, Musicke-abusers, they with him, and he with them, sings and danceth,
danceth and sings like a Nightingale Vox est and praetevea nihil.
, or Canarie bird. He is profuse and lavish. -- Donec dec^ptus and exspes,
Necquicquam fundo suspiret nummus in imo.


Never sparing till all be spent, dancing, and drinking away both wit and
wealth. Now he acts his ryots, anon his revels, and forthwith ferries to a
Playhouse, or Bawdyhouse, where the woman with the attire of an harlot kissing
him, allures this simple sot, void of understanding, to solace himself, (ver.
18.) and take his fill of love until the morning. Lust leads him to
dalliance, till a dart (Ver. 23.) strike through his liver, until he be cast
down and wounded, yea and slain by her.

This notorious good fellow (corruptly so called) being a confederate of the
Greeks, Titeretu's, or joviall roaring Boys, is of the Poets mind, when he
said;

Foecundi calices quem non fecer^ disertum? Whom has not wine made witty? He
drinks that he may be eloquent and facete, after his cup of nimis, he harps on
Barnabies Hymn, or Bacchus his inebriating Catch, bousing verily, and chanting
on this wise merrily:

Aesculapi tandem sapi,
quid medelas blateras?
Mithridatum est potatum
inter vini pateras.
Ad liquores and humores
tandum crescunt salices
Si quis aegrotet, mox epotet
december vini calices.
Quiemblema, aut poema
vult acute texere,
Ordiatur, vino satur,
and uvarum nectare.
Nil acute, nil argute,
dictum sine dolio;
Audivi sales, nunquam tale^
ac in aenopolio.
Quorsum plura, haec figarae
satis rem nobilitat:
Vas rotundum totum mundum
plene consignificat.
These are children of spiritual fornication, such as go a Whoring from God
after the idols of their own brains: Hos. 1. 2. such are superstitious
Romanists, tutoured by their Ghostly Fathers, to believe in gross as the
Church believes, which (as Luther says) is gross Divininity. These fall not
only from piety to impuritie, but also from Christian verities, to
Antichristian vanities, foppe^ies, and trumperies.

FINIS.
Printed in the Year, MDC. XLI.


