A Loyal Subjects Belief, EXPRESSED IN A LETTER TO Master STEPHEN MARSHALL,
Minister of Finchingfield in Essex, from EDWARD SYMMONS a neighbor Minister,
occasioned by a conference betwixt them. WITH The Answer to his Objections for
resisting the Kings Personal will by force of Arms. AND, The Allegation of
some Reasons why the Authors Conscience cannot concur in this way of
resistance with some of his Brethren.

1 COR. 4.2. It is required in Stewards that every one be found faithful.

ROMANS 14.12. For we shall all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ.

Oxford, Printed for VV. Webb. M.DC.XLIII.

TO MY REVEREND BRETHREN OF THE MINISTRY, and the rest of my Christian friends
and acquaintance, in the Counties of Essex and Hartford, Grace and Peace in
Jesus Christ be multiplied.
Reverend and welbeloved,
THese uncharitable times have made a breach in our holy Communion, a
separation of me from the acquaintance of some of you, because I dare not serve
them: insomuch that I may say with the Prophet, I am become a stranger unto my
Brethren, my lovers and friends stand afar off, they will not know me; it is
counted a prime note of a Malignant to be seen speaking to me, and yet (you
know) I have been some body heretofore, as well as some of you: O but the
report goes, I am now grown an Apostate; and why so? because I am (still the
same man) obstinate in my way, will not conform to the example of such and
such of my worthy Brethren, preach to promote the war (as they call it) for
the Parliament. Sirs, I am a Minister of the Gospel of Peace, and it is against
my calling and my conscience to do so, the Kings express command also being
to the contrary: I may loose my credit, mine outward estate, the comfort of
wife and children (as I have already done,) yea and my life too, which is (in
mercy) yet preserved; but I am resolved by Gods grace to keep my Conscience;
the enemy shall not spoil me of that, let him do his worst. Truly (friends) I
must confess, like you, I have always loved my credit well (and perhaps too
well) with the people; but when my Saviors truth conjoined with my Sovereigns
honor came in question, I was glad I had loved it so well, and kept it entire
till then, to sacrifice in that quarrel. What I am, you know; and what my
Doctrine and conversation has been: Had it been formerly bad, my self in
these times had fared better, for I was plainly told at the beginning of my
troubles, that I must suffer the punishment of an hundred knaves, because being
an honest man, I did more hurt to the cause then so many: which since then I
have found true, be your selves the Judges, and say, whether you know any in
these Counties that were marked for scandalous, lazy, or superstitious, and
complained of, as such, that have suffered in any measure so much as I: first
hear, and then determine.

The Apostle says, Receive not an accusation against an Elder, but by the
testimony of two or three witnesses, yet upon the bare information of one
malicious varlet One Samuel ^^rrowes, some ^nes of Col^ester, brother (...)
Master Bur^wes the Mi^ster.
(whom many of you know to be most notorious for false swearing, public
drunkenness, and blasphemy, for which the last year at the public Sessions
he was bound to his good behavior:) I was voted a Delinquent by some of the
Members of the House of Commons, and published in a Diurnall over the Nation,
to preach such foolish stuff, which none (I hope) that know me, suspect of me:
hereupon being sent for by a Messenger, and committed to custody, I was at last
referred to the Committee for scandalous Ministers, that so I might afterward
be reckoned in that number, and disabled thereby from doing Christ any more
service: (for a Minister marked with that badge by them (they call the
Parliament) is more odious then he that is made such a one by sin or Satan:)
so that when I returned home, the drunken Crew (whose vicious lives I had often
inveighed against) and their children too; would point at me as I went in the
streets, and say, there goes a scandalous Minister, there goes he that was in
the Jail, with his fellow Rogues the other day.

After this, when by Master Marshall's friendship and testimony of me, I
obtained to put in Bail, I was forced to make many journeys this last
wintertime to London (being almost forty miles from mine habitation) for
preaching against Lying and Slandering, Pride and Malice, sins notorious in
my neighbors, who had now got the trick (because all was believed against me
which they said) to affirm, that whatever I preached was against the
Parliament, so making that and their own sins all one, (for that indeed was
able to do me more hurt then they:) and though I never failed upon the least
intimation to appear, yet I was sent for again by a Pursevant, (as if I had
not been bailed) because that was most chargeable, whereby a great part of
that little money which in ten years space I had saved to keep my wife and
children (if I should die) was expended.

And now at last when it was perceived, that neither by threats, nor
molestations, nor charges, nor weary journies, I would be forced to deny the
truth of God, my debauched adversary (knowing as should seem the intentions of
his powerful friends) laid wagers, that he would quite put me by from
preaching, and turn me out of my Living; wherefore having forced many of my
simple people to make a purse to bear his charges, (by threatening them else
with plundering, and the imputation of being counted Cavaliers) he repaires
again unto London, and on the third of March in the name not only of the
Commons, but also of the Lords, (before whom I never appeared, nor was ever
summoned) he obtained a Sequestration to be granted to some others, (my deadly
enemies of his own knot) to seize upon my Parsonage-House, Glebe, and Tithes,
and a power withal to apprehend my person to do with me God knows what: And
(as the words of the Sequestration are) for the better supply of an able and
godly man in the Church, they sent down a stranger to officiate as Parson in
my place, whom they call a godly, learned, and orthodox Divine, intimating
thereby unto the world, that he whom they cast out was not to be accounted any
such a one: what I am or have been (my Christian friends) I refer to your
judgments who have known me; I thank God I am able to say with the Apostle,
I have walked in all good conscience both before God and man unto this day; I
have constantly preached twice upon the Lords day, and often on Holidays when I
could entreat my people to come to Church: But if that their godly, learned,
and orthodox Divine be such a one as is their Lecturer, whom in despite of me
they did (in the beginning of my troubles) set up to preach against Gods truth,
and me in mine own Church, I think they will have (amongst them that are wise
and godly) but little credit by him.

Concerning which Lecturer One Lemuell Tuke.
some of you (my Christian friends) did at first conceive and say of him, that
had he been good, the barren Country from whence he came would not have parted
with him: in brief by education he is a Weaver, of no University, yet one that
has a charge of souls in Notttinghamshire, from which ever since the
Parliament began, he has been a constant Non-resident, for his Parish then
framed a Bill against him to the House of Commons, articling him to be
negligent, and insufficient in his place, to be guilty of Barrettry and
Battery, to be famed of Drunkenness, Whoredom, and diverse other such (as they
are now accounted in some) small offenses; upon which he fled the Country into
our parts, and being more suitable to the temper of my people then I am, they
made choice of him: among whom he blasphemeth Gods holy Word, preaches
Sedition and Rebellion, tells in the Pulpit many foolish lies and ridiculous
tales, bawleth against the Reverend and Learned Ministers of the Country, and
raileth upon the Worshipful Gentry; and so many ways he poysoneth the souls
of them that are committed to my Cure, which is my greatest grief of all. But
the Lord I hope will not lay to the charge of his poor persecuted Minister the
damage that is thus done unto the spirits of his people; for God himself
knows that I offered the Chaire-man of the Committee (my drunken Adversaries
fast friend) to keep a Lecture my self on the week day, if any did desire
it, rather then have my flock defiled with such seditious and wicked
Doctrines, as I knew that Lecturer would teach among them. My reverend Brethren
and friends, some of you thought me much abused by the intrusion of him: I
doubt not but you think me in your hearts more wronged now, by being after all
those former troubles turned out of my Living, my Wife, Children, and aged
Parent exposed to the wide world, and my self forced to seek safety in
strange places by flying: but blessed be God yet, my flight was not in the
Winter.

Sed quid mali feci, What Law of God or man is it that I have broken, which
does expose me to these miseries? O that some would discover unto me my
transgressions, for as yet I am (to my knowledge) a Delinquent, upon no other
ground then the bare accusation and word of my enemy: when ten of my neighbors
sufficiently furnished with evil affections, were sent for up against me, they
were not able to speak me culpable in any thing, save in the matter of my God;
and when I urged them before the Committee and spectators, to say, whether they
ever heard me speak word of evil against the Parliament in public or
private, they could not say it; nor deny, but I constantly prayed for it; only
my chief adversary said in behalf of himself and the rest, We think that in
his preaching he meant the Parliament; and because my enemies did think so,
some of the Members (as it should seem) did think so too; whose thoughts (in
such a case) it is not comely for me to gainsay.

I dealt ingenuously before the Committee, relating the truth of what I had
preached, (although I might easily suspect, that some passages in regard of the
malignity of the times, might prove to my disadvantage) with which my candor
and plainness diverse honorable Members of the Committee were so well pleased,
that they concluded to have me reported to the House as a man deserving their
favor: but as appears, (unknowing I believe to them in particular) some
others did intend, and have now done otherwise; for five months after (as if I
had never answered at all) this The Copy of which Sequestration is at the end
of this Book.
Sequestration against me comes forth, wherein are some expressions alleged
(that I should use in those my Sermons) as the cause of this my punishment,
which are now shown up and down to justify the pretended equity of the same;
but they are so false and so foolish, that I need not confute them to you that
know me: or indeed, were they all true of me, I believe you would say, if you
durst speak, that my penalty exceeds my sin.

In the seven first Sections of this following Discourse, which is the pith of
some 8 Sermons preached in the months of June and July last, when my Troubles
first begun, you shall see the truth of God which I suffer for: and that you
may not tax me of folly for preaching this truth, at this time when it is so
much discountenanced, I will breifely tell you the occasion that moved me to it.

I conceived that the House of Commons (when they set forth the Protestation)
did foresee, that the Doctrine established in this Church of England, The Kings
Person, Honor, and estate, the Power and Privilege of Parliament, were or
would be in some special danger, or damage, now more then formerly they had
been, and therefore did thereby provide that we should engage our selves to
defend them: and for my part I was real in what I did, having taken the same I
truly endeavored in my calling to keep it; and therefore when I saw people
inclining to rebellion and strife, I declared that, to be rather the doctrine
of Antichrist and Popery, then of the Church of England, which taught peace and
commanded patience: this presently purchased me the suspicion, and soon after
the name of a Malignant: Secondly, hearing men unreverently speak of the Kings
Majesty's person, I opposed that blasphemy by Gods Word, and endeavored to
maintain his Honor according to my duty and Protestation: this produced me
the title of a Royallist, yea of a rank Cavaleer, and I should have a Buffe
Coat and a Scarlet pair of Hose bought me presently to make me complete. And
then Secondly observing people on their own heads, rending Common prayer
books, and altering things established by Law, I inveighed against those
doings, as injurious to the power and privilege of Parliament, which by my
protestation also, I was bound to maintain; and this (they said) discovered
me to be a plain Papist, one that loved the Mass book better then I did
God: so there I had preached away my good name, but my comfort was I had two
witnesses: God, and my own Conscience, which would justify me in my way: sed
Hinc dolor, hinc Lachrimae.

But further (for I will confess all against my self,) I have been charged,
to have been a great Hinderer of the Parliament proceedings in the
Association, and gathering money in that well affected County of Essex: if I
have, it is more by my Sufferings then any other way, and if God please to make
me an Instrument to prevent sin in others, though by mine own sorrows, I will
rejoice in my tribulations: I confess my Scandalous Adversaries have added
some fame and credit to my sufferings, as well as mine own Innocence, and
their malice is the more observed with wonder, at their success and favor
with some Members in the House of Commons: because some six weeks before they
complained of me to them, diverse of these my persecuting neighbors (whereof
the debauched Drunkard was one) had convented me before the Justice of peace,
for omitting the Cross and Surplice, urging the worthy Gentleman (to his
admiration) to inflict the penalty of the statute upon me for the same, when
as notwithstanding at that time in other places to other persons, they did
rail upon me for using the Common prayer book at all, which soon after they
rent in pieces.

And lastly, another reason of this my usage has been alleged by a Member
of the House to be this: The King (says he) turns out those Ministers that be
for the Parliament, and we must provide for them, and how should we so do, but
by turning out those that be for the King? but I believe His worship was
misinformed of His Majesty, for unto that day I cannot yet hear (though I have
inquired) that the King had sequestered any living, or turned any Minister out:
perhaps some whose Consciences accused them for preaching treason and sedition,
did run away when His Majesty's forces approached: and in pity to the peoples
souls so forsaken some might be appointed by His Majesty to preach unto them.

But such wrongs upon such grounds, unto the Kings Subjects that are peaceable
and loyal, will make men see and believe what has been foretold them by
their Sovereign; and to further that work, had I another Living (I hope) I
should be content to loose it.

And now (my Christian Brethren and friends) you have heard also the reasons of
my trouble and persecution, judge in your secret thoughts between me and my
enemies. I hope I never gave occasion of scandal to the godly wise, I am ready
to give an account of my whole faith: I took occasion from a conference with
Master Marshall, to publish my judgment in the case for which I suffer, that I
might give satisfaction to you all, and that you might see, I have some reason
for my dissent from him, and some others of my brethren; I dedicate it as to
him in particular, so to you all in general: from whose hands I beg four
things:

1. That you would not think the worse of that High and Honorable Court of
Parliament for any of my sufferings, nor interpret that any word in these
succeeding Sections, is intended against the same: I have professed before it,
and so I do now to you, and to the world, that next to Christ, and the King, I
judge my self bound in duty to endeavor the honor of it: I neither do, nor
dare in conscience attribute the wrong that has been done me, to the major
part of that part which is now sitting; only this I say, some particular
members, (who as men) being seduced by ill Counsel have been the Instruments
of my unkind neighbors thus to abuse me, whose sin God pardon, and whose
hearts God in mercy turn.

2. That you would bear in mind, that this publication of my faith and
judgment in the case, is the Consequent of my troubles, indeed occasioned by
them; for I have suffered and therefore do I speak; this I request; to the end
you might be witnesses for me, if afterward out of these following lines
somewhat should be picked, wrested, and alleged as the cause of my sufferings;
for I observe, that it is the custom of these times by doing wrong to urge men
to complain, and then from their expressions to get some color for their
former evil doing against them; when my self did first appear before the
Committee my charge was, only of a Sermon preached the Lords day after I had
been voted a Delinquent.

3. That you would not think my present flight to be a relinquishing of the
cause, I never balked to appear upon the least intimations, until now that
power was put into the hands of my raging Enemies, which (for ought I know, was
to kill me;) indeed it was threatened before (as was evidenced upon oath)
before a Justice, that I should be cut off, as not being fitting to live;
whereupon I went to that Member, who was the Chief instrument of my trouble,
and desired of him that I might be brought rather to suffer for this clear
truth of God in public, as the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days did (which I
hoped God would enable me to endure, that I might glorify him by my death) then
be murdered in private, as I was threatened; he indeed made a tush at me, and
said there was but one man that had said it: But I am by Gods grace of the same
mind still, when ever I may in public give testimony to this truth of God, I
will not keep in secret.

4. My Christian friends I desire of you in the last place, that I may not fare
the worse at your hands, because I have fared so ill at the hands of others,
the world's custom is, to judge of men according to it is own usage of them,
though Christ was more afflicted then other men. The Apostle tells us that to
you is given not only to believe, but also to suffer; and if God gives
suffering grace, he will surely send afflictions for the exercise of it; indeed
the times are evil, but we must not say so: seculo premimur gravi, quo scelera
regnant, the world goes ill when sin reigns; but remember, non est ad astra
mollis e terris via. through many tribulations we must go to Heaven, and invisa
nunquam imperia retinentur diu, this world will not last always, egrediemur
tandem, we shall be freed from all our sorrows at the last, the merits of
Christ will make amends for all: and in the mean time if the example of these
my sufferings may any way be serviceable unto you my Christian friends, I shall
rejoice the more in them: I am not mine own, I am Christ's, nay I am yours by
Christ's appointment, who has ordained his poor Minister (blessed be his name)
not only to preach the cross of Christ unto you, but also to carry it before
you. I beg all your prayers for strength from him, to whom I commend all you,
even to our only wise and omnipotent God, who will turn all things in the end
to our everlasting good, to whom be praise and glory for ever. Amen,

Your Brother and friend in Christ Jesus E. S.
March 28. 1643.
THE SVMME OF THE SEVERAL SECTIONS.
1. THe King being the Supreme Magistrate has immediate dependence upon God,
to whom only he is accountable. Page 2 2. The Title of the Lords Anointed is
proper and peculiar to the King. p. 4 3. Royal Birth is equivalent with Royal
Unction, and speaks the best Title to a Kingdom. p. 6 4. The Precedence and
Privilege of Monarchy. p. 7 5. Authority is a sacred thing; and essential to
the Kings Person. p. 9 6. The Subjects duty and the Sovereigns Excellency. p.
10 7. Inward Honor is due to the King, and how the same is to be expressed. p.
16 8. The question about resisting the Kings Person, stated and opened. p. 22
9. The lawfulness of resisting the Kings personal will by force of Arms
disavowed. p. 25 10. Scripture examples for it answered. p. 30 11. Arguments
from Reason answered. p. 34 12. Objection from the Kings Oath answered. p. 41
13. Scriptures alleged to evidence the unlawfulness of this resistance. p.
48 14. Particular Reasons, why the Authors Conscience cannot permit him to
concur with some of his Brethren in the way of resistance. p. 61 15. This way
of Resistance showed to be, 1. Against the way of God. p. 66 2. Destructive to
the whole Law of God. p. 67 3. Inconsistent with the spirit of the Gospel. p.
71 4. Contradictive to the perpetual practice of Christianity. p. 72 5.
Opposite to the Calling of Ministers. p. 74 6. Adverse to common Prudence. p.
75 7. Dissentive from the rule of Humanity. p. 76 8. Contrary to nature it
self. p. 77 9. Gainsaying Reason. p. 78 10. Against the Oath of Allegiance,
and late Protestation. p. 83, 84

Reader: By reason of the Authors absence some of these Sections are not so
plainly noted as the rest, wherefore (for your better information) of the sum
of each, and where they begin, have recourse to this Table.

Faults escaped in some Copies.
Page 9. lin. 21. for yet, read yea^ p. 14. l. 1. r. more. l. 15. r. rather
makes. p. 15: l. 4. r. hinder. l. 21. for these, r: those. p. 16. l. 13. r. the
Lord will not. l. 25. r. thousands. p. 21. l. 35. dele and now Sir. p. 22. l.
1. r. you discern. l. 3. for at, r. out. l. 34. for or, r. and. p. 23. l. 6.
r. contraria. l. 14. r. proper. l 17. for diverse, r. arms. p. 24. l. 20. r. by
Subjects. p. 30. l. 9. r. purpose. p. 31. l. 19. r. Osiander. p. 35. l. 12. r.
which. p. 39. l. 19. r. singulatim. l. 36. r. thee. p. 40. l. 34. for this, r.
our. p. 41. l. 16. for Empire, r. Emperor. p. 48. l. 29. for his, r. this. p.
89. l. 16. r. will of my, etc.

TO MY REVEREND FRIEND AND BROTHER Mr STEPHEN MARSHALL.
THe God of all Wisdom, Grace, and Peace, for Christ's sake direct all our
spirits ever to promote, and do that only, which tends to the advancement of
his own glory, and the tranquillity of this Church and State. Amen.

SIR,
THe distance of place betwixt us causes me to reply by writing unto those
things, that were urged at our last meeting, which at that time, I rather
heard, then answered: and now I do profess in the sight of that great God, who
knows all hearts, and must one day judge us, that I desire to maintain no
opinion as mine, but as I conceive it to be a divine truth: I am ready to deny
my self, in forsaking what I hold, if at length, such arguments as the weight
of the cause requires can be produced against it out of Gods book, which is
the only bridle to my conscience.

In the first place, I beg leave of your patience to declare my judgment (or
if you please my faith) in the case: I will plainly, sincerely, and fully
express it, with the grounds thereof; then I will answer your Objections, and
discover how Scripture (to my apprehension) does fairly lead me out of that
Labirinth wherein (perhaps) you thought me left entangled: and lastly I will
give some reasons why my conscience disrelisheth that other way, wherein
diverse of my reverend and well regarded brethren walk.

SECT. I. The KING has immediate dependence upon God: and to him only is
accountable.
Wherefore my good friends be you pleased to know, that I do believe (what ever
the fancy of this Age is) that next to Gods Sacred word and worship, Kings and
Kingdoms, are things of the most high and reverend regard in this world, with
great humility therefore to be thought upon, and discoursed of. For as
Scripture above all other writings, so Kings above all other persons have an
immediate dependence upon God, Dan. 2.21.
they are of his sole making: He removes, and sets up Kings: And Kingdoms
are of his own disposing, Dan. 4.25.
The most High rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will.

Rom: 13.1.
And although it is most true, that all the powers that be are ordained of God,
Joh. 19.11.
and there is no power but what is given from above: for as, by him Kings
Reign: so also, by him Princes rule, and Nobles, yea all the Judges of the
earth: Prove. 8.15, 16.
yet I believe all inferior powers under the King, are from God more remotely,
namely (mediante Rege) by the mediation of the supreme, even as the lesser
Stars have their light from God, by the mediation of the Sun: they are the
Kings delegates, ordained and sent by him (says the Apostle) who is sent by
God, 1 Pet. 2.14.
and is under God the chief: a Deo secundus, post quem primus, says
Tertullian.

And hence the Throne of the King is called the Throne of God, wherein the King
judges for God in Gods stead; 1. Chro. 29.23.24.
but the seat of the inferior Magistrates is called the Kings seat, where they
sit and judge for him. And hence too, the King or supreme has his Patent
immediately from God: He is Rex Dei gratia, and his title is, Good Deputy, or
the Minister of God, Romans 13.4.
but the Inferior Magistrates have their Patents from the King, they are
Magistratus Regis gratia, and are entitled, the Kings Ministers, or the Kings
Judges. And as the man is said to be the Image of God, and the woman to be the
Image of the man, upon whom she has dependence, 1. Cor. 11.7.
so the King is the Image of God, and inferior powers in regard of their
dependence upon him, are the Images of the King; they in their places represent
Him, as He in his place represents God, and they no otherwise represent God,
then as they represent the King.

The King is to them as Moses was to Aaron and the other Judges, Ex. 4.16.
the mouth of God, and they are the mouth of the King unto the people, as Aaron
and those others were the mouth of Moses: Ex. 18.22.
And as the Kings duty is to prefer Gods will before his own, so their duty
is, to prefer the Kings will before their own, when it contradicts not the
will of God revealed in his words.

And hence I gather that none can call Sovereign Princes to an account (if
they transgress) but only God, whose immediate stewards they are, solum Deum
quem habent Authorem habent quoque judicem: and therefore David well; tibi,
tibi soli peccavi, against thee, Ps. 51.4.
thee only have sinned, that is thou only O God who have made me King and art
above me, have authority to Judge me; Pro. 24.21.
for which reason The King in scripture is commanded to fear God only, and
none else, whereas all other men are bidden to fear God and the King, because
they are liable to answer unto both if they do evil, the Preacher says,
Eccl. 8.4.
no man may (so much) as say to a King what do thou, indeed reason says, if
equals have not any power over each other, much less have inferiors over
their superiors, from whom they receive all their Authority and strength.

A King is not servus populi, the peoples servant, no more then the Minister of
the Gospel is their dog, (what ever the dialect of some is in these days of
Liberty) but a King is Minister Dei; Romans 13.4.
and what has any to do to Judge another servant, Romans 14.4.
says the Lord: David surely was in the right, when some moved him against
King Saul, no says he, He is the Lords Anointed to whom only it does belong,
1. Sam. 26.9.10.
and not to me, or any else to meddle with him: the Lord shall smite him, for
who besides can do it and be guiltless.

It is the Kings Honor to have immediate dependence upon God, it is a part of
his prerogative royal above other men; and surely they are no friends to the
Kings Honor or to that high prerogative which God has given him, who would
make him but equal with the Common sort: The Hebrews say, their High Priest
both judged and was judged, Defense of Eccles. Disc.
bare witness, and had witness borne against him; but so had not their King,
nor was he judged of any man. And the inconformist ministers in Queen
Elizabeth's days did acknowledge as much privilege to be due to the Kings of
England, as ever was given to the Kings of Israel.

SECT. II. The title of the Lords Anointed is proper and peculiar only to the
KING.
I do also believe, that in regard of this immediate dependence, the Title of
the Lords Anointed does belong only unto Kings; to Christ in the first place,
who is Rex Regum, and then to them who are Kings under him: 1. Ioh. 2.27.
And though all sincere professors have received an annoynting from the Holy
one, yet I believe there is a difference inter Christos, and Christianos, inter
unctos Christi, and Christos Domini; for though others were uncti, yet, I find
not in scripture that Honorable title of Christus Domini conferred upon any,
save only Princes: nor do I think they had it from that Ceremony of pouring
oil upon them, for before that was in use Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob were so
called, who were Patriarchs or Princes in their families or generations, Ps.
105.15. Genesis 23.6. Act. 2.29.
(which 2 names we know are both of one signification, a Patriarch is a chief
father in government, and so is a Prince; Abraham is called a Prince, and David
a Patriarch, But that Title was given to such for their eminency above others,
because of Gods designation of them to supremacy, Es. 45.1.
and therefore it went also afterward without the Ceremony as well as with it.
Cyrus was Gods Anointed and so is Carolus.

And I do believe that royal unction must be acknowledged to give Princes an
exemption from all harm or wrong, who must in this respect be looked upon by
all men as sacred persons: David in his lamentation for Saul, speaks as if his
enemies ought to have had respect unto him in the battle, because he was
anointed with oil: and in the same Chapter the Amalikite a stranger was put to
death because he had dared (though desired by himself) to rid him of his life,
2. Sam. 1.21.
because he was the Lords Anointed: And the Psalmist says, that for Abraham
and Isaacks sake, God himself reproved Kings, (scilicit Pharaoh King of Egypt,
Ps. 105.15.
and Abimelech King of Gerar) saying touch not mine. Anointed: teaching
thereby, that such great respect is to be given by all the world to this High
and Holy order of Kings, that they must not be injured by their fellow Kings;
and if not by them then surely not by their own Subjects, who have taken the
oath of Allegiance unto them: if they do them the least wrong either in word or
deed, God will reprove them after another fashion, then he did Pharaoh and
Abimeleck. For in that Kings have obtained from God a more excellent name then
other men, it shows that they are of all others the most excellent persons. God
has not said unto others at any time you are mine Anointed, with mine holy
Oil have I anointed you fit ye at my right hand, and rule the Nations in my
stead: but to Kings he has. Others (as was said) are his Sancti, but these are
his Christi, and that is more; as the apple of his eye, they must not be so
much as touched for hurt, either with hand, or tongue, or pen, for touch the
Anointed and ye touch the Lord, they have not despised thee only but me they
have despised, says God to his Vicegerent. 1. Sam. 8.7.

SECT. III. Royal birth is equivalent with Royal unction, and speaks the
best Title to a Kingdom.
I do believe also that Royal Birth in those Kings that come to their
Kingdoms by Inheritance, is equivalent every way with Royal unction, it
speaks the same thing as truly, and as loud; which is only a right title, by
Gods appointment without usurpation; and royal unction spoke no more: this was
the language of Royal birth of old, as well as now, for after the first of a
Family had been anointed, to note Gods choice, unction was no more used in
that family, Bishop Andrews.
(unless there arose a strife about the Kingdom, as between Solomon and
Adonijah, Joash and Athaliah) the eldest son of the Predecessor was
afterward the Chosen of the Lord; His Birthright spoke the Lords Appointment,
as plainly as his forefathers unction had done, and invested him with the
title of the Lords Anointed, as we may see in Josiah and Hezekiah, and the
other Kings of Judah.

And I do believe, that the Prince who is once possessed of a Kingdom coming
to him by Inheritance can never by any, upon any occasion be dispossessed
thereof again, without Horrible impiety, Sacrilege, and Injustice in the
Instruments: Royal unction was an indeleble Character of old; 2. Sam. 1.14.
it could never more be wiped off, where it was once powered on; this was
apparent in Saul, who remained the Lords Anointed to his last gasp, David
himself confessed it, who durst not take the right of Government actually upon
him while Saul lived, although he had it in reversion, being already anointed
thereunto, and had received the spirit thereof.

Now Royal Birthright being the same in sense with Royal unction, it
follows that he who is truly borne unto a Kingdom, is in like fort, the Lords
anointed for ever (according to right and justice) to his dying day: He that is
born a King or a Prince can never be unborne more, semel Augustus semper
Augustus.

Yea I believe that the eldest Son of such a King is in respect of birth the
Lords anointed in his fathers life time, even as David was before Saul's death'
and to deprive Him of his right in reversion, is as true injustice, as to
dispossess him of it, were he actually invested with it.

I believe, where unction speaks not, Inheritance by birth is the best Title to
a Kingdom; had unction been silent, Adoniiah by this had surely prevailed as
the succeeding Kings of Judah did, Solomon's own words to his mother infer as
much 1 Kin. 2.22. ask for him the kingdom also for he is mine Elder brother.
as in this our Nation Birth has always been the best and most unquestionable
plea unto the Crown: the Conque-rour himself made use of it, so did Henry the
fourth, and Richard the 3. though both usurpers, we may observe how Gods
special providence and blessing has always favored this title, and
preferred it: they that mark what story tells, concerning the opposite
endeavors of some, both in Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth's days, must needs confess Gods special care, in conveying the
Kingdom to that Royal family where now it is seated, being lineally descended
in the Elder surviving blood, from both the divided Houses after the union: And
on the other side it is most evident that God has sharply punished those that
have offered wrong unto right of Inheritance, yea, the whole Nation has lost
much both Noble and Vulgar blood in former times, for suffering injustice to be
done unto it, if we remember but the wars between York and Lancaster, we shall
find somewhat in the root of them to this purpose.

Concerning Monarchy, I do believe, that of all Governments it is Anarchy, most
agreeing to well ordered nature (as appears among planets, birds, beasts and
bees) the most ancient and Noble, from the beginning of Nations, yea of
families, whereof there is still an Image in every well guided house where one
is chief; and lastly, it being that which God set up among his own people,
and has the nearest resemblance of himself: for where Majesty is all
concentred in one, there is a more complete Image of God who is but one, yea
and Majesty so united, makes it as in God, more amiable to the good, and more
terrible to the wicked.

And from hence I cannot but see and confess to Gods praise, this Nations
Happiness, which has ever been subject to this Government: and if I should be
of that sect who are weary of it, and wish for an alteration, Pro. 24, 21, 22.
I believe I should neither fear God nor the King as I ought to do, as Solomon
infers they do not, who associate with them that are seditious, or affect a
change, whose calamity (says he) shall rise suddenly: surely God is wiser
then man, and that Government which he so long time has blessed a Nation
with, is doubtless the best for that Nation.

In a Monarchy I do believe that the King has neither superior to compel him,
nor equal to affront him, for then he were not the supreme, 1 Pet. 2.14. Genesis
49.10.
as the Apostle calls him: and I do conceive that in regard of his supremacy, he
is fons legum, The Law giver, the Author and moderatour of the Laws, or
rather the Lex viva of his Kingdom, without him the Laws are dead, and on him
depends salus reipublicae: Himself is bound to no Laws, save those of God;
and the reason is, quia nemo sibi fert legem, sed subditis suis, He is the King
only of his people, and to whom only he is a King, to them only he gives
Laws: A King in this is like God, and must indeed be like him further, who
notwithstanding he may dispense with his own precept (and so does in some
cases) yet for the most part himself is pleased to walk toward us, by those
rules he gives unto us: Indeed the free conformity of a Prince to his own
Laws, does constrain his people to a more loving obedience.

In a Monarchy also I do believe suscipiendi belli Authoritatem penes esse
principem, as Augustine contra Faustum speaks; and if men have not their
Princes warrant, they have not Gods call to go to war, nor can they upon any
good ground look for Gods blessing. God called Joshua and the people to that
prosperous undertaking against Amalek by the mouth of Moses. We do not read in
Scripture of any just war ever undertaken by Subjects, without the will and
command of the Sovereigne, volunteers in such a case are non entia in Gods
book: justa causa, recta intentio, personarum idoneitas et authoritas
principis, are the 4 Conditions that make a war completely righteous:
doubtless the justness of the cause alone cannot give a lawful power, (as
some imagine) no though the cause be Religion it self, and the persons Holy
men, and their intentions good, yet to take up arms without the Prince, is
crimen laesae majestatis, and no less than Treason: and if war without the
Prince be so unlawful though for Religion, then much more unlawful is it, if
against the Prince, or contrary to his command though for the same cause.

And I belive that in a case of war a subjects duty is, to look principally at
a lawful call, yea more than at the cause it self, for that may be supra nos,
and therefore nihil ad nos, if we prye into the reasons of Princes undertakings
we may prove our selves busy bodies, 1 Pet. 4.15.
who in the Apostles judgment are guilty Persons: Peter Martyr out of Aug.
tells us that fieri potest, ut princeps ipse contra Conscientiam bellum gerat,
et milites tamen nihil peccent, dum ordinariae potestati obtemperant: populum
enim obtemperare oportet principi suo, id vero dum faciunt, potest illis dubium
esse, an a principe suo, contra mandatum dei pugnetur, excusantur autem dum in
causa dubia principi suo parent, suo inquam, non alieno. and their own Prince
is He under whose protection they were borne, and unto whom only they have
sworn Allegiance.

Concerning Authority I believe it to be a most high and sacred Crown and
dignity of a Prince, the Repositum which God has committed to his charge, and
he who is faithful to God will sooner part with life it self, then suffer that
which he by him is entrusted withal, to be violated, undermined, or
diminished.

Yea, I do believe, that a Sovereigne Prince is bound in Conscience to uphold
and maintain this beam of Divinity with the sword, if he be so hindered by
obstructions, that he cannot defend it by his Laws, and I believe that all
his Subjects upon his call, are bound in Conscience as they will answer the
contrary unto God, to assist him.

I believe also that the Authority of a King or supreme Governor, is the
natural and essential investment of his Person, though it extend where his
Person is not, even all over his dominions, yet in him it is radicated, and is
as unseperable from him as his life is; who ever aims at the one, aims also
at the other, is the voice both of reason, Law, and story: I do conceive, that
though the distinction holds good of inferior Governors, that they may be
considered as men, and as magistrates, yet not so of the supreme who comes to
his Authority by inheritance, He ought not to be considered of in any notion
severed from that of King; Saul's Person was Gods anointed.

In others their Authority is only sacred, and adds veneration to their
Persons, and is separable from them, the man may live when his Authority is
extinguished; but the very Person of a King (in regard of royal birth or
unction, and of immediate dependence upon God) is sacred as well as his
Authority, and does add veneration unto that, as well as that to him: indeed
they add honor to each other, and are inseparable, they live and dye
together, they are of Gods conjunction, (whereas other Authority is of man's)
and though man may sever what himself has joined, yet what God has joined no
man must sever.

Hence I believe that as he who resists the Authority of an inferior
magistrate, resists the King; so he that resists the Authority, yea or the
Person of a Prince or supreme magistrate, resists God; not only his Power
entrusted to him, but also his wisdom in making and ordaining of him, in
fastening or bestowing the Authority upon him; And as he that resists the King
in his Officers, shall from the King receive punishment, Pro. 17.11.
a cruel messenger shall be sent unto him, so they that resist God in the King
His Minister, Romans 13.
shall receive to themselves damnation, either temporal from the hand of him
that is resisted, unto whom God will deliver them up, Pro. 20.26.
to scatter, and to bring the wheel over: or from some other in his place, 2
King. 14.5.
as the Kings Son slew those that slew his father: or else eternal if they
escape here, for Solomon says, he that provokes a King to anger, Pro. 20.2.
sins against his own Soul: God doubtless will maintain the Act of his
own wisdom, their devise shall be only mischeivous to themselves that seek
to pull him down whom God has exalted: Ps. 62:4.
therefore Solomon well, Pro. 30.31.32.
against a King there is no rising, namely without the confusion and ruin of
the risers; to prevent which he gives his advise in the next words, if thou
have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, (acknowledge it,) if thou have
thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.

Private men's Injuries may be washed off with tears, but wrongs done to
Princes in regard of God his near and special interest, are hardly wiped off
but with blood: who ever (says David) lifted up his hand against Gods
Anointed, 1 Samuel 26.9.
and was guiltless? as if he had said, can any one out of any story name me a
man, whom vengeance in such a case has not always followed?

I do believe; that Military strength and outward wealth, are the nerves and
sinews of Authority, for by these fear and reverence is procured to that, and
love to the Princes person, in all those who are not able to see God in the
face of Majesty, of which sort there are too many: therefore to take away or
withold these, is to endeavor the weakening of the Kings Authority, and to
bring the same together with his person into contempt, and his life it self
into danger: surely if a King be appointed of God to be the Supreme in
Authority, it is the Subjects duty to manifest their approbation of Gods will,
and their obedience to their Prince, in yiedling to him the superiority over
themselves in such matters, true fear of God will make men honor him whom God
honors, and faith in God to trust him whom God trusts.

The Hearts of Subjects (I believe) next to the Arm of God, are the strength
of the Princes strength, and the wealth of his wealth, and therefore to rob him
of these is the greatest theft, it is to rend from him his Honor, his
Reverence, his Authority, and what ever God has invested him withal: and this
is often done by publishing and aggravating his humane infirmities, Psalm. 35.11.
but most commonly by laying to his charge things whereof he is not guilty.
When Absalom and Achitophel went about their horrid Treason, they cast Iniquity
upon the King, they found none upon him, but they laid some on, Psalm. 55.3. 2 Samuel 15.
that so his Subjects might hate him as themselves did, and join with them
against him: this I believe has always proved a sin of a purple dye, and is
a blasphemy against God as well as against the King, for he that speaks evil
of the King, speaks evil of Gods Law which commands the contrary, and so of
God himself. A King is the light of his Israel, Act. 23.5.
the Sun of his Kingdom; Jam. 4.11.
and true Religion (which is a light too) obscures not that light: the Locusts
that came out of the Pit were they that darkened the Sun, this condition
better becomes Jesuits, such as Sanders and Parsons were, then Protestants.
Rev. 9.2, 3.


A Prince is the breath of his peoples nostrils, and his honor is the breath
whereby himself lives, and whosoever have endeavored to stop or infect this
breath, have gone about to murder all the Subjects, as might be evidenced by
examples, what ever pretenses at first were, the issue in the end has been,
the Land was an Acheldama.

Surely I believe that Piety and Allegiance does instruct a loyal Subject to
prize his Sovereigns good name before his own, yea to be glad and joyful of
an occasion, even to drown his own credit in his Princes service to advance
him; Scripture teaches to deny our selves to Honor our King, Samuel at Saul's
request (when he had told him that God had rejected him, and so knew him to be
actually under Gods displeasure, and thereupon was himself departing from him
in anger) yet was content to turn again, 1 Samuel 15.30.
to honor him before the people, to put all respect that possibly he could
upon him, as he was a King.

I believe a true religious Subject dares not entertain an evil thought of
his Sovereign, nor believe evil of him, he dares not conceit meanly or
slightly of the Lords Anointed, that place of Scripture does much awe him;
Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the King in thy heart, the word in the original being disrespect
not, disesteeme not: a disrespectfull thought of a King is an accursed thought,
and who so harbors such a thought shall not escape a curse, for rather then
such a sin should go unpunished, God shall enable a bird to reveal it, as
that Text further teaches: 2 Samuel 6.16.
We all know what a curse God laid upon Michal for despiseing the King in her
heart; and how they are called men of Beliall, 1 Samuel 10.27.
who despised Saul in their hearts, when God had elected him; but they whose
hearts God had touched honored him, says that Text.

Sure (I believe) that our duty is to think of the King whom God has set over
us, 2 Samuel 14.19. 2 Samuel 19.27.
as of an Angel of God for excellency, as David's Subjects did of him; and to
endeavor too that others may have the same thoughts of him: I have reasons for
my faith in this particular.

Prove. 21.1. Prove. 16.10.
1. God gives Kings special spirits, and he undertakes in a special manner to
guide and order the Kings heart, and to direct his mouth.

2. God has honored a King above other men, and we are bound to submit our
thoughts to Gods, to concur with him, in exalting him most highly whom God so
exalts.

3. A Prince is Pater patriae, the father of the Country, yea, and of the
Church a nursing father, and children must both have themselves, and endeavor
to work in each other a reverend esteem of their common father.

A good Subject neither can nor will see or believe any thing dishonorable of
his Sovereigne, should he be where he might behold a nakedness or a weakness,
he would shut his eyes and not see it, so far would he be from acting Chams
part, in discovering it unto others.

4. A King (as I conceive him) is the most excellent Image of God in the world,
and the most glorious; Christ was God, Man, and Mediator, in all which
respects he has his Image amongst us. Every true Christian is the Image of
Christ as Man, every true Minister of the Gospel is the Image of Christ as
Mediator, (and accordingly ought to approve himself;) but a Christian King is
also the Image of Christ as God, and as so, is to be reverenced and esteemed by
us: He is the Image of Christ, as Judge and Governor of the world, of Christ
glorified, whereas every other Christian is only the Image of Christ
crucified: a King is also the Image of Christ, as he shall come; whereas we are
only Images of Christ as he did come.

Christ came at first in the shape of a servant, was humble to all, subjective
to the Civil Magistrate, did not resist his will though contrary to Law, and
like him herein I believe must all Christians be, of what rank soever (as
such) under the Supreme: they must be meek and lowly, patient when contemned,
and (if providence so order) that they be delivered up to the will of the
people their most deadly enemies, for no cause, as Christ was against all Law
of God or Man, like him they must make no bodily resistance against Authority.

But when Christ shall come the second time, he shall appear after another
manner, viz. clothed with Majesty and Glory, as a Judge and Ruler, as the high
and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity; nor will he yield himself then to be
despised and abused as he was before: no more will he (I believe) long suffer
those that bear his Image in that respect to be contemned in the mean while;
verily, I do believe, it is the most high and transcendent boldness that can
be imagined to abuse or slight in the least degree the Image of Christ, as
Judge, as God.

Surely it is the duty of Sovereign Kings, to remember in what sense themselve
are Christi imagines above other men, that so their looks may be answerable to
their dignities, for the chasing away evil from others, and the preventing of
contempt unto themselves: But if a Prince shall be so gracious as to deny
himself sometime, in respect of his greatness, and (as Christ at his first
comeing did) lay aside his glory for a season, to converse more familiarly with
his people for their good, shall he (being most highly adorned with the sweet
Spirit of the Gospel, and the conditions thereof, meekness, patience, mercy,
affability, and the like) rather delight to appear to his Subjects as Christ a
Savior, then as Christ a Judge, as Christ has done, then as he shall do: I
think his Subjects have no reason to esteem more meanly of him for this, or
to say from hence we will not have this man to reign over us, but (unless they
be of the Pharisees stamp) they will have a more high reverence and love
toward him, if not, they deserve by him to be accounted rather Enemies than
Subjects, and (as they in the Parable were) to be handled accordingly.

Indeed I believe, that as the best Christians, so the best Kings in this
world, are liable to persecution both of hand and tongue, in regard of that
Image of God which is upon them: when the insurrection of evil doers had
driven David from his royal City, then did Shimei's mouth also open against
him, to the enlargement of his sorrows: we know the Scripture tells us, that
the nature of the self advancing Bramble (when he is gotten up) is to be most
spightfull against the Cedars of Libanus; Iud: 9.15.
the most eminent in grace or place. Holiness alone cannot defend a Prince
from ill usage, it rathers make him obnoxious unto dangers, preserve me O Lord
for J am holy, said that Holy King.

Ps. 86.2.
Yea, as among inferiors, so among the chief, the best inclinations are most
opposed, the sweetest natures most abused by Satan and his Members, whose main
endeavors are to blunt (if possible) the edge of goodness; to stop all ways
of discovering or dispensing love, to prevent Subjects from their full tasting
of that grace, which is intended toward them by their Sovereigns.

Experience shows in many places, that when Enemies have slandered right
intentions, their labors are to force the doing of something which may put a
color of truth upon their scandals, they will drive a man (if they can) into
such streights that (if God do not help from Heaven) he must at length by a
kind of necessity be constrained to step into that disclaimed path, whereof at
first they did seem to prophecy.

And this God permits sometimes (for a season) to be done even to Princes
themselves, that he thereby might have occasion more evidently to declare
himself their saving strength, in upholding and delivering them, and in
subduing their people under them; as also that the Eminency of fortitude,
wisdom, meekness, and those other graces, which himself has planted in a
King may be manifest, to the encouragement of his Subjects under their
particular Burdens: If we look unto Jesus with the eye of faith, and upon our
Sovereign with the eye of sense, Heb. 12.2.
and consider both how they have endured the contradiction of sinners, we shall
not be wearied or faint in our minds, but shall run with more patience the
race that is set before us: some of us may truly speak it, that now
obstructions hindered our Kings protection of us from evils, his fellowship in
sufferings does afford us supportation under them.

But I believe further, that a Prince in regard both of Person and Office,
(notwithstanding all that darkness which for a season may cloud his Glory) is
under the Almighties most special care: God has an eye to Princes in their
dangers, was the Collection of Josephus upon the wonderful escape of Titus at
the walls of Jerusalem: great deliverance gives he unto his King, (says David)
deliverance unto others, Ps. 18.50.
but great deliverance unto his King, for he is His King, His immediate and
choicest servant; it concerns Gods Honor to afford a special defense to Him,
as men think they are bound in honor to maintain those whom themselves employ:
And from good experience does David sing in another place, It is God that
gives salvation unto Kings, Ps. 144.10.
(even because Kings) it was God that delivered David his servant (and so
Charles his servant at Keinton Battle) e gladio maligno from the hurtful or
malignant sword.

Yea I do believe that all these expressions of Divine love, and promises of
favor, which are made in Scripture to any good King, do most truly also
belong to ours; for our King trusts in the Lord, Ps. 21.7, 8.
in his care and providence, (as his many convincing Declarations do well
express) and therefore through the mercy of the most high (though the waters
swell never so,) he shall not miscarry he shall not be moved.

Yea I do not doubt but his hand shall find out all his Enemies, his right
hand shall find out all that hate him, Ps. 144.1.2.
for God is his strength who teaches his hands to War, and his fingers to
fight: 1 Samuel 2.10.
God shall give power to his King, (says Hannah in her prophecy) nay has not
God given power to his King, above the expectation of some? How is that small
handful since last August (notwithstanding all those endeavors to the
contrary,) come to be an Army like the Host of God? How did the Lord (that the
work might be noted more clearly to be his own) when He had brought him to as
low an ebb (in outward appearance) as ever gracious Prince was in, raise him
again to this mighty greatness? How has the fear of the Lord fallen upon
the people, as upon them in Saul's time, 1 Samuel 11.7.
when they came out with one consent to help their King, whom (in the
wickedness of their Spirits a little before, some of them had despised: ^ Sam.
10.27.
) Surely (Sir) this is the Lords doings, it should be marvelous in our eyes.

O cried some (you know) in their carnal confidence, when they went forth for
to pursue, He may fly from place to place for a while, but there is no remedy,
he must yield and come in, at last, he cannot possibly withstand our great
forces: (an expression like that in the Ps. which was used against David, Psalm.
75.1.
let us persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him:) But this the
Lord heard, who was even then near to his Anointed, as since then, his
wondrous works for him, have well declared: and who will doubtless perfect
what he has begun, even for his own names sake: 1 Samuel 12.22.
as Samuel said, the Lord will forsake his people, for his own great name sake,
because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people, so may I conclude, the
Lord will not forsake His King, for his great names sake, because it has
pleased the Lord to make him his King.

Yea, I do believe, that God will give the King his hearts desire, and fully
grant the request of his lips; his seduced people shall be undeceived, his own
righteousness shall be as the Sun, to dispell the cloud which blinds them;
his true intentions for their welfare shall be as apparent as the noone day, to
the shame and confusion of his enemies, whose unreverend, disloyal, and unjust
reports, he shall like a pious Christian, and a Royal King, (according to the
Apostles precept) for ever silence by his well doing: and I am confident that
1000 of his Subjects even in this our County) do believe that His Majesty's
chief desire of prevailing is, to gain this advantage.

But I proceed now to declare my faith more particularly concerning the
Subjects duty.

Kings, that every Subject is bound (as he will answer it at Gods dreadful
Bar) 'to honor and reverence his Sovereign above all other men, and
forsaking all others to adhere only to him; yea to suffer none but God to sit
in his heart above him, not to dare to wish him evil, or to have an ill
thought against him, any more then he would dare to have it against God
himself.

Psalm. 82.6.
Gods honoring Kings with the name himself is called by does confirm this; it
does teach us not only to difference them from all other men, but also to
honor them with the same inward honor subordinately wherewith we honor him:
and to my apprehension the Law of the Nation consents hereto, for whereas it is
no capital crime, only to wish or seek another man's destruction, yet the
Kings it is; for a bare purpose, if no hurt ensue to another, no man shall
suffer death: but it is not so with a King, a bare purpose or endeavor to kill
him is deadly: yea, we read of some that have lost their heads, but for
raising a force to take away (as was pretended) evil Counselors from the
Prince, because the Law did interpret that act to be a secret intendment
against the life of the Sovereign; and as I conceive the reason of the Law is
this, because as Kings participate of Gods name, (are called Gods) so do they
of this divine Privilege, that as against God so against them the thoughts of
the heart are mortal sins.

Yea further, Gods conjunction of the King to himself, and our duty to both,
under one word fear, (My son, Prove. 24.21.
fear God and the King) does also infer, that he would have us acknowledge
the same reverence due to the King under him, which we owe unto himself: and
that other connection by the Apostle, Fear God, honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17.
does suggest that the most visible and immediate evidence that we can possibly
give of our fearing God, is our honoring the King. Yea, I do verily believe,
that what Gods wisdom has conjoined in his Word, his Spirit has coupled in
every honest and religious heart.

And now as by the fear of God is signified the whole worship of God, so by
fearing and honoring the King is understood all that duty whereby the dignity,
credit, esteem, safety, content, and comfort of our Sovereign by any means
is preserved and kept undefaced: and as this our fear must be the same in
specie, so must it have the same manner and way of expression: as namely by our
believing him, by having an high esteem of him, by our obedience to his will,
by our manner of address unto his presence, by our unfeigned and constant love
unto his person, and by our endeavoring to rejoice and glad his spirit; for by
these particulars we do express our honor and reverence of heart unto the
Lord.

1. We honor God when we do believe him, yea then most of all (as Luther
says) for thereby we give him the glory of all his attributes; nor do we ever
more disparage the Majesty of God, then when we make him a liar like unto our
selves, in not giving credit unto his sayings: those (who would neither believe
nor speak one word of truth themselves) did most of all dishonor our Savior
when they voiced him to be a deceiver and a false speaker: so no greater
dishonor can men offer to their Prince then not to take his word, (unless
withal to labor that others might not.) Surely it is a part not only of good
manners, but also of that reverence and duty which a Subject owes unto his
Sovereign, to credit and believe him before any other in the world, especially
upon his Protestations: But indeed the more like unto Christ a Prince is in
meekness, mercy, truth, sweetness of disposition, and desire of doing good,
the more of Christ's enterteinment shall he meet withal in this world.

2. We honor God, by having an high esteem of his Majesty, and by
manifesting the same in terms accordingly, to his praise upon all occasions;
and after this sort must we testify our honor to the King, we must have an
high and pious conceit of him, speaking of him always as good, and praying for
him not as evil: To make mention in prayer of a Christian Prince as if he were
an Infidel, or an enemy to goodness, is rather to calumniate and vilify him
to slander and disgrace him, then to show reverence and honor to him: it is
rather the way to insinuate a tediousness of him, and to work an odium
against him in the hearts of men then a venerable esteem of him. When Saint
Paul required it, as a thing good and acceptable in the sight of God, to pray,
supplicate, 2 Timothy 2.
and give thanks for Kings, and commends it as a mean whereby to live a quiet
and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; I believe he did not intend
such kind of prayers as should leave a misconceit of Kings in the minds of
their people, no I believe such prayers have been the seeds of these our
present troubles, they have prejudiced our peace and quiet, and provoked but
little to the practice of true godliness and honesty; the Lord in his good
time touch the spirits of the seeds-men.

3. We express our honor and fear to God, by our full and perfect obedience
to his will and word; so must we to our Sovereign, by our obedience to his
Person and Laws, preferring none but God before him; the first in Authority
must always command our first obedience, God that gives Authority to the King
is therefore the greatest, and so to be first obeyed; the King gives Authority
to all inferior Magistrates, and therefore is greater then all they, (both
divisim and conjunctim) and so before them to be preferred in our submission
unto, should they command any thing contrary to his will. If it be said: but
suppose the inferior Magistrate commands according to the Kings Law, which is
his revealed will, then it is lawful not only to disobey his person, but also
to make resistance.

I answer: This objection shall be dealt withal anon; only for the present I
say this, God is not honored by being resisted, no more surely is the King.
Moreover, Authority is rather rooted in the Prince then in his Law, for as he
gives being to the inferior Magistrate, so he does to the Law it self,
making it authorizable; Et propter quod aliquid est tale, illud est magis tale,
He is greater therefore then his Law, and not to be resisted for the sake of
that; which may be evidenced farther thus, if when the Prince commands any
thing contrary to the revealed will of God, who has given him his power, he is
not to be resisted, though not to be obeyed; then much less when he commands
any thing contrary to his own Law, to which himself has given power.
Christian Religion has hitherto taught, that the Prince his will must always be
done of us, or on us; of us, when it is according to, or not against the Word of
God; on us, when contrary to the same; we must one way or other submit to
Authority, to the penalty if not to the command; nor do I conceive how I
disobey the Law of the Land, by submitting to the penalty annexed in obeying
the will of the Prince, seeing I must honor his person by my obedience.

4. We do manifest our reverence to God by our manner of address into his
presence, we do not use to carry our Petitions to God with our hands upon our
swords, nor go to him with threats and arms to have our requests granted;
neither must we in that fashion repair unto our Sovereign: nor do we use to
think to make God yield unto us, by fore reporting of him that he means to
do so and so, that we might force him for his credit sake to do the contrary:
but we go to him with selfe-denying hearts and words, confessing his goodness
and our own unworthiness, entreating him to take advantage of our
necessities, to manifest his own free grace, and to cause his own glory to
appear, and after such a manner, and with such terms must we go unto our
King; the humble way is Gods way, which he will make successful.

5. We honor God by our unfeigned and constant love unto him, and for his sake
to those that love him, or that he loves; which is expressed by our speaking
good of him and them, and not by endeavoring his or their disgrace and ruin.
And so must we also show our honor to our Prince by our love, which must be
unfeigned and constant, both to him and his in all conditions; we must be
willing rather to suffer for his and their sakes, then to countenance any evil
against either. Indeed our love to our King will be thus natured, if it be
rightly grounded, namely on Gods command, and because he is our Sovereign: for
though indeed we are to pray that a Prince may always be as eminent in grace
and goodness above others, as he is in dignity; yet if he be not, we must
remember, that we owe him the highest honor as he is the Lords Anointed, and
appointed of God to be our Governor; God who has deserved from us to be
obeyed, has commanded us to honor and love our King.

Indeed a Christian is Homo per se, and has a foundation for his duty and love
peculiar to himself; he loves not his father only because he begat him, or
his mother because she bare him in her womb, and gave him suck, or his friend
because beneficial unto him, or his Sovereign because he does protect him:
these are vulgar grounds, and of mere naturalls, yea of bruit creatures, but
his principal foundation is the Command of God, and the apprehension of Gods
love to himself; and as Gods Love and Word is capable of no alteration, no
more is a Christians love and duty which is built upon it, it is in its measure
and degree like that, constant, and unfeigned: yea, though the Prince should
change and omit what belongs to him, yet a true Christian Subject changes
never, nor dares he to neglect the least tittle of his duty. O, says he, Gods
love to me in Jesus Christ has kindled in my heart a love unto my Sovereign,
set over me by himself: Gods word in my soul is the root of my duty to my
Prince, therefore so long as God continues to love me, so long will I continue
an obedient Subject, as nothing can separate Gods love from me, neither life,
nor death, nor Principalities, nor Powers; so nothing shall separate my heart
from my King; neither fears, nor threatenings, nor plunderings, nor
persecutions: as nothing can nullify Gods word. Heaven and earth shall pass
away, before the least tittle of that shall perish: so nothing can or shall
alienate me from my Allegiance to my Prince, but him will I Honor, him will I
love, fear, and obey, actively or passively, although he should account of me
and deal with me as with an Enemy.

6. We Honor God by rejoicing his Spirit, and by being careful not to greive
the same: after which manner also we must Honor the King: our endeavors must
be to glad his heart, and our studies to make him cheerful, that so he may
govern us with comfort, Heb. 13.17.
and give up his account with joy, which will be most for our advantage, as the
Apostle speaks in another case.

Indeed crossenesse and perverseness is a great wickedness when exercised
against any, specially against a Prince, yet even such a Person is sometime so
afflicted: When I speak of Peace (says King David) then they make them ready
to battle, such was their crossenesse: Ps. 120.7.
and in another place, they dealt perversely with me, without a cause, Ps. 119
78.
indeed when ever men deal perversely with their Prince, they do so without
cause, for there neither can, nor ought to be any cause to move a man to break
his duty to his Sovereigne, or rather to his God who has commanded his
constant and loyal obedience.

It is not spoken in Scripture to the commendation of those vexatious Sons of
Zerviah, that they were too hard for David, and so often greived his Spirit;
but every true David must meet with such men, to discover him to the rest of
his people, to be a man after Gods own Heart, meek, wise, and patient.

Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, (as some write) having got power with the
Empress, did vex Ioh. Chrysostom to death, by tormenting his Spirit, and
molesting of him, who can think of that act without indignation? and it was
reported of you know whom, that he vexeda minister to death by his unjust and
incessant troubling of him, an horrid thing (if it were true) and worthy of a
sharp censure, but I pray God that some of them that blaimed him, have not
since had a finger in such endeavors, and against a more High and Sacred
person: omne occultum tandem revelabitur:

Thus (reverend Sir) by this glimpse you see what kind of Honor I believe is
due unto a King, and how the Subjects are to express the same, and now Sir I
instance not in every particular way, as in paying tribute or the like, which
our Savior and Saint Paul commands; because that will naturally follow upon
that which has been said. And now Sir, discern my faith in the whole case, and
the grounds of it, and you may perceive I am one of those that conceive the
Standard of Gods word to be the best rule to measure at a subjects duty by,
indeed I would have all men obey for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5.
and the great Apostle (I am sure) is of the same mind.

King.

I then desired to maintain, and indeed do still believe, that to whatsoever
the King commands we must either yield our active obedience, or (if against
Conscience,) we must suffer, or fly: you added a fourth, (which I did not
acknowledge,) and you called it defensive resistance: And your position was
this:

A defensive resistance against the Kings will or Personal commands when
contrary to his legal, is lawful, yea necessary.

To make good this position, there was (to prove the lawfulness) alleged the
Example of the peoples resisting Saul in the behalf of Jonathan, of David's
strengthening himself against Saul, of David's purpose at Keilah, if the men
thereof would have stood unto him, of Vzziah the King his being resisted, and
thrust out of the temple by the Priests.

Arguments from reason also were produced, or rather similitudes instead of
Arguments (which I suppose were to show the necessity of it) as of resisting a
father or master, commanding by unjust violence things unlawful, and unsuitable
to his fatherly or masterly relation.

And then the Oath or Covenant which the King takes or makes at his Coronation
was alleged, as giving countenance to a defensive resistance on the Subjects
part, if the Prince does make a breach thereof.

Lastly, I was required to show some Scripture oppugning this resistance, which
I then promised.

Sir, If my memory does not fail me, this was the sum to which according to
my Conscience, and weak ability, I shall now more fully answer then I could
(in regard of your own or my precedeing labors, it being the Lords day at
night) do then: Entreating you to remember that as then, so now we discourse of
the matter only as a case in Divinity.

1. Concerning the Position; the terms thereof, and then of the matter therein.

The practice of some in this sinful Nation, does at this present too too
sufficiently expound what is to be understood by the term of defensive
resistance: but I confess their exposition is very new, or else it is
figurative, per (...) quae vox est signans cuntraria dicto, as war is called
bellum, quod minime bellum, so defensive resistance quod oppugnat magis.

To defend of old, and properly, was and is to keep of, or to avoid, not to
give blows; not to begin the assault: but it inferres an Assault made, and a
staying at home rather then a going abroad, or a being driven from thence,
rather then a driveing, it is not to hunt or pursue from place to place, but it
presupposes a being hunted or pursued: and I shall rather take the term in
its ancient and prer signification, as perhaps you would have me think you
take it, (as being the more gentle,) then in that new sense which this
boisterous Age does: I conceive by a defensive resistance, an active resistance
by diverse renouncing passive obedience.

Against the Kings will or personal command, if they that maintain this
position, be of the privy Council to this resisting generation, we may suspect
two things from these their words, if they do not flander.

1. That the present war is not principally against those that are with the
King, as the common people are made to believe, but rather against the Kings
own Person: Indeed that voice, to fight against the King, would call together
but little money, and few men in this Nation; nor can all that look that way,
hope to wear the Kings Crown; but they may promise to themselves a portion in
the estates of the Kings friends, who if he perish (which God defend) are sure
to fall with him.

2. That this war is not to defend Religion, as the ignorant also are
persuaded, but only to cross the King; that he might not have His will:
Indeed the great and only Controversy between God and man is, whose will
shall be done; no marvel if a good King be in Gods Condition.

Against the Kings Personal will, when it contradicts his Law: I suppose the
reason is, because we must love the Law, better then we do the King the
fountain of it: but how if the Kings will be concurrent with His Law? how if he
not only protests he will, but actually does adventure his sacred Person to
defend his Law? I hope in such a case, it will be yielded without dispute, that
resistance is unlawful, because happily it would be suspected, that those that
make it, do bear as ill an Affection to the Law it self, (as fearing a trial
by it) as they do unto the King, (who would bring them to it.)

But that is not our case you will say, if you mean that which your self have put,
I grant the case concerns not us: but why then is the position of lawful
resistance now preached? do any purpose in aftertimes to get their King into a
straight, and so force in him some breach of Law, to gain advantage of
resistance, and therefore would have people by this doctrine ready prepared
before hand, to aid them against him on the sudden without scruple: well, yet
I hope the Consciences of true Protestant Subjects will never swallow this
principle.

But concerning the Position, I conceive it is built partly upon that
distinction already disliked as improper, specially for Subjects to make use
of, it being indeed of evil and dangerous consequence: namely, that a King may
be considered as a man without his office, and as a King in his office: for in
an Hereditary Kingdom the Kings right to Regality was at the beginning of his
Personality, they were borne and they die together, and therefore not so much
as ly Subjects to be considered asunder. Indeed the King himself may use this
distinction in the case of pardoning those that offend his person as he is a
Christian, he may forgive, (for he is not borne a Christian though a Prince)
but those that offend him as he is Pater Patriae (as by stirring up Rebellion
in the Commonwealth, and by shedding the blood of his innocent Subjects) he
must punish in regard of his office: I confess it is a sin of a purple dye to
offend the person of a Prince, but true magnanimity can pardon great faults,
specially when none is offended thereby but he that pardons.

Again, I conceive the distinction between the Kings personal and legal
command, is of no ancient standing in the School of Christianity; Faction bred
it, and Sedition (if let alone) will nourse it; it has been already the mother
of much strife, and I pray God it prove not the Grandmother to confusion: but
admit it good, yet I do not see how it belongs to Subjects to determine of the
Princes will, to be contrary to his Law, whenever to outward appearance it
seems so: God (says Job) gives not account of his matters, no more do
Princes (those earthly Gods) give a reason of all their doings to their
Subjects. When Solomon pretended to divide the quick child between the two
Harlots, 1 King. 3.
(a most cruel and unlawful thing to outward appearance) yet none of his
Subjects were so sinfully bold as to resist him in it, or to say, Thou art
ungodly; 2 King. 10.
so when Jehu pretended to serve Baal more then ever Ahab did; and Constantine,
to honor those that would offer sacrifice to Idols, and to banish those that
would not, neither of them were opposed by their people: beside the effect
showed that their Wills were as right as their best Laws, notwithstanding
those pretenses. It was once your own honest interpretation (before the
public Congregation) that if the Kings Majesty were acquainted with the
comeing forth of that book of Liberty on the Lords day, it was only to
discover the consciences of his Clergy, how tender and faithful they would be
for the service and day of God their master.

But I proceed from the fashion or outside, to the matter or substance

There is a difference made, or rather coined, betwixt the King and His Law;
and the Authors thereof say, It is lawful to resist the King to keep his Law,
yea necessary: as if not obeying and resisting were both one, or must of
necessity go together; the Apostle says, Romans 13.
They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation; not they that do not
obey: doubtless therefore there is a difference. I have always thought
passive obedience to be the Medium or Christian virtue between them, and
surely so it is, unless Rebellion of late has taken it from its place, made a
vice of it, and clapped it into prison; Reason says, that by an humble
submission to the penalty, a man may deny obedience without resistance, to the
Personal as well as to the Legal commands of the Prince: if men obey not the
Law when the King forbids, nor the Kings will where the Law inhibits, neither
is resisted; had all the Nation been of this mind, we had bad no fighting,
though the Kings will had truly opposed his Law, as is pretended.

But let them be (as some would have it) both one: you say it is lawful to
resist the King to keep his Law, and why not as lawful (at least as pious) on
the other side to neglect (I say not to resist) his Law, to obey him, when the
thing commanded is not ungodly? if the King be greater then his Law, we may.
Nay, if to obey the King be Gods Ordinance, and to obey the Law, but the
Ordinance of man, it is our duty: These two particulars I will briefly prove.

1. If the King be greater then his Law we may; for as was showed before, the
greater first must be obeyed, but the King is greater, for he has a more
immediate dependence upon God, then his Law has; He is the fountain of that,
and not that of him: He is the Lawgiver, (as the Scripture styles him) the
Sanedrim or great Council of Elders may prepare or fit the matter of the Law,
Genesis 49.10.
but the King gives the form or being to it, he sets the stamp upon it, and
so makes it authorizeable, whence it is called the Kings Law: And as he gives a
being unto, so he may dispense with his own Law, or with a Subject for the
breach thereof; but the Law has not that power over the King, therefore the
King is above his Law.

Truly I cannot apprehend how the Princes Will is more resistable then his Law,
unless it were proved to be subordinate thereunto; reason says, that rather
his Law is subordinate to his Will, being that his Will makes his Law, and not
this his Will. The Kings Person (from which (sure) his Will is not excluded) as
has been granted, is Solutus Legibus, freed from his own Laws; scil. from
their coactive power, and is Obligatus tantum vinculo pietatis, bound only in
conscience to have respect unto them, as they are or may be rules for better
direction; and for the breach of conscience only even we to God only are
accountable, and therefore (sure) the King by us in such a case is not
resistable.

2. If to obey the King be Gods ordinance, and to obey the Law be but the
ordinance of man, then to obey the King in the first place is but our duty: 1
Pet. 2.7.
but this is evident, Gods word which is unalterable, says, Honor the King;
whereas it is only an humane constitution which is revokeable, (and perhaps to
morrow) that says, obey such or such an Order, which is contrary to the Kings
mind: now whether it be our duty to obey God or man, Act. 4.19.
judge you.

Honor, or obey the King, and such like, do mean only the Kings Law, or his
Authority.

Law, or allowing any separation of his Authority from his Person: the
Scripture commands obedience to the King, and the term King may include both
his Will and Law, if not his Will rather, (as being an essential of his
Person) when both do not agree; indeed, if the Kings will contradict Gods
will, it is better to obey God then him; and so it is if his Law contradicts the
Law of God.



His word: but (as my judgment is) I neither can, nor dare conceive so meanly
of Gods Word, as to think it in this case only subservient to the precepts of
men, to account it no more then a bare Copula between humane Laws and men's
consciences, when as rather it is, or ought to be the foundation of, and guide
unto both.

I do find and feel that Gods Word ties my conscience to obey every one of
the Kings commands (that are not against piety) yea his Personal, as well as
his Legal, and those first in case of difference: nor do I (for my part) obey
the Kings Law, because it is established, or because of its known penalty
annexed, nor yet the King himself, because he rules according to his Law;
these are not my grounds of obedience, but I obey the Kings Law because I obey
the Kings and I obey the King, because I obey God; I obey the King and his Law,
because of God and his Law, which I hold to be the best obedience, and that of
a Christian man: when the fear of the Master makes the Scholar obey his
precept, it is better then when the fear of the precept makes him obey his
Master: so when the reverend and loving regard of the Prince makes us obey his
Law, it is better then when fear of the Law makes us obey the Prince.



Legal Command against his Personal, for I take his Person to be himself:
But we must remember, that the dispute is not about obedience to the one,
rather then unto the other, but about active and violent resistance against the
one, in behalf of the other, which I believe is unlawful against either:
because the Kings Authourity goes with both: you deny the lawfulness of
resistance against the Legal Commands, although ungodly, because established,
(for here, say you, comes in passive obedience.) And shall I hold resistance
lawful against the Personal, though not impious? it must be then earatione
because Personal, truly (Sir) I dare not, those Scriptures Honor the King,
and whoever resists shall receive damnation, do forbid me.

Besides, if it be unlawful by violence to resist Kings, or to defend our
selves by Arms against them, when they command contrary to Gods Law, my
reason cannot reach how it agrees with Christianity to lift up the hand against
them, when they command only against their own, sure man's Laws ought not to
be dearer to us then Gods, nor our own wealth more precious then Gods truth.

Reason goes with his Law, but passion with his will.



1. The Prince his Personal commands, do not always presuppose passion, nor are
attended with it: if they did, yet the Apostle says we must be Subject, Romans
13.5.
for fear of wrath which not only may, but usually does proceed from passion.

2. Yielding pacifieth wrath, allayeth passion, removes the cloud that darkens
reason, whereas grievous words (and much more violent actions) do stir up and
increase anger; Prove. 15.1. Prove. 20.2.
and who so provokes a King thereunto, says Solomon, sins against his own
soul.

Ec. 10.4.
3. It is the advice of the wise: that if the Spirit of the Ruler rise up
against thee, leave not thy place, that is modeste te in statione tua teneto,
nec rebellato (says Tremelius) keep thy self modestly in thy station, and do
not Rebel against him, He forsakes his place, (says Cartwright) qui animum ex
accept a injuria abalienatum gerens, obsequium subducit, aut etiam aliquid in
principem molitur: that being alienated in affection from his Prince,
withdraws his obedience, and does endeavor somewhat against him by way of
resistance.

established, if the Kings will be above them, or must be obeyed in the first
place?

established to instruct the Subjects in their duty, not to rule the King, they
are the Kings will in scriptis his revealed, or written will, and therefore
it is supposeable that his personal will may yet at least be coordinate with
them, and so no more resistible then they* for we must remember still the
question is about resistance.

But for the matter of obedience, let me add further the Lex or Law is one
thing, and Ius or right may be another, it may be supra legem, and on the Kings
side when his will commands contra, and in such a case even Conscience it self
requires us to prefer the dictate of his will in our obedience.

There was among the Romans a power called potestas regia, which was absolute,
and above the Laws, (still retained in that Common Wealth, after the enacting
of that festival called Regifugium, for the banishment of their Kings;) and it
was inherent to the Person of the supreme magistrate, that was pro tempore; for
those wise men, (though they were great lovers of that which they called
Liberty, yet they) conceived that if the chief Authority were restrained
within the streights of Laws, it could not be exercised to the public
utility, and therefore since all Laws were to be interpreted pro ratione
locorum, temporum, ac personarum, with respect to place, time, and person, and
many things fell out which might render the Law evil, that was in it self
good, they thought it fit in all doubtful cases, to repair ad Dictaturae Ius,
to the Personal direction of a chief Magistrate called the Dictator: et quod
Dictatori (ut res postulabat) fuit temporarium, Imperatori et Regi oportet esse
ut sit perpetuum, what was to him temporary is to a settled King perpetual, the
State of the Kingdom so requireing.

Ius or Right be on the Laws side, and the Kings will be to violate that, as
well as the Law.

force of arms; In the Jewish Politics (we know) that were made by Moses, was
couched not only Law, but even Right it self, yet when Samuel foretold the
people of the conditions of their King, and mentions such acts of His will, as
might be reckoned among such kind of violations, he did not grant them any
warrant or countenance for resistance: when the King should take away their
Sons and Daughters, to serve his lust and will, their servants and feilds, to
dispose of according to his pleasure, 1 Samuel 8.18.
Samuel does not say thereupon, and you shall fight it out in that day against
your King. But, and you shall cry out in that day, because of your King: and to
whom shall they cry? to the people, or to one another? no, but even unto the
Lord, (says the Text) who gave the King, and who alone is above the King, and
who sometimes permits a King, for the peoples sins to do such things.

Indeed reason says that God only, whose servant the King is, has power over
him, and to him only we must repair if we have any business concerning him,
Pro. 21.1.
to which parpose the Spirit says: the Kings heart is in Gods hand, who
turns it as himself wills, all men's hearts (we know) are in Gods hand too,
but the Kings heart is said to be there in a special manner, to teach that our
duty is to use Gods help only when we would have the Kings heart turned to
us: if we neglect God in such a case, and address our selves unto the people,
stir up them to rage, and be tumultuous, we shall rather drive the King
further from us, then draw him nearer to us: no way, or hand can, or shall
incline the Kings heart but the way, or Hand of God; Nehemiah went to God when
he would have the Kings Heart inclined to him, and his request, and so did
Mordecay, and Hester when they desired the like favor from the King.

These are (Reverend Sir) the objections, as I remember, that were expressed or
involved in your discourse, which according to my weak power and my Conscience,
I have thus answered, and do conclude, that I cannot see how it is lawful to
resist the Kings Personal commands in the behalf of his Legal, when
opposite; I do conceive, that rather then so, his Personal (if not against the
Commands of God) are to be obeyed, nor can I apprehend how a man in such a
case, can properly be said to break any Law, that obeys the Commands of the
Lawmakers.

precepts any of them, yet for points of practice in matters of far less
moment, precepts are necessary: and I must confess I think it strange, that a
business of such high concernment^^s resisting a King by force of Arms)
should be in action among Christians, and not one direct command of God to
bottom it upon.

Examples be pregnant, and nothing in Gods word contradicting, they being many
may be as valid as a precept.

Yes happily in some cases, though whether in such a one as this, I question: but
are these such? nothing less; they are rather blind, and unlikely
suppositions, and so threadbare with often use for want of better change, that
for this purpose (almost to every eye) they seem worthless.

The first is, that of the peoples resisting Saul in the behalf of Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.45. But how did they resist? the words of the Text are these: The
people said unto Saul (who had made a rash vow) shall Jonathan die, who has
wrought so great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the Lord lives there
shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with
God this day; so the people rescued Jonathan that he died not. Here we see are
only Reasons and Arguments, such as might become prayers; here is no
intimation of Arms or violent resistance: as therefore Saint Peter might be
said to be rescued out of prison by the prayers of the Church; or Nabal and his
family from slaughter, by the prayers of Abigail, so was Jonathan out of danger
by the prayers of the people: And that is the judgment of Divines, Junius,
Borrhaius, Psiander, whom Willet alleges in this case, and Gregory as I
find him quoted. And reason says, that Saul might easily be entreated by his
Subjects (without any violent resistance on their parts) to break a rash and
unlawful vow, to save the life of his eldest son, whom he loved, who was
innocent; and had that day been Gods Instrument of so great salvation unto
Israel: Nay, Peter Martyr adds further, that if the people did any more then
pray, if they pressed violently upon Saul in making a mutiny, they sinned; so
that the first example is nothing to the purpose.

The second is of David's strengthening himself against Saul. To which I
answer, that I find not in Scripture that David ever struck up the Drum, or
used any means to call or gather men unto him for any such end; indeed it is
said, 1 Samuel 22.2.
that many that were afflicted (as he was) gathered themselves unto him, and he
became their Captain, so that properly he strengthened not himself, they
rather strengthened him, or the Lord by them preserved him for that employment
whereunto he was appointed: But do we ever read of any act of hostility that
David with them did exercise against Saul, or against any of his followers, so
long as Doeg was in favor, they might well pretend that the King had ill
Councillors about him, yet we read not of any violence that was used to
remove them: Nay, very easily might David have revenged himself upon the
Ziphites, that did their good will to betray him into Saul's hand, if his
conscience would have served him to kill any of the Kings Subjects, against the
mind of the King.

Whereas you say, that you gather from 1 Chronicles. 12. that David was 40000 strong
in the days of Saul; and it is probable he did not lie still with his great
Army. I answer, it is not apparent that all those Captains mentioned in that
Chapter, brought all their men with them: yet if it were so, it makes against
you; that David being so strong, should always flee from Saul when pursued by
him, and resist never, much less seek after him; should get him out of Saul's
Kingdom with so many men following him, and beg a place to dwell in of Achish
King of Gath.

But (Sir) the truth is, David was never above 600 strong, till about the time
that Ziglag was burnt, which was about the time of Saul's death, and that great
concourse of men mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 12. came then to him, it may be probable
that they fled from the battle wherein Saul was slain; for the Text says,
verse. 21. some of them helped David against the Rovers: And verse. 22, 23. it is
said, They came to him to turn the Kingdom of Saul to him, according to the
word of the Lord. It was well known in Israel that David was appointed to
succeed Saul, and who will not (at such a time) look to the Sunrising: Thus to
my apprehension the second example is as far from the mark, as the former.
(Beside David being an extraordinary person, full of Gods spirit, and by
unction designed of God unto the Kingdom, his example in such a case is not
proper.

Sam. 23.
The third you alleged is the business at Keilah: It is supposed (say you)
that David would have defended that Town against the King, if the Inhabitants
would have been faithful to him: ergo. It Is lawful to resist the King, and
to keep his Towns against him.

We use to say, a facto ad jus non valet consequentia; indeed this was not
factum, yet I see not how it follows.

It is so supposed, but not by every body, for some may (and perhaps as simply)
suppose because it is said afterward, Chron. 12.1.
that David kept himself close in Ziglag) that he would also here have lien
close in Keilah, if the men thereof would (as Rahab did the spies) but have
concealed him.

But by the way here is one thing notable; David it seems though he was 600
strong in that Town, would not venture upon it for to hold it, until he knew
whether he should have the good will of the Inhabitants, he did not seize upon
it on the sudden, whether the King and they would or no, before they were
aware, and keep it by force against both, robbing, killing, and plundering his
fellow Subjects.

But to the place: the Text says, verse. 9. 1. Sam. 23.9
that David knew that Saul secretly practiced mischief against him, and
thereupon fearing some treachery in the men of Keilah if he stayed there, being
in a great straight, He asked counsel of God about the matter, and the Lord
answered him accordingly, and this was all the business: But if you will
suppose further that David had a purpose to have kept the Town against the
King, if the Citizens would have stood to him; I hope it may be lawful for me
to suppose also, that the Lord (whose counsel was asked) both could and would
have inclined their hearts to have been faithful, if the thing purposed had
been lawful; but Gods answer speaks to my apprehension his disallowance of
it, and so doubtless it did to David's, as appears by his departure, and his
never attempting any such matter afterward: if the answer of God had been
clean contrary to what it was, or such as might in any sort have countenanced
his stay, there had been some color to have alleged this story for this
matter of resistance; but Gods wisdom would not have any such example upon
record in his Word, he foresaw that they, who are so bold upon a bare
supposition, would have been more bold (if more could be) upon a plain
example, Gods answer therefore is such, that all may understand (if they
please) his refusal of a blessing upon such an enterprise.

If it be yet urged upon me farther, as was before the Committee; what I think
David would have done, if he had staid in Keilah till Saul came; I must make
the same answer as I did then: what David would have done I cannot tell, but I
suppose the men of Keilah would have done to him as the men of Abell did to
Sheba afterward, (even cut off his head, and thrown it over the wall) had the
King came, or sent for to demand it: But truly I wonder that the example of
David should be alleged in this case of fighting against the King,
considering what his deportment to Saul was at two several times, when he had
him at such advantage.

Chron. 26. ^s. 17, 18, etc.
But now for the last example, that of Vzziah, who for going in the pride of his
heart (says the Text) into the Temple, to meddle with the Priests office, was
withstood by Azariah the Priest, and fourscore Priests with him that were
valiant men: But how was he withstood by these men in the Temple? not with
swords, or weapons, but verse. 18. They withstood Vzziah the King, and said unto
him, it pertains not to thee Vzziah to burn incense unto the Lord, but to
the Priests the sons of Aaron, who are consecrated thereunto; go out of the
Sanctuary therefore, for thou have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine
honor from the Lord God: thus they withstood Vzziah by saying these words unto
him. Indeed when he persisted notwithstanding this, The Lord struck him with
leprousie, verse. 19. and then the Priests thrust him out of the holy place,
because of his uncleanness; (according to the Law) Nay, says the Text, verse.
20. himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him: this
example therefore makes nothing at all for the lawfulness of resisting the
Kings person, commanding against his own Laws.

Other examples as little to the purpose are also alleged by those that would
feign wind Gods Word to speak the language of their own spirits: but these
only were mentioned at our conference, and therefore I will not spend time to
answer any other, which indeed are already answered by abler pens then mine.

Salus populi which is Suprema lex, does require it: for thus you argue.

It is according to reason that every particular man should endeavor the
preservation of his own being; yea, it is Lex naturae, every member of the
body, every creature in the world will do it, ergo, much more man, who has
also the use of Reason to persuade him to defend himself against an unjust
violence. Indeed (say you) Christianity commands us patiently to submit when we
are wronged by the Law; but if against Law, then we may stand upon our own
guard by all the Laws of Nature and Nations.

As for example (say you) if a father or master (whose commands are to be
bounded within the compass of their particlar relations) shall by unjust
violence require things unsuteable to be done, the child or servant may and
ought to defend himself, even to the disarming of his Governor: so if a
Prince shall command any thing beyond or beside the relation of his Kingly
office, (as for example, when a sentence is passed by a trial at Law, for me
against him, he shall notwithstanding in his passion, send to my house to do me
violence) I must defend my self, and disarme him if I can, for if in such a
case I shall yield my throat to his fury to be cut, I shall be guilty of self
murder: and if this may be done for the safety of a private man, then much more
when Salus populi wrich is suprema lex does require it:

These in breife (as I remember) were your Arguments and illustrations, to
which I thus answer.

First, in general; Reason I grant rules well, when Religion opposes not,
but it is her duty to veil unto faith, and therefore as you and I have often
taught, even reason her self must be denied in some cases, as well as nature:
a Christian as well as another creature, may and must look to his own
preservation; but we are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20.
and so are not our own, nor must be in the first place for our selves: the
Honor of that profession which he that bought us, has entrusted us to
maintain, must be preserved by us, before life it self; if self defense will
blemish my Holy profession, if resisting the King speaks rather the doctrine
of the Jesuits, then of Jesus, I had rather by patience possess my soul in
safety, then by opposing endeavor the preservation of my body.









Law.

Law be on my side when the King wrongs me, my wrong is the greater, and my
patience in such a case is more glorious, and comes nearer to perfection.

Father or master within the compass of their particular relations.

peace upon me, but I have not, to justify me in my so doing against my
Prince. 3. The King has not given a father or master potestatem vitae et necis
over those that in their relations are under them, as God has given the King,
therefore although I may defend my self against them, yet not against him, to
whom (being the public father and Lord) I owe the greater duty and obedience,
and am to forsake them to serve him,

servants, b^ subject to your Masters with all fear, 1 Pet. 1, 18.19.
not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward, for this is thank
worthy if a man for Conscience sake toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. q. d. when in the frowardness of their Spirits, they command
things unsuteable; submit your selves, and resist not: now if subjection in
such a case be due to Masters, much more is it unto a Prince.

medium between obeying and resisting, in a case of that nature; and that is
complaining to those that are above them, for fathers and masters are
themselves also under Authourity, unto which their children or servants may
appeal for their own defense, when unreasonable commands with violence are
forced upon them: and so may and must the Subjects do, appeal to God in such a
case, 1 Samuel 8.18.
who only is above their Prince. 1 Samuel 8.18.



Genesis 22.14.
he is every where to whom we may appeal, yea providebit in monte, our
extremity is his best opportunity.



Esaias 50.10. whoever fears the Lord when he is in darkness and has no
light, that is, Es. 50.10.
in such great streightes, and deep dangers, that he can see no glimpse of
deliverance from the creatures, no hopes of escape: let him (namely at such a
time) trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God: O! (Master
M.) when shall we live by faith, if not in such a Condition?

The second warrant is the example of David in the wilderness of Maon, Saul
had beset him round, he was in a great distress, 1 Samuel 23.26, 27.
fly he could not from his Prince, fight he durst not against his Prince, what
shall he do? He stayed himself upon his God, who appeared to his help, by
diverting the King to a business of better consequence, a messenger comes all
on the sudden, and brings him word the Philistines had invaded his Land:

David in his distress was not) why may I not so do? and trust to Gods
Assistance that way, my House is my Castle:

House which was left you by your predecessors, be your own, and the weapons
therein which you bought with your own money, be solely yours, for your
defense, and for that purpose you may use them. But (not forgetting your
similitude) suppose you be in your fathers or masters House, and the weapons
therein be his weapons, whether you may keep his own house, or use his own
weapons against himself, Hoc restat probandum.



by faith stopped the mouth of Lions, Heb. 11.34.
and escaped the edge of the sword: God is able (and will if you pray and trust
to him) by your yiedling to your offended and displeased Prince, mollify his
heart toward you, as he did Saul's heart to David, Labans to Jacob at one
time, and Esau's toward him at another. (O dear Sir) have we been preaching
faith and patience thus many years to others, and shall we thus boggle and
wriggle against the Power of faith, and the practice of patience, when we are
put to trials? nay shall we argue in the behalf of flesh and blood against the
power of faith?

But I return.

Prince (said you) to do what he will without resistance, is the way to destroy
the whole society of men, and the Church in special, if a Prince be so minded.

Church and Commonwealth are both preserved by Gods providence, God is
Governor of and in both, and so far as the rage of men shall make to the
praise either of his wisdom and justice in punishing the wicked, or of his
Power and grace, in the trials of his servants, Psa. 76.10. Es. 10.
so far does he permit it, and the remainder thereof does he restrain: we see
it in Assure. Es. 10. and in all the Tyrants of all Ages; the Roman Emperors
that had their wills, had also but their time, and did no more by all their
fury, then Gods hand and counsel had foredetermined should be done:

Anabaptisme to hold it unlawful for Christians to fight.

one thing for Christians to fight under their Princes Banner, and at his
command, and another thing, to fight against his standard, and contrary to his
will, to fight for him is Christianity, but to fight against him is
Anabaptisme: nor indeed do the Anabaptists hold it unlawful to fight, when
they think themselves strong enough to resist, as appeared by their behavior
at Munster, but as Jsrael had been in peace if Ahab had been as free from
troubling it as Elias was whom he accused, 1 King. 18.17.
so should England at this time be, if they that oppose Regality, and endeavor
the damage of it, were as far from Anabaptisme, as they are that hold such
resistance unlawful.

Salus populi is suprema lex, and for the preservation of the whole we may
resist a part.

Salus populi now adays, but I believe there is a great mistake both in Salus,
and in Populi.

1. In Salus, which as appears by men's proceedings is thought to consist in
fighting rather then in flying, in resisting rather then in yiedling, in
shedding one another blood, rather then in sleeping in peace; God the general
conserver of mankind, has created man for that end, conservare speciem; and
his will is that those virtues should be specially practiced and maintained,
that are most conducible thereunto, and those are not wars, and contentions,
strife, and debate, but love, meekness, and patience, bearing and forbearing
one another: I profess (Sir) it is a Paradox to me, that men should lead
people from peace to war, to preserve them* sure there is a mistake in Salus.

2 And so there is in Populi too, for whereas some say, by the people they
mean all, who conjuncti^^ are as much above the King, as he is above any one
of them sigill^atim: and therefore though one may not resist him, yet all may
(as if the sin were the less because many commit it, or rather none at all,
if they have but strength and company for to act it) others again by the
people do interpret every man's particular self; whence arise those
expressions, I value the King no more then I do another man; I would rather
disarme the King, then he should disarme me; yea, and kill him too, to save my
self. I tremble to mention these sayings, doubtless these varlets to save
themselves would deal so with God himself, if he were capable, and they could
reach him.

I do believe, your self will yield that there is a mistake also in Populi.

But Sir, is not the King the Head of the people, and can they be safe without
him; I admire at some of us, that dare in the pulpit separate betwixt them, and
vilify Majesty to advance popularity.

O, cry some, the whole must be preferred before a part, if thy right eye, or
right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee, it is better that a
part perish, then the whole.

King is but for the Kingdoms sake; He is the younger of the two; there was a
people before there was a King, he was ordained for their good, and therefore
is to serve them.

Esau was Jacobs elder Brother, yet the elder was appointed to serve the
younger: and the whole world, that great Kingdom was made before man, yet made
for his sake to serve him, not he to serve that: indeed a King is no more
ordained for the peoples good, then they are for his good, they are each
ordained for other good: and both for Gods glory, which is most advanced by
peace and union, so that it is not Salus populi alone, but it is Salus Regis et
populi, that is suprema Lex; and so highly to be regarded: nor does Salus
populi consist in resisting or suppressing the King.

What says Pilate the Heathen, (to them that called themselves Gods people)
shall I crucify your King? q. d. what an unnatural, and unreasonable thing is
it, for Subjects to go about to ruinate their own King? if they had answered,
O it is to save our selves, Pilate would have laughed them to scorn: although
indeed perhaps when people go about any such business, it is to save some of
themselves, whose black merits do make them suspicious of the Kings mercy; but
should they prevail, the effect would show, that the safety of the enemies
would never countervaile (to the Commonwealth) the Kings damage.

Some there be that think Salus populi to consist in Liberty, and Li^ qerty
(as they conceive) is for every man to do what is right in his own eyes, be of
what Religion he please, commit Idolatry, and Adultery, rob, plunder, and take
away the goods of others, be both his own Carver; and his own Judge: and thus
it was of old, when there was no King in Israel: ergo.

But Sir, though some (upon a taste of this kind of Liberty which has of late
been permitted to them) cry out, O these be the blessed days, these be the
happy times: yet you and I cannot but conceive that they are the beginning of
sorrows, and will end in bitterness; we know this Liberty is every way
destructive, and rather Beast-like then Humane; whereas this should be
Christian, which consists chiefly parendo, Gods service is a perfect freedom:
and there was a King set up in Israel, to remedy those abuses.

And thus (Sir) you see, that I do not apprehend from your reasons or
arguments any necessity of such resistance in the case.

Now concerning the Oath or Covenant which the King takes or makes at his
Coronation: how that does countenance a defensive resistance

First (Sir,) let me mind you: of what you yielded, namely, that the King is
King before his Coronation; indeed his Crown is but a note or ensign of his
Kingly dignity, he has a right unto, and is in actual possession of his
Inheritance given him of God, before he makes his Covenant on the Coronation
day, which cannot therefore be supposed to be conditional with the people; nor
be thought that he by it from them receives his office with a quandiu been se
gesserit, so that of necessity he must forfeit his power unto them, if he
breaks his promise.

We read that supreme Princes in ancient times, as they were free from Laws,
so from Oaths; the Roman Empire was not wont to swear unto the Senate, or to
the people, but they both did take an Oath to him. Those Oaths and Covenants
the Scripture mentions in the Story of the Kings of Judah, were not made or
taken by the King, (if we mark them) but by the people to their King; or by
the King and people together, unto the Lord, after some general defection from
his worship and service: no, this custom of a Kings swearing, is the Infant of
later times, it was borne ad faciendum fidem, peoples distrust was the parent
of it: evil suspicion (as being for the most part the root of Rebellion) was
ever counted ominous; and therefore to prevent a sinister opinion of a new King
it was thought meet by such Princes, upon their solemn Coronation day, to
enter into a visible Covenant with God, in the presence of their people.

And I believe the custome's good as a mean (by Gods grace) to keep a Prince
his will, within the bounds of Conscience: but (in that it was not so ab
initio,) it plainly shows that a Kings entrance into his Government, does no
whit depend upon his Covenant, nor does this Covenant at all diminish his
supremacy, or derogate from the absoluteness of his Power: no, if it were made
unto his people, as it is not, I do not see how of necessity it must make him
any way liable to their subjection, God himself was pleased ad faciendam fidem
to swear to Abraham, and to David, yet did he not thereby any way make
himself their inferior.

But indeed the Kings Oath and Covenant, is only unto God, it is His Oath of
Allegiance to the Lord; and in effect to this purpose, that he will discharge
the trust imposed upon him by the God of Heaven and earth, of whom he holds his
Kingdom; and this is made visibly in the presence of the people, that they
might not distrust the faithfulness or integrity of that Person, to whom is
committed (by him who knows all hearts) so great a Power.

And sure, as it is a heavy sin in a Prince to falsify his Covenant with the
Majesty of Heaven, so it is no small sin in Subjects to distrust a Prince his
fidelity upon slight grounds, or to expose him by any means to the general
suspicions of his people.

But now, (Sir) what warrant have the Subjects from hence for their resistance,
if the King breaks his Oath to God? is not God able to revenge his own cause?
has he not always done it? observe stories, and see if you can name one
example of any King, though never so great, that brake Covenant with God, whom
God has not remembered, and is his arm shortened? or is not his Justice still
the same?

Meroz was cursed, because she did not.

Meroz indeed was cursed with a bitter curse, and did deserve it, because she
came not to help her King, her Captain, or supreme Judge whom God had set over
her, and on whose side the Lord was, against his Enemies that rose up, or went
out against him, and that were so many and so mighty; but she is not cursed,
because she did not resist her own Governor.

The breach of our Oath of Alleagiance unto the King, is only an offense
against the King, and to be punished by him, and not by any of his Subjects
without his Authority, nay, if any break promise and Covenant with one of us,
our selves only can justly accuse him, and shall we not allow God the same
Privilege? by what Authority therefore do you this thing, (call your
Sovereigne to account for his breach to God (if he were guilty,) or who gave
you this Authority?

To my thoughts that saying of David concerning Saul, should be able to tie up
all hands from such an enterprise; 1 Samuel 24.5.
when his men moved him to take the advantage, intimating that Gods providence
(according to some former promise as might seem) had afforded it on purpose:
O, says David, God forbid, what do so to my master, the Lords Anointed; lay
hands on him? absit mihi, far be it from me; never let me come where God has
to do, if such a thought lodge in my heart; I have done more already in cutting
off the lap of his Garment, then I have comfort in: 1 Samuel 26.9.10
So a little after when another like opportunity was tendered, and some were
ready to conclude for him, that God had renewed the advantage, to check his
former fearfulness, yea, and to take away his scrupulousness, one offered
himself to do it for him; give but your consent (says he) and I will
warrant, you shall never more be troubled with your Enemy: O, says David, by
no means, shall I suffer any to offer violence to the King? Lord be merciful
unto me, and keep me from such an Horrid thing: I straightly charge you, that
you do it not as you love your own life, for who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? if we mark the words well, in
both places they are denials with great vehemence; and indeed let us all again
and again observe his Arguments in both places, for they are very suitable to
this purpose.

1. He is my master: scilicet, my Sovereign, my Liege Lord, I have taken my
Oath to be true to him, therefore my duty is to defend him, against all the
world; though he forget himself toward me, and toward God too, yet I must
not forget my self toward him, unto whom I am sworn, nor toward God by whom
I have sworn, never servant or subject prospered that neglected his Oath and
duty in a case of this nature, shall I be a forsworn man? shall I turn son of
Belial? Child of the devil, as those appear to be that offer violence, and
affronts unto their Sovereigne? no, God forbid.

2. He is the Lords Anointed, (says he) and this particular he rests much
upon, repeats the Title over 3 or 4 times, (as we may observe in the places) to
manifest that awefull dread which he had in his own heart toward the King, and
to work alike in the hearts of those his servants that moved him to so impious
a mischeife: and indeed of all Arguments, it is the most forceable to an Honest
heart: q.d. what shall I rise against God? against him whom God has anointed
and marked? shall I lay hands upon what is Holy? Holy things are not to be
meddled withal: His Person is Holy in respect of unction; his calling is holy;
and it is sacrilege to offer violence to either: His Anointing is the mark of
God upon him, et quos Deus unxit nemo tanget, it is unlawful to meddle with
anything that has but another man's mark upon it, with his sheep, his horse,
his servant that wears his Livery; and shall I dare to meddle with him for
hurt, that has the mark of God upon him? O I dare not, he is none but God's,
and none but he may deal with him; as God has sentenced him, so God shall put
his own sentence in execution: v. 10. of the 26. cap. as the Lord lives, the
Lord shall smite him, or his day may come to dye, or he shall descend into the
battle (namely against the Philistines) and perish: But from me he shall
receive no damage God may smite him if he please, but I may not, I must not,
though I know him to be rejected of God, and my self to be appointed of God to
succeed him; Gods hand may be upon him, but mine shall never; or his day may
come to dye, but not a day sooner for me; for I wot well, he is marked for
God's, He is the Lords Anointed.

3. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be
guiltless? namely of high treason before God and man, he (whoever he be)
shall be questioned for it, and found guilty of the highest crime upon trial,
and shall have the due demerit of all Traitors, they that stretch forth their
hand in a violent way against Gods Anointed, there will come a time, when their
necks shall have a violent stretch for it, Hanging, drawing, and quartering, is
the punishment of such crimes; God himself else will see execution done, if
Humane Laws, or power should fail in this particular, one way or other God
will bring judgment upon them even in this world, beside that which remains
for them in the world to come; for he will never hold such guiltless: The
Psalmist speaking prophetically of strange children (and such are all Traitors,
Ps. 144.6.7.
and Rebels, of a strange birth, a Bastard brood, none of Gods) says, cast out
thy lightning and scatter them, shoot out thine arrows and destroy them, etc.
God can from Heaven cut them off, or he can cause their own beasts to help
bring them to their deserved end, as Absoloms mule did help to hang the Traitor
his master: or he can give them up to hang themselves, as Achitophel did.

Surely (Sir) God does not use to chastise Princes for their failings by any of
their own Subjects who are good men; some perhaps, that are vessels of wrath,
he permits (on their own head) to make themselves instruments thereof before
hand: but good Subjects that are ordained to be vessels of mercy, have hearts
and spirits only delighting in works of love; vessels of mercy hereafter, are
instruments of mercy here; but whoever makes himself (without authority) Gods
rod is sure to be thrown into the fire, Had Zimri peace that slew his master?
He was a rod, and he felt the fire.

quas vulgus elegerit, the King must make and maintain such Laws as the
common people shall think fit to make choice on: therefore if the King do not
so, the common people, or vulgus may force him, or at least make Laws without
him, for by that clause the King submits himself unto the people, and does in
effect say unto them, as the good Emperor Trajan did unto his Officers, use
the sword against my self, if I do not rule according to the Laws.

Popularity, then of Christianity; and discovered the Author of it, a rank
Heathen, who knew not himself to hold his Authority of God: for a King being
Gods sole and immediate servant, can no more give power to any of his people,
to draw the sword against himself, then I being the Kings Subject, can give
my servant power to kill me; or if a King should so much forget God and
himself, as to use such a sinful speech to please the people, I am sure they
(if such as truly fear God) dare not make any such use of it, though never so
great provocations were given: they would think with themselves thus: what
have we to do to meddle with another servant? we must leave him only to God
his own master: shall we be so vile as to think God either weak and cannot,
or wicked, and will not punish him in his time? shall we make our selves
Judges, or executioners for God? shall we think we can be more careful for
his credit, then himself is? shall we imagine to do him a good office, in
promoting his glory in a way contrary to his reveale^ will? O let us study to
approve our selves Gods good servants, (...) not his masters to teach him how
or when to correct his own i^^^diate Officer, upon the said Delinquents lands,
cut down his (...) and timber trees, and make spoil of all: or if a Minister
shall (...) preach obedience to the King, when he sees his people (...) ways
of disloyalty, he should forfeit all his profits ipso (...) forced to wear the
brand of a malignant, yea of a very Cavaleir (a mark as bad as a Popish Sau
bennet) until he recant such his detestable errors, and preach more
approveable Doctrine: Is the King bound by his Oath, to establish and defend
such a Law? surely no, therefore people are much deceived in their
interpretati^n of that clause, if there be any such in the Kings Oath: But his
Sacred Majesty in one of his Declarations, does fully declare the true meaning
of it, and to that only I do refer you:

Only this, I would have you remember that the vulgus do commonly go in the
broad way, which as Scripture says, etc.

But now for quas vulgus elegerit.

Whether there be any such phrase in that Oath which the King now takes, I
know not, but if there be, does it thence follow that the common people alone
must resolve what Laws are just, and to Gods glory, and what not? and that the
King must establish and defend what they only think well of, or else forfeit
his power to them, or be liable to their inforcement? every man's reason cannot
reach this: for,

Suppose the vulgar should think it just at the present, and for Gods glory,
that every man that would should be a Priest, (as it was in Ieroboams time) and
preach according to his own spirit, or new pretended light, though rents and
divisions thereby are made in all places; and thereupon should choose to have a
new Law made, that the Church Government allowed when the King took his oath,
should be quite put down; and those that hitherto have been called the Clergy
suppressed, and all learning (as Popish and profane) discountenanced; and
every man, be he weaver, peddler, or cobbler, should have free leave in public
to show his gifts; is the King bound to establish and defend such a Law? must
he break that part of his oath, which is to preserve the present established
Clergy and Church of God to the ut^^rmost of his power? and when God shall call
him to an account for (...) will it be sufficient for him to answer, as Aaron
did Moses, the peo^ ^uld have it so? I believe not.

(...) ^^ough the vulgus be somewhat unreasonable, yet we will not con^m (...)
so bold, as to urge the King by any new Law, to break any (...) ^ath or
Covenant, because they seem so careful he should (...) find such fault with
the imaginary breach thereof: I will (...) ^ce in another case.

to be vessels of mercy, have hearts and spirits only delighting in works of
love; vessels of mercy hereafter, are instruments or mercy here; but whoever
makes himself (without authority) Gods rod, is sure to be thrown into the
fire. Had Zimri peace that slew his master? He was a rod, and he felt the fire.

quas vulgus elegerit, the King must make and maintain such Laws as the
common people shall think fit to make choice of: therefore if the King do not
so, the common people, or vulgus may force him, or at least make Laws without
him, for by that clause the King submits himself unto the people, and does in
effect say unto them, as the good Emperor Trajan did unto his Officers, use
the sword against my self, if I do not rule according to the Laws.

Popularity, then of Christianity; and discovered the Author of it, a rank
Heathen, who knew not himself to hold his Authority of God: for a King being
Gods sole and immediate servant, can no more give power to any of his people,
to draw the sword against himself, then I being the Kings Subject, can give
my servant power to kill me; or if a King should so much forget God and
himself, as to use such a sinful speech to please the people, I am sure they
(if such as truly fear God) dare not make any such use of it, though never so
great provocations were given: they would think with themselves thus: what
have we to do to meddle with another servant? we must leave him only to God
his own master: shall we be so vile as to think God either weak and cannot,
or wicked, and will not punish him in his time? shall we make our selves
Judges, or executioners for God? shall we think we can be more careful for
his credit, then himself is? shall we imagine to do him a good office, in
promoting his glory in a way contrary to his revealed will? O let us study to
approve our selves Gods good servants, and not his masters, to teach him how or
when to correct his own immediate Officer.

But now for quas vulgus elegerit.

Whether there be any such phrase in that Oath which the King now takes, I
know not, but if there be, does it thence follow that the common people alone
must resolve what Laws are just, and to Gods glory, and what not? and that the
King must establish and defend what they only think well of, or else forfeit
his power to them, or be liable to their inforcement? every man's reason cannot
reach this: for,

Suppose the vulgar should think it just at the present, and for Gods glory,
that every man that would should be a Priest, (as it was in Ieroboams time) and
preach according to his own spirit, or new pretended light, though rents and
divisions thereby are made in all places; and thereupon should choose to have a
new Law made, that the Church Government allowed when the King took his oath,
should be quite put down; and those that hitherto have been called the Clergy
suppressed, and all learning (as Popish and profane) discountenanced; and
every man, be he weaver, peddler, or cobbler, should have free leave in public
to show his gifts; is the King bound to establish and defend such a Law? must
he break that part of his oath, which is to preserve the present established
Clergy and Church of God to the uttermost of his power? and when God shall call
him to an account for it, will it be sufficient for him to answer, as Aaron did
Moses, the people would have it so? I believe not.

But though the vulgus be somewhat unreasonable, yet we will not conceive them
so bold, as to urge the King by any new Law, to break any part of his oath or
Covenant, because they seem so careful he should keep it, and find such
fault with the imaginary breach thereof: I will therefore instance in another
case.

Suppose the vulgus should for the present think it just, that all whom the
King loves, or that love him, should be counted malignants, and be liable to
plundering, and should choose to have a Law made, that whomsoeyer the King
casts his favor upon, (unless approved of by themselves) and whosoever shall
speak in the Kings behalf, should presently forfeit all their estate unto the
said vulgus, unto whom it shall be lawful (before any public trial) to
seize upon the said Delinquents lands, cut down his woods, and timber trees,
and make spoil of all: or if a Minister shall dare to preach obedience to the
King, when he sees his people run into all ways of disloyalty, he should
forfeit all his profits ipso facto, and be forced to wear the brand of a
malignant, yea of a very Cavaleir (a mark as bad as a Popish San bennet)
until he recant such his detestable

errors, and preach more approveable Doctrine: Is the King bound by his Oath,
to establish and defend such a Law? surely no, therefore people are much
deceived in their interpretation of that clause, if there be any such in the
Kings Oath: But his Sacred Majesty in one of his Declarations, does fully
declare the true meaning of it, and to that only I do refer you:

Only this, I would have you remember that the vulgus do commonly go in the
broad way, which Scripture says is not the best, Mat. 7.13.
Company (you know) is the strongest argument to prevail with the many;
therefore Moses well, follow not a multitude to do evil, Ex. 23.2.
inferring thereby that for the most part they go in a way of evil doing, and
so of ill choosing, 2 Samuel 15. Mat. 27.20, 2^
as when they forsook David to follow Absalom, and Achitophel, nay when they
chose Barrabbas, and would have an order to crucify Jesus: indeed it is true,
some factious Priests, with some Scribes and Pharisees that were gracious with
them, did persuade and teach them to make that sinful choice, but their
weakness did appear in their being so persuaded: and the Common people still
are apt to be seduced, and thrust by such means into the worst ways; Bellua
multorum capitum (you know) one calls them, they are apt to be led they know not
whither, to say they know not what, and to cry they know not wherefore, as that
example shows, Acts 19.32. Act. 19.32.
therefore nothing of that nature which was alleged, but may be supposed of
the vulgus: perhaps, experience also could say somewhat to the matter, if she
might as safely use her tongue, as she may her eyes, and ears.

vulgus or Common people may not (happily) on their own heads resist the King,
or call him to an account, yet the Parliament may, the great Court of the
Kingdom.

Parliament may do, I will not determine. Only this I hope (as a man desiring
information) I may say: I do not see how the Parliament, taken in a complete
and perfect sense, conjoint together of head and members, scilicet of King,
Nobles, and Commons, can be said to resist the King, or to call him to an
account, for that himself is the principal or chief part thereof: nor (if
we take it in an incompleate or imperfect acceptance, for the minor or
inferior part, as divided from the King and the major part of his Peers) do I
see how properly (I am sure not kindly) the head can be resisted by the lower
members: I see not how such a part has power to do more then the Prince
himself can do; scilicet, dispense with oaths, and enable men without offense
to God, to break those his Laws wherein he commands Honor to the King, and
forbids resistance, nor how such members may do that for which they were not
chosen: scilicet arm us that chose them against him, that gave us power to
choose, and them to sit: nor how that they themselves as Parliament men have
Authority to oppose him, whom as private men they have sworn to obey, and whom
God in his own stead has set over them; they are but the representations of
us, our Images, and how they can pull down the Image and representation of God
I cannot see.

But this I know, and will be bold to say, as a minister of Jesus Christ, that a
Parliament (take it in either sense) though it may do what private men may not
do, yet it must not do, what a Christian ought not to do: I believe that the
Members of that Honorable Court, are Christian men, and that their duty is in
the midst of their State Affairs, to remember their relation to Christ, and to
do nothing contradicting the same, for it will be no sufficient excuse, when he
shall come to judge both quick and dead, and charge any of them for breaking
his Law, to say I did it as J was a Parliament man, and not as I was a
Christian, for if the Parliament man be punished for his faults, I believe as a
private man he will feel the smart thereof: and so I conclude this
particular, with my daily prayer: Lord give to every member of that Honorable
Court now Assembled, a full measure of thy grace, that they may be willing and
ready to comply with his Sacred Majesty, their Gracious Sovereigne, and thine
Anointed, in all those ways that tend to thy Glory, and the peace of this
Church and Commonwealth: Amen.

^criptures evi^encing the un^wfulnesse of ^ch resistance.
Now (reverend Sir) I have answered all your objections, that I can remember,
and come to your request, which was to show some Scriptures oppugning this
resistance.

(Sir) I know it rests only on their part who forsake the old way, to produce
Scriptures for their new; but because you know it is easier to overthrow that
which you are upon, then to maintain it, you are pleased to put what you
conceive is less difficult upon me; which I accept both willingly, and
thankefully.

Romans 12.18.
I will not insist upon that precept of the Apostle, So much as in you lies, if
it be possible live peaceably with all men, which the Doctrine of resistance
does manifestly contradict, if there be another course to be taken, as
undoubtedly there is, (according as I shall show anon) nor will I much mind you
of those places where he propounds prayer for, and obedience unto, (not
resistance of, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Tit. 3.1.
) Princes and Kings to be the necessary and only way to live Godly, and
honestly, quietly, and peaceably: nor yet of that saying, ye have not yet
resisted unto blood, Heb. 12.4.
which not only the Apostle himself, but also David Dixon of Scotland; and
all the godly learned expositors do interpret to be a passive resistance of
evil, by suffering our own blood to be shed (after Christ's Example in the
former verses) not an active resistance thereof, by shedding the blood of
others: I say I will not insist upon these or any other Scriptures of like
nature, because it will be answered as it has been already, that those places
concern private Christians, not a Parliament or public State; as if a
Parliament or public State, were not bound to do all that is possible to live
peaceably; as if the members thereof were not chose on purpose to procure the
peace of all, to settle godliness, honesty, religion, and quiet in a Nation;
as if the Parliament men were no Christians; as if by being advanced to that
Honor they were exempted from the rules of Christianity, or could in their
wisdoms, devise ways to promote peace and godliness, better then those
which Gods Spirit has propounded; such language therefore (as I conceive) how
frequent soever, is not to the dignity of that High Assembly: but (as I said
before) I will not meddle with the power of a Parliament, nor do I desire to
hear or know any thing of that Court, but what is pious and Honorable.

But the first Scripture which I will allege, shall be that which some,
because they cannot evade, do scoffingly call our great place: viz. Romans 13.1,
2. Let every soul be subject to the Higher power, for there is no power but of
God the powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.

I first demand, what is meant by higher power in this place? Author of the
Pamphlet called the glorious name of God, the Lord of Hosts, pag^ 113.
one answers me, That Authority which God and man has put upon a man: I
demand again, is it only naked Authority so put, without any relation to the
man, on whom put, that must be subjected unto, and not resisted? He answers
yes, for it is (...), (which signifies power in the abstract or the power of the
Law, and not (...) a more concrete word, which may implie also the power of the
Person;

I confess it is somewhat difficult to me, to have such an abstrusive
apprehension of Authority, yet because it is so Magisterially affirmed, I will
not resist the higher Spirit: though I cannot upon such an ipse dixit believe,
the full and true sense of the text to be, The power of the man may not be
resisted but the man that has the power may: for I would ask this question,
why may the man that has the power, be resisted? I confess, the answer is
ready, in respect of his illegal will, and ways: and why in that respect? is
it because Authority thereby is abused or misapplied? it should seem no for
it is professed in the same page that Power and Authority though abused, is not
to be resisted: where then does the Burre stick? is Authority subjected solely
in the Kings Law, and no whit in his Person, though put upon him both by God
and man? or is Authority it self the subject, and the person exercising the
same, a bare accident unto that, being in it (only more separably) as pride
and folly are in Homine? so it may appear in the same place, for (says that
Rabbi) if one that is in Authority, command out of his own will, and not by
Law, I resist no power, no Authority at all, if I neither actively nor
passively obey; no, I do not so much as resist abused Authority: for why? it
must be believed (as his fathers the Jesuits teach) that the Prince by his
disordered will, (or dissent from Law) has quite lost his Authority, and is
become like another man: and so though He be resisted, yet Authority is not,
for that is fled from Him.

But by the way, if Authority be wholly subjected in the Law, who placed it
there? our great new master yeildeth the Lawmakers (who it seems are too
indiscreetly prodigal of their Authority, to give it all away to their Laws,
and keep none of it to themselves, nor can have any save what it pleases the
Law to return unto them) His words are these, if those who have power to make
Laws, shall make sinful Laws, and so give Authority to any to force
obedience, we say: here, there must be either flying or passive obedience, (no
resistance) whence we may conjecture, that those who have power to make Laws,
are some Persons in Authority; and that those Persons have a possibility in
them to make sinful Laws, as well as good; and when they have made those
sinful Laws, they can give power to any to force obedience unto them; and
those Officers so enabled with power, must not be resisted for the sinful
Laws sake: but if he that made this sinful Law, shall command out of his
own will a thing less sinful, then what (perhaps) the sinful Law requires,
He may be resisted, and yet no Authority resisted by the resister, because no
authority abused by the Commander, he having uncloathed himself thereof to
adorn and strengthen his sinful Law, to make that more venerable then
himself, and less resistible:

If this be the man's understanding of the case, let us see how by this his
Doctrine he must understand the text: by Higher powers (according to this) is
meant Humane Laws and ordinances, which are the bounds and bridles of
restraint to Kings as well as to other men, let every soul, (the Prince
himself not excepted) be subject unto these, and take heed of resisting them;
for though they be evil, yet submission either active or passive, must be
yielded to them, for the establishment of iniquity by a Law does make it
altogether unopposeable: this must be the meaning of the Apostle in this
Expounders sense, but every faith cannot swallow this construction of Higher
powers to be only Humane Laws, for as he said rightly, they may be evil, and
are ordained by men; whereas the Apostle tells us that the powers which he
means are ordained of God, and therefore must needs be all good, for God has
nothing to do with the stool of wickedness. I confess my self lost in that
teachers Meanders; I am even eathed in Burrowes, and need some faithful
Jeremy to direct me out of these dark and crypticke Cavernes, and I find him
in Gods book bidding me look about and ask for the old way which is the
good way, the old exposition is the best which is this; Jer. 6.16.


By every soul is to be understood every man, with all that belongs unto him;
and by Higher power, is meant not only the power it self, but also the person
excerciseing the same; for as (...) signifies the power, so (...) notes the
person, yea the superiority of the person, and gives the power the denomination
of Higher; so that we must not only be subject to the Power because a power,
but also to the same because an Higher power; in which respect every inferior
not only soul, but also power, must be subject to that power which is higher
then it self. And the King being the supreme person under God, has therefore
in these his Dominions the Highest power, and may be called without any great
impropriety of speech, as he is Gods immediate deputy on earth the Highest
power.

If any The Author of the Pamphlet called the Glorious name of God. etc. page
122. 1. Peter ^
enemy of Regal Authority shall object, and say, though the King indeed be
supreme (the Apostle Peter speaks it too plainly to be denied) yet in the
same place the King is made an ordinance of man, and therefore to be limited by
man. Calvin on the place answers? Dicitur humana ordinatio, non quod Humanitus
inventa fuerit sed quod propria Hominum est degesta and ordinata vivendi ratio,
it is called an humane ordination, not because it is man's invention, but because
ordained (of God) for the good and conservation of men, or because executed by
man, and about the government of mankind.

But (Sir) I return to your self, that this which I have given is the true
meaning of that place to the Romans, the text it self does evidence; for what
is called the Higher power in the first verse, is called the ruler, and the
Minister of God. v. 3. which imply the person, as well as the Authority: now
(says the Apostle) this Higher power must not be resisted viz. by any kind of
resistance: and his reason is strong, for to resist, says he, is malum culpae;
who ever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and it is malum
poenae too; they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation: for, si
bonus, nutritor est tuus (says Augustine) si malus, tentator tuus est: if the
ruler be good, receive thy nourishment from him with obedience; if he be evil,
receive thy trial by him with patience: and so you have my first Script:
against resistance.

My second shall be Eccles. 8.2, 3, 4, 5. verses: Solomon was a wise man, and
the counsels of such are good: I counsel thee (says he) ut os Regis observes
(as the Hebrew has it) that thou observe the mouth of the King, Eccels. 8, 2.
etc.
and that in regard of the oath of God: i. e. that oath of Allegiance or
subjection which in the name of God with his approbation Subjects have allwaies
taken unto their Sovereigns, and whereunto God is a witness, and whereof (if
broken) he will be a severe punisher. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: that
is, says Tremelius, ne ab obsequio illius te subducito animo perturbato,
withdraw not thy self from his alleagiance in a discontentednesse of spirit:
stand not in an evil thing, scilicet, in perturbatione and rebellione quae
tibi malum allatura esset, in thy sullenness and rebellion which will bring
mischeife upon thee, for he does what ever pleases him; it is not thy will
and pleasure but the will and pleasure of the Prince that must be done; Kings
have long hands to reach those that resist them; and God does enable them to
have their Will upon such treacherous and disobedient Subjects as will not
willingly submit unto it.

Yea, where the word of a King is, there is power; as to break the heart of a
good Subject into duty, Confregit David viros suis verbis, 1 Samuel 24.7.
says the text, David brake his men with his words; so to blast the
conspiracies, and to confound the spirits of those that be rebellious: for
indeed Gods wrath awakened by the breach of oath, attends the Kings word to
accomplish the same upon resisters. And hence is that of Solomon in one place,
against a King there is no rising up; Prove. 30.31.
and in another, He that provokes a King to anger, (by opposing his word,
Prove. 20.2.
or any other way) sins against his own soul: therefore however for a
season, the word of a King, like that of God, be resisted, slighted, and
contemned, yet it shall appear in the end again, to be a word of power.

Who may say unto him, what do thou?] i. e. none has power to call a King
to account save God alone, no man has authority to gainsay him, says Elihu in
Job. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? Job. 34.18.
or to Princes, ye are ungodly? it seems it was not in those days.

Who so keeps the Commandment shall feel no evil thing.] that is, the
command of God in the first place and then (for the oath of Gods sake) the
command of the King, be it dictum or scriptum, not contradicting that of God;
qui rebellaverit ori tuo moriatur, said the people to Joshua their Captain,
Josh. 1.18.
Whosoever does rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken to the
words of thy mouth in all that thou command, he shall be put to death: but
on the other side, He that keeps the same shall feel no evil thing. Sir,
this is my second Scripture, and, as I conceive, it is suitable to our present
case, against resisting the personal will and word of the King.

More precepts I could give, but because examples are most regarded in these
days, I will remember you of some of them.

In the third place therefore be pleased to think of the children of Israel in
the land of Egypt, and of the manner of their deliverance by the hand of Moses
and Aaron. It must be confessed that Pharaoh was a wicked King, and exercised
great tyranny over Gods people, then under his subjection, and was condemned by
Gods express word; yet being lawful Magistrate over the Country, Moses did
not arm the Israelites against him, though they were able to make their part
good, as appears by their number, being six hundred thousand men: Exodus 12.37.
and Pharaohs confession, that they were more and mightier then he and his
Egyptians: Exodus 1.9.
but Continent sese and observant Pharaonem obedienter, as one says, they
contained themselves, and beseeched him obediently.

Exodus 2.12.
Yea, it should seem that Moses himself at first had a fancy, that this
deliverance should be by way of resistance, when he slew the Egyptian; Act.
7.25.
for as Stephen tells us, he knew then that God had appointed him for that
service, but that error cost him 40 years exile in the Wilderness: and when
God employed him, he directed him to go in another way, namely, in all
humility to repair unto the King, and demand a dismission at his hands; we
cannot but suppose that God could have made them able (had there been fewer of
them) with their own swords to make their own way, and by his command could
have made it lawful so to have done; but this other course which God would
have them take, did in the effect more aggravate Pharaohs obstinacy, and
illustrate the Religion of Gods people: and was more to the magnifying of Gods
glory.

In the fourth place let me mind you of that in the first of Samuel, cap. 8.
the 9 and following verses: God having a purpose to give Israel a King, does
order so in his wisdom that they should make suit for him themselves;
whereupon he takes occasion by his Prophet in that place, to forewarne them of
some intolerable qualities that might fall to be in some of their Kings, and
thereby does timely prepare them to obedience and patience under them: if we
mark, there is as great injustice and tyranny foretold as could be imagined,
their sons, daughters, and servants, should be taken from them; those that
were noble and free borne should be made slaves, and put to servile offices,
their lands and goods should be extorted from them, and diverted to his own
and his Courtiers private use and commodity, which were as great breaches of
the Laws of the Commonwealth as any could be made, yet no resistance in the
case is countenanced, but countermanded rather, the only course prescribed is
verse. 18. You shall cry unto the Lord in that day, as if he had said, be as
weary as you will, or as you have cause, yet you shall not have leave to shake
off the yoke which God through your importunity has laid upon you, it shall
not be lawful for you to resist or oppose by force these personal and unjust
courses of your King; but you shall only cry unto God: as you cried for a
King, so shall you cry under a King, and till ease and help comes unto you
this way; you must submit to the highest extremities that his illegal will
shall impose upon you: It is to be remembered, that this was at the first
erection of a King among Gods people, and all Scripture being written for our
Learning, doublesse this is chronicled in Gods book for the instruction of all
Subjects that should acknowledge and fear the Lord in after times. And most
fitly also for the good of posterity did Gods providence and spirit strengthen
this prescription by recording the example of David's carriage toward that their
first King: for as Saul discovered in part the described manners of such a King
as Samuel had spoke of, so David discovered the prescribed conditions of such a
Subject as God approves off: It is well known how unjustly and illegally he
was persecuted by Saul, and how he avoided his fury, only by flying from place
to place; he did not hunt the King, the King hunted him: He in all his
streights did cry to God, and trusted in his providence, and he lost nothing by
it, God wrought for him better then he could have done for himself; and did
him more good then e're his own resistance could have done him: it is worthy
our special remembrance, how God provided for his escape in the wilderness of
Maon, when he was so encircled about with Saul and his men, that of necessity
he must be killed, if he did not stand upon his own defense; 1 Samuel 23.27.
but God would not suffer a good Subject to have a hand in so sinful a
business, or to leave so evil an example to aftertimes, and therefore his
providence sends a messenger to tell Saul that the Philistims had invaded his
Land, whereby he was on the sudden forced to be gone, and so David was
delivered. 1 Samuel 29.
Likewise at another time when David was in as great a straight, namely, when
he should have gone out with Achish against Saul, the Lord did also deliver
him: Achish had allowed him Ziglag to dwell in, (for David durst not in
conscience possess himself of any City in Israel without the Kings leave,
much less hold it against his will) and therefore that he might not offend, he
fled the Kingdom, and God gave him favor in the eyes of Achish, an enemy to
Israel: and David could not tell how in gratitude to deny Achish to go out
with him against their common enemy, and therefore fained a willingness, but
doubtless in his spirit he cried unto the Lord for his help, that he might
not be forced to lift up his hand against his Sovereign: whereupon the Lord
moved the Princes of the Philistims to dislike of his being there, so that he
and his men were dismissed: thus is the Lord ready at hand to help those good
Subjects in their streights that walk in the ways of loyalty, and God is
still the same.

1 Samuel 15.
I could here mind you of Samuels behavior, when he had from the Lord
pronounced Saul's rejection, how he went home and prayed, and wept for him, did
not stir up the people to rebel against him; he did not forget (as some of
us do) his own doctrine of passive obedience, 1 Samuel 8.
which formerly he had preached unto them: I could also remember you of Elias
his carriage toward Ahab, an unjust man, one that had sold himself to work
wickedness; that Prophet had as good credit with the people (as any Preacher
in these days has) to have persuaded them to resist his illegal commands,
had it been lawful for him to have employed it that way; but he only saved
himself by flight from his cruelty, and so by his example taught others to do.

But the fifth special place which I desire you to observe, is the story in
the book of Ezra: Ezra 1.1. etc.
Cyrus you know had made a Decree, (and the Laws of the Medes and Persians
were unalterable) concerning the building of the Temple at Jerusalem: which
work the adversaries of the Jews hindered, and obtained a Letter from King
Artaxerxes (one of Cyrus his successors) to command the Jews to cease; Ezra
4.21.
unto which, Ezra 6.3.
(though only the personal command of the King, and contrary to a written and
unalterable Law) the people of God submitted, did not stand upon their own
defense, pleading the Decree of Cyrus, or the goodness of the work, the
building of Gods own House: Ezra 4.24.
but says the Text, The work ceased until the second year of Darius King of
Persia, when as they had new leave to proceed in the same. And by the way it is
worthy to be observed for the better practice of this age, when the King had
given them authority, and put it into their hands to build the House of God
even as themselves pleased, they did not neglect that work and fall to argue
and dispute about the Kings authority, or to set things in a combustion to
greive the Kings spirit, but they set themselves to their proper business, and
blessed God for their King: Ezra 7.27.
Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers which has put such a thing as this
into the Kings heart, to beautify the House of the Lord which is in
Jerusalem; which was indeed the way to continue the Kings heart still toward
them. O that this wise generation were but acquainted with such piety! But I
return.

If it be objected (as it is often in Pulpits alleged) that the people in
building that Temple in Nehemiah's time, Nehem. 4.
did work with their swords, and spears, and bows, and so did defend
themselves against their enemies: I answer, it is true; but they had the Kings
leave so to do, the King was on their side, Nehemiah was strengthened by the
Kings special authority; so that not they, but those that opposed them, were
the resisters of the King.

It Is worth your noting also in the sixth place, how the Jews in Mordecay's
time, Esther 3.10.
being destined to death to please the lust of proud Haman, yet because that
wicked Decree was countenanced with the Kings authority, his Privy Seal, the
Jews durst not resist, for the safeguard of their life's, and all they had;
they did not plead that the King was seduced by ill counsel to destroy their
whole Nation, (as they had cause) and therefore by the Law of nature they must
stand upon their own defense: no, the people of the Lord were not acquainted
with any such devices; they prayed and put their trust in their God, who never
failed them; and he brought it so to pass, that against the day came, Esther
8.11.
they had the Kings leave and authority to draw their swords in their own
defense, which else they durst never have done, as is plainly evident in the
story. 2 Samuel 9.1.
Truly (Sir) those phrases of Scripture, When Kings go forth to War; and,
What King going forth to War against another King, do plainly speak to my
conscience, Luke 14.31.
that the power of wageing War, either offensive or defensive, is only in and
from the King, who alone is enabled of God to warrant men in such a way;
wherein whosoever goes without the Kings approbation, is not allowed of God:
and if so, then sure the Lord will never say, Well done, good and faithful
servants to them that go in that way against the Kings command, yea, and
against his Person.

But (Sir) I will not weary your Spirit with the quotation of too many
Scriptures of this nature, contradicting resistance; I shall only therefore
remember you of two more, and then conclude this particular also; one is Act.
23. you cannot deny, Act. 23.3, 4.
but when Ananias commanded Paul to be smitten, it was a command contrary to
Law, (for the Text does so affirm it) he had no ground but his own will to
offer that violence: and yet how does the Apostle check himself, for his but
ignorantly speaking an unbeseeming word against him? and alleges Scripture
against himself, it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of
the people, and if that word Ruler did comprehend Ananias, I am sure it
includes the King, and if not an unbeseeming word to such a one, then sure not
a resisting action against a King, which is far more unbeseeming: if you say,
Saint Paul was a private man, but what is his example to a public State, or
Parliament? I answer, a public State consists of private men; besides, the
Title of volunteer, which they that walk in this way of resistance are called
by, does speak to my apprehension, that the Parliament does not command any to
run upon their own damnation, Romans 13.2.
by going this way, but leaves it to every ones own free will, and so in
effect, all resisters are but private men: and (without offense be it spoken) I
think Saint Paul's example in a matter of this nature, should be more prevalent
with a Christian, then the very command it self (if such a thing were) of a
whole Parliament.

Lastly, let the example of our Master and Savior Jesus Christ never be
forgotten by us; who when apprehended in the Garden, would not suffer Peter to
use his sword in defense of him against authority, but told him, He that smit
with the sword (against that) should perish by the sword (of that): and yet if
you well consider it, I believe you will confess that that authority was
rather guided by Will then Law, in that particular action: nay, and our Savior
adds too, that he was strong enough to have defended himself had it been
lawful, for he could have had twelve Legions of Angels with a word speaking:
yea, the whole course of the proceedings against our Savior was illegal, for
what Law was there ever that an innocent person should be delivered to the will
of his accusers to be crucified, yet the text says of Pilate, Joh. 19.16.
that, Tradidit Jesum voluntati eorum, it was mouth and malice only that
prevailed, yet our Savior made no resistance; it cannot be said that he was
then only as a private man, for sure at that time he was (of all that ever
was) the most public person also; if it be said, but his case was particular:
I answer, true, but our Savior did not sin in the manageing of it, as (for
ought I see) he must have done, if he had omitted any thing that had been
lawful and necessary; and such (if we will believe it) is defensive resistance
against the personal and illegal commands of a Governor.

Besides, I do not see how Christ can be freed from the imputation of
unfaithfulness; if this doctrine of resistance be so lawful and necessary a
thing for the preservation of a Christian Church and State, (the matter being
of such grand importance) that he did not leave some express and plain
warrant for it: No, no, Christ was faithful in all things, righteousness and
peace, truth and love, humility and obedience met all in him, let his ways
only be acknowledged safe and good, and ours confessed to be dangerous and
ungodly.

Thus (good Sir) you have my Scriptures against resistance, from which (with
many others of like nature) I do conclude, That to the Prince his personal
command, as well as to his legal, I must yield mine active obedience, (if not
against the revealed will of God) or else submit with patience to the penalty
that shall according to pleasure be inflicted: or lastly, I may fly for mine
own safety, if I have not a sufficient measure of suffering grace. And I do
conclude, that by Gods Word resistance is utterly unlawful in this case, and
that no man from thence can have a sufficient ground for his conscience to go
in such a way.

And now (Sir) I could argue thus with you: If we must not by the rules of
Divinity resist the Kings will when it commands against his Law, then surely
not when it concurres with his Law, not when it contests for his Law, not when
the King adventures his sacred person in defense of his Law, against those that
not only stop all proceedings of Law, but directly break all Laws both of
God and Man; such are those that pull down Religion established by Law, that,
(slighting all oaths, duties, and relations) do murder, plunder, rifle, rob,
and by violence take away all they can lay hold on, contrary to Law: I say,
when the Kings personal Will concurres with his Laws against such persons,
then we are not to resist him; I suppose your self will confess it.

Or again from your own position I could thus argue: If it be lawful to
resist the personal will of a King, when it opposes his Laws (as you say);
then sure it is much more lawful, and our duty, to resist the personal
commands of others when they oppose the Law, and the King too; And if the King
be bound to allege an established Law for every thing he commands, or else
may be resisted: sure we have reason to look that others should produce an
established Law for all that they require at any of our hands, or else we need
not obey them, specially against the King; even sense and reason will make that
consequent: Thus (Sir) I could argue, but I will leave the Argumentation to
your own conscience.

Only there is one more Objection which fell from your lips at supper,
against this my judgment, which then I said nothing unto: and that was this,

Rebels: all that are interessed in this present business are in a Rebellion,
if resistance be unlawful.

Rebellare in a literal acceptance, is to strike again, him that, struck
first, to return war upon him that began it, and in that sense I think you
be no Rebels. But indeed it is counted only a State Business in these days
to determine of Rebellion, and therefore referrning what I have said to your
own application, I will only as a Brother in the Ministry, mind you what in
Divinity Rebellion is accounted.

Rebellion is all kind of evil, it is the Puddle of all sins, the Sink of
all villainy, the breach of all Laws and relations both toward God and man:
Pride, Profaneness, Perjury, envy, wrath, malice, theft, murder, Cruelty,
rapine, spoil, and oppression, irreligion, and unnaturallnesse, are all
concentered in Rebellion, yea all sins, by all names, that sins can be
named, and by all means that sins can be committed do follow Rebellion, and
are found among that disordered and disobedient sort of people, yea Rebellion
is the ruin of Religion, Church and Commonwealth, of States, families, and
men; it is monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens cui lumen ademptum, a most
horrible, ugly, blind, il-favoured Monster, quite void of the light of grace,
or of Gods fear, what ever it pretends: Rebellion, says the Spirit, is as
the sin of witchcraft, though ugly and Diobolicall in it self, (for the
Devil was the first Rebel) yet exceeding specious and betwitching, 1 Samuel
5.23.
because masked commonly with Religion, and usherd with pretenses of
Reformation: and therefore it is most odious unto God.

I may well say of it, as the Apostle does of fornication, it is a sin not to
be named among the Saints; Ephesians. 5.3.
of which judgment (as may seem) are others too, for let but a Minister (in
these days) pray or preach against Rebellion, let him but say God needs it not
to maintain Religion, the very mention of the name Rebellion, makes him
capable of a Prison, and liable unto punishment: Indeed Rebellion is the
Devils sin, and a sin as bad as the devil himself, for it is the continent and
cause of all sin, and no more can be said of him; it is a sin that God has as
surely punished, as he has the Devil; I could give you many examples hereof,
but I spare you; only know this, that for my part I resolve with my self from
these Considerations, Ps. 66.7.
that the Psalmists prayer shall be ever mine (in private, since I am barred
from the public) O Lord, thou that by thy power rulest for ever, whose eyes
behold the nations, let not the Rebellious exalt themselves.

And thus (Sir) you have fully seen my judgment, and resolution in the case,
and the grounds I go upon, if your disposition be not altered from what it was,
you will freely accord with me, or freindly discover unto me wherein I have
erred.

Reasons why the Authors Conscience cannot permi^ him to concurr^ with some o^
his Brethren in this way of resistance.
viz. to give you some particular reasons of my dislike of the present practice
of so many of my brethren, with whom (till now) I have been so inwardly and
familiarly acquainted: for this as a great fault has been objected against
me, not only by your self, but also by others.

Sir, let me still deal ingeniously without offense: I do profess in the
presence of God who knows all hearts, that I desire with my soul, so far as
my Brethren follow Christ to follow the meanest of them, but if my Brethren
leave him, they must not be angry if I forsake them: Saint Paul himself
desires men, to follow him no further then he followed Christ: And I do not
find that ever Christ went in that way, wherein my Brethren would have me go
after them; I dare not do what Christ did not, to please my Brethren: I have
asked my conscience many a time, whether it thinks that Christ (if he were
here) would walk in the path of resistance with my Brethren, whether he would
say and preach such things, as some of them do now urge and press upon the
people, and it has answered me, surely no. for Christ never stirred up men to
war, or to shed the blood of one another, or to resist their Sovereign upon
any occasion, he allwaies preached for p^ace, Love, and obedience, and against
oppression, rapine, and wrong: He commanded all to deny themselves, as himself
did, and to leave their wrongs to God: He requires us to learn of him
meekness and lowliness; to be so far from returning blows, that rather we
should turn the other Cheek when the one is smitten, this was his own
practice when they buffeted his blessed face, spit upon it, and plucked of his
hair: truly (Sir) my Brethren must pardon me, if I prefer Christ before the
best of them.

Besides (Sir) if I should fancy to follow some of my Brethren in their new
way, it must be I know not how far, and in all things, for should I come
short but in one particular, I had (almost) as good be failing in all, I must
pray as they do, either not mentioning the King at all, or speak of him in a
defameing way, I must preach as they do, and cry Cursed be the Parent that
diswades his Child, Cursed be the wife that withholds her Husband, Cursed be
the Master that hinders his servant, from going to this war, to help the
Lord against the mighty (that is to say) against the King, (for so I must
interpret it) yea I must turn my pulpit into mount Eball, and curse with Bell,
Book, and Candle, with the great curse, and the little curse, with Meroz
Curse, the most bitter Curse, under the name of Malignants (that is to say
Devils) and enemies to God and truth, all persons of what rank soever, that
have set their hands to the petition for peace; I must argue, that the King is
not an absolute God, therefore he is mortal, and may be resisted; He shall die
like a man, and therefore we may fight against him, though my conscience did
never yet learn such Logic: And then too, in stead of Gods word, I must tell
some fearful tales of the Cavaliers, how bloody they be in their actions, and
how blasphemous in their expressions, to fright, and imbitter the good women's
spirits, that so they may solicit their Husbands to be more liberal of their
purses in maintaining the war against them: and then I must (to comfort them
again) and further to encourage them, relate some valiant exploits done by some
of Gods poor ROUNDHEADS, accordingly (as they say) they are scoffingly termed,
affirming all to be as true as God is in heaven; thus must I beautify and
adorn my sermons, or else they will not be worth a rush, nor shall I be free
from being suspected: But (Sir) nobis non licet esse tam disertis qui musas
colimus sacratiores, I dare not in that place, relate any thing as matter of
faith, but what I know is in Gods word, or grounded thereupon.

Nay and further yet, I must not only follow thus; but also approve of what
ever injury and wrong is done by others of that side, to those whom my
Conscience thinks to be Honest and Conscionable men, I must allow of all
rifling, plundering, robbing and stealing, and commend the actors though never
so vile in life and carriage, as friends to the good cause: I must delight to
see reverend, grave and aged Divines for preaching obedience haled from their
Churches, flocks, and families, to prisons, and insulted over and shamefully
abused by the basest men; (even as the Christians were by those bloody wretches
under the Heathen Emperors, and as the Martyrs were in Queen Mary's days) I
must joy, to bear that they are turned out of means and maintenance, unheard
and perhaps unseene, only upon the bare information of some malicious and
beastly drunkard, whom the same Minister has formerly endeavored to reclaim
from sin. and I must laugh when I hear they are hunted and pursued (as the
Indians were, by the Spaniards Dogs) in the fields and Highwaies by the
ungodly Soldiers with swords and Polaxes, unhorsed and forced to betake
themselves to woods to hide themselves; though I know them to be Godly,
learned, holy, and unblameable, yet I must deny such my knowledge, and conclude
of them, (as some did of Christ) that they are justly smitten of God, even
because they are not of our opinion; and I must believe all the rude people
that are employed to do this mischeife, and delight therein, to be very zealous
for God, and worthy of thanks for their care of the cause.

And I must also rejoice to see noble, worshipful and gallant Gentlemen, that
have borne the office of Magistracy with Honor many years, who have spent
themselves and their estates to do their Country service, fetched from their
houses, by the rabble of men, and haled to prison, spoiled of their goods, or
forced to fly from place to place, only for their Conscience sake, because they
believe that according to Gods Command, they are bound to love and Honor their
Sovereign, and not to join in a mortal resistance against him: these things
and many such like must I approve on, which (Sir) I profess I cannot, I dare
not, I had rather loose my life then my Conscience.

Nay (Sir) let me add one thing more, if I should imitate my Brethren, and
humor the people in this their heady way, I should but like the fool in the
Gospel build upon a Sandy foundation; for vulgus est mobile you know, they
that cry Kill the King today, will upon better information cry hang up the
Seditious Preachers to morrow; when they come home lamed from the Battle, and
frustrate of all their expectations, or have well paid with their purses for
their ungodly and inconsiderate undertakings, who do we think they will cry
out upon, but on those that provoked them to the business; even the Ministers
that promised Heaven, and assurance of Victory, and rich spoils out of the
estates of Delinquents? whom shall the desolate widow curse that has lost her
husband in the Battle, or the fatherless child that has lost his parent,
or the childlesse old man that has lost the staff of his age, in the War
against his Sovereign, (who has preserved him and his hitherto in safety,
under the arm of his protection) but only the Ministers that scared them with
the curses of God, if they did not yield them up to that service? The Lord in
mercy deliver me from the curse of the aged, the fatherless, and the widow.

Sir, it has been observed of some, that being maimed, have with much
difficulty returned from Edgehill Battle, (where, if their Sovereigns
fatherly bowels had not yearned with pity toward them when they were taken,
in regard of their simplicity, they had been hanged according to their merits)
when they have come for relief to the rich of the Parish, discovering their
wounds, they have been slighted with this Answer, Who bad you go, Who bad
you go? now whom shall these poor afflicted cry out upon, but on the
Preachers, whose seducing tongues wrought most upon their ignorance and good
meaning? And alas, should I be thus cruel to impoverish men, to lame their
bodies, to defile their souls, to undo them every way? the Lord keep me from
doing such a thing.

When Abigail dissuaded David from slaughtering Nabal and his family, she used
this Argument; Ne sit in singultum cordis Domini mei in posterum, lest it be a
corrosive to my Lords spirit afterward: and I profess unto you I do believe,
that had I been at Edge hill (as some Ministers were) against his Majesty,
all the blood that was there shed, would roar continually night and day in my
conscience; but the Lord I hope will ever preserve the soul of his poor
Minister, from the hearing of so hideous a cry.

Nay (Sir) may it not be imagined that all the blood that has been shed
throughout the Land in this unchristian and unnatural War, shall in the
conclusion be charged upon the Ministers heads, both by God and Man? Some say
of late that they are resolved that this War against the King is lawful. who
has resolved them? Gods Word I am sure has not, who then? even such and such
good Preachers; for my own part I am not ambitious to be called good upon such
a ground, nor do I believe that ever any Member of the Honorable Houses of
Parliament (their desires at first were so right for God) either would or durst
have countenanced this business, if they had not been encouraged thereunto by
their Prophets, sed saepe in magistros scelera redierunt sua, the blame in the
end may overtake the sinners: We may observe in Scripture how though Dathan and
Abiram, Princes and Peers of Israel, were engaged in the insurrection against
Moses and Aaron, yet because Corah was a Levite, and a provoker unto it, he
has the name of it; it is called The conspiracy and gainsaying of Corah, unto
this day.

Sir, from these and such like thoughts my resolves are, as I told you at our
last meeting, to endeavor by Gods grace to be able to say when I die, with S.
Paul, I am free from the blood of all men; Act. 20.26.
and if any of my Brethren be offended hereat, rather then break my
resolution, I shall even bid farewell unto my Brethren.

And yet (Sir) I hope you remember that I do not go all alone, some of my
godly Brethren of the Ministry are of my judgment, who for their ability and
faithfulness in their calling, for their holiness and honesty of life, have
been as well approved of, as any of the others when time was, although at this
present they are discountenanced and defamed, for their bearing testimony to
the truth of Jesus, and their dutiful love unto their Sovereign; some of whom
(you know) I named unto you, and others I could name, but their bonds and
imprisonments, their abuses and reproaches, their being made the scorn of men
and the outcasts of the people does save me that labor.

But for the matter of example: Sir, I speak it without flattery, (as God
knows) there are few whom I have desired more to be like then your self, such
an high reverence have I always had of those graces and gifts which our rich
God has bestowed upon you, which in his service you have heretofore to my
apprehension most faithfully and unweariably expended: and indeed I believe
your bare example in this business, has swayed more with many of our Brethren
in these parts of Essex, then their own judgments: (if a man may guess at
their judgments by their former Doctrines) they have trusted to your eyes and
shut their own, against their former received light: I am sure many of the
vulgar can allege no other Scripture (nor do they think it is needful) but
Master Marshals example, and the conformity of such and such good Ministers
thereunto; and I have been wondered at as the only Owl of the corner, and
judged to suffer all this molestation and persecution (by beastly men, whose
stink of late displeased many) as a due punishment sent of God for my dissent
in opinion from your self and the rest of my reverend Brethren, unto whom
before for ten years space I was so well united: But (Sir) though I confess
you have been a burning and a shining light, in which I have much rejoiced,
and for which in secret I have often blessed the Lord, yet I must forsake you
to follow that pillar of fire, Gods holy Word, which is the lamp to my feet,
and must be the guide to my paths, while I walk in the wilderness of this
world: And I am sure if you are still your former self, you will not distaste me
for so doing. As concerning those my Brethren, who think so well of
themselves, that they would have me make their example my Scripture, (as many
of the common people do) I say but this, let them as their duty is, but make
their own example Gods Scripture, (conformable to that) and I am theirs as
much as any: and to help them herein, let them but consider of these
aberrations which are in their present way, and which are the reasons of my
alienation from them.

is not the way of God, for in that, righteousness and peace, This way of
resistance is discovered to be, 1. Against the way of God.
truth and love do all meet, whereas none of these are visible in this;
experience shows that this is the way of strife and debate, of lying and
slandering, of malice and hatred, etc. insomuch, that the Apostles words, Romans
3.12. and following verses, may be fitly spoken of those that walk in it, They
are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable, there is
none that does good, their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they
have used deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, their mouth is
full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood,
destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not
known, nor will they know it; the Apostle concludes of such conditioned men,
that There is no fear of God before their eyes, and shall I go with such men
in such a way, God forbids me?

Prove. 1.10, 11, etc.
My son (says he) if sinners entise thee, consent thou not; if they say, come
let us lay wait for blood, and lurk privily for the innocent without cause;
let us swallow them up alive as the grave, and whole as those that go down to
the pit; we shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with
spoil: that is, in a word, let us rob, plunder, and destroy, cast in thy lot
among us, etc. My son, walk not in the way with them, for this is not the
way of God; Mercy and truth are in his ways, and all his paths are peace: Hos.
11.4.
He draws by the bands of Love, he rules by the Law of Love, and the servants
of the Lord must be like the Lord, not men of strife but gentle unto all, apt
to teach, 2 Timothy 2.23.
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose. Jam. 1.17.
S. James describes the wisdom that comes from above, and that which comes
from beneath, by their fruits: O that my Brethren would but examine, of which
kind their present way and wisdom is by the fruits thereof; and that they
would consider, whether those that were made a gazing-stocke to others by
reproaches and afflictions, Heb. 10.33, 34. that were spoiled of their goods
(as some of us now are) were not in a better and more Christian condition, then
those that offered these abuses to them: and whether if themselves were to
appear at Gods Bar (as one day they shall) they had not rather stand in the
number of the spoiled, then of the spoilers; and whether if they and I were
condemned to death, they for walking in the way of resistance, and I for
practiceing the duty of obedience, they had not rather be in my case (in
respect of the cause of suffering) then in their own: If any of you would but
in earnest ask your consciences this question, I dare say it would tell you
that your way were not the way of God.

2. This your way destroys the whole Law of God: Destructive to the whole Law
of God.
It becomes us who are Gods Ministers, entrusted with his holy truths, to be
faithful unto every one of them; all Gods commands ought to be equally dear
unto us: when time was, you were all faithful to the fourth Commandment. You
did run well, who did hinder? My conscience tells me that the fifth
Commandment (being upon the stage of persecution) must be as precious to me
now, as the fourth was then; and if Gods will so be, I must be as willing to
suffer with and for that, though alone, as I was before in behalf of the other
with your company: Nay (Sir) as the ruin of one Jew would not satisfy Hamans
malice, his aim was at the destruction of the whole Nation; so it is not the
death of the fifth Commandment only, that the unruly and bloody Genius of
these times thirsts after, it desires rather (as may appear) the extirpation
of all, insomuch, that if ever we had cause to cry, it is time for thee Lord to
work, for thy have made void thy Law; we have cause now.

For consider, does not the first Commandment require us to acknowledge only
one God, and him alone to be omnipotent, most blessed, and of an unerring
spirit; and yet have we not many that would make a certain piece of the
Parliament Gods equal in these Attributes? do they not entitle it the most
blessed, infallible, omnipotent, and wonder-working Parliament? for my part I
do as truly honor the Parliament in a complete sense, as any poor Subject in
England; and being rightly congregated, and jointly compacted of Head and
Members, I think it not fit for any inferior to imagine it to err in matters
of State, and yet even then it may in matters of God, for there is no Scripture
(that I know) to the contrary; I love the Parliament so well, that I had rather
die, then be one of them that provoke God to such jealousy against it, as I
fear they do that call it by his names of omnipotent, and unerring, and most
blessed. I have read what God did to the Spanish Navy in 88, that had the title
of Invincible; and how the Pope and his Church have gone down the wind, since
Infallibility has been affixed to his Chair by his flatterers. I have read
also how the good King of Sweden did truly presage his own death, when he saw
the people begin to give him more honor then was due to man: Act. 12.
and Scripture tells us, how God smote Herod with worms, because he took to
himself from the peoples hands that honor which was Gods due: nor do I see
how that part of the Parliament has greatly prospered, to the benefit either
of Church or Common wealth, since those high and divine titles by its adorers
have been given unto it. I have much wondered that among the late plenty of
Ordinances, there has not been some one to inhibit people this Blasphemy and
Idolatry, doubtless it affords suspicion of little true love to the first
Commandment.

So, is not reverence in Gods House and Service, with a due regard to his
Ministers in the execution of their office, required in the second
Commandment? (as well as Superstition forbidden?) and yet we see, it is counted
rank Popery to be more reverend there then other men, and want of zeal not to
abuse Gods Ministers; yea profaneness and misbehaviour in Gods worship, and
opposition to his servants are reckoned by some the best Characters of
Religion, I dare affirm it from what I have read, and now see; that no people
in the world, not they that worship the Devil himself, are so rude and
unmannerly in their actions of this nature, and to the Ministers of their
Religion, as some of ours are at this present, and yet there is no Law to
punish them; nay, all Laws are taken away (as they say) that were wont to
restrain them: sure (if this be so) it is a making void of the second
Commandment.

And concerning the third, we have those (and they in favor too) that not
only think it lawful for themselves to break those oaths which they have
formerly made in the presence and name of God, but also (having as may seem as
good a faculty as the Pope) to dispense with the breach of them in others, and
teach and exhort others thereunto as a thing necessary, so it be in ordine ad
causam, (as the Jesuits speak) to promote the good cause. Surely (Sir) I am
much deceived if this be not the highest contempt that can be offered to the
third Commandment; if God were in earnest when he made it, he will never hold
them guiltless that do such things against it.

And for the fourth, I wonder how that of late has lost the favor of some of
them, who four or five years ago were ready to venture all they had to
maintain the dignity of it, did they only endeavor to preserve it till now,
that it might perish with its fellows? or are all kind of revellings or
sportings no sins on the Lords Day, because they are acted in this year of
Jubilee, these blessed days of liberty (as they are called)? nay, are
mustering of men, (when there is no enemy nigh) plundering of men, murdering of
men on the Lords Day, no violations of the Day? (it seems so) for some of us
on that day can exhort to nothing else: Surely (Sir) from preaching for, and
approbation of such doings, some will be ready to say, that we Ministers
endeavored only to preserve the fourth Commandment heretofore, that our
selves might destroy it now; and our fear only was, lest any should be
injurious to God beside our selves.

And for the fifth Commandment, is there any thing required in that, which
this generation will acknowledge as a duty; any thing forbidden therein, which
it will yield to be a sin? the Author of the late exhortation to repentance
(published to the whole Nation) does instance in no one direct breach of the
fifth Commandment, to be confessed on the fast day, indeed all bonds of duty
and relation are preached asunder to make way for liberty, the Subject may not
only resist the King (says the Weaver that is set up to preach in my Church)
but also kill him in some cases; and so the wife may kill her husband, and the
child may kill his father* and Surely Sir if such preachers and Doctrines,
must be forced upon a Ministers people in spite of his teeth, I must needs
fear that treason is hatching against the fifth Commandment, we must bid
farewell to that very shortly.

And for the 6. which forbids murder, the Commission to Kill, slay, and
destroy, has silenced that half a year ago, and he that kills most of the
Kings best Subjects is thought worthy the best wages.

And for the seventh which inhibits uncleanness, that is out of date too,
since the Courts to punish that sin went down, people think they may get as
many Bastards as they will or can; for Laws (they say) are suppressed for this
very end, to encourage them to take their Liberty more cheerfully.

And for stealing, robbing, spoiling, rifling, violent taking away the goods of
others, which are sins against the eight Commandment, these (they say) they
may do by an ordinance (a certain thing above all Law) which though for my
part I dare not believe, yet this I may say, the Land was never so full of
thieves as now, and never less force appeared in the Law to punish them.

And for lying and slandering (the breaches of the ninth Commandment) they are
the maine trade of the times, the very foundation of reformation, to preach
against them, in some men's apprehension speaks us enemies to that, I know who
was sent for, to the Parliament by a Pursevant, for no other cause (that he
knows of) but only for preaching against lying and slandering.

And for Covetousness (which the tenth Commandment gives charge against)
Public faith has taken such a course to procreate and enlarge that sin, as
never (I think) was practiced before, by its promising payment out of the
estates of Delinquents; which very device has planted so much malice in men's
hearts against those they never saw, and so much covetousness of what is none
of theirs, that many years pains in the Ministry will not be able to pluck
up again.

Thus Sir, together with the King, the Custos utriusque tabulae, both Tables
themselves of the divine Law are opposed and resisted, all Gods most holy
Commandments together with his servants, are most injuriously made
delinquents, and collecta vitia per tot aetates diu in nos redundant simul. And
shall we the Ministers who are entrusted of God to defend his Laws, consent or
provoke to these breaches of them, to this injustice to them? O then how shall
we answer it, when reddite rationem villicationis vestrae shall be spoaken to
us?

3. Inconsistent with the Gospel of God.
This new way of my Brethren is not only destructive to the whole Law, but
altogether inconsistent with the Gospel, and the Spirit thereof, which is a
meek, patient, gentle, and obedient spirit, and it is way the humble, lowly,
self denying way, the way of faith and not of flesh; in fide non in ferro
salutem esse, says the Gospel, our safety consists in beleeveing not in
fighting, our strength is to fit still, and to wait upon the Lord, not to
resist evil, but to overcome it with good; whereas my Brethrens way is (if they
could) to overcome good with evil: for as our Savior said to the Jews, many
good works have I done, for which of them do you stone me? so our Sovereign
may say to them, many mercies you have enjoyed under the wing of my government,
many years of peace under my protection, for which of them do you preach and
stir up my people to rebel against me? O Sir, that we who are the Preachers
and professors of the Gospel, should delight to vex and greive the spirit
thereof! O what a blessed advantage did the Lord afford us to discover the
nature of this sweet spirit, unto those whom we judged our adversaries, for the
uniting of their hearts unto us in the ways of God! you know how Harshnesse
and abuse of power was condemned in the Bishops, but have not some of us abused
our liberty much more since we had it, to the making of greater distractions,
and the raising of greater combustions, both in Church and Commonwealth then
ere they did, have not some of our fingers been heavier then the Bishops
Loins, has not rebellious Judah justified her sister Israel in all her
ways? O (Sir) I may truly say of this Church since some of us have bin so
busy, as Veleius Paterculus said of the Roman State, that we are fallen a
vitiis in prava, a pravis in praecipitia, from bad to worse, from worse to
worst of all: (Sir) you may remember that above a year ago in a private letter
I did warn you of these miseries which I saw then beginning, and desired you
to apprehend the season of prevention, and to take heed of walking in condemned
paths, I hinted to you the occasion, which God did offer you to illustrate the
spirit of the Gospel, and since that, even the last summer, I did publish to
the world my small treatise of the right nature and temper of that loving
Spirit of the Gospel, even to the same end that I might mind your self and
the rest of my Brethren of their duty in this particular: insomuch that though
I am injuriously deprived of all my outward comforts, for not walking with my
Brethren to the grief of that spirit, yet I have abundance of peace and
cheerfulness from that spirit, for such my discharge of duty to my Brethren:
who I am sure have been failing unto me; for were I in an error, for not
going with them, they should have endeavored my restoration with the spirit of
meekness as the Apostle bids Gal. 6.1. and not have joined with the wolves as
some of them have done, for though I say little, yet I know somewhat: which of
them have ever writ unto me since my troubles? which of them have ever of
their own accords spoken to me? they have all forsook me and stood a far
off, that they might make the ignorant world fear and loath me. Nay when I
have complained to some of them of my wrongs and begged their Counsel, they
have slightly rejected me with this answer: you must practice your own
Doctrine of passive obedience, for if your way be God's no doubt but he will
carry you through it: which Answer (to my apprehension) sounded like that of
Julian the Apostate to the Christians complaining of wrongs done them: it is
(says he in scorn,) according to your Religion to suffer wrong, you must
turn the other cheek: or like that of them concerning our Savior He trusted
in God, let him deliver him if he will have him: well: though my sufferings be
not such as my Doctrine requires, (because I do not acknowledge them from whom
I suffer to be my Sovereigns) yet I will trust in God, and I know my God will
help me; But (Sir) this way of my Brethren toward me is not the way of the
Gospel no more then is that wherein they walk toward their Sovereign.

Contradicting the practice of Christianity.
4. Their way does contradict the practice of Christianity: in all ages no
weapons but faith, and patience, prayers and tears, were wont to be
acknowledged comely for a Christian specially for a Minister: coactus repugnare
non novi (says Ambrose) dolere potero, potero flere, potera gemere, Lacrymae
meae Arma sunt tal^a enim munimenta sunt Sacerdotis, aliter nec debeo, nec
possum resistere, I know not how to resist, but I can weep and sigh and groan
and pray; and indeed this is the way to conquer and silence our opposites,
specially if superior to us: Say not again that these conditions concern
only private men in their private way, for Sanctitas, pietas, fides, and
patientia are not, at lest ought not to be tantum privata bona or the
proprieties only of private men, but they do best of all become public
persons, and in the discharge of their most public trust: let me speak a
bold word: I do not see how it would misbeseeme a whole Parliament to imitate
David that man after Gods own Heart, in their carriage to a King: of whom it is
written, that when God had given him an advantage in the Cave and Tent, he did
not use it to hurt his Sovereign, or to disarme him or tie his hands, but to
discover his own Loyalty of Heart unto him, and to confute those intendements
that were suspected of him, by the whisperings of Doeg and other slanderers:
whereby he drew a Confession from the Kings own mouth of his righteousness
and sincerity: which was ten times more to David's Honor, then if himself had
set forth an hundred Pamphlets of bitter invectives against the Kings doings;
or 1000 Protestations to justify his own Loyalty, or had had as many clawing
Chaplains to extol him: and indeed this is the only way to conquer a King,
when ever he is contrary unto his people or so apprehended to be, it is that
which the Scripture teaches and which God blesses: surely if it was thus
prevalent with a Saul, much rather would it so be with a David if put in
practice.

But (Sir) how ever others boggle with Religion, it is the duty of us Ministers
to look to the Honor of Christianity, whereof Martyrdom was wont to be the
crown, which this new way (to my apprehension) does quite abolish and deny,
for they that walk in it, do seem plainly to profess that they have more
need of Pistols then of patience for their use: faith and prayer are means too
contemptible for such aspireing spirits to trust unto; and yet what gathered
the Parliament first together but these? what did extract those willing Acts of
grace from His sacred Majesty's hand at the beginning thereof, but only these?
we did run well in the right way, who did hinder, after a beginning in the
spirit shall we think to bring our work to perfection by the Arm of flesh?
God will never suffer it: O (Sir) was ever our Holy profession under that
disgrace and obloquy as now? by this practice of resistance all those unjust
scandals which former Ages have cast upon it are fully verified: wherefore let
us now cease to complain that we are traduced to be seditious, rebellious, and
disobedient to Princes, for our passage in this way does loudly speak us
guilty: one of the grand seducers of this generation, is so shameless as to
endeavor to acquit himself of that true imputation, by saying that Luther was
falsely styled Tuba rebellionis, but had Luther been of his spirit, he had
justly deserved that title; for if ever Parsons the Jesuit was worthy of blame
for his black mouth against his Sovereign, and for endeavoring to seduce the
Subjects from Allegiance, and to stir them up unto Rebellion; the Author of
that Pamphlet, entitled The glorious name of God the Lord of Hosts, deserves a
censure, The Lord rebuke him in his due season; I confess the man has good
parts, if they were but sanctified: I have (indeed) observed that it is the
craft of some Preachers to speak against those sins whereof themselves are
most guilty, (as he does against Rebellion) that so the simple sort might not
perceive their dishonesty; but Lord let not my foot ever tread in their paths,
nor let my soul ever come into their secrets: Machiavell is their Master,
whose doctrine was Leoninae assuere vulpinam, to piece out the Lions skin
with the Foxes; like Satan that roaring Lion, they thirst for blood, and like
Butchers dogs they yelpe for it, and yet they do vulpinari too, pretend
fairly to deceive the vulgar; but as Martyr Tindall at the stake prayed, Lord
open the King of Englands eyes; so my prayer is and shall be, Lord open the
people of Englands eyes, for many of them are seduced, blinded, led hood-winked
into ways of damnable error by their teachers, which will be bitterness in
the end.

Opposite to the ^lling of Mi^isters.
5. This way is directly opposite to the calling of us Ministers: We are not
entitled Filii Martis, but the Ministers of Peace, of the God of Peace, and of
the Gospel of Peace, and our Masters name is the Prince of Peace, and shall we
stir up to War? by what Authority? It would be more seemly to see us upon
our knees between both Armies, when they are preparing to fight, beseeching a
Peace and Reconciliation betwixt them, then busying our selves in exciting of
either unto the Battle; they were all lying Prophets that provoked Ahab to
such a business, and possessed with a lying spirit, and shall I thrust my
self into that number? no, let me rather with simple single Michaiah dissuade
from it, though I be smitten for it, both with hand and tongue, and fed (as I
am) with the bread and water of affliction; I know that Coelestis ira quos
premit miseros facit, humana nullos, Gods displeasure only can make me
miserable, and not man's. Besides, when you and I and the rest of our Brethren
were altogether in danger of a suffering condition, for defense of the fourth
Commandment (as we apprehended,) and for our dislike of illegal Innovations
in Gods worship and service; we did use in prayer to complain unto God, that
we were scandalized to be men of seditious spirits, turbulent, factious, and
enemies to the peace both of Church and State: and we appealed to God that we
were innocent, and begged of him occasions to evidence the truth of our
intentions against the defamation of our adversaries; (and for my part in all
this I was in earnest:) Now God has heard our prayers, freedom and
opportunity is afforded to us, which I apprehend, is in part to try whether we
did formerly dissemble with him, or no. And truly (Sir) I dare not prove my
self a mocker of God, I dare not but be the same now which I pretended then,
although my portion is to be the outcast of you all for it; I had rather be
styled an Apostate for falling off from my Brethren, then prove my self an
Apostate by forsaking the truth of God, and and disgraceing my calling of the
Ministry: I remember a passage which I have heard your self often use in
prayer, and it was this, Lord we are thine to do withal as thou please, if
thou shall think us fit to be used still in thy vineyard, we shall bless thy
name, and by thy grace endeavor to be faithful; but if it seem good to thee
to throw us aside as broken sheards, to make us of all people the most
useless, unregarded, and contemptible, thy will be done. Sir, I have from
these your words been moved through Gods grace, to labor to get a
contentedness of mind, to be alone the only one of you all in such a
despicable condition, if God so please to order, and I find (through divine
mercy) that I have not altogether labored in vain.

6. Adverse to common prudence.
This way (wherein your self and many of our Brethren are engaged) is contrary
to common prudence: It is not wisdom for any man with his nearest and dearest
friends, to trust himself in a suspicious path, lest unawares to himself and
them, he be on the sudden in mediis malis, when as tempus cavendi nimis serum
est. I remember how Peter in the High Priests Hall, not only forsook, but
forswore his Master, which before he intended not: And I have (since that time)
often thought of your own expression to some of your neighbors, when I was
last at your house: namely, that if you were but settled again as quietly in
Finchfield as once you were, Finchfield had never been so sweet unto you as it
would be; which intimated to me, that you would not have walked so far in
this new way, if you had understood before what you now do: indeed, we know
engagements have persuaded a necessity of proceeding in a sinful path, for
scelere velandum est scelus, is the Doctrine of some men, and suprema solent
facere securos mala; when Hazaell had fouled himself in a treason against the
King his Master and Sovereign, he proved more vile, cruel, and bloody, then
himself before could possibly believe; what am I a dog, says he to the
Prophet, when he foretold him of such things: O (Sir) we learned it long ago;
facilis descensus Averni; sed revocare gradum, -- Hic labor, hoc opus est.

Beside, it is not wisdom for a man to enter into a business, whereof he
cannot in probability see a fair conclusion: but I can see no good in Civil
War, I take it to be absolutely the worst thing that can happen to a State,
wherein the height of men's best hopes can come but to this, to venture and
hazard their own, to overthrow their friends and kindreds fortunes; it is
commodious to none, but desperate unthrifts, that they may cut their creditors
throats without fear of the Gallows: Sir, I have read, that Arma non servant
modum, nec temperari facile, nec reprimi potest, stricti ensis ira; it is easier
to set men at odds, then to make them friends; who is able to set bounds to
the Sea, or put a period to the madness of the people? and should I join to
blow the fire, to put weapons into their hands against their Prince the Lords
Anointed? there will be no lasting comfort or safety in it: some sayings that
I learned long ago stick still in my remembrance, Nemo potentes aggredi tutus
potest; and gravis ira regum est semper: and though vis magna est populi,
Principis major tamen, common prudence therefore (though conscience were
asleep) should forbid this way.

Dissentive from the rules of Humanity.
7. This way dissenteth from the rules of Humanity: for it is not humane to
return hatred for good will, unkindnesse for benefits: did Naball well in
giving David occasion to say, In vain have I kept all that this fellow has,
so that nothing was missing of all that pertained to him, and he has requited
me evil for good: and shall we give the like occasion to our Sovereign? have
not we all for these many years been kept in safety under his arm? have we
not been miserable since he has been barred of his will, and we of his
protection? and is it now comely for us to say to him in his affliction, as
some did to Christ upon the Cross, He saved others, let him now save himself,
if he be the anointed and chosen of God: David bad the daughters of Jerusalem
to weep for Saul, for he had clothed them in scarlet and other delights. But
our Gracious Sovereign has not only done so to us, but also (by maintaining
the true Religion among us in peace) has endeavored to cloth us with the
righteousness and robes of Christ, and shall we for this laugh at his sorrows,
and labor to enlarge them? for my part I do confess to Gods glory, and with
thanks to him, that I have received some warmth of grace under the wing of His
Majesty's Government, and have done (as I hope) some good in the Church of God
under his defense; and shall I join with them that lift up the heel against
him, and that say, We will not have this man to reign (any longer) over us?
the Lord keep me from doing such a thing. O (Sir) it was ill done of the
Disciples to sleep, when their Master was in an agony; it was more unkindly
done of them to forsake him, when his enemies came out against him; but it was
most villainously done of Judas, to go along with those that went to apprehend
him: when some of my Brethren went Northward with the Soldiers against their
Sovereign, I could not but with tears think upon that passage of our
Savior, You come out as against a Theife with swords and staves for to take me.

8. This way is against nature it self, Contrary to nature it self.
for it is unnatural to consent to our own destruction, and what else do they
that endeavor the suppression of their Sovereign? the word for a King is
(...), which is derived of (...), that signifies the foot or base of a pillar,
the ground or foundation of a building, and (...) Attice for (...), which
signifies people, implying that a King is (...) or (...), the ground or
foundation of the people, over whom he is a Governor; and as the foundation
upholds the building, so the King does them in their welfare and being; for
take away the foundation and the building is down: Kings do not use to fall
alone; Let us kill the heir, and the inheritance shall be ours, is no certain
consequent. Pitiful it is to think how many honest and well-meaning men have
ignorantly parted with their moneys to destroy the Land that bred them, and to
set men on work to kill one another; it is true by other pretenses their
Preachers have provoked them to it: but public faiths promise at the first to
pay her debts if the Kingdom stood, viz. out of th'estates of Delinquents, was
cause of suspicion that there were intentions to put it to the hazard whether
it should stand or no, by making an assault against the Royal foundation, and
the Noble pillars that did support the building: and then the Commission to
kill, slay, and destroy all that raised, or conducted forces against those who
went with the same, (the King himself not being excepted; though it might
easily be apprehended that He and his faithful Nobles would be constrained to
gather strength to defend themselves) did speak such plain English to my
apprehension, that when the Chaire-man of the Committee threatened to make such
a report of me to the House, as should prove little to mine ease, unless I
would go home and preach to promote that business; I durst not fear his
threats to offend my conscience: for I durst not be so unnatural to my dear
Country, as to help forward its destruction, nor indeed so injurious to my
unkind neighbors, as to spur them on to their own hurt, whereunto already
they are every way too forward; the Lord amend them: Pretenses move not me, as
they do other men, when actions speak a contrary language: the Pharisees in
our Saviors time pretended they were for God, and Antichrist now pretends he
is for Christ, and the Rebels in Ireland pretend they are for the King, sed
quid verba audiam cum facta videam? I must not wink that I may not see; Esau
may be discovered by his hands, and ye shall know them by their fruits, says
our Savior: there is I confess but one mean (under mercy) beside the Justice
of the Kings cause, which gives me hope, that God may yet suspend to destroy us
utterly; and that is the course that has been taken of late, in casting so
many good Ministers and Christians of all sorts, both noble and of low degree
into prison, the best place for prayer, and the best means to provoke thereto:
the God of mercy enlarge all their hearts in the duty, and stir their bowels.

Gainsaying reason.
9. This way is against reason; for it is unreasonable to proceed in that path
wherein we see all others have perished before us: who that has viewed in
Sleidans Commentaries, the Story of the Anabaptists at Munster, that can deny
the proceedings of this generation to be like theirs? they pretended the cause
of God, and against the superstition in Churches, and of Churchmen, as also
strange lights and revelations, they endeavored at the ruin of their
Governors and Magistrates; and they had some Preachers of eminent note for
gifts and abilities, as Bernard Rotman and others, that were assisters in the
business, but did they prevail and prosper in the end? nothing less, much
mischeife indeed they did, and much blood they shed of the best men, but the
strife did end in their own destruction.

So who that has observed in the French story, the ways and doings of them
that called themselves the Holy League, in the days of their Henry the 3d. but
must needs say, that the practice of some Associatours in this our nation
against their Sovereign, does most notably in many particulars go parrallell
with them? it is said that the Preachers tongues (who were for that Holy League)
did further their affairs more, then their soldiers swords, and that in those
days it was more feared to speak evil of a Page of such or such a Nobleman
who was a Leaguer, then of the King himself what ever respect was pretended to
him. Massac. of France in the life of Hen. 3. Page 164.
The intent of the Leaguers (says the Historian) was to incroach upon the
King, and to leave him nothing but a vain shadow of Royal Authority, under
the conduction and direction of their Tyranny: and as a Bridge to pass to this
point, they endeavored to make all his actions odious and intolerable; by
their false charges and imputations, and in another place, they were altogether
against peace, stirring up the poeple, to oppose the Kings desires thereto, and
the edict thereof: Page 8.
But they pretended they were for God, for the Honor and increase of Religion,
the utter extirpation of Heresy, to preserve the estate and crown of the King,
and to maintain the rights and privileges of the Subject; yet they swore
obedience and service to the General that should be appointed over their
fellowship, ingageing their lives, Honors, and estates, to adhere unto him,
and all that would not assent to the Association, should be persecuted as
Enemies to God, rebels to the State, and perturbatours of the public good, in
which number were also reckoned those that fell from it.

Let me allege the Historians Expostulation with the Leaguers concerning
their Pretenses and doings.

What think you to do, O you Leaguers, for God, for the faith, Page 8. and 9.
for the King? you undertake Arms for God, who desires nothing but peace: you
publish Rebellion, he commands obedience: you trouble the rest and quietness
of a Christian King, God wills us to endure at the hand of a Prince although
he be a Pagan: you do it for God, whose name you call upon, and deny the power;
you do it for God, who detests your actions, and knows your thoughts; you do
it for God, that will confound all those, that breed confusion among his
people; you undertake wars for religion, and nothing hinders that, more then
wars: you fight for Holiness; and yet you authorize blasphemies, plant
Atheism, impiety and despiseing of Devotion in all places; you march under
pretense of the Churches cause, and yet spoil the Clergy and destroy the
Churches, etc.

You say it is for the King, if it be, where are his Commissions? if for his
service, where are his Commandments? if for him, why do you it without him? if
for his obedience, wherefore do you adhere to the head of the League? can you
serve two Masters and be bound by one oath to two Contraries? etc. Know you not
that all bearing of Arms is treason without the Kings Authority? that the
Subjects cannot make any league without the Prince etc? and again: Pardon me,
I beseech you, (says he) Noble Princes, Prelates, Lords, and Gentlemen, if I
tell you that this fortress which you build will be your overthrow, this fire
you Kindle will burn your selves, these Knives you forge will be tempered in
your own entrails, and that thereby you will leave neither of your selves,
nor your League, but a most pitiful and shameful memory, etc.

Page 170.
Sir, I write but the Historians words, which I leave to your own thoughts,
concluding them with his relation of the Lord de Mandelot a Noble Personage of
those times, that it was to his great comfort upon his deathbed, that he had
never subscribed to that falsely styled Holy League, but died constant in his
religion and the service of his King: and I am confident that all those Noble
Lords and Gentlemen among us, who in that, are like him, shall when they die,
partake of his comforts in their Consciences; but those on the other side
though they may help to butcher their Brethren and the Saints of God for a
while, yet they shall have the same in the end at Gods hand, which those
Leaguers had, they shall ly down in sorrow.

I have read of the Carriages of Hacket and his fellows in Queen Elizabeth's
days, and find them the same in all respects with those of some people now,
only those were not so violent as these, because not grown to that height and
strength: Their talk was much of the Government of Christ, and the setting up
of that: They said this could not be done, nor reformation come to this nation
without blood, they prophesied that there must be a great bickering, which
would be very short but sharp, these were their very words, which are also the
language of these times: they boasted that their side was an hundred thousand
strong; and just that number do they boast of now; they went much upon blind
prophesies, and had high conceits of the merit of their own fastings and
prayers, which is also the very fancy of this Generation; they defamed and
belied the Queen that She was a favourer of the Popish Religion, as these do
our King: They stirred up the people to advance their way, and published this
position among them, It is the multitude and common sort that must bring this
work to pass, and is not this the tenent and practice of these times? They
endeavored indeed to engage some of the Nobility and inferior Magistrates,
with themselves in the quarrel against the Queen and her Government, but
those were more wise and godly then to be so deluded: Now what the end of
Hacket and his fellows was, the story tells us, and reason says other men's
harms should make us wary.

Nay (Sir) I have also observed with diligence what Josephus tells of the
manners, ways, and words of the seditious in Jerusalem, when that City was
destroyed by Titus Vespatian, and finding the same so fully consonant to the
qualities of our resisting spirits, I confess I have often feared the like
Consequence: I will name some few particulars unto you, and leave them also to
your own thoughts and Conscience for Application.

1. They were divided among themselves, and would not be persuaded to lay down
their hatred toward each other, yea they killed those that moved thereto, and
said plainly we will not leave our Enmity. one was slaughtered but for making
this prayer: O Lord plant among the children of Israel freindship and
Brotherhood, take away from them this hatred that is risen of nothing, and let
not the one prevail against the other, seeing they be all thy servants and the
children of thy Covenant.

2. They also at that time of division fell off from their obedience to Caesar
who was their King; indeed they had been brewing of that revolt in their
purposes, many years before; as appears by that advice of Agrippa unto them
(mentioned by Josephus) Be not hasty I beseech you of Liberty: for many seeking
Liberty have fallen into further Captivity and greater Bondage.

3. It was a fault among them, not only to be peaceable and Godly, but also to
be rich; for the Captains of the Conspiracy with Cutthroats like themselves,
would lay hands on the rich men of the City, and spoil them of their goods
pretending they had sent letters to Vespatian (their right Governor) to betray
the City to him; which by the Testimony of godless persons of their own
Company, limbs of the Devil (as the Story calls them) they would prove, and
thereupon spoil them of their goods, put them into prison, and condemn them
to death for Rebels.

4. They held the Judges in awe, threatening that unless they did give
sentence upon those they brought before them, they should go themselves the
same way.

5. They were of such contradictive spirits, that if any whom they persecuted,
did but request ought at their hands, for that cause they would deny it: when
Gorinion a good rich man, being condemned for his wealth, and his honesty,
desired but burial, they answered if he had not desired it they would have
granted it, but since he was so bold to ask it, he should not have it, and so
threw his body being slain unto the beasts.

6. They made one Pavi the son of Peniell a Carterly Husbandman (ignorant of
what belonged to the Priests office) High Priest: for says the Story, they
held the Preisthood and service of God, but as toies, gaudes; and trifles,
though they pretended that all they did was for it.

7. When Josephus (being sent by Titus with promise of favor, if they would
submit) did make an Oration to them, dissuading from resisting Caesar their
Sovereign, alleging many Scriptures against their way, telling them withal
that their fathers did never prevail with spear and shield, but with prayer,
repentance, and pureness of heart; instanceing in Abraham, Jacob, Moses,
David, and Ezekiah's examples: they did use all means that possibly they
could, to do him some mischief.

8. When Titus himself, who for his sweet disposition was entitled Amor and
deliciae humani generis, the Carolus of that age; in pity to the poor seduced
hunger-sterved people, did with all compassion and promise of mercy, persuade
them not to suffer themselves to be destroyed; they would not believe him, nor
suffer the people to yield unto him, but railed upon him, and abused him most
shamefully, endeavoring from the walls to do him hurt: who for all this when
he heard of the number of their slain, he would lift up his eyes to Heaven,
and say, It Is well known to thee O Lord of Heaven, that I am not the cause of
these evils, for I desired to be at peace with them oftener then once, but the
seditious evermore would nothing but war, war.

9. They pretended in all their rebellion that they fought for the Lords cause,
for the Law and Religion of their God: which the Romans had no purpose to
debar them of, nor indeed had they that so pretended, the least spark of
Gods fear in them, as appears by the Proclamation of one of the Captains to
gather Soldiers together, which was in these words: Whosoever lists to be
rid of his Master, or has received any injury, and desires to be revenged, or
that cannot abide the rule of any, or that is in debate or in fear of
creditors, or that has shed innocent blood, or that lurketh in secret for
fear of the Law; whoever is disposed to rob and rifle, to do injury or wrong,
to haunt whores, to steal and murder, to eat and drink at other men's cost,
without labor of his own hands; let him resort unto me, and I will deliver
him from the yoke and danger of the Laws, and will find him his fill of
booties and spoils.

10. They had their lying Prophets, that prophesied to the last, yea when the
Temple was burnt, and diverse of the obstinate Priests had leapt into the fire;
these Prophets still stirred up the people to play the men, and to resist their
enemies, telling them, that the Temple should be builded by it self without
hands, that God would declare his power unto the Romans, who now did glory in
themselves, that they had overcome the Jews: and thus the poor people were
befooled, partly by their seditious Captains, and partly by their lying
Prophets, until the whole Nation in a sort was slaughtered, and that noble
City quite destroyed: Deus nobis avertat omen. Sir, these thoughts have
wrought with me.

10. This way of my Brethren is against our oath of Allegiance, Against our
oath of Allegiance.
an Oath is a most sacred and regardable thing; God the avenger is thereby
called to witness the truth of our hearts in what we say, or promise: This
Oath of Allegiance I have taken seven or eight several times unto His
Majesty; had it been but once, I should not dare to break it: I remember
that place in Ezekiell, Ezekiel. 17. v. 15. ad 30.
where the Lord says concerning the King and people of Jerusalem, (who had
despised their oath of Allegiance, and broke their Covenant made to the King of
Babylon) they shall not be delivered, they shall not escape severe punishment;
it is expressed over and over by the spirit, to show how highly God is incensed
for such a sin, and though it was made unto an Heathen Prince, yet v. 19. the
Lord calls it his Oath, because made in his name and presence (as all oaths
are) and himself swears, as he lives, It shall be recompensed upon the
breakers heads; and so it was most heavily: for as S. Chrysostom upon the
matter says, Vbique ignis grassabatur Barbaricus, juramento ignem ducente, and
flammam passim circumagente; the Barbarian fire every where spoiled, the
violated oath led the fire, and carried the flame about from place to place:
nor can I forget how that oath which was made to the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.
though on their parts obtained by fraud, was to be kept inviolably, because a
sacred tie, and how the breach thereof was punished afterward in David's time,
by three years famine, and the death of seven of Saul's sons: for that Saul
to please the people to show his zeal to them, had slain the Gibeonites
against the oath which his forefathers had made; 2 Samuel 21.2.
from whence we may learn 2 things: First, That Princes may endanger their
Posterities and Kingdoms welfare, to the severity of Gods displeasure, by
humouring their people in all things. Secondly, That the violation of an Oath,
though but once made, and by forefathers unto slaves and servants, shall be
sure by the Lord to be sharply punished upon the violators, or their
posterity: and if so, then much more will God most surely avenge the wilful
breach of a Subjects oath, so often renewed and taken in Gods name and presence
unto his Sovereign. Sir, we Ministers were wont upon the Fast days (when with
our people we renewed our vows and covenants with the Lord) to declare the
high danger and penalty of breach of oaths; and is it honest or comely for us
now by our doctrines and examples, to confute our former selves, and drive our
poor ignorant sheep upon their assured destruction; God forbid that ever my
soul should consent thereto.

Opposite to our late Protestation.
But in the last place of all, this way of my Brethren directly opposes our
late Protestation, which I think my self bound in conscience to keep, so
far as lawfully I may: therein I promise to maintain to the uttermost of my
power, The Kings Majesty's Person, Honor and Estate; but if I go in this way
I must oppose His Majesty's Person, and (as it seems) hold that it is lawful
to resist His Personal will in behalf of His Legal; (though this be not so
much as mentioned in the Protestation); and I must (as others do) extenuate
His Name and Honor, by venting confidently as truths what ever evil I hear
of Him; I must be glad to hear that His estate is withheld from Him (as
Himself complains) and employed against Himself: and I must hope (as others
speak) that mere poverty and necessity will at length make him humble
himself, and submit unto his people. No (Sir) rather then I will thus
willingly break my Protestation, Let the enemy persecute my soul and take it,
let him throw my life down to ground, and lay my credit in the dust.

But this is not all, I must join to bring in Popery, contrary to my
Protestation too: for (Sir) I believe there be more points of Popery then one,
Superstition alone does not make up the religion of Antichrist; in this very
way of yours are many tenants and points thereof, besides a great deal of its
practice: let me instance in a few of many particulars.

1. The Doctrine of resisting Princes is a Doctrine of Popery, which is now
maintained with sword and spear, and all weapons of war; the Doctrine of
calling Kings to account by their Subjects, was the opinion of Pope Hildebrand,
the brat of his brain, he hatched it, and shall I break my Protestation to
set up Pope Hildebrand?

2. That there is an infallibility of judgment in some men, is a point of
Popery, and so it is that men may absolve from oaths, and they are dangerous
points too; the one is the ground of all errors in the Church, and the other
the cause of all disturbance in the State, and these two points are now
preached and practiced by some of them that walk in the new way.

3. To believe in the creature is a point of Popery, the Papists say they
believe in the Church; and I have heard His Majesty found fault withal,
because in his pious and convincing Declarations he says, that he trusts in
God, and in his providence: whereas (said the fault finder) he ought to have
said, He trusted in His Parliament.

4. No faith (says the Papist) is to be kept with Heretics, (so they call
good Protestants) no faith is to be kept with Malignants, say some amongst us,
(for so they call good Subjects:) Memento homo quod Gibellinus es, remember
friend you are a Royallist, was sufficient matter to condemn a man of old
among them, and so it is now among us.

5. The Doctrine of merit is a Popish tenent, and is not that daily preached by
some, unto those that go forth in this war against the King; even as the
Friars of old were wont to promise salvation to all that promoted the war of
the Pilgrims to the Holy land, and against the Christians of Merindoll and
Cabriers, so do some of our preachers warrant salvation, to all those that die
in this their cause, whereas Damnation is threatened unto the contrary parties.

6. The Doctrine of Popery is a Doctrine of Lies* what is their way of
preaching but a telling of tales and lies, against those whom they call
Heretics; and of the forged Miracles done by their own Saints? and is not
that the manner of those Preachers that are for this new way? do they not fill
their sermons with fearful tales of those whom they count their Enemies, and
with miracles (as it were) of those on their own side?

7. Has it not been counted Popery, to press the precepts of men with more
eagerness then those of God, and to punish the neglect of them with greater
severity then the breach of divine Laws? and may not men now a days, break
the righteous Laws of God, steal, rob, and spoil their neighbors, persecute
Gods Ministers, profane his worship and deface his houses, with impunity, nay
with commendation for their zeal and care of the cause? but if any for
conscience sake forbear to give a ready obedience to a burdensome ordinance of
man, which perhaps too he cannot possibly stand under, shall he not be prisoned
and plundered, his living taken from him if he be a Minister, and his people
poysond with the intrusion of some false teacher?

8. The Doctrine of Popery is a Doctrine of Pride all must submit to the Pope
and his Popelings, he for his part will be judged by none, but all must be
judged by him; from which condition, he is called by the Apostle Antichrist,
because he advances himself against all that is called God, which is the
title of Kings and Princes* and is not this superlativenesse of spirit manifest
among us? nay do not our Brethren of the new way aim at a far greater power
over men, then the Bishops had of late, whom for that cause they counted
Popish? what did those words else of one in my hearing discover: We shall
(says he) be as much troubled with the Justices of Peace, as we were before
with the Bishops, if there be not some order taken with them: and that device
of another, that for the government of the Church we only that had been
molested by the Bishops should be employed in that, and they that had before
been any way Prelaticall, should have nothing at all to do therein: Sir, those
expressions and such like did (I must confess) begin to work the first
suspicion in me of my Brethren: I (before) did think they had all endeavored
as I did, at the reformation of evil, and not at their own supremacy, both
over their Brethren, and the Gentry too; therefore for my part I shall rather
choose to walk in the low way alone, then in that High way with them.

9. The Doctrine of Popery has always been a Doctrine of violence and
cruelty, the whole book of Martyrs does sufficiently show it; and may it not
be said of them that pretend they are the reformers of Popery amongst us, that
destruction and violence are in their ways? for their cruelty, I think that
reverend Brother of ours, did sufficiently intimate it by the resolution he
gave to a tender Conscience desireing to know whether it were lawful to lend
or give money to maintain this war against the King: His Answer, as I heard,
was Affirmative, and his reason was taken from the Examples of Succoth and
Penuell who were rent with briars and thorns when the Captain returned,
because they had not given him their assistance; and to prevent a like
punishment he concluded it was lawful to give; the resolution was doughty, but
it inferred Cruelty in the exactors: And so my self talkeing with another
about this business of plate and money, his judgment was, we had better give
then not, for if the King prevailed, we were like to find mercy from him, for
he was gracious and pitiful, and would in his Princely compassion consider the
inforcement that was used upon us, and the danger we were in; but if they
prevailed on the other side, nothing but cruelty in the excess could be
expected from them; could their any more be said of the Papists?

It is true as the Papists cry out of the Cruelty of the Protestants, so do
they, of those of the Kings party, but why do men practice themselves what they
condemn in others? Author of the Pamphlet called, The glorious Name of God,
etc. Page 21.
How cruelly they of the Kings side demean themselves I know not; but this I
know however that unreverend speaker is pleased to call the Nobility and Gentry
with the King, clouts, and rags, and wispes, appointed of God to scour such
unclean vessels as himself is; yet they are better bred then those persons
employed to plunder and spoil us, and a Noble, Gentile spirit ordinarily
scorns Cruelty.

Secondly those Declarations that come from His Majesty, if as we are urged to
believe, are made by his Cavaleers, we may say their breath is not so nauseous,
to the apprehension of a Gospellike spirit as that of others, we do not meet
with Kill, slay, and destroy in any of these expresses, which indeed is the
Language of Antichrist, who is therefore called Apollyon a destroier; where
ever I hear Kill, slay and destroy: I conceive it to be the Language of
Abaddon.

Nay in one thing more let me show you the Spirit of Antichrist in this new
way: As the aim of the wicked Papists has been cheifely to defile men's
Consciences, and to destroy their souls, by laboring to persuade them by
promises and threats to recant and deny the truth of God which they have
professed, as is evident by many examples in the book of Martyrs: and because
they would not do that, therefore was that mercy less Cruelty excercised upon
them: so is it the fashion now, I can speak it by experience: when I had been
a prisoner for preaching the truth of Jesus the space of seventeene days, I
addressed my self unto that member, who (by seduction only as I hope) was
made the first instrument of my drunken adversary to bring me into trouble,
(for I thought it my duty out of love to his soul, to deny my self and beg a
plaster from that hand, that most unjustly had given the wound) and to this
end I obtained your most friendly and brotherly letter unto him: but what did I
meet withal, a serious persuasion to recant, whereto I answered that I durst
not deny the truth of God which I had preached; He most discreetly replied, yea
but the truth must not be spoken at all times: I humbly answered, that a divine
truth is then in special to be spoken and maintained by them that are
entrusted with it of God when it is in danger to be lost; which he also denied,
(but (as be said) his business was such, that he could not stand to argue the
case with me:) by which I gathered, that if I would have defiled my conscience
in disclaiming that depositum which God had committed to my charge, I might
happily at this present have enjoyed my living and the Society of my wife and
children: But (Sir) I did see the Hand of God bringing me before the
Parliament, as well as the hand of that member; and although perhaps he brought
me upon the stage of trouble, that I might deny the truth of God, yet I am sure
Gods end was that I might confess the same to his glory, and truly He must
pardon me, if I endeavor to satisfy Gods expectation before his: for I am more
beholding to God then I am to him.

Last of all (though I could instance in as many more particulars) the
endeavors of the Papists have been chiefly to suppress the most honest men
that have been in judgment differing from themselves: to defame and abuse
them, that the world might think that they did deservedly suffer those further
cruelties which they would afterward inflict upon them; And is not this the
practice of those that are for this new way of resistance; yourselfe know's (if
you remember) who told me, that, because I was an honest man, I did more hurt
to the cause then an hundred knaves, and therefore I was liable to suffer
accordingly: and so I think I have since that time, for (after my
imprisonment, and five more journeies, upon new calls, and by Pursevants unto
London) when it was apprehended I would not recant: My living (I know not
wherefore) was sequestered, a stranger put into it, my wife and children
threatened to have the house beaten down over their head, unless they would
resign up all to the will my drunken and malicious adversaries, who have power
put into their hands to take me, and carry me prisoner to Cambridge, or
otherwise to abuse me, as they shall please: and thus the Papists did with the
Martyrs of Christ; nay, thus Pilate dealt with Christ himself, tradidit Jesum
volvntati eorum, (says the spirit) he delivered Jesus to the will of those
that most maliciously cried out against him: and this is my comfort in mine
affliction, my conformity to my Master.

And in the point of defamation, these new way men are fully as dexterous as
the Papists, for on the sudden they can do that against a faithful Minister,
which the devil in many years was not able to effect, scil. make him a
scandalous Minister, by casting iniquity upon him, or by ranking him in that
number: whereby he becomes far more odious in the judgment of the vulgar,
then if by his own sins, and Satan's temptations he had made himself such a
one indeed; and hereby is discovered the greatness of their power, but indeed
Gods omnipotency is discovered another way, namely by turning evil into good,
and by drawing a beautiful world out of a confused Chaos: it is true I confess
they have a trick to make evil men good too, upon the sudden, for let those
that were scandalous before, but speak for this war, and urge people to lend
money, and persist in this way of resistance, why on the sudden all their
former faults appear to be but imperfections: or, it is concluded for certain
of their conversion, and you may see (will they say) how Gods blessing goes
along with the Parliament, there was never heard of such admirable Converts,
and of such floats of them in the days of the Prelates; by which kind of
expressions I fear Gods name is rather blasphemed, then truly honored: Sir, I
could undertake to evidence unto you, that all these and many such ways the
Papists and Jesuits walk in; therefore I say whoever promoteth this new way
does thereby introduce Popery, and manifestly breaks his Protestation, which
for my part I dare not do.

Thus (reverend Sir) you have seen diverse of my reasons why I cannot go with
your self and my brethren in this your new way: I apprehend it to be against
God, destructive to his Law, inconsistent with the Gospel, contradicting the
practice of Christianity, opposite to the calling of our ministry, contrary to
common prudence, to humanity, to nature, and to reason; to our oath of
Allegiance, and our late Protestation: so that I hope you will think from
these grounds that my dissent from you, is not because I am given up to the
spirit of madness, as some conclude.

And now (dear friend) do not blame me, if I wish your return unto my self
into that good old way, wherein we formerly walked together, in which only you
did Christ good service; for by your stepping into this new way, I can assure
you that both Christ and you have lost, though the cause has gained. Sir let
me beg of you again (as before by my private letters I have done) and even for
Christ his sake, that you would deny your self, and speedily put forth your
strength to prevent (what in you lies) the ruin of this Noble Nation, that
bred and fosterd you: you were wont to be ready to every good work and motion,
and you cannot imagine what good your return might do, I dare say it would
recall many of our Brethren: what if the rageing Genius of the times should
imprison you, and divest you of your outward subsistence (as it has done me,)
yea what if it should shed your blood for your revolting from it, and rebuking
of it, it would be both Christ's gain, and your glory: If your Conscience tells
you, that you have too highly offended your King, know that your Sovereign is
the Image of your Savior in meekness and mercy; O help to make up that
great breach which you have unadvisedly been a means to widen between him
and his people. your aim at first was (as I hope) Gods glory, and the purging
of his Church, your unhappiness was to pitch upon the wrong way, wherein you
have gone beyond your self and purpose. O confess it, and come out of it, and
the good hand of the Lord shall again be with you and upon you.

And for the Parliament sake, (whose reputation next to Christ's glory and the
Kings honor, I am bound to regard) I would beg one thing at your hands,
wherein I think you may do as much as any one man; and that is, that you would
solicit the same, that your Brethren of the Ministry who are in tribulation
for preaching the truth of Jesus, and obedience to their Sovereign, may not be
dealt withal as John Hus was at the Council of Constance, of whom it was
said, Combustus est, non confutatus Hussius, burnt, but not confuted; so that
we might not be condemned unheard, and unconvinced: that some particular
Members, (who doubtless (as men) may be seduced by ill Counsel) might not be
suffered in the name of the whole Parliament to turn out of their Livings Gods
painful Ministers, with their wives and children, upon the malicious
information of some beastly drunkard. I am credibly informed, that when my
Living was sequestered, and a stranger put in, and my self forced to fly for
the safety of my life, and my house threatened to be beat down upon my wife and
children, unless they with my aged parent would quietly depart they knew not
whither, and resign it up unto my enemies, even some of them my adverse
neighbors had some regret of spirit at this great injustice, and said, if he
(meaning my self) had offended the Parliament, yet what has the poor woman
and her tender infants done? Believe it (Sir) this is not for the honor of the
Parliament.

You know how the Bishops were cried out upon by some, for putting Ministers
out of their freeholds; but they heard them first, told them what they would
do before hand, and for what cause, and was this their fault? should they have
done it on the sudden and said nothing, had it been lawful then? well fare
Stephen Gardener yet, and Edmund Boner, for they by their Chaplains would
labor to convince and convert men to themselves, before they would condemn
them, and give them up to the secular power; nor do I read they did then put
power into the hands of their professed enemies and accusers, to afflict and
hurt them: Worthy Sir, if you shall please to consider of this, and put to your
helping hand, many that are in persecution for their faithfulness to Christ,
and their love unto their Sovereign, shall be engaged unto you. I move you not
to solicit, that we might have leave to lay open the conditions of our
adversaries, when they are malicious, drunken, blasphemous, and perjured
persons, because I understood by the Chaire-man, that it was not the custom of
that Court to permit such a thing, which he called recrimination, because it
had been a practice in the High Commission: But (Sir) my desire only is, that
we might be suffered to dispute the case before we be condemned, that the
Court might not be so liable to be ill thought of: Never among the Papists was
any man condemned for a point of Religion, till the same had first been
determined upon, to be erroneous by some Assembly or Convocation; but when or
where in this Church was this point of obedience to the Lords Anointed, (for
which we suffer) adjudged culpable?

And (Sir) for my self, if it were lawful for a persecuted Minister to speak
in his own defense, against a perjured blasphemous drunkard, I could evidence,
that nothing but my oppugning his sins is the root of my sufferings: indeed
now such persons have got a trick whereby they will suppress us all, unless
Gods mercy do prevent it; whatever sin we preach against, if they do but
say we preach against the Parliament, they boast they shall be believed, for
they are for the Affirmative; and the Minister with his Negatives is of no
credit, though he bring his witnesses: wherefore now they resolve that sin
shall live without control, at his peril the Minister must not meddle with
it, for if he do, they make no more to put him by, from preaching Gods Word,
and to cast him out of his Living, then they do for to be drunken; you may well
think that my drunken adversary was confident to prevail, when he offered to
lay wagers before hand that he would effect this against me, which he has
done. Sir, when I preached against Treason, Rebellion, and Disobedience, then
they said (no question but) I meant the Parliament; afterward I preached
against Lying, Slandering, and Malice, and this they said was against the
Parliament too, and got me to be sent for up again by a Pursevant about the
same; nay (Sir) when I did but quote those words of our Savior, Wide is the
gate and broad is the way that leads unto death, and many go therein; this
they said was against the Parliament, because the major part of people in those
parts are for the same: and when I quoted that place in the 120 Psalm, where
David says, that He was for Peace, but others were for War; when he spoke of
that, they made them ready for battle, this also they said was for the King,
and against the Parliament. When I preached against vainglory, upon those
words of our Savior, I seek not the praise of men, they said I preached
against that Member, unto whom in my behalf you writ your Letter, when I
protest I never thought of him all the while I was upon that subject, (that I
know of) save only when I prayed for my enemies: my custom being to apprehend
the wrong that any does me, as Gods call unto me to pray for that man in
particular, and therefore then I use to think of such in my prayers.

But (Sir) I pray consider whether the Parliament be not abused by these men as
well as I, yet I alone from some of its Members must bear the punishment:
alas! if God gives up some to make lies, and others to believe lies, how can I
help it? I confess I do admire at the humility of those Members, who will
condescend so low, as to be instruments of such base and inferior persons
malice against any of Gods Ministers whom they know not: But alas, I believe
indeed the reason in part is their ignorance, they do not know the men; for
had they known, they would not so far have consented to them: Now (Sir) it
being unlawful (as it seems) for such a one as I to discover the abuse which
such conditioned accusers do offer to that high Court, and to the Members
thereof: I desire that you would endeavor to do the same in the behalf of
the rest of your Brethren of the Ministry, who have not yet drunk of that
bitter cup which I have tasted, but are happily liable thereunto.

And now (Sir) I entreat you to pardon me if I have erred in these lines, by my
length, or any other way; you know my phrase and style both in writing and
speaking, it is always plain: wherefore if expressions at the first relish
appear unpleasing, let your wonted love interpret well; my zeal (I hope) is
right, and my love I am sure is unfeigned unto you: I would not willingly
offend my most deadly foe, much less mine indeared friend, by whose society I
have formerly enjoyed much good: wherefore in confidence of your well
acceptance of my sincere thoughts, I take my leave of you, commending you to
God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to re-call from errors, and
to direct in all truth both you and me, who shall by the help of that Word and
Grace ever be

Sir, Your faithful associate in the way of passive obedience, (when you shall
walk therein) not only to the loss of goods, but of life it self E. S.

FINIS.
A Copy of the Sequestration that was brought against Edward Symmons Minister
of Rain in Essex, for his preaching, and his refusing to renounce that Faith
and Doctrine of Christianity, expressed in the seven first Sections of the
preceding Discourse.
Die Veneris tertio Martii. 1642.
WHereas Edward Symmons Clerk, Rector of the Parish Church of Rain in the
County of Essex, has in his Sermons and otherwise expressed great malignity
and opposition against the Parliament, and the power and proceedings thereof,
affirming that the Parliament would force the King to comply with those Laws
they shall make, and that they raise a Force against the King, and that they
are not to be obeyed, though they command according to God, if it be not
according to the Kings Command; and advised them not to lend any Money, Plate,
or Horse, toward the raising of Forces for the Parliament, and pressed his
Auditors to believe whatsoever is set forth in the Declarations published in
the Kings name, because a divine sentence is in his mouth, and he cannot err;
and that if David's heart smote him for cutting Saul's garment, what would it
have done if he had kept away his Castles, Towns, and Ships: which the Lords
and Commons in Parliament assembled taking into consideration, for the better
supply of an able and godly man in the said Church, and for the provision of
fit maintenance for those that shall officiate therein, do constitute and
ordain that Emanuel Stock, Peter Iosceline, Richard Bugby, William Chaukley,
Henry Iosceline, Ralph Iosceline, Edward Hiat, or any three of them, shall have
power and authority; and hereby are required to sequester the Parsonage-house,
and all the Tithes, Rents, and profits whatsoever of the Parsonage of that
Church, and to appoint Collectors for the gathering and receiving of them, as
they in their discretion shall think fit, and shall have power to pay the same
unto Robert Atkins Master of Arts, a godly, learned, and orthodox Divine, who
is hereby appointed and required to preach every Lords day, and to officiate as
Parson, and to take care for the discharge of the Cure of the said place in all
the duties thereof, until further order shall be taken by both Houses of
Parliament. And if any shall refuse to pay unto the said Sequestrators, or any
three of them, or to the Collectors appointed by them, any of the Rents,
Duties, or lawful Fees, accustomed to be paid, upon information thereof by the
Sequestrators, or any three of them, unto either House of Parliament; the said
Lords and Commons do declare they will proceed against such refusers,
according to their several offenses and contempts.

Ex. Io. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.


