Dear Friends:
IT is now about six years since I was most unfortunately taken by a Turks
man of War, on the Coasts of Barbary captive into Argiere; since which time I
have written often to London to Master Southwood of the upperground, to Richard
Barnard of Dukes place, Richard Cool of the Bank-side, to Master Linger an
Haberdasher in crooked Lane, and in that to Master Southwood I sent an enclosed
to my Father, ifliving, and other Letters to my Brother and friends, if not
dead; I could never hear whether any of you were alive or dead, which makes me
think the Letters are either miscarried, or all of you deceased, or gone to
other places, or else I know you are so much Christians and friends, that you
would have looked upon me in such a condition. O my friends, once more I tell
you, I am a miserable Captive in Argiere, taken by a Flemish Vessel, two
years after I left the Wars in Gilderland; my Patroone is one Baron a French
Renegado that lives in the Country, but hires me and another Protestant Captive
(one Master Robinson a Norfolk man) out into Argiere for this time, and if we
go up to the Country you may never hear of us again; our misery is, that the
price of our redemption will be no less then 250. 1. because we are thought to
have good friends in England, and we must both go off together. Master
Robinson has written to his friends, and we have deeply bound our selves to
each other, that we will engage our friends to us both equally; Ah, Father,
Brother, friends and acquaintance, use some speedy means for our Redemption,
many hundred Slaves have been redeemed from their misery since we came hither,
which makes us hope still we may be the next, and then the next, but still our
hopes are deceived. We do pray you therefore for the Lords Christ's sake that
redeemed you, that you would use all possible means for our redemption. There
is now a part in England renowned over the Christian world for their Piety this
way, O make your address to those noble worthies in the name of Christ, for
whose sake we suffer; we did never so well understand the meaning of that
Psalm, penned by those captive Jews held in Babilonish captivity as now, By
the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered thee, O Sion,
when we remembered thee, O England. O good friends, we hope these our sighs will
come to your ears, and move pity and compassion. We are told there is a
Merchant in London, one Mr. Stanner of St. Mary-Axe, that has a Factor in
Legorne, and one Mr. Hodges, and Mr. Mico, Londoners, that are dealers there,
who are able to direct you in the readiest way for our redemption; deny us not
your prayers if you can do nothing else, it will be some comfort to hear from
friends. There is a Post in London that conveyes Letters into all parts, and
you may have an opportunity of letting us hear from you, if you please within
a month or six weeks. The Lord direct your thoughts with ways of love, and
strengthen us with faith and patience.

Your sorrowful friend, and brother in Christ, Thomas Sweet.
There subscribes to these besides, Richard Robinson.
From Barbary, September. 29. 1646.
Another Copy of a Letter since.
SIthence our last sent you in September, Master Cason the Parliaments Agent,
and the Basha have concluded a Peace, and it is agreed, that all English
Captives (not turned Renegadoes) shall be redeemed at the price they were first
sold in the Market for; which our Patroon understanding before the Agreement,
made us over by Bill to a Moore in Tunis, being a Merchant of his acquaintance,
the place being under another Government, and swore we should not be redeemed
till the last man there, unless we could procure the sum first demanded,
which is, 250. li. I do keep his books of Accounts and Merchandise, and that
keeps me here in misery, when others that are illiterate go off upon easy
terms for Cloth, so that my breeding is my undoing unless pity be shown.

November 26. Thomas Sweet.

THe long and lamentable bondage of Thomas Sweet, and Richard Robinson, our
Neighbour-Englishmen (and good Protestants) being cleared unto us by the
Testimony and recommendation of diverse godly Ministers of the Assembly, and of
this City of London, upon the desire of their friends, we can do no less then
recommend the sad condition of those men to your godly consideration and
Christian Charity, heartily wishing and desiring, you would yield your utmost,
and most speedy furtherance, that they may be redeemed with the first.

Richard Prise, Baronet. Robert Nedham, Knight. Tanfeild. Vachell, Esquire.
Arthur Owen, Esquire. John Meyrick, Knight. Cl^ Waker, Esquire. Simon
Thellwall, Esquire. William Davis, Esquire.
Members of the Honorable House of Commons.

Published by Authority.


