THE GODS ARE MEN: OR, The Mortality of Persons in places of MAGISTRACY.

As it was Explained and Applied in a SERMON Preached at the Assize holden at
Hertford for that County, on March 15. 1656/7.

BY George Swinnocke M.A. late Fellow of Bailiol College in Oxford, and now
Preacher of the Gospel at Rickmersworth in Hertfordshire.

Man being in honor abides not, Psalm 49.12. PALLIDA mors aequo pulsat pede
Pauperum tabernas Regumque turres. Hor. od. 4. lib. 1. O that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! Deuteronomy.
32.29. Vivere tota vita discendum est: and quod magis fortasse miraberis, tota
vita discendum est mori. Senec. ad Paulin. de brevit. vitae. cap. 7. LONDON,
Printed for N. Webb, and VV. Grantham at the Bear over against the little
North-door in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

To the Worshipful John Beresford Esquire. High Sheriff of the County of Hertford.
Honored Sir,
It is Camb. Eliz.
reported of Queen Elizabeth (that Deborah of our Nation) that in a letter to
the King of France she should use this expression, That if there were any
unpardonable sin, it must be ingratitude. And Plut. in vita Pyrr.
Plutarch relates concerning Pyrrhus King of Epirus, that he took the death of
Aeropus very impatiently, because he was thereby cut off from all opportunities
of requiting the courtesies which he had received from him. I think, Sir, there
are few that have any relation to me, but know something of my obligations to
you. And though I cannot strictly comply with the former, yet I bless God I
have not the same cause to complain with the latter. Notwithstanding, the only
requital I am able to make you, is by these lines to give you a Bill under my
hand that I am your debtor. I shall ever hold my self engaged to Ingratus est
qui beneficium accepisse se negat, quod accepit; Ingratus qui dissimulat;
Ingratus qui non reddit; Ingratissimus omnium qui oblitus est. Sen. de benef.
lib. 3. cap. 1.
remember the frequent and real kindness which your liberal self and loving
Consort, have freely bestowed on me and mine: For which I may say to you as
Idem de ben. lib. 2. cap. 25.
Furnius to Augustus, Hanc unam Caesar habeo injuriam tuam, effecisti ut viverem
and morerer ingratus, This is the only injury you have done me by your
courtesies, to force me to live and die ungrateful.

Your voluntary closing with them in the Parish that seek to advance the power
of godliness, your honoring them that fear the Lord, your disesteeming vicious
persons, your charitable contributions to the poor upon all occasions, are
certainly recorded in Heaven; and therefore; for the honor of God and
encouragement of others deserve respectfully to be mentioned on Earth. In
testimony of my gratitude I now present to your eyes, what was lately preached
in your ears, with the addition of some things then omitted, either through the
defect of my memory or want of time. Acknowledging both the weight of the
matter delivered, and my weakness in the manner of its delivery. It is very
visible that this Child is like its Parent, I mean my Book (if these sheets may
be called by that name) too too much resembles my body in infirmities. And
indeed the consciousness of my own inabilities has been the chief reason why I
have not yet satisfied the desires of some persons of quality in Publishing two
former Sermons composed on the like occasion. Only my respect to you has
caused this Sermon, Genesis 27.36.
like Jacob to supplant its elder brother by getting away the birthright, and
like Genesis 38.29.
Pharez to make a breach upon his i. e. A Sermon preached at a former Assize on
the former part of the Text, not yet printed.
brother Zarah, and get into the world before him. But the Almighty God (who is
a free Agent) often works great things by small means. He can by the blowing
of Rams horns cause the strong walls of Josh. 6.16.
Jericho to fall down; with common John 9.6.
clay he can make a precious salve to open the eyes of the blind: It pleases
his wisdom by the 1 Cor. 1.21.
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Dr. Reynolds epistle
before Meditat. on Lords Supper.
Herein the sovereignty of the Gospel is most excellently set forth, in that
it leads the soul by the hand of a child, Isa. 11.6. and is as truly though
not as abundantly powerful from young Timothy as from Paul the aged, 1 Timothy
4.12.

The favorable and extraordinary acceptance which this Sermon obtained when it
was heard, moves me to hope that through the blessing of Heaven, it will be
profitable when it shall be read.

Sir, In it you may discern that Psalm. 119.96.
there will be an end of, and that there is an emptiness in all earthly
perfections. That death is the great leveller making all equal, seizing as
boldly on, and dealing as hardly with the greatest Emperor as the poorest
beggar.

Divesne, prisco natus ab Inacho,
Nil interest, an pauper, and infima
De gente, sub dio moreris,
Victima nil miserantis orci.
Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium
Versatur urna: serius, ocyus
Sors exitura, nos in aeternum
Exilium impositura cymbae.
Hor. lib. 2. Ad Del. That the rich man's wealth Prove. 10.15.
which is his strong City, and an high tower in his conceit, cannot secure him
against the assault and battery of this grand adversary. Their bones and
skellitons have no Inscriptions or Titles of honor remaining on them, Vines
Ess. Fun.
That the grave m^keth no difference between the dust of Princes and Peasants.
That they which cannot be contented with much Earth while they live, will be
contained in a little when they die. As the K. Philip.
Macedonian King having got a fall in the sand, as he was wrestling at the
Olympic games, when he rose again seeing the print of his body in the sand,
cried out, O how little a parcel of Earth will hold us when we are dead, who
ambitiously seek after the whole world whilst we are living! Dan. 2.32.
That Image in Daniel does notably set out the frailty of worldly greatness;
The head of it was of fine gold, (that spoke the Chaldean Empire) the breast
and arms of silver, (this that Empire of the Medes and Persians) the belly and
thighs of brass (by these the Grecian Empire is understood) but the feet were
part of clay. The feet of this Image were the strength and foundation of the
image, and speak thus much to us, that all worldly pomp and majesty will fail,
all earthly power and dignity will fall; for the Image stands upon clay. Q.
Cur. Nudus pascit aves, jacet en qui possidet orbem, Exiguae telluris inops.
Claudian of Pomp. Mag.
Cyrus therefore did fitly cause this Epitaph to be engraven on his tomb, O man
whosoever thou art that shall come hither, know that I am great Cyrus, that
first erected the Persian Monarchy; therefore envy me not this little Earth
that now covers my body.

From it you may learn, That your greatest care should be to fit your self for
your last hour; your main work is to do your last act well. The Roman
Gladiators appointed to death, were very solicitous how they should contrive
their bodies so, as that they might fall handsomely and die modestly. Your
business is so to furnish your soul, that you may die piously, Hujusmodi
comparandae sunt opes quae simul cum naufragio enatent.
to get such riches as will swim out with you in a shipwreck, to be Luke 22.21.
rich toward God, Jam. 2.5.
to be rich in faith, to be rich 1 Timothy 6.18, 19.
in good works (Alas how poor is that (...) who has no other riches then what
are at the courtesy of the thief, mo^^, and death!) hereby you will lay up a
good foundation against the time to come and lay hold on eternal life.

It will show you, how absolutely necessary an experimental knowledge of a
crucified Christ is to a dying Christian; that no weapon is more requisite (for
us to have and use) when we enter the lists and encounter with our last enemy,
then the shield of faith: O how cheering and comforting to a dying body will
the warm blood of the Lord Jesus be, being applied by a true lively faith to
the soul! He and he only may look on the King of terrors without fear, that
has first looked on the King of Saints with the eye of faith.

It will acquaint you that a saving work of grace must be wrought, upon the
heart, before death can be a passage to the weight of glory. A Painter may
paint fire, but he cannot paint heat. A person civillized may attain to the
outward actions, but cannot to the inward affections of a sanctified Christian.
That all the godliness of an unregenerate man will die with him. That the lamp
of profession which shines gloriously whilst a man lives, if it be not fed
from oil in the vessel, true grace in the heart, a renewed nature, the image of
God stamped on the soul, it will go out in a stink when he dies, and not
advantage him at all. And therefore Christians should not like some Tradesmen
live altogether upon their credit with others, but labor to find some
testimony within them, that there is a real change wrought upon them.

It will tell you, that it highly concerns you to be laborious for your soul,
for your Savior now you live, because you must rest when you die. That you
should be much in thinking highly of God, in speaking humbly to God, in acting
vigorously for God. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
That you should abound more and more in the work of the Lord. Saints must not
Josh. 10.12, 13. Falsi illi sunt, qui diversissimas res expectant, ignaviae
voluptatem, and praemia virtutis. Salust. Non incepisse sed perfecisse virtutis
est. Aug. ad fratr. in erem.
like Joshua's Moon stand still, much less like Crabs go backward; no, not
like the Snail, creep forward; but like the Sun, rejoice to run his race. The
path of the just must be like the shining light, that shines brighter and
brighter to perfect day, Prove. 4.18.

Truth of grace is ever followed with growth in grace. though perfection be the
honor and reward only of the Saints in Heaven, yet it is the desire and
endeavor of the Saints on earth. That you should persevere and increase both
by your pattern and precept, in discouraging the bad, and encouraging the good.
That you should improve all opportunities, employ every talent, your honor,
riches, power, life, health, strength, relations, interests, all you have, are
or can be, to the utmost in his service, and for his for glory, who (I hope)
has loved you, and washed you in his blood. Genesis 47.6.
Pharaoh would have active men to be his servants; the great King of heaven is
a pure act and he loves most and likes best those servants that are most
active for him. Hereby you will please the most high God, though hereby you
will displease profane men. The world indeed whom the Spirit of God compares
to 2 Pet. 2. ult. His speech savoured more of wit, then grace, who counseled
his friend not to come too nigh unto truth, lest his teeth should be beaten out
with its heels.
dogs, if a man go softly will be quiet; but if he ride a pace in the way to
heaven, they will bark exceedingly, yea and bite if they can: do but hinder
their progress in sin, and like waters stopped at a bridge they will roar and
make a noise to purpose: But surely the favor of God will bear up the heart
against all the anger of men. Those persons which the wicked besmear with
calumny, and those actions which ungodly men speak of with scorn and contempt,
God will entertain with an Euge and reward with glory: Matthew. 25.21.
Well done good and Faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many Cities, enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord.

Sir, My hearts desire and prayer to God for Rickmersworth is, that it might be
saved. And I hope the Divine providence will ere long put a greater price into
your hands then ever yet you had, wherein you may manifest your fear of his
Majesty, your zeal for his glory, your hatred of iniquity and your real love to
the place of your Nativity: which that you may faithfully discharge at this
day, and comfortably account for at the last day, and that you and yours, 2
Cor. 5.1.
when these earthly houses of your tabernacles shall be dissolved, may have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens,
shall be the prayer of him whose desire is to be

Rickmersworth June 1. 1657. Your faithful servant in the work of your faith
GEORGE SWINNOCK.

The GODS Die like MEN, OR MAGISTRATES are Mortal.
Psalm. 82. v. 6, 7. I have said, Ye are gods: and all of you are children of
the most High.

But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes.


ONe Ambr. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 32.
of the Fathers resembles the whole Bible to the visible Heavens, wherein
says he, the Psalms are like the Sun, whose beams shine brightly, and rays
warm comfortably. An English Divine compares all the Scriptures to the body of
Man, Luther calls them parva biblia, and summarium utriusque testamenti.
and the Psalms to the heart, the most Pathetick part, the seat and center of
sweet affections. Nay as one observes, the very Turks, that disclaim both Old
and New Testament in general, yet will swear as solemnly by the Psalms of
David, as by the Alchoran of Mahomet. But what need have we of the testimony of
men? when God is pleased to give such large witness in the Gospel to this book
of Psalms. In which the Psalms are quoted above sixty Leighs hist. p. 35.
times. The Apostle calls them spiritual Colos. 3.16.
songs, both because they were inspired by the holy Spirit of God, and because
they are instrumental to spiritualize men's affections, and also because they do
suit with men's spirits; they are so penned, that every man may think they speak
de se, in re sua, of himself and to his own condition.

Quia reges and quicunque potestate praediti sunt, immensam sibi licentiam,
fastu excoecati, ut plurimum indulgent: denunciat Propheta, reddendam esse
rationem summo judici qui omnem mundi celsitudinem supereminet. Calvin. argu.
Psalm. 82.
This 82 Psalm contains a severe reprehension of superiors, for their ungodly
oppression of inferiors.

The Text presents you with their Majesty and with their Mortality. In Verse
6. They are gods; and children of the most High: there is there Majesty. In
Verse 7. They die like men, and fall like Princes: there is their Mortality.

Plautus tells us concerning Hercules, that he was the son of uJpiter, and so
immortal, and the son of Amphitrus, and so mortal: The former Verse speaks
that Ye are the sons of God; thereby ye seem to be immortal: but the latter
pronounces plainly that Ye shall die like men; and therefore it is apparent ye
are mortal.

In Verse 6. Ye are exalted as high as Heaven; I have said, Ye are gods. In the
7. v. Ye are debased as low as Earth; But ye shall die.

In ver. 6. How beautiful are your features? how Evangelical are your faces?
Nay, how God-like are your looks? I have said, Ye are gods. In the 7. when the
other side of the Picture is turned, what hoary heads? what heavy hearts? what
quivering lips? what trembling loins? what dying flesh? what decaying spirts
have ye?

Vt caeteri omnes natura sunt obnoxii morti, and quidem aeternae damnationi, si
in delictis adversus conscientiam ad extremum usque perseverent: ita scitote
vos quoque iisdem legibus subjectos esse. Moller. in loc.

Ea cogitatio de fragilitate vestra and de poenis secuturis commone facere and
excitare vos debebat, ut in procuratione muneris vestri majore diligentia and
studio versaremini, Idem ibid.


And it is not without cause that the Spirit of God subjoyneth your humanity to
your Deity, your Mortality to your Majesty, as a means to prevent sin, and as a
curb to restrain you from making your Lust your law, or your Will the rule of
all your actions.

In the words we have the Mortality of the Magistrate (namely from the seventh
Verse) First affirmed, Ye shall die like men. Secondly amplified, and fall like
the Princes. Thirdly confirmed, surely and certainly; as surely as ye live like
gods, so surely ye shall die like men, Certe sicut homo. Calvin. Moller. Trem.
legunt.

I have formerly in this place, upon the like occasion from the 6. v.
discovered the dignity of At a^ Assize holden at Hertford, for that County,
upon the 2. day of August, 1653.
Magistracy. I shall now proceed to the frailty of the Magistrate. My work now
will be like Philip's youth, to mind you that ye are but men: And I hope there
is none here of the Persian Monarchs humor, into whose presence none might
come clothed with Est 4.2.
sackcloth; nor like Lewis the 11th. of France, who would not permit the word
Death to be named in his Court: For all the Dish I have to entertain you with
at this time, is a Deaths head: Neither shall I garnish that with the flowers
of humane eloquence, as knowing there is no need of it. The deformed Harlot
wants coloring, but the Virgin truth of God is most beautiful in her native
dress. And there is little good by it. A painted window keeps out the light;
a paint^d fire will not burn; a painted sword will not cut; and if ever the
Jer. 23.29.
fire of Scripture warm Luke 24.32.
the heart; or this Ephesians. 6.17.
sword of the spirit wound the Conscience, to conviction and conversion, it
must be drawn out of the gaudy scabbard of man's wisdom.

I shall first speak to the Explication of the words, and then draw the
Obs^rvation from the words.

But i.e. For all the glorious titles wherewith ye are invested, as gods
amongst men's, and the administration of justice wherewith ye are entrusted, as
my Lieutenants on Earth; yet for all this, Ye shall Ac si diceret, quum
instructi sunt potestate ad regendum mundum, non exuisse tamen naturam ut
mortales esse desinerent. Calv. in loc.
die; though your names are Divine, your natures are but Humane.

Surely, i.e. Though ye should flatter your selves because ye are gods, ye
shall ever live, yet know certainly that ye are but men, and must die. All
God's words are true and sure; but on some there is affixed a special note of
certainty, because of man's (especially great persons) extraordinary infidelity.
Though ye should neither regard it, nor provide for it, as if it were a thing
of small consequence, or little concernment, Yet Job 17.14.
ye may say to corruption, Thou art my father; and to the worm, Thou art my
brother and sister.

Ye shall die like men. Your souls and bodies that have been joined together
like husband and wife, shall be parted asunder: Death will loose all bands,
untie all knots, even this conjugal one, 'twixt soul and body, which is the
strongest of all.

Sicut plebeius homo. Tremel.
Like men. i. e. Like ordinary men; like Adam, says Ainsworth: Though in your
lives ye are like Saul, higher by the head and shoulders then the people; yet
in your deaths they and you meet, are equal.

Two things ye do as men:

1. Ye sin as ye are 1 Cor. 3.3. Errare humanum est.
men; to walk as a man, is to walk carnally, to walk sinfully.

2. Ye die as Psalm. 9. ult. quod sint homines, i. e. quod sint miseri, infirmi,
mortales. Moll. in loc.
men; to know your selves to be men, is to know your selves to be mortal.

And fall like one of the Princes. These words have a double Lection, and
fourfold Construction.

We read them, And fall like one of the Et sicut quilibet principes cadetis.
Calv. Qui exquisitissimis tormentis cruciantur. Potentes potenter torquebuntur.
Princes; others read them, And ye Princes shall fall like one.

For their fourfold Construction:

1. Some understand them of a fall into Hell. So several of the Ancients take
them, like the Prince of the Devils; this is true of evil Magistrates, death to
them is but the trap-door to Hell; the higher their exalation is, the greater
and lower their damnation will be. The words of the Prophet are Emphatical,
Isa. 30.33. Ingentia beneficia, ingentia flagitia, and ingentia supplicia

Kings, says one, are fair marks for traitors to shoot at. Tra. on Esth. 2.


Tophet is prepared of old; yea, for the King it is prepared. The greater men's
preferment is, the greater their defilement, and the greater their punishment.

2. Others understand them of a fall by a violent death. So many Princes fall:
In that bloody way, Saul, Abner, Ahab, and many other Princes mentioned in
Scripture, went to their long homes. The Roman Historian observes, that the
Cesars got little by their places, nisi ut citius interficerentur. Some men's
honor has been the Knife to cut their throats.

Horat. ad Licin.
Saepius ventis agitatur iugens
Pinus: and celsae graviore casu
Decidunt turres, feriuntque summos
Fulmina montes.
3. A third sort Expound the words of falling as the Princes of other Nations;
Deodati in loc.
though ye are the Princes of God's people, yet ye are not thereby privileged
from the arrest of death. For as the sun of prosperity shines as well on the
briars in the Wilderness, as on the roses in the Garden: so the frost of
adversity falls as well on the fruitful corn as on the hurtful weeds. The
most notorious sinner lives as well as the most gracious Saint: and the most
gracious Saint dies as well as the most notorious sinner. Grace is an Antidote
against the poison of death, but not a preservative from undergoing death.

4. The words are construed thus, Like the Princes that have been before you.
Ye know that your Ancestors who were as high in honor and as great in power
as your selves, yet submitted to death; so must ye do as they have done. Etiam
muta clamant cadavera, Their graves amongst you do read a Lecture of mortality
to you.

The term whereby the Spirit of God describes death, is considerable; its
called a fall, and fall like one of the Princes.

Romans 14.13.
Sin is called a fall, and so is death. Death is the firstborn of sin; and
therefore no wonder if the Child be called after the name of its Parent.

Death is to every man a fall, from every thing but God and godliness. Ye that
are Magistrates fall more stairs, yea, more stories then others; the higher
your standing while ye live, the lower your falling when ye die.

Death to some is a fall from Earth to Hell; to all from the society of men to
the company of worms. To you that are great men, it will be a fall from your
richest treasures, from your delightful pleasures, from your stateliest
possessions, from your loveliest relations, Job 7.7.
from whatsoever is called the good of this world, Your eyes shall no more see
good.

Hor. ad Posth.
Linquenda tellus, and domus and placens
Vxor: neque harum, quas colis, arborum
Te praeter invisas cupressos
Vlla brevem Dominum sequetur.
Death is called an uncloathing, 2 Cor. 5.4.
because it will strip you of all your places of honor, of all the ornaments
of nature; As ye came naked into the World, Job 1. ult.
so ye must go naked out of the World. Nothing will follow you when ye die but
your works. Rev. 14.13.
When the good Magistrate dies that has been zealous for the Lord's honor,
and studious of his souls welfare; his works follow him through free grace,
into an eternal weight of glory. When the evil Magistrate dies, who has been
careless of his Conscience, and unfaithful in his calling, his works follow him
through divine severity, into a boundless Ocean of endless misery.



That Magistrates are mortal, or they who live like gods, must die like men;
the most potent Emperor must take his leave of this life as well as the
poorest beggar.

Death is called Josh. 23.14.
the way of all the Earth, because all flesh on Earth go this way. Is the
greatest road in the World, never without many travelers, of all sorts, ranks
and degrees. The grave is the Inn or resting place whither this way tends;
and Job tells Job 3.19.
us, that The small and the great are there.

The mortal sithe of death is Master of the royal Scepter, and moweth down as
well the Lillies of the Crown as the grass of Isa. 40.6, 7.
the Field. At one end of the Library in Dublin was a Globe, at the other end a
Skeliton, to show, that though man were Lord of all the World yet he must die.
All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the
field. The grass withers, the flower fades.

As Athanasius speaks of Julian, so I may say of the greatest King in the
World, Nubecula est, quae cito transibit.

Do we not find by experience, that the greater Candles consume and burn out as
well as the lesser. And that the boisterous wind of sickness blows down, and
rooteth up, as well the tall Cedars of Lebanon and the strong Oaks of Bashan,
as the lower shrubs and weaker trees of the Valleys

We Ministers that preach the Word of life, must ere long submit to 2 Cor. 4.7.
death; ye have the Heavenly treasure in earthen vessels. And you Magistrates
that are the Bulwarks of the Country under God, to preserve us from the shot
of a violent death, must necessarily your selves undergo a natural death. Ye
are called Psalm. 47.9. Scuta terrae sunt terrea scuta.
the shields of the Earth; yet ye are but Earthen shields. Ye are called the
Isa. 44.18. As at a game at chess, when done, not only pawns, but Kings, Queens
and Knights are tumbled into the bag: so when the race of life is finished,
noble as well as ignoble are tumbled into their graves.
shepherds of the people; but this Wolf of death will seize as well on the
shepherd as on the sheep.

I shall not stand to prove it any further at this present; there is not one of
you either Judge or Justic^s that hear me this day, but within a few days shall
be the proof of the text.

I shall only give you the causes of the Doctrine, and then make some Use of it.

But why do the gods die like men?

There are three Causes of it, as they are men.

Grounds of Doctrine.

1 Ethicall cause of death is sin. Romans 5.12. Romans 6. ult. Stipendium peccati
mors.


First, the moral or meritorious cause of death is sin. Sin and death like Jacob
and Esau were brought forth at one birth; they were twins and came into the
World together. As the thread follows the Needle, so death follows sin.
Wherefore, as p by one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin: and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

A worthy Divine of our own does solidly though briefly state that question,
viz. Whether man had not died, if he had not sinned; Or whether death be
natural or accidental; and does evidently prove, that man's life should have
lasted as long as his obedience; that man had never fallen into his grave, if
he had never fallen into transgression. H^ died not because his nature was
subject to corruption, but because sin had corrupted his nature. If he had not
turned from God, he had not returned to dust: Man was wholly a stranger to
death, till acquainted with sin. If he had continued in a state of innocence,
he had continued in a state of immortality.

Though Adam died not actually as soon as he fell, yet he presently became
mortal, and liable to death; for immediately upon his fall, sentence was passed
upon Genesis 3.19.
him. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return; according to that Genesis
2.17. Some say the Pope has a book called Taxa camerae Apostolicae, showing
the rate of every sin; At what rate one may be drunk, or swear, or keep an
Whore.
law, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. As the Malefactor
is a dead man in Law, when the sentence is pronounced upon him, though there be
some time between his Condemnation and Execution: so was man dead both in the
decree and threatening of God when the sentence of death was denounced against
him, This word death alone implies at what rate man may s^n. Death temporal
which is the separation of body and soul; death spiritual which is the
separation of God and the soul, in part, and for a time; eternal which is
everlasting and total perdition from the presence of the Lord and the glory of
his power, are the rate of sin, and the sad fruits that grow on this root of
bitterness. Sin is the father of death; but death like Senacherib's issue will
at last destroy its Parent. Sin in the body is like the Leprosy in the house,
which will not out till it be pulled down; but when the body of the Saint shall
be dissolved, that body of death shall be wholly destroyed.
though there was some respite between it and his actual dissolution.

Now Magistrates sin; therefore must die. If you perform but that duty (of much
difficulty, yet of absolute necessity) of communing with your own hearts, and
looking sometimes back upon your lives, without question you will find beside
your original depravation, a numberless number of actual provocations. I
believe the best of you are too like the Egyptian Temple, without fair and
beautiful, but within full of Serpents and Crocodiles. Your lives possibly may
be unblameable as to the eye of man, but are there not seven abominations in
your hearts?

2 Cause is Physical, the corruptibility of man's body. Contraria inter se
pugnant, and mutuo se destruunt. Genesis 3.19.
The second Cause of death is the corruptibility of Magistrates bodies; this is
the natural cause, your bodies are corruptible. Its now common to all Creatures
mixed of Elements, to be resolved into that out of which they were made.
Contrary qualities will for a time contend, and at last destroy each other. In
the third of Genesis we read man's exodus, viz. that he was dust in regard of
his original production; and shall be dust in regard of his ultimate resolution.

As the finest garment breeds a moth, and that moth eats up the garment;
Physicians have a rule, Vltimus sanitatis gradus, est morbo proximus.
As the strongest tree breeds a Worm, and that Worm devoureth the tree: So
the fairest and strongest bodies breed such diseases as will at last consume
them.

Eliphaz speaking of the highest men, assures us, that their foundation is in
the dust. Now the stability of a building depends on the strength of its
foundation. Job 4.19.
The Church is therefore immovable, because Christ her foundation is
invincible; Matthew. 16.18.
but our natural foundation being in the dust, we cannot hold out long. The
house of man's body is walled and roofed with Earth, and founded upon no better
then dust. The bodies of Magistrates have the same foundation. The Psalmist
speaking of a Prince, says, Psalm. 146.4.
that he returns to his Earth. As if his body could challenge no alliance to,
or propriety in, any thing but Earth. L. Cur. and Plut. in vit.
It is His earth. Alexander the Great being wounded at the siedge of an Indian
City, said, I have been told, I am the Son of God; but I see now I am liable to
wounds and death as well as others.

3. The supernatural cause of death, is the appointment of Heaven. It is
appointed for all men once to die, Heb. 9 27. 3 The Metaphysical cause is God's
decree.


Some men, yea most in the World die twice; the second death has power over
them; but all must die once. The exception of one or two that were translated,
and of them that shall be found alive at the coming of Christ, The greatest
Landlords are but Tenants at God's will in these houses of clay.
will not make void this general rule.

Magistrates that Execute the Statute Law of men, die by a standing Law of God.
When God is pleased to give sickness a warrant under the great Seal of Heaven,
it quickly executes its Office and turns men into Earth. It is thus ordered
in God's high Court, that Judges and Justices who now sit on the Bench, shall
die and appear at his Bar. The Turkish Historian observes, that when the great
Bassaes are feasting, oftentimes there comes a Messenger by order from the
great Sultan, and casts a black Mantle over them, and they are presently
forced to submit to strangling: So the proudest Potentates in the midst of
their mirth, are often surprised by a sudden distemper (commissionated by God)
and sent to their long homes. Use by way of Inference that nothing can free
from death.


I shall now draw some Inferences from the Doctrine.

First, If Magistrates are mortal, observe hence deaths prevalency and power
above all the Privileges and Prerogatives of nature. Lib. 5. in conclusion of
cap. ult.
It is a memorable Speech of Sir Walter Rawleigh, Though God who loves men is
not regarded, yet death which hates men, is quickly obeyed. O mighty death! O
eloquent death! whom no man could advise or persuade, thou can prevail with:
Take notice from hence that nothing in this World can privilege a man against
the arrest of death.

1. Strength cannot.
First, strength cannot; all the strength and power which the gods have, cannot
free them from death. Magistrates have civil strength as they are Magistrates;
the Command of whole Counties, Kingdoms, yea Empires; in this respect it is
that Magistrates are called Ti^us 3.1.
Principalities and Powers; yet death has power over them that has power over
others. Alexander and Caesar that Conquered. Countries and Kingdoms, were
conquered by death. Magistrates have natural strength as they are men, but
death trippeth up the heels and lays on their backs the most strong and
valiant. Job 21.23, 24. Plato says, that Marrow is not only the sourse of
generation, but the seat of life.
One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet: His breasts
are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow.

Put the case that a man be in the z^nith and height of his estate, when his
health is most pure, and his strength is most perfect, when he has the
choicest complexion in his face, and soundest constitution in his body, when
there is most agility in his joints, and most appetite in his stomach; yet even
then sickness arresteth him at the suit of death, haleth his body to the prison
of the grave, and sends his soul to his own place. Man at his best estate,
yea Psalm. 39.5.
surely every man at his best estate is altogether vanity.

2. Riches cannot Luke 16.22.
Secondly, as the strength, so the wealth of Magistrates is insufficient. The
holy Ghost tells us, that the ^i^h man also dyed. Men may put riches into the
grave with them, The Irish have a Proverb, What aileth a rich man to die?
but they will not keep them one moment out of the grave. Death like jealousy
will not regard any ransom, not be content though men would give many gifts.
Job speaks (supposing that he had dyed) Then I had been at rest with Princes
that had Gold, and filled their houses with Silver. Its reported of Cardinal
Beauford that when on his deathbed, he should say, Fie will not death be
hired? will Money do nothing? if the whole Realm would save my life, I am able
either by wealth to buy it, or by wit to procure it; but it could not help him,
die he did. Money is the Monarch of this World, but not of the next; it can
neither stave off sickness, nor buy out death.

3. Honors cannot.
Thirdly, as neither strength nor wealth; so neither can the honors of men help
them against this last enemy. How have the highest men on Earth been laid as
low as the Earth by it? Man in honor does not abide; Psalm. 49.12.
His duration is sometimes the less, because his reputation is so great.

Job speaks excellently, Where is the dwelling place of Princes? who shall
declare his way to his face? Job 21.28.31.
This person is so high that none dares tell him of his wicked practices.
Luther compla^neth that in his time Magistra^es Elati superbia volebant esse
ipso verbo superiores.
Kings says one, have Clouds in their brows as well as Crowns on their heads;
they would be adored like gods, and not reproved like men: Yet these men which
are so high that none must speak to them, death will be sure to speak with
them; Yet he shall be brought to the grave, and remain among the Tombs, Job
21.32. There is much weight in that word; Yet, i. e. though he be a Prince so
proud that he scorneth to hear men's reproofs, yet he shall be forced to listen
to death's language; though his dwelling place was stately amongst men, yet he
shall be brought to an homely one amongst Worms. Yet he shall be brought to his
grave, and remain amongst the Tombs. When Michael Paleologus Emperor of
Constantinople, sent for a present to Nugas the Scythian Prince, certain royal
Robes, and rich Ornaments, he set light by them, saying, Nunquid calamitates,
morbos aut mortem depellere possent?
It was a notable speech of the King of Persia, who visiting Constantine at
Rome, was shown the rare Edifices, rich Coffers, and great Honors of the
Emperor, Mira quidem haec, sed video ut in Persia, sic Romae hommes moriuntur.

If Magistrates are mortal; 2. Use by way of Inference of the Magistrates folly.
how much folly is in him that labors most for his body? The truth is, there
is a secret conceit in the hearts of great persons who have the World at will,
that they shall not die; it is not vox oris, but it is vox cordis; they still
think of a longer life, though they have lived never so long; they can see
death in other men's brows but not in their own bosoms. Psalm. 49.11. How many
be too like that Duke d'Alva, who b^ing asked whether he had observed a late
eclipse of the sun, answered, That he had so much business to do on earth that
he he had no time to look up to Heaven; so they spend so much time on their
dyi^g bodies, that they can spare none for their never dying souls.
Their inward thought is that their houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwelling places to all generations. Hence it comes to pass that they work
altogether for this world; so they have Earth in their hands, they care not
though they have nothing of Heaven in their hearts. Their endeavor is to live
in the favor of great men, and not to die in the fear of the great God.

How many great Persons spend their time (as Seneca speaks, inter pectinem
and speculum occupati) between the Comb and the Glass, and not between
Scripture and Prayer; their labor is to go finely, to fare deliciously, to
live honorably, to prosper outwardly: but not to honor God fruitfully, to
discharge that trust which is committed to them faithfully, or to work out
their own Salvation diligently.

There is a story of a fat man riding through Rome on a lean horse; it was
demanded how it came to pass that he being so exceeding fat, his horse was so
lean? he answers, Ego meipsum, stabularius equum curat, I mind my self, but
my Groom looks after my Horse. Too many God knows have fat bodies and lean
souls; their outward man is flourishing, their inward man is perishing: and the
reason is, they themselves regard their bodies, but they say they trust God (or
more truly the Devil) with their souls.

Prince Absalon is a fit resemblance of such persons; whilst he lived he
provided somewhat against the time he must die; But what does he provide? only
a place for his body to rest in. The Spirit of God takes special notice how
provident this ambitious youngster was for his body. 2 Samuel 18.18.
Now Absalon in his life time had reared up for himself a Pillar. But he never
thinks of his precious soul, where that might rest when it left his body. How
foolish and faulty are many Magistrates in this particular? whilst they live
they take special care that when they die, their bodies be in such a vault
interred, with such a company of mourners attended, that such a Monument be
e^ected, but take no care that when their bodies go to the house appointed for
all the living, their souls might go to that house which is not made with hands
but eternal in the Heavens. They little consider, that when their Friends are
weeping over their bodies, the Devils may be laughing over their souls.

O unspeakable folly! to make much of the Cabinet and disesteem of the Jewel,
to trim the Scabbard and let the sword rust; like Shimei to seek their servants
and lose themselves. Man in regard of his body claims kindred with the beasts
of the field, in regard of his soul with the Angels of Heaven; and yet this
beastial part is pampered whilst the Angelical is starved.

It is storied of Archimides that when Syracuse was taken by the Romans, he was
secure in his Closet, Plut. in vit. Marcell.
drawing circles with his Compass in the dust, and was then and there slain.
So these men ordinarily leave the Earth when they are most busy about it.

How did the fool in the Gospel promise himself a long and a comfortable life?
Soul take thine ease, Luke 12.20.
thou have goods laid up for many years. If he had said, Soul take thine ease,
thou have a treasure in Heaven, or thou have Christ who will do thee good to
eternity, it had been somewhat like: but thou have goods says he. Alas; how
irrational is this? you may as soon satiate or content corpus aura, as animam
auro, the body with wind as the soul with wealth. But I beseech you consider,
he that thought then to begin to take his ease is forced that night to make his
end. He was but a little before flourishing exceedingly, his mind full of
mirth, his heart full of hope, and his soul full of expected satisfaction; But
on a sudden he is departed, and all his high hopes frustrated: If you ask me,
whither he is gone? his estate to men, his body to the grave, his soul to Hell.
Poor wretch! little did he dream when he was asleep in sin, How many die like
those that are stung of the Tarantula a viper in Italy, that even di^ laughing
though they are going to the place where is nothing but weeping.
of going from a bed of feathers to a bed of fire. But too too many like him go
from carnal pleasures to eternal pains. Take notice how secure this rich fool
was; and yet his security was but the forerunner of his future calamity. When
the Wind lies, then the great rain falls. When the Air is most quiet, then
comes the great Earthquake. When Sisera was asleep, then his Head was nailed
to the ground. Pharaoh in his Chariot, Belshazzar in his bowls, Haman at his
banquet, Herod in his rob^s, are secure but not safe; when they least looked
for it, death surprised them; When they cried peace peace, then sudden
destruction seized on them, as travail on a woman with child, 1 These. 5.3.
which they could not escape.

Ambitious like the Jay, They are pruning and priding themselves on the top of
some high tree, when suddenly a shot from a Fowler tumbleth it down dead to the
Earth.

Covetous like Ants; How busy are they? like a company of Ants about white and
yellow Earth, when death like the feet of the next passenger crusheth them to
pieces. Voluptuous like the little Fish that swims merrily down the silver
streams of Jordan, till they empty themselves into the dead Sea and there
perish.

The worlds greatest darlings are in no better condition then the Bull that
goes to be sacrificed with a Garland on his head, and Music before him, when
suddenly he feels the stroke of the murdering Axe, and is knocked down dead.

Job 21. ver. 7. to 13. They spend their days in wealth, and end their days in
endless woe.
I shall conclude this Use with Job's Character of this rich sinner, who
flourishing for a time and perishes to eternity; The wicked live, become old,
yea are mighty in power. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and
their children dance. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down
to Hell.

Use by way of advice, Prepare for your dying hour. Isa. 38.6. Do it speedily.
Exam. Are Magistrates mortal? Let me then in the fear of the Lord, beseech you
that are Magistrates, now presently to make preparation for the hour of your
dissolutions. My counsel shall be with a little alteration, in the words of the
Prophet Isaiah to King Hezekiah; Now set your house in order, for you must die.
I must tell you all the time ye have is little enough for a work of this
weight: If Seneca can say, all a man's life is little enough for Philosophy,
etiamsi a paeritia, usque ad longissimos humani aeviterminos vita protendatur,
though the silver-wyre of life should be drawn out to the longest thread; I am
sure then that all your time is little enough for Christianity. Ye have a great
work to do, a great journey to go, and a little time will not be sufficient.
Make much of time, says Aquinas, especially in the weighty matters of
Salvation: O how much would he, that now lies frying in Hell rejoice, if he
might have the least moment to get God's favor in! The sun of your lives
(Blessed be God) is not yet let, the gate of mercy is not yet shut; I request
you before the bridge of divine grace be drawn, in this day of God's patience,
mind the things that concern your eternal peace. Austin professes, he would
not be an Atheist one quarter of an hour for a world, because he did not know,
but in that time, God might cut asunder his thread of life, and so let him drop
into Hell.

Let me persuade you, and the good Lord prevail with your hearts, to set your
selves speedily about this necessary work. Delays are dangerous, especially in
a business of infinite concernment. Mat. 24.44. Ideo latet unus dies, ut
observentur omnes.
How earnestly does our blessed Savior exhort you, to be always ready, because
ye know not at what hour your Master will call you. Caesar would never acquaint
his Soldiers with the time of removing his Camp, that they might be always
prepared to march.

Consider that on this moment depends eternity; Petrach relates an answer of
one, who being invited to dinner a day after, said, A mu it is annis crastinum
non habui. Quam serum est tunc vivere incipere, cum desinendum est! Sen. ad
Paulin. cap. 4.
God hangs heavy weights on weak wyers. And how dolefully have many
complained, and mournfully lamented their loss of time, when it has been too
late. That story of a great Lady of our land, which several speak of, may
awaken secure on^s, when on her deathbed she dreadfully screeched out, A World
of Wealth for an inch of time, A world of wealth for an inch of time. And I
have read of Chrysorius a man as full of wickedness as of wealth, when he
comes to die, cries out, Induc^as usque ad mane, Domine, Truce, Lord, but
till morning, Truce, Lord, but till morning; and with these words he breathed
out his last, Alterius perditio, tua sit cautio, Let that which was a murdering
piece to others, be a warning piece to thee.

Do but think, should God permit a danmed sinner that is now in Hell, to come
and sit but one hour amongst you, under the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven,
how highly would he prize this present opportunity; how greedily would he
embrace every tender of mercy; how eagerly would he catch at every word of
comfort; how heartily would he close with Christ upon the hardest terms? I am
persuaded ye should behold him with such streams of tears watering his cheeks,
as if he were dissolved into a fountain. And will ye trifle away such golden
seasons, and waste such precious advantages, which others would purchase with
worlds, if they had them to give; nay which ye your selves would redeem
hereafter with your heart blood, but shall not be able; O therefore now prize
time, Quare O miser, non omni hora ad mortem te disponis? cogita te jam mortuum
quem scis necessitate moriturum; mors enim inopiae non miseretur, divitias non
reveretur; non sapientiae, non moribus, non aetati parcit, nisi quod senibus
mors est in januis, juvenibus vero in insidiis. Bern.
before you come to enter upon eternity.

Be serious in your preparation for death.
And yet a little further to press this needful duty upon your spirits; O that,
if it were the will of God, I had the tongue, the understanding, the affections
of an Angel! how willingly would I improve them to the utmost, and serve them
up to the highest pitch in exhorting you to this weighty and absolutely
necessary work!

This, this is the one thing necessary; this, this is the whole duty of man;
Mors est aeternitatis ostium.
this is the great end for which ye were born, and the great errand for which
ye were sent into the World. Its a work of infinite weight, and a business of
everlasting concernment. I speak to you that are great men, and I assure you
from the great God, that ye must die, and that ye must come ere long to do
that which ye never did before, nor never shall do again; even this, to throw
your last cast for eternity. Your everlasting weal or woe, joy or sorrow,
pleasure or pain depends on your well dying. As Scipio said, In bello non
licet bis peccare; So may I of death as he of War, in death there is no erring
twice; he that erreth once errs for ever. As Soon as ever your souls launch out
of your bodies, they sail to the Ocean of eternity. Ca ill. on Job.
That we transgress the laws of living so often is the aggravation of iniquity
on all men; but that we can transgress the laws of dying but once is the seal
of misery on most men.

How pathetically does God wish, that man would mind this real wisdom; Deuteronomy.
32.29. Vid. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Pro. 19.20.
O that my people were wise, then would they consider their latter end; or that
they would consider their latter end.

It seems to me one of the dolefullest sayings in the book of God, (and by
the way let men guilty of bribery or oppression think of it) He that gets
goods and not by right, Jer. 17.11.
shall leave them in the midst of his days, and in his latter end shall be a
fool. To be a fool in the judgment or account of Scripture, while a man lives,
speaks his condition very dangerous: but to be a fool when he dies, speaks
his estate altogether desperate. For a Vessel to leak much in the harbor is
sad; but O how sad is it for the Vessel to leak in the main, in the Ocean! It
was Austin's prayer, Hic ure, seca, ibi parce, Lord lance me, burn me here,
but spare me hereafter.

And the desire of Fulgentius, Domine, hic da patientiam, postea indulgentiam.

But it is very emphatical and observable in the fore-quoted place, that the
holy Ghost speaks, In his latter end he shall be a fool. He was a fool before
in the estimation of God, and in the opinion of godly men; but now in his
latter end, he is a fool in the conviction and acknowledgement of his own
conscience; and now he will think, O what a fool was I? who was ever dying,
never to live, to my Savior, to my soul; What a fool was I? to respect so
exceedingly my vile transitory body, and to neglect so unworthily my precious
immortal soul. What a fool was I? to make so much provision for a little time,
and so little preparation for eternity. What a fool was I? to be so diligent
about Earth, and so negligent about Heaven; so careful about perishing decaying
vanities, and so slothful about real enduring felicities.

Pliny observes of the Mole, that though it be blind all its time of living,
yet when it comes to die, Oculos incipit aperire, moriendo, then it sees.
Men that whilst they live are blind in the worth of their souls, insensible of
the weight of their sins, ignorant in the severity of divine justice,
incredulous about the necessity of the new birth; when they come to die their
eyes are opened, and they see all these things clearly; Lam. 1.9. Mumb. 24.20.
and O then what a doleful screech will that soul give, that stands quivering
upon the pale lips of a dying man, ready to fly to its eternal home, and sees
nothing before it, but a bottomless boundless Ocean of the wrath of God, in
which it must swim naked for ever, ever, ever.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I beseech you attend diligently, that this Sermon,
which is a funeral Sermon in regard of its subject, may be a resurrection
Sermon in regagd of its effect. Who knows what a day, yea what a great
bellied hour may bring forth; I can assure you, this Sermon is a child of some
prayers, yea and of some tears; therefore I hope it shall not perish. If I
speak not the word of God, the mind of Christ, and the meaning of the Spirit,
cast back my words as dung in my face; But if I do, hear attentively, and
practice conscientiously, least my counsel rise up in judgment against you, at
the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

In reference to this great duty of preparing for your dying day, I shall
commend six particulars to your most serious thoughts; my prayer shall be that
they may all, especially the two latter be written in your hearts.

1 Execute justice impartially.
1. Discharge your trust faithfully; the way to have great confidence when ye
die, is to keep a good Conscience whilst ye live. Were Judges and Justices
always to live upon Earth, there were no such reason for the impartial
Execution of justice; but God acquainteth you this day, that ye must die, Heb.
9.27.
and after death comes judgment.

Judex nuper eram jam judicis ante tribunal,
Subsistens paveo judicor ipse modo.
Ye are but Stewards and within a short time ye must give an account of your
stewardship. It behooves you when you sit on the Bench of men to act
faithfully, that when ye shall appear at the Bar of God ye may answer
comfortably. Remember when ye are passing sentence of life or death on others,
that Christ ere long will pass a sentence far more weighty even of eternal
life or death on you.

Isid.
Its reported concerning the Emperors of Constantinople, that on their
Coronation day, a Mason is appointed to present unto them certain Marble
stones, saying these Verses, Elege ab his saxis ex quo (invictissime Caesar)
Choose (Mighty Sir) under which of these stones your pleasure is ere long to
lay your bones.
Ipse tibi tumulum me fabricare velis.


If ye that now are in robes would consider, death will level you with them
that are in rags; if ye would with the eye of your meditation, behold your
Coffins standing before you, on the table in the place of judicature, it might
be an excellent curb to iniquity, and spur to fidelity.

4 Requisites in a good Magistrate. 1. Magnanimity.
Now there are four things requisite in a Magistrate that would discharge his
trust faithfully.

First, courage and magnamity, Every magistrate should be a man of mettle, not
daunted with dangers, nor frighted with frowns. He should so carry himself that
others should fear him, (as a terror to evil doers) but he should fear nothing
but sin. Like Chrysostom, who when a threatening Message was sent him from the
Empress Eudoxia, go tell her, said he to the Messenger, Nill timeo nisi
peccatum. Ye are called the shields of the people; Psalm. 47. ult.
and shields ye know are ventrous weapons, they are made to bear many blows. Be
thou strong and very courageous, Josh. 1.7.
says God to the chief Magistrate of Israel. 2 Chronicles. 9.18. Durescito
Durescito O infelix Lantgravie said the poor Smith to the Lantgrave of
Thuringia, who was more mild then stood with his peoples profit, The sword of
justice says one, ought to be furbished with the oil of mercy; But there are
cases wherein severity should cast the scale.
The throne of Solomon was underpropped with Lions; and a Lion is part of the
Royal arms, both speaking that a Lion-like spirit is becoming him that is in a
public place, Deuteronomy. 1.17.

Secondly, uprightness and integrity, 2. Integrity. Its reported of a King of
Persia, that he would come of from his horse upon the way to do justice to a
poor man.
A Magistrate as he should not be frighted with fear, so not swayd by favor:
Ye should be like a Boul without a byas running on fairly and evenly, not
leaning on this side or on that side; like the Sun which affords as gracious
influences to the low violets as to the tall cedar, to the poorest beggar as to
the most potent Emperor; like a public Conduit in a City, whence justice
should run down like water, as freely and as fully to the meanest as to the
greatest. But it was a bad speech of Caesar, Causa Cassii melior sed Bruto nil
denegare possum. Plut. in vit. Ces.
Laws were never made to be Nets only to catch the little Fish and to let the
great ones break through. The great Judge of Heaven is no respecter of persons
neither should Justices on Earth, Deuteronomy. 1.17.

That Edict of Constantine was worthy to be written in letters of gold, If any
of my Friends, Courtiers or Servants have wronged any, let them come to me, I
will not only right them but reward them. Plut. in vit. Public.
And that act of Brutus memorable, who commanded his two sons to be executed
and saw it done, for conspiring with Tarquin's Ambassadors against the
Commonwealth.

Thirdly, bounty and liberality, 3. Liberality. Exodus 18.21. Exodus 23.8.
A Justice should not only not be covetous, but hate covetousness. Its the dust
of money that is blown up into the Judges eyes, that hinders their sight into
causes.

It was a witty speech of a pious Vines on 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. p. 25.
person, He is the best Magistrate, that is good for nothing. Ye must neither
take bribes your selves, nor by your servants; for Optimus and maximus
venderetur imperator; There is not a gift ye take, but will be as a dagger at
your hearts another day; like Achans wedge of Gold it will cleave your souls in
sunder. It will in this particular be happy for him, that when he comes to
die, 1 Samuel 12.2, 3.
can say as dying Samuel, Behold, here I am, witness against me before the
Lord, and before his Anointed: Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I
taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any bribe to blind mine eyes? And they said, Thou have not defrauded
nor oppressed, nor taken ought of any man's hands.

4. Ability.
The fourth Thing requisite in a Magistrate is ability. A Magistrate must be not
only a man of piety, but a man of parts, quick-sighted uf a deep apprehension,
knowing the laws exactly; because if he be not, he will sometime or other
condemn the innocent, and justify the wicked. And the rather every Judge ought
to be able, There are they that can make Candida de nigris, and de candentibus
alba.
in regard he has to deal with men that can draw a fair Glove over a foul
hand; blanch over a bad cause with specious pretenses, as Ziba against
Mephibosheth.

I honor the Profession of the law, and I wish that some men did not dishonor
their profession, who indeed value their substance above their Consciences, not
believing that of the father, In die judicii plus valebit conscientia pura,
quam marsupia plena.

Beza tells us, that he once saw on a table the Pictures of four sorts of
Persons, and their several Posies. 1. The Courtier with this Posie, By my sword
I defend you all. 2. The Clergy man with this Posie, By my prayers I preserve
you all. 3. The Countryman with this, I feed you all. 4. The Lawyer with
this, I devour you all. I request Lawyers to consider that of God to Moses,
Exodus 23.2.
Thou shall not speak in a cause to wrest judgment; and that speech of the
Apostle, I can do nothing against the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8.
but for the truth. But I have digrest too far already.

Secondly, If ye would fit your selves for death, live among men exemplarily.
You that must die shortly, Live among men exemplarily. August.
had need to live strictly. Must you ere long fall, then whilst you stand be
holy to admiration, to imitation. Nihil sic revocat a peccatis sicut frequens
meditatio mortis. Some say the stroaking of the belly with the hand of a dead
man, will cure the Tympany; I am sure the thoughts of death seriously laid to
the heart are a good Medicine for an evil heart.

Nothing in the War will so much dead the Cannon, as a mound of Earth: The
consideration that ye shall be turned into Earth, should dead the Cannons of
temptation which Satan shoots against yoir souls. 1 Pet. 2.11. Plut.
As pilgrims and strangers abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the
soul. Lycurgus made the first law that the dead should be buried about the
temples, intimating thereby that they which are dying should be very religious.
Nihil facit mortem malam, nisi malum quod praecedit, vel sequitur.
Nothing makes death evil but the evil that goes before it; for without that
no evil could follow after it. I have read of one that gave a Ring with a
deaths head to a young Ruffan, upon this condition, that he should meditate on
it one hour every day for seven days together, which he did, and through the
help of God, it wrought a blessed change in him. Take a turn or two daily in
Golgotha, walk often among the Tombs; ponder frequently your own frailty, it
may much quicken you to walk exemplarily.

Your high places call for holy practices. Its esteemed one of King Alphonsus
his sayings, That a great man cannot commit a little sin. I must tell you, As
Caesar said, That Cesar's wife should be without all suspicion of fault.
ye have many following you either to Heaven or Hell, in the narrow or broad
way; ye had need to choose a right path. Great men's vices are as seldom
unaccompanied as their persons. Dives was a great man and a bad pattern, and he
had many brethren following him to the place of torment. Vivitur exemplis
potius quam legibus.
M^n are led more by the eye then by the ear, and follow rather the doings of
Magistrates then the sayings of Ministers; -- Claudian.
Componitur orbis
Regis ad exemplum; nec sit inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent, quam vita regenium.
Sin indeed comes in at first by propagation,
Many say to such as Tiberius to Justinus, Si tu volueris ego sum, Si tu non
vis ego non sum.
but is much increased by imitation.


Ye are the heads of the people, Numb. 7.2. Mich. 3.11. If the head be giddy,
the body must needs reel. Ill humors from the head destroy and consume the
vitals in the body.

Isa. 49.23.
Ye are the Nurses of the people; and our Naturalists observe, that what disease
Nursts have, the Children will partake of. Josh. 24.15. It is a great praise
that Melancthon ascribes to George Prince of Anhalt, His Bedchamber says he,
was Academia, curia tenplum. And Xenophon of Cyrus, that a man might wink and
choose among his Courtiers he could not miss of a good man. 3. Walk humbly
with God.
Now how will it gall your consciences when ye come to die, if ye have been
ringleaders in iniquity, and not patterns of piety; believe it ringleaders in a
rebellion will be most severely punished; and with those whom ye have made
wicked without repentance, ye will be made eternally woeful.

Take up the practice of dying Joshua, who was going the way of all the Earth,
I and my house will serve the Lord.

Theodosius the Emperor being asked how a Prince might promote good abroad,
answered, By ordering all well at home. If ye cannot rule your family well, ye
are unfit to rule Cities and Counties. Let me request you to follow David's
pattern, I will walk in the midst of my house with a perfect heart until thou
come unto me, (Psalm. 101.2. or O when will thou come unto me) lest when ye come
to die, ye have cause to cry out as she did, They made me keeper of others
vineyards, but mine own vineyard have I not kept, Cant. 1.6.

Thirdly, As your frailty calls upon you to be faithful in your places, holy
in your practices; so likewise in the third place to walk humbly with God. I
would have others to have high thoughts of you, because Ye are gods; but I
desire you to have low thoughts of your selves, because ye must die like men. A
Magistrate should be like a star or spire-steeple, the higher he is, the lesser
he should seem to be.
Pride as one observes is the shirt of the soul, put on first, and put off
last: it is a weed that will grow in the best soil; but men that are highest in
place, are usually highest in spirit. Its rare to see a man great in others
eyes and little in his own: Honor is often the stinking breath of the vulgar,
which being blown into the bladder of a graceless heart, causes it to swell;
But here is a Pin in the Text to prick this bladder and take down its swelling.
Did you but spiritually consider the brittlenesse of your bodies, it would
abate the swelling of your spirits. I should think the evil disposition of your
souls, and the frail condition of your bodies should keep you low, while ye
live.

Alas! notwithstanding all your powers, places or preferm nts, what are ye, but
clods of clay, a little refined earth, moving slime, enlivened dust, breathing
ashes? Some Naturalists observe of Bees that when they rise and buz on high, if
you throw dust upon them, they will house and be quiet. When your thoughts are
lifted up on high because of those places in which God has set you, I pray
cast some dust on those thoughts, rememember ye shall be laid as low as the
worms are. Abraham was a Prince, a great man, but how much did this thought
humble him; Genesis 18.27.
Lo I have undertaken to speak unto the Lord who am but dust and ashes. I have
read of Agathecles King of Sicily, that being a potters son, he would be always
served in earthen vessels to mind him of his original. There was one Willigis
Bishop of Ments, who being son to a Wheelwright caused wheels to be hanged on
the walls up and down his Palace with these words written over them, Willigis,
Willigis, Recole unde veneris. 4. Act zealously for God.
Some write of a Bird so light and feathery that it is forced to fly with a
stone in its mouth lest the wind should carry it away. The truth is, men that
are high in place, are apt to be carried away with the wind of high
mindedness: they had need therefore to have earth in their minds, I mean their
frailty, and it may prove through the blessing of Heaven a singular
preservative.

O that you who are Judges and Justices, would but take the length of your
bodies in the dust, where ye must ere long lie, and believe that a little
dstemper will kill you, a little sheet will wind you, a little grave hold you,
little worms feed on you, and a little time quite consume you: could ye then be
great in your own eyes? Remember that your remembrance is like unto dust, and
your bodies are bodies of clay, Job. 13.12.

Fourthly, Must ye die and would ye prepare for it, then be active for God
whilst ye live; the serious thoughts of death in your hearts will put life into
your hands. This life is all your day of working, death is the night of
resting; Rev. 14.13.
the dead rest from their labors. When Psalm. 104.23.
the sun of man's life arises he goes forth unto his labor until the evening
of death. The heavenly bodies are ever in motion, though the earth stand still;
and the more pure any being is, the more active it is. Deus est actus purus.
Fire is the most active of creatures without life; Angels of creatures that
have life. O show your selves to be as Angels amongst men, by walking humbly
with God; the Angels vail their faces in his presence; by working diligently
for God, Angels are ever employed in the service of God.

Work industriously in your general callings, as Christians; John 12.35.
yet a little while the light is with you, walk while ye have the light. The
task of Christianity is great, the time ye have is little; the time ye have
lost is much: O now bestir your selves in redeeming time, and improving every
opportunity to the best advantage of your souls. How fervently should ye pray?
as not knowing but that every prayer ye pray may be your last prayer; that ye
may never have another season to beg mercy in for your souls, for your
relations, for the afflicted members of the Lord Jesus. How attentively, and
how hungerly should ye hear the word of life, even as for life? How carefully,
and how conscientiously should ye keep the Sabbath, considering ye may be very
near your eternal Sabbath? How sedulously should ye hang on every Ordinance, as
Bees on Flowers, never leaving them till ye have sucked some honey, Praecipita
tempus; mors atra impendet agenti.
some sweetness from them? Ponder this, there can be but a few days, and ye
shall never pray more, never hear more, never sanctify Lord's day more, never
enjoy Ordinances more; I that am now Preaching, and ye that are now hearing,
must shortly be carried on men's backs, and laid in the belly of the earth; and
can we do too much in so little time, especially in a work of such infinite
weight!

Rev. 12.12.
The Devil is the more busy because his time is short, and therefore striveth
in a quick dispatch of the works of darkness, to out-wit the children of
light. The time is short, therefore be indifferent about earth, 1 Cor. 7.29.
(...).
1 Cor. 7.29. the time is short, therefore be diligent about Heaven; the word
is, The time is rolled up; it is a Metaphor from Mariners; the Sails that were
spread before, when they draw nigh to the Haven, are then rolled up: You know
not how soon the sails of your lives may be rolled up; how nigh ye are to your
eternal haven; O bestir your selves carefully; ply the Oars diligently, that
the vessels of your souls may not miscarry eternally. Whatsoever thine hand
finds to do, Eccles. 9.10.
do it with all thy might, for there is no work, nor knowledge, nor device in
the grave whither thou go.

Work industriously in your particular callings, as Magistrates, because ye
must die. Be active for the punishment of iniquity; for the encouragement of
piety. Let the practice of Christ be your pattern; John 9.4. (...). 2 Cor. 8.9.
Phil. 2.6.
I must work the work of God while it is day, the night comes when no man can
work. To work a work notes the strong intention of his spirit about the work:
Christ though he was rich, and for greatness the Lord's equal, yet did not
(as many rich and great men do) play his work; he did sweat at work, yea he
sweat drops, nay clods of blood. Luke 22.44.
Now be ye followers of Christ as dear children, Magnarum rerum tarda molimina.
and think you can never do enough for that Savior which has done so much for
your souls. How sad is it, that great bodies should move so slowly?

How many talents has God committed to you? Nothing more sads the heart when a
man comes to die, then his neglect of such opportunities which God's providence
or his own place have put into his hands of doing or receiving good; nor is
there a sharper corrosive then the reflection upon those days that have passed
over him, Male, aliud, nihil agentem. Vines Ess. Fun. p. 19. Phil. 2.7.
when others have one, ye have ten: A talent is any thing that a man is
betrusted with to glorify God; and it is called a talent, because of the great
price that is in the least opportunity to honor God: Ye have many such
talents; ye may hinder much wickedness, further much holiness; be a great
terror to evil doers, a great praise to them that do well; let it not be said
of you, that ye do the work of the Lord negligently.

Did not Christ humble himself for you? Magistrates are custodes utriusque
tabulae. Socrates was adjudged to death by the Athenians for a dishonorable
speech concerning their gods.
and shall you think it below you to search Alehouses, those head quarters of
Hell; to enquire into men's observation of God's day; to use all means whereby
ye may know men's profanation of God's name, by hellish oaths, and cursed
blasphemies, and abuse of God's creatures by drunkenness, that so they may be
severely punished? Alas, a few days will come, and the best of you shall have
no such opportunity to discover your love to God for his abundant mercies;
Plut. in vit. Nici. Vid Lev. 24.16. Job 31.26, 27, 28.
your thankfulness to Christ for his precious merits: do therefore now act to
the utmost of your power for the glory of God, and your Savior.

Be not like the tallest trees, which bring forth either no fruit, Matthew.
25.26, 30.
or that which is only for Swine. Remember God puts no difference betwixt
nequaquam and nequam, an idle and an evil servant; the unprofitable servant is
for utter darkness.

Do but consider the time of your departure may be at hand, and should not this
resolution be in your hearts, to act vigorously and strenuously for God? The
nearer ye are to your center, the faster ye should move: The setting Sun
shines most brightly: The dying Swan sings most sweetly: The approaches of a
Needle are so much the more quick, by how much it draws nearer to the
Loadstone: The Rivers run with a stronger stream, Oportet imperatorem stantem
mori. Vespa.
when they are about to empty themselves into the Ocean. Ye are nearer death
then ever, be quicker in your motions for God then ever, that it may be said of
every one of you, how young soever ye may die, as one said of Juel, Diu vixit
and si non diu fuit.

5. Mind the power of godliness.
Fifthly, Must ye die, and would ye prepare for death? labor to find some
inward work of grace wrought upon your hearts; be not contented with forms, but
mind the power of godliness. A man may live by a form, but he cannot die by a
form: An heart not balanced with grace, may hold out in the calm of life; but
when the boisterous winds of sickness blow, and the storm of death comes, it
will suffer shipwreck: When death comes, when that damp arises, the Candle of
Profession separated from the Power of Religion, will first burn blew, and then
go out: The bellows of death will blow the spark of sincerity into a flame, and
the blaze of hypocrisy into nothing. O therefore get that saying of our
Savior written on your hearts; Verily, John 3.3.
verily, I say unto you, except a man be born again, he can never see the
Kingdom of God. Pious Mr. Strong on Heb. 12.14. p. 39. vid.
A worthy Divine, now in Heaven, observes four things from this verse: 1: The
manner of the assertion, Verily, verily. 2. The matter asserted, except a man
be born again; Non unius partis correctionem, sed totius naturae renovationem
designat. Calvin. He that is born but once, dies twice. He that is born twice,
dies but once.
3. The universality of the assertion, it is equivalent to an universal
proposition, though he be a man civil in his conversation, a Saint in his
generation, yet he must be born again. 4. The necessity of it, without
regeneration no salvation; he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

You know what the Pharisees were, how strict in their lives, Phil 3.6.
according to the Law blameless; how abundant in Matthew. 23.14.
duty; they made long Matthew 6.
prayers; gave much Luke 18.12.
alms; fasted twice a Matthew. 23.15.
week; compast Sea and Land to make Proselytes: Nay, they were so holy that the
Jews would speak commonly, That if but two in the world went to Heaven, the one
should be a Scribe, and the other a Pharisee: Yet our Savior speaks
expressly; Matthew. 5.20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of God. Pharisaical
holiness will never evidence your right to eternal happiness. (...) Duo
negativae apud Graecos vehementius negant.
He that considers how great their priveledges, how seemingly gracious their
practices were, will at first wonder why Christ should set a double bolt on
Heavens gate to keep them out: But their chief falling was in this which I am
exhorting you to, namely, in the want of the power of godliness; their actions
(to the eye of man) good, but their affections were bad; their practices did
not proceed from renewed and gracious principles: Whatsoever civility was
without in the life, there was no real sanctity within in the heart.

You that are Magistrates may probably be free from scandalous enormities; none
can tax you, it may be, with swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, or the like;
nay, I hope you go farther, that ye perform duty in secret by your selves in
private with your wives and children, in public with the Congregation, that ye
instruct your families in the things of God, and be earnest with all under your
power to mind their eternal good; these things are commendable, and the Lord
increase the number of such Magistrates; but I must tell you that though this
reformation in your lives be good, yet without an alteration and change in your
hearts, it is not sufficient. I may say to you as Christ to the young, One
thing lackest thou yet. As the rude Satyr in Plutarch, who strove to make a
dead man stand upright, had so much wit as to say, Deest aliquid intus; There
wants something within. So I say to you, if ye go no further, there is
spiritual life, the seed of God, the divine nature, the new creation, the power
of godliness wanting within; without this all other things will come to
nothing. Alchimy Gold may shine brighter then true Gold; but as some observe,
it will neither cheer the heart as a Cordial, nor pass the seventh five: A
dram of true grace will be of more worth to you when ye come to die, then a Sea
of gifts. Heaven is the Father's house, and none can come thither but his own
children, such as are born of God.

6. Apply the death of the Savior to your own souls.
Lastly, If ye must die, to prepare your selves for death make sure of an
interest in Christ, in the death of the Lord Jesus: There is no shroud to this,
namely, to be wrapped in the winding sheet of Christ's righteousness.

I would request ^ou to discharge your trusts so faithfully, to work for Heaven
so industriously, to walk with God so humbly, to live among men so exactly and
exemplarily, to mind the renovation of your natures so carefully, out of
thankfulness to God for his Son, out of affection to him that has loved you,
and washed you in his blood, out of a desire to clear up your title to the
Covenant of grace, as if ye were to be justified by your works, to purchase
Heaven by your holiness; Isa. 64.6.
but when ye have done all, throw them away as filthy rags, as a menstruous
cloth, as dung and dross in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of
Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.8, 9.


He that is to encounter with this grand enemy death, had need to have Armor
of proof: Joh. 11.25, 26.
And as David said of Goliah's sword, so I of this death of Christ; There is no
weapon like it. That which makes a man die with true courage, and step with an
holy boldness unto the grave, is to remember that Christ died not only before
him, but for him; and has conquered and vanquished the King of terrors upon
his own dunghill.

I desire, says the Apostle, to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified:
All the mercies that believers enjoy, come streaming to them in the blood of
Christ; though there be much attribued to his intercession, Calvin observes on
1 John 2.1. that Christ's intercession is nothing else but a perpetual
application of his death. Christ intercedeth by showing to his Father his
wounds in his hands and side, quot vulnera, tot ora, to plead for sinners.
yet that like the King's stamp on silver, adds no real value to it, only
makes it current. By his death Ephesians. 1.7.
sin is pardoned; God's justice satisfied, his wrath Col. 2.14, 15. Heb 2.14.
appeased; Satan vanquished; Gal. 3.13.
the curse of the Law endured; Tit. 2.14. Heb. 9.14.
grace purchased for the Saints here, John 14.2. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.
and an eternal weight of glory hereafter.

Ephesians. 1.6, 5, 2.
The whole Ring of Christ's Mediatorship surely takes its value, not only from
the Diamond of his Divinity, but also from the Passion of his Humanity. Its out
of the carcass of this Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that the true Sampsons get
so much honey of comfort. Thence it is that the Apostle rings such a challenge
in the ears of death, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory? Vide Mr. Herberts temple-dialogue between the Christian and death, p.
164. Lenietur mortis damnum; non enim est invicta ut antea, cum Christus illam
superavit, ac in suo certamine crucis, faelicissime vicit. Pet. Martyr. loc.
comm. de Luct. pro mort. Genesis 46.30.
The sting of death is sin; But thanks be to God, which has given us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle speaks as alluding to a
soldier that having fought with, and disarmed his adversary, triumphs, O
Sir! where is your sword wherewith you threatened so bitterly? where is your
pistol with which you would wound me mortally? O death! where is thy sting with
which thou threatnedst to make me smart eternally? O grave! where is that
victory of which thou boastest so exceedingly? Thanks be to God that has given
us the victory through Christ. Christ died not only in bonum fidelium sed in
loco eorum, not only for their good, but in their stead; now death like a Be
left its sting, and lost its sting in Christ, that now it may make a noise, but
cannot sting the believer.

Surely If Jacob could say when he had seen Joseph, Now let me die, since I
have seen thy face: The soul that with the eye of faith has seen this son of
Joseph, may with greater boldness dare death, and encounter the grave. How
sweetly does old Simeon sing out his souls requiem, having (says one) laid in
his heart that holy Child Jesus, Luke 2.29, 30. The souls solace.
whom he lapt in his arms, sings his Nunc dimittas; I fear no sin, I dread no
death: I have lived enough, I have my life; I have longed enough, I have my
love; I have seen enough, I have my light; I have served enough, I have my
saint; I have sorrowed enough, I have my joy: Sweet babe, let this Psalm serve
for a lullaby to thee, and for a Funeral to me. Oh do thou sleep in my arms,
and let me sleep in thy peace.

Valde protest atus sum me nolle sic a Deo satiari. Luther. Melch. Adam in vit.
Luth.
Be not contented with any gift from God beneath his son. Say as Abraham, Lord,
what will thou give me, if I go Christlesse. Lord, thou have given a plentiful
estate, comfortable kindred, a goodly dwelling, lovely children, much honor
from men, many lawful pleasures and delights: But Ah Lord; what are these to a
Christ? Give me Christ or I die: yea Lord, give me Christ or I die eternally.

View thy Savior on the Cross, fighting with this last enemy, for thy sins,
for thy soul. See his arms stretched out to embrace thee, his head hanging down
to kiss thee, his feet nailed that he cannot run from thee, his side opened to
show thee how nigh thou lie to his heart; and take him down with the arms of
faith, and lay him in the sepulcher of thy soul: O be not faithless but
believing, Cry out, My Lord and my God.

I tell thee could thou heap up mountains of prayers? could thou pray so
frequently that thy heart even bled within thee, and so frequently that thy
knees were as hard as Camels knees, as is reported of James the brother of our
Lord; could thou weep (as some speak of Mary Magdalen in Balba) thirty years
together; could thou fast as many Millions of years as there have been
moments since the Creation: yet without an interest in this death of Christ it
would all be of no worth, of no value, to no purpose at all.

Motives.
I shall in the next place annex some motives, that the former particulars may
have the deeper impression on your affections.

1. Other things are unprofitable. Honor is called (...) An opinion. Matthew.
4.8. (...). A fancy.
1. Consider how vain and unprofitable all other things will be to you when ye
fall. Do but ponder that word, fall, when ye die.

1. Ye fall from the highest pinnacle of honor and reputation. The place of
Magistracy which knows you now, will know you no more. One of the Ancients
standing by Cesar's tomb, cries out, Vbi nunc pulchritudo Cesars? quo abiit
magnificentia ejus? Where is now the beauty? Acts 25.23. (...), A mathematical
figure, a mere notion. 1 Cor. 7.31.

One was appointed at the Popes inthronization, to burn a wad of Straw, and
running before the Pope, to cry out, Sic transit gloria mundi. Genesis 25.32.


what is become of the magnificence? where are the Armies now? where the
Honors, the Triumphs, the Trophies of Caesar? All was gone, when Caesar was
gone. Your honors, and your worships, your power and your places all die with
you, if not before you. Titles of honor glister like Glowworms in the dark
night of this life: but in the day of death, they all vanish and disappear. Its
probable some of you, may be nobly born, finely bred, highly advanced; but when
ye come to die, ye may say of all these as Esau of his birthright, Behold, I am
at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me? What good
will my honor, my credit do me? Christ will do me good when I come to die; so
will the power of godliness: but none of my places or preferments will.

2. Ye fall from your greatest treasures and possessions; 1 Timothy 6.7. All the
Cains of Adam are Abel's; all the possessions of man are vanity. Mr. Broughton.
As ye brought nothing into the world, so it is certain ye shall carry nothing
out of the world. Saladin the mighty Monarch of the East is gone, and has
carried no more along with him then ye see, ( i. e. a shirt hung up for that
purpose) said the Priest that went before the Bier.

The holy Ghost observes well, that rich men are by their wealth 1 Timothy 6.17.
rich only in this world, and they are 1 John 3.17.
this worlds goods. For as the Martyr said, I am going to the place where money
bears no mastery; In another world Gold and Silver are not current coin. Holy
Mr. Buroughs.
A Divine (now with Christ) gives me two stories of dying rich men; The one is
of a Miser, that being to die, called for his bags, and hugging them, cries
out, Must I leave you, Must I leave you? The other is of one that being on his
deathbed, called for some pieces of Gold, and laid them to his heart; but
presently said, I find them cold; Take them away; They will not do, They will
not do. The unsearchable riches that are in Christ will do; His warm blood
applied by faith, will not be cold to thy heart.

3. Ye fall from all your friends and relations; when ye die, they that were
near and dear to you will leave you. Ye may when ye lie on your death beds look
on your left hands, and there is none to help you; on your right hands, and
there is none to pity you; on the one side of the bed, thy neighbors may be
sighing and sobbing; on the other side thy wife and children may be wringing
their hands, and renting their hearts; Psalm 142.4, 5.
but if thou can not then with David, look up and say, Lord, thou art my
refuge: O what a sighing, sobbing, weeping condition art thou in indeed!

O what a comforting cordial will it be to a dying person, to be able in
uprightness of heart to say with Psalm. 73.26. It was an excellent saying of a
worthy person to a great Peer of this Realm: (that showed him his houses goods,
lands, honors, pleasures, and the like) My Lord, you had need to make sure of
Heaven; otherwise your Lordship will be a very great loser when you die.
Asaph, My flesh and my heart fail me; but God is the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever. When news comes that ye must die, can the ablest
Physician in the world, prescribe or provide such a cordial as good Hezekiah
had? He turned to the wall and weepeth, saying, Lord, thou know I have
walked before thee with a perfect heart.

Believe me, Sirs, your honors, treasures, and relations, will shake hands
with you at death; like leaves in Autumn, fall from you; like Absalom's Mule,
fail you even in your greatest extremity. Then Dives and his dishes; Herod and
his Harlot; Isa. 38.2, 3.
Baltasar and his bowls; Achan and his wedges; Balaam and his wages; the
ambitious man, and his honors; voluptuous man, and his pleasures; covetous man
and treasures must part, and that for ever, ever. Does it not concern you then,
to choose that part that shall never be parted with, 2. Hereby your names will
be highly honorable. Prove. 3.13, 15.

Salvian complained that in his time men thought Religion made Noble men vile;
when indeed, says he, it makes vile men Noble. Job 1.8. Car. in loc.


which shall never be taken from you?

2. By this means you names may be highly honored; true glory is entailed on
piety. The Heathen would go through the Temple of Virtue to the Temple of
Honor. Happy is the man that finds wisdom; length of days is in her right
hand, and in her left hand riches and honor.

I do not say that wicked men shall commend you for godliness; no, their good
word were a blot to your names. What evil have I done, said the Philosopher,
that this vicious wretch speaks well of me? Yet godliness will make you like
statues of Gold, which the polluted breath of ungodly ones cannot stain; the
more the dirty feet of men rub on a figure graven in brass, the more luster
they give it: But God and godly men will honor you for holiness. What does
God say of a living Saint? Have thou not considered my servant Job? i. e. I am
sure in thy travels and wanderings about the world, thou could not choose but
take notice of Job; he is my jewel, my darling, Job was a godly magistrate.
Godliness does truly ennoble a person, the four Monarchs without it are
resembled to four beasts, King Herod to a fox, Nero to a lion, the Princes of
Israel to the kine of Bashan Nam genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voc^. Ovid.
a special man among all the sons of men: He is such a spectacle, as may justly
draw all eyes, and hearts after him: When thou walkedst to and fro, did thou
not make a stand at Job's door? I cannot but look upon him my self, and
consider him; therefore surely thou have considered him. And how honorably
does God speak, not only of a godly Magistrate living, but when he is dead
also? Josh. 1.2.
Moses my servant is dead. Isa. 41.8.
The seed of Abraham my friend. So godly men will honor you if ye fear God:
When your eyes are shut, men's mouths will be open: And what will good men say
of a pious judge? There was a Judge that would not swerve a tittle from the
Law, but executed it courageously, without fear, impartially without favor;
who made the Malefactor to tremble with his frowns, and cheered the innocent
with his smiles: He was one that did justly, loved mercy, and walked humbly
with his God; of whom the world was not worthy, for he is now enjoying a weight
of glory. And of a good Justice when dead; what a character will good men
living give? There was a Justice that would secure his conscience, whatever
became of his credit; that would please God, how much soever he displeased men;
that was not only strict to punish, but active to find out swearers, drunkards,
and Sabbath breakers: Pious Master Vines at Essex Fu. p. 15.
He was one that ever counted the toleration of men in such sins, an
intolerable sin: Or if you will have it in the language of a learned Divine now
in Heaven; He was a Justice that would scatter drunkards from their Ale-bench,
and never understood the language of a Bottle or a Basket. O how gallantly, if
ye act nobly for God, will these trumpets sound your praises when ye are in the
place of silence.

When of a wicked Magistrate they will speak when he is dead, (as Nazianzen of
Julian, Caligula could say of his father in law Marcus Silanus, that he was but
a golden brute.
when he was smitten and wounded; It was to him indeed vulnus lethale, but
(...)) The sickness whereby he died was (possibly) damnation to him, but it was
salvation to us; we are thereby freed from his wicked pattern, and ungodly
practices. Or as the Romans of Pompey, by a witty sollecisme, Misera nostra
magnus est, The more he was advanced, the more our misery increased. The very *
Heathen can tell us of a long lived vicious man, Diu fuit, non diu vixit.
Multum jactatu est, Senec. ad Paulin. cap. 8.
non multum navigavit. Believe me, the highest ungodly Magistrate when he
dies, goes out like a Candle that leaves a stinking sent, a noisome smell
behind him.

3. If ye mind godliness, your deaths will be truly peaceable.
3. Hereby your deaths will be truly peaceable. An ungodly man can never die
with true peace, though he may die in much security. He may die by his own
hands, and yet not with his own will. Luke 12.20. Job 27.8.
Such a man's soul is taken from him, and snatched away by fo^ce.

Were I not by experience too too much acquainted how hard and desperately
wicked the heart of man is, I should much wonder how any man should die in his
wits, that dies not in the faith of Christ; that their souls go not out of
their bodies, as the Devils out of them that were possessed, renting, raging,
foaming and tea^ing. I am confident were the conscience awakened, no graceless
wretch alive can look death in the face with blood in his ch^eks. It must needs
make the stoutest heart alive to quake, to look that distemper in the face,
that at once may both kill him and damn him.

Yet we see by experience, that many die like Lambs, whilst their souls are
amongst Lions, Aristotle when dying spoke thus (says one) Dubious morior, que
vadam, nescio. And Adrian more dolefully, Animula Vagula, blandula, quae nunc
abibis in loca, etc.
and they are going to the place of Dragons. We read there are no bands in the
death of rich wicked men, Psalm. 73.4. And that phrase in Job. 21.13. In a
moment they go down to the grave, is generally interpreted thus, They die
quickly and quietly. In quiet in infernum descendunt, says an Expositour,
like a Lamp that goes out of it self when the Oil fails. So Caesar said, the
day before he was slain, Finis vitae commodissimus est repen^inus and
inopinatus. And Julian the Apostate said, Vitam reposcenti naturae, tanquam de
bitor bonae fidei, redditurus, exulto. But this quietness arises or rather
carnal security to them, not from any knowledge of their good estate, but from
ignorance of their bad estate. A wicked man's hope is like the giving up of the
Ghost, Job. 11.20. He breaths out his soul, life, and hope together.

Psalm. 33.37. Some of the Martyrs thanked their Judges for condemning them,
Sententiis vestris gratias agimus, cum damnamur a vobis a deo absolvimur.
Tertul. Apol. c. 5. Si vis in pace mari, sis servus dei.
The good m^n only has true hope in his death, Prove. 14.32. I am neither
ashamed to live, nor afraid to die, having a good Master to go to, said
Ambrose. And how manlike did that feminine Martyr subscribe her Confession, Fox
Acts, vol. 2. p. 576. Extrema Christianorum desiderantur etsi non exordia.
Florus says of the Romans, Populus Rosaepe praeliis, nunquam bello victus.
They were often conquered in skirmishes, but never in a pitched battle. The
godly may be often foyld in their lives, but never in their deaths. At that
long run they are always too hard for their most potent adversaries. 4. This
will make your conditions everlastingly comfortable.
Subscribed by me Ann Askew, that neither wishes for death, nor fears its
might, but is as merry as one that is bound for Heaven. He that with the
Apostle can say, I have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4.8. may sail with a
Plerophory, with top and top gallant into the Ocean of eternity. An happy death
is the conclusion of an holy life. The godly man and his godliness are like
Saul and Jonathan; lovely in their lives, and in their deaths they are not
divided.

Now what an Argument is here to stir you up to godliness? Is any thing more
desirable then a good end, then to do your last act well? The evening crowns
the day. The last Scene commends the act, Finis perficit tam agentem quam
actionem. Balaam could desire to die the death of the righteous, and to have
his latter end like theirs, Numb. 23.10. The Papists have a Proverb, It Is good
to live in France (because there is most liberty) and to die in Italy (there is
most Popish purity and strictness) When Julius Caesar was surprised and wounded
in the Senate, he cast his robe about him, ut honest caderet, that he might
die decen^ly. If ye would not die ill, then be sure ye live well; let holiness
be your way, and happiness shall be your end.

4. This will make your estates and conditions eternally comfortable. Death to
you then will be no night, but the daybreak of eternal brightness. O what
welcome will Christ give that Magistrate in Heaven, that has served him
faithfully on Earth! All the good ye do for God or his people, is now
perfectly recorded, and shall then be bountifully rewarded. It Is observable the
Epistl^s to the Churches begin with Novi opera, and end with Vincenti dabo, to
assure us that Christ is a strict observer of our good works at first, and will
be a rich rewarder of them at last.

All your ^ndustry in your general callings of Christianity, all your prayers
are now on the file in Heaven, all your tears for sin are in God's bottle, all
your fastings, watchings, duties in secret between God and your own souls, in
public in the great Congregation: All your sedulity in your particular
callings of Magistracy, all your pains to preserve us in peace, all your labor
for the Lord's honor, all your justifying the righteous, condemning the
wicked, all the good ye do, evil ye prevent, if done out of conscientious
Principles are not lost, Locker 2 Kings. 10.30. If God valued counterfeit coin
at so high a rate, how highly will he value true gold. Esse Christum cum Paulo
summa securitas, esse Paulum cum Christo summa felicitas. Ber. Aug. on those
words, No man can see me and live, says, Moriar domine ut te videam. Austin
desired to see Romam in flore, Paulum in ore, Christu^ in corpore. Bid comes
after him and corrects his last thus, Imo vero regem in solio stellato
sedentem, the King in his glory rather. I wish for death, says Melancthon, Vt
desiderato fruar conspectu christi. Melch. Ad.
but will all be found to your praise, honor and glory at the coming of
Christ. Duty is sweet at last, it comes off with Heaven, though Hell dog it
for a time. If God give that Magistrate Jehu, who served him in Hypocrisy, an
earthly Kingdom to the fourth generation; surely he will give an Heavenly
Kingdom that is eternal to those Magistrates that serve him in sincerity.

O how comfortable will your conditions be when ye die, if ye be cordial to
God, and zealous for God, whilst ye live, ye shall be wi^h Christ, is not that
enough? Did the wise men rejoice so much to see the star; and will not your
hearts (think ye) rejoice much more to see the Sun in its Noonday brightness?
This was the ground of Paul's desiring death, Phil. 1.23. This was the rich
inheritance that Christ bequeathd to his in his last Will and Testament, Joh.
17.24. This was the enlivening cordial which the Physician of souls administered
to the dying thief, Luke 23.43. In a word, this is the top of the Saints
ambition here, and the apex of their perfection hereafter, even to enjoy
Christ. Ignatius could say, Fire, Cross, breaking of my bones, quartering of
my members, and all the torments that Man and Devil can invent, Let come, so I
may enjoy my Lord Jesus. And Jerome thus sweetly, If my father stood weeping on
his knees before me, and my mother hanging on my neck behind, and my brethren,
sisters, children, and kinsfolk howling on every side to retein me in a sinful
life; I would fling my mother to the ground, run over my father, tread my
kindred under my feet that I might run to Christ. What is that which causes the
Saint, to be so busy about the Scriptures? but because they are they that
testify of Christ, they prize the Cabinet for the Jewels sake; what makes the
godly man so frequent at prayer? surely because therein he enjoys Communion
with his Savior, with Jesus Christ; his voice to every Ordidance is, Saw ye
him whom my soul loves. Now this is the felicity of the Magistrate that is
godly, he shall be with Christ when he dies. There will be a perfect freedom
from all evil; when the Sun is at the highest there shall be no shadow. When
the Christian has passed this red Sea, he shall see all his enemies both
bodily and spiritual dead on the shore.

There will be a full fruition of all good, Psalm. 16. ult.
In his presence will be fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for
evermore. The presence of this King will make a Court indeed; There will be all
that thine eye ever saw, or thine heart ever desired, or thy tongue ever asked,
or thy mind ever conceived; yea ten thousand times more then thou can either
ask or think. There will be all beams of light in this Sun, all streams of
water in this Ocean, out of whom as out of a crystal Fountain, thou shall
drink down all the refined sweetness of all Creatures in Heaven and Earth for
ever. And this Condition will be eternally thus comfortable, 1 These. 4.17. We
shall ever be with the Lord. O how sweet is that word! Ever, Ever to be happy
and ever happy, to enjoy Christ fully, immediately, and ever to enjoy him.
Certainly as the Word, ever is the Hell of Hell, Baxter's Rest excellently.
so it is the Heaven of Heaven. Frailty is a flaw in the best diamond of
nature, which abateth its price. Eternity is one of the most precious jewels in
the Crown of glory, which increases its value exceedingly.

What an Argument is here to incite you to live to Christ, Cyprus famosa
divitiis paupertatem populi Romans ut occuparetur, solicitavit. Sextus Rufus.
why? when ye die ye shall eternally live with Christ. When the Gauls had once
tasted the wine, made of the grapes in Italy, they marched eagerly desiring to
conquer it. I have given you a taste of Canaans grapes; O use violence for the
inheritance above; Be constant, immovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, for your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult.
Plutarch. Pericles that famous Orator, before ever he pleaded would entreat
his God, that not a word might fall from him besides his cause. Plut. in vit.


To conclude all, Its reported that Scipio African when he had any weighty work
in hand, would go before day into the Capital, in Coelum Jovis, quasi
consultans de Republica cum Jove. d And also that Moses in four causes which
came before him; two whereof were not weighty, and two were more material;
Caeterum tam de his quam de illis dicebat, Non Audivi. Of both the lighter and
weightier Moses said, I have not heard; To wit, from the Lord: to show that a
deliberation and consultation as it were with God, Jewish Antiq. lib. 5. cap.
6. Plato in his 6 lib. de legibus would have the Palaces of Princes joined unto
temples.
ought to be in all judgment before sentence be pronounced. Your custom
(Sirs) is commendable to make your supplication to God, before the
administration of justice to men. I beseech you again and again in the bowels
of Christ, As ye would have your Savior to stand by you, when all your
friends, estates, honors will fail you, as ye would have your names to smell a
sweet savor in the Churches of God, when your bodies shall be rotten, as ye
would die the deaths of the righteous and have your latter end like theirs, as
ye would render up your accounts with joy when ye must appear at the Judgment
seat of Christ: Now execute justice impartially, Live among your inferiors
exemplarily, Walk with God humbly, Work for God zealously, Mind the power of
sanctity, and know a crucified Savior. In a word, let true righteousness
toward men, and real holiness toward God, be your work while ye live; that
perfect holiness among men that are good, and eternal happiness in the fruition
of God may be your reward when ye die. For though he has said, Ye are gods:
and all of you are children of the most High; Yet ye must die like men, and
fall like one of the Princes.

FINIS.
ERATA.
Page 2. line 13. for uJpiter read Jupiter, line. 21. for Evangelical read
Angelical.


