A SERMON PREACHED At the Consecration of the Right Reverend Fathers in God,
GILBERT Lord Bishop of London, HUMPHRY Lord Bishop of Sarum, GEORGE Lord Bishop
of Worcester, ROBERT Lord Bishop of Lincoln, GEORGE Lord Bishop of St. Asaph.


On Sunday 28. October, 1660. at S. Peter's WESTMINSTER.

By JOHN SUDBURY, One of the Prebendaries of that Church.

LONDON: Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1660.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Lord HYDE, Baron of Henden, Lord high
Chancellor of England, Chancellor of the University of Oxford, one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
HAving sent this Sermon to the Press in obedience to Your Command, I have
taken the boldness to shelter it under the protection of Your Name; in hope
that when the Readers shall see it has had Your approbation, they will be the
better inclined to afford it their own. I wish it may have this effect upon
such as have any prejudice against the Truth, which I assert and maintain;
because it is of so much concernment to the public good, that I cannot think
it would have any Adversaries, but such as are the enemies of Mankind, if it
were not through some misunderstanding, which I have endeavored to remove. I
hope at least some will lay aside that envy with which they look upon the
Bishops for the height and dignity of their Office, and esteem them very highly
in love for their Work sake; 1 These. 5.13.
when they shall have seen here, that it is not only an Office of dignity, but
of work, and that work as good as the Office is great. I will say no more to
them here, than that the peace and safety of the Kingdom is so bound up with
that of the Church, that he that is a friend to the one, cannot be an enemy to
the other: And that the Office and Dignity of a Bishop is so necessary to the
peace and safety of the Church, that the opposing of the one must needs beget
disorder and confusion in the other. But I will pray, That God, who has
restored us to a better Understanding of the Royal Office and Dignity, will
likewise give us a right Apprehension of the Episcopal. Psalm. 77. ult.
And as He led his People like a Flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron, so He
will make us all the people of his pasture, and the Sheep of his hands, and
lead us like a Flock in the right and good way, which will make us as happy as
we can be in this World, and finally bring us to the perfection of our
Happiness in his Eternal Kingdom. And herein I doubt not but Your Lordship
is ready to join Your Devotions with those of

Your LORDSHIPS Most humble and most faithful Servant, JOHN SUDBURY.

1 TIMOTHY 3.1. This is a true saying, If a man desire the Office of a Bishop, he
desires a good work.


THere needs no other Preface or Introduction to commend this saying to our
attention, then this which the Apostle has set before it, This is a true
saying. For seeing there is not any saying in this book which is not as true as
this, we may be sure there is some difference between the truth of this and
other sayings, which made the Apostle so particularly commend it to us. And
though it be not easy to determine positively what it is, it is not hard to
say what it might be.

For first, it is easy to perceive what great need there was to arm and fence
it well against the contradiction of such as would oppose and gainsay it. For
there is not any saying in this book which has met with more and greater
opposition and contradiction. The Office of a Bishop has been the mark at
which not only the professed Enemies of the Church have bent their bows and
shot their arrows; but likewise they who have the greatest contention with each
other, which of them should be the better, if not the only Christian Church;
they on the one side contending for one Bishop over the whole Church, and
making all the rest but his Ministers; the other would have as many Bishops as
there are Ministers, which is in effect to have none.

But secondly, the truth of this saying is likewise a matter of great
importance, worthy of more then ordinary regard, which might move the Apostle
to commend it to a more then ordinary attention. For there is not a word in it
which will not require and deserve a distinct and particular consideration.
First, here is the Office of a Bishop; secondly, the Work belonging to that
Office; thirdly, the Goodness of that Work; fourthly, the Desire of the Office,
and of the good Work: the one set down by way of supposition, If a man desire
the Office of a Bishop; the other by way of inference or conclusion thereupon,
he desires a good work.

These are the particulars in the Text, of which I shall speak in the same
order that I have proposed them, beginning first with the Office of a Bishop.

(...), which is here translated the Office of a Bishop, signifies not the bare
Office or Function of a Bishop, as it is an Office of work, but the Office
together with the Dignity and preeminence, the Power and Authority, which is so
essential to it, and so necessary for the due exercise and discharge of that
Office, that it cannot be without it. As likewise the word (...) signifies not
the bare Office, but the Office together with the Dignity of an Apostle. Which
Dignity the Apostle St. Paul was careful to assert and maintain, as well as to
discharge the Office. And it is the more remarkable in him, because he was a
man so far from all manner of arrogance and vainglory, that no man could have
more humble thoughts of himself. Insomuch that when he speaks of himself, 1
Cor. 15.9.
he calls himself the least of the Apostles, though he knew he was not
inferior to the chiefest Apostles; and not only the least of Apostles, but
less then the least of all Saints: Ephesians. 3.8.
but when he speaks of his Office, he says, In as much as I am the Apostle of
the Gentiles, Romans 11.13.
I magnify mine Office. And truly we likewise have great reason to magnify
the Office of a Bishop, so great, that St. Hierom (who was not partial to the
Dignity of that Order) confesses that the safety of the Church depends upon
it. Ecclesiae salus pendet in dignitate summi Sacerdotis; cui si non exors
quaedam and ab omnibus emine is detu potestas, tot in ecclesiis efficientur
schismata quot sacerdotes. Hieron. ad Lucif.
The safety of the Church (says he) depends upon the dignity of the high
Priest; to whom unless there be given an extraordinary and eminent power,
there will be as many Schisms in the Church as there be Priests. And we have
seen the truth hereof by so sad experience of late years, that it will be the
more seasonable at this time, and especially upon this occasion, to speak
something of the Dignity of this Office.

The word in the Text, (...), signifies properly an over-seeing or
superintendency; for a Bishop is an Overseer or Superintendent. And we know
that he that is set to oversee, must be in a higher station then they are whom
he is set to oversee. There be many other names and titles by which they are
described in Scripture, and in the best Writers of the ancient Church, which
are names and titles not only of Office, but likewise of Dignity and
Authority. Rev. 1.10.
They are the Stars in the right hand of Christ; Luke 12.42.
the Angels of the Churches; the Stewards whom the Lord has set over his
family; the Pastors or Sheepherds of the flock which he has purchased with his
own blood; the successors of the Apostles; the Vicars of Christ; the high
Priests; the Rulers and Princes of the Church. All these are names and titles
of no small Dignity, and some of them likewise of Power and Authority; wherein
the Office of a Bishop differs from that of a Priest or Presbyter: not only as
Celsior gradus, a higher degree; the Bishop among the Priests being, as it is
said of the high Priest among his brethren, Ecclus 50.12.
like the Cedar among the Palm Trees; but it is likewise potestas alterius
ordinis, a power of another Order, a power to ordain other Officers in the
Church, and to oversee them, that they may do their work as they should, or if
they will not, to put them beside their Office.

This Power and Authority of the Bishop was so well known to St. Hierom, (whom
I mention the rather, because he himself was no Bishop, and is thought by such
as would have no Bishops to be a friend to them) I say, St. Hierom, when
Vigilantius broached his Heresy, wonders that the Bishop in whose Diocese he
was a Priest did not withstand his madness, Miror sanctum Episcopum, in cujus
parochia esse Presbyter dicitur, acquicscere furori ejus, and non v^rga
Apostolica virgaque ferr^a confringere vas inutile, and tradere in int^ritum
c^rnis, ut sp^ritus salvus fiat. S H^eron. Epist. ad Riparium. Et tu quidem
honor^fice circa nos and pro solitaria hum litate fecisti ut malles de eo nobis
conqueri, cum pro episcopatus vigore and cathedrae au^horitate haberes
pot^statem qu^ posses de illo sta^m v^^d^^art. Cypr. Epist 65. ad R^gationum.
and break in pieces that unprofitable vessel, and deliver him up to the
destruction of the flesh, that his spirit might be saved. By virtue of the same
power St. Cyprian punished the delinquent Clergy of his Diocese, by depriving
them of their monthly Dividends; and writing to Rogatianus, a Bishop, who had
made his complaint to him of a Deacon that behaved himself injuriously toward
him, he tells him, it was a great humility in him to complain of one over whom
he himself had Authority and Power to right himself, by virtue of his Episcopal
Office, and the Authority of his Chair. And herein likewise the Hierarchy of
the Church differs from that of the Angels; for though there be degrees among
them, some are of a higher Order, and others of a lower; yet we do not find
that they of the higher Order have power to depose or degrade those of the
lower; there is no need of any such power, where all are regular and orderly:
but such a power there is in the Hierarchy of the Church, and must be, because
it cannot be supposed that men will be so orderly as Angels.

There is therefore a necessity of this Office, with this Power and Authority,
to preserve Truth and Peace and Unity, and to prevent the manifold and great
mischiefs which Parity, the Mother of Anarchy and Confusion, would soon
produce: which must needs be greater in the Church, then in the State. For
there is nothing that so effectually rules the Multitude as Religion, the name
whereof is so venerable, that they are more apt to follow their Preachers then
their Princes; because they look upon them as the Ministers of God, whose
Office it is to teach them his word and will; and are afraid to think amiss of
any thing which they hear from them, lest in so doing they should set
themselves against God: whereby it comes to pass that there is scarce any
Error so gross which some of them will not believe, or any Wickedness so
great which some of them will not practice, and think thereby to do God
service, if it be preached to them as a matter and duty of Religion. And how
much this may tend to the disturbance of the public Peace and Government, is
easy to be seen. For remedy whereof, if the sovereign Prince interpose his
power only, he runs the hazard of being reputed an enemy of God and of
Religion, then which nothing can be more prejudicial to him not only in point
of reputation, but of safety likewise.

There is no better Remedy against all this mischief, then that wise and good,
grave and learned men, such as are able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and to
convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1.9.
should be set up over the rest, with Power and Authority to charge them that
they teach no other Doctrine, as St. Paul writes to Timothy, whom he left at
Ephesus to this end, 1 Timothy 1.3. and to stop the mouths of such unruly and vain
talkers, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, as the
same Apostle writes to Titus, whom he left at Creet to do this Office, Tit.
1.10, 11.

This is too great an Office for one man to exercise over the whole Church: as
therefore Christ chose not one only, but twelve Apostles, to whom he committed
this Office and trust: so his Apostles, John 20 21.
whom he sent as his Father sent him, i.e. with a power to send others after
them with the like power, ordained, not one Bishop only in the City of Rome,
but one in every City. But as it is too great a power and trust to be committed
to one man over the whole Church, so likewise it was not for the good of unity
and order that it should be committed unto every one that was fit to bear some
Office in the Church. As therefore Christ, who had so many Disciples, John 4.1.
that the Pharisees had heard that he made more Disciples than John, did not
make them all Apostles; and though he gave diversity of Gifts and Graces to
diverse men, yet among all these he chose but twelve Apostles: so the Apostles
after him ordained Elders or Bishops, not in every Village, but only in every
City; making the Government of the Church herein conformable to that of the
State, where the Prefect or Governor of a Province or Country had his
residence in the City, but his Jurisdiction in the Country round about. And
this conformity in the Government of the Church to that of the State was so
much the better, because that kind of Government in the State was best for the
State, and the like Government in the Church was best for the Church.

It were easy here to show how all Government is so much the better, as the
Power and Authority of it is more united in one man; unless the Piecincts of it
be so great, that it is above the proportion of any one man's ability: That
where it is divided, though it be but between two, it is very apt to destroy it
self. That a Family is best ordered, where there is but one Pater-familias; a
Ship, where there is but one Master, who commands all the Officers under him; a
Castle, where there is but one Governor, to whom all obey; an Army, where
there is but one General, that commands all the Officers in their several
charges; a City, where there is one Mayor, though many Aldermen; a Kingdom,
where there is but one King, though many inferior Magistrates. And after this
it were as easy to show that such an orderly Government is as decent and
necessary in a Church as in any of these. It were likewise easy to show how
agreeable this order is to that which God himself established in the Church of
the Jews; what a fit resemblance there is between the Levites, Priests and
Highpriests in the one, and the Deacons, Presbyters and Bishop in the other;
how careful Christ was to retein in his Church, whatsoever he found commendable
in that; and how wary of introducing any innovation, where there was no
necessity. And after this I could show you how all Religions have had their
Priests and their Highpriests; the light of natural Reason teaching them that
they must have some Religion, that Religion cannot be publicly exercised
without Priests, nor by them so well, unless they be under some High Priest; it
being necessary for the good of order, that there be a subordination, and that
to hold many together in one, they must be all under one.

But what need all this to justify this order in the Church, of which we
speak, when it is a thing so clear, that Irenaeus calls it Traditionem
Apostolicam toti mundo manifestam, an Apostolical tradition manifest to all the
world; and writes that many of the Bishops in his time could derive their
succession from the Apostles? And the most ancient and best Writers of the
History of the Church have left us the names of them in some of the principal
Cities of the world, together with the time and order of their succession from
the Apostles. There is not a Council, not a Father, which might not be produced
as a witness of this Truth. Yea, those Heretics who would have unchurch'd all
the world but themselves, the Novatians and the Donatists, had Bishops of their
own, as thinking them so necessary to the being of a well-form'd Church, that
to be without them were to unchurch themselves. One ambitious Presbyter there
was, Aerius by name, who because he could not be a Bishop, would have none;
because he could not raise himself to the Dignity of that Office, studied to
bring down that Office and level it with his own. But he was condemned by the
whole Church, and remains upon the Catalogue of Heretics.

To all these Testimonies we may add one which is more than all these, the
testimony of Christ from heaven, in an Epistle sent by an Angel to his beloved
Disciple and Apostle St. John, bearing witness both of the antiquity of this
Order, and of his own approbation of it, Rev. 1. ult. where interpreting the
mystery of the seven stars in his right hand, he says, the seven stars are the
Angels of the seven Churches. Where by the seven Churches he means the seven
famous Churches which are mentioned afterward, to whom his Epistles are
directed; and by the seven Stars and the seven Angels, he must mean the seven
Bishops of those seven Churches: for if he had meant seven Presbyteries or
Classes, it had been more proper to have called them seven Constellations than
seven Stars, and seven Quire of Angels than seven Angels.

Other Offices there are in the Church but the Office of a Bishop is the
highest, to which all other Offices are as steps or degrees, according to that
which we read in the 13 Verse of this Chapter, They who have used the Office of
a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree, or, as we may render it, a
fair ascent or step, i. e. to a higher degree of Office in the Church. But
there is no Office in the Church to which the Office of a Bishop may be called
a step or degree. One Bishop may have a greater Diocese than another, which is
not by Divine, but Ecclesiastical right, limiting not the power and authority,
but the exercise of it, for the good of order, and to avoid confusion: but he
that has the least Diocese is as much a Bishop as he that has the greatest,
as he that has a little Flock is as much a Shepherd as he that has a greater.
Every Bishop is as much a Bishop as the Bishop of Rome, or as St. Peter, for he
is a successor of the Apostles in the whole Episcopal Office, which is all that
in which they have or were to have any successors.

The differences between an Apostle and a Bishop are only in such accessories
as do not belong to the Office of a Bishop, but only to the Time in which they
exercised that Office. The Apostles were eyewitnesses of Christ; which none
could be but such as were conversant with him during the time that he went in
and out among them, unless it were by vision from Heaven, Acts 1.21.
as St. Paul. But as they were testes oculati, eyewitnesses; so the Bishops
their successors were and are testes instructi, witnesses instructed and
taught. They who were first, were endued with extraordinary Gifts and Graces of
the Spirit of God, which was poured forth upon the Church like the holy Oil
upon the head of Aaron: but the same Spirit of God which was poured forth upon
them, runs down upon the Bishops their successors as truly, though not so
plentifully. They had their Calling immediately from Christ; the Bishops their
successors have their Calling as truly from Christ, though not so immediately.
The Apostles chose their successors, and they others after them: but they did
not bestow that Power and Authority upon them, but were only the Ministers of
God and Christ. It was by them that the Episcopal power was given, but not from
them, but from him from whom all Powers are ordained. And therefore all Bishops
anciently were wont to write themselves Bishops of such or such a City: not by
the constitution of the Apostles or their successors, nor by the favor of
those who elected them to their Office; but by the grace of God. The Apostles
were Bishops of the whole Church; so is every Bishop by Divine right: the
limitation of them to such or such a Diocese, which is by Ecclesiastical
constitution, is not a limitation of their power and authority, but of the
exercise of it, not to lessen them, but to preserve peace and unity in the
Church. In a word, the Apostles were the chief Governors of the Church which
was in their time, the Bishops of the Church in their time. And what need we
say more for the Dignity of an Office, which is so much the same with that of
an Apostle?

But because I have said thus much of it, it is the more needful, before I
pass from this particular, to speak something of the difference between this
Power and Authority, which is the highest in the Church, and that which is the
highest in the Kingdoms of the world. Both are powers ordained of God, not to
oppose or confront, but to assist each other. The Power of the one is the power
of his Sword, which is a rod of iron; the Power of the other is the power of
his Sword, which is the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God. The Power of the
one serves to punish them that will not be subject to him with banishment,
imprisonment, confiscation, death, etc. The Power of the other banisheth no man
out of his Country, but only out of the Church; it cuts off no man from the
land of the living, but only from the communion of Christians; it deprives no
man of any right that belongs to him either as a man, or as a member of any
Commonwealth, Kingdom or other Society in them, but only that which belongs to
Christians. In which it deprives him of nothing, but that to which he has no
right.

And as the Powers are distinct, so likewise are the Ends of them: the End of
the one being the civil and temporal good of them that are under it; the End
of the other, the spiritual and eternal good.

But these two distinct Powers with their different Ends do not hinder but help
each other. For while the Bishop uses his power to make men good Christians,
he makes them so much the better Subjects; it being a part of their
Christianity to be good Subjects, their Allegiance is bound up in their
Religion, so as they cannot depart from the one unless they likewise renounce
the other; a Christian cannot be a Rebel, but he must depart from his Faith
and turn infidel, if not in word, yet in deed.

So that the Spiritual Sword does not clash with the Temporal, but join with
it in the same work, and so assists and strengthens it, as that it does that
work which belongs properly to the temporal Sword better than it self. The
King with his Sword commands all that are under him to live in obedience to him
and to his Laws, for fear of incurring his displeasure, and falling under his
power, which can but kill the Body. The Bishop with his power commands subjects
to be obedient to their Sovereigns and their Laws, out of Conscience toward
God, whose Ministers they are, for fear of his displeasure, and falling under
his power, who can cast both Soul and Body into hell.

And as the Spiritual Sword does not clash with the Temporal, so neither does
the Temporal Sword clash with the Spiritual; as I could show you, but that I
must remember that my Text speaks not of the Office of a King, but of a Bishop,
and there be other particulars in it for which I must reserve some time: and
therefore I pass on to the next Particular, which is the Work belonging to
this Office.

The Office of a Bishop is an Office not of Dignity only, Work: the Dignity is
annexed to it for the Works sake, partly as necessary for the better exercise
and discharge of it, and partly as a due for the worthiness of the Work. 1
These. 5.12, 13. We beseech you, brethren, to know them that labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them very highly
in love for their works sake. He does not say for their Office and Dignity, but
for their Works sake. For the Office and Dignity were not made for the Bishop,
that he might have an Office, but the Bishop was made for the Office, and the
Office for the Work. This is the end of all the Offices which Christ has set
in the Church. Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors, for the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; Not for the
dignity of a Magistracy, but for the work of the Ministry; for every one of
these Offices is a ministry, even the highest of them all. For who is Paul? and
who is Apollo? 1 Cor. 3.5.
but ministers? and a ministry is a Work. As therefore in the Church of the
Jews God ordained Priests, not that they might have the Office of Priesthood,
but that: they might minister to the Lord in the Priests Office: Levit. 7.35.
So in the Christian Church he has ordained several Officers, but all of them
to this end, that every one of them might minister to him in his Office. When
our Savior committed this Office to St. Peter, he did not say to him, Be thou
a Bishop, or a Pastor; but he said unto him, Feed my sheep, John 21.15.
to mind him chiefly of his Work for which he put him in Office. And S. Peter
in like manner minds the Elders or Bishops, not to stand so much upon their
Dignity, as to look well to their Work. 1 Pet. 5.1, etc. The Elders which are
among you I exhort, who am also an Elder -- Feed the flock of God which is
among you, taking the oversight thereof -- not as being lords over God's
heritage, etc. For they are not the lords, Luke 12.42.
but the Stewards, whom the Lord has set over his household; not to exercise
dominion, like the Princes of the Gentiles, but to give them their portion of
meat in due season. It is not their flock, but the flock of God, over which
they are set; not to feed themselves with the fat, and to cloth themselves with
the wool, but to feed and oversee the flock of God: it is not their heritage,
but the heritage of God which is committed to them; not as a principality, to
have a dominion in it, but as a charge, to have the care and inspection over it.

The Work which belongs to the Office of a Bishop must needs be greater then
that which belongs to the Office of a Priest or Presbyter: for every Bishop is
a Priest, but every Priest is not a Bishop; as much greater as the Office is
higher, and the sphere in which his work lies of a larger compass. A Priest or
Presbyter is over his flock, inasmuch as it is his Office to minister to them
the things that are holy, and to instruct and teach them the word of God: but
his flock is but a small part of that greater flock which the Bishop is to
oversee, and it is his work to oversee not the flock only, but the overseers of
the several parts of his flock; for though they be over their several flocks,
they are all under him. It is his work to oversee the whole business of the
Church; to see that the service of God be duly and decently celebrated; that
all the Congregations be supplied with such, and such only, as teach the things
which become sound Doctrine that cannot be condemned; that in their life and
conversation they behave themselves in all things as the Ministers of God,
giving no offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed; that such as
are scandalous be removed, if they will not be reformed; to purge the Church of
them, if they will not purge themselves; to see that they whom they have
baptizd be first instructed by them, and then confirmed by him.

Some indeed there are, who think the work of a Bishop is nothing but to
preach; and if he should preach so often as they would have him, he should have
work enough of that. I do not deny, but that this is a part of his work, a work
which belongs to him as he is a Bishop, so properly, that it belongs to no
other Officer in the Church but by Commission from him.

In the first Age of the Church, while the Apostles retained the Office of a
Bishop to themselves, there was little other work but that of Preaching; and so
much of that as was enough to take up all their time. The great work of their
time was to gather together the Sheep that were scattered abroad, and bring
them into the fold of the Church, to convert Infidels to the faith, of which
they had not heard, and of which they could not hear without a Preacher. And
because this was a great Work, to the end they might give the more attendance
to it, they committed some other parts of their work to others, that could do
that as well as themselves. It was a part of their work to baptize, for Christ
sent them not only to teach all nations, but likewise to baptize them: but when
it was too great a work for them to do both, they committed the work of
baptizing to their Disciples, giving themselves to the work of Preaching, the
less work giving way to the greater. So likewise it was a part of their work to
take care of the poor: but when it came to be a great Work, by reason of the
great number of them, and the complaint of some that they were neglected, they
instituted the Office of Deacons, whom they set over that business, Acts 6.4.
giving themselves to Prayer and to the ministry of the Word.

The Work of the Bishops their Successors, was, not so much to convert
Infidels, as to confute Heretics and Schismatics; not so much to gather the
Sheep into the fold, as to keep them from going astray, and to keep the Wolves
from entering in among them. To which end they have other work beside that of
Preaching, and for which reason the Apostle in this Chapter tells us, that a
Bishop must not only be apt to teach, but he must be one that knows how to Rule
his own house well: and he gives this reason for it. For if a man know not how
to Rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God? Where it is
evident that it is the Work of a Bishop to take care of the Church of God.

This is a Work that may take up so much of his time, and require so much of
his pains, as will disable him from the frequency of Preaching, especially
when through age and the infirmities incident thereunto, he must either do it
with great disadvantages, or omit some other part of his work, which is no
less, if not more necessary then this. For it is not with the Preaching of a
Bishop as it was with that of an Apostle: the Apostles preached as they were
inspired by the Holy Ghost; the Bishop must give diligence to reading, hearing,
meditation. He must study to approve himself to God, 2 Timothy 2, 15.
a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
This is a work that cannot be done without much study. But all this work must
not lie upon the Bishop only; there be other Officers under him who have partem
solicitudinis, part of the care, though not plenitudinem potestatis, the
fullness of the power: and these having not so much of the work of Ruling, may
spend the more of their time in Preaching. But still it is the Bishops Work, to
see that they, to whom he commits this part of his Work, be such as the Apostle
advises Timothy to make choice of, faithful men, 1 Timothy 2.2.
such as shall be able to teach others also. Wherein there is great care and
circumspection to be had, as we may see by the strict charge which he gives him
concerning it. 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without
preferring one before another. Do nothing through partiality; lay hands
suddenly on no man, neither be thou partaker of other men's sins.

But yet this is not all his Work. He must not only take heed to whom he
commits this Work, but likewise see that none but such as are sent to the work
take it upon them, and that they who are sent, do the work for which they are
sent, and not through ignorance or design mistake their errand, and teach
things which they ought not. For when Christ commends the Bishop of Ephesus for
examining them who say they are Apostles, and are not, Rev. 2.2.
he does imply that this was a part of his Work, and tacitly blame those who
having the same Office, have not the same Care. And this is likewise a great
Work. For if in the Apostles time there were, as he says, Tit. 1.10.
many unruly and vain talkers, whose mouths must be stopped; it is not like but
there would be many such afterward. Act. 20 29, 30.
He knew that after his departure grievous wolves would enter in, not sparing
the flock; and that among themselves would men arise speaking perverse things,
to draw away Disciples after them. And we know that Popularity was not the sin
of that Age and place only: we find the like complaint in the Church of
Galatia; there were false Teachers crept in among them, who withdrew them from
him that had called them in the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel, Gal 1.6.
and chap. 4 17. he tells us who and what manner of men they were. They
zealously affect you, but not well; yea they would exclude us, that you might
affect them: i. e. they make profession of a zealous affection to the good of
the people to whom they preach, but their aim is to steal away their hearts and
affections from all other men to themselves; in pursuance of which design, they
would preach down the Apostles, to preach up themselves. And what wonder to see
a popular affection transport men to preach down Bishops, when the same
affection so early transported some to preach down Apostles?

But it is not only the Popularity and Pride of such Teachers, but likewise a
giddiness in the people, which makes more work yet for the Bishop. The Apostle
foresaw it, and gave early notice of it to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.3. The time will
come that they will not endure sound Doctrine, but according to their own lusts
they will heap up to themselves Teachers, having itching ears. And this must
needs make more work for the Bishop, for the more greedy they are in heaping up
such Teachers, the more vigilant and careful must he be to pull them down.

In a word, there is Work enough in the Church for the Bishop, and for all
other Officers under him, wherein his care must be to mind that Work or service
most, by which he may most promote the Glory of God and the Good of his Church,
and to see that they to whom he commits the rest of the work, do their work as
they ought to do it. And so much for the Second Particular, in these words, the
work which belongs to the Office of a Bishop. I come now to the third
Particular, which is the Goodness of the Work.

It is very well rendered in our Translation a good work, The goodness of that
work.
not an honest or a pious or an honorable work, as it might be rendered: not
but that it is all these, but because it is all these and all these are
comprehended in this expression of a good work.

First, it is an honorable work; for it is the work in which they are called
workers together with God. And that for very good reason: for that, which our
Savior says, Joh. 5.17. my Father. works hitherto, and I work, is as true
now, as it was then when he spoke it, and that more especially in this then in
any other work. For there is nothing on earth so dear to God as his Church;
nothing to which his Providence and Goodness extends more then to the good and
orderly government of it. It is the work for which he sent his Son from
heaven; no other name or title does so well express the work for which he came
into the world, as that of the great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. For
which reason diverse of the ancient Fathers, by the lost sheep in the Parable
understand Mankind in the state of his Fall; by the ninety and nine that went
not astray, the Angels that kept their first estate; by the man that left the
ninety and nine, to seek the sheep that was lost, the man Christ Jesus that
came down from Heaven the habitation of Angels, to seek and save man that was
lost. It is the work for which he sent abroad his Apostles, John 20.21.
as his Father sent him. The work for which he sent down his Spirit upon them
soon after his return to heaven, and his exaltation at the right hand of God:
The work for which he has promised to be with them and with their Successors
unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. ult. And this is sufficient to show how
honorable a work it is.

It is likewise as pious, honest and Charitable a work as it is honorable. It
is the most acceptable work or service that men can do to God. 2 Cor. 2.15.
We are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, says the Apostle, speaking of this
work, which is the work of a Bishop as well as an Apostle; to signify, that as
a sweet and fragrant odor is grateful unto us, so is this work noe less
acceptable to God.

And as it is so acceptable to God, so it is no less for the good and benefit
of men. The good which it works most Directly and properly is the spiritual
and eternal good, which is so much better then all that is but temporal, that
there is no comparison between them. But it is not so particularly for the
spiritual and eternal good, but that it is likewise very much for the
temporal. The Histories of all Ages since the beginning of Christianity bear
witness abundantly of the manifold and great good which has been wrought in
the world by Bishops doing that work which belongs to their Office. They have
been, and are the chief Ministers under God of upholding, Tit. 1.1.
and preserving that Truth which the Apostle calls the truth according to
Godliness; 1 Timothy 4.8.
that Godliness of which he says that it is profitable for all things, having
the promise of the life which now is, and of that which is to come. And to the
End we might the better consider how true this is, he adds in the next verse,
This is a true saying and worthy of all acceptance. And to say nothing of the
life which is to come, of which no truth ever had so clear and ample promises
there is nothing more profitable for the life which now is. Nothing so
effectual to restrain all the iniquity which makes one man a Devil to another,
or to promote all that Virtue and Goodness which makes one man a God to
another. For every iniquity is then most carefully avoided, and every very good
work most sincerely and exactly performed, when he that avoyds the one and does
the other is moved thereunto by a principle of Religion. This is the great
advantage which Religion has above all the best Laws that the wisdom of men
can make, or their justice put in execution. The best humane Laws can but lop
off the branches of those iniquities which Religion plucks up by the roots. The
power of the one is only upon the Actions of men, so far forth as they fall
under the cognizance of other men; the power of the other upon the Affections.
It is much if the one can restrain men from being very wicked; the other has a
power to make them very good men.

And there is no Religion so effectual to take away all manner of Iniquity,
and to plant and cherish all manner of Virtue as the Christian; the Precepts
whereof, which are in their nature the most pure, are likewise in the extent of
them the most perfect and complete, reaching to all sorts of men, in all manner
of conversation, to Princes, Subjects, Parents, Children, Husbands, Wives,
Masters, Servants, Neighbors, Strangers, to make them all good in their
several relations, and the better they are, the more happy in each other. The
Promises annexed to the observation of these Precepts are the most high and
heavenly; the confirmation of those Promises the most divine: to the end that
the Promises being so confirmed might be the more steadfastly believed; and the
Promises being believed, the Precepts might be the better observed; and the
Precepts being so observed, all men might conspire together mutually to promote
the happiness of each other, then which they can do nothing better to advance
their own. This is the natural effect of that Truth which is according to
Godliness, the receiving and observing whereof is the most excellent means to
procure the favor of God, then which nothing can make the happiness of men
even in this world more complete.

Now as all this good comes to men by Christian Religion, so the Office and
Work of a Bishop is of great necessity and virtue to uphold and preserve this
Religion in the truth and purity of it. All other Offices which God has set in
the Church, have their work herein, when they are well and duly performed; but
it is the work of a Bishop to see that they be duly performed. There is no
Office so necessary to prevent Schisms and Factions, then which there is
nothing more destructive of the civil Peace; nothing more fruitful in all the
mischiefs which make the life of men the most unhappy. For what greater
mischiefs among men, then those which arise from hatred, variance, emulation,
wrath, strife, sedition, heresies, envyings, etc. and whence arise so much of
these, as from the rents and divisions in the Church? and whence come these
rents and divisions in the Church, but from the contempt which is poured forth
upon the Office of a Bishop? Whence have Heresies and Schisms arisen, and do
still arise, but from this, that the Bishop, who is one, and is over the
Church, Unde schismata and haereses obortae sunt, and oriuntur, nisi dum
Episcopus, qui unus est, and Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumptione
contemnitur? Cyprian.
is by the Pride and presumption of some despised? says Cyprian. This is that
which, has so often changed the Pulpit into a Theater, from whence so many
instead of preaching the Gospel of Peace have blown the Trumpet of War, and
perverted that which God has ordained to turn swords into mattocks, and
spears into plowshares, to serve as the greatest means of turning mattocks
into swords, and plowshares into spears.

In a word, there is nothing so necessary and effectual to the happiness of
men in this life, as to live together in Unity. Psalm. 133.1.
Behold, how good and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell toget
her in unity. There is no Unity among men so strong and so good as that, of
which Religion is the bond; nothing so necessary to preserve the unity of
Religion, as the Dignity and Authority of the Office of a Bishop. Brethren will
be apt to fall out among themselves; though they be of one house, they will not
be of one mind. But as the best means to keep or make them friends, is, the
reverence which both of them owe to their common Father: so the best means
under God to keep up amity in the Church, or to recover it when it is lost, is
to remember the reverence which all the true Sons of the Church owe to those
who are their Fathers in God. And, so much for the third Particular in the
Text, which is the Goodness of the work. I come now to the fourth and last,
which is the Desire of the Office, and of the good work.

Here are two things to which the word desire is applied, desire the Office,
The Desire of the Office.
and desire the good Work: but not in the same manner, for the former is by way
of Supposition only, If a man desire the Office of a Bishop; the later is by
way of Inference or conclusion upon that Supposition, he desires a good work.
And though in our Translation it be one and the same word in both places,
desire the Office and desire the good Work; yet in the original, there be two
different words. The former is (...), the later is, (...) The difference
between these two words is so nice, that our language cannot well furnish us
with words fit to express it: but in that there is some difference in the
Original, it may teach us, that it is not always one and the same desire that
is set upon the Office, and that which is set upon the good Work.

True it is, that when the Apostle wrote this, there was nothing in the Office,
for which a man would have desired it, but the Goodness of the work. There
were no Temporalties annexed to it, no Dignity in the eye of the world, but so
much Work, and that so full of peril, as well as pains and labor, that had
it not been for some great Goodness in the Work, no man would have undertaken,
much less desired it. We read of one Marcus, who cut off his thumb because he
would not be made a Bishop; and we read of many, who had their heads cut off
because they were. But when it came to be an Office, which might be enjoyed not
only with Safety, but likewise with great Honor and Dignity, and Revenue
sufficient to maintain and uphold that Honor; we read of some who have desired
the Office of a Bishop, not for the Goodness of the work, but for the
uppermost rooms at feasts, and the highest seats in the Synagogue, and to be
called of men Rabbi. Then an Infidel would be a Christian, if he might be a
Bishop, as he that said, Make me Bishop of Rome, Facite me Pontificem Romanum,
and protin^s ero Christianus. Praetextat.
and I will soon be a Christian. Thus to desire the Office of a Bishop is so
far from being a good Work, that the better Work it is which belongs to the
Office, the worse it is so to desire the Office. It is a greater question
whether it be lawful to desire the Office for the goodness of the work: for
though it be a commendable thing to desire a good work, yet when that good Work
is so annexed to a great Office, that a man cannot do the Work unless he have
the Office, it may be suspected that he looks more upon the greatness of the
Office then upon the goodness of the Work; and this Office requires a man that
is not only without blame, but likewise without suspicion. I answer,
generally, it is more seemly for a man to stay till he be desired to take the
Office than to desire it before; and it is not unlike but that one that does
least desire the Office, will best perform the Work. But yet I will not say but
that a worthy and good man may have so true and so great a desire to do so good
a Work, as to desire the Office and the Dignity, not for the Office or the
Dignity, but for the necessity of both to make him capable of doing so good a
Work, and be the worthier and better man for having that desire.

But admitting it to be lawful, it may be another question whether it be
prudent. For I find it a question among Philosophers, whether it be the part of
a wise man to take upon him a great Office; which might well be a question
among them, who thought it so great a happiness to be at quiet without any
trouble to molest, and to live at ease without any burden to oppress, that
there could be nothing in the greatest Office to recompense the loss of this
tranquillity and liberty, which men in great office cannot hope to enjoy: for
how can a man be at quiet that puts himself into the noise of business? or how
can he live at his ease, that has the Government upon his shoulders? Besides
it is a very desirable thing to have the thoughts free for Contemplation,
wherein a man may converse with many of the wisest and best men that have ever
been in the world, who being dead yet speak, or with Saints and Angels, yea
with Christ, and God, and any thing, to which his thoughts may have recourse
when they are free: and if there be a life on earth that comes near to that of
Saints in Heaven, it may seem to be this. But a great Office has ever too much
work to allow a man this freedom for his thoughts. Solitude and Silence are
much fitter for such a purpose then the noise and crowd, which must needs be
where there is so much Work.

Yet the Philosopher could think and say, that though the Dignity and splendour
of a great Office was no recompense for the loss of his quiet and his ease,
and the freedom of his thoughts for contemplation, yet because some men must be
in office, it might stand with his wisdom to take it upon him, rather then to
suffer it to fall into the hands of a fool: But still this is but to take the
Office upon him, not to desire it. If there be any thing that can make a wise
and good man desire this Office, it must be the Goodness of the work; there is
nothing else that can make satisfaction for the great care and pains which
lies so heavy upon the Office. A Bishop in his Office is like a Candle upon a
Candlestick, set up to give light to them that are in the house, by consuming
himself. It is but a small recompense for consuming himself, that he is set up
in a golden Candlestick: but to give light to them that are in the house is so
good a Work, that for the doing of that a great charity might make a man desire
it, though it be with the disadvantage to himself, of consuming himself. I say
a great Charity: for it must be a greater Charity then has been taugh in the
School of Philosophy; but not greater then may be learned in the School of
Christ, where we are taught to mind the good of other men as well as our own,
and a much greater good of other men with the loss of a less good of our own;
according to the pattern and example of our Lord and Master who emptied himself
that he might fill us. The good of other men, which is or may be wrought by
this Work, is so great as may well invite a good proficient in this School to
part with all that is dear to him in this world for the procuring of it, though
they for whose good he consumes himself, return him nothing but evil for good,
and hatred for his good will, according to that which the Apostle speaks of
himself, 2. Cor. 12.15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for your sake,
though the more abundantly I love, the less I be loved.

And yet I do not say that any man may desire the Office of a Bishop for the
goodness of the Work. For as it is a good, so it is a great work; and as it is
desirable because it is good, so it is no less dreadful because it is great.
It is a good work to watch for the Souls of men; but it is a great work, Heb.
13.17.
so to watch for the souls of men, as they that must give an account. Onus
Angelicis humeris formidandum.
This has made some wise and good men to call it a burden, which the Angels
might be afraid to take upon their shoulders. 2 Cor. 2.16.
It made the Apostle to say, who is sufficient for these things? And if it put
so great an Apostle to make that question, he that would offer himself in
answer, had need first consider himself, and in that consideration lay aside
himself; or else he may easily be deceived in himself, by thinking too well of
his own Sincerity and Sufficiency, because it is his own.

When our Savior put that question, Luke 12.42. Who is that faithful and wise
Steward whom the Lord shall make Ruler over his household? he is thought by some
to make enquiry after one that is fitly qualified for the Office of a Bishop.
Certain it is, that such a man ought to be a wise and a good man. For if he be
not a wise man, he will not know how to behave himself in the house of God: and
if he be not a faithful and good man, he will not do that which he knows he
ought to do. He must be a wise man, that he may understand his work; and he
must be a good man, that he may do it.

But it may be a question, whether it be enough that he be a wise and a good
man, and whether the Office of a Bishop do not require the wisest and the best
of men. When the Apostle says in the following verses, that he must not be a
novice, and that he must be apt to teach, and that he must be one that knows
how to Rule his own house well; he does not speak as if one that were thus
qualified were wise enough, but one that is not thus qualified is not wise
enough. He must not only not be a novice, but one that is able in Doctrine to
show uncorruptness, Tit. 2.7, 8.
gravity, sincerity, sound speech, that cannot be condemned, that he that is of
the contrary part may be ashamed, Tit. 1.9.
having no evil to say of him. He must not only be apt to teach, but likewise
able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. He must
not only know how to rule his own house well, but likewise to take care of the
Church of God.

The Philosopher, who said that Kingdoms would then be most happy when Kings
were Philosophers, or Philosophers were Kings, gave this reason for it, That
Philosophers above all other men spend their time and pains in observing and
considering how God governs the world: and having this pattern so much in their
eye, they must needs be so much the fitter to govern under him. The Office of a
Bishop is to govern the Church as a Vicar of Christ, and to the end he may do
his work well, he had need be one that has not only well studied his pattern;
but such a one as is very conformable thereunto. He must have much of his
wisdom, and much of his temper: so much of his Lenity, who would not break a
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, as to know how and whom and when he
must instruct in meekness; and yet so much of his Courage and zeal, who whipped
the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, as not to be afraid to rebuke
sharply, where it is necessary or expedient. He must know not only whom to
bind, but likewise whom to loose; lest while he either binds where he should
loose, or looses where he should bind, he binds himself so much as none can
loose him. He that desires the Office of a Priest, had need be wiser then they
who are of his flock: he that desires the Office of a Bishop, had need be so
much wiser, as he is higher then a Priest. And not only so much wiser, but
likewise so much better. There be many good qualities which the Apostle
requires in him, in the words which follow these of my Text. A Bishop must be
blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given
to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of
filthy lucre, but patient, not a brauler, not covetous, one that rules his own
house well, not a novice; and moreover he must have a good report of them that
are without. But when he says, he must in all things show himself a pattern of
good works; Tit. 2.7. 1 Pet. 5.
and when St. Peter says, he must be an example to the flock; they both imply,
that he must not only have all these good qualities, but these and all other
good qualities in a great measure and perfection: -- (...) -- (...), etc. Naz.
Orat. 1.
for so it becomes him that is to show himself a pattern and example.

When our Savior conferred this Office upon St. Peter, he first put this
question to him, Joh. 21.15. 1 Cor. 16.22.
Simon, love thou me more then these? Not only, Simon love thou me? for he
that loves not him, is so unworthy to be a Bishop, that he is not fit to be in
the rank of Christians. If any many love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
anathema maranatha. But, Simon, love thou me more then these? to show that he
would not have the flock, which he has purchased with his own blood, committed
to any but such as have a singular and extraordinary love and devotion to him.

And thus I have gone through the Particulars in my Text. I shall now only look
back upon it with two reflections, and so conclude.

The first is with Sadness upon them that look with an evil eye upon this
Office, or at least upon the Dignity of it. For the better work it is that
belongs to the Office, the worse it is, to wish there were no such Office, or
no such Dignity and Authority, which is necessary for the better performance of
that work which belongs to the Office. There is not an expression of greater
misery that can befall a people, then that which is frequent in the Scripture,
of being as sheep without a shepherd. He does not say as sheep without
pasture, or sheep gone astray, or sheep among Wolves, for so long as there is a
shepherd over them, he may provide them pasture, or bring them home into the
fold, or drive away the Wolves; but as sheep without a shepherd, in which all
these miseries are involved: for if the shepherd be smitten, the sheep will
soon be scattered, and if the sheep be scattered, they will soon be distressed
for want of pasture, and the Wolves will enter in among them, and there will be
none to drive them out. Such is the miserable condition of a people that are as
sheep without a shepherd: and what is a Church without a Bishop, but as sheep
without a shepherd? The same expression is used to show the misery of a
Kingdom without a King. It has been the sad condition of this Nation these
many years to be without both. And yet as if it had been our happiness, we
have been commanded to give thanks to God for that which he would not have
suffered to befall us, if he had not been much offended with us. The Office of
a King and the Office of a Bishop may say among us, as Christ once said among
his Countrymen, Many a good work have I done among you; for which of these do
ye stone me? But it is no new thing for men to mistake their best friends for
their enemies, and their enemies for their friends; to hate the one, and to
fawn upon the other. The Apostle St. Paul gives us instances of both: of the
one at Galatia, Gal. 4.16. Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you
the truth? of the other at Corinth, 2 Cor. 11.20. For ye suffer if a man bring
you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt
himself, if a man smite you on the face.

But now, God be thanked, we have seen the hand of God among us, in gathering
us together, to lead us like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron, the King
and the Priest.

And this makes me look back upon my Text, with another reflection of joy and
gratitude, to see the good care and circumspection which is and has formerly
been in this Nation, in the choice of such men for the Office of a Bishop as
are the most able and the most likely to do the Work which belongs to the
Office. Wherein I think we are more happy then any Nation in the world. We have
read of some times and places, in which novices have been made Bishops, because
they were the sons or kindred of great men; or such as were able to purchase
this Dignity for them; as the chief Captain obtained the privilege of a Roman
with a great sum of money: Boys have been taken from the School and set up
in the chair, not so glad that they had gotten the Crosier-staff, as that they
had gotten out of the reach of the Rod. Laetiores quod virgas evosevit, quam
quod attingerint principatum. Bern. Non iste ad episcopatum subito pervenit,
sed per omnia ecclesiastica officia promotus -- ad sacerdotii sublime
fastigium, cunctis religionis gradibus ascendit. Cyprian Epist. ad Antonian.
But with us the way to the Office of a Bishop has been and is the same by
which St. Cyprian says of Cornelius, that he came to the Bishopric of Rome,
not suddenly, but by an orderly ascent through all the inferior Offices in the
Church, as so many steps and degrees. The way to purchase the Office of a
Bishop in this Church, is only that of which the Apostle speaks in the 13 v. of
this Chap. They who have used the Office of a Deacon well, purchase to
themselves a good degree: so it is by having used the other Offices in the
Church well, that men purchase to themselves this degree, which is the highest
of them all. And as the Philosopher says, they who would choose a fit Pilot to
govern a ship, do not choose a man because he is the richest, or because he is
the noblest, or because he is the comeliest person among them, but because he
is the ablest and most likely to do his work well: so it has been and is the
way in choosing men to sit at the stern in the government of our Church, to make
choice of the most able and worthy, men who cannot more desire the Office of a
Bishop, then the Office of a Bishop desires them.

And now to conclude all in a word. It was said of one of the Emperors, That
he got nothing by coming to the Empire but the opportunity of being able to do
as much good as he was willing: so it is the happiness of our Church, to see
such men promoted to the highest Office in it, as aim only at a power to do
all the good which they were willing to do before. And as it is happy for the
Church, so it is likewise happy for them; for though the Work be as great, as
it is good, the reward will be greater. For when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, 1 Pet. 5.4.
ye shall receive a crown of Glory that fades not away.

THE END.

