THE SOLDIERS CATECHISM, Composed for The KING'S Army; Wherein His 1 Cause is
justified, and his enemies condemned. 2 Soldier is instructed, and the Rebel
reclaimed.


Written for the encouragement and direction of all that have taken up Arms in
this Cause of God, his Church, and his Anointed; especially the Common
Soldiers.

By T. S.

DEUTERONOMY. 20.1. When thou go out to battle against thine enemies, and see
horses, and charets, and a people more then thou, be not afraid of them; For
the Lord thy God is with thee.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall. 1645.

TO MY Honored Friend NOAH BRIDGES Esquire, Clarke to the Honorable House of
Commons of the Parliament of ENGLAND.
Sir,
Iunii 18. 1645. I received from you a Thing called, The Soldiers Catechism,
composed for the Parliaments Army, written by R. Ram, Minister of Spalding in
Lincolneshire; you desired me to answer it, because it had done some Disservice
to the King, as is supposed, in misleading some simple souls.

I have read it and believe the supposition; and for present answer return you
the same Title, with this alteration only, Composed for the Kings Army;
certainly persuading my self that this truth (and it is nothing else but
truthy may reduce those whom his Falsehood has seduced; yet promising you, if
so you will have it, speedily to answer his verbatim, and largely, which is
here done only in sense and breifely; yet fully I imagine for the service
abovesaid, namely, To reclaim my Countrymen to their ancient obedience, which
is your and all good men's desire, and amongst them,

Sir, of Your Friend and Servant, T. SVVADLIN.
Junii 19. 1645.
THE SOVLDIERS Catechism Composed for the Kings Army.
Qu: SIR, I pray tell me; is war lawful? and may I lawfully be a Soldier?

Ans. Yes, War is lawful; For God allows it; Deuteronomy. 23.9. and He is styled a
man of war: Exodus 15.3. And you may lawfully be a soldier: For Gods choicest
Servants, Abraham, Joshua, Sampson, Gideon, David, and many more were
Soldiers: And you may safely follow their example, so that you have a lawful
calling to that Profession.

Qu. How may I be assured that I am lawfully called to this profession? and
consequently may with a safe conscience take up Arms?

Ans. This you may know both Negatively and Affirmatively.

Qu. How Negatively?

Ans. By three Notes; 1. If you thrust your self into this calling, either
without or against that education your Parents have given you, either without
or against their allowance: For such Rashness Jacob chid his two sons,
Simeon and Levi, Genesis 34.30. and blamed them, Genesis 49.7. If your Parents
disallow and forbid you this calling, you are not lawfully called unto it.

2. If you enter into this Profession either without or against that Supreme
Authority under which you live. For this fault were the children of Israel
destroyed by the sword, because they presumed to go up against the Amalekites
when Moses their King forbad them. Numb. 14.42. If the King or those
Magistrates that are appointed by Him do forbid you, you are not lawfully
called unto it.

3. If you take up Arms for your own private ends, either for Coveteousnesse
and to grow Rich thereby, or for Malice, and to be Revenged thereby, or for
Sensuality and to delight therein; you are not lawfully called unto it; For
says the Psalmist, Scatter thou the People that delight in War: Psalm. 68.30.

Qu. What then think you of those that now take up Arms against the King?

Ans. Why I think, yes I know they are Rebels; and I fear (without Gods great
mercy and their own Repentance) they shall be tormented with the Devil and
his Angels.

Q. God forbid Sir; pray why censure you them so hardly?

Ans. Nay God will not forbid it; for he has forbidden all men to Rebel; and
has threatened them that do Rebel with Damnation, To. 13.2. Nor is there one
example in the whole Bible of any one Rebel that ever died in the outward
possibility of Salvation.

Qu. Sir, may not Subjects resist their King in any case, though He be an
Heretic, an Apostate, or a Tyrant?

Ans. No, Subjects may not resist in any case: this is the doctrine of Jesuits
and Puritans, but assure your self there is neither Precept nor Practice for
it in the holy word of God; nor did the Primitive Christians ever dream of it.

Qu. But if the King be such a one, and intends the Destruction of His People,
what remedy have the Subjects?

Ans. Prayers and Tears: 1 Samuel 8.10, 18. let the King be never so bad they
may not use other weapons against their King then Prayers and Tears.

Qu. Sir, It may be you speak of an Absolute Monarch; but I speak of the King
of England; who, as some Divines and Lawyers have told me, is but a mixed
Monarch, and may be curbed and resisted.

Ans. Did they tell you He is a mixed Monarch? are you sure on it? then they told
you a Bull; and by their language you may perceive they are but boys in
Divinity, and but Smatterers in law; for the Kings of England are Absolute
Monarchs, and not to be curbed by any, not to be resisted by any: 24. Hen. 8.
cap. 12.25 Hen. 8. either at home or abroad; If Forraigners do it, they are
public Enemies; If Domestickes do it, they are Rebels.

Q. But the Subjects of England have supposed they had such a Power; and upon
that supposition they have entered into a Holy League and Covenant, and bound
themselves by Oath to Reform the King and Kingdom, even by Arms: are they
not now bound to do it?

Ans. No; For the Oath is unlawful, and the end is ungodly.

Qu. How is the Oath unlawful?

Ans. Because it is imposed without Authority; because it is imposed against
Authority.

Qu. Why? Is it not imposed by Authority of Parliament?

Ans. No; because the King is absent; and none has Power to impose an Oath,
but he that has power to draw the sword, i. e. the King. Or admit it as you
say; Yet because that which you call the Parliament has imposed this Oath,
has enforced this Covenant, not only without, but also against Supreme
Authority, i. e. the King; It is unlawful.

Qu. How is the End ungodly.

A. Because it is to shed blood, because they that take it, swear that
Assertively, the truth whereof they know not, viz. the Scots Religion in
Doctrine and Discipline; and they swear that Promissorily, which for ought
they know is impossible, viz. the extirpation of Bishops, and the bringing of
all those whom they call Delinquents (who are the best and major part of this
Kingdom) to condign punishment, i. e. to Ruin; and also for the extirpation
of Popery, whereby they must divorce many Husbands and Wives, which is a thing
detestable both to God and man. And this is plain perjury.

Qu. But good Sir, for Gods sake what shall we then do now that we have sworn?

Ans. What must you do? Why you must Repent; Repent even for taking this Oath;
so far must you be from performing this oath, or else you will add sin unto
sin, the sin of Perjury to the sin of Rebellion; the sin of Murder to
the sin of Perjury; and the sin of Obstinacy to the sin of Murder.

Qu. But Sir, I am bound in Conscience to perform that which I have so
solemnly vowed, How else shall my Conscience be satisfied?

Ans. Your Conscience may be satisfyedupon these four irrefragable Maxims of
Divinity.

1. A Sacrament of Piety must not be a Bond of Iniquity. i. e. Admit the Oath
be an holy Oath; yet because thereby you have sworn to be Evil, viz. to fight
against the King, which is to be a Rebel, you must desist. The Example of
Herod proves this, Mat. 14.7.

2. A Sacrament of Piety must not be an Impediment of Piety, i. e. Admit the
oath you have taken be an holy Oath, and the end you have taken it for, be an
holy End, viz. Piety, simply to extirpate Popery, yet because it hinders a
greater point of Piety, viz. Obedience and Loyalty to the King, you must
desist, The example of Saint Peter proves this, John 13.8. and so does the
Example of Saul. 1 Samuel 15.22.

3. Unjust Bonds are dissolved by Righteousness; i. e. Admit you were forced
to take this Oath for fear of plundering, Imprisonment, and the like; You are
yet discharged from the performance of it, and bound only to Repentance for it:
The Example of Jepthe comes near this, Judic. 11.31, 40. and so does that of
the Elder son, Mat. 21.28. The example of Saul in slaying the Gibeonites
proves it at full: 2 Samuel 21.1. and so does that universally resolved Case. If
Theives make me swear not to discover them upon pain of death; I am yet bound
to discover them.

4. Just vows may be nulled and made void by the Superior, i.e. Admit the vow
you have made, the Covenant you have entered into be neither of Evil for an
evil End, nor of Evil to a good End, nor of Good to an evil End, but De Bono
Been, of Good for a good End; yet because the consent of the Superior the
King, is not to it, yea because he has published his dissent against it, You
are so far from being bound by it, that you are free from it. Deuteronomy. 30.4.

Qu. Sir, If I have taken it, will you absolve me? If I have not taken it, can
you direct me how I may take it with certain Limitations, that so I may
preserve both my Loyalty, and my Liberty together with my estate?

Ans. Noe, neither; I cannot absolve yous nor can any absolve you but God and
the King; nor will God absolve you, until you have made the King amends for
the wrong you have done him by taking this oath; And therefore 2ly I dare not,
indeed I dare not nor may, I give you any directions to take this oath by any
limitations whatsoever: For it is a resolved case in Divinity.

That every one that swears, must swear in the sense of him that gives the
oath, and not of himself who takes the oath, be the Judge lawful or
unlawful. I confess it is a hard case you are put unto, either Penury, or
Perjury; If you take it not you must be plundered, and imprisoned; If you take
it, you are Forsworn, and a Rebel; But better loose the world, then your
soul.

Some men I confess do mince the matter, and say a man may take this oath and
not be forsworn, by reason of his limitations and reservations, (which is but
a Jesuiticall trick) yet even they confess that thus taking the oath, is
taking Gods name in vain; Which who so does, you know God will not hold him
guiltless. Exodus 20.7.

Qu. Sir, I have caused you a little to digress, but I thank you for that
abundant satisfaction you have given me; I return, and promise to trouble you
but in a few Quaeries more. What think you of them that fight for the King?

Ans. This I think of them; yes and am assured of it too, so they fight
Conscientiously for the Cause without by-respects, of Riches, or Reward, or
Revenge, If they die, they die Martyrs; for they dye for the Lord, Matt. 5.10.
which is more then to dye in the Lord Apocal. 14.13. and are therefore blessed:
If they live, they live honest men, the honor of their Country, and the glory
of their Friends.

Qu. If your affirmative evidence be as good as your negative, you have not
only disheartened me from them at Westminster, but you have also heartened me
for the King: (and I hope many more with me) How may I affirmatively know that
I am lawfully called to be a Soldier?

Ans. By three other notes, 1. If the ground be good, as either to maintain
the true Religion; Therefore is war against Antichrist commended, Apocal. 17.
16. or else to recover that which the Enemy has unjustly taken away, hence did
the Israelites set upon the Philistims 1 Samuel 7.14. or else to punish such as
have done public wrong. Hence David made war upon the Ammonites a Sam. 10.7.

Qu. How do any of these Grounds concern this war?

Ans. How? marry in each respect, 1. Those at Westminster have voted down our
ancient Religion, which we have justified against Papists and Puritans, to be
the truest Religion in the world, both for Doctrine and Discipline. 2. They
have unjustly taken away whatsoever belonged unto the King, His Magazines, and
Forts, His Customs and Revenues. 3. They have done public wrong, not only
in taking away the Churches means, but the Church-mens lives also; not only
in taking away their and all other the Subjects Property, but their Liberty
also; so that the ground of this war on the Kings part is, To maintain and
Recover our Religion, our Property, and Liberty.

Qu. What is the second Affirmative Note?

Ans. If the End be good: as either to withdraw Enemies from some dangerous
Plot; Thus God stirred up the Philistines to invade Israel: to draw Saul from
pursuing David, 1 Samuel 23.27. or else to weaken the power of professed Enemies;
To this end David set upon the enemies of Israel, 2 Samuel 8.12. or else to
subdue Rebellious Subjects that will not be governed by Law. Hence was Sheba
and his followers beseiged by King David's men in Abell of Beth-Maachah, 2 Samuel
20.15. And what is the end of this war on the Kings part, but that Rebels and
other Delinquents may be governed by law? Let the law take place, and the war
is done.

Qu. What is the third Affirmative note?

Ans. If the Execution be right, as 1. That you shed no more blood then
Necessity enforces you; If the Enemies yield you must spare them: Hence was
that charge, If they make thee answer of Peace, etc. Deuteronomy. 20.11. and 2. If you
slay not such as cannot hurt you, weak women, aged men, young children; Hence
is that charge in Deuteronomy. 20.11. But the women, etc. And 3. If you put not such
as you are forced to kill, to cruel torments; For Cruelty provokes God to
anger; witness the Sirians and the Ammonites, Amos 1.3, 13. (not but that
Torments may be used in some cases: As 1. To find out the Truth. Or 2. To
requite like for like. Or 3. To punish insupportable wrongs. Or 4. For Breach
of Faith.) And setting aside these Cases, let one be named, woman, old man, or
child, that has been put to death, or any other, soldier or whomsoever, that
has desired Peace or Quarter, that has been refused on the Kings part; I
could name many on the other.

Qu. If such be my End, such my Ground, and such my Execution, may I then
lawfully take up Arms and be a Soldier?

Ans. No, unless the King call you to it. For howsoever the foresaid Ground,
End, and Execution are required to make war lawful, yet you may not be a
soldier, unless the King call you to it.

Qu. If the King invite me to it, may I then lawfully take up Arms?

Ans. Yes, you may, my life and soul for yours, you may, whether the War be
Defenfive or Offensive, you may with a safe Conscience, yea and must undertake
this profession.

Qu. One thing more I beseech you: Suppose the King has neither such a Ground,
nor such End, nor such Execution, may I yet safely be a Soldier under Him?

Ans. It is an odd and unmannerly supposition you make: you would take it very
ill if your Neighbor should not believe you upon your word; and why then do
you not believe the King upon his Protestations! On my Conscience you may, and
with my soul I believe it. But admitting the supposition yet notwithstanding
you are bound to fight for the King when He commands you; His unjust Commands
herein make Himself only guilty; your ready obedience will approve you
Innocent: So have all the Casuists that yet I have met with resolved it: and
sure I am too the Laws of this Land command it. Look you else upon that
Statute of 25 Edw. 3. c. 3. Edw. 2. Exilium Hugonis de Spens. 5 Ric. 2. c. 31.
and 32. Speed lib. 9. c. 20. Speed lib. 9. c. 24.

Qu. Sir, I beseech you now you have made me a Soldier for the King, to
furnish me with one form of Prayer.

Ans. You have the Prayers of the Church, then which cannot be better; use them.

Qu. Sir, I confess it; But they are Public Prayers, and so I shall use
them: I desire one for mine own private Devotion.

Ans. I am willing to satisfy you; If you cannot better furnish your self, use
this:

The Soldiers Prayer.
O Almighty God who have styled thy self a Man of War, and have now called
me to be a man of war, I beseech thee to teach my Hands to war and my
Fingers to fight: give unto me and to every one of my fellow soldiers
strength, courage, and wisdom, that we may undermine all their Attempts, and
overthrow all their Plots, and overcome all their Giants that fight against thy
Truth and thine Anointed: yet even in the heat of our Fury give us Pity,
that we may rather spare then spoil; and while we gird our selves with Armor
to resist these Enemies of ours, do Thou put upon us thy Armor, that we may
resist that Enemy of Mankind, and quench all the fiery darts of the Devil;
Go thou forth with us against them that are come without thee against us;
Animate our, and abate their Courage; Confound their Devices, but Convert their
souls; And because Death is before our Eyes give us grace to be mindful of
it, and prepared for it; that while we fight against them we may also fight the
good fight against all our ghostly Enemies, and receive a Crown of
Righteousness; Take our Bodies into thy Protection, and defend us; Take our
souls into thy Tuition, and Sanctify us; that if we return not home we may be
received into Heaven, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

In whose most blessed name and words we further call upon thee, saying,
OUR Father which art in Heaven.
Hallowed be thy Name.
Thy Kingdom come.
Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into Temptation.
But deliver us from evil.
For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

