To ALL,
Paupertatis ergo Ne peream fame
To SOME.
Gratitudinis ergo Ne peream infamia


WHETHER It be better to turn PRESBYTERIAN, ROMAN, Or, to continue what I am,
CATHOLIC In Matter of RELIGION?

By Thomas Swadlin, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Michael Burges, at the
little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1658.

I. Whether Presbyterian?
IT is a Thriving way, and I am poor; the tentation therefore is strong, but
better enjoy peace of Conscience, than the spoils of violence; I shall yet
propose some cases of conscience, and upon their true Resolves, I shall either
shake hands with him, or continue what I am.

1. Whether I do not believe, That Christ taught his Apostles to pray, and say,
Our Father which art in heaven?

2. Whether I do not believe, That the Apostles did pray, and say, as Christ
taught them, Our Father which art in heaven?

3. Whether I have done well, to expunge and obliterate that Prayer, Our Father
which art in heaven?

4. Whether I do not believe, That Christ sent his Apostles, as his father sent
him? Joh. 20.21.

5. Whether I do not believe, That the Father sent Christ to be the chief
Bishop of our Souls? 1 Pet. 2.25.

6. Whether I do not believe both these missions to be jure Divino?

7. Whether I do not therefore believe, Episcopacy to be Jure Divino?

8. Whether I do not believe (...), to be a different word from (...)?

9. Whether I do not believe Bishop to be the name of Office and dignity,
Presbyter to be a name of order and duty?

10. Whether I do not believe Bishops are sometimes called Presbyters, because
they were Presbyters before they were Bishops?

11. Whether I do not believe Presbyters qua Presbyters are never called
Bishops?

12. Whether I do not believe, that St. Paul spoke and did divinely, when he
constituted Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus Bishop of Creete, to over see
and if need were to rebuke the Presbyters there?

13. Whether I do not believe St. Jerome spoke piously, when he said, Nisi
exors quaedam and ab omnibus eminens potestas Episcopo ducetur, tot essent
Schismata, quot Sacerdotes, That unless an extraordinary and peerlesse
pre-eminence were given to the Bishop, there would be as many Schisms as
Priests?

14. Whether I do not believe King James spoke politickly and prudently, when
he said, no Bishop, no King?

15. Whether I do not believe the Primitive Church, and so the Church
successively until of very late years, one century and less than an half, was
governed by Episcopacy?

16. Whether therefore I do not believe I have done very ill to shoulder out
Episcopacy, that I might get into his Chair?

17. Whether I do not believe, That Thebulis and Aerius were therefore called
Heretics, because they would have had an ecclesiastical parity, Bishop and
Presbyter all one?

18. Whether I do not believe, The Canons of the Apostles distinguished, the
three degrees, of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and gave the superiority to
Bishops? Can. 4.6, 7.

19. Whether I do not believe Thebulis and Aerius did therefore fancy an
ecclesiastical parity, because they could not be made Bishops, which they
earnestly affected? Epiphan. Haeres. 75.

20. Whether I do not believe the Church of Jerusalem was called a Virgin
Church, and never corrupted, until by Thebulis because he was not made a
Bishop? Eus. l. 4. c. 22.

21. Whether I do not believe Ignatius lived in the Apostles days, and saw
Christ in the flesh, and being yet a Presbyter, writ to the Antiochians, to
remember Evodius their Bishop, who first from the Apostles received the
superiority above the Presbyters; and after being Bishop himself, and going to
suffer under Trajan, writ to the Clergy and Presbyters there, That they would
be diligent in feeding their flock, until God did show unto them, Him that
should rule over them, after his death? And in another Epistle ad Sard. thus,
Presbyters be obedient to your Bishops; Deacons be obedient to your Presbyters;
Laymen be obedient to all: And after all concludes thus: My soul for theirs
that observe this order, The Lord be with them.

22. Whether I do not believe Aerius was the first that voted down all Fasts.
Vigilantius the first, that voted down all Feasts appointed by the Church, both
Heretics; and therefore whether I may not fear, I am something Heretical in
following their steps?

23. Whether I do not believe, that St. James set out a Lyturgie or book of
Common Prayer, for the Church in his time? St. Basil the like in his time? St.
Chrysostom the like in his time? and so downwards until Mr. John Calvin's time?

24. Whether I do not believe, that Mr. John Calvin himself thought well of
Common Prayers, and particularly of our Common Prayer Book, when he said, Quod
ad formam precum and Ritum ecelesiae; valde probo; ut certa illa extet, a qua
pastoribus in sua functione discedere non licet; Concerning a Form of Prayer,
and Ecclesiastical Rites; I very well like, that they be a certain and constant
one, from which the Pastors of the Church may in no wise depart or vary?

25. Whether I do not believe, That every word in the Common Prayer book is in
the Bible, either literally or rationally deduced thence. v. g. for the
Confession. Almighty God. Genesis 17.1. And most merciful Father, Exodus 34.6. We
have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep. Psalm. 119.176. We have
followed too much the devises and desires of our own hearts, Jer. 18.12. We
have offended against thy holy laws, Mat. 7.8. We have left undone those things
which we ought to have done, 1 Samuel 15.24. And we have done those things which
we ought not to have done, 1 Samuel 24.5. 2 Samuel 12.13. And there is no health in
us, Psalm. 38.3. But thou O Lord have mercy upon us, miserable offenders, Luke
18.13. Spare thou them O God which confess their faults, Prove. 28.13. Restore
thou them that be penitent, Ezekiel. 18.31. According to thy promise declared unto
mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord; Mat. 11.18. And grant O most merciful
father for his sake, Joh. 16.23. That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous,
and sober life, Titus 2.12. To the glory of thy holy Name, 1 Timothy 6.16.

26. Whether I do not believe the Absolution, Almighty God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, be grounded upon, Joh. 20.23.

27. Whether I do not believe, the Lords Prayer with the Doxology, Thine is the
Kingdom, Power, and Glory, is verbatim in Mat. 6. and without that Doxology in
Luke 11.

28. Whether I do not believe, those Versicles, O God make speed to save us, be
not in Psalm. 102.13. Open thou my lips O Lord. And my mouth shall show forth
thy praise, Psalm. 51.15.

I might be endless: to Answer therefore some of your grand Objections, I ask.

29. Whether I do not believe, Remember not Lord our Offenses, nor the offenses
of our forefathers, is a sincere prayer for the living, and no sinful prayer
for the dead; viz. That God would not visit the offenses of our forefathers
upon us their children, and grounded upon Exodus 20. and Ezekiel. 18.

30. Whether I do not believe, From sudden death, good Lord deliver us, is a
fervent ejaculation, no idle desire, that God would not take us away
unpreparedly, until we have made ready our accounts?

31. Whether I do not believe, for all them that travel by land or by water,
all women laboring of child, and is a charitable prayer, and answerable to
the Apostles command Do good to all, Gal. 6.10. Pray for all men, 1 Timothy 2.3.

32. Whether I do not believe, By thy holy Nativity and Circumcision, by thy
Agony and bloody sweat, etc. is obtestative, and the sign of our Faith, not
affirmative and the sign of an Oath; desiring God by these effectual means of
the Actions and Passions of Jesus Christ, to deliver us from those punishments
which are due unto us for our sins.

33. Whether I do not believe, the first prayer in the Office of Matrimony,
That God would bless this couple, as Isaac and Rebecca, proceeded rather from
the holy Ghosts inspiration, than from humane invention; because if from man
only, he would have gone upon reason, and made the prayer thus, bless them as
Abraham and Sarah, or bless them as Jacob and Rachel; for Abraham was Gods
first friend; Jacob was Gods great friend; yet neither so, nor so, but as Isaac
and Rebecca; because Abraham had his Hagar, one Concubine; Jacob had his Zilkah
and his Bilkah two at least, Isaac never any but his Rebecca?

34. Whether I do not believe, That that prayer, Prevent us O Lord, in all our
doings, etc. be not absolutely against those great points of popery, concerning
work of preoperation and cooperation, grounded upon that of St. Paul, Ephesians. 2.8.
and so no kin to the Mass book?

35. Whether I do not believe the Creed of the Apostles is every word in the
Scripture, viz. I believe, Mark 9.24. in God. John 14.1. the Father, 1 Cor.
1.3. Almighty, Genesis 17.1. maker of heaven and earth, Genesis 1.1. and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, Romans 1.3. which was conceived by the holy Ghost,
and born of the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35. suffered under Pontius Pilate, John
19.1. was Crucified Joh. 19.18. Dead Joh. 19.30. and Buried, Joh. 19.42. He
descended into Hell, Act. 2.27. the third day he rose again from the dead, 1
Cor. 15.4. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, Mar.
16.19. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Act. 10.42.
And in the holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints, Ephesians. 5.27. the forgiveness of sins, Col. 1.14. The Resurrection of
the Body, 1 Cor. 15.35. and life everlasting, Joh. 10.28.

36. Whether I do believe the Feasts of Christmas, Easter and Whitsuntide have
been observed by the purest and Primitive Churches, and commanded upon us to
observe the same? Clem. ep. decret, Telesph. p. 117. Cyprian de Nativ. Christi,
Nazian. Orat. 38. Chrysostom. hom. in Nativ. Christi, The Church of Helvetias
confess. c. 24. The Church of Bohemia, c. 15. The Church of Bremen, Regist. 2.
fine, The Church of Auspurge confess. act. 4.

37. Whether I do not believe, The Lord be with thee, and with thy Spirit,
equivolent to Ruth. 2.4.

38. Whether I do not believe St. Paul spoke Scripture, when he said, and bid
us pray with the spirit and with the understanding, and whether I do not
sometimes pray without the understanding, when I think I pray by the spirit?

39. Whether I do not believe, That therefore I have done very ill to
excommunicate the English Common Prayer Book, which by most Divines has been
called optimum Breviarum, and instead of it, have set up, a Directory, which
speaks nothing so much, as the sixth sense, and has no better Derivation than
from the Directarii? But I am in earnest, and earnestly desire of Almighty God,
that if the Presbyterian be determined to go on in his opinion; yet that we may
join together in all Christian affaction, and so meet in heaven, in an
everlasting Union; for till I am convinced upon the former Queries, I am
resolved never to be of their communion upon earth, though I wish them increase
of sanctity, while they live, and eternity of happiness, when they dye, through
Jesus Christ Amen.

II. Whether Roman?
I Am as far from Rome, as I am from Geneva; yet finding the Roman possessed
with more of the water, and the Presbyterian with more of the fire, I hope some
moderation may in time cement England and Rome into the Catholic, so strongly,
as never hereafter to be dissolved, or melted by the fury of zeal; You and you
only I confess have the face of a Church, and I hope you will not deny us the
Form, and Being of a Church: since I believe there is so much ingenuity and
wisdom in you, as to distinguish betwixt a Church extinguished and eclipsed or
persecuted, The Church of England I acknowledge is under a cloud and eclipsed;
but the Candle is not quite out and extinguished? Wheresoever two or three ( of
the Catholic Church) are gathered together, there is Christ in the midst of
them, so was his promise Mat. 18.20. And wheresoever a lawful Priest or Pastor
of the English Church is with two or three of his Congregation, I will not, I
dare not doubt of the performance. If you have less charity, either in the
taking or mistaking of it, I shall propose some few Queries in my own name, as
one of you, though I thank God I am none of you, nor ever intend to be in
opinion, howsoever in affection, because you are my next neighbor; I therefore
love you as my self.

1. Whether I do believe Roman and Catholic are Termini convertibiles? 2.
Whether I do believe, I may be saved, if I pray as the Catholic Church does,
and was taught by Christ, Our father which art in heaven; though I do not pray,
as the Roman Church does, and teaches, O thou mother of God, St. Peter St.
Paul pray for me? 3. Whether if I do believe as the Primitive and Catholic
Church did and does, and has taught the Apostles Creed, though I do not
believe as the Roman Church does, The Creed of the Council of Trent, I may be
saved? 4. Whether if I endeavor to live after Gods Commandments, and obey him,
though I do not endeavor to live after my superiors command, I may be saved?
5. Whether if I receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist as Christ Instituted and
Commanded me to receive it, in both Kinds, Bread and Wine, Flesh and Blood,
though I do not receive it as the Church of Rome has abrogated it, and
Commanded to receive, in one Kind only, I may be saved? 6. Whether my
Conscience can be satisfied by the devise of concomitants That the Blood is
given in the Body, since in the Eucharist the Blood is to be given as shed, not
kept, as poured out, not contained in the Body? 7. Whether if I be born again,
and made a Christian by true Baptism, and afterward confirmed by a true
Bishop, though I am not anointed with oil, I may be saved? 8. Whether if I
believe the Scripture, and frame my life accordingly, though I do not equally
believe Tradition I may be saved? 9. Whether if I serve and worship God in
Spirit and in Truth, though I worship no images, nor God by images, I may be
saved? 10. Whether I may not be saved, if I believe in Gods mercies through
Christ's merits, though I put no confidence in the merits of my own works?
These Queries with a very few more by moderate and, unbyassed men, might be
brought to a Reconciliation, and that they may be, I pray you let us join in
one Prayer, till we join in all points.

O Most merciful God, who have made all Mankind of one; O most merciful God,
who have contracted all the Elect of mankind into one body, thy Church; and
have given thy whole Church but one Soul, thy Spirit; and that Soul but one
Life, thy Faith; and that Faith but one prop, one Gospel, one Baptism, one
Lords Supper; and this one Body and one Soul, but one Head, thy Self, who art
but one Lord, and have again dispersed this Body into several Assemblies and
Societies, and have made each Society and Assembly but one; thereby intimating
to us, that we should all have but one Heart and one Mind; In mercy we beseech
thee look upon thy Church, and make her as thy Son did leave her, One; one in
Opinion and one in affection, that she may be no longer Crucified betwixt
Heretics and Sismaticks, Thieves of thy Truth, betwixt proflygates and
Hypocrites, thieves of thy Grace; betwixt Zealots and Superstitions, thieves of
thy Honor; but by virtue of thy Sons Golgatha, dry up Aceldema, and for the
merit of Calvary, Deliver, O deliver her from all her present misery; Relieve
her from Force without, and Fury within, both against her; Rescue her from
civil Enemies and crafty Children, both which fall upon her; Suffer not Reeds
any longer to be thy Scepters, nor Chaires thy Throne, nor Tricks thy Order,
nor Rudeness in one part, nor Superstition in another part, thy Service, nor
miscreants thy worshippers, nor Confusion thy Religion, nor Wilde-fire thy
Zeal, nor Lunaries thy Resolutions, nor Devillishnesse thy Spirit; but appear
by her once more in thy own Spirit, of Peace and Purity, of Sanctity and
Sincerity, of Wisdom and Sobriety, that all men may know thy Church by thy
Livery, which thou did bequeath her, Love, Peace and Patience; and that
thereby all men may be guided by thy One Church, in the right way of Truth into
Heaven, through Jesus Christ Amen. In whose blessed Name and Words, we farther
call upon thee, as he has taught us in his holy Gospel, saying;

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
will be done in Earth, as etc. Give us this day our daily bread, And forgive us
our trespasses, as etc. And lead us not into Tentation, but etc. For thine is
the Kingdom, Power and Glory, etc.

Or 3d. continue what I am Catholic?
I Desire so to continue, though I starve for it; For I have not took up this
Religion upon Tradition or Education, but upon Judgment, and Deliberation; And
instead of Quaeries, and Cases of Conscience, I offer to my self these
Irrefragable Demonstrations:

1. If I pray aright according to the Pattern of Devotion Summed up in the
Lords Prayer, I shall be heard. 2. If I repent aright according to the Prophets
and Apostles Direction, with the Contrition of my Heart, with the Confession of
my Lips, and the Endeavor of my Life, I shall be forgiven: Joel 2. 2 Cor. 7.
3. If I do right according to Gods will in his Word, summed up in his
Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, though not absolutely and Exactly, yet
Uprightly and Evangelically, I shall be accepted. 4. If I believe aright
according to Gods Gospel, Summed up in the Apostles Creed, without doubting,
without distrusting without disparing, I shall be saved. 5. If I receive
Christ's holy Sacraments, as he did Institute, and appoint them, not only as
Signs, but means of Grace, not only as Assurances of Salvation, but
Conveyances of Sanctification, I shall be glorified.
And my Religion being so good, I desire not to change, but to continue as I
am; and for that I praise Gods mercy, and pray for Gods blessing.

My Religion is Good, for it is Gods; my Calling is Lawful, for it is of God;
my Service is honorable, for it is for God and my Savior; my Message in which
I am employed is Honorable, for it is of Peace, and to be an Instrument of
Reconciliation betwixt God and his people, and my Proceeding in it, if it be as
it ought to be, in Love, shall be acceptable; Joyfully I may do it, for God
will reward it; Freely I may do it, for God will make it good; Boldly I may do
it, for God will defend it; and incessantly I should do it, for first or last
God will give a blessing to it.

But who, who is worthy to do this weighty business? not the best of men, how
much more unworthy am I the worst of men, and chief of Sinners? Truly of my
self I am as unworthy as unable, and unworthy to be enabled, if thou enter into
Judgment with me, That thou may not, I thus address my self to thy Throne of
Grace.

Look upon me O my God in the face of Jesus Christ I beseach thee, and for his
sake assist me with thy Spirit, That I may speak thy Word, least I be guilty of
Carelessness; That I may not speak before I Learn, least I be guilty of
Rashness. That I may Learn and Speak, least I be guilty of Idleness; that I
may not speak to the Ear, least I be guilty of Flattery; That I may speak to
the Heart and so be a means of other men's salvation; and when I have Preached to
others, That I may not be a Cast away my self? Sanctify me with thy Spirit I
beseech Thee, That I may as well Live as speak Divinity; Let thy glory be my
Chief, Thy peoples and my own safety my next Aim; That I may not bring a Woe
to thy Flock, Give me Learning; That I may not bring Woe to my self Give me
Diligence That I may not bring Dishonor to thee, Give me Descretion; Deliver me
from the Misery of Starving thy Flock, for want of skill, Deliver me from the
Cruelty of starving thy flock, for want of will, deliver me from a fruitless
Industry in feeding thy flock, for want of Prudence; make me painful in my
Study, Powerful in my Pulpit; Fervent in my Piety, Holy in my Conversation,
Succesfull in all; That I may be discharged of the Blood of all those Souls
Committed to my Charge; It is a precious people; for thou have purchased them
at a dear rate, Even with Blood, with thy Blood, with thy precious Blood: Let
them be precious too in my Esteem, That I may preach to them in Season and out
of Season, not only by Speaking well, but Living better: help their
understandings in my knowledge of Divinity, better their Wills in my Practice
of Divinity; Supply them and my self for this Life and the next out of thine
own fulness, and Crown my Labors with the Conversion of such Souls, as
thou have Ordained to Life Eternal* Through Jesus Christ: In whose most blessed
name, and Words I farther call upon Thee, as he has Taught.

FINIS.

