THE GREATNESS OF THE MYSTERY OF GODLINESS; Opened in several Sermons BY
CUTHBERT SYDENHAM Teacher to a Church of Christ at Newcastle upon Tine.

LONDON, Printed by W. Hunt for Richard Tomlins, at the Sun and Bible near
Pye-Corner. 1654.

TO THE Right Worshipful William Johnson Mayor of Newcastle, With the
Aldermen, Sheriff, Common Council, and the rest of that famous Corporation.
Honored, and Beloved,
IT is not any vain desire to appear in print that I present you with these
sheets, but these two reasons have pressed me thereunto.

First, because I cannot now preach to your ears, I would leave something
before your eyes that might quicken up your spirits to a holy remembrance of
what you have formerly heard; for careful and observant reading does imprint
with more efficacy that which it may be did but pass more transiently thorough
the ear; besides, in reading a man may dwell on a nation until he has sucked
the spirits of it, and yet not lose the next, which in hearing is hazardous; so
that primarily my uselessenesse to you (through sickness) in preaching has
provoked me, that if possible I might be a little useful to your souls by
this.

2. I have attempted this work to leave a character and testimony of my deep
sense I have of your great favors to me; you have nursed me as a Parent his
Child: Now what have I to present you with but even this spiritual mite, which
is seconded with many desires for your eternal welfare; and this I must say,
that I believe never more respects have been shown by any Corporation in
England to the most grave and worthy Preachers among them, than you have shown
to me, unworthy me. Thus I have given you a short account of what moved me to
this enterprise, I hope it will be heartily interpreted among you.

I have only one thing to add (which all the Nation may take notice of and
wonder) concerning your happiness, that these nine years, when all the Nation
have been in a puzzle about errors, sects, and schisms, even almost to blood,
you have sat as in a Paradise, no disturbances in your Pulpits, no railings or
disputings, Presbyterians and Independents preaching in the same place, fasting
and praying together, in heavenly harmony, expressing nothing but kindness to
each other, in their meetings ready to help each other; and as for the errors
of the times that have disturbed so many Towns in England, it may be said of
Newcastle as of Ireland, the Air is so pure no such venomous creature can live
there; and this has been through the power of the Gospel, and your careful
Government.

Now the Lord make you reach after immortality, take heed of this evil world.
Oh that you may further prize and profit by that precious Gospel which shines
among you, and may this little Treatise add one cubit to your stature in
grace, how will it rejoice the soul of him who is

From my sick Chamber in Axeyard in Kingstreet in Westminster. Yours to serve
you in Gospel, if ever God recover my strength, Cuthbert Sydenham.

To the ingenuous godly Reader.
ALL I have to entreat thee in the reading of these sheets is, first that thou
would no^ look on it as a bare Treatise, wherein things are only opened and
demonstrated, but as Sermons where the same things must sometimes be repeated,
and often inculcated to work the notions, if possible, into the spirits of
men. Secondly, that thou would do thy self and me so much right as to
correct what thou find amiss, and especially there is need of thy charity
in reading this book; for in expressing such high and great mysteries, the
least omission or addition of a syllable, yea, of a letter, may make it
blasphemy to the Reader; I have found out some which I point out before thee,
p. 44. for very read every. p. 45. for (...) r. (...). p. 67. for God did
manifest himself r. God did not. p. 69. for nature r. heart. p. 77. for
dwelling r. dreadful. p. 93. for when r. were p. 94. for you r. gone p. 96.
for wise r. wisdom. p. 97. for your death r. only you. p. 119. for expression
r. impression. p. 145. read the four first verses warily. p. 183. for take r.
took. p. 144. leave out very p. 190. for Jews r. Gentiles. Other things I
entreat thee to correct thy self, and where the sense fails to help it with
charity; the Lord give an understanding heart, and a discerning eye to dive
into the mysteries of the Gospel; this is the desire of him who is

Thine in the Gospel C. S.

The Greatness of the Mystery of Godliness opened in several Sermons. SERMON
I.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness,
which is, God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory.


THe Apostle in this Chapter suits his Exhortation to the diverse Offices in the
Church, and lays down their particular qualifications who shall be fit for
such places. God never calls any to places but he fits them, and he would have
us look to whom he has qualified. It is not enough that men have public vote
for public places, but they must have suitable endowments; a Bishop that is a
Pastor must be blameless, v. 2. So he that thinks to act for God must have
qualifications from God; Gods Call has ever his blessing and assistance. Now
that Timothy might take special notice of this, he tells him that he writ these
things on purpose that he might know how to behave himself in the Church,
which he calls the house of God, and the pillar and ground of truth, ver. 15.
that is that which holds forth truth as the pillar does the light that is set
on it; The Apostle lays the weight of his work, and all the Ministers of the
Gospel, and heightens their Calling from the preciousnesse of the truth that
is to be manifested by them; and at last breaks forth into the great truths
which they are to manifest, which are undeniably the great Mystery of
Godliness in the world. God was manifest in flesh, etc.

So that this is the sum of all: Pastors, and Teachers, and Elders, and all
Office, of the Church, had need be men peculiarly qualified, that they may
behave themselves as becomes them in the Church; for that is as a Pillar of
truth, and the great Mystery of Godliness is opened among them, they are to
hold forth that Godliness which is a great Mystery. And it is as much as if he
had said, Timothy, I write these things to thee, and all the Ministers of the
Gospel, that they look to themselves; for a great charge is committed to
them, to be as pillars in Gods House, and to carry forth the greatest mystery
in the heaven and earth, that upon which depends the great weight of Salvation.
Oh, if these that are to dispense the Gospel did but know their work, what a
glorious and great Dispensation is committed to them, how would they labor to
behave themselves in that great charge?

Here be many things observable in the words.

1. The Preface, or Porch. 2. The Fabric it self.
In the Preface is 1. The manner of his speech, and that twofold: first, the
affection he speaks it with, he is so as a man in rapture that speaks in pure
sentences, without Controversy, etc. He breaks off as it were from all that
he had formerly spoken, and sits down and wonders at the greatness of that
Mystery which the Gospel held forth.

2. That he speaks of its Godliness.

3. The description he gives it, he calls it a Mystery, and that with this
Adjunct, that it is a great Mystery.

4. The confidence he speaks it in, without Controversy, (...), manifest e ex
confesso, without doubt or question it is so; none that ever knew God, or ever
felt the power of it, but said it was a great mystery.

Then secondly, you have this Mystery unfolded, and cleared up in these
several particulars of it, which he deduceth to these six heads: God
manifested in the flesh. Justified in the spirit. Seen of Angels. Preached
unto the Gentiles. Believed on in the World. Received up into Glory.


So that here is Truth, and that truth is Godliness, and that godliness is a
great Mystery, and all that is laid out in various manifestations of God. Here
are many glorious things to be insisted on; all Divinity comprehended in these
few lines, the very marrow and pith, the foundation and fountain of all that
we need to know, or to be acquainted with. And before we come to Launch out in
the Ocean, we must cast an eye upon the Connection of the words.

Obs. First, That which the Apostle calls Truth in the former verse, he calls
Godliness here; Truth is not a fancy or notion, but it is holiness it self,
and none can know Truth in the nature and power of it, but they must be godly.

First, Truth is the pattern and platform of Holiness, it is the mould of
Godliness; that is godliness which is conformable to divine truth; Truth is
Gods mind, and godliness is a soul conformable unto that mind, or transformed
into that truth; therefore the Apostle when he would relate the godliness of
the Romans, Romans 6.17. he says, they obeyed that doctrine or truth into the
form of which they were delivered, (...), he makes the truth of the Gospel as
a type, a mould into which they were cast.

Secondly, godliness is truth, because truth works godliness; Christ prays
the Father to sanctify them with truth, Joh. 17.17. It is the nature of truth
to sanctify and work holiness; truth is light, and life, and does as the
Sun, both enliven and enlighten all souls on whom its beams shines; error
never makes holy, though it may be in a holy person, and shadowed with the
holiness in whom it is; but all the truths of Christ they are as fire that
convert souls to its own nature; whatever holiness is in the soul is no more
but truth digested, turned into life and spirit.

Use. So that first let not the world mistake themselves concerning truth. It
is not enough that men have abundance of notions concerning God or Christ,
except it be holy truth, sanctifying truth; this world is growing exceeding
knowing, men boast of many great and mysterious truths which they know, but
where is godliness? Truth without godliness is as an Oracle without a voice, a
body without a soul; as letters in brass without life. Brethren, what is it
for a man to have found a piece of Gold when he is hungry and can find no meat?
It is clear men know little of truth, they are so unacquainted with godliness;
that is truth indeed which moulds the soul into the nature of God, which draws
a soul into pure fellowship with God, which elevates the spirit into the glory
of God, which turns all things into life and power in the soul, other things
are but notions; to have truth written in thy Bible and not in thy heart, what
is it? For thee to have a form of truth in thy understanding, the letters
transcribed in thy fancy, and not be turned spiritually into that form,
godliness is nothing else but truth baptized in the soul, truth with a new
name; that soul has not a sparkle of truth which has not a motion of life
from it, truth came out of Gods bosom, and is the manifestation of his life
and glory, and it will turn the heart suitable to that life.

Use 2. Would you know what it is to be godly, not to have a form of this and
that way of Religion of our own making, but to be conformable to divine truth?
as good principles and notions without divine impressions of it on the soul
are nothing; so godliness without a principle of truth to lead it is
superstition; as truth works godliness, so godliness lives answerable unto
truth; godliness consists not in any form of worship set us by men, though
never so glorious, but by being one with truth, in serving God after his own
mind and heart.

Use 3. Again, know who are the knowing and the godly men; what those who
barely and nakedly confess the Articles of faith, who believe in a cursory
manner what is said of God and Christ in the Gospel? no, but those which are
made godly by these truths. It is impossible for any to know Jesus Christ, and
the mystery of the Gospel, but they must have the life of it in them; if men
will judge as God does of their knowledge by their hearts, how few knowing men
shall we have in the world? God values men's knowledge by their affections, by
the value they set on truth; all our knowledge and speculations of truth
without godliness is but a humane knowledge of divine things; you know much,
you see great mysteries of truth, what life, what spirit has it put in you? If
you have seen Jesus Christ as the Center and substance of truth, where are the
transformations, and the raisings of your souls after this Christ apprehended?
When principles are turned into practice, and speculations into power, and
notions into spirit, then your truth is godliness.

Will you know the reason why there is so much profession of truth, and so
little practice of godliness, why the heads of men have so outgrown their
hearts?

I think it be this; either first that which men call truth is error, or the
fancies of their own brain, not the Vision on the mount: Or else, secondly,
they have but the bare and lean apprehensions, do not see them in their own
nature; men place Religion in knowledge, and godliness in a mere conceit;
doubtless it truth were seen in her naked glory, without her hood, or gown,
only as she comes out of the bosom of Jesus Christ, the beams of her glory
would pierce the very hearts and souls of men, and leave impressions of an
immortal nature on their spirits. How can souls see Jesus Christ as the
manifestation of God, behold him as one received up into glory, and sitting at
the right hand of God, and have it as truth within him, and not be drawn out in
strong desires of Communion with him, and have the reflections of his holiness
and glory on the heart? What is godliness but God shining in light, and working
in life in the soul? Take thy picture of truth which thou think thou have
in thy understanding, and sit down and rejoice in the high-flown notions of God
and Christ, (thou knowing Professor) while poor souls enjoy the life, and
power, the beauty, and substance of all truth within their hearts.

Obs. 2. The second thing of worth is this; How full Paul's heart is when he
begins to speak of the things of the Gospel; like a man that is full of
grief or joy, longs to have vent, and breaks off on a sudden from his former
discourses, so does the Apostle; he was to swim out into a great deep, and his
heart cannot hold, he speaks as a man overmatched with matter, that is feign to
speak broken expressions, without controversy, etc.

High manifestations of God should be expressed with great affections; as God
let out himself, so our hearts must be taken: a little love and admiration
will not serve when God manifests himself in a mystery, the best frame of
spirit a soul can be in when he is meditating, or to speak of
Gospell-mysteries is to be astonished at them, as one that knows not where to
begin or end; you never have known the mysteries of God which have not admired
them.

Use. All the use I would make of this to you, is, to get affections suitable to
manifestations, to rise as God rises. Oh let not your hearts be low when God is
high in love and glory. Souls which are wrapped up in the bosom of glorious
enjoyments, that apprehend God in his discoveries of himself, cannot but be
lost in the thoughts of them; then are your souls in a spiritual frame when
they work in the sight of God in Christ, and suitable to the openings of his
heart; the more your hearts are full of these apprehensions, the more you will
break forth in admirations.

But now to the words themselves, and in them first of the Preface; without
Controversy, etc.

The Apostle speaks as one so confident that all did grant it to be truth, that
there need no farther debate but the laying down the very things themselves.

The word ((...)) signifies an absolute and clear confession of a thing
without doubt or scruple, and it is as much as if the Apostle had said by the
confession of all, it is so; it is a confessed truth by all the Saints, not one
disputing or denying it, that godliness is a great mystery; in all these
particulars I need give you no confirmation at all of it, it is without
question, to deny it is to be wilfully blind and desperate.

Obs. That there are principles and mysteries of godliness clear and
undeniable to all the Saints.

He does not say, I confess it is so, and all that I have conversed withal,
but all that have had any light of the spirit confess this to be true; it is a
thing generally received without any controversy at all: In the opening this I
shall show,

1. That there are principles of godliness as of other things.

2. That they are confessed by the Saints.

For the first: As there are principles in every Art or Science, which are as
the foundations of other things, so likewise in divinity; such as the Apostle,
Heb. 6.1. calls ((...)) the foundation, and Heb. 5.12. ((...)) the first
principles, and now calls ((...)) the mystery: and to prove,

1. Because divinity or godliness is the most demonstrative and certain
knowledge of things that can be, now principles are the foundation of all
demonstration; if there were not principles, there could be no certainty of
knowledge. No man could speak any thing, no man could believe any thing, if
there were not common and general foundations or principles to build upon;
therefore this must be granted, that God has left something in Religion which
is without dispute.

2. If there were not set and absolute principles, there could be no common
faith, or common experience among the Saints; none could know the condition of
one another, or be able to judge of one another, neither of things themselves.
Now the Apostle speaks of a common faith; and in another place there is but
one faith, one baptism, one hope among all the Saints, 2 Pet. 1.2. That other
Foundation no man can lay than what is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
3.11. in Gal. 1. no preaching of anothor Gospel, no, though by an Angel from
heaven. But I need prove that no farther.

2. These principles are confessed by all the Saints, this is that the Apostle
aims at, that none of the Saints scrupled this, That Godliness was a great
mystery in every one of the particulars mentioned. Consider,

1. That which belongs to a Saint as a Saint, to his very being he cannot be
ignorant of, as that Jesus Christ died, and by his merits we are pardoned, that
from him is all life, that God was manifested in him, and accepts us by him;
that we come to him by faith, and enjoy him by our union; these things go to
the constitution of a Saint, faith toward our Lord Jesus, and repentance
toward God; he is not a Saint which knows not this, for they are the
principles of his being; indeed the largeness and extent of these principles.
The privilege of his being he may be ignorant, for they are successively
manifested, as the glory of his union, and the fullness of grace, and the rich
assurance of it to his own soul, these he may be doubtful in; but to question
this, whether Christ be the Son of God, has died, and is risen again, these
he cannot be ignorant of, for his faith is vain if these things be not true
and granted by him, he is no Saint if Christ be no Savior; but for the manner
of making out this, of what full efficacy Christ's Death and Resurrection is,
and the like, and the manner of applying this, he may be exceeding dark in.

2. The principles of godliness are laid down so positive, and so plain, that
the light that every Saint receives makes him believe them; these things are
expressed in absolute terms, that Christ is the only Savior, and nothing to be
joined with him; that justification is freely by grace; that in Adam all have
sinned; that all which are in Christ are new Creatures, with such like
expressions, so that the first and most common light of faith assents to them;
there be some things in the Word, in which there lies a great deal of beauty
and glory, not so nakedly expressed, nor so obvious to every understanding, as of
the time of justification, the manner of our union, many things of the Kingdom
of Christ, and other things which may admit a Controversy, they being not so
clear in themselves.

3. Principles that are absolutely fundamental, God has set them down as the
objects of faith to be believed on, not disputed. And though we cannot see the
reason of them, yet we are to believe them; their demonstration lies in Gods
testimony of them. Gods word for things is a Christian reason.

Use. Oh that in this sceptick age we would but observe this rule, to hold to
principles: men are grown to question every thing, fundamentals cannot escape;
some men's questions, most men's critics are above their judgments: Some think
Religion lies in a questioning all things. That good notion of searching after
truth deceives many by misapprehension; the way to lose truth is to question
the principles on which they are built; the Apostle speaks unto Timothy ((...))
not to strive about words which tend to no profit, 2 Timothy 2.14. and to hold
fast the form of wholesome words of doctrines ((...)) 2 Timothy 1.13. an express
systeme of principles. In all Sciences something must be taken for granted;
Philosophers have made a just Law, Contra principia non est disputandum; they
hiss at men that shall deny principles received by all Scholars, grounded on
the absolute Law of Reason; for there must be some granted rules and principles
that men dispute by, else it will be but a babble, no dispute; all
argumentation is concerning the application of rules, and deductions from
principles: So it is in divinity, there be some truths are as foundation
stones, must not be touched lest the whole building fall with it. I blame not
Saints for searching after truth, but condemn that stint of men's spirits to
look after no more than they have known; great and noble spirits love to be
reaching after perfection, there is much to be discovered of the mystery of the
Gospel, of the glory and beauty of truth. But this I urge, that there are some
things must be without controversy, some truths that are written as with a
Sunbeame, confessed and acknowledged by all, that must be believed, not argued.

There is a twofold questioning of things:

1. Doubting whether they be so or no, that is dangerous, because men shall
never want their scruples, if they will dispute those things which are
supernatural; what God has by his own testimony in the Word, and in the
hearts of all the Saints put out of question, It is Crimen laesae Majestatis
but to name in doubting.

2. Men question things to be more cleared and confirmed in them, not so much
for satisfaction of the truth of them, as desire to see the farther beauty and
excellency of them; this is commendable, for Saints to study all the principles
wherein God has manifested himself, that he may have his heart more set upon
them. So the Bereans they were more noble, they would enquire into the Doctrine
that Paul preached, and Paul commends them for it, and says, they were ((...))
men of better breeding; whatever comes from men you may question, and search
again whether it be so or no; but what you find in the Word laid down in
express terms you may not question, but believe; though yet you may labor to
be more clear, and to have the same thing more demonstrative, and more
spiritual to you; the Apostle unto Timothy, that the things he had heard of
him among many witnesses he should ((...)) commit unto faithful men, who may
teach the same to others, 2 Timothy 2.2. the Apostle would have the same Doctrine
to go from hand to hand, and be transferred unto others; for new principles to
be revealed I expect not, but those in a new way, more of truth in a new kind
of glory, more full and enriching; the light that the Saints have received is
the same for kind and nature, but not for degree, therefore the Apostle says,
If we or an Angel from heaven shall preach another Gospel, that is different
from what is preached in the revelation of Christ, let him be accursed, Gal.
1.8, 9. It is one thing to preach another Gospel, and another thing to have
that same Gospel opened more gloriously, and to have the sparklings of it more
strong and glorious. He that will know no more than he has known, is proud,
and knows nothing; and he that will know any thing contrary, or more than these
principles of godliness contains, and will by improvement come up to, will be
as one in the dark that knows not where he goes; to stick on the bare
principles and go no farther, is as a child that learnes his Catechism, and
thinks he needs no more learning; and to seek to know much with casting of
principles, is as one that would learn the Hebrew or Greek, and yet will cast
aside the Characters and Rules. That soul can never miscarry in divine
knowledge, that holding the foundation builds according to that. Let your
structure be as high and glorious as can be, so your foundation be sure; for a
man to make a long and mysterious discourse, and accent every expression, with
the best language, and yet neither he, nor any that hears, can tell neither
what he aims at, or to what head or principle natural to reduce it, how
ridiculous is he in all wise men's eyes; all the fine and curious webs of
speculation which men spin, and these stately structures in their own fancies
will all be cut in sunder, and fall down, if they be not founded on the first,
same, and eternal principles of godliness. God has saved all the Saints by
one and the same way, Christ, and faith; And though these things are more
gloriously expressed now than before, and the same heart more opened in the same
Christ, and faith acted with greater strength and cleereness than formerly; yet
the same love, and faith, and Christ continues still. It is a pitiful thing
to see souls stick still on the bare principles, and not launch out into that
deep mystery which is contained in them; and as sad it is to see men leave
these principles and hug their own fancies. Oh Beloved, that unity in the
spirit lies much in the oneness and union of the foundation. This one
Principle, That God was manifest in flesh, and this Christ made a Mediator of
souls, what an eternal ground of comfort does it afford, thou need not go
seek a new manifestation of this God; the studying but of this one, may take up
all thy thoughts every minute and moment of thy life, and entertain thee with
fresh and new wonders of Glory. Every one of these Principles are a mystery,
and mysteryes, though about the same things, are opened but by degrees. Angels
desire to let out their thoughts in the reviewing of these unsearchable riches.
There is not a line or expression of Christ in the Scripture, but is matter
enough for a whole Age to Comment upon; so that thou need not leave old
principles for new discoveries; for in them thou may find successive
sweetness.

The Apostle in the 2 Colossians v. 2. speaks of a full assurance of
understanding, which the Saints may come unto. (...). That is the same with
what the Text says. To be so fully assured in our understandings, of all the
truths of the Gospel, that nothing can shake us. To have all things so
demonstrative and clear, and our judgments so convinced and settled in them,
that we may see round about all the objections that can be made of them:
Doubting in judgment, makes doubting in conscience and Faith. As your
principles are, so your practice will be; therefore you had need have them
clear. The holding of some things are so odious, that a Saint should not
answer them, but contemn them. So Paul, when this objection came in, that we
might sin because grace abounded. Romans 6.1. What, does he stand to confute
it? no, he will not honor it with an answer, but abominates the thoughts of
it; God forbid, says he.

To conclude this with a ground of comfort to all Saints. Your salvation is
without controversy; the grounds of your eternal peace, are not to be so much
as questioned. All things are carried on in a mystery; yet so sure, as that it
is death to question them: You may as well doubt, whether there be a God, as
doubt whether the everlasting foundation of your peace can be removed: There is
nothing for you to do in this, but to believe; as these things in themselves
are past dispute, so do you believe that they may be without doubt to you. Get
your assurances as unquestionable as Gods foundation; for that stands sure, and
has an eternal seal unto it; put your propriety in this mystery out of
dispute, that you may be able to say without all controversy, this mystery is
in me; and as God was manifest in flesh, and I may not doubt it, so God is
manifest in me, and I dare not deny it. Art thou in Jesus Christ, who is the
sum of this great mystery? why then; let Devils and men question thy
salvation, it cannot hinder thy comfort. Beloved, get things at such a pass in
your souls, that all things are beyond dispute in your hearts, either
concerning the principles, or the application of them to your conscience, that
you may come to the full assurance of Understanding in the mysteries of the
Gospel, not to doubt of the truth of them; so come to the full assurance of
Faith, not to question your part in them. That as this is sure, that Christ is,
so you may be as sure, that you are in Christ.

God has not left the things of salvation, the great truths of his Gospel, to
be judged by the pur-blind eye of a probable judgment, but by the clear and
open eye of Faith. And though they seem to lie never so contrary to the
received principles of reason; yet if they have God's stamp, they must be
believed by our Faith.

If we may but guess and conjecture at things of the Gospel, what a miserable
condition were we in? what a disparagement to the divine light of Truth, that
it is not so demonstrative, and fit for knowledge, as the maxims of Nature?
Indeed as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.8. The natural man with all his
accomplished parts and light of reason, cannot perceive the things of God; the
utmost of his knowledge is but conjecturall and common; he sees not into the
nature of these truths. But the poorest soul which has the least beam of
supernatural light in his Understanding, beholds such infallible cleernesse in
the mind of God, that his whole soul falls down before the manifestation of it.

Ob. But can a soul be as much without controversy and doubt of his own
salvation, and of his being wrapped up in in that Mystery, as he is of the truth
of the things themselves?

Sol. I answer. Yes; the same that reveals the one reveals the other, the
same un-erring spirit that revealed the mystery in it self, reveals it to the
soul, and the same closes with the light of the one, as with the other; why
may not a soul be assured, that what the Holy Ghost has written in his heart,
is as certain, as what he has writ in the word? Doubtless, the work of the
spirit in the fleshly tables of our heart, is as certain; and I may have as
sure knowledge of it, as of the writing in Tables of stone, or in paper; for
the Mystery of God in the heart, is but a transcript of what is in the word:
yea, doubtless it is more glorious then the bare expression of the mystery in
words. What makes the soul be fully persuaded, that this in the Bible is the
word of God, that these truths are certain? but because of that light and
demonstration of the spirit, which accompanies it, every one sees not that
infallible glory and beauty in these things, only takes them up in a general
and customary notion; but in the Saints they know it is so, as they know that
snow is white, and the same light and power of the spirit, assures their
souls, that what is written in their hearts, is as absolute, an undeniable
truth. The inequality of light from the spirit, causes the inequality of
knowledge and assurance, concerning them both. And the Apopostle speaks as
confidently of his own salvation, as he speaks of the Truth of the Gospel; we
know that if this earthly house, etc. 2 Cor. 5.1. And we know we are of God,
though all the world lies in wickedness: And there is a full assurance of
Faith, as of understanding. Oh look therefore to come into an unquestionable
condition; once thou have it demonstrative that thou art in Christ; take heed
of questioning it. As every word which God has spoken, shall not pass away
unfulfilled; so every work which God has wrought in thee, shall be perfected,
God giving the same assurance to thy spirit, as he does to his own Truth.

SERMON II.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, etc.


IN these words, there is a full and summary comprehension of the deepest
divine truths that ever came out of Gods heart, and a seal of confirmation
added to the assurance of them; they are not things which hang on uncertain
grounds, but have such demonstrations within themselves, that they are without
all controversy, confessed absolutely by all Saints; not but that some do deny
them, but that in themselves they are to be believed by the Saints. There is no
place in all the Scripture, that in one verse, does Epitomize all Divinity, as
this; that I may call it a Map of both worlds, wherein at once you may behold
all that, which would cost you all your life to travel over, and see in the
fullness of its Glory.

All Divinity may be reduced to two heads: Gods manifestation in Christ, and
Christ's manifestation in us; God in Him, and He in us; and both these are laid
out to the full in the Text.

We may well admire the fulness, and shortness of Divine expression in the
Scripture, that so much should be wrapped up in so little; more then to have
Homers Iliads comprised in a nut-shell. Turn over all the Volumes of Nature,
all the large writings of Profane or Divine Authors, they contain not so much
matter as one of these expressions will hold forth unto us.

That which I shall begin with, is the general description of Divinity, which
is laid down in these words;

Great is the Mystery of Godliness.

(...).

Wherein you have, first, the thing described, that is Godliness; or else you
have, The subject, Godliness. The predicate, Mystery. The adjunct, a Great
Mystery. 2. The description it self, it is a Mystery. 3. The adjunct, our
Title to express by, it is a Great Mystery.


The Apostle cannot contain himself in ordinary expressions; to say it was a
mystery is an exceeding large expression beyond our apprehensions; but in that
he calls it a great mystery, he raises our thoughts, and loses our
understanding.

This observe by the way, you can never speak too high of, nor admire too much
any thing of the Gospel; when you have spoken to the utmost, and have lost
your self and your hearers, yet then you are below what glory is contained in
them; you may speak too much of any creature, and presently transgress in
your commendations, but it is impossible that ever any expressions should reach
Gospell-mystery; Hyperboles in the world are the excretion of our frothy wits,
and serve but only to indulge our corrupt affections; but as one says, Deus
and Coelum non patitur hyperbolen, all the height of expressions and wit
strained through the narrowest and purest fancy can never be too high in
expressing Gospell-glory. Gods own spirit is as it were straightened, and at a
loss for expressions to set forth the deep mysteries of the Gospel; and
though what is spoken of them be proper, yet they are far under the things
themselves, and no more than Pictures and Phantasmes to the reality of those
things themselves. What words can be given to set forth invisible, and
immortal, and immense glory. God has helped our senses and understandings by
those expressions, though in all that is written he has spoken below himself;
if a man should paint the glory of the sun, what colors could he use, or how
would he limb out the nature of a soul? why spiritual mysteries are far more
invisible and glorious.

1. I shall begin in the first place with the subject of the proposition, that
it Godliness.

2. Show that it is mystery.

3. That it is a Great mystery.

That every word as well single as compounded may have its weight.

For the first, the word ((...)) signifies the right worshipping of God in the
general signification of it; and it is used by the heathens to express the
worship of their Gods: But in that notion it is not meant here; besides, what
was said the last time of the nature of Godliness, in regard of the communion
of the two expressions truth and godliness, I shall proceed more particularly
to express the nature of it.

It is used three ways in Scripture.

1. For the whole doctrine of the Gospel as a general word which contains
whatever is demonstrated concerning God; so it is called the doctrine which is
according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. thus godliness is truth.

2. It is put for the inward work of all these truths on the heart, for the
gracious qualifications of a soul suitable to the truths of the Gospel; they
are put both together by the Apostle, Tit. 1.1, 2. the acknowledgement of the
truth which is after godliness, it imports the inward frame of the soul in
conformity to the truths which are godliness.

3. It is put forth the holy walkings of a Saint in the world from the pattern
of these spiritual truths, 1 Timothy 4.7. exercise thy self in godliness, that
is, in all the ways of holiness; by godliness here is meant the whole sum of
divinity, the circumference of all Religion, especially that which contains the
great contrivance of Gods wisdom and love in the Gospel, and the manifestation
and working of it in us; It is not meant barely of the truths themselves, but
of the works of these truths in the Saints.

So that godliness consists in the light of truth, and in the life of grace;
God manifesting himself in the light of truth, and working in the life of love
and grace in the heart.

There is a form of godliness which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 3.5. a
mere external profession and garb of godliness, there is no mystery in
that, men may take up a curious picture of holiness without much ado, nature
can reach that mystery; but there is a power of godliness which consists in the
life and spirit of truth in the soul, that is a mystery.

Will you know then what godliness is? It is the openings of Gods glory in its
self, and the workings of it gloriously in the soul. Godliness lies not in
the bare expression of words, nor in the external form of profession of these
words: But it lies in the divine glory of God which is wrapped up in these words,
and the gracious dispositions and affections of the soul to these things; What
a great matter is it for a man to confess Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, to
pray and express outward words accordingly: But to see the mystery of that
glory which is in this that Christ is Gods Son, and to have the powerful
influence of it in the soul, this is godliness, and that which is called a
great mystery.

Thus then the whole manifestation of God in the Gospel, all the actings of
his glory in truth, and all those truths wrought in the soul, is this
godliness which the Apostle well calls a great mystery; though this must be
added, that the Apostle especially aims here at the truths themselves, and
Gods manifestation of his glory in them.

Now secondly, This he calls a mystery; It is a high expression, and worthy to
be appropriated unto godliness; and the Holy Ghost ever makes use of it when
he would set forth the unexpressible nature of Gospell-truth; therefore to open
it:

1. It signifies some secret and hidden thing that is above vulgar
apprehension; its word that comes from ((...)) which signifies to shut up, and
hide a thing that none may find it and know where it is, as men hide jewels and
precious things from common hands; therefore Daniel says, It is God in heaven
that reveals mysteries or secret things, Dan. 2.28. Thus godliness is a
mystery hidden from the eyes of thousands, hidden in Gods own breast from
everlasting, and as the Apostle expresses in Ephesians. 3. hidden from generations
of men. The Gospel is Gods secret, that which is his bosom counsel. Angels
nor men could not have known it, if God had not revealed it; so that it is a
mystery which without revelation is unknown, that which cannot be demonstrated
or argued out, but its nature consists in revelation. Among the heathen they
had their mysteries in their temples which they must not discover; therefore
there was an Image before the Temple with his finger before his mouth, showing
that they must be silent in discovering hidden mysteries. Though the Gospel be
now revealed, yet it is a mystery, because once it was kept so secret.

2. And which follows from thence, that is a mystery which has any thing in
its own nature which is not obvious, and which lies not open to the quick and
present apprehensions of men; as some things in nature are said to be
mysteries, and in government there are arcana imperii, hidden things of state
that the vulgar cannot pry into; secret wheels that move many actions which
they cannot see move, only do behold the outward action; the things of the
Gospel are arcana Dei; though we see the things done, yet we see not these
invisible glorious wheels which did act them; and thus though the thing it
self be revealed, yet because the reasons of them lie under ground they are
called mysteries; thus the conversion of the Gentiles, and the calling of the
Jews are both called mysteries, Romans 11. thus divine truths are mysteries; thou
hear of Christ, and have manifestations of God to thee, but alas the
infinite reason God has acted from, the secret wheels that have run along in
every vein of Gods love, that is unknown; who has searched his counsels,
says the Apostle? All Gods actions to us they have come from infinite and
unsearchable counsels; go into a Chemists shop, there thou find several
extractions of metals which thou see, and tastest, but how he did it thou
know not; that is a mystery to thee, what art he used in so rare a thing
which to thy eye seems contrary and impossible; godliness has been acted in
such an invisible way that it may well be called a mystery: How has the
Lodestone pusled all the heads of the greatest ones in the world, that they
have left it as a mystery, a thing only to be believed, but the reason not
known, only have reduced its power under a general notion of Sympathy, and
all, because men knew not the occult reasons of its nature. That God should
carry himself in such a hidden way of glory that none can find out his steps
but only by the effects of it, and that we can only say it is so, but not how,
or why it is so, is the mystery of godliness.

3. That is a mystery, whose inward nature and excellency cannot be expressd,
but is wrapped up in outward figures and representations, that which is so
glorious in its own Nature, as it cannot be seen or manifested to us, but by
the intervention of some external medium. Thus marriage is said to be a great
mystery, because it is set to convay the hidden and mystical Marriage between
Christ and the Church. Ephesians. 5. One would have thought all along that Chapter;
he spoke in a literal sense of marriage, but at last he sums up all; this a
great mystery: But I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Thus all the
Gospel in general, and in particular, is full of mysteryes; Its own Nature
is veiled in words and outward Types: Gods relations to us and Christ's, under
the notions of Husband and Wife, Father and Children; God compared to light;
Christ set out by a Lion, a Lamb, a Shepherd: Grace expressed by gold and
silver, and precious stones: Heaven by Paradise. All which things do rather
veil, then express these hidden glories in them, and all these titles which
are so many mysteries, of Christ in which are contained the Nature of things
far above them. And under all these is covered the realtie that God is to the
soul. As Hieroglyphics do denote something that is internal; so do all the
expressions of Scripture, and all the manifestations of God, but represent some
hidden glory that at first we cannot perceive. Therefore Christ delivers the
Gospel in Parables, and tells his Disciples; Unto you it is given to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom. God makes many shapes and appearance of these inward
beauties, that we may come to learn what they mean, by these sensible things.
As some stately pictures are covered over with a Curtain, that every one that
comes into the room, cannot see them: So is it with the things of Heaven; they
are represented in gross bodies, which is as a Curtain before them. and
until that be drawn, none can behold them. The Sacraments, they are outward
signs of an invisible glory; in Water, and Bread, and Wine, are represented
and veiled, Christ in his person, and merrits, in all his holiness to the
soul; he that comes and touches these things, and tastes them, may see but
little in them, more then in ordinary bread, but only God discovers a mystery
under these signs, unto a Saints Faith, makes the soul see Christ in his
Nature and Merits, and feel him in his Virtue. So in preaching the high and
unexpressible love of God is to be let forth in the words of a Minister; which
words can never express what that love is.

And souls may hear a thousand of the most Gospell-Sermons that can be
preached, and yet understand nothing of Divine Truth, only there is a mystery
veiled in these words; and the great and inward things of God are manifested
thorough these words: And this is one great respect wherein the godliness is
called a mystery, because its own Nature is not to be expressed, though it be
represented by outward things.

4. It is a mystery, because of the fullness, and vastness, and variety of its
manifestations; it is so full, as that it cannot be discovered at once; it is so
vast, as that it cannot be looked into but by degrees; the variety of its
actings are so many, as that you have it opened in several parcels. As some
looks that you have seen, have so many several wards and turnings in them, that
though they be in one piece, yet you must have diverse keys, and diverse turnings
to open it; as several artificial Boxes, folded in one another; so is the
mystery of the Gospel, though one entire piece of Heavenly light, yet
interwomen with such variety of turnings, and spreading it self abroad into
so vast a circumference, that you cannot see but a little of its glory, as you
can see no more of the Sun, then in your own Horizon. So says the Apostle,
Romans 1. The Righteousness of God, is revealed from Faith to Faith. And in the
Revelations; The Book of the Lamb had seven Seals.

Take godliness in its self, and the whole bulk of it, and it is so large, as
it reaches from everlasting to everlasting; and all along it is manifested in
a multitude of new expressions and demonstrations.

Take it in all the particulars of it, and every one is a distinct mystery, and
so large, that there is not any one part of it fully discovered, or to be
completely known; very other knowledge may be soon attained unto, men have
come to a great perfection in it; but all our life is but a learning of this
art, none profess to be Masters of it, all are Scholars, and the more they
learn, they wonder the more at their own ignorance, there is so much behind.
It is delivered in short sentences, that all the wits in the world have been
racking their heads, but to beat out knowledge of it. All the former ages have
had work enough for all their parts too, and to serve but their age, out of
the very letters in which this mystery is written; and yet the after ages
wonder that they have known no more, and could dig no more glory out of this
one Mine. The very outside, and Characters of the Gospel, have tortured the
strongest heads from age to age, but to understand the meaning of it. And how
much do Saints find in the Gospel, in this age, as if there were a new
manifestation of God unto the world: Yea and the ages to come shall know more
of this mystery then we have.

The Apostle. Ephesians. 2.7. Has an expression in the Ephesians, which is
observable, viz. That in the Ages to come he might show forth the exceeding
riches of his grace, (...). The superabundant riches of grace, that is but one
part of this mystery, yet it is in an extreme excess: Why had not God revealed
grace enough in the former ages; and in that present age, in calling in the
Gentiles, in converting so many thousands at once; what a deal of that grace
had Paul himself. 1 Timothy 1.14. He says, that grace did superabound to him,
before he writ to the Ephesians, and is there any more grace to be revealed?
Oh, yes; herein lies the mystery of grace, that he has reserved exceeding
riches of grace, for the ages to come, grace that never saw light before, as if
he had yet a fuller magazine of riches of grace for the latter ages, and unto
this day, we see grace running over all bounds on the Creatures. And we may say
the like of every part of godliness; It is such a vast body of light and
glory, that it can be seen by no eye in the world at once. God has laid out
every part in a distinct excellency: As when you go to buy curious things at
the Exchange, there are so many varieties, that you must have one box opened,
then another, and by degrees see all their commodities: Therefore you have it
said of the manifestations of God in the old Testament. 1 Heb. 1. (...). God
manifested in his glory, by peece-meale, and in diverse ways and
administrations, because of the abundance of glory in it; so not in the new
Testament, these truths are set forth in diverse administrations, diverse
operations, and multitude of gifts; some have one gift, some another, and yet
all but opening one and the same mystery, in various and several ways; the
whole variety of dispensations is called by the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.10. The
manifold wisdom of God, or the wisdom of God variously manifested, one and
the same wisdom acted in several glories ((...).) And thus godliness is a
mystery indeed, which has such manifold wisdom in it, so highly, and
diversely, and successively acted.

Fifthly, A mystery is put to express the depth of knowledge, the profoundnesse
of any Science; it is knowledge unknown as it were unto the most, that which
few know, or can dive into. It is not the scum or froth of wit, but the height
and depth of wisdom; to be known in mysteries is to be a man of learning and
knowledge, as we say: Thus is godliness a mystery, that it has the bottom
and depth of all counsel and wisdom in it; in the contrivance of godliness
God acted his utmost and eternal wisdom, and there you have the bottom of
his heart turned up; these things that lay deep in the boundless sea of
eternity are brought in sight unto our eyes; the Apostles expression of it is
this, he brought life and immortality to light, through the Gospel. As if some
man of rare parts should bring to knowledge some secret and strange contrived
plot of great consequence into a state; why by the Gospel which is the systeme
of godliness, light, and immortality, the greatest things of most infinite
concernment are brought to light; you read in the Corinthians of the deep
things of God which the Spirit reveals, 1 Cor. 2. ((...)) these deep things
are nothing else but this mystery of godliness, which come out of the depth of
wisdom, and power, and love unto our souls.

In Romans 11. the Apostle speaking but of one part of this mystery in the
rejection of the Jews, cries out in admiration, ((...)) Oh the depth both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God, etc. godliness is no shallow thing, an
outside of knowledge, but the very depth of wisdom and knowledge, the word
signifies a gulf that has no bottom at all.

There is not a part of godliness but you must go back unto eternity to find
its beginning, it contains the weightiest and important things of immortality
and glory; the Elephant may swim in these streams, the soul may soon be
drowned in wading into these waters, lose his feet, and have the billows of
immortality and unsearchable wisdom overflow him; godliness contains things
which reason cannot reach, which wit cannot express, which the vastest
understanding cannot contain. Sense is swallowed up, reason is non-plust while
it deals with those mysteries; the Apostle professes that they are so deep
that none but the blessed spirit, who knows all things, can reveal them; yea,
and he says, that he searches the deep things, etc. As if they were so deep
that the Spirit it self must search into them before he can know them; not but
the Spirit knows all things, but to express unto us what mysterious things are
in godliness.

Babylon in the Revelations is called a mystery, because of the depth of deceit
and policy whereby she stands, Rev. 10.7. In a word, whatever is dark in it
self, or delivered in hidden and unusual terms, that is called a mystery,
whatever cannot be known but merely by Revelation, Romans 16.25. Thus is the
Gospel, and all Religion purely to be discovered by the revelation of the
spirit of God; thus much of what the Word in its use imports: I must apply this
ere I go farther.

Use 1. It may serve as a reason to inform us, why no more are acquainted with
the Gospel, it is a mystery; the most of men are ignorant of the ordinary, and
the common principles of nature, there are but a few of strong apprehensions
that can fathom them, but the things of Religion are mysteries far above the
reach of nature; no marvel if the wise men, and the noble men of the world are
so foolish in these things; for the Apostle gives the reason, We speak the
wisdom of God in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7. the wisdom of God is made known in
the Gospel, and in a mystery; what is that? why it is veiled in outward, and
poor, and low expressions, which all their parts cannot see into.

The Apostle professes, that no natural man can reach the meaning of them, 1
Cor. 2.14. All the things of Christ they are paradoxes, strange things to men
of great judgments in the world; and the reason is, because they are
spiritually to be discerned: ((...)) this is a great objection against many
things of truth, such great men and wise men can see no reason for it; it is no
wonder, for they are mysteries: Those which will find out this riddle must plow
with another Heifer than sense and reason, and natural endowments. God has so
ordered that he has chosen the foolish things of the world, ((...)) to
confound the wise things of the world. 1 Cor. 1.27.

Therefore the Gospel is called the wisdom of God, as opposite to the wisdom
of men; And the Apostle says positively, that it was wisdom in such a mystery
that none of the Princes of this world knew; Nay, the Spirit jeeres all the
learned of the world in this very thing, because of their gross ignorance,
((...)?) Where is the Scribe? Where is the wise? Where is the disputer? has
not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? 1 Cor. 1.20. ((...)) Christ he
blesses his Father for this, that he had hid these things from wise and
prudent and revealed them unto babes, Mat. 11.

There is a twofold knowledge of Religion: A historical, or notionall, and
spiritual, and mystical; the first, these which are most wise may come unto
the most exact knowledge of, as far as letters and words will express things,
as much as outward Characters can express inward life; and they may know the
true sense and meaning of things in the Gospel, according to what either the
history, or the tenor of such words will import, and have as real meaning of
the words as the best of Saints may have: But this is (haerere in cortice) to
stick at the rind, they can never spiritually see into that glorious mystery
which God intends by those expressions.

But this I would have all to note, though the mystery is more than can be
expressed in word, and there is a further glory hidden than is expressed in any
sentences divine, yet there is no mystery contrary to the very sense and
meaning of the positive words of scripture.

Ob. So that if any ask how far the light of humane reason can go in the
finding out these great mysteries?

Sol. I answer, No farther than what the sense of words will bear, and the
deductions, and conclusions from thence, (which yet may be as true for the
notion as any knowledge which enlightened souls have) but into the intimate
glory and nature of the things themselves, and Gods design of love and glory
in them, all the light of nature cannot see, for they are spiritual things,
though clothed with earthly forms, and expressing themselves by earthly
mediums, and they are to be judged in their own nature, and their ownlight.
((...)) judging spiritual things by spiritual, as the sun must be tried by
its own light, not, by the stars or a candle; for example suppose a man's soul
be affected with joy or grief, or taken up with apprehensions of some high
nature, and it breaks forth in words or writing to express this, any man
which has reason can tell what the words mean, and so gives judgment of his
workings: But to see intimately how that soul works, how the spirits flow up
and down in the workings of the soul on those apprehensions, none can imagine
but one that is possessed with the very same passion, and can go as it were
purely into such a soul; so may I say of all the mystery of the Gospel, the
sound of words, the sense of things which they hold forth, nature may see,
reason may apprehend: But to behold the spiritual glory and beauty of God in
these above all things else, none but the spiritual man, one who has his
heart in the bosom of those glories, can see. Therefore the Apostle prays for
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. That they might have the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation, in the knowledge of him, the eyes of their understanding being
enlightened, they might know, etc.

2. Use. What cause have thou to bless God for ever, who have any thing of
this mystery made known to thee? It was hid from ages and generations of men,
and has God revealed it in any measure to thy poor soul? Oh what a deal of
wonder should it raise in thy heart. It is as a great mystery, to reveal this
in thee, as the things themselves do hold forth. The Apostle to the
Colossians, magnifies the dispensation of it, 1 Col. 26, 27. And he calls it the
riches of the glory of the mystery, which is, Christ in you. This mystery holds
forth the unsearchable riches of Christ to the poor soul: Oh, men do not know
what a mercy it is, to have a revelation of this glorious Christ, in such a
mystery, in their own souls; that must needs be a glorious mercy, which
Christ does so heartily thank his Father for, Mat. 11.

There is not such an expression in all the Scripture again, where Christ does
so expressly thank his Father, as for the revelation of these great things to
poor souls.

God might have shut up thee in blindness with the world, given thee only parts
and gifts in the world, heightened thy understanding, to have contemplated the
secrets of Nature, and it had born a great mercy, or at most might have
enlightened thy reason, to have taken in the outward notion of the Gospel: But
has he revealed Christ in thee, let thee see into the wonders of glory, which
no tongue can express, and given thee the light of his Glory in thy heart? Oh,
how should thy soul be ravished with the riches of God's love to thee?

3. Use. If Religion be a mystery, how should we wait on God for the
manifestation of every truth of it: when we come to hear the Gospel, we
should come as to mysteries, lay down our own carnal reason and unbelief,
and look for God to teach us, and to reveal his own glory in us.

There is a twofold veil must be taken away, the one from our eyes, and the
other from the things themselves.

1. God must open divine truths to us in their own Nature; there is a veil
that lies on them, viz. the darkness of the expression of them; nay, the
resplendentnesse and exceeding glory of truth in its self, is as a veil
before it, as the glory of the Sun is as a veil unto it, that we cannot look
steadfastly on it to behold its Nature. Now, God must remove all vailes from
godliness, and make its glory raking unto us, and not only so: But

2. The veil must be taken off from our eyes; though these things were never
so lightsome, yet if we are blind, it is all one to us: light and darkness is
at one with a blind man. The Apostle says of the Jews, that when Moses was
read there was a veil on his face; they could not see thorough these outward
shadows, the living substance, Jesus Christ; but the reason was, because the
veil was on their hearts: But when the veil is taken off, then we behold with
open face, the glory of God, as in a glass. 2 Cor. 3 ult.

Men strive to excel in knowledge in the world, to dive into things that are
not common, which others understand nor. Oh Brethren, here is knowledge indeed,
to comprehend this mystery of godliness.

1. In the knowing this a man comes to be privy to all God's eternal plots and
designs of love and grace unto the world.

2. Souls which behold this mystery, they see their own persons, and happiness
wrapped up in it; for it is a mystery for us, and in us.

3. In knowing this, a soul is able to reconcile all contradictions, both in
himself and the world, for they all have their reason here, which in Nature,
are absurdities.

4. There is no way to take thy heart or work on thy soul by any truth, but
as thou see in the hidden and mysterious excellency of it; all outward
apprehensions of divine things, will go no farther then the outward man.

SERMON II.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. God manifested in the flesh, etc.


I Am now come to these particulars, wherein the Apostle lays down the
greatness of the Mystery of godliness; he might well elevate his voice, and
accent his words when he was to speak of such deep things; to call it a great
Mystery. Godliness in general is a mystery, and every thing contained in it,
grace and the actings of so many mysteries. But here indeed lies the greatness
of the mystery, that is passing all knowledge, that God is manifested in the
flesh, justified in the spirit.

So that the Apostle sums up all the mystery of godliness in these six
particulars.

Before I come to handle each distinctly, know in general, that all that is
spoken of here in this mysterious enumeration of particulars, it is spoken of,
in reference to Jesus Christ, he is the sum and subject of it. For God
manifested in the flesh, was no other then Christ, who was also justified in
the spirit, and who is Preached unto the Gentiles, and who is believed on in
the World, etc. They all are so many several openings of Christ, according to
the several ways he may be apprehended,

Christ is the mystery wrapped up in all the mysteries of the Gospel; he
comprehends all the circumference of godliness; he is the scope of all the
Scriptures, the Pearl hid in the large Field of God's word. Every line is
drawn to him, as the center, all things and persons in the old world were types
of him, all the Prophets prophesied of him, all the New Testament speaks of
him, all the Saints are joined to him, all Gods love runs thorough him, all
graces and gifts flow from him, the whole eye of God is upon him, his great
designs in Heaven and Earth meet in him; as man is an Epitome of the whole
world, so is Christ of all religion. Ephesians. 1.10. There is an (...), a summing up
of all things in Heaven and Earth, in Jesus Christ. If you look on the
Creation, the world was made by Christ, Col. 1.15, 16, 17. on evidences, all
things subsist in Christ, have their being and well being in him: If you eye
what is the end of all things, why it is Christ; all things made for him: Look
again how all things are redeemed, why God was in Christ, reconciling the
world, 2 Cor. 6. Will you know where to find God? why, he is in Christ. Will
you know what is Heaven? it is to be with Christ; Phil. 1. Whence comes the
spirit but from Christ. what does the spirit do in the World? He shall glorify
Christ, for he shall take of mine, Joh. 16. What is the subject of the Old and
New Testament, but a Christ to come, and come? What is the end of preaching,
but to bring men to Christ? What use of ordinances, but to set forth Christ?
Christ is the great center between Heaven and Earth, God, Angels, Men, and all
creatures meet in him, and are all vertually in him. What is in the Saints, but
Christ? What do the Saints love and believe in, but Christ? He is the fullness
of him that fills all in all. 1 Ephesians. ult.

Use. Let all creatures stand and gaze, and wonder and admire at Jesus Christ,
he is the great wonder of knowledge. Oh, how should all our hearts be
contracted in the beholding Jesus Christ! What delight should souls take in
the studying of this Christ? Saints, turn your eyes on the Lord, and see his
glory. Whatever you know in the world, labor to know him: He is the mystery of
all the glory of God. When thou have sought over all the world, all the
Gospel, thou shall find God laying out nothing but Christ; all relations are
found in Christ, all excellencies are gathered up in him, as beams in the Sun.
Come poor soul, whose eyes run two and fro the world to find comforts and
happiness, cast thy eye back, and see Heaven and Earth in one, and look what
ever thy vast thoughts can fancy, not only to be in this world, but in the
world to come; or if thou can imagine more variety, see that, and infinitely
more shining forth from the person of the Lord Jesus. Ministers must cry up
Christ; Saints must adore him, Angels must stand amazed at him, all creatures
must veil all their glory to him: Here is an object of love, a compendium of
all glories; here is one for a heart to be taken with, that is made of nothing
but of several mysteries of glory.

Well might the Apostle; 1 Cor. 2.2. Phil. 3. desire to know nothing but Jesus
Christ; to account all things but dung for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ, he knew all things in him,

Oh what mad men are sinners, which reject this Christ, they slight all at
once; nothing is ever to be had without Christ, nothing but in Christ. Why
stand you gazing on the toys of this world, when such a Christ is offered you
in the Gospel? Can the world die for you? can the world bring God to you? can
the world advance you to Heaven?

Oh, let all cry out, none but Christ, studdy nothing but Christ, go to
nothing but Christ, admire nothing but Christ; as he is the sum and substance
of all things, so let him be the full and complete subject of your Faith and
Love, and Joys and Delights; the more you see him, the more your hearts will
be lost in love to him; you may see every day new mysteries of Love and Beauty
in Jesus Christ, new depths of wisdom and fullness. Oh, how could the Apostle
choose when he thought of Christ, but break out as he did: Let them be Anathema
Maranatha, that love not the Lord Jesus. Cursed for ever be those souls, that
cannot love such a Christ; there can be no curse too dreadful.

But so much only in the general, which yet is worth your observation.

The particulars in themselves are so glorious, as they dazzle my eyes;
something might be said of them, but the depth and glory of them, can never be
expressed.

To begin with the first.

God manifest in flesh. This is the bottom of all the mysteries in the
Gospel; every word speaks Paradoxes, God manifested is wonderful, for no man
ever saw God at any time; But God manifested in flesh, that is a contradiction;
it is more absurd to nature, then to say, a spirit is flesh: God has gone
beyond us exceedingly in the work of our own salvation; yet because that the
thing is made known, we must pry into the mystery of it, and of all the
mysteries in the Gospel, this is the first and greatest, the foundation of all
the rest. In the opening of it, we must observe; 1. What is meant by God. 2.
What by God manifested. 3. What by flesh, and the manifestation in flesh. 4.
How God has manifested himself in flesh. 5. The eminency of this
manifestation above all other. 6. The mystery of all this.


For the first: By God, is not meant God essentially, the very Godhead
indefinitely, but God personally in such a person; though the whole godhead be
included, yet it is manifested but in one Person; to wit, the second Person
Jesus Christ, because all actions are done by Persons, not by Natures:
Therefore, this is a manifestation of God in his own Son. God's essence was
never manifested, no man ever saw God, only, the only begotten Son.

He that came out of his bosom to reveal him: And this is none other, but an
exact description of Christ, which is, God manifest in the flesh.

Now secondly; by God is not barely meant an apparition of God in flesh, which
he meant to lay down again upon an occasion; but as the word signifies
passively, conspicuus factus est in carne, is made known and clear to us in
flesh. This manifestation notes not a transcient show of God to us, but a clear
and constant demonstration of God, and the only great and glorious first way of
the manifesting God unto us, as the word signifies, a making of a thing to
shine as the Sun to our eyes, that convinces every man, of what he sees: And
this not only as a glimpse of God, which was very glorious, and so away; but as
the cleerest and richest way of discovery, that ever was, or should be in this
world.

But thirdly, What this flesh should be is a mystery. Flesh is taken several
ways in Scripture.

First, For sin, and its sinful Nature we have.

See the lusts of the flesh, that cannot be here meant, God has made no
appearance of himself in sin.

Secondly, Flesh taken for our humane Nature.

All flesh have corrupted their ways, Genesis 6. That is, all men, their Natures
are defiled. So Romans 7. in my flesh, dwells no good thing, that is, in my
Nature, either in soul or body, or both.

Thirdly, Flesh is commonly taken for the weakness and infirmities of that
Nature; All flesh is grass, and the glory of it as the flower. 1 Pet. 1.

And the Holy Ghost speaking of the Egyptian Horses, tells you, that they are
flesh and not spirit, it is weak and not strong. So that,

Fourthly, How has God manifested himself in flesh, not in the first sense,
but the two latter, in appearing in our Nature, in taking our infirmities and
weakness, suitable unto that Nature, (sin still excepted.) And what is here
called the manifestation of God in flesh, is in other Scriptures parallel
explained. As he is said to be Immanuell, God with us. Mat. 2. How can that be,
but only because of being in the same common Nature with us. It is said, the
word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. 1 John 14. it is the same phrase with
this; for the word was God. v. 1. And yet it was made flesh, not that there was
any transmutation of God into flesh, that was blasphemy, but only by reason of
the union of flesh to him who was God.

This is farther expressed in the Apostle to the Hebrews Heb. 2.16. He took not
on him, the Nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. ((...)) He assumed not
to himself; that is, God did manifest himself, or appeared in any Angelical
Nature, but in the Nature of men; And was made in all things like unto us, sin
only excepted.

There is another clear place, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Which the Apostle urges about
the manner of this discovery, that Christ, though he were in the form of God,
and thought it no robbery (that is, did God no wrong to say he was equal with
him) yet assumed or took on him, or appeared in the form or the likeness of a
servant, it is our Nature which was in subjection and servitude unto God.

So that now this manifestation of God in flesh, is no other then God in the
second person, assuming to himself the humane Nature, and so revealing
himself to men, sutably to their condition; and this is Christ. This
manifestation is an effect of Gods assumption of our Nature; so that this
expression literally imports:

1. The assuming of our Nature, and the union with God; God taking up us to
himself as one, in our common Nature.

2. The full discovery of God to us, in our own Nature, God acting forth his
glory in our own flesh.

And all this is still but to denote out Christ, who is the person set forth in
the Gospel, who was with God, and was God, and dwelt among us, as the Apostle
says; that is, took up his Tabernacle of flesh in our Nature, thereby to
converse with us: Yet many would feign wrest this Scripture from the person of
Christ; for some of the old Interpreters, as Beza observes; leave out ((...))
and put in only ((...)) quod manifest est) omit God, and put in which mystery
manifested in flesh, thereby to take off the glory of Christ's as God. Erasm. by
flesh, here he understands the whole world, and by manifestation the Gospel,
intimating that this is the mystery, that God should be manifested to the
world, but that is contrary unto this place, for he afterward speaks of the
Preaching of it to the Gentiles, that is, to the whole world.

It is doubtless, meant of God as in our Nature, making up the person of Jesus
Christ; and this will yet appear if you consider the

4 Thing; that this was the greatest manifestation of God, that ever was; God
was manifested in nothing like this; for look first over the manifestation of
God in the first creation, there was but only some outside of God's glory
discovered, nothing of Gods Nature: The whole world never saw what God was,
truly by that: Indeed the Apostle says, Rom 1. That the invisible things of
God, were known by the things that are made, even God's eternal power and
wisdom; but these were manifested in an ordinary and common way; as a Picture
shows the art of the Painter, but yet you may not know his person. But in
this, God himself is manifested; for first, here is not only so much of God
manifested, as humane nature it self could demonstrate, for then it had been a
poor manifestation of God, who can see God, in seeing all the men in the world,
or in all the Saints in the world, in their flesh; but it sets out a special
way of assumption of our Nature unto the person of Christ, who was God making
these two natures, but one person.

2. This manifestation was in union of flesh in the nearest way to God
himself; not as a lantern to hold the light only of God's glory; but as one
entire person, to represent what God is in himself; all the whole world was
never united to God before, though God did manifest some thing to our Nature,
as to Adam, yet God did never unite any creature to himself before, and though
God was manifest to flesh, yet never in flesh before; that is the great
mystery. God is manifest to his Saints, but he is not manifested in the flesh
or in the Nature of any but Jesus Christ. This is so great a manifestation, as
that God is become man, as it were by reason of the union of their Natures; the
word was made flesh, and dwelt among us; as if God had relinquished his own
Name and Nature, and lost himself in our Nature; he was found in the form of
a servant. Now let us but think what a manifestation of God this must be,
which is God not only letting forth himself in a way of communication, but God
in union with the same Nature which we are in: Therefore Christ is called the
express image of the person of the Father, not an image as he was the second
person merely; for so he was not the image, but God himself; but an image,
because in that union of our Nature with God, there was the exactest discovery
of God himself, as possible could be to the creature.

2 Cor. 3 ult. Therefore Christ is called a glass, wherein a man may with open
face, behold the bright glory of God. But

6. How great must this mystery needs be; God manifested in flesh? how is that
possible? flesh hides God, he is of a spiritual Nature; it is as much as to
say the Sun manifested in a cloud, or light manifest in darkness: I confess,
my heart could rather stand and admire, then speak any thing more. What ever is
a medium of conveyance of any thing in Nature, must be proportioned unto the
thing it discovers; as the air, not a mud wall conveys the light of the Sun to
us; flesh and God; what proportion is there between them; let flesh be but
thought, God must needs be forgotten, for they are at an infinite distance,
yea, contrary; yet this is the mystery.

1. God not only setting our himself thorough flesh in a transient way,
shining thorough it, but being made flesh, being one with flesh.

2. Not in innocent Nature, but in the likeness of sinful Nature, Romans 8.3.
To manifest himself in the flesh of Rebels and Traitors, and honor that
flesh which had so sinned, and was so polluted: this is a mystery.

3. To act in this Nature in the world, to dye, and be despised, and suffer the
utmost contradiction of sinners, who is able to fathom the depth of this
mystery? As one says of the Trinity, they were like three sisters, which spun
one piece of a garment, and only one wears it; so had all these three an hand
in the making of this Nature, but only Christ the second Person wears it, and
all their glory is laid out in it; how one Person could be God and man; how God
should be put to death in our Nature, to reconcile us to himself, flesh filled
with the fullness of God, is beyond the apprehension of men and Angels to
declare. But we may tell that it is so, and admire it as we speak.
Blessedness to be made a curse, Heaven let down into Hell, the God of the
world shutting himself up, as it were in a body, the invisible God made
visible to sense; he which has all things in Heaven and Earth at his command,
not have a house in the world, glory it self of no comeliness: What shall I
say, all things become nothing, making it self of no reputation? And a
thousand more such paradoxes are wrapped up in this one expression. Oh how great
a depth is in this glorious design of God; he was manifested to Adam, to Moses,
and many others; but here was his utmost manifestation in our flesh.

For the nature of this manifestation, know:

1. It is not a bare manifestation of some attributes of God, but it is a
manifestation of God in his own nature; the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in
Christ bodily or really, Col. 2. Not that God is circumscribed in our Nature,
but that the Godhead it self is united to Christ's body, and dwells in it, fills
it, and abides upon him.

2. Neither is it a manifestation of God absolutely, as in himself; but as in
order to reconciliation and salvation of soul. For God might have been
manifested else in our flesh to have consumed us: But as the Apostle says, God
was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself. That is, God was in Christ's
Nature, as a God in order to the reconciling poor souls; and this is the great
mystery. God was offended by our Nature, and God takes that Nature on himself,
to reconcile us to himself, by himself. God himself will pay the price, out
of his own glory, for our offenses only assumes our Nature, (as if it should be
thought to act it out for us) and joines it to his son, and calls that Christ,
and this is the Gospell-notion of Christ, God manifest in flesh, in order to
the reconciliation of poor souls. Thus God must satisfy himself, and save
us, himself only takes our Nature to do it in, and calls it Christ a Savior,
when it is none other then God himself in our Nature, transacting our peace.

This manifestation is a peculiar one.

For

First, God was never manifested as one with flesh before; he was not one with
Adam's Nature, or with any of the first Creation; but this is a manifestation
of ownnesse

Secondly, God never manifested himself in his Godhead before, in such a
manner: many of his glorious attributes were seen and discovered, as his
wisdom, power; But no man saw God at any time, the only begotten Son
revealed him, and the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in no Nature bodily, but
in our Nature which Christ had.

Thirdly, God never manifested himself in such a strain of love, as in our
flesh; it was the highest manifestation of Love, that ever was, that God loved
our very Nature so, as to be one with us; herein was his love manifested, and
commended indeed, that he would come down in our Nature to us. And as one said
well, God did so love the very Nature of his Elect, that though he had them not
all with him in Heaven for the present, yet he must have their picture, of
their own Nature in his Son, to see them in, and love them.

1. Use. Then here is still ground of new admiration and wonder to souls; God
is come down, and has left as it were his own habitation, to dwell amo^^ the
sons of men: This is the first and great mystery of the Gospel. God out of
infinite goodness, would make a revelation of himself to the world; to do it
in his pure glory, would consume all flesh, especially seeing it was to be a
manifestation unto sinners; but he cloths himself with flesh, with our own
Nature, and so appears to us, as in infinite love and sweetness; there be many
great designs in this one.

1. By this he takes away the distance between his majesty and us, for he is
now become Immanuell, God with us. The thoughts of God would have been
sufficient terror; we could never have come nigh God, for we were infinitely
below him. But now, Gods taking up our Nature as one with himself, and
appearing as in our own form and likeness, has broken down the wall of
partition in Nature, as that which takes away the dwelling nature of Gods
glory, yet reflects the real sweetness of it to us.

2. By this, God would indeare and sweeten himself to his poor creature, and
fit a way of sweet converse with us; if God had manifested himself in his own
naked glory, still while we are sinners, we should not only be daz'led, but
shrunk up to nothing; to see the Sun as it shines in its own luster, would
spoil the sight of the strongest eye.

But to look upon it, as in an eclipse in water, or thorough a glass, that is
not offensive; to consider God in himself, is to have our souls swallowed up,
but to look on God in our nature, brings down his glory to our eye, and wooes
us to behold it.

3. By this God has raised up a statue and visible monument of his own
infinite love to his Elect for ever: For rather then they shall want a suitable
discovery of himself, he will come and take up their own nature, and be
called after their names, as if he would be any thing to show his love. This is
the fullest visible demonstration of God's love that ever was: It was more for
God to take our nature, then simply to save us, more then let a out bare mercy,
and grace in it self. For a King to save a murderer from the Gallows, by his
own prerogative, and dispense with the Law, is not such an act of love and
mercy, as to take the murderers clothes, and wear them as his richest livery,
and give as a mark of honor, to his own Son, and to make an honorable
order of the rags of that garment, as that King did of a Garter. God has done
more in taking our Nature; what love was this, that God will be no more God, as
it were simply, but take up another Nature, rather then the brightness of his
own glory shall undo us.

4. By this God would show what he means to bring us unto; he took our nature
up to himself, as a pattern or type of what he would bring all Saints unto;
God is come down in our likeness, to bring us up into his likeness. Nature
was never so advanced; it is the highest glory that is possible to be put upon
nature, it is more then to fill all our souls with a fullness of grace; for our
nature is united in a personal union with the second person, then which there
cannot be more glory. What a fair step is now made, for the bringing the
person up to the enjoyment of God.

Oh, let none say now, that God is not willing to save souls, who is come down
so low, as live among us; say not who shall go up to Heaven to bring down
God, or down unto the deeps to fetch him up. God is nigh you, even in your
own flesh: You may but turn about, and see God manifested to your own eyes;
we preach not fancy, when we lay out the riches of Gods glory in love and
mercy. But as the Apostle says, what we have seen, and what we have felt and
tasted, that we declare unto you, 1 John 1.1, 2, 3. Say not unbelieving soul,
how shall I come nigh God; why God is come to thee, he dwells in the Tabernacles
of men. In a word, God is manifested in our flesh, that our flesh may be taken
up into his fullness.

SERMON IV.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. God manifested in the flesh, etc.


I Made an entrance on this the last day, but there are new mysteries yet
arising, and no sooner does one discovery pass but another comes on, this
bottomless depth of Gods glory in the Gospel can be sounded by none but God
himself; we have some manifestations of it, and that in flesh, or else we had
never imagined what thoughts God had toward his poor Creatures; besides what
has been spoken as to the opening of the words, still this must be taken in,
That it is not God in flesh mystically, but personally: Or else thus, It is not
meant of God manifested in flesh, that is, in the whole mystical body of
Christ, the Saints: But only God assuming our nature into the union of Christ's
person, and this had need to be observed, because all these places, where it is
said, that it pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell, Col.
1.19. and that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, Col. 2. and
this place is spoken of Christ mystically, or in his body, not personally,
intimating that God dwells in the flesh of the Saints, as much as in the humane
nature of Jesus Christ; and that there is no other distinction than of head and
members.

Now to clear up this to you, I shall not need to go farther than this verse.

1. This is spoken of a thing that is already done: God is, or was manifested
in flesh; now if it were meant of the whole mystical body of Christ, it must
have been said God will manifest himself in flesh, for all that body is not yet
made up, are not capable of any such manifestation, thousands of them being yet
unborne.

2. God that is manifested in flesh, is justified in spirit, and seen of
Angels, and preached unto the Gentiles, and believed on in the world, and
received up to glory; now none will be so grossly ignorant as to attribute
this to Saints; Saints are not preached to the Gentiles, nor believed on in the
world, nor yet all received up to glory.

3. God as manifest in flesh, did dye in that flesh, was crucified to make
atonement for sin, for this was a manifestation in order unto reconciliation;
now who will say, that the bodies of the Saints did dye, and were offered up in
sacrifice, and did make our peace with God, which they must be said to do, if
the meaning of the phrase be according to that interpretation.

We had need be wary in the letting out our thoughts on the Scripture, and
fastening interpretation of things, seeing such strange consequences may follow.

And especially take heed of advancing Saints so as to lessen Christ; he must
have the pre-eminence above Saints and Angels; and know that there is not only
a distinction between Christ and Saints merely as head and members, but a
distinction of them in regard of their persons; for Christ is a head, in regard
of his person, as the husband is the head of his wife, and though they be one
body, yet he is a distinct person, and has those incommunicable prerogatives
that cannot be appropriated either to Saints singly, or as his body.

Gods manifestation to the flesh of Saints, is at second hand thorough Christ,
of his fullness, that is, of that fullness which resides eminently and
distinctly in his person, they receive grace for grace. Indeed God is said to
dwell in us, and we in God; but how? not as God dwells in Christ, but because he
dwells in us by his own nature, and we by union with Christ partake of that
fullness, according to our measure. God dwells in Christ immediately, and as a
God he dwells in us through Jesus Christ, Christ letting out part of that
fullness on our hearts. And thus God was pleased that in him all fullness
should dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to himself, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence, and that his person might be distinctly
admired above all Creatures.

The difference of Gods manifesting himself in flesh, that is, in Christ's
humane nature, and ours, lies in this, that this manifestation was as in an
ordinance of life and salvation, making that person which had our nature the
great conveyer of eternal peace and comfort through that flesh; so the
Apostle, Col. 1.22. In the body of his flesh, through death, he is to present
us blameless and spotless to his Father; wherefore says the Apostle again,
Heb. 2.17. It became him in all things to be made like his brethren, that he
might be a merciful high Priest, etc. that is, that he might be fit to convey
life and salvation to poor souls.

But Gods manifestation in the flesh, or persons of the Saints, is as into
several Cisternes which lie under the fountain to receive their proportion:
God manifesting himself in Christ's flesh is as of a fullness to fill all; but
in the person of the Saints it is but of several degrees and measures in order
to a fullness; that we may come to the fullness of the measure; God has
manifested himself in our nature, that by that he might at length fill all our
persons; Thus is our nature joined to the Godhead, to be as a great pipe set at
the mouth of some full spring, that through that God might run out his love and
glory by degrees on our heart; first Christ receives it at once, and then
thorough his Spirit discovers it in us.

In a word, Gods manifestation in Christ's flesh was as a Savior, a Redeemer, a
Head, yea, as the Author of eternal Salvation to us. And this is the mystery
of mysteries, he which reads this may very well cease to wonder at any thing
else.

This is the foundation of all Gods other actings to us, the pole on which they
all turn, all the discoveries of God are wrapped up in this one; this unlocks
Gods own Cabinet wherein all his designs lie; Election, Redemption,
Glorification, all is wrapped up in this, and made clear when we understand this
one expression; God manifested in flesh, it is the being of light, and
immortality to light, at once it opens heaven and earth.

1. This is the foundation of our union with God and Sonship; it is from hence
that God is one with our nature, God is manifested as a Father in our own
flesh; we are Sons, because Christ is, he was really and naturally the Son, and
we through him receive the adoption of sons; For he which sanctifies and they
which are sanctified are all one, therefore he is not ashamed to call them
brethren, Heb. 2.11. So you have ( Gal. 4.4, 5.) God sent forth his Son in our
flesh, that we might receive the adoption of Sons. God first takes our nature
and marries it to his own Son, that so we might be united to him in his nature;
This is the Antitype and model of all relations; God one with flesh, here is
Father, and Son, Husband, and Wife, all relations meet in this one. 2. It is by
this that we have communion with God, we had never seen God, had not he
manifested himself thus familiarly in our own flesh; communion is in things,
and between persons suitable; There was no sutablenesse between God and us
until he appeared in our own likeness, but now he made himself as it were
fit for converse with the unworthiest Creatures; there is a sweet sympathy
between Christ and us, by reason that he dwells in the same house of clay, as it
were with us; the devil himself when he comes to the Indians as their God, to
draw their hearts to worship him, appears in the form of a man, that so he
might the better converse with them: The blessed God was willing to manifest
infinite goodness to the Creature, and to converse with them, and that all
terrifying apparitions might be shunned, he appears as a man, that so we may
have intimate fellowship and communion with him; with what a holy boldness may
souls draw nigh to God, and delight to behold him, and converse with him, now
he is in such a habit of love and sutablenesse unto our own senses? Why art
thou strange, poor trembling soul, and stand afar off, as if it were death
to draw nigh? Of whom art thou afraid? What vision of amazement do thou
behold? Is God come down among men, and thou can not look on him, lest thou
dye and perish for ever? Why, cast one look more, and be not discouraged; It is
true, God is come down, but not in flaming fire, not in the armor of justice,
and everlasting burnings, but clothed with the garments of flesh, and sweetly
desires to converse with thee after thine own form. Nothing can be a stronger
motive to allure poor souls unto terms of peace and love as this, that God
is come down, not to consume them with the brightness of his glory, but to
beseech them to see with their own eyes their eternal happiness. Let all
poor souls come and put in their hands, and they may feel Gods heart come,
and behold life and immortality inhabiting the tabernacles of earth, and their
own peace and eternal happiness in their own flesh. Who can make any excuse
now that he believes not? Why do souls now stand off? What can be desired by
lost souls more? Oh that I might see God, say some souls, why, he is come
down in the likeness of man; he walks in our own shape; Oh, says another,
might I have my heart united to God; why, he is come down on purpose, and has
united our own nature to himself; God has left all the world without excuse,
he has condescended below himself, that we might be above our selves.

In a word, by this the way of life is paved, and all the bars and blocks taken
out of the way, all objections stifled in the birth, and answered before they
are made; In this manifestation justice and mercy sweetly kiss each other, and
have their equal joy, free grace, and merit, bounty and beauty, fullness and
nothingnesse are made one, and triumph together, the most hidden things
revealed, and the worst things advanced, all things become nothing, and nothing
all things; our nature which lay in rags enriched with the unsearchable
treasures of glory; that flesh which was so weak as not able to put forth a
hand to save its own life enabled to save millions of souls, and bring forth
the greatest designs of God; and that flesh which the Apostle calls a vile
body, enobled and advanced beyond the nature of Angels: This, this is the great
mystery hid from Ages, and Generations of men, that God lives in our flesh, and
there acts all the parts of his glory. It is now no wonder that man is made one
to God, and has boldness through faith even to go into heaven, seeing God is
come to carry them up with him; this was the first and great experiment which
ever God did make of the fullness of his love, and glory, and we have now seen
that in our flesh, which could never have been seen in it self.

Use 1. Seeing this is so great a mystery, what use can we make enough of it?
doubtless it cannot be accounted less than a spring of unconceivable comfort
to all poor souls, yea, in whatever condition they be; give leave to extract
some few grounds of strong support and joy, and we need no chymicall art, the
consideration does naturally drop the strongest spirits of rejoicing and
encouragement, that can be possible.

Unto two sorts I shall especially direct this use.

1 To poor souls, that are yet in the embryo, under the first and lowest
convictions of their own condition, who first for fear of there wrath to
come, and would feign draw near, but dare not touch the staff of their
eternal comfort; this point will yield water of life, at the first striking
unto their poor souls, yea, and more then their souls are able to bear, or
their doubts are able to answer, if they will but observe what the weight of
this expression is.

2. To believers, who are yet trembling at the sight of their many sins, and
not yet cleared up in the spiritual notions of the Gospel.

For the first,

Let me speak to you drooping hearts, who long after life and salvation, and to
see God as yours, more then life it self; what ailes thy heart, who has made
thee afraid? what is that shakes thy knees, and dryes up thy marrow, and breaks
thy bones, and cuts thy joints and nerves.

Oh, why do thou start back in the day of thy trouble! Why, you will say God
is mine enemy, I am a stranger to him, I shall never see a glimpse of the face
of God, where all my happiness lies, sin has brought forth death and misery
in my soul; God's law condemns me, my own conscience accuses me, and
justice will have its due: These and such like, are the usual apprehensions of
such convinced souls.

Yet notwithstanding all this, let word of the Gospel be heard, let the truth
be heard speak for it self: God is manifested in the flesh. When thy soul
lost seven fold more then it is, the spirit of this expression is able to
recover thee, and set thee upon thy legs, with a crown of glory on thy head.

1. God himself is come into the world to offer the terms of love, and peace
unto thy poor soul, because it was impossible for thee to come to God; he is
come to thee, and has laid aside, as it were his own glory, while he
converses with thee. This is no ordinary design that God has to drive, when he
is so wonderfully manifest in thy own flesh; when God manifesting himself as
formerly, in Thunder and Lightning, with an innumerable company of Angels, all
having their swords of justice and vengeance drawn; well might poor souls
tremble, and run into corners, for who would ever be able to endure his
coming; but lo poor soul, God is come in flesh, with an Olive branch of
eternal peace in his hand, and bids you all be witness, he is not come to
destroy, but to save: There be but two things in God, which might discourage
poor souls from making approaches to him, the infinite brightness of his
glory, whereby there is such a great distance between God and his poor
creatures.

2. The infinite severity and exactness of his justice, whereby he is clothed
with vengeance; but behold, these terrifying sights are you, God has made his
appearance as a man, as one of us, and there shall not be the least distance
between us; and this God is likewise in our own Nature, to satisfy himself,
and to gratify his own justice; for this is the natural meaning of this
phrase; that God has taken flesh, to reconcile flesh to himself.

Bring out thy sins, and weigh them to the utmost aggravation of them, and take
in every circumstance, both of law and Gospel, and set but this in the other
scale, that God is manifested in flesh, to take away sin; how would all thy
iniquities, seem lighter then vanity, yea, be as nothing, in comparison to that
which is laid down as a propitiation for these sins.

It is most true, that nothing can reveal God at such a distance from a soul
as sin; it being that which is most contrary to his blessed Nature, who is
infinitely pure and holy.

Yet, here is the mystery of godliness, that God himself, is become the
satisfier of himself, and that in our own Nature: The utmost height of sin
lies in regard that it is a contradiction to the immortal God; therefore it is
so heinous, that the death of Angels and men could never expiate it, or
reconcile sinners to God; but if God will dye in our Nature, and lay down
himself as a ransom, how is the demerit of sin swallowed up in the
incomprehensible redundancy of divine glory? and now, how does grace
superabound infinite wise laid down for satisfaction of the transitory and
finite transgressions of the poor creature, the Lawgiver suffering for the
offenses done against the Law? Does not your hearts yet begin to leap within
you, and the blood to come again in your faces, and strength into your sinews?
In the apprehensions of this mystery of comfort, surely that soul is shut up
in the inmost dungeon of unbelief, where never a beam of the glory of God
shines.

But yet, will you have more, at least to leave you without excuse? This
manifestation is not only a discovery in flesh, but to flesh.

And therefore, as he come in our Nature to satisfy, so he comes in the
Gospel, freely and fully to offer the terms of love, in the richest and most
alluring expressions; And if God cannot satisfy your death, what will? What
ever was done in our Nature, in order to redemption, was none other, then God
acting out his own love, and grace, and glory. So the Apostle says, the blood
of God was offered, meaning, that the efficacy and life of all that offering,
was from God in our Nature, using that as an Organ or instrument to act by: Let
unbelief come forth and make its plea, and let it dare to appear before this
consideration; is not God enough to satisfy thy conscience? Oh, come nigh poor
souls, see what an infinite ground of comfort is laid in for you, let the rich
and glorious openings of the heart of the almighty overcome your hearts; had
God spoke from Heaven by himself, and called poor creatures, that lie in the
midst of sin, crying out who shall deliver, and had he said, I will pardon you
by my own prerogative; I made the Law, I will dispense with it, rather then
you shall perish, what soul would not have been raised but up, even from the
bottom of Hell; (and yet unbelief might scruple, and say, what shall become
of infinite justice, shall that be dishonored to save me?) But alas, that were
not as much, as for God to come in our flesh, and come as a price, and pay
himself before our eyes.

In the Romans 9. The Apostle gives this as the great reason of all his actions,
he has mercy on whom he will have mercy; if there were nothing else but God's
will in the salvation of poor souls, who has contradicted his will? But God
has not only shown his willingness, but has really undertaken the effect of
it by his Godhead, and engaged his own honor, and all his glory, in the
transacting of it. Oh then, why should thou fear to cast thy self into the
infinite Ocean of God's own glory, notwithstanding all thy vileness, God
himself stands to lead thee by the hand, and has put a price sufficient in
the hands of justice, to stop the clamors against thee; and if thou yet fear
to come to God, yet come to thy own flesh; go to Christ as having thy own
Nature, and knows how to pity thee. What can be said more, to draw on thy
trembling heart? if God himself, and God so fitted and qualified, as it were,
will not, must not men dye and perish in unbelief, and who can pity them?
that when God's justice is satisfied, our Conscience should be unsatisfied;
that when God is come down so low to us, we should stand questioning, whether
we should come to him, what is it, but to say, all that God is, and does, is
less, or too little to comfort me.

2. Use reaches to these poor believers, who yet stand afar off, and though
they have hopes, yet have little Faith, and cannot so fully close in with the
Gospel, nor draw nigh so boldly before God, thorough the fears of their own
hearts. This point opens a door of rich entrance into the presence of God
himself; the blessed God has made a Portall into Heaven, not of Iron or
Brass, but of thy own flesh; this is that new and living way which is
consecrated from Heaven, and now, with what freeness and boldness of heart,
may thou draw near to God. Unbelief is strangled, after this consideration;
since God is come in the flesh, we may believe any thing, for this is the
greatest impossibility that could be. Why is God come down so suitable, so
lowly, if he would have thy poor soul be afraid to come to him, if he had any
other intention, but to give strong consolation to the most sad souls, he
would have appeared in another form, made use of another way, which should
have bespoke such a design: But what is the meaning of this at first sight; God
manifest in flesh, but this, as if God had said; you will not come to me, I
will come to you, and that you may see how real and tender I am of your good,
I have taken up your own flesh to make my great discoveries in; put your hand
into my heart, and see how love beats, and look into your own hearts, and see
what you want, I have taken the same Nature, that I may more sensibly supply
you, and that nothing may disquiet your hearts, or dazzle your eyes, I have set
out my own glory in love, and sutablenesse to your capacities; this, and much
more of the like expressions, are the very natural speakings of this blessed
mystery. Oh, consider once again, what a heart of love was in this design, and
what a ground of eternal comfort and support is there to thy heart in this;
God is in thy own Nature, to take upon him all the miseries of thy Nature, and
to supply thy flesh with his fullness; this is none other then God's heart
leaping out into our bosoms; and as much as if God should have said
expressly, poor souls, I cannot keep from you, I love your very Nature; I
will be nothing, so you may be something, my glory shall not hinder me, but I
will veil it, rather then it shall hurt you, I will take as much delight in
your flesh, as in my own Son, so I may but show my self kind and tender to
you, and so I may have communion with you, and you with me, I care not, if I
become one with you, live in your very flesh. Oh, that ever there should be a
heart of unbelief, after these sensible demonstrations of divine glory and
love; will thou stand off now, doubt now, why, what will thou have God to do?
can he manifest himself in a more taking, alluring, suitable way to thy
condition? Is there any thing below flesh wherein the great God can humble
himself for our good, think of another, and a better way, or else for ever
believe? What, art thou shye of God, who is so sweet to thee? many souls
think it a great part of their humility, to see their own unworthiness, so
as to draw back from God? Oh, it is pride to the utmost, when God has made
himself low, and is come so nigh to us, not to take notice of him; to draw
back from such a blessed one, who draws so nigh unto us. I beseech you, gather
up your spirits, and anoint your hearts with the oil of gladness; for God
himself is come to live among you, and professes he will have no other life,
but among you; there he will manifest himself in all his sweetness and
blessedness to your soul. Lay aside all coyness and strangeness of spirit,
seeing such a way of familiarity and intercourse is made, between you and God.
It is very sad to see believers still so shye of approaching to God, so
doubtful of their acceptance, when God himself stoopes first, and is so in
love with our acquaintance, as that he will be as we are. Let not such a Rock
of strength be slighted. But every day entertain sweet and precious thoughts
of this design, and inure your hearts, to a way of believing in this God, so
fully discovered.

Lastly, Let men and Angels look about them what a mount of vision is raised up
for the strongest and quickest eye to take the fairest prospect of glory from,
seeing God is manifest in flesh; If God begins so gloriously, how will he end?
If God be so full of love, as to come down in flesh, oh what matter of hope is
laid before us of what he will be to us? What does God mean to bring poor
souls unto? If his heart and glory be let out so full at first, believe, and
wait for the most glorious openings of all Gods glory, seeing that he has took
the first rise of his manifestations so suitable to us; he is now manifested in
flesh, and has laid out a world of glory in that, but he shall be manifest in
himself.

SERMON V.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. God manifested in the flesh, etc.


ALl divine truths, though they are but one in substance and nature, yet they
are various in their manifestatations, and have their particular glory and
luster that sparkles from them.

Here is in this verse one and the same glory of God discovered in diverse
administrations, and yet every one shining forth in a distinct excellency. God
was manifested in flesh, made the object of shame and misery in the world,
humbled and abased in our flesh, and that God is again justified in the
Spirit, and set forth as an object for Angels to look and admire, and for the
world to lay hold on and believe, and then this God is taken up again into
glory, that is, advanced to that dignity which he seemed to leave and bid adieu
unto for a while; and all this but a delineation of the various conditions and
considerations of one and the same person Jesus Christ, and carrying on but one
design in several representations for the good of poor sinners. This is that
which the Apostle calls a great mystery, that is, the most hidden and profound
design that ever God undertook to act, wherein all the depth of his counsels
and heart was. For here is nothing else but God appearing in manifold shapes
and forms to make poor souls partakers of himself, and raise up our
conditions to a state of happiness and glory.

Of the first of these particulars we have largely spoken, it being the prime
and great mystery in this great order of mysteries. And yet there is so much in
it as may again take up our thoughts with new wonderment, what can be more
sweet and precious than a manifestation of God to poor Creatures; but for God
to be manifested in flesh so suitable to us, herein lies the mystery; that is,

1. God manifesting himself in a way of humiliation, as one that would lay
aside his glory to come and live with us, and undergo the poorest and meanest
condition for us.

2. In flesh, that God should make our own nature which had sinned against
him, and was so infinitely below him, to be our great ordinance of reconciling
us to himself, and the organ of union, and communion with his own blessed
nature; for God to manifest himself unto flesh is not such a mystery, it may
soon be conceived; God did manifest himself to Adams nature: But that God
should be manifest in flesh is the great mystery of godliness; God himself
taking flesh, and dwelling in it with all his fullness, and advancing that
flesh into oneness, and making that flesh more glorious than Angels; through
that flesh opening all his Counsels, dying, and satisfying for the
transgressions of flesh, and making the richest discoveries of love and free
grace unto the sons of men, this may well be called a mystery, and a great
mystery, an astonishing, and amazing expression: And all other mysteries are
wrapped up in this, this is that which Angels do so pry into.

Let us view it a little more in the contrivance and depth of it; God had an
eternal design to discover his infinite love to some besides himself, he
therefore creates a world of Creatures, some rational, and only capable of
love, others irrational, and serviceable to that one Creature which he makes
the top of the whole Creation; set up one man Adam as a common person to
represent the rest, gives him abundance of glorious qualifications, set him
over the works of his hands, made all subject to him, as if he were the
darling of love. Now one would think Gods love and glory had been centred
here, that he had taken up his abode for ever; but behold this man was but for
a day, he fell from God, and all that were in him, even the whole world, and
all these beloved ones that were in Gods eye from eternity fell with him into
the same gulf of sin and misery; Gods face is hid, not a sight of him, but in
flaming fire to condemn sinners, and execute vengeance; but God had a further
reach of love, and wisdom, and out of this dark cloud let some glimpses of
another discovery, though so darkly that few could spell it, or make any
comfortable sense or application of it to their own soul: But by degrees God
hints it out more, points out with the finger by types and shadows, makes some
models of it in outward Ceremonies, yet all hid and dark, that in three
thousand years men were but guessing, and hoping through promises for a
manifestation of God. And this is the meaning of that in Ephesians. 3. that it was
hid from Ages and Generations of men, that is, hid in Gods breast from them,
they knew not what to make of this design; but at last God opens himself
fully; and what does all this workings end in? why, in this, that God is
manifested in flesh; the whole of all this mystery is summed up in this, that
God took the flesh of these poor sinners which he had so loved, and joins
himself to it, and calls it Christ a Savior, and Redeemer of these poor
sinners that lay condemned by the Law, and under condemnation with the whole
world; and God comes to lie in the womb of a Virgin, to be borne as we are, to
live in the world in the poorest and meanest estate, as if he had not
wherewithal to lay his head, he dies in that flesh, and is glorified in it;
and joins it so nigh, as that there is a communion of properties between them;
that attributed to God which is proper to flesh, as to be borne, to suffer,
that to flesh which is only proper to God; who can choose but wonder when he
thinks of this phrase, that a piece of flesh should be called God, and God who
is immortal, incomprehensible be made flesh, and dwell among us; flesh
infinitely provoking God, and God in the same Flesh infinitely pleased and
satisfied. God veiling himself with Flesh, which was a way to darken his
glory, and yet unveiling at the same time the deepest and darkest of his
designs in the most blessed and comfortablest way to souls; this swallows up
our thoughts, and raises our faith to believe any thing, after this, when a
soul can look on God as in his own flesh, and see him at one time as Savior,
and his Father, and his Friend, and his Reconciler, as his Justification, and
his Sanctification, how can his heart contain within it self, but leap out of
it self as one lost in the admiration of it; all the actings of Salvation
turn upon this hinge; when Christ was borne into the world, the Apostle says,
Joh. 1.14. We saw his glory as of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace
and truth, noting out, that at first sight of him, so much glory sparkled from
him as could appear from none but a God walking up and down the world, or at
least his own natural Son that came out of his bosom.

I will add but two things by way of use to shut up this point.

Use 1. Study this mystery above all things, nothing so pleasant, nothing more
deep, come but once to know the mystery of God in our flesh, and thou will
desire soon to be taken into fellowship with it; the Apostle desired to know
nothing but Christ, and him crucified, this is none other than the Lord Jesus;
whatever expression is given of godliness, it is none other than God in
Christ; what delight should souls take in the looking on their own happiness?
with what joy should we draw water out of this well of Salvation; the great
reason of the shallowness of our comforts, the shortness of our hopes, the
faintness of our spirits, the lowness of our graces, is from the not knowing
this mystery: we look on our selves, on our present attainements, at some
scattered promises, but not fully on God in Christ; God in our own flesh, a
soul would see here a fountain opened of grace and comfort that could never
run dry.

1. God has set our own nature as a vast pipe to his Godhead, that it may flow
out in all manner of fullness upon our hearts; our flesh stands not for a
cipher, but it is an Organ of life and grace to us. If we saw such a fullness
in our own flesh laid in on purpose to enrich us, would we be so poor, want so
much? We eye this, and that, but know not that all the fullness of God lies in
our own Flesh, to be emptied upon us.

2. God has in our own flesh laid out the model and draught of what he will
do unto all his Saints for ever, for he made Christ the great Epitome of all
his design, and thou may see thorough thy flesh at once, what thou art
designed unto, and how high and rich thou shall be, what a design God has upon
thee; for look what was done to our Nature in Christ, shall at length be done
to all the persons of the Saints in Heaven. If we knew this, how high would our
hopes be, and how lofty our expectations, after the utmost inrichings of the
great God? For to what end has God made flesh so glorious, but to show what he
will by that make us.

3. What ever God is in himself, thorough our flesh, he is to us, if he be
good, or merciful, or gracious, or powerful, etc. For this manifestation is a
suiting of all that God is to us, that when we eye this mystery, we may see
what ever God is acted out to the comfort and benefit of our own poor souls;
God himself making all his attributes and glory serviceable, to the good ends
of his poor creature, and that in and thorough their own flesh.

Oh, my Brethren, let not such a strong hold be passed by, not such a treasury
be unlookt into: In this mystery, you have Heaven brought down to Earth, yea,
more then Heaven; For God himself is come down to open his heart to you. Let
nothing take off your eye from this, set Faith on work immediately to eye this
fullness; one mite of Faith on God in Christ, that is in our own Nature,
brings in more grace and comfort then a thousand considerations of any thing
else; yea indeed, it is the only spiritual way of conveighing all comfort to
the soul; there is no saving knowledge of God, but as he is manifest in
Christ, and do not think that God is gone out of flesh, that is, that Christ
has left his humane Nature behind him, and is only gone up in his spirit to
Heaven, nor but this flesh of thine is received up into glory, and stand as an
eternal monument of love, and is the great Ordinance unto the end of the world
of life and salvation, and God shall come again in the same flesh, though not
as abased, but glorified. Oh Brethren, what successive sweetness, and without
any intermission, would flow out on your hearts, if you did by Faith lay your
heads at this pipe: How can thou want grace, when thy own flesh has it
without measure, and on purpose to fill thee? why art thou sad, when thy own
Nature is made reconciler of thee to God? Brethren, you live not like men
under this design, that know what such a mystery means, you would see enough
and to spare, a redundancy of every thing you want in this Lord Jesus; and the
floods of immortality and glory would soon break over your unbelief, and
swell your hopes and joys, beyond all bounds. God has made our Nature a Mine
of all sorts of rich and precious graces, that by digging into it, we may see
our estate. Whatever the person of Christ has in himself, is all to convey
unto us. Oh, that you were but insighted into these glories! had but
acquaintance with this discovery of God, how blessed might you live! What a
happiness must it needs be, to see God in our own Nature, and our Natures in
him, and to behold nothing else but love, acting in a fullness of all grace and
glory, to a poor soul!

Let your whole spirits be carried out thus fully to Jesus Christ, and with
both hands, even with heart and soul claspe about Jesus Christ, and you will
soon find depths of love and grace, power and sweetness, overflowing and
swallowing up your heart.

A soul has space enough to expatiate its self, and has a sure Rock to rest
on; other things are narrow, and circumscribe the thoughts; all the promises of
particular graces are gathered up in this one manifestation of God. Think upon
love in this or that communication, either in outward or inward graces; still
we are shut up, our thoughts can go beyond all that; but God manifested in
Christ, there is room enough for a soul to let out his utmost thoughts, and to
enlarge his affections, and yet there is no taking in by one soul, the
vastness of this mystery, or the compleatnesse of this fullness: When a soul
has got out grace enough for this condition, and yet still that fountain
runs, and knows no proportion; if we would therefore study to know how to use
this mystery, we should find out comforts exceeding our doubts, and our
supplies our wants. When Sailors are out in the Ocean, they fear not, though
storms arise, and the Ship toss: But when they come nigh land, then they
fear, Sand and Rocks then lie undiscovered. So it is with a poor soul, as
long as he lancheth out by Faith into the fullness of Christ; it is safe in the
midst of the greatest storms, all the fears of unbelief are, when we come
nigh the shore of our own duties and performances, and come to see the land of
our weak workings, then we come into shallow water, and stick fast in
misprisions, and are scattered by doubts and fears, because there is not water
enough, not a stream deep enough to bear up the burden of our sinking and
dying souls.

That we may therefore know how to act our Faith to get strong consolation and
full supplies.

1. Faith must go directly unto God as in our flesh, that is, unto Jesus
Christ, and take in nothing by the way which may divert its strength, never
stop until it fasten on this fullness of God in Christ. For when the eye of
Faith roles here and there, and takes in but partial sights of Christ, as in
some particular promise only of this and that grace, and does not fully set on
Jesus Christ, as God in our Nature, it loses the efficacy of that influence,
which also would come, and besides, it divides the strength of its own act,
which is most strong, as it does adaequately rely on Jesus Christ, and singly
closes in with him; for the truth, is, promises and actings, or what ever way
God lets out himself, is but to allure and draw on the soul to an immediate
close with the person of Jesus Christ.

2. Know, that though there be some things in Christ, which are most proper for
some acts of Faith; as Christ dying, and crucified for a recumbents Faith unto
the satisfying of his soul, in the pardon of sin; yet the strongest and purest
acts of Faith are these, which take in Christ as such a person, laid out in all
his glory, and all his offices as suitable to the condition of the soul. And
the more comprehensive acts of Faith are taken in Christ in his fullness, the
more are the enjoyments of it, and the more lively the influences; As the more
Iron is set at the advantage of the strongest point of the Loadstone, and
adaequately laid for an immediate close, the stronger expression is left; and
the more powerful it is attracted, all such electricall bodies, work (as all
other) according to the propinquity, immediation, and adaequatenesse of the
approach of other things of a suitable Nature to them. Therefore the Apostle
says, Heb. 12. looking unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith,
standing and beholding as with a steadfast eye, what he is, from first to last,
as the Author and finisher of our Faith. So in another place, 1 Pet. 2. To whom
come as to a living stone, we are built up, etc. These loose and transient
glances on the actions and offices of Christ, bring in but loose and ordinary
communications; but hearty and full outgoings to him, as God is in him, and as
such a person, thus and thus qualified from Heaven, carries power and life with
it. And these vast and serious spirits who are not content only with flashie or
secondary actings on Jesus Christ, but are longing to be diving into the depths
of Christ's glory and excellency, carry along with them impressions of an
abiding and transforming Nature. Oh, therefore be ambitious only of
apprehending what is the riches of this glorious mystery, and let not course
and common apprehensions of Christ content you.

Some think it a carnal apprehension of Jesus Christ, to know him as in flesh;
it is true, to apprehend him absolutely so, as only having flesh, and going up
and down in weakness: But to consider Christ as God manifested in flesh, and
that flesh acted by God, and filled with God, is a true and spiritual
apprehension of Christ, and that wherein lies one of the greatest mysteries of
godliness; for we are not to understand this as a mystery only for that time:
As if God came and once manifested himself in flesh to satisfy for the sins of
his Elect, and so to leave it down again, but very flesh remains to this day,
and shall remain, and all the spirit and life which the Saints shall have unto
the end of the world, is to be conveyed through that person which has our
flesh; yea, the Spirit it self dwells in it, and is conveyed through it;
therefore look upon this as a standing manifestation of God to your souls,
and believe perfectly on it. See but how God has fitted an object for faith in
this mystery. This expression that God was manifest in Flesh is so laid out,
that it does as it were create faith in every soul that looks in it.

1. What is fitter for a poor soul who has nothing than God himself, who is
the utmost object of faith, the happiness of the poor creature depending on
his relying on God. But,

2. Because God himself is offended, and the soul cannot find ground for
faith in God himself, you have God manifested in our own Flesh, that is, God
takes up our nature, and joins it to himself as one person, and lays out
that before faith: So that here is God, and God suited to the particular state
and condition of the sinner; and not only barely acting toward us, but
manifested in the greatest love and fullness to us; whatever may feed the
humor of unbelief is destroyed in this: For God has laid in that in our own
nature, which does not only suit, but swallow up the wants and miseries of
poor souls.

There be but three things can hinder faith.

1. The infinite exactness of divine justice which must be satisfied.

2. The exceeding unworthiness of the soul.

3. And in the sight of both these, the want of a Mediator, or some suitable
person which may stand between the sinner and God, which the soul may go unto,
and first close withal before it deals with the infinite glory of God
himself.

Now in this mystery faith is fully satisfied.

1. God has seemed to pass by, and overlook the unworthiness of his
Creature, himself disdaines not to be as they are, to wear their own flesh;
and

2. That his justice may be satisfied, and their hearts quieted, he has by the
union of that flesh set up a person which is nothing but fullness, and
righteousness, love, and bowels to receive the first acts of our faith, and to
have immediate union, and communion with us, and yet still this is God himself
manifested to us; and though we pitch not our says immediately on God, yet at
last we come to him, and our faith lives in God before it is aware as it were,
through the sweet intervention of that person which is God himself called but
by another name.

Take faith as it lies in adherence and recumbency, or as it may be sometimes
taken for an act of assurance, both have enough to lay hold on in this mystery:
For the first, Take the poorest soul that groans under the saddest wants, and
burdens, and seems by sin to lie at the vastest distance from God, yet he
has ground here to believe, that is, to go unto, and rely, and cast himself
freely and fully, with the greatest confidence on Jesus Christ: For here is
none other than God himself offering himself as the righteousness and riches
of such a poor foul, and that in such a way as he shall be judge with his own
eyes; and for the faith of assurance what a ground is there for a soul to be
persuaded of all the reality and truth of Gods intentions, seeing he has so
sensibly demonstrated it in taking our own flesh; if God cannot content
himself, who shall? And he professes he is pleased, and delighted in that
Union, and satisfaction by it, which he has in our nature; This is my beloved
Son, in whom my soul is well pleased, Mat. 3. ult. Doubtless Gods heart must
needs be much in, yea, and infinitely set on the salvation of the souls of poor
sinners, seeing he has made such an overture to advantage it, as the taking up
our flesh which was so far below him; and what can poor souls now believe
otherwise, but that God cannot be content with his own honor and glory alone,
but he must impart it, yea, and to those which have been the most unworthy,
and most contrary to him and his glory.

So that Believers, you see, how heaven and earth, God and man, are combined
together to do you good, and what opportunity have you of living gloriously
upon God in your own nature; Faith desires no more but an encouragement, and a
person to close with, and in both you have a sutablenesse from this, that God
is manifest in flesh; that God is manifested in such a way as flesh, is enough
to move any heart to believe that he is as he acts; but this expression does
not only stir up hope, but fits the very person so sweetly, as if one would
desire, or propose a thing to ones desires, it could not be more qualified than
this, that God is manifested in flesh; for here is God himself brought down
to our terms, and made subject to our own propositions. Oh that this
exhortation might be of force but to improve this glorious design to the
supplying of all your wants, and the making up all your losses; and when you
make use of Christ, go not to him as one who has something, but all things;
yea, let faith have its course, and hinder it not from a full and immediate
laying hold on the riches and fullness of God himself, both for Justification
and Sanctification; for it is God himself which in your flesh is made the
proper object of your faith.

Use 2. That seeing God is manifest in flesh, that is, so blessedly in Christ
for us, labor to get a manifestation of God in your own flesh, for this is the
comfort to your souls; what if God be made one with a common nature in Christ's
person if he be not made one with my spirit? You hear often that there is a
mystery in Gods being discovered in Flesh, but who among you have had the
manifestation of this God in your own souls? The Apostle speaking of the sweet
fruit of his suffering, says it lay in this, that the life of Christ was
manifested in his mortal flesh; doubtless Gods design of manifesting
himself in flesh in general, was, that by that he might manifest himself to
flesh in particular; and these souls can have no special comfort in this,
that God is manifest in their nature, (that is, in Christ) except they have a
special discovery of this God to themselves; actions are suitable to the being
of things: if God be in our nature he will act in that nature what may be most
glorious to the good of souls. Look to your own hearts what manifestations of
God are there; Do thou say, thou beleevest that God was manifest in flesh?
And yet there is not a glimpse of Gods glory in thy own heart; why, the Devils
can say as much and perish; why has God taken up our nature? What, for
himself? No: But by that as a medium he might communicate himself to our
persons; Let not souls flatter themselves with general notions of the
Gospel, and the mystery of it; If God be not in thy person, as truly, though
not as fully, as in thy nature, thou have no particular comfort from this
design; when Paul speaks of the Gospel in general, he speaks particularly of
the manifestation of it to him as his comfort, It pleased God to reveal Christ
in me, Gal. 1. whatever is done in our nature in common is to be done
spiritually (though not literally) on our persons; and if God be revealed in
Christ, and that Christ be not revealed in us, all is nothing; the end of God
is by that to bring up our hearts to himself, and that we may know what is the
riches of that glory which he intends to communicate by the first fruits of it
in our own souls.

SERMON VI.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. Justified in the spirit, etc.


HAving spoken of the first and great mystery of godliness which the Apostle
reckons up in this verse, that God was manifested in flesh: Another presents it
self before our eyes to be admired; In the things of the Gospel you go from
glory to glory; you can no sooner come out of one room of blessedness, but
you step into another as glorious; every step to heaven is a new opening of
Gods glory; What would a soul expect more than a manifestation of God, and in
flesh so fitly for his good? Who would not sit down under the shadow of this
happiness and go no farther; but yet this is not all, this God is set forth in
another mystery, as, Justified in the spirit; before one is able to go to the
bottom of one mystery he is led into the bosom of another; so thick and fast
does the glory of God break in upon the poor soul, as he is not able to keep
his eye fast on one thing, but another as glorious comes to be presented.
Brethren, what a blessed thing is it to live in God, to be viewing the
mysteries of godliness? Seeing God himself is laid out before your eye as in
manifold manifestations of his own glory; Saints may do nothing else but ravish
their hearts with the diversity of heavenly light which breaks forth from the
bosom of God.

One would think there needed no other mystery to take up the thoughts of a
Saint but this, that the blessed God is manifested in flesh; Who is able to
reach the fullness of this discovery? But yet you have another mystery as great
and amazing springs out before your eyes, to astonish you, that this God was
justified in spirit.

The first respects his humiliation in our flesh: The other the beginning of
his exaltation; and yet these are only various expressions of Jesus Christ our
Mediator.

There was two great things to be done for the salvation of sinners:
Satisfaction, and Justification; God now, in regard of these two
considerations, manifests himself as in two form as: First, in flesh, as
abased and humbled, that in our own nature he might satisfy for our sins, and
lay a groundwork of eternal communion with us; and then as a testimony of
the reality of this satisfaction he was justified by or in the spirit. So that
you have Christ set out in these two considerations, as standing in our own
flesh to bear the guilt, and charge, the misery, and punishment of our sins,
and as discharged and justified from all these by the spirit.

There be these things to be opened.

1. What it is to justify. 2. What meant by spirit. 3. How God is said to be
justified in spirit.
For the first, to justify, or to be justified, are words though commonly
spoken, yet much mistaken; Bellarmine, and the Jesuits take it ever in a
Physical sense, for the infusing habitual principles of grace in the heart,
and so make it all one with Sanctification, that so by that they might have a
way of setting up their own righteousness equal with, if not above, the
righteousness of Christ; and yet it is not to be denied but sometimes this
word signifies to make just. But the common and usual signification is, first,
to pronounce or declare one just; So ( Luke 16.15.) Wisdom is justified of her
children, that is, all the sons of wisdom will vindicate her from all the
false aspersions cast on her by the sons of folly in the world, and pronounce
her righteous, that there are the issues of life in her ways.

That thou may be justified by thy sayings, Romans 3.4. that is, declared to
be just. So in Mat. 12. says Christ, out of thy words thou shall be justified
or condemned; that is, pronounced just according as thy words are good.

Secondly, It is taken sensu forensi, in a legal sense, for the acquitting or
absolving a Malefactor from the guilt and punishment of the Law; Esa. 5.23. he
which justifies the wicked, and condemns the righteous is an abomination to the
Lord; speaking of the Rulers, and these which sit in judgment, that is, he
which lays guilt on an honest man, but acquits a wicked man.

How is a man said to be justified this way?

1. When as he is falsely accused, and is declared by the Judge not to have
done the fact, but to be righteous, then he is justified from that act.

2. When a man is really accused, and yet for, and in consideration of some
other thing is acquitted and absolved from the guilt and punishment of that
which was laid to him, then he is said to be justified also.

For the second thing; what is meant by Spirit?

This word is likewise taken diverse ways in Scripture: Sometimes for the soul
and life of a man; Into thy hands I commend my spirit, Psalm. 31. Christ cried,
and gave up his spirit, Mat. 27. that is, his life departed from him. But
especially it is taken these four ways.

1. For the whole divine Nature, or the Godhead. God is a spirit, that is, the
Nature of God is spiritual, unknown to flesh.

2. It is sometimes taken for the divine Nature of Christ; so the Lord is that
spirit, that is, Jesus Christ is that spirit, which is opposed to all the
outward and fleshly ordinances of the Law.

3. It is taken for the Holy Ghost, or third person of the Trinity, as distinct
from the Father and the Son. There be three that bear witness in Heaven;
the Father, the Word, and the Spirit. 1 John 5. It is the spirit which bears
witness, for he is truth. I will send the Comforter, even the spirit of truth,
John 14. And I will pray the Father for it. John 3.

4. Taken for the product, or work of the Spirit; what is borne of the Spirit
is Spirit, that is of the same Nature with the Spirit it self. So that now,
for God to be justified in the Spirit, is not meant as if he had any
righteousness infused in him, which he had not before, but that he was
justified, that is, declared to be righteous, one who had no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth, and that he was absolved from all that charge of the
guilt and punishment of sin, which was laid upon him, and one who had finished
his course, and done his work completely, both satisfied the law, and the
justice of God; and that in or by the Spirit, that is, his Godhead, or by the
virtue and merit of his divine Nature, which made all he did, efficacious and
satisfactory, the Spirit it self bearing witness of it, and fully discharging
him from what was laid upon him.

For these words, (as one says) to be brought in answer to an objection, which
might be made on this, that Christ was God manifest in flesh, that is, humbled
and abased, or else he could not have suffered; why hence, the world thought he
was a deceiver, that he was not such a one as he pretended, took upon him as a
malefactor, and used him so; why, but he was not so; for though he was
manifested in that base and low way, and so united and clouded in flesh, yet he
was justified in the spirit; they saw not that inward glory and power which was
in Christ's Nature, but what ever men esteemed of him, yet the spirit it self
justified him.

But seeing this is so great a mystery, set in the second rank of the deep
things of God, we had need look more narrowly into it, and see what the
Scripture says concerning this; how Jesus Christ may be said to be justified.

This is to be premised in general, that it is spoken in opposition to his
humiliation or manifestation in flesh, for in that he seemed to be condemned to
walk up and down as a sinner, one which was the shame of the world; and
therefore he is said to be justified in the spirit; that is,

1. Internally, what ever he was without, yet within he had a spirit of glory,
his outside was mean, but his inside blessed.

2. Externally, he was notwithstanding all the visible actings of him in the
world, and the misapprehensions of wicked men, yet the spirit did still justify
him, and clear him, and declare him to be righteous.

Two things were laid on Christ, which he had need to be justified from.

1. The false aspersions which the world laid on him; they looked on him as a
deceiver, a friend of Publicans and Sinners; one which blasphemed, when he said
he was the son of God, one which had a Devil, and wrought all his miracles
by the Devil.

2. The state he stood in under our sins, have had the guilt and the punishment
of them laid on him, whereby he stood as a visible malefactor, and under the
visible sentence of condemnation.

For Christ was really charged with the satisfaction of our sins, and was
liable to all that the Law could say to us for them. Now he had need to be
justified from this, by having an acquittance and absolution by the spirit of
God.

Now, in both these ways may Christ be said to be justified.

1. He was justified in the spirit, from all those wicked imputations his
enemies laid on him; none were accounted of so vile, as Jesus Christ; all the
reproaches that could be invented, were laid on him, they called him a Devil
commonly. Now see how he was justified in the spirit, that is; first, how clear
he was within in his spirit, no guile was found in his mouth.

2. By his Godhead, what bright sparklings of God, was in the face of Jesus
Christ, to the conviction of his enemies? many times when they came to catch
him, they were caught by the beauty of his glory, and feign to confess he was
a righteous one, and that never any spoke or acted like him: in all that ever
he did in the acts of his humiliation, he was justified in it, God clearing it
up, that he was the true Messiah and Savior of the world; when he was borne,
wise men came by the spirit to see him and worship him, when he was baptized,
the spirit came down visibly on him, and proclaimed from Heaven, that he was
the beloved Son of God, with him he was infinitely well pleased. Nay, come to
the uttermost degree of his humiliation, when he hung on the Cross between two
thieves, by his spirit, he converted one of them, and made them acknowledge he
was the righteous man, and they only the sinners; In a word, what ever he did
or spoke, the spirit did act it in him, and justified him in it. I speak not of
myself, but God testifyes of me, John 6. He was begotten in the womb by the
spirit, led up and down in the spirit, offered up by the eternal spirit,
raised from the dead by the spirit. That place in the Romans, 1.3. cleers up
this; He was declared to be the Son of God with power, by the spirit of
holiness in his Resurrection. It is a place which answers this; He was of the
seed of David as concerning the flesh, but declared to be the Son of God in
the spirit, when he did rise again; as much as to say, he was God manifest in
flesh, that is, in weakness, and yet he was justified by the spirit of
holiness, to be the son of God. Christ would often call himself the son of
God, and for that, he was called a blasphemer, and for that, they sought to put
him to death, as if they had said, we will try that, thou can not dye if thou
be the Son of God: And so when he was put to death, they were confirmed, that
he was a deceiver; But now, when he rose again of himself, then he was
declared with power, to be the son of God, that is justified by the spirit of
holiness, or the holy spirit; that spirit did declare, that he was full of
holiness: But this was the least part of Christ's justification.

2. Christ stood under the charge of all the sins of the Elect, as a common
person, and so was by God himself condemned; he bore our sins on the Tree, in
his own body, that is, was really charged with the guilt, and the punishment
of it, and though he was not guilty of any sin, yet was punished as the
greatest malefactor, standing as our surety. Christ may seem to be condemned,
even by God himself, and he must come off clear, or else lie under the
punishment of it for ever; for once the charge was laid on Christ, the law
looks to him.

Now Christ that was thus visibly condemned, he is justified in the spirit, not
only that he was appointed to satisfy; but that he had satisfied, and took
away these sins; and it was reason, that if God did charge him with the debt of
our sins, that after he had paid it, he should be acquitted and declared just,
and the Justifyer of these, for whom we undertook: Now this is the great
meaning of this phrase; that whereas Christ was manifest as God in our flesh,
and so stood under the guilt of our sins, he was justified in his spirit, and
cleared by God, that he had fully satisfied him.

That whereas God was manifested in flesh, that is, as the Apostle says, Romans
8. To condeme sin in the flesh, that same God-man was also justified in the
spirit, that is, freely and fully acquitted by his Godhead from all these
sins, and so taken up into glory. And Christ himself in a Prophecy, when he
was to dye, and be judged as a condemned man, he comforts himself with the
thoughts of this; He is near that justifies me, who shall condemn? Esa. 50.8,
9. So likewise the Apostle speaking of Christ's Resurrection, he was put to
death in the flesh, but quickened in, or by, the spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. a place
fully parallel unto this, Paul says, he was justified in the spirit; and
Peter, that he was quickened in the spirit; both mean one and the same thing,
viz. that new life which Christ had from the dead when he left all our sins
behind him and rose again; and by spirit is meant his Godhead or divine
nature, whereby he was both raised from the grave, and the guilt of sin
together, he was quickened and justified; as a Malefactor, by an absolution
receives a new life after the sentence of death: and this work of justifying
Christ is especially laid on Christ's resurrection; who when he dyed was as a
condemned man, but when he rose again appears as a righteous man, which had
finished his work. For justification implies and supposes a former guilt laid
to ones charge of which he is acquitted. There was reason, that if Christ bore
our sins, and stood as one condemned, having done away sin, should likewise be
justified from the guilt of what was laid on him, and be pronounced righteous:
Christ was under the greatest attainder that ever man was, he stood publicly
charged with the guilt of a world of sins, and if he had not been justified by
the spirit, he had still lain under the blame of all, and been liable to the
execution of all this in his own soul; therefore though he was manifest in
flesh as one condemned in that flesh, yet the power of his Godhead raised him
up from under the power of death, and declared him as a righteous person, one
that was accepted for, and that had completely satisfied for poor sinners. And
as at first conversion we pass from death to life, that is, from an estate of
death and condemnation to an estate of life and justification; So did Christ at
his Resurrection, from an estate of death and guilt which was laid on him to an
estate of life, and glory, and justification from sin; for had there been any
sin unsatisfied for, he could not have been justified.

Use 1. Is to inform us of the greatness of this mystery, that God should be
justified in spirit; That God should manifest himself is a wonder, and
especially in flesh: But that we should be justified, that implies a guilt,
some default; and doubtless this is one of the wonderfullest discoveries of
his love to souls. How can God be said to be justified? who can imagine any
evil in the Almighty, who finds folly in the Angels? they are not able to
justify themselves in his sight; but the mystery is in this, that God
himself which was in our flesh, (which is none other then Christ) he is also
justified for us. God in our flesh takes upon him the charge of our debts, and
by his own spirit justifies himself.

Oh, how are poor souls raised at these expressions. All the works of our
salvation are done by God himself, he taking that on him, and acting over that
in the person of his Son, which must be particularly done in them.

Two things was to be done to save us; Satisfaction, and Justification, payment
of debt, and discharge of bonds. Why now, God comes in our Nature, and is both
punished and justified, as if he had done the offense, not we: God is
justified, instead of us, and dies when it was our condition; let our hearts
not be commonly affected with this mystery.

2. Use. This mystery raises again from the dead, the hopes and joys of poor
souls, and in the midst of all their sins, and apprehension of wrath, gives
the strongest ground for Faith in their justification. Why was God (or God in
Christ) justified, he had no need of such an act in himself, no guile was ever
found in his mouth, he was a Lamb without spot; but all this is to denote what
God was for us, that he might be to us. All the acts that were to be done on
us, and to us, were first done to God in our Nature, acted on Jesus Christ; and
he was but an image of what is to be personally done to us; yea, whatever
consideration he passed under, it was as in our stead, and we are to reckon our
selves as sharers with him, yea, as really partakers with him, as if we had
acted it in our own persons. When he dyed, he stood under an act of attainder
for sin, he acted nor was capable of none, but only stood there for us, and our
very sins, on the Cross were crucified with Christ, and satisfied for by him,
as if we had paid the utmost farthing with our own hands; so when he was
justified by the spirit, we were justified. He was justified as a common person
in the room of all the Elect, as he died as a common person for their sins.

In these two expressions, you have all the mystery of Redemption, and the
reconciliation of sinners to God.

1. God was manifest in flesh, to bear our sins, and to be abased and humbled
for them, whereby he might satisfy himself, and then in the token of
acquittance, and absolution of us from all these sins, he is justified in
spirit, and all the objections of unbelief, are answered in this. Says the
soul, how shall my sins be satisfied for? why God is manifest in flesh for
that end, to lay down an infinite price to his justice; But how shall I know
that my sins are taken away, and that I am justified from them? why, that God
was justified in spirit, that is, the spirit which speaks nothing but truth,
and who knows all things, did publicly declare that there was a complete
righteousness obtained for sinners, and did pronounce it to Christ, as in the
name of all the Elect.

It is worthy further search into this, what Christ's being justified in the
spirit, amounts unto, for the comfort of poor souls, in regard of their
justification, that so we may all see, what full and plenteous redemption there
is in Jesus Christ, and what matter of holy triumph we have, in regard of our
own justification

First, that Jesus Christ should be justified, and that for us, or in our name,
as the Attorney takes up the bond in Court for his Client; it is as good in
Law, as if the party himself were there to recieve the verdict, and see the
act enrolled. And observe, it was more for Christ to be justified, a harder
thing then for us, for he had the sins of the whole world of the Elect upon
him, and yet Christ believed his justification; in that former place; Esa. 50.
he is near that justifies me. Well may thou believe the particular
justification of thy person, seeing Christ was justified for thee before hand;
he was that great surety, that stood bound to pay thy debts, and he was
publicly acquitted for thee. And this is certain, that Christ being
justified at that moment, all the Elect were virtually and really justified in
him; that act of God which passed on him, was drawn up in the name of all you;
and when you believe, this Indenture is shown unto your hearts.

But secondly, in that he was justified in the spirit, our comfort is raised
higher, for it was not an ordinary acquittance which was given Christ in our
name, but what was drawn up by the spirit of truth, who can speak nothing but
truth; God himself justified himself in our Nature, by his own spirit, such
an infallible witness cannot be questioned. And though by spirit be meant his
Godhead in general; yet it is specially meant of that person which is the
spirit. Therefore the Apostle John, John 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. reduces all to
this, that it was the spirit that bears witness to this, that life is in
Jesus Christ; Christ came by water and blood says he, but Christ is the spirit
that bears witness to this.

There were two things which did justify Christ, and both done by the spirit;
his resurrection and ascension into Heaven, in that he rose again; it was
clear that he was justified, for else he could not have risen, if he had not
satisfied, the bands of Death would have held him fast in the Grave, but that
he can raise from the dead, he was declared to be the son of God with power,
but still by the holy spirit. Romans 1.3. And in that, he by the spirit was
carried up unto his Fathers glory, and sat down at the right hand of God. It
clearly did show, he was accepted, and freed by God, from that which was laid
on him. Therefore Christ says, that this shall be one of the great things
which the spirit shall convince the world of, viz. Of righteousness, because I
go to my Father. Ioh. 16. That is, that there is a complete righteousness
obtained, and justification, or else I had never been admitted into my Fathers
presence; and all this acted by the spirit.

And as a further evidence of this, as soon as ever he was ascended, he powrs
down the spirit as a flood on his Apostles, and the Saints with them, and to
demonstrate, that he was not only accepted in his own person, and he
personally justified in him, and now grace and life must necessarily run out
upon them. In all these acts Christ was justified in the the spirit for the
comfort of believers. Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Now how may your souls triumph and rejoice in your justification, in the
thoughts of this, that Christ, yea God was justified for you; and how ever you
are in your selves, yet you may be justified in the spirit; believers have
nothing to do, but to take out the personal assurance of this to their own
souls; at that time when Christ was justified, you were vertually so, and yet
but out of the particular discharge by the spirit to your hearts, and your
justification is complete. The great complaint of souls is in this, that they
are not justified in God's eyes: But now, we are not only acquitted by the
spirit in our own hearts, but God himself is justified in our Nature for us;
there is none to offend but God, and none to be justified but sinners. But now,
when God shall satisfy himself, and justify himself in our persons, or in
our stead; what strong consolation have we, God will not lay the payment on us,
but himself, and he will justify himself for us.

It was more for Christ to be justified, then for any one of us, for he had
more laid on him, then can be laid on us, he standing not under the charge of
one persons sins, or many, but of all the Elect; and when he was justified, a
full discharge was given for all that he represented. This is a mystery indeed,
God is offended, and God takes that on himself in our Nature, which lay on us,
and is justified for us. When Christ was justified, there was a public record
of it; and now when we believe, we go but to that Court, and take out the
particular discharge to our own souls, Christ received the first act on
himself in our Name, and it was as authentic as if it were formally done on
our persons; But when we believe, it is done personally to us. So that now
believers, you have nothing else to do but apply that righteousness, which
issued forth from Christ's justification, and lay hold on it as your own: Go
to the Court, and see your own names in the Indenture, and get out the copy
of it in your own heart; for there is a necessity, if Christ be justified,
that we should be discharged; therefore get holy and glorious triumphs in your
heart, over sin and Death, in that, Christ is not only dead, but alive, and
that you are justified in him; get out the special assurance of it, by the
spirit to the hearts.

3 Use. If Christ were justified in the spirit, Let it be your care to justify
Christ in your spirits. God has discharged him, so do you.

Q. How can we justify Christ, you will say?

S. Why, when you believe what he has done for you; Christ has done all
things for you, satisfied wrath, fulfilled the Law; God has acquitted him,
pronounced him just, says he is contented, he can desire no more; why now do
you justify Christ in this, by saying Amen in your own Consciences to this.
Has Christ dyed? believe that your sins shall die; Is he justified? believe
that so are you. When the surety has paid the debt, the principal as well as
the creditor, ought to give an acquittance.

Oh how are we to be blamed for our unbelief; what aspersions does it cast on
Christ, he has done all things well, but we say by unbelief, he has done
nothing. Unbelief professes Christ is not dead, or at least not risen; the
Law is still in force, justice is not satisfied, there is no justification
procured: Every doubt in a Saint, casts a scandal on Christ; God saw cause
enough to justify Christ, even by his own spirit, and to declare him in our
names, to be a righteous one, and we in him; but we see not cause to believe
our own justification, or the remission of our sins; what is it, but to think
that Christ is held under the pains of death, has not done any thing to
purpose, that the wrath of God is as open to destroy us, as ever it was.

You keep Christ as it were in a prison, and under condemnation, when you
believe not; Oh souls, will not you justify Christ in all these glorious
things he has done for you.

Then you justify Christ, when you acknowledge him to be what he is made of
God to you, wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption, I might
go torough all his Offices and Acts for us; as then we justify him in regard
of his death, when our hearts are satisfied with the offering up of himself,
and that satisfaction he has made. So in his resurrection, when we believe we
are freed from our sins, our surety being risen for our justification; so in
regard of the whole work of salvation, we justify Christ when we go to him
as a full and complete Savior, having our conscience quieted by his
righteousness, and our hearts triumphing thorough his fullness: Oh it is sad
to see how Christ is crucified again in our hearts, thorough unbelief,
arraigned as a malefactor; for this is certain, if there be not enough laid in
for the satisfying and enriching of souls, then Christ is not righteous, and
he is under condemnation: How should we rejoice to witness to Christ
faithfulness and righteousness. When we go boldly to God by Christ, then we
acknowledge Christ to be a Mediator; when we find the sense of our
justification in our own hearts, then we acquit Christ, and declare he was
justified from our sins.

SERMON VII.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. Seen of Angels, etc.


GReat mysteries have great admirers; according as things are in themselves so
they are adored. Godliness is the greatest mystery that ever was, (it being
made up of various workings of the glory of God;) and it has the greatest and
most glorious Creatures for to study it, even the Angels themselves. This is
one of the particulars whereby the Holy Ghost sets forth the greatness of this
mystery, that it was seen of Angels. The two former expressions set forth this
mystery in its nature, and essence, under a twofold consideration of God, as
manifested in flesh, and justified in spirit: But this sets it out in regard of
the outward effect it had on the highest Creatures, it was the object of their
admiration; not that this is part of the mystery it self, but an expression
which the Apostle puts in, in the midst of all, to raise our thoughts of it,
because Angels did look into it, and adore it; that we may therefore open this,
we will consider,

1. What this mystery was which Angels saw. 2. What is meant by this sight, or
how they may be said to see it. 3. How it does magnify this mystery.
For the first; the mystery which is here held out as the object of Angels
sight, is none other than Jesus Christ acting as a Mediator for poor sinners,
concerning whom all these expressions are; Christ being a visible God in the
world, God manifest in flesh, a full justification for his Elect; all the
working of this mystery was in the person of the Lord Jesus, and he is the sum
and substance of all; the Apostle brings not any thing as a part of this
mystery which was done merely in God, which lay in his own heart, and were
immanent acts of his nature, such as Election, Predestination, and the like;
but only of the way or contrivance of this as it was acted in the person of
Jesus Christ, who was God in our flesh; all these things are included, and
employed in this discovery; it is Jesus Christ who is the mystery that was
presented to the eyes of the Angels as the most glorious object for their
sight, God as in our nature dying, and satisfying, and being justified for
poor sinners, this mystery was seen of Angels; that is,

2. ((...)) seen, it is not meant of a bare sight but of a sight which
astonished the understanding, and takes up the heart, else it had been a poor
expression to raise the glory of this mystery, that Angels saw it; but it was
so great and wonderful, that they took the greatest delight to behold it, it
was that which they were ravished in beholding, as at some new and strange
object, as we use to say of some wonderful apparition, it was seen by such and
such, that is, they were happy to behold it, exceedingly taken with it;
therefore the Apostle Peter, when he would express the glory of this mystery,
says, the Angels do desire to look into them, 1 Pet. 1.12. ((...)) their
whole spirits were taken up with this; it was to them as the blessedest sight
that they could ever behold; so that the meaning of this, that he was seen of
Angels is this, that Jesus Christ, who was to act out the peace and comfort of
the Saints, was discovered to the Angels, and they looked on him as so great a
mystery that they could not look off, but stand and admire it. So when Jesus
Christ was borne, there was a heavenly host of Angels praising, and admiring
God for this discovery, Luke 2.13, 14. leaping for joy but to bring the news of
him to the world, you have no such expressions of the joy of all the world
besides, as they took but in the seeing and manifesting this great mystery.
But,

3. Well may this be brought in to advance the greatness of this mystery in
our eyes, that it was seen of the Angels; Angels who are creatures of the
highest order, who are of the finest make, of the noblest spirits, who behold
the face of God himself, and are taken up with the immediate enjoyments of his
fullness; for them to look into this mystery, as if nothing else were worthy of
knowledge besides; as if the face of God himself were not so sweet, nor so
taking, and satisfactory, (excuse the expression) but they must see this
mystery as the top of their knowledge, and that which went beyond all their
other enjoyments; and which is more, this being a design not so principally
concerning them, they being in it as a far off, and in general; but being a
mystery of the salvation of sinners, yet that Angels should prefer this to all
their sights, and sit down viewing this Christ before all their own proper
happiness; how does it swell up the glory of this design? Thus you have the
meaning of the words in the general opened. I shall draw up the scope of it
more particularly in this Doctrine.

Doct. That Jesus Christ in the mystery of the Gospel is the object of
Angelical vision and admiration.

The things of the Gospel are not common or shallow things, but that which the
blessed Angels have their divine spirits taken up in the adoring of. Sight in
Scripture is put to express the inward motions of the affections; Joh. 1.14.
We saw his glory as of the only begotten Son of God, etc. that is, we were
taken with him as with God himself. So Paul uses the same expression, Gal. 1.
He was seen of me also, ((...)) speaking of that glorious sight which he had
of him, which converted him, and for ever took his heart with love to him. So
here (seen of Angels) that is, Angels beheld the glory of this mystery, and
were taken up with it, as the greatest joy of their hearts.

For opening this. Seeing the Apostle puts so much upon it, as to put it in one
great expression to open the greatness of the mystery of Godliness; that it
was seen of Angels, I shall propound these things to handle.

1. What sight the Angels have of the mystey of the Gospel. 2. How they come
to the knowledge of it. 3. That this is a mystery, that Angels should come to
see this Christ. 4. What is in this mystery, that should so affect them.
For the first. Angels being creatures of a spiritual Nature, are vast in
knowledge, they having no bodies to cloud their apprehensions, but are purae
intelligentiae, see things nakedly, as they lie in themselves, yet their
knowledge is imperfect, being creatures, they know not all things which God
knows, though they know all that is made. Now for their sight of Christ in the
mystery of the Gospel; doubtless they see much into it; for they are said to
bring the first news of it, to wait on Christ in this mystery, to comfort him
in his sufferings, to administer cordials to him, in these fainting fits of his
passion; they sat in the Grave to inform the women and his Disciples,
concerning his Resurrection; when he ascends up to Heaven, they come to the men
of Judea and Jerusalem, and ask them, Why gaze ye here? Christ is taken up
into Heaven; and they spoke further of his second coming; He shall come
again, as you have seen him go up. So that Angels now know much of the
mystery of Jesus Christ: They which have followed Christ from step to step,
from the birth to the grave, from the grave to Heaven, must needs be acquainted
much with these things, and not only a bare Historical knowledge, but a
knowledge of the mystery of it. Only they see it not as a mystery in them.
There is the difference of Saints sight of Christ, it is as acting all for
them, and as a mystery within them; but not so with Angels, though yet they
have some concernments in it, for they stand by this Christ, he is a head to
them also. But this will be more discovered in the second thing.

2. How do the Angels come to know this mystery, whether it be natural to
them, as such creatures, or whether it be conveyed to them by some other
means. Some think that God did discover a model of this mystery, and gave a
glimps of it to all the Angels, at their first creation, and showed them who
must be their head, and thorough whom he would act all his mind, even Jesus
Christ, as in our Nature, which, when the reprobated Angels saw, they could not
endure to come under that mystery, or submit to Jesus Christ; they liked not
the sight, and so fell, and are now Devils for ever; but the Elect Angels (of
whom we speak) delighted in the sight of this mystery, and submitted to the
hint of this discovery, and so stood by Christ, and he was made a head to them,
and they subsist still in him. But whether that be so or no, this seems to be
clear, that this mystery in Jesus Christ, Angels had not the knowledge of it by
their natural being, but as they had it by revelation; for this mystery the
Apostle professes, Ephesians. 3 It was hid in God himself, kept secret in his own
breast, manifested to none out of God, before he was pleased in time to reveal
it; they might see some probabilities of it, have some guesses by seeing of
God's heart, that he was big with some rich design toward the creatures, but
the mystery was hid in God; what it would be, and in what manner they could not
tell, but by revelation, though they saw God face to face, yet they could not
see this mystery in God's Nature; for it lay in his decrees and councels, which
the Angels know not, and it was a design from eternity, before the Angels were
acted and contrived in God, yet this must be granted, that they had a
manifestation of Christ, as to that which concerned themselves, as he was their
head, and as they stood in Heaven by him; but as the transactions of it
concerned us sinners with the mystery of it (which is properly the mystery of
the Gospel;) they knew not but by degrees, as it was acted, and are still
capable of increase. When God had broken his mind, opened his councels, in that
first promise made to Adam, in renewing of the Covenant with Abraham, in the
types and ceremonies of the Law, by all the Prophets; so they gathered out the
means of it, and they got more by the birth of Christ, by his ministry; but
there be two great ways, by which Angels come to see much of the mystery of
Christ in the Gospel.

1. By seeing the person of Christ. 2. By the Church, and the manifestations of
Christ to them.
For the first; besides what they have seen in the action of Christ in this
world, (formerly spoken of) which yet gave them abundance of insight unto this
mystery, for they first preached the Gospel with joy and gladness to the
world. Luke 2.

They were the first Ministers of the Gospel, in the affirmative, that Christ
was come, they preached more of Christ, then all the Prophets did, and with
greater joy, they were in a multitude together, praising God, and saying, peace
on earth, etc.

But besides that, the now seeing Christ's person in Hea^^n, as glorified, and
he being the express image of the Father, that which expresses all his heart,
and opens all his cabinets, upon whom, all the glory of God to man is acted,
the Angels cannot, but by beholding Christ in this consideration, know much of
the Gospel from him, Christ being the Epitome, and sum of this mystery; but
yet,

2. The great knowledge, Angels get in these mysteries, is from the Church,
from the discoveries of Christ to the Saints. That place of the Apostle,
deserves to be opened to this purpose. Ephesians. 3.1, 2. where it is said, that one
intent of preaching the Gospel is, that Principalities and powers, (names
given to Angels) might know by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God. The
Apostle had before magnified the preaching of Christ, as the opening of the
greatest mystery, that ever was to be revealed, and to set it forth, he says,
first, that it was kept hid from Ages and Generations of men, and ^id in God,
laid up as the great secret of Gods heart.

2. He says, that the Angels come to get their knowledge of it from the
Church; the opposition is this, that as it was hid from ages of men, from the
beginning of the world, so it was also hid from the Angels; and as men have the
knowledge of it by the preaching of it, so have Angels; only the Church has
first, they at second hand. The Church is the great subject on which all this
is to be acted, it is that which concerns them, they are folded up in it, it
is a mystery in them, as none have been privy to the first contrivance of
this mystery, but these three which bare witness to it, the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit; so none have the manifestations of it, so glorious as the
Saints who are the subjects of it: The manifestations and openings of the
mystery of the Gospel, are not properly in Heaven, but in the Church,
therefore the meeting of the Saints are called Heavenly places, because there
Christ makes his Heaven; and though the Angels see the mystery of it, as Christ
has acted it by himself, and in his own person; yet they cannot see it as it
is acted on the hearts of the Saints, which is a new mystery, therefore it is
called a discovery, of the manifold wisdom of God; and the apostle says, Col.
1.27. That the riches of the glory of this mystery, is Christ in us. There is a
depth in this mystery, and such manifold actings of the infinite wisdom of
God, that it is impossible for men or Angels to know it all at once. It was so
vast, that God himself was feign to open it by degrees, to act it in parts, by
manifold, and diverse actings of his wisdom: And all this to the Church. If a
man will know the mystery of such an Art, he must go to school where that Art
is taught. The great things of Christ are taught in the Church, Christ reveals
that there, which he does no where else; if Angels will see into the depth of
this mystery, they must go to school as it were unto the Church. When a
company of poor Saints are together, Christ stands in the midst of them, comes
down by the spirit, makes a throne, brings to light, glories that were
prepared for them, before Angels had a being, kept warm, as it were in Gods
heart all this while. It is said, in (1 Cor. 2.) None knows the things of God,
save the spirit, he only searches these deep things of God, none exclusively,
no not Angels. Now the spirit is only promised to the Church, and has his
offices on purpose in relation to the Church, and herein lies the exceeding
glory of God, that he will discover such a mystery to his poor creature man,
which he will make his highest creatures admire.

Thus you see how Angels get their knowledge by the Church. When Christ is
preached, and his glory laid forth, and souls are taken into it as it were,
why Angels come down, and listen, hold their spiritual ears unto the
whisperings of the Spirit in the Gospel to us; and yet you must not understand
it as if the knowledge they got by the Church were merely a deduction of
conclusions from principles, but when they hear and see the Spirit speaking to
the Churches, and opening these eternal glories of God in Christ, they see
intuitively into it, as we see when beams of the Sun on a sudden break out on
the world, they are exceeding quick, and take it as by revelation; they catch
up, as it were, the words that are spoken to us, and before they come to our
ear they are in their hearts; for they being spirits know the meaning of the
Spirit as soon as ever it is but revealed; neither is it to be understood as
if they had no knowledge of Christ without the Church; for they knew Christ
before the Church, and preached Christ unto them; but it is meant of the
degrees and increase of their knowledge in these mysteries, the depth of them
is laid out before them in the Church; because the mystery of Christ concerned
man, it was first revealed to him after his fall, though but very darkly, and
unto none else; and so now in the discovery of it in the perfection of it there
be some things that God reveals to none, but those who are the subjects of it;
As we know not the nature of Angels, nor their condition, though we know
Christ, because it concerns us more peculiarly: neither do Angels know all
that Christ does, and will reveal to his Saints. There is in the things of the
Gospel the things themselves in the general nature and use of them, and the
glory, and depth, the mystery and fullness of them; the first Angels knew long
since that God should come in our flesh, and procure peace, and that he was
justified in the spirit, and will save souls; but the depth of this mystery,
the riches of the Glory of it, the several mysteries contained in it, they do
not know, but as it is opened to them, and that by the Church; for herein God
shows, as his prerogative, so his distinguishing love, that some choice and
blessed things of Christ, shall never be manifested out of God's heart, but to
the Saints first, and none shall know them, but by him, in converse with them.
As the mystery of Christ to the Saints, is a peculiar design, so they shall
have the peculiar discoveries of it, and others by them. And the manner whereby
they know things, by the spiritual species, wherein they are manifested, and
by the seeing of that glory which shines on them in their manifestation.

3. This may well be put in as a mystery among the rest, that God thus
discovered, is seen of Angels; for it was a new design, that was carried on in
the most unvisiblest way that could be; It being a mystery so remote from
their particular natures, they having no need of such a discovery, and that
God should act a thing unknown unto these high creatures, not discover unto
them but at second hand as it were, that the greatest design of God, should be
hid from these creatures, which lay in his own bosom as it were, for so long
a time; this is the mystery which the expression seems to imply. (Seen of
Angels) And then when God had acted it, and laid out his glory in it, he
presents it as a sight of glory to the Angels, that they might see and admire
at what God had been doing all this while; this comes nighest the meaning, God
hid it from them, until he had set up Jesus Christ in state and glory, and
then shows him in a mystery to his Angels, that they might fall down before
him, and see the unspeakable wisdom of God.

To this alludes that phrase, Heb. 1.6. When he brings in the first borne into
the world, he says, let all the Angels worship him; God shows the Angels this
first begotten of his love and wisdom, and they worship him.

As Nebuchadnezzar, to show his state and glory, set up an image, that all his
Subjects must bow down before: So did the great God make an image of himself
in Jesus Christ, by whom he acted the greatest designs of his heart, and set
it before the Angels to adore; but,

4. Let us see what this mystery contains, that it should thus affect the
Angels; why, if it were nothing else but the manner of its acting, it were
enough even to fill them with admiration, that God himself should come and
assume flesh, and be one with it, taking the form of a servant, emptying his
glory as it were, and making himself of no reputation. This cannot but
astonish the highest apprehensions, means to do, the very outside intimates
that this is a depth that cannot be sounded. It is a mystery of unsearchable
riches, Ephesians. 3. In this dispensation there are all the riches of the great God
contained; It is a way which God has found out to bring the poor creature
into the bosom of all his treasures.

It is a mystery in which all the decrees, and purposes, and thoughts of the
heart of God himself are acted, in which the manifold wisdom of God is most
opened; whatever he has been acting in all the world has been but in
reference to this, to set it forth; the choicest love in the utmost act, in the
greatest variety, at the extremest disadvantages, is manifested here; and as
it has been a casting, and contriving in God from eternity, so it will be
acting to eternity, and there will be no end of it, new wonders of glory will
be brought forth through it the longer it is looked into.

And for what concerns their particular, they may well wonder at what God is
about in this, when he passes by the most glorious of all the creation, and
acts out the brightest of his glory on poor sinners, and takes them up to an
oneness with himself, and advances them with Christ far above principalities
and powers, when they see such a design toward those so far below them, and
which had never been so nigh God as themselves; when flesh shall be set down at
Gods right hand, and exalted above all the Glory of the Creation, and by that
to let out eternal love, to manifest infinite treasures of glory; and all this
over and above, and besides what God has to bestow on them; how can the Angels
choose but look about them at such a sight? But no more for the opening of it;
we had need now to apply this, and reflect on our selves.

Use 1. Is to shame all our hearts that we are no more affected with Christ,
and the mysteries of the Gospel; who can say that ever they saw this mystery
with admiration? it is rather a mystery in this regard to us, that we see
little of it that takes our hearts; Shall Angels see this mystery, and be so
taken with it, and not we? It concerns not them so particularly, they are not
wrapped up in it, yet are exceedingly longing for to know it; yea, cannot be
content with a bare sight of it, but pry into it; Oh hearts that the Sons of
men have, that magnify no more this great mystery! God is come down among us
in a mystery of mercy, riches, love, glory, wisdom, come to let out a fullness
of all this on our hearts. And this is preached in the Gospel, and yet who
looks into it? how few hearts are but ordinarily taken with it? who searches
into it as to the blessedest Cabinet in the world? Christ is not as much
esteemed as swine, it is sad to say it; men respect toys, notions, any thing
before it; consider sinner, do thou make little of that which has taken up
the heart of the great God from eternity, on which he has set the highest
design of his own glory, which Angels, creatures of surpassing glory, think
it their happiness but to see, as it were, though they enjoy not? Oh how
unworthy art thou ever to have a glimpse of it! Angels behold the face of God
immediately, want nothing, are filled with immortal glory, yet they come down
to the Church to hear the manifestations of this mystery, the openings of this
Christ: They think they are not happy enough in heaven, but must know what
Saints enjoy of this Christ, as if it were a glory above their seize.
There be two expressions to this purpose which the Apostle makes use of in
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.12. That the Angels desire to look into the things of the
Gospel; the word for desire signifies the utmost coveting, or longing after a
thing which a man cannot be without; Christ is so sweet and blessed an object,
and the Gospel so filled with the glory of God, that these blessed creatures
cannot contain without seeing of him; their pure spirits would feign be in the
bosom of them, and leave their heavenly glory but to converse with Saints
about the mystery of God in Christ: So the other word intimates, they desire
to look into them, ((...)) the word signifies bowing down, to pry heedfully
and narrowly into a thing. It is used for the Disciples stooping down and
looking into Christ's Sepulcher, Joh. 20. ((...)) the poor disciples did not
more heedfully look into Christ's grave, to behold their Savior, than Angels do
to see Christ in the Gospel. So you have it typified of them, Exodus 25. the
Cherubims were made looking down toward the mercy-seat, showing how Angels
should desire to peep into Christ's heart, where the seat of mercy is, as if
they longed to have one glimpse on them; Oh blush you hearts which have made so
light of the concernments of the Gospel!

Use 2. How happy are you who have had under the Gospel any manifestations of
Christ, any discovery of this mystery to your hearts; blessed are your eyes for
they see, and your ears for they hear; you have seen that which never eye saw
which is natural, and what the purest spirits see and wonder at; Angels envy
not your happiness, but they veil to your glory, they are not your corrivals
but admirers; you have these sights laid before you, that Angels would leave
their habitations above but to see; such dainties spread before you to eat,
which Angels every day long for; certainly Saints are kept very high, that
these blessed spirits long to feed with them, the leavings of your enjoyments
they take up. Oh has God discovered his love to thee in Christ, given thee a
sight of his face in Christ, justified and sanctified thee in him; he has done
that for thee that Angels wonder at; know thy own happiness, pry into thy
privileges: And if thou can not wonder enough thy self, take in Angels to
bless, and praise, and admire with thee, they desire no better employment;
these celestial, Seraphicall spirits love to sing the tune of the Gospel
most, they do service to the Church, administer to them, and all their ways,
as it were, is to hear something of Christ among, and to know more of this
mystery by them.

Use 3. Let your whole hearts be laid out in the studying of the mysteries of
the Gospel, there must needs be some rich jewels in it of unspeakable worth,
that God makes Angels to dig for, and above all things labor to see the
mystery; content not thy self with any bare Historical knowledge, or outward
apprehensions of it, but strive to be in the bosom of the enjoyments of them,
and let no sight satisfy thee, but what is raising and astonishing thy heart;
this sets out the worth of Christ, that he was seen of Angels; what, barely
presented to their sight? no, they saw him with delight, with joy, they were
rapt up above themselves, to see such a glorious object.

Consider it is a mystery, wherein your happiness is included, your joys, and
comforts, and all your concernments lie in it as in so many folds. All the
wisdom and love of God is laid out in reference to the making of you happy;
the Angels are but in it secondarily, as Christ is their head, that benefit
they get by it, which is a high advancement, but Christ's heart is particularly
opened to you, and all his riches made over to you; and if you will not get to
see much of Christ for your selves, to add to your own joy, why get Christ
opened to you, for the Angels sake, that they may know more of Christ by thee.

SERMON VIII.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. Preached unto the Gentiles, etc.


YOU have heard of the mystery of Godliness in the former particulars, in the
inward nature of it, as it is acted in the person of Christ, and seen and
admired by the Angels, you shall hear it, in regard of the outward
manifestation of it to the world, As it was preached to the Gentiles. God would
have all the creatures adore this mystery; therefore first, he presents it to
the Angels, discovers the person of Christ to them, they indeed were the
fittest creatures to dive in to it, and be taken with it; but it is not only
seen by them, but it is preached unto the Gentiles, discovered to the whole
world, and this is the mystery that all the New Testament is filled with, and
that God would have took up all the time of the world to preach it in all
Nations. Full hearts long for vent, and cannot hold, but must open themselves
every where. God's heart is full of mysteries of love and salvation, and he
cannot keep it in, but first he must show it to the Angels, see how they would
be taken with it, and must have it even preached to the Gentiles also, that
they might be taken up into it; and this is also a part of the mystery, that
God should let Angels see it and preach it abroad to Gentiles.

Yet observe the difference, it was but seen of Angels, they had but a glimpse
of it, it was discovered to them, to raise their admiration, but not as a
mystery properly for them; but it was preached to the Gentiles, proclaimed to
them, as if God meant to open his whole mind only to them. Preaching being a
set way of disco-of very of a man's mind, the great and set way its
manifestation, was not to be unto any, but the Gentiles: This did swell up the
glory of it, in the former expression, that it was a sight that the Angels were
taken with, worthy to be presented to them, yea, and as that which was beyond
all their seize; what wise men and great men, are taken up with the study
of, and stand gazing on, we judge to be some strange and prodigious sight; they
use not to say out their thoughts on common things, or cast their eyes
slightlie on every thing, see what the Angels, these glorified, and
metaphysicall spirits shall look on with astonishment, and long to see, must
needs be some supercaelestiall glory, a mystery of the greatest depth and
fullness; But this is farther, that this mystery should be preached unto the
Nations of the world, that God should make the great declaration of it to such
creatures, as a mystery for them.

This the Apostle may well call a great mystery; the sum of it is this: That
the Lord Jesus Christ, as God manifest in the flesh, and justified in the
spirit, and admired by Angels, should be preached to sinful creatures, and
open himself unto them in the working of his love and righteousness: this is
one of the great mysteries of Godliness.

Here be two things in this one sentence, that make it a mystery indeed.

1. That Christ should be preached, that Christ should take such a way for the
manifesting of the mysteries of his glory which is so un apt and weak to do
it.

2. To whom he is to be preached, not to Angels, not to pure and spiritual
souls, but to the Gentiles, that is, either first sinners in general, the
Gentiles being the great sinners of the world; but especially to the Gentiles,
in distinction from the Jews, the Gentiles being the outcast of the world:
this is the proper meaning of the word here, though the other is comprehended
in it; both these have a great emphasis; the Gospel has but few words in it,
but vastne of matter, and fullness of emphasis in the expression.

I shall open them both, and set out the mystery in them.

First, That Christ should be preached ((...)) manifest this mystery in a
greater mystery, discover invisible glory, by outward expressions, the riches
of his love and life should come out of the mouths of sinful creatures; as it
was to be manifested to sinners, so even by these that were sinners themselves,
to have this treasure in earthen vessels, the way it self is a mystery. So the
Apostle (1 Cor. 1.21.) after that the world by wisdom knew not God, that is,
by all their parts and learning, which they accounted the greatest wisdom, yet
all could not bring them to know God: It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching, to save them which believe. It was a foolish way, and that not only
because the world accounts it so, but because in it self it was a weak and
unsuitable way to save souls by, that by the breath of a mortal man, he would
break hearts, and breathe in life, make souls believe, and build them up to
heaven, by earth to convey heaven; for one by the outward expression of words,
to set forth inward glory, is but as if one would write in Characters for
plainness; speak a man's mind in Hieroglyphics. Now, that all the things of
Heaven should be opened in such a dark and weak way, ads to the mystery. God
might only have shined out the glory and opened the nature of Christ, purely
and silently by his spirit, and then it would be no mystery to conceive how
things are manifested, but that he will have the spirit reveal them in outward
expressions, thorough the mouths of the sinners, to whom it must be revealed;
this is a mystery of it self: if a man speak a plain sentence in an unknown
tongue, he speaks a mystery, so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. he that speaks
in an unknown tongue, is as a Barbarian to me, and I to him; just so it is
here, for Christ a Heavenly man to be expressed in words and writings, and God
who is not to be seen by any creature, seen in such and such words; it may well
be put in the rank of these great mysteries; if God had made use of Angels, as
he did at Christ's birth, to preach these things, it had not been so much, they
might have come in state, and proclaimed Salvation to the sons of men, have
brought down the glory of Christ unto our eyes; and if Christ himself had
come in his glorified body, accompanied with Angels, as he shall at the last
day, such a way would not have been mysterious; but for Christ to be preached
by poor men, to make that an instrument of the richest discovery, and to make
words to convey life, and our tongues to speak Christ into men's hearts, is a
mystery indeed.

Again; That Christ should be preached, that is, first an open way, it is the
proclamation of a thing, what is preached is known of all, Christ would not
have his mind hid, but preached to all the world, he would have every soul
take notice of his love, and of his glory; he proclaims it as on the house
top; he would have the great mystery of the Gospel preached to all; let all
the world know he has a design of salvation on them; so Christ gave in
commission to his Apostles, Mat. 28. when he sent them abroad to preach; go
preach the Gospel to every creature, except none; I will have them all to know
that life and immortality is brought to light. Christ is a general good, and
therefore is preached to all; he would not have the things of heaven be
whispered in the ear of some select souls, but preached as on the house top,
that if all the world will they may hear with their own ears the voice of
the Lord Jesus, as from heaven, speaking mysteries.

2. It is a solemn way, as it is public, so it is serious, that Christ is to
be preached; It is to be the great work of Ministers to lay him out; the things
of the Gospel are to be preached with the greatest solemnity that can be:
Preaching is nothing else but men speaking Gods mind in their own language.

2. But that which does indeed make it so great a mystery, is, that Christ is
preached to the Gentiles; the word ((...)) is used promiscuously, sometimes for
to express sinners in general, sometimes properly; for all the world in
distinction from the Jews, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile: these two
names comprehending the whole world, I shall open them both, whereby you may
see what a great mystery it is, that Christ should be preached to the Gentiles;
that is,

1. To sinners, that the great discovery of this Christ, who is so glorious,
should be preached and proclaimed to Gentiles, the worst of creatures in regard
of sin. So the name Gentile is put to express all kind of sinners; therefore
the Apostle when he would express the condition of the Gentiles, he calls them
sinners of the Gentiles, because the Gentiles walked in nothing but sin, knew
not God, Gal. 1.15. So when the Apostle would aggravate the fornication of the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.12. he says there was such fornication among them as was
not named, ((...)) among the Gentiles, that is, among the worst and most
notorious sinners, such as the Gentiles were: Yet this Christ, and all the
mystery in him, is to be preached unto sinners, not to Angels but Gentiles.
That God should ever have a thought of goodwil to such, is above al our
apprehensions, God being so infinitely displeased with them; but that he should
make sinners the subjects of the utmost discovery of all this glory, terminate
and center as it were his heart in them, and let them know that which Angels
admire and long to know, this makes up a mystery of it self: for God to make a
throne, and set himself up in the fullness of glory, to preach and proclaim
his own riches to some pure and unspotted souls, whose hearts might presently
fall down before it, this were something suitable; but that sinners, who are the
children of wrath, should be this design; all this mystery is to be preached
to them as a mystery, to be acted only toward them.

Oh how much glory is in this! God is here preaching life, and reconciliation,
redemption, glorification, and laying out himself in ways of wisdom,
righteousness to the worst of sinners; nay, which is more, God in this mystery
is preached as the peace, the life, the righteousness, the propitiation for
poor sinners; what is this but the mystery of free grace acted in infinite
wisdom and love to such souls. The Apostle when he does but think of it he
cannot hold, this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am the chief, says he, 1 Timothy 1.

But secondly, as to sinners in general, so to the Gentiles; the whole world
besides the Jews; this is the proper meaning of it, respecting the calling in
of the Gentiles by preaching, and rejecting the Jews; This the Apostle always
makes a great mystery; the Apostle tells the Colossians, Col. 1.27. that Gods
great intent was to make known the riches of the glory of the mystery among the
Gentiles. It was a mystery that this should not be preached to the Angels, but
to sinners; but herein is a farther mystery, that it should be preached to the
Gentiles, not the Jews. The Jews were owned by God as his own people, he
picked them out from the whole world, put the visible stamp of his glory on
them, seemed not to care for the whole world, but they, let them sink or swim
they had the Oracles of God among them, the Covenant, Promises, Prophesies,
Gods Presence: But the poor Gentiles, outcasts, for some thousands of years
left of God in blindness and darkness to serve Devils and their own lusts,
not a smile of God on them; yet for the Jews to be cast off, have scarce a
glimpse of this mystery, but those Gentiles to be called to the riches of the
mystery, and have preached among them, the Jews had the first offer and refuse
of the Gospel, but they soon discharged it; and now for God to leave his
darling people, and let them have but the outsides of the Gospel, the shadows
of it in Types and Ceremonies, and the offer of the substance of it but in
gross as it were; and for God to preach this Christ among the Gentiles, those
whom the Jews abominated as sinners, strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and without God in the world, that these should be brought under the
dispensation of the rich and precious mystery of the Gospel, may well be put
in to greaten the mystery of Godliness. The Apostle in Ephesians. 3. when he would
magnify his Office in the Ministry, puts in these, that he was sent to preach
to the Gentiles, as the highest favor and glory that could be; for he says in
ver. 2. that he had it by revelation: and he calls it a mystery, and a mystery
of Christ, and a mystery which in other ages was not made known unto the Sons
of men; and he says, it is now only made known by the spirit; what is that
which all this is spoken of?

That the Gentiles should be fellow-heires, and of the same body, partakers of
his promise in Christ by the Gospel, v. 6. That ever such a blind, miserable,
forlorn people, among whom the devils ruled from the beginning of the world,
that they should have the promise of Christ made to them, and be fellow-heires
with the Jews, this is a mystery that the Apostle boasts of that he is sent to
preach it, and therefore he goes on, as one that could not contain, ver. 8. To
me who am less than the least of all Saints is this grace given, that I should
preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; (Among the
Gentiles) there he lays the strength of the privilege; as if he had said,
that I should be sent to open the mystery of heaven to such a stupid and blind
people, to preach the riches of Christ to these poor Gentiles, this is a
dispensation, and a grace indeed. So in another place, Forasmuch as I am the
Apostle of the Gentiles I magnify my Office, Romans 11.13. This must needs be a
great mystery, that the Apostle thought it so high an honor, and such a
peculiar grace given him, that he should but preach unto Gentiles; And in
another place, the Apostle speaking of the manner of his call to this work, he
says, Gal. 2.8. that the spirit of God was mighty in him toward the Gentiles,
it was a mighty and great work, and the Apostle was mightily, and with
exceeding actings of powers moved to it.

This was a new design, never expected to be acted, that God should in the
latter end of the world cause the Sun to come into that part of the Zodiac it
never was, after it had run its course three thousand years, to make a
noonday in the remote and dark places of the world, and leave the habitable
parts of it; that Christ should at last be preached in the fullest riches of
his glory to those who had not a benign aspect of his face in such a time.
Many generations of them went down to hell in multitudes, in droves, not
knowing God or Christ, never dreaming of a Savior, and now for the Lord Jesus
to come and set up his throne among them, open the most precious Cabinets of
his love and riches to these poor creatures, here is a mystery indeed. It was
prophesied of Jesus Christ, and put down as one of the blessedest ends of his
coming, wherein he should be most glorious, He shall be a light to the
Gentiles, Esa. 42.6. Herein lay the glory of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, that
he should be set up as a Sun to enlighten the darkest part of the world. Nay,
yet further, none ever thought that Christ should have been preached to them;
for when he first called his Disciples, sent them abroad to preach, and gave
them a Commission to go into every City and preach peace, Mat. 10.5. He makes a
particular exception, and gives a special charge, Go not into the way of the
Gentiles; as if he had said, Go any where but among them, there is no peace to
be spoken to them, as they have been miserable, so they shall be. And yet at
last for the richest discoveries of peace and love to be made to them, Christ
preached only to them, this is the mystery, those which were no people to be
made a people; for God to be found of those which sought him not, is a wonder.

This is that paradox by which the Apostle aggravates the Jews condition; Romans
9.30, 31. What shall we say then, that the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness have attained unto righteousness, yea, even the best
righteousness, that which is of faith: But Israel which followed after the Law
of righteousness has not obtained it. The Gentiles they never sought after
righteousness, they never minded such a thing, yet obtained it; Christ came to
be a righteousness to them, and left the Jews, who sought to be righteous by
their own works and endeavors without righteousness. The newness and
strangeness of this, that Christ should be preached to the Gentiles equal
with the Jews, and be brought into the same privileges, and of the same body,
was that which stumbled the Jews, even against Christ himself; they thought
it could not be possible that such a generation should ever be looked on by
God, or ever taken it to Covenant with him. The Apostle when he does but think
of the greatness of this mystery, that Christ should be preached to the
Gentiles, and the Jews cast off, cries out, Oh the depth of the riches both of
the Wisdom and Counsel of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, etc. Romans
11.33. As if he had said, here is a contrivance of wisdom, and a depth of
mercy and love indeed, that God has shak'd off his old friends, and taken in
strangers, to be teachers of all his riches.

Thus you have the sum of what this sentence holds forth, and the opening of
a great mystery; the Gospel, which opens the mystery of God, is in it self
a mystery, in regard of the manner and object of its manifestation. The former
two expressions hold forth what the mystery is, with the glory of it; this is
the way of the manifestation of it with the persons, to whom, it is by
preaching, and unto the Gentiles; and this likewise goes to make up the
greatness of the mystery it self. But I shall rather make use of it, then
open it further.

1 Use. If this be so, it may inform us, first, how open the heart of God is
toward us; he cannot contain his love and grace within himself, it is so
vast and ardent, he cannot keep his own counsels that are for our good, but
must manifest it to us, and that in the openest way, preached and proclaimed,
all the mysteries of the Gospel, though there be so much of the glory of God
in them, yet they are not hid, Christ is laid out to open view. God keeps
nothing hid, he will have it preached, let every poor soul know this, that
though all the things in the Gospel be secrets in themselves, yet he will have
them opened, he is not shie of speaking any thing, which may be for your good;
Heaven is opened, God's heart is proclaimed to sinners. Thus light and
immortality, is brought to light by the Gospel, God has set all his glory out
in the light, that men may see how they like them, what they are worth, none
shall be cosen'd with Christ, they are brought to light, Heaven is brought home
to your own doors, you need not go out to seek righteousness, it is brought
to you, peace Preached to every house. Christ will have nothing of his love
kept back, he will have all known what he is, and what he has done; go
preach the Gospel to every Nation, except none, and preach not only this and
that, but preach the Gospel; what ever may bring joy and gladness to poor
souls; go to them. Christ preached to the Gentiles, what is it but this, that
he would have all his glory laid out before them? Oh Brethren, how cheap are
the mysteries of the Gospel! you may have them for taking, you may know them,
if you will lend an ear to them; the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth;
Christ is proclaimed in the streets. Oh what love is in this, that God should
manifest Christ and his deepest mysteries to us, by such a familiar and sweet
way! to tell his mind to us, by such a course medium! open his heart to us! by
our own mouths, it does manifestly demonstrate to us, how willing he is, that
we should know all his heart. Let me therefore exhort you, to come and buy
milk without money, Christ is laid open for every man's good, he is for every
man's penny; Christ deals not underhand with you, you shall see what you buy,
he is not shie nor close in his spirit, but is preached to you. What does the
Gospel say? but here is Christ, as wisdom, righteousness, etc. Take him, and
do what you will with him: Preaching is but a declaring this, that life and
light is in Christ for you, that eternal love waits for you; that what ever may
do you good is provided for you. Oh will souls now refuse Christ, when he is
brought to their very ears, they may hear him speak of his riches, and
glory, and love to them: Oh neglect not so great salvation.

2. It informs us, what is the work of Ministers, to preach Christ, to open
the mystery of the Gospel, to sinners; what ever men preach besides Christ,
is but by the bie, the great duty is to lay out Christ. Ministers must draw out
Christ's blood freely; let the Gospel be preached as it is discovered, without
any limitation of mercy and love, without any exception of souls from Christ.

3. It informs us, to whom Christ must be preached, unto sinners, not only
Saints, but sinners; unto Gentiles, who were the worst of sinners. Christ must
be laid out before the eyes of sinners, offered to sinners, as sinners, in
their lowest condition, notwithstanding all their vileness.

But it may be some may stumble at this, therefore I would clear it up, that
sins are the proper subject, to whom the Gospel must be preached, without
any qualification, but believing and laying hold upon Jesus Christ. Christ is
to be first offered unto sinners, under no other consideration but as sinners;
when it is said here, that this mystery was preached to the Gentiles, what is
the meaning of it, but life and salvation was preached, that is, offered to
them.

Christ must be preached according to the end and intent of his death, and of
his offices; now Christ dyed for sinners, for the ungodly, he came on purpose
to save sinners, therefore he must be offered first to sinners, as such as he
suffered for. He dyed not for such and such sinners so humbled, so qualified,
but for sinners absolutely to take away their sin. When we preach Christ, what
do we declare but Christ as dead, and risen again, for life to sinners.

And the truth is, men are capable of the Gospel, under no other notion but as
sinners; for it offers righteousness and free justification, reconciliation and
redemption, which respects purely sinners; none need Christ but only such, a
righteous Christ is for a sinful creature.

When Jesus Christ comes to any soul, he finds him ungodly, and yet justifies
him; though still this is to be taken in, though Christ be to be preached unto
sinners, yet none but such and such sinners do receive him; or believe upon
him, whose hearts he moves, and makes see the need of him; though Christ
belongs to sinners, and came into the world on purpose to save them, yet these
sinners which he does save, he convinces and humbles, and makes believe; yet
we must preach Christ, according to the true intent, and proper end of Christ's
mission and commission, which was to save sinners, and if men believe not, and
are not sensible of their need, and want of Christ, we must shake off the dust
of our feet.

2. Use. If this be so, then let no sin discourage thee from believing, and
going to Christ, Christ is given to thee, on no other terms, then as thou art
a sinner, and he a Savior; let thy condition be what it will, it cannot be
worse then the Gentiles was: what if thou have lived long in sin, have been a
stranger from God, yea, worship^ the very Devils as they did? Christ and all
the mystery of the Gospel is to be preached to thee, and if preached, thou
may believe. Let all the world know, that grace is not circumscribed, that
Christ is not dainty of his love. We are commanded to proclaim peace, even to
those which are afar off, even cursed Gentiles. Oh except not your selves out
of the terms of the Gospel, when the worst of sinners may come and be welcome
to the richest things of Jesus Christ, yea, to drink of Christ's own heart
blood. What a sad thing is this, that thou should be more shie of Christ,
then he of thee; what is Christ but a Savior? for whom has he done all for,
but for sinners, such as thou art? suppose but any righteousness in thy self,
or any thing but sin, and thou layest a ground work of destroying the end of
Christ's coming: If thou have no sin, God has done nothing for thee; if
sin hinder thee from Christ, it is, because thou know not what Christ is
made for thee. We can do no more then preach Christ to the Gentiles, offer him
as a full and complete Savior for sinners, and if you being sinners, keep you
from Christ, it must be, because you think not Christ to be a Savior. We have
commission, not to over-heat Christ's blood, but give it to souls, as they can
take it; and I here profess this day, that if thou be a Gentile, the veriest
wretch that ever the world bore, Christ is preached unto thee, and thou art
one, who may have all the mystery of the Gospel discovered to thee. Stand
not mincing of the Gospel, make not critical exceptions against Jesus Christ;
it is sufficient thou art a sinner, thou need add no more sins; and if thou
be a sinner, Christ is offered unto thee. I, this mystery is a design of free
grace, and knows no other objects to act upon but such as thou art. Oh lie at
Christ's feet; lay thy ear at the mouth of the Gospel, it speaks nothing but
mysteries of love and life to thee.

Lastly, If it be so, here is a new object for your admiration; that God should
contrive such a mystery, and manifest it unto us, that we, we wretched ones
should be the subjects of such transactions, what reason have we to bless and
admire the love of God to us? Free grace has no bounds: It has not only
wrought in Gods heart, but it breaks out to all the world, stands up and
cries, grace, grace to all the world; how ought we to prize the preaching of
the Gospel, which is a revelation of the mystery of Christ to us? God could
have revealed all this immediately to his Elect, and have made no more ado; but
he will have it preached, this shall be the ordinary and common way of the
manifestation of the great mysteries of the Gospel, and those which cast off
preaching renounce the way of God, whereby he will open his hidden treasures.

Oh brethren! think what cause you have to admire that Christ is preached to
you, his love manifested in such a way; you have Christ taught in your streets,
the sweet sound of the Gospel in your ears; what should take up your hearts
but this? What better news unto sinners than to hear of a Savior? The
Gospel speaks nothing but glad tidings to poor souls; it gives out the
spirits of life and immortality to refresh the soul. You that were Gentiles,
Christ is preached to you, believe, and close in the Gospel, lest it happen to
you as to the Jews, that Christ be preached no more to you; when Christ
declares such great things he looks for attendance, and woe to those souls
that obey not such a Gospel.

SERMON VII.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. Believed on in the World, etc.


THe mystery of Godliness is comprehended in two things: Gods actings toward
us, and our actings toward God; of the first you have heard in the former
expressions, how richly and sutably God has discovered himself to the
salvation of his poor creature, man; God himself personates us in our
condition, and so transacts our happiness, and that we might have the comfort
of it, proclaims it by preaching,, even unto the Gentiles, the most forlorn
and contemptiblest souls, and this is the right line in which the greatness
of this mystery is conveyed; for that it was seen of Angels, is but collateral
to it, to make up the glory of it ab extra, from the admiration of such divine
creatures, when they did but look on it; but yet this mystery goes on still in
its greatness, even in regard of our actings toward it; and this is put in
among the rest, to fill it up, that it was believed on in the world; the
receiving of Jesus Christ, and believing on him, as the Author of life and
salvation, and the righteousness, and redemption of poor sinners, is one part
of the great mystery of godliness, and that which is as much to be admired as
any of the rest.

Let us first look on it, in relation to the other parts of this mystery,
then consider it in it self.

First, consider it as with the rest, and it is one of the greatest parts of
the mystery; for the acting and contriving of this in God's own heart, he had
no opposition, all was done in light and glory; but when it was acted on us,
there was the opposition, light and darkness striving together; yet one would
think this should be no mystery at all, for us to believe this which was so
much for our own eternal good. Who will wonder at a starved beggar, to take
bread that is offered him? or for a poor prisoner condemned, to take a pardon?
all the wonder is, that the man should be so bountiful, as to part with the
bread out of his own belly, to give the beggar, and that the K. should be so
gracious, as to grant the pardon to such a wretch; yet the Holy Ghost sets this
down as an equal mystery with the rest, that Christ should be believed on in
the world, which is no more, but that sinners should receive and entertain
that glory, which is let down from Heaven, to bless them withal, to lay hold
on that Rock, without which, they are drowned for ever; to accept of that
grace, which only can bring salvation to them, to give up themselves to be
saved by the infinite riches of love and glory; yet this is a mystery, that
ever this Christ should be thus believed on. That God should be manifest in
flesh, to save such sinners as we are, why his own infinite love prompted him
to it, he had a design of glory out of it, he knew what he did, it was an essay
of acting out his wisdom and love, and that he was seen of Angels; such
sagacious and spiritual creatures, is not so much wonder, for who was fit to
behold such an object, but such blessed spirits, and that it should be preached
to the Gentiles, may yet be conceived: For, God to proclaim it to us, and open
his heart, was exceeding glorious, yet still this was God letting out his own
love to us; but that sinners, who lie in darkness, know nothing of God,
should believe this; this is yet a farther mystery, and as great as any of the
others.

But to open it more fully, that we may see wherein this mystery lies in this
expression, I shall lay down these particulars;

It will be a mystery if you consider, 1. The condition which the world is in.
2. The nature of believing. 3. The difficulties, and disadvantages, to the
work of believing. 4. The requisites to such an act.


For the first. That Christ should be believed on in the world; by the world is
meant the Gentiles, unto whom Christ was to be preached. Now, the whole world
lay in wickedness, averse from God, scorning the name of Christ; the condition
of the world was a condition of utter darkness, they were given up to
blindness, and hardness of heart, they walked in the valley of the shadow of
death, under the power of the Devil, ruling in their hearts, as children of
disobedience, dead in trespasses and sins, 2 Ephesians. 1, 2, 3. What a wonder is it,
for blind men to see, though it be the best thing which may do them good; for
dead men to be sensible of a miserable condition, or of any thing that lies
upon them; such were all the world, running with full careere to sin, and Hell,
and will not be stopped, delighting in sin as their meat and drink, serving
their lust and the Devil as their God; men not only not sensible of their own
estate, but having the name of that which may reform them: Now, for such to
receive and entertain a Christ, submit to the glory of the Gospel, must needs
be a mystery: how such blind souls can see the light of the glory of God,
such dead hearts entertain joyfully a living Christ, and be brought from death
to life, from the power of Satan to God, be transformed into light and life, be
taken up into glory, may well be put on the account of the mystery; of the
Gospel, and add to its greatness.

But 2. What is meant by believing? in general here Faith is put for all
graces, and all the glorious workings of God in our hearts, believing being the
first and the choicest grace, every grace in our hearts makes up a mystery;
and believing here comprehends all the workings of our hearts, in relation to
the design of God in the Gospel, as the manifestation of God in flesh, and
his justification in spirit, is put for all the work of redemption and
justification, the foundation of it being surely laid in that, so all the
workings of it in our hearts, is summed up in believing: How our hearts should
take in all this love, and be turned into it, and live in it; this is a
mystery indeed; but especially, believing is to be taken properly for the
Faith it self, which is nothing else, but a closing with, a receiving of, and
laying hold on Jesus Christ; now if you look into the nature of this Faith, you
will find it a mystery, that Christ should be believed on in the world.

1. A renunciation of self. 2. A real and full closing with Jesus Christ. 3.
It is a receiving Christ on his own terms.
For the first; That a man should renounce himself, and be nothing, it is the
hardest strait that Nature is put to, self being the principle and end of all
men's actions by Nature, and that which lies diametrically opposite to the
mystery of godliness, for a poor creature, whose Nature and actings, can
comply with nothing but self, to abjure it, and cast away all, yea abhor and
loath self, as its misery; what shall we think of this? can it amount to less
then a mystery, to see Nature not only to be weakened, but turned against it
self, and acting contrary to its own principles? As to see light thinks
descend, and heavy ascend, and that against its nature. Self is the
predominant principle of the world, it rules like the sole Monarch, and there
is no absolute Monarch but self; it rules in the most noble natural breasts,
and is that which is founded in the nature of things. But now, when a man
believes he goes directly against natural self, he says he is nothing, nor
can do nothing; and not only is believing a denial of the worst self, sin
and lust, (which yet is as a man's right eye, yea, as the Caul of a man's heart)
but he denies honest self, and religious self, self dressed and adorned, self
righteousness and actings, self adorned with the most glorious endowments,
and richest performances, self natural and acquired, yea, and a soul contrary
to all its motions, both rational and seemingly godly believes on Jesus
Christ. Take a raised and high spirit, one who has built his nest in the
Stars, in regard of speculation, and one whom the world can say nothing in
regard of converse unto; for him to come and submit to a Christ, to throw down
all that ever he has studied, as dung and dross, to descend and come into the
lower parts of the earth, and look on himself as the poorest despicablest,
and undonnest creature in the world; one that knows not the way to happiness,
(which he must do, if he believe) why this is the mystery. Self is sometime
so painted, acted in so much state, and so spirituallised, (as it were) set out
with such ornaments, both of nature, art, and morally spiritual gifts, that it
would make any spirit in love with it; yet when a soul comes to believe on
Christ, he must renounce all these as dung and dross, the worst of things, in
regard of saving his soul, or in comparison of Jesus Christ. This is death to
a man; Nature would as lieve be damned, as entertain such a proposition, and
cast it self out of such a privilege, that it looks on as its birthright;
yet there was no soul that ever believed on Jesus Christ, but did willingly
do this. Paul, when he begins to reckon up his privileges, both of his birth
and education, and the strictness of his life, one would have thought he
needed no more, Phil. 3. (and he thought so to) self was so richly
accomplished, not only against the Law, but the Gospel; he was borne in the
Church, had the privileges of a Saint, was blameless in the Law; yet when he
came to believe, he was glad to cast away all this, as the offscouring of the
world; he was alive once, and thought himself a glorious one; but he dyed to
all these, they were all as dead things to him. For a man, not only to deny his
lusts, that are his Nature, (and so dear, as many venture the wrath of God
for) but his performances, which he has been in for a long time, and throw
down the glorious structure of duty, he has been building for 20, 30, 40 years
together, with all the curious paintings of formality: You had better tell men
of parting with God, Christ, Heaven, yea, of all the good of soul and body,
rather then of such a thing.

This self is the bottom and original, of all sin, it is that which is the
very constitution of our Natures: Self has been borne and bred with us; it
lives in our bosoms, has been the old companion in all our actions, and to be
cast off at last, and hated, is very hard; it is easier to change the course of
the Sun, and turn Heaven into Earth, to place the Elements above, and the
Stars beneath, to make the stream naturally run back from the same Fountain
it came, yea, to work the greatest miracle in Nature, then to make a man to
deny himself, especially self so ingratiated and clothed with gifts and
honesty, and righteousness of the Law. Yet when a man believes, this is the
first thing done upon him, self is turned against self; Nature runs counter
to its own inclinations: that darling and first borne of the souls delights
and love is made the abomination of the heart, and the soul most set against
it. Now let this be weighed, which yet is but the first, and rather implicit,
and supposed act of Faith, then the Nature of it, and you cannot but conclude,
that this is a great mystery, that Christ should be believed on in the world.

But 2. Which is yet farther; for a soul to close in with Jesus Christ, and
fully to rely on him as his own, and expect all righteousness and grace in
him alone, and nothing from self, first or last, (which is properly believing)
this sets it out yet farther:

For 1. It is a great venture for a soul to forsake self, its dearest
consort, and leave all its strong engagements to the flesh; for that which yet
he has no particular assurance of, but a bare tender and offer. No man in
reason will part with any thing in possession, but upon a certainty of a
better; whereas the soul is still in doubt of what it may enjoy, though Christ
be offered to all, yet some go without him; and this may be the condition of
the soul.

'Yea, 2. To close in with Christ, against whom it has naturally the greatest
antipathy, and whom it never saw; to cast all the weight of its joy and comfort
on Christ, whom the heart has offended, and against whom it has received such
prejudices, that his heart cannot endure him of any; this is exceeding strange
unto our apprehensions. As Abram left all his own Kindred, and Fathers house,
and not knowing where he went, binding up this reason, and denying a present
good, only on the security of a general and indeterminate promise, was a
miracle to all the world; for this is the Nature of Faith, on a bare word and
promise to close in with Christ, and venture its eternal comfort. Faith comes
by hearing, and that of the word preached that is, of the word of promise. Now,
for a soul engaged thus to sin, and lust, and self, to leave all on a promise
of a Christ, which yet, the soul is a stranger unto, and is dark in the
knowledge of; this must needs be a mystery; and that

3. If you consider that it is not only a bare taking of Christ as at a shift,
to make some present advantage of him, to rid a man out of fears, or preserve
him from wrath, which self may be willing unto, out of its own principles;
but it is a receiving Christ on his own terms, a submitting unto the tenure of
all his commandments, it is taking Christ nakedly, with all his holiness, as
well as his love, yea with all his inconveniences unto flesh and blood, even to
take up a Cross with him, lie down in the grave with him; it is a giving up
the soul unto Christ, to be what he will, and do what he will; that a soul
believes not only for peace and joy, but for power and life, and is led captive
for ever, unto the will of Christ; therefore it is called the obedience of
Faith by the Apostle; this must needs be a mystery, especially if you consider
in the third place, the difficulties and disadvantages the poor sinner meets
withal in the way, besides that natural darkness and stupidity which lies
on our hearts, that we cannot judge of our own peace, and that averseness from
Faith in us, above any thing else. There be these difficulties rise up, for a
soul to leap over.

1. The greatness of sin, which when it is once discovered to an enlightened
soul, is so great and vile, that it cannot imagine how it can be pardoned, the
Law pressing so hard for satisfaction, and the soul can give none; when it
thinks of God, he is so offended it thinks, that he will never have mercy. The
sinner is now put to it, in the full prospect of such a heart, of such
abominations, to go to Christ for salvation, to believe all these sins, though
so amazing the soul, and of such a damning Nature, to be all done away, and
see more righteousness in Christ, then sin in it, this is a hard work.

But 2. That a soul should believe at such a time, when yet among all the rest
of its sins, it has such a root of unbelief within it, springing from the
power of self-love, which keeps the soul under, raises mists before the eyes
of the souls self and it, striving to evade all the arguments of the Gospel,
to elude and baffle the soul, in all its apprehensions of Christ. Unbelief
says, there is no such thing as Christ, it is but a mockery, a delusion, or
else raises up a dust before the promise, that the soul may not see it for
him; it tells the soul, it is to no end to think of pardon, thou art gone too
far to recover, it is too late, or else lessens the riches of mercy, but
multiplyes the misery of sin: Thus unbelief, like a strong man uncontrouled,
reigns in the heart: But which is more,

3. Sense and reason stand unsatisfied, the soul can neither see cause why to
believe, nor find any ground in it self, that if it believe, it must go
beyond experience, go contrary to its own senses it feels nothing but the
workings of deaths thorough sin, sees nothing but hell before its eyes, and a
necessity of satisfying justice; it has nothing visibly held out to it, but a
general promise of a Christ, which unbelief evades; it cannot see reason, why
God who has been so highly displeased, can ever pass by such affronts, and
take the soul into favor. Now, for a man to believe against his own sense
and reason; as Abram believed against hope, and above hope, La mystery indeed:
To venture a man's eternal happiness against his reason and sense, on such
general terms as at first is presented to the soul, is the great wonder of
the world; especially if we yet look further and consider,

4. What prejudices, and misprisions such a sinner has of Christ. The Devil
presents him under cruel shapes to such a soul, and unbelief is not backward
to make hideous discoveries, as that he is not so rich, nor so merciful; one
which has, but will not spare me, which has a stock, but no heart; either
they think he cannot, or will not give what the soul needs. Christ lies
remote from the eye of the soul, he is in Heaven, and they see not his heart,
they must take things on trust, receive him in the promises, and that seems to
be an uncertain way of assurance. That gross ignorance of the Nature of the
Gospel, of the person of Christ, is of it self invincible, and oh what
conceits are raised up in the heart, against Jesus Christ. The soul will run
to this, and that, rather then Christ; it will look to self, if it can find
any thing there, which may give it but little a ease, (though it do deceive
it) rather then go to Christ; it will court duties, and performances, Saints
and ordinances; if any of them will afford but a spark of comfort to it, that
it may stay from Christ; for self and sin cannot endure to hear a good word
of Christ, the Antipathy is in nothing stranger.

Lastly, view the requisites to believing; what is required to make one
believe, for it is above the power of Nature. Why?

1. There must a light from Heaven shine into our hearts. All the light of
Nature and reason can never show what Christ is, nor make a man capable of
knowing any thing of this mystery; The natural man knows not the things of
God, and it is impossible for him to discern them. 1 Cor. 2. Therefore Paul,
when he speaks of his conversion, he describes it by a light that shined from
Heaven, above the light of the Sun; He says, that Christ was revealed in him,
Acts 9. Gal. 1. Thus to make any soul believe, he must have (...) spiritual
eye made on purpose, and that eye enlightened immediately from God; therefore
you shall find believing and seeing all one in Scripture, because Faith is a
spiritual sight of the Lord Jesus. But

2. All this will not do, but there must be an almighty power put forth, even
as in creation, to make a soul believe, so the Ap. says, Ephesians. 1. that the
same power is put forth to make souls believe, that was, to raise up Christ
from the dead; the soul lies in such darkness, and has such an enmity to
Christ, that nothing can reconcile it, or make a soul have good thoughts of
Christ, but to create a new heart in him, there is no dealing with the old
heart, or working on it, it will come to no terms of agreement at all; for we
are not only enemies, but enmity it self, there is not only in us an
incapacity, but an opposition. Col. 1.21. So the Apostle expresses it, by the
casting down strong holds, imaginations, and every thing which exalts it
self against Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4. There are such forts, which unbelief
has raised in the soul, such strong holds, and mighty strange, and yet strong
imaginations against Jesus Christ, that nothing but weapons made mighty
thorough God, can cast them down. These strong holds are such as will never
yield, take no quarter; therefore they must be pulled down with a high hand;
and there are imaginations, a thousand reasonings against Christ and the
Gospel, which can never be answered, but they must be cast down. Christ must
not only be fet out of Heaven in light, and shown unto a poor soul, but the
power of the almighty God must come with him, and cast down all opposition
against him, if all the Angels should come else to persuade the soul; nay if
Christ himself should come in his own person without this power, he could not
persuade the soul out of its Forts. Therefore it is said, None can come to
Christ, except the father draw him. John 6. That is, none can ever believe on
Christ, except God let out a mighty power, which may bring him. So Faith is
called Faith of the operation of God, because it is a work peculiarly, that
goes thorough his hands, it is beyond all other power to do. To sum up all
then, This must needs be a great mystery, that Christ should be believed on in
the world; that darkness should comprehend light; enmity embrace a union; that
such proud hearts as we have, should be content to go a begging to one we
naturally hate; for a man to deny his sense, reason, self, righteousness,
lusts, prejudices, and submit to an unknown Christ, to be made nothing of,
live at the finding of another. For this is the language of Faith; I am
nothing, Christ is all, I cannot live without him.

In a word, there are the greatest paradoxes in the workings of Faith, as any
thing.

Nothing living, as if it had all things: unrighteousness making its self
most righteous; a soul at the greatest distance from God, going most boldly to
him, one which has most offended him, most relying on him, a soul which has
nothing but sin, assured it shall have all grace, in the midst of greatest
unworthiness, triumphing in the compleatest righteousness: The greatest enemy
made submit to the hardest terms to his Nature; with many such are found in
the acting of Faith, that you see what a mystery is in this expression;
believed on in the world, and how it may be well rancked in the number of these
great mysteries.

Us. 1. If this be so, then let shame cover our faces, that ever this should be
reckoned up as a mystery, that we believe, that God should manifest himself to
us, bring down his own glory to our eyes, offer life and immortality to us,
and it should be a wonder for us to take it; that God should act in so much
love unto us, and frame such a Fabric of glory, to take us into it, may well
be a mystery, who can express it? But that it should be a mystery for us to
believe this, and to take God on his own word, so faithfully spoken, is our
misery, though in it self a mystery. Must it be a wonder for hungry creatures,
to eat the bread set before them, and for beggars to take the Alms offered
them? yet the Holy Ghost makes this a mystery, that we believe on Jesus Christ.
What should shame us more then this, that we have not a hand to take in our
own happiness, cannot swallow down a drop of the water of life, except it be
poured in us? What an aggravation must it be of our sin, that we are harder to
believe, and take in what God has done for us, then for God to kill his own
Son, and part with him out of his own bowels? We have nothing to do but
believe, and yet it is a wonder we do believe. Oh strange creatures; God
manifested in flesh, came in a sensible and demonstrative way, of love and
glory, to woo poor sinners, and yet they will not believe. Are you not yet
ashamed? what, shall God present his own heart in blood to you, and yet you
will not receive it. Christ is come as justification and righteousness, with
peace and sweetness, and yet men will not believe; this is most unreasonable
and wicked.

2. Use. Have not slight thoughts of believing, it is not an ordinary work;
men think it is nothing to believe: If a man do but live under the Gospel,
and have a general profession of it, he thinks he is a believer. Oh know Faith
is the highest work of a Christian, that which is the acting of a mystery; if
thou did but know thy own heart, and see thy sin, thou would wonder how
ever thou came to believe on Jesus Christ. There is a common Faith indeed,
which the world has, but it is not worthy the name of Faith, a Faith which is
merely historical and traditionall; but for the Faith here spoken of, the
Faith of God's Elect, that is another manner of work; thou will find it a
mystery for thee to believe on Jesus Christ. It is an easy matter for men to
say they believe, when they see neither sin nor Christ; but have thou ever had
but an aspect into thy own sinful Nature, and a right knowledge of thy
wretched state, then tell me, whether Faith be a common or an easy thing; it
is that which many souls see it harder to act then remove Mountains. For a
poor trembling soul, who stands on the brink of Hell, to leap into Christ's
bosom, and such a proud heart as thou have, to be willing to be at the
disposing of Jesus Christ, and make a total resignation of self, and all
interest to Christ, yea, though thou may enjoy them; this is Faith, and a
great mystery, therefore deceive not thy own heart.

3. Use. Let us from hence see, what is the great thing the Gospel requires of
us; it is to believe, all is summed up in this; all the mysteries of the
Gospel are nothing to us without believing. Though God be manifested in flesh,
and justified in spirit, that is, made redemption and justification for us; yet
if he be not believed on by the world, it is nothing to us. Faith brings down
the particular sweetness and comfort of all this unto us, and puts us in
actual possession of it; what ever God is to us before Faith, yet we have no
benefit really by it until we believe. Oh therefore, make this your work,
admit of no exception, against believing, this is the great duty of the
Gospel, and the great way of God's revealing himself to us; it is a taking
hold of all that Christ does, and has for us, and gives us the actual
enjoyment of it. God requires no more of us, but that we believe the work is
done really for us in Christ's person, and this is preached unto us, and
nothing else remains, but the putting to our seal by Faith, that all is true:
The blood of Christ is drawn out, and his graces run out in justification, and
sanctification, nothing is behind, but the laying of our mouths to his breasts,
the stretching out of our hands, to receive in that life and righteousness
which is purchased for us. Oh let not the work stick in you, your believing
does as it were perfect the mystery of the Gospel. According as God has
discovered himself, so should we act Faith; the mystery of God in Christ has
wrought exceeding strongly; so should our Faith. The mystery of your salvation
is opened, the materials of it made ready, and brought down to you to take,
only your work is to believe, lay hold on them by Faith. God in flesh
condemned, and justified in spirit, is preached to you, that you may believe.
The blood of Christ is shed, and fitly tempered for to quiet your consciences;
only your mouth must be opened wide to receive it. Faith is nothing else but
the eying of what Christ has done, and taking it home to its self, and living
in the mystery as its own. Oh now, God has done all so well, will not you set
to your soul that it is true? By believing you witness unto all the other
mysteries. The Apostle says, he that believes not has made God a liar,
because he believes not the record that God has given of his Son. 1 John
5.10. Unbelief belies God in all he has done for us: Let Faith have no stop
nor stint in its actings; suffer no contrary objections to believing; as the
riches and righteousness of God are laid out before you, and demonstrated to
your very senses, so give faithful witness to all by believing; the more you
believe, the more you get the sweetness of call this fullness, and you act in
the mystery your self; for not only Christ, but your Faith on him, is part of
the great mystery of godliness.

SERMON X.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. Received up into Glory.


WE are now come to the last step of this long ascent, at the top of which,
you have the full sight of all divine workings; God seems to begin low, takes
flesh upon him, and is condemned; but then rises higher, and is justified in
the spirit, and admired by Angels, preached in power to the Gentiles, yea, and
believed on in the world, and now received up into Glory. This notes the
highest advancement of our Nature, in the Person of Jesus Christ. The great
subject of this mystery, is Jesus Christ, he is the center in which all these
lines end, the great and common representative of all the Elect; and he is set
forth here, as under diverse forms and conditions he past through, and the
several ways of his manifestation to the creature, as condemned and
justified, as admired and preached, and believed on in the world, and now at
last, as received up into glory. And it is no more then to set forth the 3
great acts which Christ did, as Mediator for us, in transacting our salvation;
he was manifest in flesh, to dye for our sins, he rose again for our
justification, he ascended up into Heaven, to sit at Gods right hand for us.
This is put in opposition unto his lowest extremity of humiliation for us. He
that descended, also ascended far above the Heavens. So that now we must view
this mystery as in another world, and follow it up to Heaven, where it is acted
in glory.

The greatest part is yet behind, it seems now to be gone out of sight; as the
sun, when it is gone from our Horison, begins a new day in another part of the
world: So God having acted that part of the mystery which was for this world,
takes him up into Glory, there to act the rest in a new and blessed way. By
glory is meant Heaven, where Gods sets forth his glory most.

For the cleerer opening of this, I shall propound these things?

1. Who or what it is, that is taken up into glory.

2. What it does import and comprehend?

3. The mystery which is in it.

For the first; It is no other but Jesus Christ, who was God manifest in flesh,
who after he had suffered, entered into his glory, having done his work, as the
Apostle says, he entered into his rest, Heb. 4. He came out of the lap of his
Fathers love, into a wide and miserable world, to lead a contemptible and mean
life, in the form of a servant, and having finished his course, is again taken
up into that glory, and high dignity from whence he came. This was the prayer
of Christ, that when he had ended his work in the world, that God would
restore him to that glory he had with him, from the beginning of the world,
John 17. He left his place for a while, seemed to be turned out of it, as one
not worthy of it, until he should purchase it by his own blood. He was let
fall out of glory into a form of misery, and lost his station for a while, and
again is restored to it, with an addition of highest honor.

That this is meant properly of the person of Christ is clear, for the same is
received up to glory, who was God manifest in flesh, and justified in spirit,
who died and rose again; that none of the Saints did, neither can any other be
said to be seen of Angels, nor preached to poor sinners, nor is any the object
of Faith, but Jesus Christ; but yet this must be granted, that mystically, and
representatively, the Saints likewise are received up into glory with him, as I
shall show anon; and if you will that Jesus Christ that in the names of all the
Elect was condemned, and made a sacrifice for sin, and justified in the Spirit
in their stead, that Christ is also received up into glory as in their stead.

But secondly, what does this hold forth, that Christ is received up into
glory? You must look on this as containing a glorious design, and a great part
in the salvation of souls.

1. It implies a complete finishing of that work he had to do for us here,
that there was no more to be done in this world for us, that the satisfactory
work to justice was finished, and he and his sacrifice accepted before God;
Heb. 10. having by one offering perfected those which are sanctified; he entered
into the holiest place, viz. heaven, and there sat down at the right hand of
God, having no more to do, justice being satisfied, justification for sinners
procured; this was evident when he rose again: For if he had not paid the
debt, he had never come out of prison; but much more evident seeing he is
received up into heaven, taken into the Fathers bosom: many break prison, and
walk up and down securely, as if all were paid, but they dare not come in the
face of the Court and behold the Judge, or come nigh any of their Creditors;
this is the greatest ground of security that can be possible, that sin is done
away, and that redemption is purchased, because that Christ is received up into
glory; God would never have let Christ come so nigh him, if he had any of the
smell of his grave-cloaths on him; had left any one sin unsatisfied for.

2. It imports not only a bare satisfaction of justice, but clearly
demonstrateth how infinitely God is pleased with Jesus Christ, and what he has
done, that his heart is contented, and he has over and over pleased him; many
a broken debt may be paid by a third penny, and composition and the Creditor
pronounce satisfaction in Law: But Christ did not agree so with God by way of
composition, but Christ paid the utmost farthing that justice could command,
and in such a way that God is infinitely taken with him and his Oblation, and
so delighted in him as that he thinks him not fit to stay any longer in this
world, but takes him up to glory, cannot be without him in heaven, gives him a
name above every name; that he may ask what he will, he has the command of
all Gods treasuries, of all his riches.

When Christ went up and down the world, and was but about the work, he could
not hold but must send the Spirit to proclaim to all the world, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; as if he had said, Whatever he shall do
I will accept: But now how much more when he has so faithfully acted out his
will, and is received up into his glory; and is received up into his glory, is
God pleased with him? It is said, that Christ entered into heaven there to
appear before God for us. As a confident Debtor, who has paid the Creditor,
comes into the Court and asks, who has any thing to say to him, he owed no
man a farthing, all is paid, let the Law take its course: So did Christ, he
entered into heaven as one asking justice, what will you have more for poor
sinners? here I am, if the Law has any thing to say to these souls which I
have dyed for; have not I given satisfaction to the utmost? I here appear to
answer in their behalf who cannot speak for themselves; Justice is silent,
gives the acquittance, and God sets Christ down at his right hand; no place, no
honor and advancement is too good for him who has purchased so much; So that
now a poor soul by faith may see a discharge indeed of all sin; do but think
that Christ is taken up into glory, and there cannot remain a thought that any
sin is unsatisfied for; God is pleased so as that nothing but glory is to be
expected.

3. This imports a new design to be acted in heaven for us; he is taken up
into glory that he may act gloriously the second part of our happiness; he
acted one part in flesh, in the habit of a beggar clothed with rags: He is now
gone to act the person of a Prince in robes of glory, and all this to manage
our salvation in the richest way that can be; he is now gone to follow his
blood, and to get all into his own hands, that he may make ready mansions of
glory for us. Two great things Christ acts for us now in glory, which is of
exceeding consequence to the salvation of our souls.

First, He is in place of an Advocate for us, Heb. 7.25. he lives to intercede
for us; he is always begging of favor and love for us; he lies there to stop
whatever plea may be brought in against us by the Devil, or the Law: So that
no sin can come in to make plea there but Christ answers it with his old
satisfaction; he is there to get out fresh pardons for new sins.

Secondly, He is the great provider and caterer for us, against we come there
he is laying up a store and stock of glory for us; he went before to take up
Gods heart for us, and now is drawing out the riches of love from him, and
laying it in bank for us; therefore the Apostle says, My God shall supply
your wants according to his riches in glory; now he is in glory, he intimating
that Christ's riches lie in glory, and now he has the possession of them all.
And this is that which thirdly is here so great a part of the Mystery of
Godliness; that God who was manifested in flesh should be received up into
glory; he who dwelt in glory, and was nothing but glory, should yet be
represented as at a distance from glory, and said to be received into it; but
especially the mystery lies in this: That Christ went not up as a single
person, but taken up as a common person, carrying all the Elect with him;
whatever was to be done on us was done representatively, and vertually on
Christ as in our nature; he dyed as a common person, and was justified as a
common person, and so now he is received up into glory he went not up alone;
but though it is meant properly of his person, yet vertually, and mystically it
is meant of all the Saints, they were all taken up with Jesus Christ into
glory; not that they are so actually, but mystically as in Christ their head.
And this is the design, God coming down to us to bring us up to himself,
letting aside his glory, from whence we were departed, and then taking it up
again, and us with him. It is no mystery for Christ as God to be in glory, so
he cannot be said to be received into it, for he never was without it, but it
is meant of his humane nature. Neither was Christ's humane nature received up
for it self, but as it was a figure of us; Christ's person was the great
model, and first draught of all that shall be done to his body the Saints,
therefore he is said to be the Captain of our salvation that leads us all on,
and our forerunner into heaven; he breaks the clouds first, appears first
before God, and is glorified, then we follow; Christ wears the Crown in heaven
as our King, and he is united and married to God as our Proxy.

This is the mystery, poor sinners taken into glory with Jesus Christ, God
himself in our own nature is gone into glory for us. Christ is not only gone
to heaven to prepare a place for us, Joh. 14. but sits in heaven in our room,
and God looks on him as the great Picture of all that body, and delights
himself in seeing them all glorified as in him. And even the Saints now are
said to sit down with Christ already, Ephesians. 2. (in supercoelestibus) in
heavenly places, in supercoelestiall places. And as though now we be the Sons
of God we know not what we shall be when we come to glory, but that we shall be
like Christ; so though we know Christ is gone up to glory, yet what new mystery
he acts there, and how he acts out our salvation as in glory, we know not
until we be actually taken up into the same glory, we have but hints of that
transaction.

Use 1. What a stately Tower have we erected for to see heaven on? What a fair
prospect have we of the heavenly state of blessed souls? Faith may stand on
this mount and see it self in glory; it is like some optique glasses, which
bring in all which is done without in the streets into one room; this
expression opens heaven to every believer, and so fully that he cannot but see
glory. Is Christ received up into glory? What is this but the investing all
Saints with the same privilege; your faith is led up very high to take in
glory it self. Faith stands very lofty when it may both see earth and heaven
at once, all that God has acted for it here, and all that he will act in
heaven. Faith should eye Christ as far as he goes; if he be ascended, so should
faith; if he go into glory, so should you also by believing Jesus Christ is
lifted up, thus that we might be drawn after him; it is a great encouragement
to us to think that Christ was dead for our sins, and is risen again as our
justification: But much more that Christ is gone into glory, and has carried
all our names with him into the Fathers bosom; believers should look on Christ
under a twofold notion.

1. As one from whom all their happiness comes; as a head ordained on purpose
to convey life and influence unto the soul; one who is filled with all
fullness to fill them.

2. As the plat-forme and idea of what they shall be, and this is a high
consideration, that Saints may not only have from Christ, but expect to be what
he is; look whatever God acted on the person of Christ, that he did as in our
behalf, and means to act the same on us: was Christ crucified? so are we; as
he rose again, so are we raised together with him, and if he be taken up into
glory, so are we. Oh how should faith stand and gaze on Jesus Christ now he is
in glory; not an ordinary and mean act of faith will come up into this
mystery, such a faith only as sets the soul in heaven, and puts it in a
condition of glorious triumph becomes this expression; heaven is not only
opened, but possessed by Jesus Christ for us. Faith goes to Christ as dying and
rising again, and so believes its remission of sins and justification; but yet
faith is low while it does not go within the veil and see glory. Saints should
not rejoice in present acts, but live on future glory, as it was with the Jews
at that time when the high Priest went into the holy of holies, (whcih was very
seldom) yet then they ought to have higher joy in believing, because they saw
the utmost of their happiness represented then when merely they saw the
bullock killed for sin. So now that Christ is gone into glory, the holy place
not made with hands, we should not only have a faith of justification, but of
glorification; you may anticipate the condition of heaven it self, and your
actual possession of that by believing; when faith looks down and sees Christ
on the Cross, and his blood running out to satisfy wrath, it cannot choose
but think that righteousness is procured, especially when we see him rise
again; but now when we look up higher, and see Christ taken into glory, what
can we have less than a glorious faith?

Use 2. And now seeing I am fallen on this, I cannot choose but bewail our
stupidity, and reprove our folly; how miserable do believers live? Where is the
spirit of glory that should be on them? When Stephen saw Jesus at the right
hand of God (though but for a moment) his face did shine like glory, Acts 8.
How many are there that never came up yet to act faith in Christ as a glorified
Christ? We are yet still in the lower form, can take in no more of Christ than
what was done on the Cross, what some natural and common resemblances of him
can hold forth; we seldom follow Christ into heaven to see what he is doing
there for us; many profess to live immediately on God, and to be in glory
already, but we cannot see their faces shine, their outward man scarce as
glorious as common professors. It were well if we could see Christ in his
glory; such a sight would be transforming of souls indeed; we should live not
only as men borne for glory, but as in glory, as these that have not only one
foot in the grave, but one foot in heaven; heaven is not only let down to you
in the frame and picture of it, but you are taken into it in the person of the
Lord Jesus; you may not only dream of heaven, but enjoy it; and you thar live
below glory live below Christ who is received up into glory.

Use 3. This cannot but heighten the joys, and enlarge the comforts of the
Saints, when they do but consider that Christ is received up into glory. In
believing this, what can they find less than joy unspeakable and full of
glory. For,

First, Now Jesus Christ is accepted of the Father for them, and has declared
gloriously that his heart is at rest in the works of his hands, and that he is
well pleased with you; for in this condition he could never else have received
Christ into heaven: if there were any frowns left in Gods face, you might be
sure Christ should have them, first he coming so nigh him; and if any flawes
were in your pardon, or any exception against his satisfaction, he had heard of
it, and would have been turned out of heaven until he had made full payment;
thou need not doubt acceptance at the throne of grace and to find a blessed
welcome to God, when Jesus Christ is accepted for thee, and thou come in
such a relation.

Secondly, Now he is in a capacity of acting out all his love, and the Fathers
desire in the most glorious way to thee; Christ is gone into heaven to do
something more for thee still; he had some glorious piece to frame for the
Saints, and therefore left this world and went to his Father that he might act
it in glory, and now he is invested with all the riches of heaven; he has all
the keys of heaven and hell, he has all power to command, he has received all
the promise to himself, and all that he has to do is to empty himself again
on you; he has not only got his fathers heart for you, but got all his riches
to bestow on you; he cares not as it were for his own advancement, but only as
it is the advantage to glorify you; and now he can do what he will; when he
came to heaven the Father bid him sit down at his right hand and take what he
would, he would have no more to do with the world, but he should bestow what he
had among his Saints; this should be the reward of his death; all judgment is
committed to the Son, the Father judges no man, Joh. 10. he has given away all
his prerogatives unto Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, As Christ is received up into glory to act for you, and to bring you
to glory, so he sits in heaven to represent you; he is there as a public
person, and God sees you all in him; he does but occupy your place, and employ
your stock before you come to years, all you must be gathered into his
fullness, and received up into the same glory; he cannot be contented with that
glory he has until you be with him, then he still prays the Father so
earnestly that you may be with him where he is, Joh. 17. that they may see
(that is, enjoy my glory) if Christ intended to resign up his place, and all
his glory when once his Saints were come about him; he is but as Feoffee in
trust with your estate; and how will Christ improve it for you who has such an
opportunity? And which is more, what kind of glory must that needs be which is
the honor and the happiness of Jesus Christ, which is his highest advancement
as Mediator.

Therefore every Saint should expect every sight of Christ as glorious to wait
on the Lord Jesus for glorious manifestations of himself, and in the next
place expect to see himself in glory; do not only remember that you have a
head in glory, who can supply your wants, but remember that you are there with
him, and that his Crown is as it were a burden on his own head until it be
set on yours; live according to the rate of such a mystery; ask of Christ
communications according to his riches in glory; let all your actings be
glorious, all your walkings, joys, breathings, let them all be as in glory;
view Christ, and see him as in that relation and condition, and you will soon
have the sparkles of the same glory on your hearts; bound not your faith and
expectations within this poor world, and the enjoyments of in it, but ever and
anon cast glances into glory, and if you will be in such an estate you must get
Christ that is received up into glory in you as the hope of glory, Col. 1.27.
It is only as Christ breaks forth in your hearts by faith that you come to
have such sights of glory; that glorified person that is now in heaven must be
in you by his spirit of glory, or else you can have no hope of glory;
believers, you see your object, you know his person, never be quiet until you
come into his condition; as you must go through all ordinances and creatures
until you come to Christ, so through all the conditions of Christ until you
come to glory.

Let us now view it in the whole as it were, as it concerns Christ and the
Saints together, and this is the end of that, it is received up into glory. As
God in Christ was condemned in flesh, so are the Saints, and justified in the
spirit, so are they; and at last they with Christ are received up into glory.

Quest. Now the great question is, How Christ and the Saints are received up
into glory?

Sol. As for Christ, it is clear that he was taken up in his humane nature; as
he was God-man in the world, so he is now in heaven, Jesus Christ has a real
body now in glory as he had in the world: But it is taken into glory, and so a
glorious body, Phil. 3. ult. In any other respect Christ could not be taken up
into glory, for nothing wanted it but his humane nature: And so must all the
Saints be received into glory in the same way, not only in their souls but
bodies, for the Saints have not phantasmes in heaven, they are not annihilated
in their being, and made in another essential form, but are taken into glory
in regard of the whole man as it consists of body and soul. For that place in
1 Cor. 15. where it is said, flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
heaven, therefore no real bodies shall be there. It is answered, that the
meaning is, flesh and blood without a change, as it is mortal and weak, not
simply the being of flesh and blood; but it is expounded in the same verse,
neither can corruption inherit incorruption, that is, no flesh and blood, as
subject to corruption, as it is weak and sinful, shall not enter in: For it
shall be made a spiritual body, still a body, but spiritual and free from
corruption, having a being of immortality put to it.

And this is so clear as it cannot be denied, except we will imagine a
chimaera of a man without soul or body; let this be considered, whether the
man that sinned shall not be saved, the same individual man; if the man, then
certainly both in his soul and body, without which he is no man, the being of
him as a man lying in the compositum. And besides, the same that is redeemed
must be saved, now we are redeemed in soul and body; but yet this body shall
be a glorious body, so changed, as that whatever may denote weakness and
corruption shall be done away, it shall put on incorruption. And how strange is
this, that the same man which is justified, and sanctified, shall not be
glorified. But I leave that as the excrescency of the pride of this wanton age,
who would frame a glory to themselves out of their own fancy.

Let all us know, that Christ and his body shall be taken up in their souls
and bodies to one and the same glory; and though now we dwell in houses of
clay, and walk in rags of dust and ashes, we shall one day be taken into
glory. This should comfort us in all conditions, that this is not our place,
and draw out our spirits to scorn this world, and to breath and long after
another fullness which is to be revealed; the more high and aspiring our
spirits are from the world, and all enjoyments to that glory into which we are
to be taken, the more we express our assurance of it. And this glory is so
great, that there is no taking it in, but we are received up into it. Oh what a
blessed time will that be when the whole man shall be cast into glory, lost
as it were in glory as in an infinite Ocean.

Thus I have presented in a short view to your eyes that which has been acted
from eternity, and will be yet acted to eternity: It is little has been said
to what might have, and to what shall be really done, I have only showed you
the things in a rude lump, let you see the outside of inward and unexpressible
glory. I have glanced at that which will be the prospect of the strongest eyes
for ever; but alas, who is able for these things? God must act it in us that we
may know it in it self; it is a work for the spirit of the living God, who
searches the deep things of him.

I shall only in conclusion sum up all, and set before your eye a small map of
the whole continent of this mystery, that you may see what God is adoing for
poor sinners; the Apostle comprehends all in this expression of a mystery, and
a great mystery, and then lays it out in these particulars which are
enumerated in this verse; God manifested in flesh, etc. Here is a chain of
mysteries, the first end of it is tied to Gods heart, and the other end's in
glory; in the whole you may take notice of these things: 1. The plot and
design. 2. The contrivance of it. 3. The way of acting it. 4. The effecting
and issue of it.


The plot was to save so many poor sinners, who lay in the bottom of hell,
and had so offended God, as that nothing but eternal wrath was their portion;
the spring of this, and invisible wheels from whence it was acted, was Gods
eternal love and goodness, that he might discover it freely to his creatures,
because this design might go on glorious.

It was contrived that the same nature which sinned should save, and that the
manifestation of God should not be until the time of the sin, and misery of
the poor creature; and that the riches of love might be shown, wisdom
contrived that God himself in another form should act out all our salvation.
Thus God comes to be manifested in flesh, and calls himself Christ; takes up
our nature, and joins it to his Godhead to be one person, and in that person
dies, and suffers, and satisfies himself, and is justified as in our stead; he
himself is made that to us which we were to be made; he makes that person for
the glory of the transaction, a head to Angels and men, and presents him to the
view of these blessed creatures that they might admire him; and then, as a way
to manifest it to us, makes a Gospel which shall contain the sum of all this
design, and causes it to be preached and proclaimed to all the world; and
because there was nothing in the creatures at all to move him, it is to be
preached freely, and that to the Gentiles, to the worst of sinners, without
exception; and then these poor sinners which have been thus loved, they
believe on it, entertain it joyfully, are made one with this person thus set
forth, have all applied to themselves, and then this person, and all these
souls are taken up unto glory together, and enjoy the fullness of God
himself; this is the Epitome of the mystery: but every particular, as well as
the whole, is a great mystery, and past the apprehension of men and Angels to
fathom.

The whole work of Salvation is acted by none other than God himself several
manifestations; first, in the person of Christ, and that in several habits:
and then in us, and that in several condition^; but still it is God acting
toward us, and acting us toward him. God comes down from heaven, and acts out
his love to us in five various forms, and under diverse considerations, and as
he goes along gathers us into it, and then at last goes up again into glory
and carries all us with him; he lets down Christ as a platform of his own
love, and makes him act before our eyes all his glory, and then according to
the several outgoings of his love discovers him to us, and at last wraps us
up with Jesus Christ into his own fullness: glory was the end, that was the
condition which we were designed unto; but God lets out this glory first in
several sparkles, and then contracts them all in himself again, and receives
us up into it; herein lie mysteries like mountains one upon another, and they
reach up to the heavens; not a manifestation of God but has been in a mystery
beyond all the apprehensions of the whole world; love breaks out in a direct
line, but as it goes along, winds up it self in such a variety of contrary and
unthought of discoveries, as that it amazeth men and Angels; So that this is
the total, God acting in Christ, and he in us, and both received up into his
infinite fullness, which is here called glory.

Oh therefore to conclude all, let all your spirits be taken up in the
admiration of these mysteries; what we cannot express, do you labor to enjoy,
take not up your heads and hearts with trifles, ordinary, and low things, when
you have such depths of love and wisdom to study and enjoy the sweetness of,
think nothing worthy of a glance of your eye, or a thought of your heart, but
this Great mystery of Godliness. And in all your apprehensions of the Gospel
wonder not if you see not at first the glory and beauty of them, you must
consider there is a mystery in every one of them; think not in a slight and
ordinary glance to understand divine mysteries, they will take up the most
serious and most sublime thoughts, and swallow them up at the very entrance on
them.

Get the key of divine mysteries if you will open them exactly, that is, the
Spirit of the Lord; sense and reason will never unlock the depths of such
mysteries, he which will know the mind of God must have his own Spirit to
reveal it. Four things are required to all knowledge: An Eye, an Object, a
Medium, and Light, the Object is supposed.

1. There must be an organ or capacity to see, though things be never so
clear, no man can see without an Eye, therefore the natural man cannot see
the things of God, because he wants an Eye; you must get a spiritual eye, a
divine judgment; for, whatsoever is received in, is per medium recipientis,
your old understandings will not serve to judge of Gospell-mysteries.

2. You must have a divine light to shine on this Object before you can see it;
Christ is in himself out of sight, and the mysteries of the Gospel are too
far above all the light of nature and reason too, and therefore the light of
the Spirit must be waited on.

3. You must have a fit medium to convey this light to your eye, and that is
the Word of God in the Scriptures, through that word the Spirit shines, and
opens the light and beauty of these truths to us. Study the Scriptures, wait on
the Spirit in them, and you shall know the deep things of God; and I may add
this as the last, get the power and life of truth in your hearts, and then you
will soon know the mystery; get your hearts wrapped up in the life and beauty of
truth, and you will soon know the meaning of it.

FINIS.

