portrait of William Sanderson Souse pinxit W. Faithorne sculp*
Gulielmus Sandersonus. Aetat: suae. 68
Etsi Se nescit quod senescit tamen cupit diss^^^i. 1658



GRAPHICE. The use of the Pen and Pensil. OR, THE MOST EXCELLENT ART OF
PAINTING: In Two PARTS. By WILLIAM SANDERSON, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Robert Crofts, at the sign of the Crown in Chancery Lane,
under Serjeant's Inn. 1658.

On the Picture of the Author, Mr SANDERSON.
LEt others style this Page a Chronicle;
Others, Arts Mystery; let a third sort dwell
Upon the curious neat Artifice, and swear,
The Sun near saw a Shadow half so rare.
He outsaies All, who lets you understand,
The Head is Sanderson's, Fathern's the Hand.
THO. FLATMAN, Inn. Temp. Land.

PREFACE.
I MAY be censured by some persons, who have known me busy the most part of my
life, to find me at leisure now in my last days, (under the discipline of
Providence) to set out this subject of Painting.

It is an Art I never professed: These Readings are gathered at my Study,
accompanied with observations which I met with beyond Seas, and other Notions,
picked up from excellent Artizans abroad, and here at home; not without some
experience by my own private practice, and altogether suiting my Genius. Which
gave me occasion to say somewhat to our Painters, with their approbation, and
desire, to reduce that discourse into a Method, legible to all, and so to
render it profitable to the Public; it being as well delightful to be read,
as useful for practice, (I speak to Lovers of this Art, not to Masters): Yet,
not altogether uncocerning the ordinary Artizan, whose former Instructions
(hitherto) not reaching unto knowledge, rather hinders his progression from
ever being excellent; himself (perhaps) unacquainted with his own spirit,
cannot so readily rise to estimation, though he labor much to make it his
profession: For, the invention or election of the means, may be more effectual,
than any inforcement or accumulation of endeavors. Not that I desire to
derogate from the worthy intentions of any, that have deserved well in the
condition of this elaborate Art But I observe, that their Pieces are rather
works of labor, and alike to what has been done, than of progression and
proficiency; the same things multiplied, not new, nor rare, taking them the
ordinary way, without advancing to the former, in manner or matter. For, all
works are mastered either by 1. Amplitude of Reward. 2. By soundness of
Direction; or, 3. By conjunction of Labor. And therefore I could wish, that
the excellency of Painting, were higher prized, better taught, and more
workmen. The first multiplieth endeavors, the second preventeth error, and
the third supplieth the frailty of man. But the chiefest of these, is Direction
in Painting. I have therefore endeavored to enlighten him, into the Theory of
the first Book, distinguished from the profitable practice, which descends to
the second Book; and the Heads of all contained in an Index, prefixed to the
whole, fitted with Cuts and P rints, proper to their Sections, for the apt
apprehension of the Punie, by which he cannot easily misconceive my meaning.

Such as they are, I send abroad to your judgments, who are the best
Proficients, and merit the Mastery; that so, the mystery of this wondrous Art,
and your artificial working, (a secret inconsisting with common capacities)
may hereby be so far revealed to men's admirations, as to be first understood,
and then how to be valued. Not unproperly for use, to those ingenious spirits,
who have no will to be ignorant in any Art, that does not mis-become the
Student's wit, nor mis-beseem the quality of a Gentleman, that intends to
entertain Attendants, Handmaids to the Sciences of Liberall*Learning.

W. SANDERSON.

READER,
WIth much Cost and Art, orderly to this Impression; I labored to be furnished
from beyond* seas, with Cuts and Prints, proper for several Sections; But the
watchful Pirate plundered the passengers, and that Cargasoon of Papers, which
makes them failing in this Work, and crave excuse* till the next Edition, with
such other, and (...) further enlarg^^^^^. In the mean time, the Practitioner
may be furnished at Mr. Fatherns, (a Graver, without Temple Bar) and at other
Print-sellers, with such Cuts and Prints, as may serve his own private use for
this whole Book, which could not be gotten by me in England, for so many
thousands of Prints, as the Press of this Edition would contain; only three
or four Plates I have met with, which are here inserted for Example.

And for the Art of Painting in Glass, as also the excellency of Graving and
Etching, in Copper or Wood, with the manner of Printing those Pieces in
several colors, may soon be made public, as this Book finds acceptance.

W. Sanderson.

To Mr. Sanderson, the Author of this Book, The Art of Painting.
VEnus, scarce finished by Apelles death,
Was by her Painter (just) deprived of Breath.
Painters nor Pictures were there any such,
Distinguishable only by the Touch.
None could complete It, when that He was gone;
This Book was wanting, else it had been done;
Which teaches Intellectualls, Hands, and Eyes,
To value, work, and view their faculties.
Prometheus by his sar-setch'd sained Fire,
Into his mouldings (once) did life inspire.
Your Rules direct us to avoid that toil,
And to give life by Water, and by Oil.
Your Pen excells the Pensil, whilst you write,
You finish Venus in your Black and White.
R. P.

Upon our English Zeuxis, W. Sanderson, Esquire.
POets and Painters dare do much, and can
Fancy a Man a Beast, a Beast a Man.
But when themselves are subjects, and the Quil
Describes the Pensil, there is the trial oth' Skill.
When that fierce Ovid must a Zeuxis show,
And Verse to Shapes give enterview:
It Is not one Muse will serve, but the whole Nine,
And father Phoebus too must prompt a line.
As he, that pourtraicting the Horses foam,
Despairing, that to life it e're would come:
Threw his famed Pensill at the very Bitt
Of The Brute, and so a casual froth did hit,
In such an exact figure, that lookers on
Feared, that the drops, themselves would fall upon.
So it must be some Providentiall strein,
And an exstatick fancy, and raped vein,
Betwixt Despair and Inspiration,
That fits the Zeuxis of our Nation.
What Colors in our Rhetoric, can show
Thine, which more various are, than those 'ith Bow?
If in Grotesco, or in Landscape thou
Express thy skill, wee're in a wood I vow,
And lose our selves in thy feigned Groves, and view,
And wish the Milk-wench, and her sine leg too:
Such lively streams her snowy hand does stroke
From the milk'd Cow, that Calves they do provoke
To louw for painted Teats, and Sheep do gaze
On the deluding Commons, and would graze.
Then since thou can deceive all subtlest sense,
And art a Zeuxis of such excellence,
I will admire thy parts, and cosen'd be:
But for to write thee, let't alone for me.
EDMOND GAYTON.

On the noble Art of PAINTING.
STrike a bold stroke (my Muse!) and let me see,
Thou fear no colors in thy Poetry,
For Pictures are dumb Poems; they that write
Best Poems, do but paint in Black and White.
The Pensill's Amulets forbid to die,
And vest us with a fair Eternity.
What think ye of the gods, to whose huge name
The Pagans bowed their humble knees? Whence came
Their immortalities, but from a Shade,
But from those Pourtraictures the Painter made?
They saddled Jove's fierce Eagle like a Colt,
And made him grasp in's fist a Thunderbolt.
Painters did all: Jove had (at their command)
Spurred a Jackdaw, and held a Switch in's hand.
The demigods, and all their glories, be
Apelles debtours, for their deity.
O how the Catholics cross themselves, and throng
Around a Crucifix! when all along
That Is but a Picture. How the spruce trim Less,
Dotes on a Picture in the Looking-glass?
And how ineffable's the Peasant's joy,
When he has drawn his Picture in his Boy.
Bright Angels condescend to share a part,
And borrow glorious Plumes from our rare Art.
Kings triumph in our sackcloth, Monarchs bear
Reverence to our Canvase 'bove the Robes they wear.
Great Fortunes, large Estates, (for all their noise)
Are nothing in the world but painted toies.
The Egyptian Hieroglyphics, Pictures be,
And Painting taught them all their A. B. C.
The Presbyterian, the Independent too,
All would a color have for what they do.
And who so just, that does not sometimes try,
To turn pure Painter, and deceive the eye?
Our honest sleight of hand prevails with all;
Hence springs an emulation general.
Mark how the pretty female-artists try,
To shame poor Nature with an Indian die.
Mark how the Snail with his grave majestic pace,
Paints earth's green Wastcoat with a silver lace.
But (since all Rhymthes are dark, and seldom go
Without the Sun) the Sun's a Painter too;
(Heaven's famed Vandyke) the Sun, he paints ('it is clear)
Twelve signs throughout the Zodiac every year:
It Is He, that at the spicy Spring's gay birth
Makes Pensils of his Beams, and paints the Earth;
He Limn's the Rainbow, when it strutt's so proud
Upon the Dusky surface of a Cloud;
He daubes the Moors, and when they sweat with toil
It Is the^ He paints them All at length in oil;
The blushing fruits, the gloss of flowr's so pure
Owe their varieties to his Miniature.
Yet, what is the Sun? each thing where e're we go
Would be a Rubens, or an Angelo.
Gaze up, some winter-night, and you will confess,
Heaven 's a large Gallery of Images.
Then stoop down to the Earth, wonder, and scan,
The Masterpiece of the whole Creation, Man:
Man, that exact Original in each limb,
And Woman, that fair Copy drawn from him.
What e're we see's one Bracelet, whose each Bead
Is cemented, and hangs by Painting's thread.
Thus (like the soul oth'world) our subtle Art,
Insinuates it self through every part.
Strange Rarity! which can the Body save,
From the coorse usage in a sullen grave,
Yet never make it Mummie! Strange, that hand,
That spans and circumscribes the Sea and Land:
That draws from death to th'life, without a Spell,
As Orpheus did Eurydice from Hell.
But all my Lines are rude, and all such praise
Dead colored nonsense. Painters scorn slight Baies.
Let the great Art commend it self, and then
You Will praise the Pensill, and deride the Pen.
T. FLATMAN, lately Fellow of New Coll. Oxon; now Inn-Temp. Land.

To the exquisitely Ingenious, W. SANDERSON Esquire On his Book of Painting in
Watercolors.
Great Artist,
When I saw thy ROYAL STORY,
(That Theater erected for thy glory)
I stood amazed at each Majestic line,
And deemed each syllable therein Divine,
Thinking Thee All-Historian: But now,
Thy Protean Pen constrains me to allow,
The Diadem of Arts and Sciences to Thee;
Their vanquished depths confess Thy Sovereignty:
Whose absolute Dominion can dethrone
The Rest, and fix supremacy in One
(Rare MINIATURE) whose glittering Trophies stand,
Reared by the learned endeavors of Thine hand.
Thy Watercolors shall out-brave the Fire,
And dare courageously confront Jove's ire.
Your fame shall (spite of Proverbs) make it plain,
To write in Water's not to write in vain.
Clarissimo viro Guilielmo Sandersono, Artis Zoographicae excultori Celeberrimo.
OUis precor hic? iterumne Orbi comparet Apelles?
Anne magis radio Pictor Apollo suo?
Neuter adest; sed uterque tamen: sed major utroque
Sive homines lubeat pingere sive Deos?
Pingendi heic stupido prostent cum viscera mundo
Viscera, Primaevis impenetranda Sophis.
Forma, and Norma recens; Artique Ars addita priscae;
Et pictura Ostro nobiliore nitens
Cuncta suis speciosa notis, renovata Colorum
Temperies, Radii Daedala forma novi,
Authoris Genium, si non depingere, saltem
Fas Vati aeternis pangere Carminibus.
Plaudite Pictores! Patremque agnoscite; vobis
Ludus erit, priscis quod fuit ante labor.
Obruat expositas ne forte litura Fabellas,
Picturae Archetypon nobile, Pictor, habe.
Amicissime scripsit amicus charissimus, GUILIELMUS MOORHEAD.

A tam laudato laudari laus erit vera.
GRAPHICE. OR, The use of the Pen and Pensill, in Designing, Drawing, and
Painting; with an exact Discourse of each of them. AS ALSO, Concerning
Miniature or Limning, in Watercolors: The Names, Natures, and Properties of
Colors: The ordering, preparing, washing, and using them, for Pictures of
Life, Landscape, and History. AS ALSO, Of Croyons, or Dry-Colours, by Pastills
or Powders; The way of making them, and working with them: With rare Receipts
and Observations, of the best Masters of this Art. In two Parts. With some Cuts
and Prints, proper to each Section. By WILLIAM SANDERSON, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Robert Crofts, at the sign of the Crown in Chancery Lane,
under Serjeant's Inn. 1658.

portrait of Charles I G Faithorne Excud.
Carolus Primus D. G. Ang^iae Sc^^iae Franciae et Hiberniae Rex. ^^.


In Effigiem Caroli, Nuper-Regis.
INdiges heic quorsum prostat Tibi Carolus! Ann^
Hunc quod ames? vel quod te redamarit, erat?
Anne quod Essigiem subrepti Martyris, Orbis
Qua patet, indomito more and honor colat?
Anne, quod hanc reliquis (dum vixerat) Artibus Artem
Praetuleri^ Genio discure, Mome, tuo
Cuncta simul number vera sient, non dirimit Author,
Cui satis est Sphyngem solvere posse suam.
G. M.

GRAPHICE: OR The use of the Pen and Pensil; In the most Excellent Art of
PAINTING.
Pen and Pensill described.
THe most excellent use of the Penn, and Pensil, is illustrated by the
admirable Art of Drawing, and Painting; and perfectly defined, to be the
Imitation of the Surface of Nature, in Proportion and Color.

By Mathematical Demonstration of Globes, Spheres, Charts, Mapps,
Cosmographicall, Geographicall, Chorographicall, and Hydrographicall.

Or, by particular description of Plotts, Fortifications, Forms of Batalia's,
Situation of Towns, Castles, Forts, Lands, Rocks, Mountains, Seas, Islands,
Rivers.

Or, by shapes of Creatures; Men, and Beasts; Birds, and Fishes.

Or, by Vegetables; Fruits, Flowers, Herbs.

In all, it preferrs likeness to the Life, and conserves it, after Death; and
altogether by the Sense of Seeing.

Of the Five Senses.
THe number of Senses, in this Microcosm, or little world of Man, do correspond
to the first Bodies, in the great World, as Of the five Senses.
Sight, to the Heavens. Smelling, to the Fire. Hearing, to the Air. Tasting to
the Water. Touching, to the Earth.


I have lamented the defect, that most Men mis-understand the true use and
perfections of the senses; when the advantage of our Reason prefers us before
ordinary Creatures, that enjoy them in common.

How many men that have Organs, and de hear, yet cannot distinguish the
Excellency of Musical sounds, and find not the defect?

As many, who have the sense of Touching, that labor not their hands to the
things that are good.

Those that can smell, yet profess their ignorance in the delicacy of sweet
Odours; and conceive no more benefit thereby, than others, who are satisfied
with a stinck.

To cram the Belly, and fill the gutt, diseaseth Nature, without apprehension
of health in a choice diet, or, in difference of Tastes

And there are several notorious degrees of sin depending on the extreme
fruition of those Four, which taints both body and mind with impurity.

Sight the best sense.
But in my Opinion, the whole World, and all the forms of Nature may be safely
comprehended, by the royalty of external sight, (There being a Lordship of the
Eye, which as it is a rangeing, impetuous, and usurping Sense, can endure no
narrow circumscription, but must be fed with extent and variety to the glory of
the Creator,) and yet without prejudice to the reasonable Creature) except in
the mis-use of looking with Lust, after that, which is none of his, Lasci^iously,
Covetuously, Superstitiously; To which possibility of Mis-application, not
only, those Semiliberall Arts, but the highest perfections, and endowments of
Nature, are subject; Nay Religion it self. Therefore Ab Abuti, ad non-Uti,
negatur consequentia.

Sight compared with other senses.
Of the Excellency of Sight.
BUt, Sight deserves, a higher, and a more mysterious consideration, and
therefore, let us compare the difference, with other Senses.

The State of sense may be divided into two parts; Inward, and outward;
commodity, and necessity; Soul, and Body: but, as the soul is more excellent,
then the body, so the sense that profits the soul, is to be more esteemed then
those, that are needful for the body; because it is better to be well, then
simply to be.

The Soul of man, (that most perfect form of the Creator) not consisting of
matter, or subject to division, and so by consequence, whole in all the body,
and wholly in every part: Yet, in every respect, the noblest powers thereof are
more eminent, in distinct places; some have lodged and bounded the limits
within the compass of One Member of the Brain, (the magnificent stately Turret
of the soul,) wherein is placed Reason, the Sovereign power of the Soul,) as
the Messengers of understanding. The Eyes, Ears, Nose, Tongue, (Guards and
Servants to Reason) placed in the head, as ne^r att^ndants.

The external Senses are but five because of the five sorts of Objects, either
unto Color, Sound, Smell, Taste; or to those Qualities whereabout Touching is
conversant. Seeing and Hearing are the most pleasurable; Sensus Jucunditatis*
The other more Practical; these more contemplative: Those, Sensus Disciplinae;
these are Mentis, Noeticall.

Excellency of sight.
The excellency of Sight, is especially, in four things.

1. Variety of objects; which it presents to the Soul.

2. It Is means of Operation; altogether Spiritual.

3. In respect of its particular object, Light; the most Noble Quality that God
has created.

4. In respect of the certainty, of his Action.

(In a word; all things, under the first Moveable Orb, are subject to the
power of sight.)

For the first; all Natural Bodies, are Visible; but all are not effectual,
to other Senses. Heaven, (the World's Ornament) is not to be touched; Harmony
of the Spheres, not to be Heard; No taste in the Earth, or Fire; All these may
be Seen.

1. Variety of Objects.
Sight, besides his own proper Object (Color), has infinite others, as
Magnitude, Number, Proportion, Motion, Rest, Situation, Distance: And
therefore called, the sense of Invention of all Arts, and Sciences.

And all the skill in deep Astronomy,
Is to the Soul derived by the eye.
Philosophy was begot, by admiring of Things; Admiration, from Sight of
excellent things; the Mind, raised up and ravished, with the consideration
thereof, desirous to know the cause, began to play the Philosopher.

2. In spiritual operation.
Secondly, Sight is the Sense of our Blessedness, as it brings us, to the
knowledge of God. The Invisible things of God, are manifested to us, by the
visible. Infinity cannot be known, but by his effects.

Set on work this Noble Sense, to view and consider the Excellency of the
Workmanship, of the Great Creator; the Heavens, and the glory thereof, in
Proportion, and Color; the Beauty of the Surface of the Earth, and the
Creatures thereon. Consider Man, the Wonder, and utmost endeavor of Nature. so
that the Prophet-Singer cried out; How secret and wonderful am I made!

3. In Light the Noblest Quality.
Thirdly, it is endowed with the goodliest quality in the World, Light, The
Heavens offspring, the eldect daughter of God, Fiat Lux the first days
creation. Common, as indifferent to all; best known of us, (for other Natural
Bodies consist of mixed Colors. It discovers it self in the modesty of a
morning Blush, and opens it is fair and virgin eyelids in the dawning of the
day, shine out in its Noon-daye's glory. It twinckles in a Star; Blazes and
glares out in a Comet; frisks and dances in a Jewel; dissembles in a
Glowworm; Epitomizes and abbreviates its self in a spark; Ruddy in the yolke
of the Fire, pale and consuming in a Candle.

Thus described in old Rhyme.
Light, the Grandchild to the Glorious Sun,
Opens the Casement of the Rosy Morn;
Makes the abashed Heavens, soon to shun
The ugly darkness, it imbrace'd beforn.
This, a true Looking-glass, impartial,
Where Beauties-self, her self does beautify,
With Native hue, not Artificial;
Discovering falsehood, opens verity.
The day's bright-eye; Colour's distinction;
Best judge, of measure and proportion;
The only means, by which, each mortal eye,
Sends Messengers to the wide firmament:
That to the longing Soul brings presently
High contemplation, and deep wonderment:
By which aspiring, she, her wings displayes,
And, her-self thither, whence she came, Up-rayes.
It performs his Office, at an instant, though far distant, without moving it
self. And as the understanding part of the mind, receives from the
Imagination, the forms of Things naked, and void of substance; So the sight is
the subject of Forms without a Body; which are called, Intentionalls.

It comprehends Universality, without pestering any room or place contained:
the largest Mountains, enter at once undiminished, through the Apple of the
Eye, without straitness of entrance.

It judges, at one instant of two Contraries, White and Black, and
distinguishes them; the knowledge of the one, No impeachment to the knowledge
of the other; being that, of what the other Senses are not capable. It receives
at One instant, the circumference of the World; But the other Senses move by
intercourse of Time; the reason why we see Lightning, before we hear the
Thunder; being neither of them made before or after another.

It has a kind of liberty, which Nature has denied to the other Senses; The
ears are always open; so is the Nose; the skin always subject to cold and
heat, and other injuries of the air: but the eye, opens and shuts, at pleasure.

4* In infallibility.
Fourthly, it is the most infallible Sense; which least deceives being ten
times of more certainty, than hearsay; as between truth and falsehood.

According to the French Proverb.

Ce qu' on voit est plus certain que cequ' on oit. Horace says, Oculis potius
credendum, quam auribus.

The Prophets confirm their Sayings, by the Sight (Visions) as most true; It is
the form, and perfection of man: by it, we draw near to the divine Nature,
seeming that we are born, only to see*

Eyes their exlency and effects.
The Eyes, the Looking- glasses of Nature: Consider the beauty, and excellency
thereof, from several Objects: Behold the spangled Canopie of Heaven by Night:
the watery Clouds, by day, with excellent Colors, and Shadows of the Sun's
reflection: The wonderful painted Rainbow: The glorious appearing of the
Morning Lamp of Light: the golden rays, round about him, spreading a faint and
trembling Light, upon the stickering and gilden waves: How, his shadows lessen
at Noontide; and how they increase toward evening, and at the burning ruddy
Sunset.

To view, the Towering tops of Mountains, unaccessable Rocks, with ridgie
extents, or sudden fractions, by some steepy abruptness: Here a valley, so
large, that at the end of the plain, it seems to meet Heaven; there a Grove,
and here a Green pleasant Arbours; rows of Trees, spreading their clasping
arms, like gentle lovers embracing each, with intricate weavings; gently
swelling Hillocks; high delightful plains; flowery meddows, pleasant streams;
natural fountains, gushing waters down the rocks.

Stately Cities; famous Towers; large Bridges; spiring Steeples; intermixed
with Orchards, Gardens, Walks; and what not of these kinds, that delights the
mind of Man?

Consider the shapes of each several Creatures; from the Elephant to the Emet:
the admirable and absolute perfections of each Limb; the beautiful Colors of
Birds; silver skaled- fishes; wonderful forms of worms, and creeping things.

And all these to praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever.

Of the Excellency of Sight, in the Art of Painting.
HAving said thus much in general: Let us draw down to our particular use of
this Sense, first to be apprehended by speculative knowledge, in the Art of
Designing, Drawing, and Painting, which comprehends It: when lights and
shadows, (set out by Art, to counterfeite Nature) give the workman the
excellency of representing in proportion and Color, what ere Nature has
produced. Nay more, described into form, what ere can be uttered by speech of
another, or to be imagined, by his own fancy.

Of a Landscape.
In the descrption of a Landscape.
What a large scope of several objects, are daily offered to delight the
wearied travailler, when with true judgment, he beholds the variety of Nature,
and the Artifice thereof, within the Landscape of his Horizon in a well chosen
Prospect?

Give me leave to describe unto you, a Landscape; by which, and many such like
you may apprehend with delight, the excellency, of a journey by land, or voyage
by Sea, Which commonly, are either not observed with judgment, or soon lost to
memory, for lack of Art to put them into form, and Color.

By an English Gentleman.
For example; An English Gentleman, of singular ingenuity, came to Naples by
Sea, at the instant, of a strange accident without the City: The report
whereof amazed the people, into sudden fear; Yet curious they were, to behold
that, which they apprehended, horrid: Each one, crouding forward, to pull back
his Neighbor; disorderly Number, stopped their haste, so that, they stuck fast
in the Gate. Only this Stranger, whose single discretion taught him, always,
to avoid a Tumult; and now showed him the way, to creep out at a Wicket.

The Mountain Vesuvius burning.
He soon discovered the cause; casting his eyes up to the view, of the Towering
Hill, Vesuvius, from whose Base, the fruitful vallyes, trend down to the
Strond of a River, refreshing this City.

This double topp'd Mountain, had one Speer burnt, in time of Pliny, by which
means, (that Rocky part dissevered into fractions) there appeared, rare
reflections of Lights, and shadows, occasioned from a fearful Fire of the
other Speer, now flaming up into the Clouds.

Sometimes, with blazing flash to frighten Heaven, instantly quenched by a
crouding vapor, as dark as Hell: And yet each raging quality stinted by Him,
that in a bounded measure, preserves all from destruction. These objects
(unequally mixed) expressed such glaring variety of Colors, as two contraryes,
Light, and Dark in opposition, usually do produce. Simile*


So had he seen (he said), a sight at Sea; a Ship so gallant never plowed the
waves, but she, and our brave Sovereign; when in the moment of a twinkling
eye, the Wretchlesse Swabber, with a Lintstock-match, tin'ds but some powder
for his knavish crack, which kindled all on fire;

So q^i^k is Sulphur, that the sound and sight
Soon into Air dissolved the fabric quite.
But now his sight, dimmed with much gazing, and his Eyelids wearied, wi^h force
of long looking up-wards, of them selves took ease, to descend.

(So did his thoughts, in an humble consideration, of the Natural Cause,
Sulphurous matter, many ages past, pent in for a time, and now (fired with
heat) burst out into this fury. Which, though not seldom happening in hot
Conntries, yet to his sense, the more rare, that never saw the like.)

Prospect of the Vale.
When suddenly he seemed ravished, with the most pleasing Prospect of Nature,
and Art, mixed with accidents of diverse manner, such as possibly might delight
him;

River.
It took its Site, at the entrance of Naples, from the Vallyes; where the
cool streams of -- gently pass; seeming then, a preservative Element, of
powerful contrariety to quench the raging Fire with turnings and windings, on
the right hand, so far as the Countries of Apulia, six Leagues off.

Bridge.
Over this River is raised a stone- Bridge of antiquity, more then splendour,
yet fair enough, with six locks, or vaults, through which, the water runns,
not too quick on purpose to delight you; but murmuring down on the left hand,
to a single Pile of Red-marble; partly ruined, more by War, then time; and
yet of some Antiquity, by the remnant of Pillars, Pedestalls, Cornices, and
such like, of old Tuscan, and Dorique Sculpture.

And Orchards.
Near unto an Orchard of Palms, and Sicamours, where, under an ample Arch, the
River seems convayed to utter loss of all, but imagination.

People fly from the Fire.
A world of people, from far, filled the Bridge, with haste; being come to
secure themselves, their goods and cattle: Those of Quality rod, pranzing on
their Gennets; not too fast, being fettered, within a flock of Sheep.

The good Man and his Wife, load their own backs, to save their Bedds, leading
their Infants, frightened with the Fire.

The poor Ass now bears his Burden, not in vain, being driven from danger,
as concerned in the Interest, as well as the wiser sort, who governed the Beast.

The Wagoner, whips on his wearied Jades, who yet, huye so fast, that they
tread, on Horses heels.

Fearful apprehensions scare them all, that follow in a Train, beyond the
comprehension of Sight; and until from several degrees of dimensions, each
Creature seems contracted into Shapes, almost of Atoms.

And from the mixed Villages.
These Multitudes, fled from Torre, del Greco, and Nunciato, two pleasant
Towns, seated upon this River, appearing so far distant from the eye, as
usually, the Judgment assists the Sight, to distinguish them into Buildings.

Before these Towns, anchored two Neapolitan Gallyes, sent thither to receive
the people, and their goods aboard, from the destruction of stones and ashes,
disgorged by force of the fire, and which the violence of the Rock-water
stream, hurried down from the top of the Hill, overwhelming these Villages,
almost as a Cover; the suffocating heat of this rubbish, more fearful then any
Fire.

Behind these you might discern, the rising sallow-fields, here and there, mixed
with trees, and hedge-rows.

Hills a far off.
Beyond them, the proud Hills, covered with whiteness of S^ow, which the
Sunbeams expressed, like Silver Towrs, that reached up, to the next Region.

The left hand Prospect of the Vallye.
Then on the left hand view, you might behold, (Sun and wind clearing that
side) the whole Vale graced with several structures, and buildings, here and
farther off.

Here, and there, the stately Pines, overtopping their Tops, naturally
intermingled with Cedars, and Citrons.

Foot of the Hill.
From these, your sight (ascending the rise of the Hill) becomes ravished, with
pleasant Gardens, and Orchards; beautiful rows and walks of Trees,
gracefully high and large; Here vineyards of Grapes; there Groves of Grenades,
Citrons, Pomegranes, Figs, and Olives, and other Fruits without Number.

Horison.
These reach so far, until your sight is lost, into the Edge and Circle of
an Horison, where Heaven and Earth, beget a wonder, This in contemplation
covets to mount, That, in affection, willingly descends, until with joint
embraces (like two reconciled Lovers) kiss each other into everlasting
kindness, Terram Coelo miscere.

Travalers.
Near hand, a Loader, following the heels of his Horse; and to spare his
overmuch burden, the good old man, in charity to his Beast, takes part of the
pains, and stoops his own bended Back, with the remain of the carriage.

Not far before him, trots another, ready to climb the mounting ground, and
to ease himself, the poor Jade, spares his pace; but two rustique Swains, hard
hearted drivers, (or else in more ha^te, than good speed) both of them beat
him.

Beyond them, you may perceive two more; one hastening forward, the other
returning; their business belike, of more concernment, than to salute; though
the narrowness of the way, necessitates them to meet.

And thus the Traveller, having long time looked over these objects; he turns
his back from all, with religious Contemplation: That in such varieties of
Prospect; contrarieties in Nature and affection; Fire and Water; Hills and
Vales, barren and fruitful; Trees, and Medows; Heaven, and Earth; all should
concur in beautiful Objects, and Ornaments of delight, to Gods glory, and
content to the Creature.

A Curtezan Courted.
When lo, he espies a Neopolitan gallant, caressing his Curtizan; she was
handsome, he was not so; and yet the custom of the Country, taught him
boldness, to court her, into more then ordinary kindness; which no doubt, in
dependence thereto, was soon after, put into practice, when the opening of the
Gates, received them into the City.

The Stranger being entered: He tells this Story, unto other Guests, to one of
them, that for a Wager (The Table taken away) The Tale put into a Picture.
described this Tale, into the form of a Picture; and Painted it to the Life
from the others report; which being done, became such a Miracle of Art to
everlasting Memory, that deservedly, might adorn the Viceroy's Gallery.

The papers of this print were lost at* Sea. But any other print of a
Prospective, may serve the practitioner to discourse thereupon; and ^it this
example.

Description of a storm at Sea.
Another, of the Sea, a storm and ship-wracks.

It was so fair a Morn as midling- June, which invited tender virgins, to the
brinck of the Ocean: where they beheld, a Fleet of gallant Ships, such as never
graced the Flood before.

Each distinct Squadron attending their Admirals, in an orderly course, to the
very Bay of a secure Haven; the Seas as smooth as glass.

When, for Novelty; (the various desire of change) one of the virgins, wished to
see the Waves.

Storm begin^ with wind and waves.
The stormy- Fiend obeyed, and vexed the Air with wind which volved the Waves,
till they on end do stand; ranging their race with mighty furrows; wave shoveth
wave, and Billow beats Billow.

Twixt Ridge, and Ridge; the engulphing space was hollow,
Much like infernal Jaws, whole Fleets of Ships, to swallow,
In those devouring, liquid Graves.
Lowers the Sail.
The Mariner by often trials, becomes fearlesse;
Yet his Sails takes in, and stoops to an ill, he cannot master.
^orridnesse.
A monstrous shower of rain, thickened the face of Heaven; peale after peale.
"So dark as Hell; and yet the Stars are seen,
"And dreadful terrors, had bin*lost to sight,
"But that, (these) dire Lightnings turn
"To me^^ horrid fears.
"The Seas* like quenchlesse flames, do burn:
"Sad ^louds, sinck into showry tears:
"You would have thought,
"The high swollen Seas, to Heaven had wrought,
"And Heaven, to Seas descended.
Ships Instruments useless.
Away goes steerage, Lead, and all adieu;
The Card and Compass too:
Of two and thirty winds, not one of safety shows;
All point to death. The Lodestone useless;
The Needls-North, drunk with the waves
Turns round, and reeling too: so did the Ship.
And disengorged the Sea, into the Sea again.
The Jacob-staff, no farther sight could reach,
Then second surge.
In sundry ships several distresses.
The dancing Beak-head, dives into the deep,
Then bounding up again, then down amain,
Which cracks her massy ribbs.
"So have you seen a fierce strong Bear,
"Stand bolt upright, to paw the Mastive Dog,
"Which in his Clutch, once got, he gripes to death.
No place for Art, or force, yet all are tried:
For now* the waves must have their will,
"Obedienc^* best to follow, and that was ill.
Sheets rent and Tackling tare.
The Ship sides crack, and tackle tare like Twine,
The six-fold Buck rom sheet, is rent to ragg^
"Nor left so much to wipe a tear
"From the distressed Passengers, that weeping were.
Boy blown away.
A bucksome-bully Boy, up to the Topmast climbs
To clear a Haulfer, or less waightier course;
Like Crow on May Pole ^ane, a wondrous height,
Yet he obeyes, and chearly cries, Done, done, Sir:
When in the moment, of a twinkling eye;
Not half way down, a blast of mighty force,
"Darts him as far
"As David's pibble from his sling of war.
Mariners miseries.
Upon the Decks two stand, but bind themselves,
Yet both are blown away:
Another, on his hands, into a corner creeps;
But bounding Hatches, band him to the deeps.
Some trust to Haliards, others to their holds,
But cardage cracks, and they o're-board, are roul'd.
The giddy Ship turns Saylor's brains,
Though bound his brows;
And as from flint, so sparkles Fire, from both his eyes;
Spectators frighted.
The sickly Soul was worse, weary of Life, he dies.
Those on the shore (by prospective) that saw, were giddy grown.
And whilst I tell this tale, I Am not mine own.
My brains turn round, so does the Reader's too,
No wonder then, the Mariners did so:
The stresse of horrid storm, none but by feeling know.
Passengers in a long-boate, cast away
Some seeming wiser, hear the Long-boat's out, and leap therein;
Which soon like froth are spewed upon the sands:
And with the stroke are torn to smallest chips.
The aged father strides the lusty Lad,
Some swim, others wade, till many footing find;
When by degrees, the swallowing tide, steals on them,
upon Sands,
First to the feet, the anckles, knees, and waste.
Then to the rising ground they all retire,
And down they kneel;
And
Their Sacrificing hands, above their heads, they heave, and hold them there:
Till brinish Seas, up to the Chin comes in, and choakes them all:
They are drowned.
A dozen of such, by several scapes, got thither,
Freed from the Sea; on sands are drowned together.
Those in the Ships see this, and on their knees they fall,
The Wrack described.
This sad example, makes them, one, and all: for now,
The Rudder's torn away, the wracks begin,
And traiterous leakes, the dryving Seas drink in,
No Master, Mate, nor steer's-man, now;
Nor Plummet guide or Watch can show;
No standing on the decks;
The unbridled beast, the Master casts,
And shakes off the Saylor, griping close the Mast,
The rest shrink into Cabines, as their gravy rooms.
The main Mast, by the Board is cut,
Goods thrown overboard.
The goods thrown over the Hull to save.
Then gaping comes the fatal wave.
Which into watery womb, at one suck d^^ws down all.
Yet as a Load too heavy to digest,
One s^rge, plays it over to the rest,
Some pieces of the wrack, on sands are cast,
Some on the ragged Rocks:
Ship sincks.
The Timber plancks, start out; the Ribbs in pieces crack*
And these, thus yielding, breaks her massy back.
The lading flotes, and men upon them.
Here, barrells flote, there packs, not yet through-wet,
And chests of mighty wealth;
Men and boys, bestride them, whilst they can,
Then shrink, and cry, Farewell, from boy to man.
The Hog sheads, full of Claret Wine,
The curled Foame, does mix with brines
Both being dipped, in dies of red; and seem to blush with shame,
And men drowned.
For swallowing down, the Merchant's gain.
The Factors, Saylors, Children, Wives and Friends,
In wretched loss, the whole adventure ends.
A world of scattered goods, on Billows green,
Wrack on shore.
(As at a Mart on grass) you might have seen.
The shore, more cruel, then the Seas, devoures.
For they, who claim the wrack, cry, All is ours.
The sunck ships fall, and beaten waters roar,
Which mightaiy affrights them, on the shore.
Who scapes the greedy waves of Seas, are cast on land,
Find burial there; the people, weeping stand:
Only one man saves himself.
You might behold, one Man, never stooped
To baseness, though to brine
In swimming sincks, but up again he gets;
Now strides a Mast, lays hold, on yard, and planck,
And though amongst the lost, himself does vault.
Yet strives with arms, and legs, and (often so)
Death favored him, and lets him go.
God unto Man, gives gifts of such a mind,
Above the power of Fortune, Seas, or Wind.
The Maidens wept when they came in; and it was her task to tell this story,
whose beauty, (shadowed only by her tears,) gave grace to the relation, and
pity to the distressed. But afterward, being put into a Draught and colored,
it is accounted no less than a singular dignity to Cardinal -- Cabinet, his
most admired Piece. And the Prints of this are likewise lost at Sea. Which you
may supply with any other such storm.

Of Painting and Poetry compared.
THus have I adventured the challenge, in the name of Apollo, to the Art of
Apelles; by comparing Wit, and Words, by the Poem, with Draught and Color by
the Pensil; in these two distiall discriptions, of the Fiery Mountain, and
Prospect at Land, and of the horrid tempest and Ship*wrack at Sea* the like may
be conceived of many other millions of change. There being such Harmony in
them, Harmony of Poetry and Painting.
that may not be separate; and when Eloquence flourished, Painting was esteemed.

For Poesy is a speaking Picture, and Picture is a silent Poesy, the first,
as if always a doing; the other, as if done already. In both, an astonishment
of wonder; by Painting to stare upon smitation of Nature, leading and guiding
our Passions, by that beguiling power, which we see expressed; and to ravish the
mind most, when they are drunk in by the eyes.

Painting before Poetry by Hieroglyphics.
Yet Painting was before Poetry; for Pictures were made before Letters were
read. For before that the Egyptians had Letters, they signified their
conceptions by Hieroglyphics of Figures, Characters, and Ciphers, of diverse
things: as Birds, Beasts, Trees, Plants, and by tradition to their Children
were readily understood. As by the Earth, the Ox, a beast of the Tillage; by
the Faulcon, diligence and swiftness; By the Be, a King, mildness and justice,
by honey and a sting; by the Eagle, Envy, not accompanying other Birds; by a
Serpent his tail in his mouth, the revolution of the year; for hearing, a
Hare listening; and such like numberless. And framed their gods also of such
Creatures, and things; as that ancient piece of Antiquity, a carved Stone in
Rome in the Garden of the House of Julius, the form of a Man with an Apes face
and Dogs ears, holding a Sphere of the Heavenly Circles in one hand, a
Mercury-Staff in the left, standing upon the back of a Crocodile, according to
these verses.

Templa Paretoniis onerasse Altaria Monstris
Quis negat? inter quae Simia et Ibis erant;
Et Canis et Vasto frendens Croc^dilus hiatu,
Herbae etiam cultu, non caruere suo.
Dij Aegyptiorum. Romae in Hortis Julij. III. P. M. Graecians the first
Painters.
The Greeks adventured on this Art, merely in the first Elements of Black and
White; which afterward were put into Color by the Romans, with whom Painting
was much in esteem, and had the honor of a liberal Art. In Rome the fabij
were surnamed Pictor, and the Temple Salus circumscribed. Quintus Fabius pinxi:
from whence the Italians, of excellent spirits and best designers, gave
examples. The Germans more laborious, followed their fashion; and the English,
Dutch, and French, become Imitators of them all.

Paintinghighly valued.
The Art of Painting has been valued, from Antiquity; yet rarely arrived to
its perfection, in any age: partly by ignorance, of most men in this Art,
seldom encouraging the Professor: Besides, in truth, it is a gift in the Artist
peculiar; more natural to a single fancy, then common to all. The difficulty
therefore to attain it, is not to be labored out by ordinary pains, and
industry; yet requiring indefatigable assistance, to bring the work to become a
wonder.

Excellency and
Picture insinuates into our most inward affections: Things by the Ear, do
but faintly stir the mind, but captivate the Eyes; as being the more accurate
witnesses of the two: Gods may be conceived by Poesy, but are madeby Painters.

Effects by
So did they well; who, to enforce a more horrid reception massacre at Amboyna.
of the Dutch-cruelty upon our English at Amboyna in the East Indies, described
it into Picture (after that it had been, most eloquently urged, by Sr. Dudly
Digs and imprinted,) to incense the Passions, by sight thereof; which truly (I
remember well) appeared to me so monstrous, as I then wished it to be burnt.
And so belike it seemed prudentiall to those in power, who soon defaced it;
lest, had it come forth though we have not wanted other just provocations since
to make them our enemies.

However, at the time before, it wrought this strange effect upon the widow of
one of the Martyrs; who, upon former relations, prosecuted her complaint; but
when she saw the Picture, lively describing her Husband's horrid execution, she
sunck down, in a dead swound.

Pictures valued at a mighty Price.
We read, of Kings and Nations, that have valued Painters; so have they sought
their Paintings, for their weight in Gold; for 100 Talents; for 6000. testers;
12000. testers Nay some Pieces were preserved with so much safety, that their
Keepers lives, have been responsable for their security.

Van Dorts death by loss of a Picture.
An example of that nature, we had in Abraham van-Dort, Supervisor of the late
King CHARLES his Repository of Rarities; with especial command and care of one
most excellent piece of Miniture; which therefore he lodged (more secure then
safe) so far out of the way, as not to be found by himself, when it was
missing, to his own memory, at the KINGS demand; till after his death, the
Executors brought it home. Mr. Gibson, the Marquisate Picture.
This chance, fitted the story; which was [of the lost Sheep found] The design
of the Limner, A shepherd bearing upon his shoulder a strai'd sheep to the
fold. The Doctrine; Christ reclaimes the sinner. But miserable it was to the
poor man who at the first, for fear of his Masters Van Dorts displeasure, or
perhaps his own love to the excellency of that Art, in sad regret, went home
and hanged himself.

Several Pieces have been presented to Cities, Commonwealths, Nations, and
Kingdoms, as overvaluable for any private person. Our late King CHARLES, had
many most rare Originalls, Collections, both of Painting and Sculpture. He
being the most of fame, for his encouragement, and Patronage of Arts and
Honor. His love to this Art, begat three Knight- Painters; Rubens, Vandick,
and Gerbier, Three Knight-Painters.
the last had little of Art, or merit; a common Pen*man, who Pensil'd the
Dialogue in the Dutch Church LONDON; his first rise of preferment.

The Use and Ornament of Pictures.
Use of Paintings.
TO give a Picture its value, in respect of the use: We may consider, that God
has created the whole universe for Man; the Microcosm whereof, is contracted
into each Man's Mansion House, or Home, wherein he enjoyes the usus-fructus of
himself, and leaves it so, to his Son, as an Inheritage of strength, Profit,
Pleasure.

Ornaments to Houses.
The great Oeconomistes of all Ages (and so other men from noble examples) have
indevoured, to magnify their own Memories, with Princely Palaces of
structure, and afterward to adorn them distinct and gracefully, with Pictures
within, and Sculpture without. And both these witty Arts, have Whether
Sculpture or Painting, be supreme.
contended for Supremacy, whether Imagery imbossed, which pretends (as indeed
it is to ordinary Capacities) more natural, and so easier to be apprehended,
whose excellency is only in the soft Sculpt of the Chizell, as if it were
Painted; Or the other, Painting, being the more rare by enforceing shadows upon
a Flat, as if Carved; and yet the shadows themselves, not grossly apparent.

Certainly, this latter, must be the more excellent Artifice, by forcing this
to seem so, upon a Flat, which Nature makes rising and hollow; and indeed, the
truth is wonderfully concluded by one A. B.

Decided by a Blind Man.
He is a blind man, yet by feeling the form and lineaments of Nature in the
Life, does mould by the hand in Clay, rare figures exceeding like in shape,
which is impossible to be don by him, in Painting.

But of this, more hereafter when we come to working in Colors.

1. The first Grace of a Picture.
A Picture in truth, must stand off Natural, as if it were Carved, graceful
and pleasant at the first blush, or sight thereof; which are the excellencies
of ancient Painters: of whose A Cut hereof.
Originalls many, even pretenders to this Art, are deceived with Copies.

Of Original Pieces and of Copies.
To distinguish Principal from Copies.
GEnerally, in Originalls, the Colors become often vaded, and, in many, much
changed; the Piece in time grown crusty, and often peeles by ill usage. Yet you
shall find the Lightnings bold strong, and high; the shadows deep and
graceful.

Their Copies, if well counterfeit, the workman must alter the manner of his
Colors by a mixed tempering; otherwise then the Modern Natural way of
Painting admits. To do this well, he may be less excellent in the Precepts of
Painting, and yet in this way of working, out Master, a better Artizan; Mr.
Croix.
I knew but one, that herein (La Croix) who out-went all; and copied many of the
Kings Originalls, from several rarities in this kind.

Of Laniere.
It is said that Laniere in Paris, by a cunning way of tempering his Colors
with Chimney Soote, the Painting becoms duskish, and seems ancient; which done,
he roules up and thereby it crackls, and so mistaken for an old Principal, it
being well copied from a good hand.

How to judge of them
To judge of them with facility; Originalls have a Natural force of Grace
Rising; Copies seem to have, only an imperfect, and borrowed comeliness; and if
you stay to judge of them, though they seem so, to the sight of Imitation, yet
it proceeds not out of a Natural Genius in the Workman.

By distinction
An Imitator, does never come near the first Author, (unless by excellent
modern Masters own working) a similitude ever more, comes short of that truth,
which is in the Things themselves: The Copier being forced to accommodate
himself, to another man's intent. Authority gives Pictures repute by age, which
no Art can well imitate. Garish Colors, in new Pieces, take the eye at first;
But in old Pictures we are delighted, with their decayings, horridness of the
Colors.

Of Old and New Pictures.
Old PICTURES in a wonderful simplicity of Colors, draw their chief
Commendations, from a more accurate, and graceful design.

New Pieces, on the contrary, being but carelessely designed, stand most of all
on their garish Colors, and some affectation of Light and shadows, strained
with over-daring.

It is the opinion of many Masters of this Art concerning Ancient Originalls;
that the air, by time and age works so much upon the Colors, that the
Oilynesse thereof, being vaded, the Color becomes more fleshy, more Natural
than at the first. So they say of Tytians, and of Jurgiones being his Master.
In Copies you shall not find such freeness of the hand and Pensill; It will
discover it self to skillful observators, not to be Natural, but forced:
Painters express the difference; they judge of old pieces and their decays
from what they were at the first, by viewing them through their fingers as
through a Lettice or Vale, by a secret Mystery in that Art. Like as to a good
Judgment we usually may guess of the Beauty of her Youth in an ancient well
formed Matron.

Choice of Pictures.
AFter the first view of a Picture you may limit the understanding (without
more difficulty) in few observations; as first.

1. The Artizans care and pains must be visible,

2. It must appear that he had knowledge and understanding in the Art, and
followed it in every particular throughout; Not as if done by several hands,
good and indifferent.

3. Then observe if he have expressed his Natural Genius, with delight, upon
some special fancy, as more proper to himself, than any other.

For Example, some. In History and Figures. Others in Prospective. Some in
Shipwreck and Seas. In design. In likeness to the Life. In Landscape, not
many. In Flowers. In Huntings and Beasts. Cattle and Neat-heards.
The Prints of these were also lost but you may meet with others for Example.

And in each of these several Artists have been (properly) more rare.

In History. Ancient Italians and their successors.
The ancient Italians, who first began in Figures were Cimubes, and he was
far surpassed by Gotto, famous until the time of Peter Perugino, who was
infinitely outdone, by his excellent Scholar Raphaell Urbino; In his time
flourished the most admired Artizans for Architecture, for Paintings, for
Sculpture, as Bramon^ for Architecture; etc.

Then came the World's wonder Michael Angelo; Bona R^tto; Georgeon del
Castelfranco; Coregio Dannielle; Macerino* Andrea del Certo, Julio Romano.
These all excellent History Painters, whose works (for the most part) they
thoroughly finished.

To these, succeeded Titian, and Jacobus Palma, whose Paintings were Inferior
to none; but as to the Invention and Design they mastered it in another manner.
After them, we find Lu^hetta, Tenteret^a, Paulo Vern^s, who for Noble
Inventions, quantity of make, excellent design, beauty of Coloring exceeding
all before, are different in Painting from all the rest.

The late age produced many brave Masters, but somewhat inferior to the former;
viz. Anniball and Lodowick Carosier (two brothers). And another Michael Angelo
(called Corrowageo^) Joseph d' Arpi^as, Guido^ Paleneza and many other their
equals; at present, Peter de Cordova.

Dutch Masters.
That famous Albert Durex, who never learned of any, yet he is known of all. He
never traveled abroad, nor had the light of study after the Antique Marbles,
wherein he was deficient; otherwise no doubt he had infinitely surpassed all
the former, as it may appear by his admirable works in Oil, Limning, in water,
Etching; and Graving in Copper and Wood. His works of Graving were the first
that were ever seen in Italy, which set that Nation Imitators of him therein,
for his Master Marta (20 years before) found out that Art, but never performed
any matter therein prayseworthy.

We find only this Albert Durex (of a Painter) that writ methodically of the
Art of Perspective and Geometry: No modern has writ better. And his Symmetry,
so exact, both of truth and diligence; that none other has adventured to
imitate. This defect he had, that all his designs were disgraced by his
Gothic way of Architect, which he followed, after the gross building of his
own Country, always living at home.

Hans Hobben and Antonio More, in that curious smooth Painting specially after
the Life, have not been exampled by any.

About the same time lived Martin Hemskerke, So^oclere, and diverse others, good
Masters.

Since these; we find Blewmart, Seagers, Ruberus* and Antonia Vandike, who
exceeded these, especially after the Life.

French Masters.
The ancient French Masters were Le petit Barnard, Voget, Lehere, Blancher. And
at present, the most excellent Nicholas Posen for History.

Foquere and Claud Delaverne, for Landscape.

Particular Masterie^.
Designs.
FOr excellent designs of Noble History, we may be amazed to behold the
aforesaid Urbin, Angelo, Vernes, and Tinteret.

Life.
For Life, Titian, Holben, Antonio More* but now it becomes the bold adventure
of all, as the ordina ry practice that most men apprehend, of common Use and
Sale. In which Vandik was excellent; and now in England the most Painters
profess it.

Landskip^
Albert Durex was the first in Landskips whose errors are now amended by late
observation. He usually wrought, his Horison to the top or edge of the Piece;
which may be true to nature and Art, but nothing graceful (as hereafter is
observed when we come to working.)

The best indeed in this kind, were Paulus ^rill, Claud de Laniere, and
Vanbots: The French were well affected to this way, Troquere for one; for of
that Nation, their Spirits are seldom so well settled, as to be excellent. And
for the Dutch, Vangore was the best* but pretenders not a few.

Of our own Nation I know none* more excellent but Streter who indeed is a
complete Master therein, as also in other Arts of Etching, Graving, and his
work of Archi^ecture and Perspective: not a line but is true to the Rules of
A^t and Symmetry.

Flowers.
For Flower-pots and Paintings of that kind, Brugel and Dehem were excellent:
but now Paulus Seagers is best of all, a rare Artizan, and Van Thewlin of
Antwerpe, his Imitator.

And in dead-standing-things, Little-House, a Dutchman.

Prospective Sea Pieces. Beasts.
Stenwick in Prospective.

Porsellus in Sea Pieces and Shipwracks.

For Hunting and Beasts of Prey, Snider* and in little, Ellsamere, Rohen,
Hames, Tambots, who led the way to sundry others that practice after his
excellent hand in this kind, and for Horses; Woverman for Cattle and
Neat-heard, both the ^assances; Neat herds.
the Elder, more exact.

And in an excellent Master, you may meet with all these Eminencies complete;
Raphael Urbin, and Titian the best that this Art can boast of.

All these had their several ages of Fame, and decay; their Growths and Wanes;
Perfections and Weaknesses.

English Modern Masters.
These now in England are not less worthy of fame then any forraigner; and
although some of them be strangers born, yet for their affection to our Nation
we may mix them together. Our Modern Masters comparable with any now beyond
Seas: Not to take upon me to enroll them in order and degree of merit; each one
has his deserts.

In the Life, walker Zowst, Wright, Lilly, Hales, Shepherd, de Grange, rare
Artizans.

Fuller for story. Stone and Croix ingenious Painters in the incomparable way
of Copying after the Ancient Masters.

Barlo for Fowl and Fish, and Streter in all Paintings.

Then have we Marshall for Flowers and Fruits.

Flesher for Sea-Pi^ces.

Reurie for most Paintings, usually in little, and John Baptista; also Cleve
his excellent designs for those rare Tapstry work, wrought at Moretlake, and
otherwise, which will eternize his aged body.

Limning in Water Colors.
For Miniture or Limning, in Watercolors, Hoskins and his Son, the next
modern since the Hilliards, father and son; those Pieces of the father (if my
judgment fail not) incomparable.

The like of Coopers and Carry: And let me say it with submission, Gibsons great
piece of the Queen of England's head to the Life, done with that elaborate and
yet accurate neatness as may be a Masterpiece to posterity.

And to make good that Maxim, that the ground of all excellencies in this Art
is the Natural fancy bon-esprite, quick wit, and ingenuity, which adds and
enables the elaborate part, pick me out one equal to Madam Caris, a Brabanne;
Judgment and Art mixed together in her rare pieces of Limning, since they came
into England. And in Oil Colors we have a virtuous example in that worthy
Artist Mrs. Carlisle: and of others Mr. Beale, Mrs. Brooman, and to Mrs. Weimes.

And to give honor to this Art of Painting many worthy Gentlemen, ingenious in
their private delight, are become Juditious practitioners herein; Namely Sr*
John Holland, Mr. Guies, Mr. Parker, Mr. Sprignall, and others; I need not name
the rest; their works will better their worths and estimations in this and
other excellent sciences of Art and Learning. Quaere, Haines and Thorn.

Of Abilities in Painters.
War destroys all Arts.
HIstory informs us, that in War, all Arts dissolve into that action; but
when the Roman Sword had bounded the Empire, then the peaceful endeavors of
cunning Artizans outwent former excellency of the Grecian instructions; from
whom, these derived their Learning.

And yet of all Arts, this of Painting is least beholden, to the Gramaticall
Pen, for any knowledge of the Theory by their deficiency in the Practical: and
so not doubly qualified in both, Pen and Pensil, Rule and Example, the
perfection becomes less communicable to posterity; being rarely conjoined in
one, a Learned Painter.

This observation leads me into an ingenuous Confession of my self, to be
neither; but as a Lover of Arts, I am an intruder upon either. The Liberty of
these latter loose times prevailing over my former employments, (heretofore of
somewhat more concernment) have now resolved me into the harmless simplicity
of doing any thing, that may be aeque bonum to divert me, (even my thoughts)
from Malignity.

Abilities of Painters.
You may desire many Abilities of an Artist in his Piece, but the Italians
observe each single praise to deserve merit, in any one Master.

Some, are noted for one of these, viz.

Diligence and Proportion, ^ith a free hand. Fancy, and conceiving of
Passions. Invention. Grace.
Confined.
Of all these, we shall discourse hereafter.

But in a word, there may not be wanting these two,

First, to be well drawn, or (as Artizans term it) well designed; and herein
without exceptions, let there be truth and Grace.

Secondly, well Colored, with Force and Affection.

Well Designed.
FOr the first; there must be truth in every part, and Proportion of the
figure, just and Natural with the Life. Some artizans, strain Limbs into
extreme. Albert Durar, Golties, Spranger, did so, in that which was; and
Michael Angelo, in that which should be; and thereby in truth, loose the
gracefulness.

Of Factions.
But then, if an Artizan adventure on a Fiction, it will appear The Painter's
freedom.
less pleasing, unless it be done boldly; not only to exceed the work, (but
also the possibility) of Nature; as in Centaurs, Satyrs, Sirenes,
Flying-Horses. And therefore I say.

Pictur a fit ejus, et quod est, et quod non pote st esse. Which are easily
figured, by those that dare adventure, with Judgment. And so the beauty of such
a fiction, may consist in Exorbitance, and the fancy of the Painter to be
without Limitation.

And yet the Philosophers have writ of wonderful intermixed shapes, that have
been seen of several kinds, in one Creature. Earthly, as Satyrs, Centaurs,
Flying-Horses, Waterish, Fishes Flying, Sea-Horses, Tritons the Male, Nereides
the female. Th^odore Gaza caught one of these Nereides in Greece; and in Zeland,
was another taught to spinne; so says Alexander of Alexan^^ia, and some others
that have seen Monsters, Chimeraes Hippotames, and others such, which Heralds
undertake, to bestow upon Gentleman's Buryings.

Beyond the actual works of Nature, a Painter may describe, but not to exceed
the conceived possibilities of Nature in the same Culture. St. Austin affirms,
that in Utica, a Town in Africa, he saw the Jaw Bone of a man, as great and
weighty, as of 100. men of that age.

The descriptions of men in great actions, were the constant designs of Poets,
to afford the^ large and ample Limbs. The Statuaries of Roman Gods, and men of
fame, were so imitated; and being well drawn, (that is Proportionate to
Disproportion) in Picture, are excellent Ornaments: for though I confess a
Painters profession, may be, the imitation of Nature, yet to exceed her kind,
shows his own store and provision of fancy, without borrowing of her example;
and does well in Picture, if not ill done by the Painter. Since it discovers no
suspicion of ignorance in him, having his liberty allowed, that what he could
not master, he might have left undone.

Difference of Natural and seigned Figures.
The Natural figures indeed, show property and decency to delight common
Judgment; and the forced figures, may be the sign of the Novelty in
expression, and pleasing the Excitation of the mind; for Novelty causes
admiration, and admiration enforces curiosity, the delightful appetite of the
mind.

And certainly from an Artizan's excellencies, proceed those extravagant
varieties, or admirable Novelties, which are not the issues of an idle brain,
or to be found within the compass of a narrow conception, but please the Eyes,
like new strains of Music to the Ears, when common airs become insipid.

And with Grace.
Grace, is the bold and free disposing of the hand in the whole draught of the
design. You have the pattern to the Life, in an unaffected freedom, La mode,
or Bon mean of fashion in Man or Woman; which sets out, or supplies beauty; the
French have devised that phrase, to commend a Madam, whose behavior mends
Natures defects, and thereby the Courtisie of Court allows her, not unhandsome.

Well Colored.
Well Colored.
SEcondly, for well Coloring, you may observe, that in all darkness there is
deepness; but then the sight must be sweetly deceived, by degrees, in breaking
the Colors, by insensible passage, from higher Colors, to more dim, better
expressed in the sight of the Rainbow; where several Colors intermixed with
soft and gentle distinction, as if two Colors were blended together.

1. With Force, what it is?
Force, is the rounding, and rising of the work, in truth of Nature, as the
Limbs require it; without sharpness in out lines, or flatnesse within the body
of the Piece; and both these are visible errors.

2. And Affection, what?
Affection, is to express Passion in the figure; Gladness, Grief, Fear, Anger,
with motion and gesture of any Action. And this is a ticklish skill of the
hand, for Passions of contrary Nature, with a touch of the Pensil, alter the
Countenance, from Mirth to Mourning, as a coincident extreme.

We have done with our Picture of Choyc not to trouble you with more, or other
Notes of perfection, for the preseut until afterward, that we treat of
Working. Indeed Perfections of these kinds, are so various, and mysterious,
that chief Masters themselves, in the right censure of their work, have
undergon, several characters of defect.

Grecians the first Painters.
The first ordering of Painting by Grecians.
WE have it rendered from an old Author, that the first of Antiquity, that drew
Proportions, were Grecians (as aforesaid) in Black and white; who have begotten
others, that in time became Masters in Painting also. And afterward, many
added to this Art. The first inventing the due disposition of Lights in the
draught, and evermore, with ampler Limbs then the Life. Homer set out so his
gods (...) goddesses with large forms and features, as aforesaid.

Then they came to limit Proportions exactly, as Lawmakers; whom others
followed as decrees.

About the time of Philip, Painting began to flourish; and so to the successors
of Alexander; for we have several of those ancient Artizans, set out to us,
for their excellencies, in sundry of those Abilities, which we have named, as,
Their Names and Qualities.
Pictegenes, in Diligence. Pamphilus and Melanchius in Proportion. Antiphylus,
in Facility. Theon, in Fantasy and Passions. Apelles, in Invention and Grace.
Euphranor, a rare Artizan as in General, so in Painting.


How to dispose of Pictures and Paintings.
How to dispose of Pictures.
ANd now; supposing that you have purchased the most costly Pieces, we must
next consider, how to dispose them properly, with Conveniencie and Grace, for
the adornment of your House.

We shall not doubt the Question, whether Painting becomes Not upon outside of
Houses.
outsides of walls of the House; In imitation of the Germain; Caecill Viscount
Wimbleton (sometime general of the English in the Dutch Wars) seems to intend
the beautifying pleasant Site, and graceful Edifice at Wimbleton, with large
and ample figures without doors; in Fresco and Stoke park in Northampton, they
are done by claine. And Carew House at Parsons Green, large and bold, but
almost decayed, though but lately done. Some Towns are done so amongst the
Germains, but then, not with glaring Colors; that were to please common
judgments.

I have observed other Pieces in England, not many; for indeed the work is
soon lost upon a moist Wall; which in our Clime necessarily follows. That
excellent Painting of the two Kings, Henry the seventh and eighth, with their
Queens, done upon the Wall in the Privy Chamber of the late KING at White Hall
in Oil only, by the rare hand of Holben, has been preserved with continual
warmth within doors, and benefit of fire, even till now. But withal, I observe
the Wall, prim'd with a very thick Compost of Plaster, and some other mixture
fixed, to preserve the work.

Therefore I admit of no Coloring upon Walls; If any Draugh^^ ^^en let them be
Black and White, or of one Color hightn^^ (...) Figures of Life, Men and
Women: Or otherwise Nakeds, as large as the place will afford. If without
Personages, I wish it of Counterfeits, or imitations of Marbles, Aquae-ducts,
Arches, Columns, Ruins, Cataracts, in large proportions, bold and high, and to
be well done; for fear of Lamenesse, which is soon discerned.

Of Grotesco.
Grotesco work, what it is.
AS for Grotesco or (as we say) Antique-worke; It takes my fancy, though in
forms of different Natures, or Sexes, Sirenes, Centaures, and such like, as the
outward walls of White Hall, observes this kind; as running-trale*worke, and
not ill mastered: But when all is done (now a days) it looks like an
Alehouse; Citizen painting, being too common; and usually else-vvhere, were
very ill wrought. Excellent prints of this kind were lost at Sea, of Steven de
Labella.

And if Poets devise these double Natur'd-Creatures, why, not the Painters; who
can do what the other but bespeake? But in true Judgment I would confine
Grotesco, only to Borders and Freezes: then it may become the Wall, within or,
without doors. Here a Print of Grotesco should have been inserted.

Of Fresco.
Of Fresco what it is*
THere is a Painting upon Walls called Fresco: It was the ancient Graecians
Noble way of Painting, and since much used by the Romans. Plutarch tells us:
That Aratus the great Commander under Ptolemie of Egypt, (being curious to
satisfy his Sovereign's delight in Pictures) presented him with such Rarities,
as his Victories made him Master of; or, that he could purchase at any price,
and (in a Complement to the Emperor's affection that way) spared the sacking
of a wealthy City* merely for the Excellency of Fresco-Painting, upon the
Wall, and out*side of Houses; lest the unruly Soldier, by Fire, or otherwise,
should ruin the raritie.

Whole Towns of this work.
There have been PAINTINGS of this work, in several Towns of GERMANY, rarely
done; but now ruined by War.

Three Chambers in Rome.
At Rome; there are three Chambers, in the Popes Palace, of Frescoe; done by
Raphael Urbin, and Julio Romano, (his disciple,) who finished his Master's
work, and are yet called, Raphaells designs. Other places, done by Andrea
del sexto, and Michael Angelo, and some other Artists.

And in France.
At Fountain-bleau in France, is most excellent work of this kind; they are
the continued Travails of Ulysses in 60. Pieces, done by Bollameo, Martin Rouse
a Florentine, and others. But more of this hereafter; when we show the manner
and order of this work, in the second Book.

To place the Pictures within Doors.
^o dispose Pictures within doors.
LEt us therefore contrive our Pictures within doors; spare your purse and
pains, not to Clutter the Room with too many Pieces, unless in Galleries and
Repositories, as rarityes of several Artizans intermingled; otherwise it
becomes only a Painters-Shop, for choice of sale.

How for light?
Place your best Pieces, to be seen with single lights: Thorough Lights on both
sides, or double windows at each end, are Enemies to the view of Painting; for
then the shadows fall not natural, being always made to answer one Light.
Observe in their placing, as you may see how the Painter stood in his working,
the light of the windows to fall upon the right side of the work from whence
their Shadows always fall backward. The Italian's evermore, stand low beneath
their high windows; so then, the shadows in his figures, have that respect, as
a descending light, best for men's Orderly for grace
faces, and shows them lively, and generally low Lights to large Pieces, do
prejudice Paintings.

Then bestow them orderly, and in their Qualities properly, and fitly, for
Ornaments; lest your cost and discretion, be cast away at once.

In the entrance of your house, or Porch; with some Rustique figures, or things
rural.

In the Hall,
The Hall with Paintings of Neat-heards, Pesants, Shep-heards, Milke-maides
attending Cattle, in proper degrees, some other also, of Kitchenry; several
sorts of Foul and Fish, sitted for the Cooking.

Staire-Case.
Pictures becomes the sides of your Staire-case; when the grace of a Painting
invites your guest to breathe, and stop at the ease-pace; and to delight him,
with some Ruin or Building which may at a view, as he passes up, be observed.
And a Piece over-head, to cover the Sieling, at the top-landing, to be
fore-shortned, in figures looking downward, out of the Clouds with Garlands or
Cornu-Copia's, to bid welcome.

Great Chamber.
The Great Chamber with Landskips, Huntings, Fishing, Fowling; or, History of
Notable actions.

Dyning-Roome.
The Dyning-Roome; with the most eminent; a King and Queen, if possibly to be
purchased at any rate, (I mean their Pictures) rarely done; the want whereof in
former times, were supplied only, with the Court-Arms of their Majesty's; few
good subjects then, but conceived it expedient, to express their Love and
Loyalty, by some such Emblem, or note of remembrance. But then in reverence to
their Persons, forbear to place any other Pictures of Life, as not worthy their
Companions; being, themselves, Ornament sufficient, for any Room: unless (as
some will have it) at the nether end, two or three, of their own blood: Or of
chief Nobility, (Favorites) to wait upon their princely Persons.

Drawing-Chambers.
Inward with drawing Chambers; place others of the Life, whether of Honor,
friendship or of Art only.

Bedchamber.
Your own and your wives or Children, best become your discretion, and her
modesty, (if she be fair) to furnish the most private, or Bedchamber; lest,
(being too public) an Italian*minded Guest, gaze too long on them, and
commend the work for your wive's sake.

We had an arrant Knight, notorious in this error, who was so mistaken with the
love of his wife and handsome daughters, that in each hole (of his house I
mean) you might salute them; As for which, they became the more common here,
and after beyond Seas, to his and their ruin.

Banquetting-Rooms.
Cheerful Paintings, In Banqueting Rooms: but here, as any where, forbear
Obseene Pictures; those Centaures, Satyrs Ravishings, Jupiter-scapes in
several Shapes, though often done by rare Artists: unless you mean to publish
the sign, because you delight in the sin.

Galleries:
Graver stories; Histories your best figures, and rarest work becomes
Galleries; here you Walk, Judge, Examine, Censure.

Tarraces. ^
Landskips become Chimney-pieces, Boscage, and VVildworke, in Tarraces or open
places; Summer-Houses, Stone-walks some Church Prospect, or Buildings, set out
well, at the end of the Walk.

Note.
One Rule for all, and every pieces; If they hang high above reach, set them
somewhat bending forward, at the Top from the wall; because (as one observes)
the visuall beams of the eye, extend to the top of the Picture, appear
farther off, then the foot; to reduce it, allow the advantage of stooping
forward above.

Five sorts of Paintings.
And thus much of Pictures their Choice and Use, there being five kinds of
Paintings. Distemper or Sise-colour; Frescoe; Oyle-Colours; Miniture or
VVater-Colours; Croyons, or dry Colors.

By this time having told you thus much, to make you in Love with the Work,
let me say somewhat to teach you the ART; and so to save your purse, and
delight your practice.

Which to do, I must begin, with the beginning of the Practice of the Pen; and
then, to the Pensil.

Of Drawing, and Designing in general.
Drawing and Designing, their excellent use.
I Have marvailed, at the negligence of Parents in general; they not to
enforce a Necessity, in the Education of their youth, to this Art of Drawing
and Designing, being so proper for any course of Life whatsoever. Since the use
thereof for expressing the Conceptions of the Mind, seems little inferior, to
that of Writing; which in no man, ought to be deficient. And in many Cases,
Drawing and Designing performs, what by words are impossible; and (to boot)
perf^cts the hand, for all manner of writing.

And, if it be the general Rule, (or should be) that Children be taught some
gentle Manu-facture; then, does this of Drawing, apt them for those. For
almost, nay in any Art, we must respect Rule, and Proportion, which this makes
perfect. And such as will not make it up to a trade, yet, the Idea thereof,
renders a man very useful, As for Navarchy; Modells for building Ships, and
Rigging them. Architecture; Modells for Houses. The Cuts of these, all lost ^^
Sea.
Anatomy; forming Skeletons. Magneticks; Compasses, Globes, Instruments,
Dialls. Batonicks; Gardning. Astronomicalls. Graving, Etching, Carving,
Embling, Moulding, etc. Thus much in general, for the Excellency of this Art.


But to our particular purpose of Painting, it is the only Consequence. And
therefore to draw well with the Pen, after a Copy, or the Life, is the most
difficult to begin, and the only pains, for the present; but when mastered, the
whole work of Designing (which leads you into Painting) will become the
greatest pleasure; and of more variety, then any Manual Profession what ever.
Being the singular delight, rather to be doing, then to have done. The Spirits
evermore refreshed, with new fancies, and unexpected success in the end, are
never wearied. The livelin^sse of the fancy, cannot be contained within the
compass of ordinary practice, readily expressing the inward Motions of a
forward mind.

The Practice of Drawing or Designing.
The practice of Drawing and Designing.
I Would prepare you with Rule and Compass, and other Instrume nts, necessary
for you to lie by you at hand; but advise you to practice without them; It is
your eye must judge, without artificial Measuring. And when you have past my
first directions, and are perfect to draw by the Life, you may afterward, in
large Proportions and dimensions, use your Instruments, both for perfection,
ease, and speed.

So then you may have large and less paires of Compasses, the one foot
shorter, to put therein a Pen for Ink, or Black lead; a strait Ruler and a
squire. Of Box, Holly, Sallow, and Prick-wood.

Provide your self necessarily of Cole-Pensils, split into shivers, from a
Charcoale of Sallow wood, soft with a pith running through it, well burnt, the
grain, and Color like Black Satin. Other Pensills, of Black-lead, Black and
white Chalk, and Pastills also of several Colors; the making and use is
hereafter taught you in the second book.

Get a book in Folio, of a double Quire of fine Paper, (as also some sheets of
Blew Papers and other Colors) to avoid loose leaves, soon lost; that by
overlooking your first draughts thereon, you may with encouragement, delight in
your proficiency.

The foundation of Proportion consists in several particular figures, by
which, I would have you enter your Drawings; as the Circle, Ovail, Square,
Trangle, Cilinder: Each of these have their effects.

Ovall, is a direction for the Face Square, for Platforms, buildings,
fortifications; Circle, for all Orbicular Shapes; Triangle, for three-side
lines; Cilinder for Pillars, Columns; and these with small practice, you will
Master: they do, but, make your hand.

How to draw by Copyes.
Begin your Example, by a Copy or Print, of those several forms of figures; a
the Sun, ^ull- Moon, Orbicular Flowers, or other Circular shapes, and so of the
rest, by the outside line only, without shadows.

These I propose as most easy, to win your affection, to more difficulties; to
bring your hand, to hold your Cole, to draw lightly, to wipe it out, with a
feather and to practice it, over again, until you master these forms, as your
first work.

Of several members o^ the body.
Then, practice by several members of the body; in some Print; as the Ear,
Eye, Nose, Hand, Foot, Leg, by themselves in several Postures, all which are
particularly designed for Head and shoulders.
this Art.

The next is, by a Print, or Copy of a Head and shoulders of a Man or Woman,
frame the out dimension or Table, which comprehends your Sample with equal
lines, whether Square, Circle* or Ovall; by help of Rule and Compass.

Observing the distance from the lines of your Table, by your eye; then take
your Cole, made very fine and sharp, with a Penknife, or smooth File. Begin
from the top of the Brow or Forehead; trace the out line of the face down to
the tip of the chin with a soft and gentle hand, hardly discernable, wiping it
out with a feather, or piece of Spanish Leather with sharp Corners so often,
until your practice comes like your Pattern.

Then gently draw Orbicular, the out side line of the Head, from the Brow where
you began, to the Crown; and so backwards, down to the Neck, compassing it to
the Throat and Chin, where you left; all which becomes Ovall.

Then guess at the Eyebrows; mark out the place of the Eyes; between them,
draw down the Nose and Nostrills, score out the Line, and length of the Mouth
and Lips; lastly, the Ear, and the Hair, falling upon the Face; wipe it out
all with a feather; leaving the Lines discernable only, by which you may
discover the errors and amend them.

Then draw it all again as before; overlooking each part, until it becomes
reasonable; then perfect the Eyes, Nose, Lips, Ears, Hair, go on boldly;
adventure a stroke or Line, down from the Chin, for the Throat; the
Back-stroake, alike, from the Ear, to the Neck, and Shoulder; and so proceed
to the Breast, or further down, as your Print is in length, which commonly is
not deep, for a Head*

Look over this work; be not discouraged, though deformed; wipe it out as
before; and by the Errors, amend it so often till it become reasonable handsome.

Let this draught remain in your Book; begin another of the same, and so a
third, or more; perfecting each with courage, and confidence, for 2 or three
several days practice, that you may find delight in your proficiencie.

When you can Master a single head of several postures; as side-face, three
gutters and full; looking upward, downward, fore-shortned; Then adventure on a
whole figure at length, Nakeds.
Man, Woman, or Child; Then some Skeletons, forward, back, and side, and after
all, clothed with Garments; Lastly, shadow Skeletons.
each one of those severally, as a true Copy from the Principal; drawing over
the Lines of the Charcoale, and then over that, with a Ravens quill pen, for to
remain in your book, and hatch it.

I had prepared Prints for all these directions but they are lost at Sea.

Pensils.
Black Chalk Pensils draws handsomely (without the Cole) upon Blew-paper, and
shadowed neatly; being heightened with VVhite-lead Pastils, you may practice
upon several colored papers, as the ground and shadow; and heighten it with
other Color Pastils, as your fancy affects.

By Copies of Prints; first drawings of good masters, by Paintings or by
Sculptures of round; and then by Observation of nature, in the Life, learn to
understand (before you shall perfectly draw them) the reason and cause of true
shadows of Bodies, as they appear heightened, outward, or deepned, in their
Concave or hollow. Which are caused by neernesse, as farther distance, from the
light; and therefore, those Prints which duly observe them, express much
judgment, and the true Spirit of a Picture.

Drapery what?
Drapery-garments; of several Stuffs, coorse or fine, Silk, VVollen, or
Linen, have their* different and natural folds; So as in the Lines, of
greater, or softer shadows, (well done by an Artist) you may (though in black
and white) easily discern the meaning of the draught; to be of such a Stuff,
or Clothing.

Of hatching.
In shadowing, with hatches, or small strokes (as in your print) use the pen of
a Ravens-quill; and be sure not to cross any stroke, before the former be dry;
lest they run into each other.

After some practice with the Pen (which follows the use of the Cole) proceed
to shadow, with black and white Chalks, in strokes, or sweetning (as in
Painting.)

For your better directions herein, get some Designs or draughts, done in
Chalk, Red-oaker, dry Colors, Croyons, or Pastills, for your patterns.

The best Prints.
The best Prints, for true proportion; take Raphael of other Old Artizans well
graven.

Coltius, (a Hollander of Harlem,) varies his postures, very much; large and
bold hatches; but curious and true, in all his shadows; Michael Angelo, his
Pieces are not common, a famous Italian; Hans Holben, a perfect Master; his
bold hand appears in several Ornaments of Painting, at White Hall Chapel,
and Palace; at Greenwich, Hampton Court: but mostly defaced by the injury of
time. He was employed by King Henry the Eighth against the entertainment of the
Emperor Charles the 5th, his Prints are not common.

Shadan and others.
Shadan, VVierin, Spranga, Michaell-Jans of Delph, Raphael and John Sadler, and
other Masters sans, Number.

Most Pictures are Copied by Gravings.
Now, though we name these, as other Artizans, for draughts, and to be met with
in Prints; you must know that they were Painters, and for the most part,
wrought their Pieces first, by design, and draught, with black and white
Chalkes in little; and so in Oyl-Colours, to the Life or History: from which
other Masters, Gravers in Copper, or Etching with Strong-water, have preserved
them in Prints, for more public use, and eternal memory of the first Authors,
either after their first Draughts, or Paintings.

With several Names to them.
So shall you have, two or three, or more, several Names oft-times, set to the
Print; the Designer, the Painter, the Graver, and sometime the Printer. Our
excellent Artists in Graving are, Father Lambert, Hollar, Vaughan, Trevethen,
Gay-wood, Cross.

Not to Paintere you can Draw well.
By this time, and Practice, you expect that I should put you into Painting,
the usual longing desire of the Practitioner; but forbear, by any means,
until you be excellent in Copying of draughts, according to the foresaid
Rules; nay, until you can boldly and truly, adventure upon your own fancy,
and design a Pattern for others. And believe it for truth; hasty Coloring,
undoes the Painter. He shall never be excellent, that is not ready, in his own
Draughts; Nor be able to paint (and be esteemed) till he understand a Picture
as it should be made. And therefore, give me leave to read a Lecture of the
powers of a Painter.

Of the powers of a Painter and Painting.
In reference to Philosophy and
PHilosophers, divide the universe (which is their subject) into three Regions;
Caelestiall, Aeriall, Terrestrial.

Poetry
So the POETS, (who imitate humain Life, in measured And
lines,) have lodged themselves, in three Regions of Mankind; Court, City, and
Country.

Painting.
So, the PAINTERS, (whose Art is to imitate Nature) perform it in three
several Qualities; Design, Proportion, and Color.

Into three sorts.
And these, into three sorts of Painting; Prospective, (or Landscape,)
Historical, and Life.

Prospective; a wonderful freedom, and liberty, to draw, even, what you list;
so various is Nature in that.

Historical; respects due Proportions and figures.

Life; only the Color.

In each of these; you must have dependency upon all the other, but
necessarily, on each in particular.

Of Imitation.
The powers of a Painter, is expressed, by Imitation of Natural things,
whereof the most excellent, are ever, the most difficult; easy to paint
deformity.

In your Imitations of Art or Copying, observe to hit the virtues of the Piece,
and to refuse the vices; for all Masters have somewhat, of them both. For,
Paintings* may be puft-up, but not stately; starved in Color, not delicate;
rash* not Confident; In several graces and abilities.
Negligent, not Plain. Several men, several excellencies: Some in Grace,
Boldness, Diligence, Subtility, Magnificence, etc. (as aforesaid). In all, do
not imitate outward Ornaments, but express inward force? Yet in some Pieces I
have found these virtues not pleasing, and, even vices (themselves) graceful;
but then, it has been by a Master, that boldly did it, to show, that he was
able, to make his conceit a pattern, (as before said.)

Generally, follow best Masters, lest an indifferent choice bring you to an
evil habit.

Of Fancy.
Proficiencie of Painting, is purchased, not (altogether) by Imitation, (the
common drole-way of ordinary Painters) if you neglect the amendment, by your
own generous fancy; (Estautem proprie Imago rerum animo insidentium). For, he
that only follows another's steps, must (needs) be the last in the race: Lazy
Painters study not, the brain: Nature can do much with Doctrine; but not
Doctrine, without Nature: Nature, is of greater Moment: Every Artificer has a
peculiar Grace, in his own work, agreeing to his Nature; though many (of the
other sort,) owe most to Doctrine.

The force, of Imitation of Nature, is in the Fancy; which works with the
more Wisdom. It being an imaginative faculty, or Wit, and is set on work to
imagine, what we have seen (or at least made up with some other Sense) being
Surpassing Imitation.
the Print or foot*steps of Sense. It is the treasury of the mind, The darkness
of night awakes our Speculations of the day; when sleep fails, the Mind does,
then, digest the conceived things into Order; that so, the whole invention
wants nothing, but the hand of the Artificer, to effect the work; and, without
Art, to do, Imagination is useless; Fancy supplies Imitation's weakness; the
property and Office whereof, is to retain those images, and figures, which the
Common Sense receives: First, from the exterior sense; and then transmits it to
the judgment; from thence, to the fancy; and there looked up, and covered in
the memory; and we may alter and move with the re-presentation of things,
although it have them not present, which the common Sense cannot have, unless
present. Fancy in sleep.


Herein appears the marvailous force of Imagination; A man sleeps, his Senses
are at rest, yet his Imagination is at work; and offers things to him, as if
present, and awake. It changes passions and affections.


Imagination moves the passion and affections of the Soul; and can provoke the
body, to change the Accidents; as to make a man sick, or well; sorrow, joy,
sear.

We may paint a conceived, or intelligible thing, Perfect, by the Idea of
Fancy: but, by Imitation, we may fail of Perfection. Hence it was, that the
Ancients intending to excel in the forms and figures of their Jupiters, would
not imitate, Mr. May.
or take a pattern, generated, but rather, by a conceived description of Him,
out of Homer, or other Poets.

There is in the form and shape of things, a certain perfection and
excellency; unto whose conceived figures, such things To increase fancy.
by Imitation, are referred, that cannot be seen.

To amend fancy, we must lodge up such rarities, as are administered to sight,
to increase the meditation of fancy; as in your daily view of forms and
shadows, made by lights and darknesses; such as in the Clouds near summer
Sunsetting; which soon alter change and vanish, and cannot remain for Copying,
but must be lodged in the fancy so that it is no difficulty, to study this Art
walking by day or night. In your bed, waking or sleeping, or what dr^ams and
fancy possesses your sleep. You have Lessons in all, and Paintings there are
of either.

And order it in a Picture.
In a draught of design, the Artist must fancy every circumstance of his
matter in hand; as usually Rubens would (with his Arms a cross) fit mu^ing upon
his work for some time; and in an instant in the liveliness of spirit, with a
nimble hand would force out, his overcharged brain into description, as not to
be contained in the Compass of ordinary practice, but by a violent driving on
of the passion. The Commotions of the mind, are not to be cooled by slow
performance: discreet diligence, brings forth Excellence: Care, and Exercise,
are the chiefest precepts of Art. But, diligence is not to stagger, and stay at
unnecessary Experiments; and therefore I have observed in excellent Pieces a
willing neglect, which has added singular grace unto it. Be not so
overcurious that the grace of your work be abated by the over-diligence; as
never to tell, when you have done well: therein you will be maximus tui
Calumniator, your own worst detractor.

Not to dwell upon d^signing.
Not to dwell upon every line; nor to alter what is well; It wants true
judgment and makes it worse; and so to love every thing we do, whilst a doing,
though too much. Not being able in the exercise of designing, to overtake the
quickness of fancy; we must therefore unbend the intention of our thoughts;
breathing, and reviewing what is done, by which we make a handsome connection of
things.

To correct what is amiss.
To add or detract, to allay those things which swell too much, to raise
things that sinck, to ty things that flow, to digest or compose what is without
order, to restrain what is superfluous, require double pains; to lay it by for
a time, and as it were to give it new birth; festina lent.

And to submit to Censure.
Admit of censure; What others justly reprehend, amend: Apelles did so; great
wisdom in a confessed ignorance; and be content with every ones opinion, for
you shall lie open, unto two exceptions; the Incompetent, and the corrupt
witness; the first, if not a Painter; the second, if no Poet.

being wisely judged.
But if your Piece deserve it, a man of knowledge should say in general terms.

That you have chosen a good Argument, Story or History.

That the Parts are excellently disposed.

The Maintenance of the several characters, of the Persons, properly.

The dignity and vigor of the expression, in Form and Color.

A good Spirit, boldly done, etc.

And so, it may seem to have in it performed, all the parts of various
experience, clear judgment, ready memory, swift and well governed fancy, and
this being enough for truth, and the weight and credit, of a singular testimony.

But if your understanding be called to council, you may please both parties,
and speak like a stranger in this or the like manner, viz.

Of a Picture.

I Know another Person for the Life; Yet I like the Picture of this Lady. A
lively Spirit and good Grace. Well wrought; Round, and Neatly painted. The Lady
becomes a Limner's Art. He takes the less pains, when Nature makes her so, to
his hand. Comely Tall. If she designed her own posture, it was done with
discretion. Bon-Mene adds to Nature, and yet to yield her the due, a Handsome
Lady, A beauteous blushing Brown.

Her hair proper to the complexion; neatly put into Curles and folds. I
believe she did direct her own Dress, and so saves the labor of his fancy;
for if I mistake not, the Lady wants no will, nor judgment to set her self
forward.

The face made up of excellent parts. A quick Eye and full, amends the defect
in the Color; and yet the circled brows gracefully big and black Her Nose not
over-Romane, with Nostrils fair enough. A sull mouth: the largeness of the
Lips commendable, because plump and Red. I like well the deepned shadow
stroke, which parts them, and almost shows her Ivory teeth, as if to appear;
and altogether seems to be speaking.

The very dimple by the Cheek, with a wanton touch of the Pensil, singly sets
out her looks, most lovely: Somewhat long visage; and it may be in true measure
to the Life, and sufficient Symmetry. But see the Painter has done his part
and me^ded Nature by round shadows, whichdeceives the Eye to the better. He did
well to make her face not too full, the features had been less becoming.

The Head is w^ll set on, supported by her Noble Neck: roundrising full and
fat. Ample Breasts interlined with River'et Vaues See, see; the swelling Papps
like fair Pome-waters. The Nipples too, like Rasberry fountains, in true center
to their circles. Her brawny Arms of good flesh, and pure color. A Hand well
drawn; the singers spread, and yet not forced. Her Body well fed, not too fat.
An Italian Dou's delight.

Her Drapery of good fashion, true Mode; the very Color not improper for her
complexion; well chafen Colors become the countenance. Certainly, the Painter
was well paid; or sel^pleased in his own work, for it must be valued a
Masterpiece of Lilly and might show with more advantage, by a better light.

This way and manner to commend, does not a miss for the Painter, nor to the
Person if the work deserve merit. Yet judgment will be the more true, when
your eye dwells not upon particulars, but views the Limbs apart, and skips from
several Objects, to a full Close, and Censure of all.

It is pity that a Piece well done, should hang like an offender in Chains,
as if set up only, to be seen a far off not to be valued near hand. I could
wish that the Ladies would read their own Lectures this way, and though not so
becoming to commend themselves, (which the man does too much, to their faces)
yet they may cunningly inform underhand, and set out the work to the full
view of their own excellency. To teach the Gallant by such Artificial
Patterns, how to ascribe due praise to a deserving person and so in sooth with
modesty and truth, to commend both as in particular upon the Lady Vandikes
Picture in England.

I marry Sir, Vandick's rare Mistress, and his Masterpiece, she needed not of
his Art to help her forward. A goodly Plump, Fat, well Favored, well formed
Figure.

A lovely look. How she leers out her inticeing Italianated eyes, able to
confound a Saint. Her Habit put into a Garment, call it a Petty-coate, and
Wast-coate, or morning dress. (an Alphabet of Titles, serves not sufficient to
number the names of Ladies coverings.)

But i will say so much for this Piece, not overcurious (it seems) to set out her
self. A delicate Isabella sarsnet; the Bodies tackt together before, with sour
Jewels set into buttons of Diamonds; on each side thereof an Orient Pearl,
and a fifth Jewel more fair, the pendant to the other four, in fashion alike;
only, the lowest pure Pearl, so large, (such is the Painters Art to make it)
inestimable. These but untacked, (with little pains, but much passion) you
come to the smock, which peeps out between them; and at the hand-wrest
carelessely purfled of purest Holland (the Nunns never spun neater twine) which
needs no Flanders-lace to come near it. Indeed the Nations are at Odds, we
know, their Ware may not mingle. What a stately head she has! well set on! A
goodly Rope of Pearl surrounding her firm, fair, and noble Neck; full and fat
fleshed shoulders, plump breasts, well colored skin, and altogether, able to
endure a man's handling. Her hair of a well chosen mingled Color, (as you may
say) of all into one. Not brown, nor black, and too too graceful she was, to
produce a flaxen. I can tell that the Painter was put to it, upon two ^allats
full, to mix them into a Color, which made it as you see a lovely pure bright
Aburn; with which the darkened folds, set out each Circle, sufficient to enchant
a man into those Mazes. But that her looks were so near, which hooked yours
into her eye balls, full black and rouling, and when she had you, she held you
there. Only, you might have leave to steal to her Cheek and Lip, and there to
dine and sup, and sip. The whole frame of her face a very Miracle of Nature.
Her counte^ance double, for though she seems to invite you, yet with so much
majesty, as to command your distance, only to admire, not to meddle.

And what is her fancy, would you think? Somewhat she must have of ^ashion to
set her out. Surely, Nolshe needs none Yet she goes not far to fetch it. A
Sap green and golden colored Oken-branch tackt to her head. The Emblem,
Strong and lasling. So was she; a bounsing Bona-Roba, to endure for ever.

Hold Sir! Her self gives you the Ensign of Religion; for having done her
devotion, she wraps her Row of Beads about her Arm, lifting up the pendant
cross, as who should say: At the end of all. Look upon this Sir, and you shall
never sin.

It Is Vandick's. The first Painter that e're put Ladies dress into a careless
Romance. This way suits well to most fancies, and not improperly befits the
various modes, that alter with the time, and which our vine-folkes call a
New-fashion. But if we look upon Paintings of late ages, how ill does the
apparel in use then, become the Picture now? A Noble Custom of the ancients,
to be so diverse in their dress, as not seriously to settle upon any; and so of
this and other his Pieces of different devised dress.

This figure (you see) side-way; perhaps her body would not otherwise bear it
out forward, with so much advantage as to the pleasing humor of Plumpnesse.
She seems flatbreasted; and therefore the Painter has done what he can by Art,
to hide defects of Nature, and sets her out in such a posture best becoming
her parts. Yet has he given her Grace to her good Face, which she turns from
the bodies posture and shows it at the best, three-quarter. She is fair and
full, not fat; plump enough, and with good features to her length; Not
over-tall, nor too slender. See, see, how pretily she is busied to wreath her
Lilly*flowr'd branch into a Chapelet which signifies her innocent mind intent
to Nature, not Art, holding it forth as an Emblem, that Solomon in all his
Loyalty came short of Nature's purity. A light brown hair; handsomely curled;
not too forward upon the face. Her fair cheeks and pure complexion need not her
locks, for shadow, themselves will bear out all censure; and the better, for
she used no Art to make them Red, nor has the Artizan painted them at all.
Look behind, how her Tresses roll up with ropes of Pearl; rich and pretty,
without so much as a knot of fancy to be seen, or any strain of dress about
her; her mind seems to be more serious. Her eyes somewhat sad. A Cherry lip and
full, which does invite you. Her neck, something too long; and therefore, the
rope of pearl does well to help nature which cannot promise plumpnesse.

Take her together, she is better for a brave Wife, than a complete Mistress;
her mantle rich for Winter-covering. A deep Ruby velvet, lined with Aurora
sarsnet with excellent true shadows well folded, and ^ackt up backwards, with
an equal pair of Collets* pure Ovall Emralds, large and fair, well set,
between four Pearls (quarterly) round and great. Over all, a tippit of Sables
rich and deep; Certainly, the great Tartar sent it a present to salute her. It
sets off the color of her skin, Pine Lilly w^ite; smooth as unspotted Marble
(if it were proper, or possibly comparative in any degree, to pattern lively
flesh, to be like a stone.)

Her linen not seen at all, unless her smock-sleeves, cuffed with a
Neat-new-fashion-Flanders lace, rich and deep. Her Arms and hands well formed
by nature, and may not be ill done by the Artizan. Altogether, framed equally
to an eeven feature. No parts strained, to make her other than she should be. A
handsome Piece, well worth the Painter's fame, that has not left his fellow.

Maria Ruten Vxor D. Antoni van Dyck Eq:

W Faithorne excud*
portrait of Mary Ruthven, wife of van Dyck

A Picture of the Husband and his Wife.
IT is a painting of figures, inseparably two, and so made up into one Picture;
nor needs there any more addition, themselves are grace sufficient, to fill up
a story* The design sets it out, as after Mid-Noon Summer, when heat has
influence on hearty affections.

A new Bed-Bridall went out a walking, led by the way into a well-grown Wood,
where, under the branched boughs of an ample Oak they two sat billing: and
after all, in the close of the Even, the Married Man starts up, and looks
wishly on Her.

His Aspect cheerful; a silent testimony of a clear Soul and an eeven
Conscience at peace with it self. His Countenance not more nor less than Manly;
His Constitution Sanguine, complexion ruddie. His hair of good grace, and
proper color, a darkened brown fitted for length and curling; eyebrows, more
sad, full eyed and quick. The Nose somewhat rising, not Roman: His youthful
chin but thin, for Nature was in doubt, whether a Beard were better, or without:

I might read a Lecture of his outside Limbs, but better what is within. His
looks not unlovely, show him Manlymild; a tender heart full of Noble pity. Of
a Spirit too brave to offer injuries to any, and so much a Christian as to
pardon them from an other; rather willing to suffer, than to disturb the
temper of his well-composed mind into a degree of Anger. His Apparel of
Silk, and (like civility it self) the Color Black. His Mantle-Cloake cast on
his Arm. He looks long upon her, and having twined his hand in hers, He
seem^ to speak unto Her.

But She sat still; for having found his Eye Balls fierce, an^ fixed on her,
and hers the like on him, and they thus imprisoned; both of them blushed, and
she looks back: he would have done so too, had not her modesty began first.

Had you but seen her thus upon the sudden, you would have said she did so, as
not to undo him, with over-looking. Her beauty was of brown: Her hair of
Aburn-black; and though she sits down, her dimension showed her Symmetry of
personagetall, not thin. Her years beneath his, yet at such a desired distance
as made eithers age equally matchless. Her beauty, in this blush, caused her
to look the more lovely. A full eye and piercing; the circled brows gracefully
big and black; Her forehead high, her cheeks so well complexion'd, as never
till non) she could endure (or need they) Painting; somewhat long visage, in
true measure of the Life; yet the Painter did his part by artificial shadows
and roundings, that you could not easily distinguish it, to be any defect of
Nature. Her hair curled in wreaths and folds, as if she had a mind to enchant
the Man into those fetters, and hold him there. Her ear came under all, round
and small, such as men say belong to witty Women; the tippe rather graced a
Pearl than that It: In form it was most like a Pear (no doubt there was a
pair, the other though unseen) but of such Value that a single one might be
sent a Present to a Princess; the pattern sampled a Rope of them so round,
that they were enobled into her Neck-lace. Her dress, her own direction,
surpassing the Painters design; so then, she might teach him that Art, for ever
after. Her Knots of choice Riband sap-green and silver, fancied into witty
fashions, twining her hair like mazes made up into round Rouls, that lodged in
the Crown and center of her Head behind.

Her Head was well set on (as Artists use to say) supported by a round neck,
down behind to her rising shoulder, full and plump, and meeting before with a
fair breast, well proportioned, interlaced with Riveret-azur- veins. See, see,
the swelling paps like ripe Pome*waters, well grown and fit for her Husband's
gathering. The ruddy nipples, two if seen, would seem Rasbery fountains in
true Center to their Globy-Orbs. Her brawny Arms* of good flesh, and pure
color. A hand well drawn, holding a sprig of Gesmine, the other shadowed in
his. Her body well fed not fat, sitted only for his delight.

Her Apparel right Mode. I dare say, therein she learns of none, being her
self a sample to all. Her Drapery well fashioned of Aurora Silk. Her Skarfe of
Azure sky, opened with the wind to let in Air, or to uncover her beauteous
breasts toher Husbands beholding.

In a word; She appears a Lady of a high Fancy, and an equal Wit; both of
them made up, by a commanding Judgment.

The Grove was deepned dark, which set out all like a Sunsetting; so seemed the
sky, in the view of a far fetched Horison. When lo, (a distance off,) you
might discern her pretty Dog (Sable) came running in; Love to his Mistresse's
looks, made him hasten his diligence, seeming to consent to her desire, as
being now time to return home.

Certainly, the Painter was well paid for his pains, or well pleased to see
them while they sat to his elaborate work. A comely Piece, rather with dignity
of presence than beauty of aspect. The Artist rather busy not to err from his
pattern, than in labor to produce greater excellency than their own
deserving. And thus, in sum, it must be valued an Ornament to the
Dyning-Roome; being besides well known to be the Art of Sowst's handy-worke,
and he a Master of sufficiency.

A Promontory of Land, like a Man's head.
A Promontory which bears it self into the Sea and makes a Cape of Land (formed
by Nature) in fashion of a Man's Head.

The face (as it were) lying upwards, Neck and Shoulders fixed; like to St.
JOHN's Head in a Platter of blood.

The Grove of Trees rising thick and round, shagging themselves in show
downwards, like curled locks.

The Brow-part forces outward, (with Hills) leaving a Valley toward the
rising Nose, a Rocky Clift so formed by Nature as needs no Art to model it, to
be the same.

Between that and the Lips, a tust of bushes of an eeven length, makes the
tuske of hair as it were the upper Lip: only a little Lodge-House raised (per
chance) for necessary use, appears, as if by consent of Art and Nature, to
answer for the nether Lip.

The place for the Chin is right set, round with bushes for the beard,
proportionably thick and short, along the cheek, breaking off, before you
come to the ear, and bearing a space of sallow ground, being the useful way
up to the Mount.

For the Ear, indeed a convenient plat is left by Nature to raise a work of
safety to the place; the inner Contrivers, made up with Stone, answer to the
Ear in all parts; and the Eye at some distance, shows it self to be such in
truth, being yet no more than a Rift in the Rocky part, equally formed to the
rest, and in proportion to all.

Then comes the Throat and Neck; a large Valley with small Hedge-rows in
breadth and length orderly in frame, for the rising and falling of Veins, to
make up the whole fabric a complete Headpiece. So we see, Art or Nature can
counterfeit each other.

Of the Parts of a Piece.
Five Principa parts in a Picture.
IN a PICTURE from Nature, there are five Principal parts.*

1. Invention or Historical Argument.

2. Proportion, Symmetry.

3. Color, with Light or Darkness.

4. Motion, or Life* and their Action and Passion.

5. Disposition, or oeconomicall placing, or disposing, or ordering the work.

The four first, are observed in all sorts of Pieces.

Disposition only in those Pictures, that have many figures; not to appear
mingle-mangle; but, in all and every part of the Piece, to observe a decent
comeliness, or grace, in a mutual accord, of all five.

Of Invention.
Invention.
IT must flow easily; to force and strain it, marrs the Life and Invention
flows from general knowledge; Antiquity must be familiar to the workman; most
of all, multitude of Historical and Poetical Narrations; Geometry; Obtieks;
and so to order your Piece, as to be valued near or farther off.

Observe to express, proper and fit things, agreeing in Circumstance to the
Time, Place, and Person: Habits, according to the fashion of such a people or
Nation, ancient or Modern.

Of Proportion.
It Is called Symmetry, Analogy, Harmony.

Proportion.
Proportion is of any part; a Hand fitted to the bigness of a body.

Symmetry is the proportion of each finger to that bigness; Analogy or
Harmony. All together in one; a Concinnity of Harmony; A congruence, or
equality of parts and members; or, due connection, in reference of all parts,
one to the other, and all to the whole, which produces a perfect Nature, or
beauty. Of true beauty.


Whatsoever is made, after a conceived or Intelligible thing, is Fair.

Whatsoever is made, after a thing generated, is not fair.

Natural or conceived.
Beauty, may be perfectly conceived.

True beauty in any Creature, i^ not to be found; being full of deformed
disproportions, far remote from truth; for sin is the cause of informity.

Beauty in truth, is, where Joints and severally every part with the whole,
has its due proportion and measure; and therefore hard to describe.

Beauty should consist but of One at the most; and deformity contrariwise,
measured by many: for the eeven Lineaments and due proportion of fair and
goodly Persons, seem to be created and framed, by the judgment and sight, of
one form alone, which cannot be in deformed persons; as wit^ blub cheeks, bigg
eyes, little nose, flat mouth, out chin, and brown skin, as it were molded
from many ill faces; and yet some one part considered about, to be hand some,
but altogether become ugly; not for any other cause, but that they may be
Lineaments of many fair women, and not of One. The Painter did well, to procure
all the fair maids naked, to judge of each By the Idea.
several and single perfection; and so from the Idea of fancy, to shape a
Venus.

And thus, by often exercise from several beauties, you His brave and
unpattern'd and unparalled Piece of Artime^ia.
shall fix^ a conceived Idea i^ your mind of accomplished Pulchrit^de grace or
comeliness* according to the true rule of Symmetry. So like the Life, (if done
by Lilly.) that by the Lines and Color, a skillful Physiognomer (another
Lilly) may by the Picture foretell her fortune.

A Beauty may be expressed by a comely body, though not of delicate features;
rather dignity of presence, than beauty of aspect. It is seen at the first
sight. Favor more than Color; and yet that of decent and gracious motion,
more than that of favor.

There is no excellent beauty without some strangeness in the proportion, and
both Apelles and Albert Durer, do but trifles out the time and trouble us; The
One to compose a Personage by Geometrical proportion; and Apelles by
collecting the best parts from several faces, to make one excellent. Indeed a
Painter may make a better personage than ever was seen since the first
Creation; which he does by a kind of felicity, not by Rule; as a Musician does
his French Aires, not by true Method of setting.

Some faces examined by Piece*meale do not well, and yet put together make a
good one.

If then beauty may be had in a comely decent motion, it is no wonder if
Persons in some years, oft*times, seem more lovely then youth; Pulchrorum
autumus Pulcher. Such is she, N. B. T. For no youth can be comely but by
excuse, and considering the youth to make up the handsomnesse. Beauty being a
Summer Fruit, easy to corrupt and cannot last.

Likeness, not to be compared
But the work of Art, is not singly in the Similitude or likeness to the
Life, (as common judgment will have it) but in the Symmetry; which in truth,
proceeds from someskill in the Artizan's surpassing Art.

To Symmetry
It was distinguished by that excellent Painter. A Boy holding a cluster of
Grapes so like, that deceived the Birds, and yet not deterred by the shape of
the Lad; which therefore being an exception to the excellency of the Pie^e,
the Painter put out the Grapes, (though most like,) but reserved the Boy (for
his Symmetry,) as the better esteem of the Art; not understood by ordinary
capacities. And therefore Naked Bodies hard to Paint.


You shall hardly find an Artist, very excellent in a naked body, where true
Symmetry is expected; and therefore the ancient skill of the Graecians, sildome
apparelled any. A timorous Painter, excuses his weakness, by covering the
body, with a muffled Mantle. Designing Lines, what?


The Artizans call this proportion, the designing lines* Scatches, the first
draught, and so a second and third, before you Paint A Cut.
them; which strokes, by those that have in^ight in Art, are esteemed of high
value; for by these first draughts, the true force and undisguised Lineaments
of Nature, do ravish the contemplation; wherein the thought of a studious
Artificer is perfectly evidenced.

And lineall designs or proportions, draugh^d, Scatches, may be called
Picture; which rarely done, show not only the shape, but also the partie's mind
and intent, for we may draw in white-lines, the Symmetry of a Black More, and
to be like him; there may be beauty and force in a proportionable design,
naked and undisguised Lineaments.

After design and proportion, we come to Coloring.

Of Coloring.
COrruption composition or mixing of Colors, we call Painting; which is, to
express shadows in Colors; thereby, Coloring, what?
to resemble, what we do desire to imitate, by a moderate confusion, or
tempering, discordant Colors; as white, black, red, blew, green, etc.

To mix them accurately: To shadow conveniently. To apply them seasonably.
With Light and shadows.
Observe herein Light and Shadows, Obscurity and Brightness.

Contrary things are more apparent, being placed near their Contraries; Light
and Shadows forward, set out any Painting outward; as if you might take hold
of any part.

Obscurity or Darkness, is the duskishness of a deeper shadow; as brightness
is the Intension of Light:

white appears sooner, or nearer to the Eye; and the black seems farther off,
any thing that should seem hollow (as in a Well, or Cave,) must be colored
blackish; more deep, more black.

On the contrary, to lighten or rise forward, with white.

Tonus, what?
Tonus or brightness; as it is of necessary use, so of excellent ornament in a
Picture, it is that which is above light; sparkling A Brightness.
as in the glory of Angels, twinkling of precious stones; Armory, Gold and
silver vessels; Flame, Gold; a burning glittering Luster: the variety of these
Ornaments, must be expressed excellently; but avoid satiety, not cloy your
Picture with it.

Harmogia what?
Harmoge in Colors, is an unperceivable way of Art; stealing to pass from one
Color to another, as in the sea and sky meeting in one thin misty Horizontall
stroke, both are lost and confounded in sight; water and air become one in As
the Rainbow in Colors.
their meeting. The Rainbow's sundry Colors, seeming one mixture, not distinct;
and consisting of one Color, shows excellent; but considered of severalls,
becomes a wonder.

So also in Art; to paint the line or meeting of a Centaur in his two Natures,
which must seem to unite and join insensibly, as not to distinguish where they
meet; deceiveing the Eye with a stealth of change; a pleasant confusion of
differing Colors. It is hard to be expressed, and difficult to be done, the
very excellency of an Artist; when the extreme or utmost lines, the
unrestrained extent of the figure, lightly and smoothly coosin the Eye, as if
something were behind the figure, more to be then the Eye sees, when the
Lineaments, Of Spirits and Souls Painted ^^
that do circumscribe, or include the figure, are so thin, as to vanish by
little and little; the highest subtility of A Geometrical Line.
a piece, like spirits and souls painted.

You may call it a Geometrical Line; which is, without breadth: Observe the
parting of the Sun-shadow, upon Coloring of a Man.
the Wall, the line parting the light, and that is thus.

In Painting of a Man consider his dignity, stout and incorrupt; (in effeminate
smoothness) the Limbs moderately swelling-grac'd with true and lively Color;
of pure and wholesome blood: Blood and strength makes it goodly fair; the black
exquisite black, pure white, with the flower of redness intermixed: Ivory died
in Purple.

And beauty of a Woman.
As for the beauty of a Woman, possibly so rare and pure; not to be imitated
with Color of Painting. Her natural gracefulness not yielding unto an Art,
which does but counterfeit. No hand, in truth, knows the temper, for such a
countenance. Confound Lillies with Roses, and what reflection the Air takes of
them, that is her complexion. N. B. T. Never to be well done, but by an
Ingenious, Excellent Artizan, and a faithful admirer of his beauteous Mistress.

Of Action and Passion.
Action and Passion.
THe next observation, is out of which, Life and Motion Action or Passion in a
Piece, barely, upright, looking forward, the Arms hanging down, the feet close
together, and so seems unmovable, and stift.

How to be expressed
In lineall Pieces, there may be a deceitful similitude of Life and Motion,
and statues may seem to live and breathe but colored Pictures show a lively
force in the several effects, and properties of Life and spir^t.

And to be improved
To be well acquainted with Nature, Manner, guize and behavior; as to paint a
Man, angry or sad; joyful earnest; or id^^iall passions to be proper to the
figure: for every commotion of the mind, alters the countenance into several
passions of fear, hope, love, joy; so does a touch of the Pensill from mirth to
mourning. The head cast down, seems humbleness; In several postures of the
Head.
cast back, Arogancie or scorn; hanging on the Neck languishing stiff and
sturdy, morosity of the mind. Indeed the several postures of the head,
describe the Numbers of passions; the countenance as many; the Eyes, the like.
So excellent must the Art be, to counterfeit Nature. In a word, each several
member or part of the body, either of themselves, or in reference of some other
part, expresses the passions of the mind, as you may easily observe in the Life.

Hands and Arms.
The Arms abroad; the Hands expansed; the Fingers spread; all motions of the
parts of the body assist whilst we speak; but the hands seem to speak
themselves, in several actions, and postures

The Poets in their descriptions of their gods and great men, do rarely express
the passions of their minds, and I would have an Artizan to observe so much in
each Picture of the Life (which indeed they only aim at, but do not take the
pains to express) this being effected more by the Master's thoughtfulness, then
by diligence and labor.

Study therefore to your self, that affectation in your thoughts, which you
intend to express. So shall your endeavors be assisted by a virtue, which the
Greeks called Energia what?
Energia, effectual operation, evidence or perspicuity, wonderfully studied by
them.

By example of Titian' Pieces.
I have seen a piece of Tytian's: A Child in the Mothers Lap playing with a
Bird; so round and pleasing, it seemed a doubt whether a Sculpture or Painting;
whether Nature or Art, made it; the mother smiles and speaks to: the child
starts, and answers.

And of Palma's Piece.
Another of Palma's; a speaking Piece indeed. The young Damsel brought for Old
David's Bedfellow; all the company in Passion and Action: some in admiration of
her beauty, others in examining her features, which so please the good Old Man,
that in some Ecstasy of passion, he embraces her, which her humility admits,
yet with a silen^ modesty a^ best became her, only to be dumb and to suffer.

And of another.
Another; the Picture of an Infant, in a Surprised C^tty, creeps to the Mothers
breast gr^velling on the ground, amongst other Captives and dying of a wound:
seeming to have only so much sense, as f^aring lest the Child finding no Milk,
should suck her Blood, and so be ^^oakt; she stri^es with death to prevent the
Infant so destruction. In an^ient Excellent Pieces, you may at a view under^ake
to read the mind of the Artizan, in his intent of the Story. We are gone
through all, but the last.

Of the disposition of the Parts.
figures, must needs express some Historical Of Disposition.
part in it; Every figure ought to represent therein, by a speechless discourse,
the connection in them. Assign therefore the principal place, to the
principal figures, next to hand: Other figures, farther off. Finish the
Principal figures, In order to perfection,
whilst your Spirits are fresh. Frame not your Historical Piece, rude, loose,
and scattered, but rather, in an equitable roundness of composition; to be
perceived by each observer; to be liked of the most; but to be judged, only, by
^he Soon discovered.
learned. Neglects in disposition, are soon discovered.

Pourtray in your excellent Pieces, not only the dainty Lineaments of Beauty,
but shadow round about, rude thickets, rocks; and so it yields more grace to
the Picture, and sets it out: this discord (as in music) makes a comely
concordance; a disorderly order of counterfeit rudeness, pleases: so much
grace, do mean and ordinary things, receive from a good and orderly connection.

But altogether excellens.
All these together, make that perspicuous disposition in a Piece of History;
and is the effectual expression in Posture and Action; the very Passion of
each Figure; the Soul of the PICTURE; the Grace and Air of the Piece; or the
sweet Consent of all manner of perfections heaped together, in one Picture.

By exampl^ in brief
And so have we done with an Example of all in One: For Invention allures the
mind. Proportion, attracts the Eyes. Color, delights the Fancy. Lively
Motion, stirs up our Soul. Orderly Disposition, charms our Senses.


Conclude a rare Picture.
These prodnce graceful Combiness, which makes one fairer then fair; and all
together, confirm us into Rupture. N. B. T.

This Grace is the close of all, effected by a familiar facility in a free and
quick spirit of a bold and resolute Artificer; not to be done by too much
double dilig^nce, or over doing; a careless show, has much of Art.

Parergia what? With pretty adornments graceful.
For additions* to your Piece to adorn it, or Parergia to your work. Some by
Paintings are not amiss; pretty draughts upon sheilds; Sword, hilts; Pots,
brakes of Vines, Ivy, Cypress, and such like devices: we call them sweet
seasonings of the Picture.

But then, these do but adorn, and must be dim and carelessly drawn, rather
seemingly with a light air, then actually done.

And to conclude it a wonder.
And these conclude the work. That all sorts of people, wise and weak,
ignorant and Learned, Men and Women, one and all, may find in it, to be
delighted, which comes now to be a Wonder.

Our Ancient Painters, famous for Art, Immortalized their works with all
excellencies, and thereby consecrated Dedicate to the gods.
the Wisdoms of their hands, as Donaries unto Delphis, a sacrifice to Deityes.

Painter's faults.
Our late Painters strive for wealth, by sale of Ordinary and quick work, (the
bane of all Arts) rather than labor for Fame, and Glory; the cause of many
Pieces, so common and few of Art.

For, upon enjoying of Glory, follows a confident boldness of Art, incredibly
advanced by success and repute. Success, is that veneration of Art, by Kings
and Nations. In such a Man, shamefastness is a vice, causing our Wits to rust
with too much secrecy. The shunning of vice, when it wants Art, leads us into
vice. Be bold and know your merit, and in Gods Name when you do well, make
others pay for it. Art cannot be over-valued.

Conclusion of this first Part.
Conclusion of all
TO reduce and discipline my scattered Notes and Papers; and such indigested
Collections, as require a more formal Method and a better Pen, has been my
pains and desire to effect; Wherein, perhaps, I have been over prolix; A fault
pardonable, and excusable from such, as are any thing acquainted with the
profoundness of this Art, and Artificial Mysteries.

The consideration enlightens my understanding, and sits my mind, with such a
treasure of discourse, as that with great difficulty, I cannot be brief; to
distinguish, or to devide.

Sets you forward to the Second Book.
This subject, being so fruitful, that store makes me penurious.

And now, with no more ado, I represent you with the Second Part. The Art of
Limn^ngton Water Colors, differing somewhat from Oyl-Colou^s; In both, the
practice will easily distinguish. The way and manner, those directions before
and what does follow will serve for either.

And so, I put you forward, to your Pallet and Colors.

The Use of the PENSIL: In the most Excellent Art of LIMNING, In WATERCOLORS.
Part II.
Of Limning in Watercolors.
The True Order and Names of Colors, the means to prepare them for the Pensill
and to cleanse them from their corrupt mixtures, wherewith they are Sophisticate.
We name them Seven (though in truth the first and last White and Black are no
Colors; but Elements.)

Whites,
Ceruse; White-Lead.
Greens,
Sap-green. Pinck. Bise-green. Cedar-green.
Reds,
India-lake. Read-Lead, or Mean.
Blews,
Indico. Ultramanue. Bise-blew. Smalt.
Yellows,
Masticoate. Oker of England.
Browns,
Umber. Spanish-brown. Terra lemnia or* Cullins earth.


Blacks,
Cherry*stones burnt. Ivory burnt. Lamp-blacke.


Colors not useful.
In this account or number of Colors, I name not Vermilion; Verdigreece;
Ver^iters blew and green; and several other Colors, frequent with
Painter-stainers, but in our work unnecessary, useless, and dangerous; both for
their Mineral qualyties, coorse and gross bodies, not to be mixed with our
Colors, of a more fine subtle, and transparent Quality.

We do not admit of diverse others; as Saffron, Litmus, Russet, Brasill,
Log-wood; nor of Colors, extracted from Flowers, juice of Herbs or Roots; more
proper, for washing, or Colourring, Prints, Cards, Maps.

Of Whites.
FIrst in order, the most excellent pure Virgin Colors, are Ceruse and White
lead: the latter is the better for use, and less subject to mixture; yet both
have these Inconveniences, and thus to be prevented.

Ceruse.
Ceruse, after it is wrought will starve, lavish, and dye; and being laid on
with a Pensill, a fair white will, in a few months, become Russet, Reddish, or
Yellowish.

White-Lead.
White-lead, If you grind it fine (as all our Colors must be) it will glister
and shine, both in the Shell, and after it is wrought; and if not ground, it
will not work, nor be serviceable.

To prevent these Inconveniences of both Colors; This is the only remedy.
Before you grind either of them, lay them (especially White-lead) in the Sun
for two or three days to dry, which will exhale and draw away, the Salt,
greasy com-mixtures, that starve and poison the Color. Besides, you must
scrape off the superficies of the White-lead, reserving only the middle as the
cleanest and purest.

Note.
Be careful of your white, being the ground and foundation of all your other
Colors, and if faulty, all the work is marred.

The effect you may see at Rome in the Vatican Library, and in the Silla of
Cardinal Burgess, and in the Porta*setimiane, there where many excellent
Pieces heightened with White-Lead unprepared, are spoiled, Russet, and dead.

How to grind it
Being thus prepared, grind it (upon a Porphire, Serpentine, or Pebble-stone;
any of these are excellent: some use Marble, Upon what stone
thick Glass, or Crystal. But the first two are too soft, and in grinding,
mix with the Color and spoil them; the latter is very good, but hard to be
got large enough. I say grind it very fine, and a good quantity together in
water, without Gum; then have in readiness, a piece of thick white chalk; make
therein certain furrows or troughs, in which instantly put the White-lead
ground from the stone wet; let it remain there, till it be very dry: the chalk
will suck and drain up the filth, salt, and grease in the Color.

Preserve it for use in a paper, or clean Boxes.

To use it*
When you intend to work with it. Take as much as conveniently will lie in a
shell, of Mother of Pearl, neatly cleaned and burnisht wherein (as in all
Colors) be curious and neat, not to have the Room troubled with company, where
you grind, for avoiding dust or Atoms which you will find troublesome in your
working.

Gum-atrabick.
Put to this (as to all Colors) a little Gum-Arabick the best and whitest;
which you must have ready in powder, very fine, in a box (or else dissolved in
water) and with a few drops of running water temper it with your finger to
dissolve and mix with your Color. Discretion and Practice will direct you.
Leave not your Colors too dry and liquid in your shell: but somewhat thick and
clammie, cover them from dust till it be dry in the shell, then draw your
finger gently upon the Color; if none come off, it is well; if it do, add a
little more Gum-water, if it be too much it will glister and shine in the
shell; then wash off the gum with fair water or temper a new shell.

Note a general rule*
Observe (in each particular) what is directed in this Color of washing,
grinding, tempering. A Rule for all the other Colors, that are to be ground.

Some Colors are to be washed and ground, and they are these.
Colors to be washed and ground*
Ceruse. White-Lead. India-Lake. English-Oker. Pinke. Indico. Umber.
Spanish-brown. Colens-Earth. Cherry-stone and Ivory black.
Other to be washed only, are these.
To be washed only.
Red-Lead, or Mean. Masticote. Blew-Bise. Green-Bise. Cedar-Green. Smalt.
Ultra-marine.
Only Sap-green to be steeped in fair water.

Why to be washed.
The reason why these Colors are not to be ground, as the others are, because
of a sandy substance, loose, gravelly, and so heavy ponderous and solid bodies
hardly to be reduced unto such firmness as is to be required in this Art: for
if you think to make them fine by grinding, they instantly loose their beauty,
starve, and dye. Besides, some of them as Masticote and Red-Lead, become of a
greasy and clammye thickness, by reason of the agitation and tampering upon
the stone, and so utterly unserviceable to refine them, therefore they must be
washed.

But five perfect Colors.
There are but five perfect Colors (white and black being none) like the five
precious stones perfect and transparent several Colors.

The hard Topas for Yellow, the Amethyst orient for Murray, the Rubie for Red,
Sapphire for Blew, Emrauld for Green. All which Colors are perfect different
from mixture of white and are thus distinguished by Heralds in blazoning of
Arms of Princes Bearings.

And although what has been said for grinding Ceruse and VVhite-Lead; may
serve for a direct order in all other grinding Colors: Yet I shall for full
satisfaction speak of them severally; before I come to those that are to be
washed.

Colors, to be grinded.
India-Lake.
THe next in order is India-Lake, the dearest and most beautiful; grind it as
the VVhites with the help of the Sun, and with your finger spread it about the
shel sides. After it is dry, you will find this Color, and some other as
Amber, subject to crackle and fall from the shell in pieces; take To ^ixe all
Colors.
care that this an^ all others be fast, smooth and firm, which to effect take a
little quantity of VVhite-Suger-candy with a few drops of fair water, temper
the Color again as it is in the shell with your finger, till the Color and
Sugar Candy be thoroughly dissolved, which being dry will lie fast and eeven.

Oker,
English-Oaker is a very good Color and of much use for shadows in Pictures by
the Life, for Hairs and Drapery, Rocks, Highways in Land-skips, and commonly
lie eeven and fast in the shell, and works beyond any other, being well ground.

Pinke.
Get the fairest; because with it and Blew you make the Blew and yellow makes
green.
fastest Greens for Land-skips or Drapery: for the Green-Bise and Sap-Green,
though good in their kind, the first is of so coorse and gross a body, and the
other so transparent and thin, that in many things they will be
unserviecable; espetially where you have occasion to use a beautiful fair
Green by mixing a little Indico, with Bise and Pinke: this Color being ground
fine, works very sharp and neat; of exceeding use, if ground as the rest.

Umber.
The next in Order is Umber, a Color greasy and foul, hard to work with: you
must burn it in a Crusible or Goldsmiths Po^* and being ground as the rest, it
works sharp and neat.

Brown of Spain.
It is exceeding coorse and full of gravel of no great use; for a little
Umber, Red-Lead or Mean mixed, makes the same Color.

Terra-Colen.
Is easy to work when it is new ground very good to close up the last and
deepest touches, in the shadowed places of Pictures by Life; and also very
useful in Landskips:

Cherry-stone and Ivory black.
Are both to be burnt in a Crusible and so ground: the first is very good
especially for Drapery and black Apparel, but but if you make Satin, temper
it with a little Indico: only to make it appear beautiful* glassshining,
lightened with a little mixture of more white. In strong touches and deep, hard
reflections deepned with Ivory will show mavelous fair; this was the way of
that famous Hilliard the English Limner in Queen Elizabeth's days.

Ivory.
Serves only for a deep Ivory black, nor is it easy to work without well
tempering with Sugar Candy to prevent crackling and peeling. And so much for
Colors to be ground.

Colors to be washed, and not to be ground.
I Shall follow the former* Order by showing how one Color is to be prepared;
which will demonstrate all the rest.

Red-Lead to be washed.
Put an ounce thereof into a Basin or clean earthen dish, full of fair water,
stir it sometime together with your hand or spoon till it be colored, then let
it stand till the greasy scumme arise upon the superficies, which with the
water pour out: fill it again with fresh water, stir it often until it be
thick and troubled, which presently pour out into another clean Basin or
Vessel: reserving behind in the first Basin the dreggs of the Colors, which
happily will be the greatest part, and to be cast away; for you are to seek the
best not the most. A little good Color goes far in Limning, and if a handful
of Red-Lead yield a shell or two in goodness it is enough, so it be fine.

The troubled water being in the second Basin, add more water, wash them well
together, as before, let it settle till it become almost clear; but if you*
perceive a scumme to arise again upon the water, pour it out and put in fresh
till the Color be clearer; for the skumme is Chalk and other filth, which
washes out by stirring all the Color together. Then let it settle, and so when
the skum arises, pour it away till it be perfect.

It will not be amiss when you have washed your Colors a while, if you stir
the water till it become thick; then pour out half that thickened water, into a
third Basin, and washing both the second and third water, you will find your
Color of a coorser or else finer quality. In so much that the third (and if
you please) fourth and fifth sort, will be very fine and fair being often
washed; and so by often changing and shifting the Color and Water, you will
find it perfectly cleansed.

You must by little and little gently drain away the remainder of the water,
not suffering any or very little of the Color to pour out; so that setting
your Basins in the Sun and shelving them, you will find your Colors drying and
lodging about the ^ide^ of the Basin o^ dishes like drift land, some places
^air and clean, others more coor^e and soul: which when it is all dried, take
away with your finger or feather; the finest part like flower will fall away,
with the least touch: Reserve this for your prime use, the rest for ordinary or
coorse work.

How to use it.
When you will use this Color, ^ake so much as will lie about the sides of
your shell, somewhat thin, that you may handsom^ly take it o^^ with your
Pensill; which you cannot conveniently do, if you fill the shell, or to let it
lie thick or in heaps, and so with Gum-water (or Gum-powder and a few drops of
water as before said) temper it finely with your finger, letting it spread
about the sides of the shell, as in ground Colors. Thus are your Colors
prepared.

Of Pensils.
Pensils how to choose them.
YOUR Pensills must be chosen clean and sharp poynted, the hairs not divided
into parts (as many of them do, being drawn gently out of your mouth between
your Lips) let them be full and thick next the Quill, and so descending in a
round sharp point. This fashion I prefer before those that are long and
slender, which retain the Colors longer time, and then deliver it out, too
free and full. If you find one hair longer then the other, cut it away with a
sharp Penknife or pass it through the flame of a Candle.

To make Pensils.
Take the Tails of Chalibes, and breaking an ordinary Pensill assunder,
observe how they are tied up and fastened; they being now made here in England
by an old Workman to the Painters, the best of any here or beyond the Seas.
Bind your hairs (much or little) somewhat loose, fashion them round to an
eeven point, rubbing or turning it upon a clean paper or Table; Mark how the
hairs scatter or spread, and ever with a Penknife take them away; easily to
be done. When it is prepared to your mind, tie it fast about and fit it to your
Quill: according to the size of your Pensil, disposed upon some neat stick of
Brasill or such like Wood: the length of an ordinary writing Pen. Having six
or seven for the several shadows of your work.

Some only for Gold.
And remember that those Pensills which you use in Gold or Silver Work, be
reserved only for that purpose* not to be mixed or tempered with Colors.

Being thus settled with these Tools, you want a Tablet whereon to express your
Art, which must be made severally, as you are disposed to work either for a
Picture of Life, Landscape, or History.

The first Division, by Life.
The Tablet.
Tablet for the Life.
THe Tablets for the Life are commonly wrought in an Ovall form not very great
nor little, as I have seen many in France no bigger then a Penny; an
indifferent size is best. Take an ordinary playing Card, polish it smooth with
a Bores-tooth or such like, as possibly slicke as may be, the White side every
where eeven, and clean from Spots or Knobs; then choose the best abortive
Parchment, cutting out a piece* size with the Card, pasteing them fine and
firm together; let them dry, and making your Grinding-stone exceeding clean,
lay the Parchment side of the Card downward; and holding it fast, polish and
rub the Card as hard as you can upon the backside, that so the other may be
smooth, whereon you are to work: When you paste the Parchment, let the outside
of the skin be outward, it being the smoother and better to work upon.

The Prime for several Complexions.
Lay your ground or Prime therein of Flesh-colors, tempering it a^cording to
the Complexion you are to paint. If fair; White-Lead and Red-Lead mixed
together, a pretty quantity, indifferent thickness, in a shell somewhat bigger
then ordinary. Fair.


Brown.
If Swarthy or Brown; mingle White, Red, and a little fine Masticote or
English-Oker, or both. Evermore* observing, as a sure Maxim that your ground
be fairer than the Party painted: for being over- fair you may in working
Darken or Shadow it as you please; but if too sad you shall never heighthen it
higher.

In Limning of Pictures, you must never heighthen, but work them down to their
just Color.

How to lay on the ground.
Your ground or Complexion thus mixed in, upon the shell; lay it on the Card
with a greater Pensil then ordinary; and very carefully, couch and spread your
Color, as smooth and eeven as is possible, clean from spots, hairs of your
Pensill, or dust. In doing this, fill your Pensill full of Color rather thin
and waterish, then too thick and gross. And with two or three dashes, or sweeps
of your long Pensil, lay it on at an instant, the quicker the better, and the
eevener will your Colors lie; Not forgetting to cover so much of your Card, as
shall be larger or broader, then you intend to make your face, for you cannot
add any more largness to it; being to be done at once and speedily. Otherwise
the Card or rather the Parchment will become rough and rise in bubbles, and
come off from the Card.

To prepare Colors upon your shell.
This done, you are to take a pretty large shell of Mother of Pearl or such
like, and before you begin to work, temper certain little heaps of several
shadows for the face, and (as Oyl-Painters lay them upon their Pallet) so place
them severally about your shell. There are some that temper or mix them as
they work them in the shadows, without more ado; but I esteem this other way,
the better.

Of Whites,
First then, in all your shadows mingle some White with every one, and white by
it self.

Reds.
Then for the Red in the Cheeks and Lips, temper Lake, Red lead and a little
Vermilion together.

Blews,
For blews; use Indico and white (for Blew-bise is never used in the face.)
Then for those sweet and fine bluish and Grisatrie.
grayish Colors called in french Grisatrie (which are the weak and faintest
shadows) take white, a little English oker and as much Indico, and (if you
will) add a little Masticote, it will give the shadow a good grace, so that it
be not too Green.

For the deep shadow, take White English Oker and Umber; for the dark shadows
in men's faces, mingle Lake and Pinke, which makes an excellent f^eshy shadow.
But to prescribe an absolute and general Rule is impossible; Nature is so
infinite various in the Colors and shadows of the face, differing one from the
other; that, what e're can be said, your own discretion and practice by the
Life, will be the best direction. Yet this, and what I say hereafter, will be a
great furtherance to your ingenious Endeavors.

To Order your Light.
Your Light.
AND now, notwithstanding the former preparations very necessary, yet take this
Observation of your Light, being of the greatest importance; and therein I
advise you to be curious* Make your Light with a Curtain or windowshutters
somewhat clear, with soft and gentle reflecting upon the Person to be drawn;
for a glaring bright light makes hard, and unpleasant reflections and shadows.
And because the Sun is an enemy to this work, choose your Light Northwards
toward the East, one single Light only, great and fair, without any reflection
of Trees or Walls: let it be high, and so your shadows will fall downward^,
rather then traverse-wise, and the work will be the fa^rer and rounder.

And sitting.
Place your self to your Deske, that your Light may strike inside-long from the
left hand to the right; your work will show with more advantage being turned
and viewed to the same light that it was wrought unto.

Have a clean Sawcer or Shell of Water, to wash your Pensils, and another of
Water to temper your Colors; Have a dry brush-Pensill to clean your work from
dust. A neat and large Penknife to take away such spots or hairs that may mix
with your Colors, or fall upon your Card* Place all these on your Right hand:
You may likewise cover your Piece with a small paper, whereon to try your
Pensills and Colors, before you begin to work.

First lines.
Thus settled; Draw your Lines purfle, of the face with Lake and White mingled
together very fine; so that if happily you mistake your Draught at the first, yet
you may with a strong Stroke, draw it true, and the other Line be no hinderance
to the Work, it being faint and not easily discernable.

The Lines thus truly drawn of the face, somewhat sharp and neat (wherein you
are to be very exact, ^bove any other directions) observe the deep and most
remarkable shadows for your better memory and help, when you come to go over
them more exactly. And now you may if you please, draw out also the fashion and
portraicture, and that part of the body which you will join to the face,
commonly not much beneath the Shoulders; wherein observe the Life so much as
possibly you can: that part you may draw with a strong and dark Color; it
being easy to change or deface, in case you mistake in the just proportion.

The General manner of working in Limning.
Manner of Limning.
IT is ano Art so curious and difficult to describe by my Pen, that many
Prac^it^one^s, with much Industry and the help of Demonstra^ion* have not
easily proved Proficients, as in these populous Nations of England, France, and
others; which draw but few famous Masters out of thousands Practitioners. In
England at this day are the most and best famous in Christendom; Yet according
to the Italian Proverb A buen Indentore poch^ parola basta, so I doubt not* but
your ingenious capacity and knowledge, (I^ speak to a Gentleman) having already
rendered you Master in Studies, (very likely much above this either in Honor or
Profit) will by the same industry easily conceive me: and with ordinary
diligence and practice, you may likewise attain to express the Life with the
Pensil; by what I shall deliver in this dead GODOUR Observations.

To the Life. First ^itting.
The order you are to follow to the Life* is to observe somewhat* the manner of
Oil Painters* The first sitting, to ^^ad-Colord ^he face only. ^ (not troubling
your self at all with the (...) of Hairs, ^pparrell etc.) Which commonly takes
up the time of two hours* or, if very exact, three or four hours.

Second.
The next s^^ting requires four or five hours* for in that time you are to go
over the face very curiously; observing whatsoever may conduce either to the
Likeness which is the Principal^; or to the judicious Coloring and observation
of the several graces, ^eauties or deformities as they appear in Nature; or
else in close, sharp, neat workmanship, and sweetness of the (...) and smooth
touching of the Colors.

Third.
The third sitting, is commonly the work of two or three hours, and is spent in
clothing what was before left imperfect and rough; but principally in giving
to every deep shadows, their strong and deep^ing touches, as well in dark
shadows of the Eye and Face, Eye-brow, Hair, Ears, etc.

And these Observations and touches, are ever the last part of the business,
and are never done till all the Hair, Apparel etc. be finished, for this
being wrought with judgment and discretion, adds exceedingly to the Life
likeness and roundnesse of the Picture. It is like to a Consort of Mu^icke
which is relished in the Close.

Colors to the Complexion.
Dead-Colour
AND first to speak of dead-Colours, the manner of working is suitable to the
Name, to be done rough and boldest of all; Having drawn the face with Lake and
White (as before said) you may take to this Color a little Red-lead tempering
them to the Color of the Cheeks, Lips, etc. but very faintly: Note.
for you must remember, that in this and all other Colors in Limning, you may
add when you please to make your Color deeper or stronger: but be sure not to
make it too deep or too strong, for you can hardly help it without defacing or
spoiling the Picture. Because, (as I have told you before) you can never
heighthen in this Art* except the two bright lights of the eyes and touches of
the Hairs. Thus much in general. And now we come to the particular Working.

The first sitting to work in particular.
Particular directions of the Picture,
THe comeliness of the face consists in three abilities, Beautiful* Color, or
Complexion; true Proportion and Favor; and Grace in the Countenance; The
curious Artist must watch and catch the lovely graces, witty smilings, short
and sudden, which pass like Lightning. In smiling how the eye changes and
narroweth, holding the sight between the Lidds, as a Cen^er; ^ow the Mouth
extends little, at both ends of the Line upwards; the Cheeks raise themselves
to the Eye wards.

The first Coloer to begin the face, are the Redds of the Cheeks and Lips
somewhat strongly in the bottom of the Chin (if the man be beardless) as also
over, under, and about the Eyes, you will perceive a delicate and faint*
Redness; and underneath the Eyes somewhat inclining to a Purple Color; which
in fair and beautiful faces, are very ordinary, and must be diligently
observed.

The (...) commonly is Reddi^^ and a little Crimson and sometimes the Roots of
the ha^re also. All these you must work after the manner of (...) Ha^ching or
Drawing your Pensill along, and with faint and gentle strokes; rather washing
then wipeing it, with strokes and pricks as some do affect. But the manner of
working must be the fruit of your industry and practice, and as you find your
inclination, ease and dexterity of hand; Wherein to prescribe a certain Rules
is impossible, above that of your own Nature and experience.

The sum of all. That in your dead Coloring, you must wash over your Ground
or Complexion, with this Red and the following shadows, endeavoring not only
to be exact and curious, but also bold and judicious: for I have seen Pictures
by a good Master begun, and dead-coloured only, that near at hand they seemed
exceeded Rough, Uneven, and unpleasant; yet being viewed at a distance from
your Eye, they appear very smooth, neat, and delicate: therefore I shall
persuade you in this first work, not to study or regard curiosity, or neatness
of your Colors; but a bold and judicious manner of expressing, what you see in
the Life.

Which though you work never so Rough at the first, yet in the finishing, it
will be in your power to sweeten and close it, neat and curious as you please.

Blew-Colour-working.
The Red being done, the next is your faint blews about the Corners and balls
of the eyes and temples, which you must work Eyes.
from the uttermost part to the face, and so along, but exceeding sweet and
faint; by degrees, sweetning your shadow and deepning, according as the light
falls, with hard or gentle touches; and in going over the face, be sure to
mark out the hard shadows, in the dark^ side of the face, under the Nose,
Chin, Eyebrowes as the light falls, and somewhat strong touches, in those
places, bring up the work in an equal roundnesse; giving perfections to every
particular part, by visiting all the face curiously, and in a kind of random^;
by which means you will better observe the likeness, roundnesse, postures, or
coloring, whatsoever is remarkable, to make your work complete and exquisite.

The faint and lighter shadows being done and somewhat smoothed, and wrought
into the Red, you may work over the Hair.
Hair disposing it into such forms, folds, and turnings, as may best become
the Picture.

You must at first only draw them with Colors as neat as you can, sutabl^ to
the Life; and after wash them roughly as the rest, and then once more, perfect
the work; and be sure to fill up the void empty bare places with Color which
are uncovered, and for the parting blew; deepning it somewhat more strougly
then before, in the places of the darkest shadows, still carefully observing
the Life, which must be your Load star.

Note.
And ever remembering most needful, first to work your Colors and shadows, as
deep and strong as you see them, but by degrees; beginning faintly, increasing
the strength of the shadows, as the rest of the work comes up unto it, and
suits for it.

And for this, no Rule can be given better, then that of your own judgment.
And so here we have done our face alone and that in dead COLORS only.

Second sitting.
Second sitting.
YOUR next work will be longer in time, but not so long in description: for
this will take up five or six or more hours, as you will bestow more or less
pains in the work.

And now the Person being set just in the former posture, you are more exactly
to observe and curiously to express Nature; which you did but rudely score out
before. For direction therein, this is all that can be said. You must use g ain
the Observation.
same Colors, in the same places, you did before in the first sitting; working,
driving and sweetning them one into another; to the end that nothing be left in
your work, with an hard edge, or uneven heap, or patch of Colors; but
altogether mixed and driven one into another, with the point of (somewhat) a
sharper Pensill then you used at first, that your shadows may lie soft and
smooth, beinga dispersed and gently extended into, and toward, the light and
part^ of the face, like air, smoke, or vapor,

But before you proceed thus far, you are carefully to observe all the
aforesaid shadows and Colors, and by little and little to work them, over, and
into one another; and when you have wrought an hour or two, it will be time to
lay your The Ground-Colour behind.
ground behind your Picture. It is commonly blew or Crimson, somewhat like a
satin or velvet Curtain, much in use with old Hilliard.

Curtain of Blew, How to lay it
If blew, you must lay it thus, (being not easy to do it well and eeven.) The
Bise being pure and clean washed, temper of it as much in a shell, as will
cover a Card. Let it be all thorough moist, and well bound with the Sun; Then
with a small Pensill draw (with the same Color) the outside or Purfle, I mean
the outmost line of the head and body of the Picture. That done with a larger
Pensill, wash over carefully the whole ground, that you mean to cover, with
somewhat a thin and waterish blew; and after with a reasonable great Pensill,
full of Color and flowings, lay over that very place, with thick and
substantial Color, which before you had only washed over. In doing of this, be
very swift, keeping your Remarkable.
Color moist, that you have laid, not suffering any part thereof to dry,
until all be covered: by this means, it will lie as smooth as glass, and the
watering over the Card before, with a thin Color, makes the rest, that you
lay after, to settle eeven and handsome, which otherwise would lie in heaps,
like unto drift sand: It is a troublesome Color.

Crimson Satin ground.
If you will have the ground as Crimson Satin, you must work with India-Lake,
where, and in what places, you will have those strong and high lights, and
reflections to fall, which are seen in satin and velvet.

Lay your light with thin and waterish Lake, and in deepning and strong
shadows, close by the other lights, with thicker Color.

It cannot be better expressed possibly, than to take a piece of satin, of any
Colonr, being laid before you* you will presently see, what an excellent
president the life is for light and shadow: no instruction, being like to this
experiment.

When your back- ground is laid and dry, you will find the Picture strangely
changed, the beauty of these grounds will so darken and dead the Picture: The
apparel with fitting Color, being also done only flat with heigthning or
deepning; Over-view, and add to the face,
Then go over the face again, reducing your shadows, to much neatness, drawing
the eyes and lines of the lids, expressing the nostrils redness, the shadowy
entrance into the ears, the deepnesse of the eyebrows, and those more
perspicuous marks of the face, with somewhat a more sharp and curious Pensill.

But to particular line every thing, would seem to be a plot upon your
patience. And therefore to finish this second sitting; I only wish you not to
leave your ground, to rest upon the face too hard, with an edge; but with your
Pensill so to sweeten and drive-in your Colors into the Enstroake, or outline
of the face that when the work is done, the ground may stand as it were a great
deal distant from the face behind the Picture, and the face seem to stand
forward off from the ground; by darkning both the ground above, from the
light-^ide of the Picture, and below, on the dark-side of the Picture.

Then go over the hair, lightning and deepning it by the And Hair.
Life, and gently drawing the lines of those locks of hair upper most, and
behind over the ground, which else would seem hard and unpleasant.

Now when you have done this sitting, and the Person gone and weary (as usually
they are) and yet your work be rough (as indeed it will be, as yet, impossible
to bring so curious work to absolute perfection) you must spend somegood time
by your self, in polishing and working your Piece to perfection; filling up the
empty places, and sweetning the shadows, that as yet may lie uneeven, hard, and
unpleasant.

The Dressings
Then go on in your linen dressings and apparel, to make out the several
folds, and deepning as you shall find in the Life: for in perfecting the work,
lay the linen, apparel, jewels, pearls, and (what else is to be imitated,)
in the same fold and form as you have drawn it in your first drought, and then
finish it by the life as you shall see the shadows and light fall; lightning
the lines, with the purest white, a little yellow, and less blew.

Blackish reflections.
The black must be deepned with Ivory-black, and if you work in heighthning
and light reflections, you must mingle with the ordinary black a little Lake or
Indico, or rather bileing in stead of Indico; you will find the black to render
a curious and admirable reflection like to well dried satin; especially if
your light be strong and hard. The matter whereof, if you please to see
imitably expressed, you will find it abundantly in several rare pieces done by
that incomparable Master Hans Holbin who in all his differing and various
manner of Painting either in Oil, Distemper, or Limning was so general an
Artist, as never to follow any man, nor any one able to imitate him.

Third Sitting.
Third sitting.
THe third sitting will be only spent in giving the strong touches necessary
for rounding the face, which now will appear better for observation, the
apparel, hair, and ground, being already finished.

Likeness, Resemblance, Countenance, Marks, Moles.
In this sitting therefore observe, what ever may conduce to the likeness and
resemblance, which above all is the principal aim: viz. skin-molds, smiling,
or glanceing of the eye, descending or contracting the mouth, narrowing the
eyes, with smiling* to which purpose, find occasion of discours^, or Note.
cause the party to be in action, or to regard you wit^ a Joviall merry and
discoursive aspect. Wherein you must be ready and apprehensive to steal
observations, and to express them with a quick bold and constant hand, ever
remembering Remarkable.
not to make the deeper shadows too dark and obscure, as happily you may think
they appear in the Life, which in Painting (as deep as the Life) is no good
Rule to follow, and in Limning is a note of very necessary consequence;
conclude your face with these observations, that the eye gives the life; the
nose, the favor; the mouth, the likeness.

Armor to Color
If there happen any Armor or Gold-work to observe this Rule.

Silver.
First, lay Liquid Silver, flat, and eeven, dried and burnisht with a small
Weesels-tooth, (handsomely fitted into a Pensill-stick;) then temper the shadow
of Armor, with Silver, Indico, Li^mus and a little Umber; work your shadows
upon, and over, according to the Life; the heighthnings are to be left, bearing
the bright burnish. Then deepning the depth of the shadow (the thinnest part
thereof) with some store of Silver which must be sweetly wrought into Silver,
and laid all flat as before.

Gold Color.
As for the Gold, you may lay your ground flat with English Oker, tempered with
liquid Gold. Yet there is a stone in the ^all-stone of an Ox.
Gall of an Ox, called the Gall-stone, which being ground and mixed with Gold,
is good for all Gold*works, and gives an excellent luster in the shadowing.

When the deepest darkest places are to be mixed with black; your lightning
must be purest and finest liquid Gold.

The manner of working liquid Gold,
The manner of working whereof was taught by Old Hiliard thus: If in your work,
there be any carving or Imb^ssing, and that in the light part, it must be
sparing; and you must very finely express it by raising (in the high and round
places) a little pile or heap of this Gall-stone or English Oker, by taking
your Pensill full of Color, and resting the point in one and the same place
til your height, or touch, be raised above your other work.

That done, cover over your raised work with Gold, and Or Silver.
you will see it exceeding fair and bright.

The like you must do with Silver.

Pearl.
To express the roundnesse and luster of Pearl; do it with a Diamonds.
little Pinck. Diamonds are expressed flat with liquid Silver, laid round and
high, the deepning must be Cherry-stone black, and the deepest Ivory-black, the
Silver dried and burnisht is for heighthning; the strong and darker the
shadows are, the fairer the DIAMOND; which if you could set off, as I could
wish, would equal that in the Grand-Sultans Cap.

Rubies.
The secret of Rubies, is of maine consequence; vix a visu temperanda. It is
delivered in the same Hieroglyphical* Cabalisticall Character. Having therefore
laid the ground of silver burnisht, the bigness of the Rubie, take
gheereaguar, of the best and purest wagron mixed; then take a needle or small
pointed Instrument, heated in a Candle and lay a drop or a little of this
composition upon the burnisht Silver as aforesaid, fashioning the stone, round
or square, or other form with the point of Emrauld or Green-stone.
your Instrument; Let it lie a day or two to dry, and it will be very fair and
transplendent, it being long a drying; And to the other composition a little
powder of Tunie. For an Emrauld or Green- stone, temper your gheereaguar with
verdigreece and a little turmerick root, (first scraped) with vinegar; then let
it dry, then grind it to fine powder, and so temper it with gheereaguar, as you
did for the Rubie.

Sapphire.
For a Sapphire, and all kind of blew stones the same Gheereaguar tempered with
Ultra-marine is excellent, especially if your Color be fai^e.

Amethist,
For an Amethist the same Gheereaguar mixed with Waycoriant and way wick; and
so the other colors as you please to mix them; though I conceive I have
already told you the fairest.

Thus having enriched you with a Mine of Precious stones, and pearls, with
Gold to inset them; I will conclude this first part of Picture by the Life,
with the manner of making liquid Gold.

To make Liquid-Gold most Excellent.
Liquid Gold, to make it.
TAke of the fine lease-Gold about the quantity of half a Crown or rather of
the cutting of the same, to the like quantity (at the Gold-beaters); grind this
with a thick and strong Gum-water, upon a reasonable large stone, very fine
and painfully; you cannot make it fine enough, being rather opus Laboris, quam
Ingenii. As you grind it, add more Gum-water, and though the Gold look never
so dirty and black esteem it not the less worth: and having wrought it to a
competent finenesse, take it off from the stone; putting in more Gum-water wash
it as clean as you were told before, and in the same manner as you did your
Bise, Smalt, etc.

Being very clean, add to it a little Mercury sublimate, on the point of a
Knife, with which you must temper with it, a very little Gum, to bind it in the
shell, and as it settles and begins to dry in the shell, shake it together;
remove, and spread the Gold about the sides thereof, that it may be altogether
one Color and finenesse, which when it is dry and fair, as it will be, if you
carefully wash it clean. Use it with fair water, as you do your other Colors:
and this way you shall find your Gold fairer and more in quantity, then you can
buy, for much more money.

To make Liquid-Silver.
Liquid Silver, to make it.
THe same course take with Silver, which you must use in the same manner. Only
with this observation* that seeing the Silver, either with long keeping, or the
moisture of air, will become starved and rusty, you must prevent this
Inconvenience before you lay your Silver, by covering over Silver larnish
the place with a little juice of Garlic. It will keep it very fair and
bright: this secret I had from Mr. Hiliard. Thus have I done with my first
Division.

The second Division by Landscape: The Tablet.
TAke some Vellome, shave it upon a thin frame; fastening Tablet for Landscape.
it with Starch, Paste, or Glue, and pasting it upon a board; which manner of
making, for Landscape or History, is altogether used in Italy. I mean thin
Parchment with any Pastboard for your Tablet, large or less size, you intend
for your Picture.

Green, of all Colors is most delightful to the Eye. Not in all the Art of
Painting such variety of Color, more pleasing Landscape after the Life, the way
to draw it.
then is the Prospect of a well-wrought Landscape; espetially when your ingenious
Industry has already rendered you a Master of Art and contemplation. If you
draw a Prospect from the Life; Take your Station upon the rize of ground, or
top of an Hill, where you shall have a large Horizon; And skore your Tablet
into three divisions downwards, from the top to the bottom, set your face
directly opposite to the midst of your Horizon, and keeping your body fixed,
Observe what is comprehended directly before your eyes, and draw that into
form upon your Tablet in the middle- Division.

Then turning your Head only, (not your body) to the right hand, draw likewise
what is presented to your sight, adjoining it to your former Draught and frame
it into the same.

And so also removing your sight to the left hand, take that observation, which
will make a complete PROSPECT.

And as all things appear in Distance and Truth, Proportion and Color, so be
careful to express them; Most Countrie^ Southward, Spain and Italy, afford
wonderful strange objects in Landscape, Hills, Dales, Rocks, Mountains,
Ca^aracts, Ruins, Aquaeducts, and always a fair sky to discover far off,
which are rarely done there to the Life. You cannot miss of many examples every
where, though less pleasing; but in Holland, none at all* So then, the Dutch in
composing a Piece of Prospect, of their own Fancy and Invention, for want of
the Life most grossly err in Proportion, Distance, and Color. Now for the want
of the Life and Nature, if you will adventure on your fancy; Go to work this
way.

I cannot prescribe, how to order your light, in a piece of Landscape by the
Life; for according to the place, as you look North, or Southward, East, or
Westward, as the time of the day and the Sun's declination, so must you order
your shadows as they appear. But in all working of Painting by Fancy, let your
light descend from your left, to your right hand: So will it appear upon the
work, from the right to the left, the more graceful. (But when you paint a
face to the life, you must observe the parties face, which differs, some more
perfect, either to the right or left.

To make a Landscape.
In making it; First, begin with a large sky or Element and if there be any
shining or reflection of the Sun, (in which only the Dutch are neat and
curious,) then you must be careful, by no means to mix Red-lead, or Mean, in
the purple of the sky, or Clouds, but only with Lake and White; the Yellow and
Whitish beams of the Sun, must be wrought with Masticoate and White, which as
soon as you have done, lay by that Pensil; For you must not mingle the blew
Colors of the Clouds with any Pensil that has touched Masticoate; it will
make the sky Greenish and discolored.

Make up the bluish sky and Clouds with Smalt and not with Bise, for it is
too green and blew; and nothing so proper Dead Color.
for the purpose. At the first working, dead all your Piece over, full and
flowing with Colors suitable to the Air, and green Meadows and Trees or
Ground not laying them on heaps but somewhat smooth. Be not curious in your
first dead-Colours; do it slightly and hastily. Leave a large sky, which
work-down in the Horizon; faint and fair: as you draw near the Earth, let the
remote and far off Mountains appear sweet and misty, undiscoverable, and
almost indistinguishable, mixing into the Clouds, as it were lost in the Air.

Next ground*
Your next ground-Colour downwards, must increase in bigness of proportions as
nearer the sight, and must be somewhat bluish as Seagreen and as you draw
nearer the first ground let them decline sometimes into a Reddish, otherwise
into a Popinjay-green.

Your last ground Color must be nearest the Color of Earth, a dark-yellow,
brown and green, easier to be done with the Pensil then described by the Pen.

And neere^.
The same Color (or near the same,) must be your first Trees, and always as
they come down nearest in distance, they must increase toward their Natural
Color, in largeness, and perfection, somewhat suiting the Earth.

Note.
By any means, let passengers and people by the ways increase nearer hand and
be made bigger in their form and Color; and evermore let every thing, from
left to the right hand in a Line, be of the same equal bigness. You might have
seen Passengers in some Landscape (who should be imagined four or five miles in
distance from the Eye) to be expressed nearer, and as at hand which is a gross
error.

Trees.
The Trees must be made with great judgment, the leaves flowing or filling one
with the other, some sticking forward, others lost in shadows.

Note*
Let not your Landscape of land, rise high, and lift it self into the top of
your Piece, as has been noted in the Prints of Albert Durar, (otherwise, in
his way, an excellent Master;) rather let them lie low, and under the eye,
which is most graceful, and more Natural, with a full sky.

The most general and absolute Rule in Landscape, was observed Paul Brell's
observations.
by that excellent Master at Rome, Paul Brell, whose delightful* works many of
them extant in Prints, are set out by Raphael and John Sadler. Besides many
Paintings of his own hand both in Frescoe and Oil, in the Palace of Cardinal
Montaltre, by St. Maria Mahgior, Bentoglia in Mount Gaballo, and in the Church
of St. Cecillia; His observation i^ only this, That an Artist must be sure to
make all his shadows fall Light against dark, et ^ contrario.
one way; that is, to place light against dark, and dark against light. His
meaning is, that to oppose Light to shadows, is only to remove and extend the
Prospect, and to make it show far off, yet so as ever they must lose their
force of vigor as they remove from the eye, and if strongest always nearest
at hand, and as they fall on the first ground.

Heightning the touches of the Trees.
Besides all this second working, you are to touch up the Trees, boughs, and
branches of them, putting all the dark shadows first, and raising the lighter
leaves above the darker, by mixing some Masticoate with the dark green, which
you may make with Bise, Pinke, and Indico.

The uppermost of all, you are last of all to express by lightly touching the
exterior edges and brimes of some of the former leaves, with a little green
Masticoate, and white. If deeper, darkest shadows, you may well set off with
sap-green and Indico. Only remember, that both in the leaves and trees, Rivers,
and far distant Mountains, you must affect, to express certain real
Morrice-dello (as Paul Brell calls it), or soft delicateness, which is the very
next remarkable in the work.

Cataracts and falls of water-Rock^.
There is great Art in making Cataracts, and terrible falls of waters (such as
you see at Bruolli near Rome) and fearful Rocks. Wherein Montpert of Antwerp
is excellent; no Pieces pass his hand without them. They are rather made with
sleight of hand, and a little dram of discretion with judgment, then by study
and diligence.

A good full ground must be first laid near the Color; then with stronger, in
the dark places; and sl^ight and easy heighning in the light; ever observing
those dis-proportions, Cracks and ruptures of various over-wannie colors; the
manner whereof, you see abundantly expressed by most men's Pensils, almost in
every Landscape. Second working.


I should have proceeded in a formal discourse of the second manner of
working, according to the second sitting after the Life: But I spare your troub
le referring you to those observations heretofore directed: for curiosity in
this work is not so much required, as in a Picture.

The greatest cunning herein is to cosen your own eyes; which yet, you cannot
do, without their consent in assisting, by an apt accommodation of rarity of
Colors, in their due places, In such manner, that many times in a Tablet of a
span long, a man's Imagination, may be carried quite out of the Country, Seas,
and Cities, by a sure Piece of his own making. See Streeter's most exact and
rare Landskips in Oil.

The Third Division of History.
History of rare pieces by Salmiato.
YOu shall rarely see History in Limning to be done in any largeness. Only four
books there are in a Master Book of Paulo quinto in the Vatican Library
reasonably well done by one Salmiato, a Florentine.

In the same place there is a very ancient Greek Martyrologie, sometime
belonging to the Emperor Basilius about a thousand years since. Wherein were
Limned upon Parchment 463 good large Histories out of the Martyrdom of Ancient
holy people in the primitive Church; and these pieces were done by several
Gretians dwelling at Constantinople. By Graetians,


By Albert D^rar,
Other Books exceedingly well limm'd in that Library, done by Albert Durar.

Don Clavio*
Another, done by Don Clavio very neat and curious, and al these upon
Parchment, only the fleshy Color wrought in, with the point of a Pensill,
without any Primere or ground at all. Which certainly ^is an error, or rather
Heresy in the Italian, Error in the Italians.
who will by no means admit of Limning with a ground.

But that which i^ Instar omnium, is an History of the Burial of a Gretian
Monarch, done upon a large Tablet of sine abortive Parchment, polished on a
smooth and well seasoned board of Pear Tree. It was in the hands of Mr.
Endymion Porter and begun by that in comparable Master, Isaac Olyver, almost
Isaac Oliver.
to the end, but it had finishing from his Son. It was a piece of the greatest
beauty and perfection (for so much) as I think all Europe or the World can
produce. And I believe if Carlovan Mandras in his Dutch History of the famous
Painters had seen this Picture, his book might have increased to a Tome with
this worthy description.

The difference in Painting History and Picture.
The difference in Painting of Pictures and History are infinite, though the
Colors be the same; and to particularise but in part, what may be said of this
subject would be endless.

Variety of Colors in the Life.
The most remarkable difference certainly is in the variety of Colors which
according to their several Complexions, Sex, and Ages may be represented, and
many times according to the humor, judgment and affection of the Workman; And
we see ordinarily, the practice of the best and most famous Painters, (those
that follow the Life,) Bloomart and Spranger.
do tie themselves straightly and precisely, to what they see in their
patterns (the designs and drawings of Bloomart and Spranger.) Yet in the
Invention they assume Liberty affected in Coloring.
unto themselves liberty or rather license in their racking and strained
proportions so others in their Coloring, as that many times extravagancies,
and impossibilities, (if not ridiculous), do appear.

By Raphael Vrbine.
Hence comes it, that the rare Raphael Urbine affecting a delicate pleasing
liberty in Coloring of his Na^ea's, is so pitifully imitated by some of the
Dutch Masters.

And so, the Dutch pester their work with greenish, bl^^ and purple Color, in
their Na^e^s, as would rather serve for a reasonable Landscape, and set out the
flesh as if bastinado'd into black and blew.

And Bassano,
The Natural Basano, an old and excellent Master; yet so affected to Pots and
Dripping-pannes, to blew cotes and Dogs, that his History of the Deluge
sometimes in the Gallery at St. James' by White^all, seems to be rather a
disordered and confused Kichin; then Noah's flood.

Ruben and Cornelius of Harlem,
So Ruben in his affected Coloring sometimes in the privy Gallery at
Whitehall, and Cornelius of Harlem in his loose and untrussed figures, like old
and beaten Gladiatry; seem exceedigly to abuse that gentle and modest license,
which always graced the work of that admirable Italian Michael Angelo.
Angelo, that therefore it is not safe to go beyond the Life rather then so
much to exceed the pattern by the Chimeraes of their own brain and fancy* and
yet what I have touched before concerning him also, is accounted a fault.

Four several sorts of Coloring.
Four several ways of Colonring.
INdeed and briefly there are four several kinds of Coloring to be observed
in History. Of young Infants, of fair virgins, of young women, of old women,
in every of these severally. It is in the power of a judicious Artist, to vary
and change their manner of coloring, according to his discretion, or as the
occasion and subject of his intention shall require.

1. Of Infant^.
Infants and yo^ng children are to be of a soft, airy, and tender complexion,
crimson and delicate colloured blood upon the ear and skin, almost transparent;
which you will express with White, Lake, and a little Red-lead; the shadows
are to be thin, faint, and tender; the cheeks, lips, chin, fingers, knees, and
toes, more reddish than the other parts of the body. The Linen and Laune about
these tender bodies, are to be made thin, and very transparent; only strongly
touched up in the thickest foldings.

2. Virgins and fair-Women.
The complexions of Virgins and fair young women, are not so much different
from the other coloring, as in the perfe^tion and shapenesse of the work;
those few and soft Muscles are to be done gently and easily, to express the
shadows of white-yellow, bluish, in some places purple. And if you seek
perfection in this, or any of the rest, the nearest, and most certain, and
infallible direction, is, by the Life; which you may follow with best
assurance; since always, we suppose, you know all colors, and how to mix them
at pleasure.

3. Men naked*
Men's bodies naked, are to be made strong, robustious, and vigorous; the
Muscles and Sinews strongly and exactly fellowed, allotting to every Artery
his right and due place; which to do with understanding, is a study and
practice of your whole life; and yet an Artist otherwise, may not be deficient
in this. So exceedingly does Nature transcend Art, and her Idol^ters; not
easily to be courted, or so much as to be followed afar off.

And though these observations are carefully to be exampled, yet is it in the
power and judgment of the Painter, to vary the colors and several complexions
of bodies; only, if the postures be either reposed, or otherwise in violent
action, they are to be more or less expressed.

4. Aged bodies.
An excellent shadow for an old man's body, is Pinck, Lake, and Ivory-black; it
will be a glowing shadow, like the expression of the wrinckles and furrows of
the face and hands, of people extremely aged, dark eyes, melancholy aspect.
Subject enough, to show the riches of invention and spirit, especially if it be
suitable to the History.

Several persons of one age and sex, in one Tablet.

Colors of their Apparel.


To order many persons in one Tablet, of the same sex and age, apparelling and
clothing their persona^es; I do not find, that the best Painters have been very
careful, to present figures with colors of apparel, fitting their years; as
to an old man, sad and dark colors, and such like; but rather quite contrary,
bending their noble study to cloth their figures, with what may best adorn
their workmanship. The Eastern Nations were never clothed in black or sad
colors.

The Virgin Mary is universally (as it were by common consent) represented in
Purple and Azure; St. John the Evangelist in Scarlet, the Apostles (though most
reverend) are vested in Green, Crimson, Blew, as pleases the Painter.

Of Drapery in Limning.
FOr Drapery, I find but two ways in Limning; the one by Drapery two ways.
Italians and French, to work-in their Aparrel, in manner of washing; working
it with the point of a Pensill, with slips and little pricks, and engraving it
all over, somewhat like the nap of Frisado; yet so, that when all is done, you
may see the parchment quite through your work; which, in my opinion, is a very
slight single-sol'd device, and rather like a Wash-drawing, than a Master's
work.

The bett^r way is, to lay a good, flat, and full ground, all over, whose
Drapery you mean to make; and if it must be Blew, then all over with Bise,
smoothly laid. The deepening Blew Drapery
Lake and Indico, the lightning White, very fine, faint, and fair; and that
only in extremest light. The same order you are to observe, in all your
Draperies whatsoever. And this was the Isaac Oliver.
way of Isaac Oliver, in my observation.

There is to be seen in the Palace of Don Julio Clovis, Crimson-velvet
Lightning with Gold,
Curtains, and Clothe^ of Gold, excellently expressed by lightning, with fine
shell-gold: but it must be hatched and washed; and your gold must be of your
own making, for you can buy none fine enough for this purpose.

You cannot believe, what an ornament this lightning with upon all Colors,
Gold is, and what a luster it gives to fair colored Drapery; as,
crimson-velvet, red, green, and blew: And if you mix gold with the very ground
it self, you will find the apparel much fairer.

And in the same manner, you are to work the Building and by Albert Durar.
Architecture, especially in rich stately Edifices; And so far was Albert Durar
in love with this manner of working, that I have seen the very dirty earth, the
dead stocks of rotten trees, and stakes of hedges, in Landskips, all lightened
with this manner of working in gold, which show very pleasant, and affect the
eye exceedingly.

Other remarkable observations there are, which you shall better master by your
own practice, than my relation: And yet those that follow will not be amiss.

Observations in Limning.
Observations in Limning.
WHen you begin to work, temper the Colors in a shell with your finger, dipped
in water, a little before you begin; if your color will not take, or your
parchment be greasy, temper with the color a little ear-wax, as little as may
be; it is good to mix with those colors that do peel from your work, as has
been before noted.

The Sitting,
Sit not above two yards at the most (for the face) from the person, whose
picture you take; and six yards distance for the whole body, level with them;
unless they are tall, then somewhat above them, for so they appear to most
men, who are not so tall. Mark when he removes, though never so little, from
his first station or placing; recall him to the former sitting, for a little
change of the site of the body or face, causes error in the work. Draw not
any part of the face, in story or picture, exactly, or perfectly at the first,
neither finish the eye, mouth, or nose; but let all the work be made and
concluded together.

Proportion,
All the art and judgment is in the touch of Proportion, and the exact drawing;
yet, neatness of work, and curiosity in beautiful colors, do indeed many
times grace the Picture in such manner, that the defects of drawing are not
easily discovered, but unto very judicious observers.

Light,
Never change your light, if you can possible, but rather finish the work by
the first light: And therefore not many excellent Artists in this kind, will
work abroad from their own light. A dishonor to transport his Easel, Pallat,
Colors, and Pensills from home.

and Posture*
When you have finished the face, and are to draw the posture, let the Person
rise and stand, when you draw the lines of posture, and not sit by any means;
for though never so true sitting, yet you will find your self deceived in the
draught, which will lose the grace and sprightfulnesse, and will be rewarded
with a dull and livelesse aspect.

Of Pastills, or Croyons.
Pastills for Croyons.

To make them


THe Pastill for Croyon, or dry color: take three ounces of Lint-seed oil,
six ounces of yellow Wax, two ounces of white Mastick, four ounces of
Colophonia, four ounces of Rosin-Depino Greaseo, one ounce of Turpentine: Melt
all these together in a fair earthen pot or pan, well leaded; put not all in
together, but one quantity after another, as they melt; cut the wax in pieces,
it will melt the sooner; stamp the Rosin, and Caliphonia; this done, let it be
lukewarm, in any wise not hot* mingle there with (as best you may with your
hand) the Lapis Loculi, Lapis Lazarilli. To make Ultramarine.
Lapis Loculi; ground and work it up in a lump, and so let it rest a day or
two, then take a fair earthen pan or a dry smooth Basin almost full of water,
so warm, as you may well endure your hand in it. Then take the massy Lump and
work it between your hands, so long as you can see it sweat out a clear water
of a blew Color, and the longer it is before the drops come forth the better.
When the water is well blewed, set it away, and take another Basin or Pan of
clean water and work it as before, then take another Pan* a fourth, and a
fifth; till no more drops will sweat out, letting the ground remain and dry
thoroughly: then with a feather wipe it off the pan, upon a paper; and so put
it up the first blew that sweateth is best, and so the rest in degrees. You may
put the worser sort into the like new Pastill again, and work it over as
before. It will be the fairer but less in quantity. There are other ways
pretended.

Note also, that the Pastill can never serve but once: and afterward, to make
Lincks, and Torches. You may get some of the broken pieces of Lapis Loculi of
the Merchants of ALEPPO, the deepest color the best.

To work in Croyons or Pastills,
I observe three manners of ways.

The first and worst, is that of Monsieur de Mousters of Paris, whose custom
is to ^ub-in several Colors, *being first reduced 1. With Powders.
into powder, and set in several small boxes,) upon the paper, which commonly
is the whitest; and this he does with several stubbed Pensils, the ends fitted
with Cotton or Bumbaste. His work is reasonable neat, but not lasting, there
being nothing to bind on the Colors, which commonly fall off, and the work
lost or defective.

2. Pa^tills*
The second is with Pastills the length of a finger or thereabout, composed of
several Colors, mixed and ground together, of a good consistence and
stiffnesse, and so rouled up and laid to dry. They have used to make them up
with Milk, Beer, or Ale, or new Wort; others with old rotten size, to bind the
Colors together.

3. Colored paper.
The last and best (as I conceive) is to Color the pa^er, whereon you intend
to draw the Picture, with Carnation or flesh Color, near the Person's
Complexion you mean to draw. Cover the whole paper (for some complexion) with
Ceruse, Mean, and a little yellow-Oaker, ground with Gum; When you prepare one
paper, do so with many other papers to save labor, and those with different
complexions, until you have use of them.

Lay the Complexion with a sponge wet, but let it be so bound, as it may not
come off with rubbing; this done and dry, draw your outward lines with
red-Chalke faintly. Then with your several Pastills rub in the Colors, and,
with your fingers-end, sweeten and mix them together, driving them, one within
another, after the manner of the Oyl-Painters; and because you cannot sharpen
your Pastills as shall be needful, you must remember to close up all the work
with Red-Chalke and black-Chalke, which (with your Penknife) sharpen at your
pleasure.

Croyons of Holben, a rare Book.
I have seen a book of Pictures in this last manner of Croyon, done by the hand
of that incomparable Artist Hans Holben, who was servant in Ordinary to KING
Henry the Eighth. They were Paintings of the most ENGLISH LORDS, and LADIES
then living; and the patterns whereby he drew their Pictures in Oil. Many of
those Pieces in the book were spoiled by the injury of time and the ignorance
of such as had it in custody. Yet there appeared in those ruins and remains,
an admirable hand, and a rare manner of working in few lines, with much
diligence and labor in expressing the Life and Likeness. Many of them
equalling his own Oyl-Pictures, and always excelling any other Artizan. After
a long time of Peregrination, this Book fell into the hands of the late Earl
of Arundell, Earl Marshall of ENGLAND, an eminent Patron to all PAINTERS, and
who understood the ART; and therefore preserved this BOOK with his Life, till
both were lost together.

Ordinary working in Croyon.
The Ordinary working in Croyon is upon blew-paper, the Color rubbed-in, first
with the Pensill; and afterward, either with a stubbe- Pensill with your
finger, or with a little piece of paper, or with a sponge, or otherwise.

You may also work in Croyon upon Parchment exceeding neat and curious in that
manner, as these small Pieces to the Life done upon Velome, Parchment, and
white Paper also, by the admirable Artist and Gra^er in Brass, Henricus Jessius
at Harlem in Holland. The faces no bigger than a Jacobus in Gold coin. His
Pastills of the shape and bigness of a tackpoynt, but longer: they might
compare with Limning and seemed so, to the sudden view. They were rubbed-in,
with small Cotten-pensills, and were finished with sharp poynted Red-chalke and
Black-chalk.

The true way of making the Pastill, is the secret of the Art; and so you may
remember that I said, some make them of Ale-wort and such trash, to tell you
the difference not to teach you those ways: for either they bind so hard, that
they will not mark nor score at all, or else so loose and brittle, that you
cannot bring them to finenesse.

For tempering so many Pastills for change of Colors in the Face.
I Shall only direct you in one COLOR, for example of all the other.

Brown Complexion.
For a Brown Complexion.

Grind upon the stone, Ceruse, Red-leade (or Vermillion, for this is a more
useful color in this kind of work then in Limning) English Oaker and a little
Pinke; you need not grind them very fine but only to bruise and mix them well
together. To these, add a reasonable quantity of Plaster of Paris burnt and
finely sifted, mix and incorporate this, with the other Colors, thick and
stiff, like moist clay; then take it off the stone, and roll it betwixt the
palms of your hand, as long, or as little as you list; then lay it to dry, in
the Sun or Wind, but not by the Fire.

Plaster of Paris.
In this manner, and with mixture of Plaster of Paris, temper all the other
shadows, and Colors whatsoever; the quality of this plaster of Paris, is to
bind the Colors together, and to make them durable, which otherwise would be
loose and brittle. With your Penknife scrape them being dry, to a fine point,
so sharp, that you may with it draw a hairs breadth, and this Plaster makes
the Color so hard and dry, that you may draw lines upon Parchment or paper.

For Crimson*
The Color Crimson is most difficult to work; It is made of Lake, which of it
self is light and hard: therefore instead of that, use India Lake or Russet,
observing always to mix white Ceruse with all the other Colors, or shadows,
whatsoever.

And when you are to mix a Color that is hard to work as this Crimson,
(which commonly you shall find brittle and hard) then temper it with another
Color, near the same in Color, but more soft and gentle.

As if you mix a little Vermillion with a good quantity of Lake, it will take,
not much from the Color, and make it work very well.

Greens,
In this manner you may make all manner of beautiful Greens for Landskips and
all other Colors requisite for Rocks, And
Waters, Skies, and tempering the Greens with white Pinck, Bise, Other Colors.
Masticoate, Smalt, Indico, and to make them high, deep, or light, as you
please; remembering where you are to temper fast and firm colors, as Umber,
Oak, Indico, take the less plaster of Paris. But where your colors are loose
and sandy, they bind the stronger and faster, by adding more plaster.

And when your colors are dry, before you begin your work, sharpen them with a
penknife, according to the large or little proportion of your design.

White-Lead.
Having ground the white-lead to a sufficient finenesse, put it together with
the water with the which you ground it, (being sweet water distilled) into a
Silver or China-dish, wherein has been dissolved a good quantity of
Gum-Arabick, and strained: The water becoming clear, and the color become
settled; pour the water away, and let it dry inthe dishes, and so receive it to
your use. The second washing will serve well to work withal, and temper and
mix with the shadows. The third and last is good for heightnings, lights, and
high touches, and strong reflections. But the first and coorsest in the bottom,
reserved in the first dish, must be ground again, and tempered with gum-water,
and is very good for laying grounds, and carnations, and complexions for
Picture by the life.

To counterfeit Spanish White.
It is good to mix Spanish White with your white-lead, for it will bind it
together; and it is good to be heightened upon. If you have no Spanish White,
make this mixture: Take two parts of ordinary Chalk, and one part of Allom;
grind these together to a good finenesse, which being made up to a lump, burn
it in the fire, and reserve it for use. And so much for the work, by Croyons,
or Pastills.

Frescoe.
Of Frescoe.
Painting upon Walls.
THe way of Painting upon walls, to endure weather, the Colors must be ground
with limewater, or milk, or whey, tempered and mixed in pots, as in
Size-colouring. Take the powder of old rubbish stones, mixed with well-burnt
flint-stones, (or lime) and water; wash out the saltness of the lime, by often
pouring out the water, and put in fresh, the oftener the better, which makes the
plaster or compost: Avoid moist weather, which has influence upon the walls.
(To do the work lasting, strike into the brick or stone-wall, stumps of head-
nails, about six inches assunder, which will keep the plaster firm from
peeling.)

Then with this compost, plaster the wall a good thickness, letting it dry;
and your colors prepared ready and mingled, plaster again over the former,
the thickness of half a crown of silver, very fine and thin, so much as you
intend presently to work upon, whilst it is wet: Work your colors therein,
which will cooperate and corrob o rate into the plaster, and so dry together
as a perfect compost.

Work your painting quick with a free hand, for there cannot be any alteration
after the first painting; and therefore make your painting high enough at the
first: You may deepen, but not easily heighten.

Without any Mineral colors.

What Brushes


Avoid Min^rall colors; Earth colors are best, as all Oker s, Brown of Spain,
Terre-vert, Spanish-white, and such like.

Your Brushes and Pensills must be long and soft; otherwise they will ^ake the
work, and raise the painting. Your Colors must be full, and flowing from the
Brush; your Design, perfect in the Image, or paper-copy; for in this work, you
cannot alter or add upon any color.

To make excellent pur^ White-Lead.
White-Lead.
PUt into a gallon pot certain plaits of clean fine le^d, cover them with
white wind vinegar, glewing the pot with clean Lome; bury it in a Cellar a
months space, or six weeks, then you shall find very good white-lead upon the
plates, which take off for use.

To make several Colors.
BReak the best Verdigree^e into fine powder in a mortar, then having laid the
ground with liquid silver and burnisht, Emrauld. Ruby. Sapphire.
temper the Verdigreece with Varnish, it makes an Emerauld; as also with
Florence-Lake, it makes a fair Ruby; and with ultra-Marine, it makes a Sapphire.
Let it rest a while upon your hand, that the varnish thereof may di^solve the
stone. Make it little, eeven, and smooth upon the Card, and it will dry ^n a
day.

A Crimson-Velv^t.
Crimson-velvet.
TAke Indico-Lake, well ground, and strongly bound with G^m, and a little
white-Sugar-candy. Temper these with a little Turnsoil, then lay it full; and
when it is wet, with a dry Pensill, wipe away the color, where you will have
the heightning of the Crimson-velvet appear, and the strong reflections will
this way express it.

Excellent Receipts from Mr. Hilliard, that old famous English Limner.
Pearl.
PEarl must be laid with a white, mixed with a little black, and a little India
blew Mastick, but ye ta very little, in comparison of the white, not the
hundred part; which being dry, give the light of the Pearl with silver,
somewhat more to the light side, than to the shadow. Then take White allayed
with Mastick, and underneath the shadow-side, give it a compassing stroke,
which shows the reflection; then without that, a small shadow of sea-coal,
undermost of all. But note, that the silver must be laid round and full.

Note.
Note, that all Stones, (besides the Diamond) must be glazed upon silver, with
their proper colors, with a varnish.

An excellent Black.
Black.
THe best Black is black-Ivory, burnt in a Cr^cible, well stopped with a
tyle-shard, or iron-plate, and luted, that the air enter not: Mix therefore
the luting with a little salt, heat it red her a quarter of an hour, then being
set by, let it cool of it self, the pot still close; then open it, grind it
with Gum-water, only wash it in this manner from the Gum; pouring water into
it by little and little, in some deep glass, stirring it with a feather; and
when it is as thin, or thinner than Inck, let it settle an afternoon; then
pour it from the uppermost of the matter, which is but the sc^m and foulness,
(good to put into Inck) the rest being very dry, take it out of the glass and
keep it in paper or boxes for use. But you must soft grind it again, or temper
it again upon the stone with water, adding Gum beaten fine, into it, with
discretion, for by use, you will find the fault; if too little, it works ill,
and dries too fast; if too much, it will be bright, and glister like
oyl-colour, which by any means avoid.

The five perfect Colors, with their Lights and Shadows.
Murray, or Amethyst.
THe best for Limning, is a Lake of it self, of a Murray color, which is best
made, and to be had at Venice, or in Flenders at Antwerp; for if you make shift
with other Lake, adding blew, to make it Murray, it can never be good. The
former Lake is to be ground with Gum-Arabick water only, although when it is
once dry in the shel, it is hardly reduced into a condition to work well again.
Then grind more and fresh.

2. Red, or Ruby.
2. Fair Red, or Ruby.
IF you will make a fair Red for Limning, take India-Lake, (with breaks of a
Scarlet, or Stammell-colour) there are sundry Lakes, which will shadow one upon
another, and some ^o black, that they must be ground generally with
Sugar Candy, amongst the Gum, and others with Sugar only. You cannot grind
them too much, nor need they washing. Vermilion also is another Red, which must
be ground and washed.

3. Blew, or Sapphire*
3. Blew, or Sapphire.
THe darkest and richest is of Ultra Marine of Venice; but that is very dear,
in the place thereof we use Smalt, of the best Blew; Bises also of several
sorts, paler then other of five or six degrees. They may be ground; but better
to be beaten in a Mortar of flint, like Ammel, very smooth, with a Pestill
likewise of flint, or Aggat, well stirred, till it be fine, with gum-water
only, and well washed. So have you many sorts, and all good; shaddowing
Blewes, or Litmus, Indico blew, Flory. These need no washing, nor Litmus any
grinding, but steeped in the lees of Soap-ashes. Use Gum with discretion, as
aforesaid.

4. Green, or Emrauld.
4. Green, or Emrauld.
GReen; the best is Cedar-green, in the place thereof, take Tripall, to draw
with: Pink is also needful for Landskips, mixed with Bise-ashes, makes another
Green; so likewise with Mastico^e and Ceruse, as you see cause. For
light-greens, sap-greens, flour d^ Bise, tauny-green, needs nothing but steeped
in water, which is best.

5. Yellow, or Topas.
5. Yellow, or Topas.
YEllow the best is Masticote, whereof there are diverse forts, paler or deeper;
yellow Oker, for want of better, is another also; and these washed, not ground,
do best; and must have a little Sugar amongst the Gum, in tempering them.
Shadowing Yellowes* are of the stone, found in an Ox-gall, ground with
Gum-water, not washed. And yellow Oker, made with white Roses, bruised with a
little Allom, and strained; neither of them needs grinding, nor washing, nor
Gum. You may make shift with fair Oker de rouse, and Sa^^ron water. Shadow your
Masticote with yellow Oker, deepen it with Oker de rouse.

And so have we done with the five perfect Colors.

An excellent Receipt to make Vltra-Marine.
To make Ultra-Marine.
TAke the broken pieces of Lapis Lazarilli, the deeper blew, or between black
and blew, with as little grains of gold upon them as may be; put it into a
Goldsmith's meltingpot, covering it with a potsheard; heat it hot about an
hour, upon a fire of charcoal; then quench it with urine, vinegar, or water, in
some pot, well leaded: dry it in a fire- shovell upon coals, the moisture quite
dry; then lay it upon a table, and with pinsers, nip off the hard part from it,
being gray and whitish: Then boil two spoonfulls of Honey in a pot of clean
water, and take the Lapis Lazarilli, and grind it out with this water, as fine
as may be, and so let it dry for use.

To make a Varnish.
To make a Varnish.
TAke a pound and half of oil Aspeck, the best; five ounces of Mastick, as
many of Sandrose: put these together in a glass, boiling them in a pottle of
water, and putting a cloth in the bottom; stir it often for three hours, the
longer the better; and after it is cool, let it stand in the Scum for ten days.

An excellent Water, for the preserving white-Colours, and recovering them,
being dead or starved; and generally for all Colors.
An excellent Water.
TAke Rosemary-water distilled, and with a few drops thereof temper a shell of
White, so starved or dead, and it shall instantly become perfect; for a truth,
try one half of the color, and see the difference. It has also this quality
of goodness, that whereas all colors (especially Whites and Umber) in the
grinding and tempering, arise in bubbles, very troublesome to an Artist, a
little of this water cleanses the color, and disperseth the bubbles; and being
tempered with your color in the shell, makes it flow, and to work exceeding
sharp.

The draught of a Landscape Mathematical; they that have leisure and desire
thereto, may make experiment.
A Landscape.
SEt up a little black Tent in a field, made easy, portable, and convertible,
as a Windmill, to all quarters at pleasure, capable of no more then one man
with little ease, exactly close and dark, save at one hole, an inch and half
diameter; to which, apply a long prospective Trunck, with a unequal glass,
fitted to the said hole, and the concave taken out at the other end, which
extends unto (about) the middle of this erected Tent; through which, the
visible radiations of all the objects without, are intermitted, falling upon a
paper which is accommodated to receive them, and so trace them with your pen in
their natural appearance, turning this your little Tent round by degrees, till
you have designed the whole aspect of the place.

There is good use hereof in Chorography; but to make Landskips hereby, were
too illiberall. Surely no Painter could exceed the preciseness of these.

To make clean a fonl, or old Picture, in Oil.
To clean old Pictures.
MAke clean the Picture with a sponge, dipped in warm beer, and then let it dry;
and afterward wash it over with the liquor of the whitest Gum-dragon, steeped
or dissolved in water, which will set a glare or freshness upon the Picture.
If you use blew starch, or glare of eggs, or other such trash, as is very
common, it will take off the heightning, and spoil the grace of the work.

Light, bad for the eyes.
Light, bad for the eyes.
LEt not the air be too lightsome; excessive light scatters the spirits, and
causes the sight to be lost. Xenophons soldiers passing a long time in the
snow, became almost blind.

Dionysius the Tyrant, shut up his prisoners in dark holes, and suddenly
bringing them to sunshine took away their sight.

Colors good and bad for sight.
Some colors are not profitable for the sight, which diffuseth the spirits,
drawing them to it; Black makes them too gross: Not any color does much
comfort the eyes, but Green, Blew, Viol^t, Saphir, and Emerauld.

Flowers of Burrage, and leaves of Burnet, put into Frenchwine, the colors
comfort the eyes, the property of the Herbs repress the vapor of the Wine;
and this Wine is most due to be drunk by an excellent Painter; in which, other
persons may have leave to taste only, unless to drink his health, unto

The END.

