A SERMON Preached at NEWPORT IN THE ISLE of WIGHT, October 1648. In the time
of the TREATY. BY ROBERT SANDERSON, D. D. Chaplain to the late KING, and
Regius-Professor of Divinity in the University of OXON.

London Printed by T. M. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in S. Paul's
Churchyard 1653.

A SERMON PREACHED In the Isle of WIGHT, Before the late KING.
GALAT. 5. 22, 23.




HE that shall impartially look upon former and the present times, shall find
that of Solomon exactly true, There is Eccles. 1. 9.
no new thing under the sun: Vetus fabula, novi Histriones: The things we see
done are but the same things that have been done, only acted over again by new
Persons, and with a few new circumstances. It was in the Apostles times, and in
the Churches of Galatia, even as it is with us in these days; False Teachers
had crept in among them, who by their Hypocrisy and pretensions of the Spirit,
had so corrupted their Faith, that they were removed (after Gal. 1. 6.
a sort) unto another Gospel, and so extremely sowred their Charity, that from
provoking and envying, they were now 5. 26. 5. 15.
grown to biting and devouring one another.

The Apostle wondering at this so unexpected a change, [I marvel you are so
soon removed, Gal. 1. 6.] to see them so befooled in their understandings, and
bewitched in their affections, as to suffer so sore and sudden a decay in the
two most Essential parts of Christian Religion, Faith, and Charity, thought it
high time for him, after he had first schooled them [O foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you] to offer this advice toward the allaying of those heats
and Gal. 3. 1.
distempers that were the causes of this so sad and dangerous an alteration.

The Remedy he prescribes for that end [verse 16.] is short, but very sure, if
they will follow it, Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh. As if he had said, You talk much of the Spirit, but you make it
little appear in the fruit of your lives that you are led by the Spirit. The
Spirit and the flesh are contraries, and they lust contrary things, verse 17.
If you were as careful to walk in the Spirit, as you are to boast of it, you
would not be so forward as now you are, by the cherishing of unbrotherly
contentions, and other ways, to fulfill the Lusts of the flesh.

An hard thing it is to bring an overweening Hypocrite to a true understanding
of himself; for Pride and Hypocrisy are two such things as few men are willing
to own. That they might therefore with better certainty be able to discern
whether they were indeed Spiritual, or but yet carnal, the Apostle proceeds
to describe the flesh and the Spirit, by sundry their different effects. A
Catalogue we have for that purpose, of the works of the flesh, in seventeen
particulars, in the three next verses before the Text; and then another
Catalogue of the fruit of the Spirit, in nine Particulars, in the Text it self.

Wherein we may observe three things, First, the Notion, or general Description
of spiritual graces as they are here proposed: they go under this name, The
fruit of the Spirit. Secondly, the particular species given in under that name
or Notion; They are these nine, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance. Thirdly, a special Privilege
belonging to all and every the aforesaid particulars; to wit, exemption from
the Law: Against such there is no Law.

In the general Description (which is like to be our only business at this
time) the thing we are to take notice of, is, the difference that may be
observed between the Titles under which Saint Paul has entered the several
particulars of both sorts, as they are set down, the one in the beginning of
verse 19. [The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery,
etc.] The other in the beginning of verse 22. [But the fruit of the spirit is
Love, etc.] And these differences are four. First, Those effects of the former
sort proceed originally from the flesh, these from the Spirit. Secondly, Those
are rather styled by the name of Works, these by the name of Fruit; The Works
of the flesh, but the Fruit of the Spirit. Thirdly, Those are set forth as many
and apart, Works, in the Plural; these as many, but united into one Fruit, in
the Singular. Fourthly, Those are expressly said to be manifest; of these, no
such thing at all mentioned.

The first difference which arises from the nature of the things themselves as
they relate to their several proper causes, is of the four, the most obvious
and important; and it is this, That whereas the vicious habits and sinful
actions Catalogued in the former verses are the productions of the flesh; The
graces and virtues specified in the Text, are ascribed to the Spirit, as to
their proper and Original cause; they are not the Works of the flesh, as the
former, but the Fruit of the Spirit.

Where the first question that every man will be ready to ask, is, What is here
meant by the Spirit?

The necessity of expressing Supernatural and Divine things, by words taken
from Natural or Humane affairs, has produced another necessity of enlarging
the significations of sundry of those words to a very great latitude; which is
one special cause of the obscurity which is found in sundry places of Holy
Scripture, and consequently of the difficulty of giving the proper and genuine
sense of such places, and consequently to that (amidst so many interpretations
of one and the same place, wh^lst each contendeth for that sense which himself
has pitched upon) of infinite Disputes and Controversies in point of Religion.

Among which words, three especially I have observed, all of them of very
frequent use in the New Testament; which, as they are subject to greater
variety of significations than most other words are, so have they ever yet
been, and are like to be to the worlds end, the matter and fuel of very many
and very fiery contentions in the Church. These three are Faith, Grace, and
Spirit. Truly I am persuaded, if it were possible all men could agree in what
signification each of these three words were to be understood in each place
where any of them are found, three full parts, at least of the four, of those
unhappy Controversies that have been held up in the Christian Church, would
vanish.

And of the three, this of the Spirit has yet the greatest variety of
significations. God in his Essence, the Person of the Holy Ghost, good Angels,
evil Angels, extraordinary Gifts, wherewith the Apostles and others in the
Primitive times were endowed; the several faculties of the soul, as
understanding, affections, and conscience; the whole soul of man, Supernatural
grace, besides many others not needful now to be remembered, all come under the
appellation of Spirit. Much of the ambiguity of the word (I confess) is cut
off, when it is opposed to flesh; yet even then also it wants no variety.
The literal and mystical sense, the Ordinances of the old and new Testament,
the body and the soul, sensuality and reason; the corruption of nature, and the
grace of God; all these may (according to the peculiar exigence of several
places) be understood by the terms of Flesh and Spirit.

Generally the word Spirit (in the common notion of it) imports a thing of
subtle parts, but of an operative quality; so that the less any thing has of
matter, and the more of virtue, the nearer it comes to the nature of a Spirit;
as the Wind, and the quint-essences of Vegetables or Minerals extracted by
Chemical operations. We use to say of a man that is of a sad, sluggish, and
phlegmatic temper, that he has no spirit; but if he be lively, active, quick,
and vigorous, we then say, he has a spirit in him. It is said of the Queen of
Sheba, when she saw the Wisdom and Royal state of King Solomon, that there was
no more spirit left in 1 Kin. 10. 5.
her; that is, she stood mute and amazed at it, as if she had no life, speech,
sense, or motion in her: the soul is therefore called a spirit, because it
being it self no bodily substance, it yet actuateth and enliveneth the body,
and is the inward Principle of life thereunto, called therefore, The spirit of
life; And Saint James says, The body without the spirit is dead; that Genesis ^2.
7 Jam. 2* 26
is, it is a liveless lump of flesh without the soul. So that whatsoever is
Principium agendi internum, may in that respect, and so far forth borrow the
name of a spirit; insomuch as the very flesh it self, (so far forth as it is
the fountain of all those evil works mentioned in the foregoing verses) may in
that respect be called a spirit, and so it is by Saint James, The spirit that
is in us lusts after envy, says he; that is, in very deed, the flesh that is
in us; for among the lusts Jam. 4 5.
and works of the flesh, is envy reckoned, in the very next verse before the
Text.

To come up close to the point, (for I fear I have kept off too long) as they
stand here opposed, By Flesh, I take to be clearly meant the natural corruption
of man; And by Spirit, the Supernatural grace of God: even as the same words
are also taken in some other places; as namely, in that saying of our Savior,
John 3. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the
Spirit is Spirit. Which John 3. 6.
words may serve as a good Commentary upon this part of the Text: for they do
not only warrant the Interpretation, but afford us also the Reason of it, under
the Analogy of a twofold Birth or Generation.

The Generation, whether of Plants, or living Creatures, is effectual by that
prolifical virtue which is in the Seed; Answerable therefore unto the twofold
Birth spoken of in the Scriptures, there is also a twofold Seed. The first
Birth is that of the old man, by Natural Generation, whereby we are born the
sons of Adam. The second Birth is that of the new man, by Spiritual
Regeneration, by which we are born the sons of God. Answerable whereunto, the
first Seed is Semen Adae, the seed of Adam, derived unto us by carnal
Propagation from our natural Parents, who are therefore called The fathers of
our flesh; together wherewith is also Heb. 12. 9.
derived that uncleanness, or corruption, which upon our first Birth cleaves
so inseparably to our nature, and is the inward Principle from which all the
works of the flesh have their emanation. But then there is another Seed; Semen
Dei, (as S. John calls it) the seed of the second Adam, Jesus Christ, God
blessed for ever, derived unto us by the communication 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
of the Holy Spirit inwardly renewing us; together wherewith is also derived a
measure of inherent, supernatural grace, as the inward Principle whence all
these choice fruits of the Spirit do flow.

So that upon the whole matter, these two points are clear: First, clear it is,
that all the wicked practices recited and condemned in the foregoing verses,
with all other of like quality, do proceed merely from the corruption that is
in us, from our own depraved minds and wills, without any the least cooperation
of the Holy Spirit of God therein. It cannot stand with the goodness of God to
be the Principal, and neither with his goodness nor greatness to be an
Accessory in any sinful action. He cannot be either the Author, or the Abettor
of any thing that is evil. Whosoever therefore has committed any sin, let him take
heed he do not add another and a worse to it, by charging God with it; rather
let him give God and his Spirit the glory, by taking all the blame and shame of
it to himself, and his own flesh. All sinful works, are works of the flesh.

Secondly, It is clear also, that all the holy affections and performances here
mentioned, with all other Christian virtues and graces accompanying salvation,
not here mentioned, (though wrought immediately by us, and with the free
consent of our wills) are yet the fruit of Gods Spirit working in us; that is to
say, they do not proceed Originally from any strength of nature, or any
inherent power in man's free will; nor are they acquired by the culture of
Philosophy, the advantages of Education, or any improvement whatsoever of
natural abilities by the helps of Art or Industry; but are in truth the proper
effects of that supernatural grace, which is given unto us by the good pleasure
of God the Father, merited for us by the precious blood of God the Son, and
conveyed into our hearts by the sweet and secret inspiration of God the Holy
Ghost; Love, Joy, Peace, etc. are fruits not at all of the Flesh, but merely,
and entirely of the Spirit.

All those very many passages in the new Testament, which either set forth the
unframableness of our nature, to the doing of any thing that is good, [Not that
we are sufficient of 2 Cor. 3. 5. Romans 7. 18.
our selves to think a good thought. In me, that is, in my flesh, there
dwells no good thing, and the like:] or else ascribe our best performance to
the glory of the grace of God, [Without me you can do nothing. All our
sufficiency is of God. John 15. 17. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 2. 13
Not of our selves, it is the gift of God. It is God that works in you both
the will and the deed, and the like] are so many clear confirmations of this
truth.

Upon the evidence of which truth it is, that our Mother the Church has taught
us in the Public Service, to beg at the hands of Almighty God, that he would
indue us with the grace of his Holy Spirit, to amend our lives according to his
holy Word: and again, [consonantly to the matter we are now in hand with,
almost in terminis] that he would give to all men increase of grace, to hear
meekly his Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit; as without which grace, it were not possible for us to
amend our lives, or to bring forth such fruits, according as God requires in
his holy Word.

And the Reason is clear, because, as the Tree is, such must the fruit be; Do
men look to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Matthew. 7. 16.
or can they expect from a salt Fountain, other then brackish water? certainly,
what is born of flesh, can be no better then flesh. Who can bring a clean thing
out of that which is unclean? or how can any thing that good is, proceed from a
heart, all the imaginations of the thoughts whereof, are only and continually
evil? If we would have the fruit good, reason will (and our Savior prescribes
the same Method) that order be taken first to make the Tree Matthew. 12. 23.
good.

But you will say, it is as impossible so to alter the nature of the flesh, as
to make it bring forth good Spiritual fruit; as it is to alter the nature of a
Crab or Thorn, so as to make it bring forth a pleasant Apple. Truly and so it
is: If you shall endeavor to mend the fruit, by altering the stock, you shall
find your labor altogether fruitless. A Crab will be a Crab still, when you
have done what you can; and you may as well hope to wash an Ethiopian white,
as to purge the flesh from sinful pollution.

The work therefore must be done quite another way, not by alteration, but by
addition; that is, leaving the old Principle to remain as it was, by
super-inducing (ab extra) a new Principle of a different and more kindly
quality. We see the experiment daily in the grafting of Trees. A Crab-stock,
if it have a cyon of some delicate Apple is artificially grafted in it, look
what branches are suffered to grow out of the stock it self, they will all
follow the nature of the stock; and if they bring forth any fruit at all, it
will be sour and styptick; but the fruit that grows from the graft, will be
pleasant to the taste, because it follows to the nature of the graft. We read
of (...), An engrafted word, James 1. Our carnal hearts are the old stock,
which before Jam. 1 20.
the word of God be grafted in it, cannot bring forth any Spiritual fruit
acceptable to God: but when by the powerful operation of his holy Spirit, the
word which we hear with our outward ears, is inwardly grafted therein, it then
brings forth the fruits of good living; so that all the bad fruits that
appear in our lives, come from the old stock the flesh; and if there be any
good fruit of the Spirit in us, it is from the virtue of that word of grace
that is grafted in us.

It should be our care then, since the Scriptures call so hard upon us for
fruits, [To be fruitful in good works, to bring Col. 1. 10. Mat. 3. 8, 10.
forth fruits meet for repentance, etc.] and threaten us with excision and
fire, if we do not bring forth fruit, and that good fruit too. It should be our
care (I say) to bestow as much diligence about our hearts, as good husbands do
about their fruit trees: they will not Suffer any sucker, or luxuriant branches
to grow from the stock; but as soon as they begin to appear, or at least before
they come to any bigness, cut them off and cast them away; by so doing, the
graft thrives the better, and brings forth fruit both sooner and fairer.

God has entrusted us with the custody and culture of our own hearts, as Adam
was put into the Garden, to keep it, and to dress it; and besides the charge
given us in that behalf, Genesis 2 15.
it behooves us much for our own good, to keep them with all diligence: if we
husband them well, the benefit Prove 4. 23
will be ours; he looks for no more but his Rent, (and that an easy Rent)
the glory, and the thanks; the fruits wholly accrue to us, as usu-fructuaries;
but if we be such ill husbands, so careless and improvident, as to let them
sylvescere, overgrow with wild and superfluous branches, to hinder the thriving
of the grafts, whereby they become ill-liking and unfruitful; we shall neither
answer the trust committed to us, nor be able to pay our Rent, (we shall bring
him in no glory) nor do our selves any good, but run behind hand continually,
and come to naught at last.

It will behove us therefore, if we will have our fruit in holiness, and the
end everlasting life, to look to it betimes, lest some root of bitterness
springing up, put us to more trouble Heb. 12. 15.
then we are aware of for the present, or can be well able to deal withal
afterward. The flesh will find us work enough to be sure, it is ever and anon
putting forth spurns of Avarice, Ambition, Envy, Revenge, Pride, Luxury, some
noisome lust or other: Like a rotten Dunghill, that is rank of weeds, if we
neglect them but a little, out of a thought that they can do no great harm yet,
or that we shall have time enough to snub them hereafter, we do it to our own
certain disadvantage, if not utter undoing; we shall either never be able to
overcome them, or not without very much more labor and difficulty, then we
might have done it at the first.

In the mean time, whilst these superfluous excrescencies (...), (I know not
how to call them) are suffered, they draw away the sap to their own
nourishment, and so pine and starve the grafts, that they never come to good.
(...)* says S. James: we will translate it, Wherefore Jam. 1. 21.
laying aside; perhaps it may import a little more: the whole verse is worth
the further considering, if we had time to insist upon it; it seems to allude
throughout to the lopping off all those suckers or superfluous branches that
hinder the prospering of Grafts; as if he had said, If you desire the holy word
of God, which is to be grafted in your hearts, should bring forth fruit to the
saving of your souls, suffer not these filthy and naughty superfluities of
fleshly lusts to hinder the growth thereof, but off with them, away with them;
and the sooner the better, that is, (...).

I should from this point, before I had left it, (but that I have other things
to speak to, and may not insist) have pressed two things more. First, the
necessity of our Prayers. It is true, our endeavors are necessary; God that
does our work for us, will not do it without us; but without the assistance of
his holy Spirit, all our endeavors are bootless; and we have no reason to
presume of his assistance, if we think our selves too good to ask it. We may
not think we have done all our part toward fruit-bearing, when we have planted
and watered, until we have earnestly solicited him to do his part too in
giving theincrease, and Crowning our endeavors with success.

Secondly, a duty of thankfulness; If by this good blessing upon our Prayers
and endeavors, we have been enabled to bring forth any fruit, such as he will
graciously accept, take we heed we do not withdraw the least part of the glory
of it from him to derive it upon our selves or our own endeavors: Non nobis,
Domine, non nobis: Not unto us, O Lord by no Psalm. 115. 1.
means to us but to thy Name be the glory. Enough it is for us i^ we have the
comfort inward, and shall have an immeasurable reward at the last, for the good
we have done; (either of both which, is infinitely more then we deserve) but
far be it from us to claim any share in the glory, let all that be to him
alone. Whatsoever fruit therefore we bear, or how much soever, let us not be
high minded thereupon, or take too much upon us; for we bear not the Root, but
the Rom 11. 18.
Root bears us; and when we have done our outmost endeavors, the fruit we
bear, is still the fruit of the Spirit, and not the fruit of our endeavors.

I have dwelt long upon this first difference, not so much because it was the
first (though that sometimes falls out to be the best excuse we are able to
make for such prolixities) as because it is most material, as arising from the
different nature of the things spoken of: whereas the three that follow are
rather verbal, arising but from the different manner of the Apostles
expressions in respect of the words.

The first whereof (the 2d of the whole four) is, That the evil effects
proceeding from the flesh, are called by the name of works; and the good
effects proceeding from the Spirit, are called by the name of fruits. The Quere
is, Why those and these, being both effects alike, they are not either both
alike called works, or both alike called fruits; but the one works, the other
fruits? The works of the flesh there, here the fruit of the Spirit?

For answer whereunto* I shall propose to your choice two conjectures; the one
more Theological, which is almost as new to me, as perhaps it will seem to you
(for it came not into my thoughts till I was upon it;) the other more Moral and
Popular. For the former, take it thus, Where the immediate Agent produces a
work or effect virtute propria, by his own power, and not in the virtue of a
superior Agent; both the work it self produced, and the efficacy of the
operation whereby it is produced, are to be ascribed to him alone so as it may
be said properly and precisely to be his work. But where the immediate Agent
operateth virtute aliena, in the strength and virtue of some higher Agent,
without which he were not able to produce the effect; though the work done, may
even there also be attributed (in some sort) to the inferior and subordinate
Agent, as the immediate cause; yet the efficacy whereby it was wrought cannot so
properly be imputed to him; but ought rather to be ascribed to that higher
Agent, in whose virtue he did operate.

The Application will make it somewhat plainer. In all humane actions, whether
good or bad, the will of man is the immediate Agent, so that whether we commit
a sin, or do a good work, inasmuch as it proceeds from our free wills, the
work is still our work howsoever. But herein is the difference between good and
evil actions: The Will (which is naturally in this depraved estate corrupt and
fleshly) operateth by its own power alone, for the producing of a sinful
action, without any cooperation at all (as was said already) of God or his
Holy Spirit; and therefore the sin so produced, is to be ascribed to the
fleshly Will, as to the sole and proper Cause thereof, and may therefore very
rightly be said to be the work of the flesh: But in the producing any action
that is spiritually good, the Will operateth only as a subordinate Agent to
the grace of the Holy Spirit, and in the power and virtue thereof. And
therefore, although the good work may in some sort be said to be our work,
because immediately produced by our Wills; yet it is in truth the fruit of the
Spirit, and not of our Wills, because it is wrought by the power of that, and
not by any power of our own Wills. Nevertheless, not I, but the grace of God
with me. 1 Cor. 15. 10.


If this conjecture seem but a subtilty, and satisfy not, let it go; the other
(I presume) will, being it is so plain and popular. The word fruit, most-what
relates to some labor going before. Hoc fructi ab labor pro his fero, in the
old Poet: So in the Scriptures, Nevertheless, this is the fruit of my labor.
The Husbandman that first labors, must be partaker Phil. 1. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 6.
of the fruits. Labor first, and then fruits. That which David calls the
labor of the hands, (Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands) Psalm. 128.
Solomon calls the fruit Psalm. 128. 2. Prove. 31. 31.
of the hands, (Give her of the fruit of her hands) Prove. 31.

The reason is, because no man would willingly undergo any toil or labor to no
end, he would have something or other in his eye, that might in some measure
recompense his pains; and that is called the fruit of his labor. Tully
therefore joyneth Praemium and Fructum together, as importing the same thing.
Who planteth a Vineyard, but in hope to eat of the fruit of it? Or what
Husbandman would Plow, 1 Cor, 9. 7.
and Sow, and Plant, and Prune, and Dig, and Dung, if he did not hope to find
it all answered again when he comes to Inn the fruits? Spe fructus dura
ferentes. The first question in every man's thoughts, when he is importuned to
any Hor. 2. Ep. 1.
thing of labor and business, is, Ecquid erit pretii? will it be worth my
labor? what benefit shall I reap by it? what will be the fruit of my pains?

In all deliberations, where two ways are offered to our choice, Wisdom would,
that we should first weigh as advisedly and exactly as we can, the labor, and
the fruit of the one against the other, and as we find those (rightly compared)
to be more or less, to make our resolutions accordingly. We are called on hard
on both sides; God commands us to serve him, Satan and the World solicit us
to the service of sin: Promises there are, or intimations of fruit on both
sides; Salvation to our souls on the one side, Satisfaction to our lusts on the
other. Here then is our business and our wisdom, to compare what is required,
and what is offered on both sides; to examine on the one side first, and then
on the other, whether the work exceed the fruit, or the fruit the work.

Now the Apostle, by the very choice of his words here, has (after a sort)
done the business, and determined the controversy to our hands. In the service
of sin the toil is so great, that in comparison thereof, the benefit is as
nothing; and in the service of God the benefit so great, that in comparison
thereof, the pain is as nothing. Where the flesh rules all, the work exceeds
the fruit; and therefore without ever mentioning the fruit, they are called the
works of the flesh: But where the Spirit of God rules, the fruit exceeds the
work; and therefore without ever mentioning the work, it is called the fruit of
the Spirit.

If in this passage only, this different manner of speaking had been used by
the Apostle, it might perhaps have been taken for a casual expression,
unsufficient to ground any Collection upon. But look into Ephesians. 5. and you
cannot doubt but it was done of choice, and with this very meaning; speaking
there of the duties of Holiness, even as here, without any mention of work, he
calls them by the name of fruits; (The fruit of the Spirit, is in all
goodness, and righteousness and truth, verse 9.) But by and by, verse 11.
speaking of sinful actions, he does not only call them works, but positively,
and expressly calls them fruitless; Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of Darkness: Works, but without fruit; unfruitful works of darkness.

This justifies the Collection to be evident, and natural and without
enforcement: The ways of sin are very toilsome, yet withal unfruitful; but
in all spiritual labor, there is profit; the fruit will countervail the
pains, and recompense it abundantly. We may not unfitly apply to these two his
words in the Comedy; In his fructus est, in illis Opera luditur. Terent.


The paths of sin seem indeed, at the first hand, and in the entrance, to be
very pleasant and even. The Devil, to draw men in, goes before like a
Leveller, and smootheth the way for them, but when they are in, he drives them
along, and on they must. Be the way never so dark and slippery, never so
crooked and craggy, never so intricate or perplexed, being once engaged, they
must go through it, per saxa, per ignes, stick at nothing (be it never so
contrary to the Laws of God or men, to all Natural, Civil, or Religious
Obligations; yea even to the Principles of common humanity and reason) that
Avarice, Ambition, Revenge, or any other vicious Lust puts them upon:
Ambulavimus vias difficiles, they confess it at last, when it is too late, and
befool themselves for it: We have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness
and destruction, we have gone through dangerous ways etc. Wisd. 5. They have
wearied themselves to work iniquity, Wisd. 5. 7. Jer. 9. 5. Hab. 2. 13.
says the Prophet Jeremiah. And the Prophet Habbacuk, The people labor in the
very fire. The Greek word that signifies wickedness, comes of another that
signifies labor. (...) of (...). And how often in the Scriptures do we meet
with such like Phrases asthese, to work wickedness, works of iniquity? Saint
Chrysostomes eloquence inlargeth it self, and triumphs in this Argument more
frequently, and with greater variety of invention and amplification, then in
almost any other; and he clears it often, and beyond all exception both by
Scripture, and Reason, that the life of a wicked or worldly man, is a very
drudgery, infinitely more toylsome, vexatious, and unpleasant, then a Godly
life is.

Now, if after all this drayling, the fruits would (though but in a scant
proportion) answer the pains, it were the more tolerable: but there is no such
matter; the sinner has but his Labor for his Pains. Nay, I may say, it were
happy for him, if he had but his Labor for his Pains, and that there were not
a worse matter yet behind. The best they can hope in the mean time, is nothing
but vanity, and vanity is nothing. Man walks in a vain shadow, and
disquieteth himself in vain, says David. The Psalm. 39. 6
work disquietness, the fruit vanity. The people labor in the very fire, you
heard but now from the Prophet, his very next words are, They weary themselves
for very vanity. Saint Peter therefore Hab. 2. 13.
calls the conversation of a sinner a vain conversation. And S. 1 Pet. 1. 18
Paul puts the question home to their consciences after a sort, challenging
them to answer directly to it, if they could, What Romans 6. 21.
fruit had ye then of those things? etc. Romans 6.

No great reason then, if we well consider it, why we should envy sinners,
though they prosper never so much in wicked designs, and seem to reap the
fruit of their labors in the success of their affairs. All temporal advantages
of Wealth, Honor, Power, Pleasure, and the like, which are the utmost fruit
that a sinner can fancy to himself of all his labors, have but the show and
semblance, not the truth and reality of fruit; both because in the mean time
they give not that satisfaction in the enjoyment, which was desired and
expected from them in the pursuit, (as they write of the Apples of Sodom, that
look very fair and full, and tempt the eye; but as soon as touched, Fathiscunt
in vagum Solinus.
pulverem, like a Fussbal, resolve all into dust and smoke:) as also, because
they have a very ill farewell with them at the last; Honey in the mouth perhaps,
and that but perhaps neither; but Gall certainly in the stomach, if not rather
rank Poison. Know they not it will be bitterness in the end? Shame, Sorrow, and
bitter repentance? and that is the best end imaginable of such bad beginnings:
but without repentance, eternal death and damnation not to be avoided: For the
end of those things (abused and continued in) is death.

Let us not therefore either envy their prosperity, or yet follow their
example: Wherefore should we lay out our money for that which is not bread, or
our labor for that which satisfies not? when Isa. 55. 1.
we drive a far easier trade, with far more profit another way; have less toil,
and yet reap more fruit; and that is, by walking in the holy ways of God, and
taking upon us the yoke of Christ, that (we are told) is an easy yoke, at
least in comparison of the other, (that of Satan) and a light burden. And we
have no reason to Mat. 11. 30
disbelieve it, Truth it self having told us so; especially considering that he
puts under the shoulder himself also, and by helping to bear with us,
bears off, in a manner, the whole weight from us, leaving no more for us to
carry, then by the strength he gives us he knows we are well able to bear,
if we will but put to our good wills, and use that strength. Nay, do but compare
the works themselves, and you must conclude, that his Commandments are more
equitable, and less grievous then are the imperious commands of our own raging
and exorbitant lusts. Will not any reasonable man, upon the hearing of the
names of the things only, 1 John 5. 3.
presently yield, that Love, and Joy, and Peace, and Gentleness, (for example
which are fruits of the Spirit, are far more lovely and desirable, more easy
and delightful, fuller of sweetness and calmness, less toylsom and vexatious,
then are Hatreds, and Debates, and Emulations, and Seditions, and Murders, and
those other works of the flesh?

Now, if (as the task is easier, so the benefit be greater) what can excuse our
folly, if we do not give up our selves to be ordered by the guidance of the
Spirit in every thing, rather then yield to satisfy the lusts of the flesh in
any thing? And the benefit is greater: A sure reward (says Solomon.) For God
is not unrighteous to forget your labor of faith and love. A great reward,
says David; Prove. 11. 8. Heb. 6* 10. Psalm. 19. 11
and that many times for a very little work done: the giving of a Cup of cold
Water to refresh a thirsty soul, shall not want its reward. It is our Apostles
elsewhere, that we should always abound Mat. 10 42 1 Cor. 15. ult.
in the work of the Lord, and that upon this very ground, forasmuch as you
know, (says he) that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. If we labor in
his work, we shall find the fruit of it in time.

Only let us be content to stay the time, and not be thrusting in the Sickle,
before the Corn be half ripe. The Husbandman, when he has done his work in
earing and sowing, does not look to receive the precious fruits of the earth
into his Garners again the next day, or the next month; but he has long
patience for it, Jam. 5 7.
and whether it chance to be an early Harvest, or a late Harvest, he waits
still, and takes the season as it falls: Even so have we need of Patience,
that after we have done the will of God, and suffered according to the will of
God, we may receive the promised reward; Heb. 10. 36 Gal. 6. 9. Heb. 10. 37.
for in due time we shall reap, if we faint not. The final reward is sure,
veniens veniet, it will come at last, and not fail us; and it is so great
withal (Copiosa nimis) that when it comes, it will abundantly recompense all
our Work yea and our Patience too.

Nay, let me say, if that reward were not, nor any other world to come, yet the
fruits we reap in the mean time, even in this world, from a godly life, is
incomparably greater then any that the works of the flesh can yield us; even in
the judgment of Heathen men, Virtue ever carries its reward with it, as being
Bonum propter se expetendum, a thing to be desired and embraced for its own
worth, without respect to any further reward: and certainly, the evenness of
the mind, and vacuity from those secret lashes, those horrors and fears that
haunt a guilty conscience, and the sweet comfort and complacency that a
righteous soul finds in the sincere performance of his bounden duty to God
and man, in eschuing evil and doing good, is a fruit infinitely more valuable
then all the pleasures and sensualities of a wicked life. How happy then is he
that truly serves God; who both has his Fruit in holiness onward (that is,
the hundred, fold Mark Romans 6. 22 Mar. 10. 30
10.)* and shall in the end, have everlasting life to boot.

There are of the four Differences proposed, two more yet behind, which I must
dispatch in few words. The 3d is, That the works of the flesh, are spoken of as
many, (...), works, in the Plural; but the fruit of the Spirit is spoken of as
one, (...), Fruit, in the singular; many works, but one fruit.

There is such a connection of Virtues and Graces, that albeit they differ in
their Objects and natures, yet they are inseparable in the Subject. As when
many links make up one chain, pull one, and pull all: So he that has any one
Spiritual Grace in any degree of truth and eminency, cannot be utterly
destitute of any other. But as for sin and Vices, it is not so with them; they
are not only distinct in their kinds, natures, and definitions (for so are
Virtues too) but they may also be divided from one another, and parted asunder
in respect of the Subject wherein they are. We are told Romans 2. and if we were
not told it, we could not but see reason enough otherwise to believe it; that a
man may hate Idolatry, a work of the flesh, and yet love Sacrilege Romans 2. 22
well enough, a work of the flesh too. There is no necessity that a swearer
should be an Adulterer, or an Adulterer a slanderer, or a slanderer an
oppessor, or an oppressor a drunkard, or a drunkard a seditious person, and so
of many other.

The reason of the difference is, because all spiritual graces look one way,
they all run to the same indivisible point, wherein they concenter; to wit,
Almighty God, who is Bonum Incommunicabile, unchangeable and one: even as all
moral virtues concenter in the same common point of Right Reason: But sins
which turn from God to follow the Creature, and vices which are so many
deviations from the rule of Right Reason, do not only necessarily run toward
the same point, but may have their several tendencies different one from
another. Because though God be one, yet the creatures are manifold; and
although the strait way from one place to another can be but one, yet there may
be many crooked turnings, bypath, and deviations. Even as Truth is but one
and certain, but Errors are manifold and endless.

The Spirit of God, whose fruits these are, is first a renewing Spirit: It
creates a new heart in a man, whereby he becomes a kind of new creature; it
disposes him to obedience: Psalm. 51. 10
And true obedience is copulative; it submits to the Commanders will
entirely, it does not pick and choose. The Spirit of God Gal. 6. 15.
is (secondly) a holy Spirit, (The holy Spirit of Discipline:) And such a holy
Spirit will not brook to dwell in a soul that is subject to Wisd. 1. 4, 5.
sin, it will endure no such inmate: they can no more dwell together, then light
can fellow with darkness; but where any grace is wanting, there must needs be
the contrary sin to fill up the vacuity: And therefore, where that holy Spirit
is, there cannot be a total defect of any holy grace. The spirit of God is also
a loving Spirit, and sheddeth abroad the love of God in every heart it takes
possession of; and love is so comprehensive a grace, that it includes all the
rest, and so is, in effect, the fulfulling of the whole Romans 13. 10.
Law. There is a thread of love that runs through all the particular duties
and offices of Christian life, and stringeth them like so many rich Pearls
into one chain. See 1 Cor. 13. throughout.

A Confideration not unuseful to quicken our care for the subduing of every
sinful lust, and our endeavor to have every grace of the Spirit habituated in
us; knowing that so long as we allow our selves in any one sin, suffer any one
lust of the flesh to remain in us unsubdued (at least in respect of desire and
endeavor) there cannot be any one true grace of God in us. There are certain
common graces of Illumination, which are the effects also of Gods Spirit, and
are therefore called (...), spiritual gifts; and these indeed 1 Cor. 12. 1. and
14. 1.
are given by dole, (alius sic, alius vero sic) knowledge to one, to another
tongues, to another healings, miracles, etc. All by the same spirit,
manifesting himself to sundry persons in sundry kinds, and measures, and
dividing to every one severally as he will; but it is 1 Cor. 12. 8.-10.
nothing so in the special graces of Sanctification; there is no distribution
or division here; either all or none. He that certainly wants any one (at
least in the desire and endeavor) may justly suspect, that all those he
seems to have, are but so many counterfeits; all this variety of graces
makes but one fruit.

The Last difference is, that the works of the flesh are expressly said to be
manifest, ver. 19. but no such thing affirmed of the fruit of the Spirit. The
most probable reasons of which difference are to my seeming, one of these two
following; First, the commonness and frequency of those above these, every
where abroad in the world. The works of the flesh, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Wantonness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatreds, Emulation, Debate,
Wrath, Strifes, Seditions, Herefies, Envying, Murders, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
and such like, (I name them, because the bare recital of them will save me the
labor of further proof) do so abound in all places, that you can scarce look
beside them; turn your eyes which way you will, you shall see cursed examples
of some or other of these every day, and in every street and corner. Alas, the
works of the flesh are but too manifest.

But the fruits of the spirit are not so, Love, Peace, Gentleness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance, and the rest: These are very thin grown in the world,
they are rarities, not every where to be met withal; insomuch as David
complaingly cries out, there is not one godly man left, Psalm. 12. and Psalm.
14. There is none that does good, no not one: And the Prophet Jeremiah, when he
had run to and fro in the streets of Jerusalem for the purpose to find out Jer.
51 etc
a man that executed Judgment, and sought after truth; when he had employed
his legs, and his eyes, and his tongue in the search, he could not yet find the
man he looked for. Hippes and Haws grow in every hedge, when choicer fruits are
but in some few gardens: And every soil almost yields stones and rubbish; but
gold and precious stones are found in very few places.

Secondly, the works of the flesh may be said to be manifest, and the fruits of
the Spirit not so, with respect to our judgments of them, and the easiness of
desiring the one more then the other. The works of the flesh are so manifestly
evil, that no man of common sense can lightly be mistaken in them. Murder,
sedition, drunkenness, adultery; it is not possible any man should be of such
gross understanding, as to imagine they should be the fruits of Gods holy
Spirit; they are undoubtedly and manifestly to every man's apprehension, the
works of the flesh; but as for the fruits of the Spirit, they are not so
manifest, but that a man who has not his senses very well exercised to the
discerning of good and evil, may be easily deceived therein. Hypocrisy is spun
oftentimes of a very fine thread, and the heart of man abounding with so much
hypocrisy as it does, and so much selflove, and uncharitableness withal, is the
most deceitful thing (yea and the most deceivable too, actively and passively
both) of any thing in the world. There are on the Jer. ^7. 9.
one side so many Mock-graces and specious counterfeits, that carry a semblance
of spiritual fruit, but are not the things they seem to be. And on the other
side, inordinate love of our selves partly, and partly want of Charity toward
our brethren, have so disposed us to a capacity of being deceived, that it is
not a wonder, if in passing our judgments (especially where our selves are
concerned) we be very much and very often mistaken. It might rather be a wonder
if we should not be sometimes mistaken.

As most errors claim to be a little a kin to some truths, so most vices
challenge a kind of Affinity to some virtue. Not so much from any proper
intrinsecall true resemblance they have with such virtues, as by reason of the
common opposition they both have to one and the same contrary vice. As
Prodigality has some overly likeness with liberality, and so may hap to be
mistaken for it; for no other cause but this only, that they are both contrary
to covetuousnesse, (...), says Aristotle truly, fallacy and deception for the
most part arise from the appearance of some likeness or similitude; when
things that are like, but not the same, are taken to be the same, because they
are like. They that have given us marks of sincerity for the trial of our
graces, have not been able to give us any certain rules or infalliable
Characters, whereby to try the sincerity of those marks; so as to remove all
doubting and possibility of erring.

Whence I suppose, I may safely infer, that the certainty of a man's present
standing in grace, but much more then of his eternal future Salvation
(although I doubt not, but by the mercy of God, it may be attainable in this
life, and that without extraordinary Revelation, in such a measure as may
sustain the soul of an honest Christian with comfort) is not yet either so
absolutely necessary, nor so void of fears and doubtings, as some perhaps have
imagined.

Not so necessary, but that a man may be saved without it. Many a good soul no
doubt, there is in the world, that out of the experience of the falsenesse of
his own heart, and the fear of selfdeceit, and the sense of his own
unworthiness could never yet attain to be so well persuaded of the sincerity
of his own repentance, Faith and Obedience, as to think that God would approve
of it and accept it. The censure were very hard, and a great violation it would
be of charity, I am sure, and I think of truth also, to pronounce such a man
to be out of the state of Salvation, or to call such his dis-perswasion by the
name of despair, and under that name to condemn it. There is a common, but a
great mistake in this matter: Despair is quite another manner of thing then
many take it for. When a man thinks himself so incapable of Gods pardon, that
he grows thereupon regardlesse of all duties, and neither cares what he does,
nor what shall become of him; when he is once come to this resolution, over
shoos, over boots, I know God will never forgive me, and therefore I will never
trouble my self to seek his favor in vain; this is to run a desperate course
indeed, this is properly the sin of despair. But when the fear that God has
not yet pardoned him, prompteth him to better resolutions, and exciteth him to
a greater care of repentance, and newness of life, and makes him more
diligent in the performance of all holy duties, that so he may be more capable
of pardon: It is so far from being any way prejudicial to his eternal
salvation, that it is in the readiest way to secure it.

But where the greatest certainty is, that can be attained to in this life by
ordinary means, it is not ordinarily (unless perhaps to some few persons at the
very hour of death) so perfect as to exclude all doubtings. The fruits of the
Spirit, where they are true and sincere, being but imperfect in this life, and
the truth and sincerity of them being not always so manifest, but that a man
may sometimes be deceived in his judgment concerning the same; it can hardly
be, what between the one and the other, (the imperfection of the thing, and the
difficulty of judging) but that the Assurance, which is wholly grounded
thereupon, and can therefore have no more strength then they can give it, must
be subject to fears, and jealousies, and doubtings.

I speak not this to shake any man's comfort (God forbid,) but to stir up every
man's care to abound and increase so much the more in all godliness, and in the
fruits of the Spirit; giving all 2 Pet. 1. 5.
diligence, by walking in the Spirit, and subduing the lusts of the flesh, to
make his calling and election sure: Sure in it self, that he fail not of
salvation in the end; and sure to him also, as far as he can, that his comfort
may be the greater and sounder in the mean time.

Now the God of all grace and glory, send the Spirit of his Son plentifully
into our hearts, that we may abound in the fruits of godly living, to the
praise of his grace, our present comfort in this life, and the eternal
salvation of our souls in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
FINIS.

