A RESOLUTION OF CONSCIENCE, in Answer to Mr Ascham's BOOK.
UPon perusal of Mr Ascham's Book you left with me, I find not my self in my
understanding thereby convinced of the Necessity or Lawfulness of Conforming
unto, or Complying with an unjust prevailing Power, further then I was before
persuaded, it might be Lawful or Necessary so to do: viz. As I paying Taxes,
and Submitting to some other things (in themselves not unlawful) by

(...) 3. Without any explicit or implicit Acknowledgment of the Justice and
Legalitie of their Power: I may submit to the (...), (to the Force) but not
acknowledge the (...), (the Authority) or by any my Voluntary Act give
strength, assistance, or countenance thereunto.

4. Without any prejudice unto the claim of the Oppressed Party that has a
right, Title; or casting my self into an Incapacitie of lending him my due and
bounden Assistance, if, in time to com, it may be useful to him toward the
Recoverie of his Right.

5. Where I may reasonably, and Bona Fide presume, the Oppressed Power, (to
whom my Obedience is justly due) if he perfectly knew the present Condition I
am in, together with the Exigence and Necessity of the present Case, and all
of Circumstances thereof, would give his willing Consent to such my Conformity
and Compliance.

So that, upon the whole matter and in short, I conceiv I may so far submit
unto the Impositions, or complie with the Persons of a prevailing usurped
Power, unjustly commanding things not in themselves unlawful; or make use of
their Power to protect one from others Injuries. As I may submit unto, complie
with, or make use of an High-waie Thief, or Robber, when I am fallen into his
hands, and lie at his Mercy.

As for Mr Ascham's Discourse, though it be handsomely framed, yet all the
Strength of it (to my seeming) lie's upon two Principles, which (if he would
speak out) would be in plain English these:

1. That Self-preservation is the first and chiefest Obligation in the World,
to which all other Bonds and Relations (at least between Man and Man) must give
place.

2. That no Oath, at least no imposed Oath, at what Terms soever expressed,
binde's the Taker further then he intended to bind himself thereby; and, it
is presumed, that no man intended to bind himself to the prejudice of his own
safety.

Two dangerous and desperate Principles, which evidently tend 1 to the taking
away of all Christian Fortitude and Suffering in a Righteous Cause: 2 to the
Encouraging of daring and ambitious Spirits to attempt continual Innovations,
with this Confidence, that if they can by any ways (how unjust soever)
possess themselves of the Supreme Power, they ought to be submitted unto: 3 to
the Obstructing unto the Oppressed Party all possible ways and means, without
a Miracle, of ever recovering that just Right, of which he shall have been
unjustly dispossessed: And (to omit further instancing) 4 to the bringing in of
Atheism, with the Contempt of God and all Religion, whilst every man, by
making his own Preservation the Measure of all his Duties and Actions, makes
himself thereby his own Idol.

FINIS.

