A VINDICATION from Colonel SANDS: Being the true Copy of a Letter sent from
Colonel SANDS to His Excellence the Earl of ESEEX from Worcester the 8. of
October.

Wherein Colonel SANDS does declare his Resolution to maintain the Cause he
has begun, with the hazard of his Life and Fortunes.

Also manifesting to the world, that those reports of his being slain, with
the contents of the Lord Faulklands Letter, to be false and scandalous.

With his humble desire to his Excellence, that the Coppie of his Resolution
might be presented to the Parliament, that they might be satisfied concerning
his fidelity.

Read in the audience of both Houses of Parliament, and by them approved of.

Whereunto is annexed seven Articles of impeachment of high Treason, Exhibited
in Parliament, against Sir Edward Heron, High Sheriff of the County of
Lincoln.

London, Printed for T. Fawcet, October. 14. 1642.

A VINDICATION FROM Collonell Sands.
TUesday the 7.th day of this instant October, was read in the House of
Commons, the Coppie of a Letter, directed from Col^onell Sands to his
Excellency the Lord General, who is now resident with his Army near
Shrewsbury, the effect whereof is as follows.

By which is made mainfest, the most scandalous Aspersion raised upon the said
Collonell, by the ill-affected party, of his recantation and sorrow before his
death (who is yet living) for taking up Arms on the Parliaments side against
the King.

THE LETTER.
SIR,
MAy it please Your Excellency to pardon my presumption in writing these few
lines of the condition I am in, and how J have continued since your
Excellencies departure from Worcester: The wounds J received are dangerous, but
the Chyrurgions put me in comfort, not mortal, but within some time of rest; J
may again recover my strength, I have been in much anguish and pain, but am
of the mending hand, thanks be to God. (Sir) J am emboldened to inform your
Excellency of my resolution, (if it please God to restore me to my former
Health) to do the King my Liege Lord and Sovereign, and his great Council of
Parliament, representing the whole State of the Kingdom, the best service J
shall be able to perform, to the loss of my Life, or that J see peace in this
our Israel settled, this expression of my Resolution, is to vindicate a most
scandalous aspersion of late raised and cast upon me, by the wicked and envious
party, that J should be dead, and before my death did much repent me of taking
up Arms against his Majesty, on the Parliaments side, which if I should have
done directly against his Majesty, it would repent me, but in that it was by
order from both Houses, and for the preservation of the Peace, Religion and
Laws of this Kingdom, and of his Majesty's own Royal person, with his
Kingly Of spring, J never had a thought of changing my resolution to persist in
maintenance of that cause your Excellency has undertaken, to the loss of Life
and fortunes, (Sir) J most humbly desire that this my Resolution may be
presented to the Parliament, that they having good testimony of my fidelity
toward them, may not be drawn to conceive the contrary of me and my actions,
and not believe the false and scandalous aspersions raised against me.

Your Excellencies in (...) SANDS.


Articles exhibited in Parliament, against Sir Edward Heron, High Sheriff of
the County of Lincoln.
AFter the reading of this Letter in the Lords house, it was sent down to the
Commons and in their House read, and after some debate of the same, the House
fell into consideration of the many abuses of Printing scandalous and libellous
Pamphlets against many Gentlemen of good worth employed by the Parliament in
the service of the State, to the disheartning and discouraging of them and
other well-affected to proceed in preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom,
and procuring the punishment of Delinquents. Now many Pamphlets are and have
been printed against the Proceedings of Parliament, as a Paper entitled The
Kings vindication, etc.and against the proceedings of our Army, as the Paper
entitled A Letter from the Lord Faulk land of the Fight at Worcester, and many
other of the like nature, and after the House had debated thereupon, they
appointed a Committee to sit every afternoon, to receive information against
the Authors of such Pamphlets, and the Printers and sellers thereof, and to
report the sense of them to the House, that they may receive condign
punishment according to their deserts.

Then the Commit appointed for the drawing up the charge of Treason against
Sir Edward Heron, high Sheriff of Lincoln, Presented the same to the House,
containing these Articles.

1. That the said Sir Edward Heron, upon three several summons of both Houses
of Parliament, refused to make his appearance before them, but in a slight and
scornful manner returned answer; he had a countermand from his Majesty, and
could not obey the Orders of the House. 2. That in a traitorous manner the said
Sir Edward Heron procured many of the Gentry of that County to subscribe to a
seaitious and scandalous Petition, by his direction framed against the
proceedings of Parliament, in defense of his Majesty's proceedings, and sent
the same by his man to the Parliament. 3. That being sent for by Messengers
from the House of Commons as a Delinquent, to answer the framing of t^^ said
Petition to the House, he refused not only so t^^^, but Apprehended and
arrested the Messengers (...) committed them to Prison. 4. That in a traiterous
and Rebellious manner he has raised about one hundred men of the Inhabitants
of that Country, and actually leavied war upon the Kings good subjects
apprehending, fining, and Imprisoning all such as he could, which endeavored
to oppose his traiterous actions and d^signes. 5. That being commanded by a
Warrant from the Lord and Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Lincoln, to lay
down his Arms and make his Appearance before them, and answer his Contempt in
not obeying the summons of the House, he returned a slight answer and retired
with his Company to his house, where he fortified himself with Arms and
Ammunition, and stood out against the Parliament. 6. That he has bought of
Recusants, and ill-affected persons of that County, Armor, and privately
convaid to his House there Arms of professed Papists, because they should not
be disarmed, fostering and maintaining Priests and Papists in his house. 7.
That he procured a Cart-load of Arms more to be brought to his house on
Tuesday the fourth of this instant Month, and the same being seyzed upon by
the Parliaments Forces, he in a traiterous manner, with about fifty persons
issued out of his house armed, and assaulted those that had seyzed the said
Armor, and being demanded to yield himself, and go with them to the
Parliament, he refused and stood upon his guard till he was taken by force, and
brough to the Parliament.
These Articles being read in the House of Commons, and some debate upon the
same, they were appointed to be read again the next morning the second time.

FINIS.

