REASONS Of the present judgment of the University of OXFORD, CONCERNING The
Solemn League and Covenant. The Negative Oath. The Ordinances concerning
Discipline and Worship.
Approved by general consent in a full Convocation, 1. Jun. 1647. AND
Presented to Consideration.

ACADEMIA. OXONIENSIS.



Printed in the Year, 1647.

A Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation, and defense of Religion, the
honor and happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Jreland.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty,
Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms wherein every ones private condition is
included, and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, Conspiracies,
Attempts, and practices of the Enemies of God against the true Religion, and
Professors thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms, ever
since the Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power, and
presumption are of late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the
deplorable estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate
of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church
and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public Testimonies; We have now at
last, (after other means of supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and
Sufferings) for the preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter
ruin and destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms
in former times, and the Example of Gods People in other Nations; after mature
deliberation resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League
and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself with
our hands lifted up to the most High God, do swear:

I.
THat we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies; The Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our posterity after us may as Brethren live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II.
That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III.
We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness:

IIII.
We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one
of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both
Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall
judge convenient.

V.
And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both Parliaments, we
shall each one of us, according to our place and interest endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all posterity; And that
Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
the precedent Articles.

VI.
We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant* in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality i^ this
caus^, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms and
the honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and
constantly continue therei^, against all opposition and promote the same
according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal* and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in
the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned purpose,
desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to
amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian tyranny; to join in the same, or like Association
and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

The Negative Oath.
I A. B. Do swear from my heart, that J will not directly, nor indirectly,
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War* or in this Cause,
against the Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the two
Houses of Parliament, in this Cause or War: And J do likewise swear, that
my coming and submitting my self under the Power and Protection of the
Parliament, is without any manner of Design whatsoever, to the prejudice of
the proceedings of this present Parliament, and without the direction, privity,
or advice of the King, or any of his Council, or Officers, other then what J
have now made known. So help me God, and the contents of this Book.

Reasons why the University of Oxford cannot submit to the Covenant, the
Negative Oath, the Ordinance concerning Discipline and Directory mentioned in
the late Ordinance of Parliament for the Visitation of that place.
WHereas by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for
the Visitation and Reformation of the University of Oxford lately published,
power is given to certain persons therein named as Visitors, to enquire
concerning those of the said University that neglect to take the Solemn League
and Covenant, and the Negative Oath being tendered unto them, and likewise
concerning those that oppose the execution of the Ordinances of Parliament
concerning the Discipline and Directory, or shall not promote or cause the same
to be put in execution according to their several places and callings, We the
Masters, Scholars, and other Officers and Members of the said University, not
to judge the Consciences of others, but to clear our selves before God and the
world from all suspicion of Obstinacy, whilst we discharge our own, present to
consideration the true reasons of our present judgment concerning the said
Covenant, Oath, and Ordinances: Expecting so much Justice, and hoping for so
much Charity, as either not to be pressed to conform to what is required in
any the premises, further then our present judgments will warrant us; or not
condemned for the refusing so to do, without clear and real satisfaction
given to our just scruples.

. I. Of the Pr^fac^ to the Coven^^t.
THe Exceptions against the Introductory Preface to the Covenant although we
insist not much upon, because it may be said to be no part of the Covenant: yet
among the things therein contained, the acknowledgment whereof is implicitly
required of every Covenanter,

1. We are not able to say, that the rage, power, and presumption of the
enemies of God (in the sense there intended) is at this time increased.

2. Nor can truly affirm that we had used, or given consent to any
Supplication or Remonstrance to the purposes therein expressed.

3. Nor do conceive the entering into such a mutual League and Covenant to be
a lawful, proper and probable means to preserve our selves and our Religion
from ruin and destruction.

4. Nor can believe the same to be according to the commendable practice of
these Kingdoms, or the example of Gods people in other Nations. When we find
not the least foot-step in our Histories of a sworn Covenant ever entered into
by the people of this Kingdom upon any occasion whatsoever; nor can readily
remember any commendable example of the like done in any other Nation: but are
rather told by the defenders of this Covenant, that Such an Oath, as for
Matter, Persons, and other Circumstances, the like has not been in any Age or
Oath we read of in sacred or humane stories. M. Nigh, Covenant with Narrative,
page 12.
the world never saw the like before.

. II. Of the Covenant in gross.


1. Such imposition (to our seeming) being repugnant to the nature of a
Covenant: which being a Contract implies a Pactum est duorum pluri^mv^ in idem
placitu^ consensus. L. 1. ff. de Pactis.
voluntary mutual consent of the Contractors; whereunto men are to be induced
by persuasions, not compelled by power. In so much that the very words of this
Covenant in the Preface, conclusion, and whole frame thereof run in such a
form throughout, as import a consent rather grounded upon prudentiall motives,
then extorted by Rigor.

2. Without betraying the Liberty, which by our protestation we are bound, and
in the third Article of this Covenant must swear, with our lives and fortunes
to preserve. To which Liberty the imposition of a new Oath, other then is
established by Act of Parliament, is expressed in the Whereas many of them have
had an oath administered unto them not warrantable by the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, They do humbly pray that no man hereafter be compelled to take
such an oath -- All which they most humbly pray -- as their rights and
liberties according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. Petit. of Right,
3. Carol.
Petition of Right, and by the Lords and Commons in their It is declared 16
Jan. 1642. That the King cannot compel men to be sworn without an act of
Parliament. Exact Collect. page 859, 860.
Declarations acknowledged to be contrary.

3. Without acknowledging in the Imposers, a greater Power then, for ought that
appears to us, has been in former time challenged; Or can consist with our
former Protestation (if we rightly understand it) in sundry the most material
branches thereof.

Neither, secondly, are we satisfied; although the Covenant should not be
imposed upon us at all, but only recommended to

1. How we should in wisdom and duty (being Subjects) of our own accord and
free will enter into a Covenant, wherein He, whose Subjects we are, is in any
wise concerned, without his consent, either expressed or reasonably presumed.
It being in his power (as we conceive) by the equity of the Law, Numb. 30. to
annull and make void the same at his pleasure.

2. How we can (now that His Majesty has by His public Proclam. of 9. October.
19. Car.
Interdict sufficiently made known His pleasure in that behalf) enter into a
Covenant, the taking whereof he has expressly forbidden; without forfeiting
that Obedience, which (as we are persuaded) by our natural Allegiance and
former Oaths we owe unto all such His Majesty's Commands, as are not in our
apprehensions repugnant to the will of God, or the positive Laws of this
Kingdom.

III. Of the first Article of the Covenant.
WHerein, first, we are not satisfied, how we can with judgment swear to
endeavor to preserve the Religion of another Kingdom;

1. Whereof, as it does not concern us to have very much, so we profess to
have very little understanding.

2. Which (so far as the occurrents of these unhappy times have brought it to
our knowledge, and we are able to judge) is in three of the four specified
particulars, viz. Worship, Discipline, and Government, much worse; and in the
fourth (that of Doctrine) not at all better then our own; which we are in the
next passage of the Article required to reform.

3. Wherein if hereafter we shall find any thing (as upon farther understanding
thereof it is not impossible we may) that may seem to us favoring of Popery,
Superstition, Heresy, or Schism, or contrary to sound doctrine, or the power
of godliness; we shall be bound by the next Article to endeavor the
extirpation, after we have bound our selves by this first Article to the
preservation thereof.

4. Wherein we already find some things (to our thinking) (viz.) In accounting
Bishops Antichristian, and indifferent Ceremonies unlawful.
so far tending toward (a) Superstition and viz. In making their discipline
and government a mark of the true Church, and the setting up thereof the
erecting of the throne of Christ.
Schism, that it seems to us more reasonable that we should call upon them
to reform the same, then that they should call upon us to preserve it.

Secondly, we are not satisfied in the next branch, concerning the Reformation
of Religion in our own Kingdom, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government; How we can swear to endeavor the same, (which without making a
change therein cannot be done,)

1. Without manifest scandal to the Papist and Separatist,

1. By yielding the cause, which our godly Bishops and Martyrs, and all our
learned Divines ever since the Reformation have both by their writings and
sufferings maintained; who have justified, against them both, the Religion
established in the Church of England to be agreeable to the Word of God.

2. By justifying the Papists in the reproaches and scorn by them cast upon
our Religion, whose usual objection it has been and is, that we know not what
our Religion is; that since we left them, we cannot tell where to stay; and
that our Religion is a Let us not be blamed if we call it Parliament Religion,
Parliament Gospel, Parliament Faith. Harding confut. of Apology, part 6. Chap.
2.
Parliamentary Religion.

3. By a tacit acknowledgement that there is something both in the doctrine
and worship, whereunto their conformity has been required, not agreeable to
the Word of God; and consequently justifying them both, the one in his
Recusancy, the other in his Separation.

4. By an implied Confession, that the Laws formerly made against Papists in
this Kingdom, and all punishments by virtue thereof inflicted upon them, were
unjust; in punishing them for refusing to join with us in that form of
Worship, which our selves (as well as they) do not approve of.

2. Without manifest wrong unto our selves, our Consciences, Reputation and
Estates; in bearing false witness against our selves, and sundry other ways:
by swearing to endeavor to reform that, as corrupt and vicious*

1. Which we have formerly by our Personal Subscriptions approved, as
agreeable to Gods Word: and have not been since either condemned by our own
hearts for so doing* or convinced in our judgments by any of our Brethren that
therein we did amiss.

2. Which in our Consciences we are persuaded* not to be in any of the four
specified particulars (as it stands by Law established) much less in the
whole four, against the Word of God.

3. Which we verily believe (and, as we think upon good grounds) to be in
sundry respects much better, and more agreeable to the Word of God, and the
practice of the Catholic Church, then that which we should by the former
words of this Article swear to preserve.

4. Whereunto the Stat. 13. Eliz. 12.
Laws yet in force require of all such Clerks as shall be admitted to any
Benefi^e, the signification of their hearty assent, to be attested openly in
the time of Divine Service before the whole congregation there present, within
a limited time, and that under pain (upon default made) of the loss of every
such Benefice.

3. Without manifest danger of Perjury: This branch of the Article (to our best
understandings) seeming directly contrary

1. To our former solemn Protestation, which we have bound our selves neither
for hope, fear, or other respect ever to relinquish. Wherein the Doctrine
which we have vowed to maintain, by the name of the true Protestant Religion
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, we take to be the ^ame
which now we are required to endeavor to reform and alter.

2. To the Oath of Supremacy, by us also taken, according to the Laws of the
Realm, and the Statutes of our University in that behalf. Wherein having
first testified and declared in our Consciences, that the Kings Highness is
the only supreme Governor of this Realm, we do after swear to our power to
assist and d^fend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authorities
granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, His Heirs, and Successors, or
united and annexed to the Imperia^^ Crow^^ of this Realm^. One of the which
Privileges and Preheminences, by an express Statute so annexed, and that even,
in termi^^, in the selfsame words in a manner with those used in the Oath, is
the whole power of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, for the
correction and reformation of all manner of errors and abuses in matters
Ecclesiastical: as by the Such jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities and
preheminences spiritual and ecclesiastical, as by any, etc. for the
Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for reformation, order
and correction of the same, and of all manner errors, heresies, schisms,
abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities, shall for ever by authority of this
present Parliament be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.
An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction, etc. 1 Elizab. 1.
words of the said Statute more at large appears. The Oath affording the
Proposition, and the Statute the Assumption, we find no way how to avoid the
Conclusion.

. IV. Of the Second Article of the Covenant.
FIrst, it cannot but affect us with some grief and Amazement,

1. Endeavored to be extirpated; without any reason offered to our
understandings, for which it should be thought necessary, or but so much as
expedient so to do. But also

2. Ranked with Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism and Profaneness; which
we unfainedly profess our selves to detest as much as any others whatsoever.

3. And that with some intimation also, as if that Government were some way or
other so contrary to sound doctrine, or the power of godliness, that whosoever
should not endeavor the extirpation thereof must of necesssity partake in
other men's sins, which we cannot yet be persuaded to believe.

4. And we desire it may be considered, in case a Covenant of like form should
be tendered to the Citizens of London, wherein they should be required to
swear, they would sincerely, really and constantly without respect of persons,
endeavor the extirpation of Treason, the City Government (by a Lord Major,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, Common Counsel and other officers depending thereon)
Murder, Adultery, Theft, Cosenage, and whatsoever shall be, -- etc. lest they
should partake in other men's sins; whether such a tendry could be looked upon
by any Citizen that had the least spirit of freedom in him as an act of
Justice, Meekness and Reason?

respect of the thing it self. Concerning which government we think we have
reason to believe,

1. That it is (if not Jure divino in the strictest sense, that is to say,
expressly commanded by God in his Word, yet) of Apostolical *institution,
that is to say, was established in the Churches by the Apostles, according to
the mind and after the example of their Master Jesus Christ, and that by virtue
of their ordinary power and authority derived from him, as deputed by him
Governors of his Church.

2. Or at least, that Episcopal Aristocracy has a fairer pretension, and may
lay a juster title and claim to a Divine institution then any of the other
forms of Church Government can do; all which yet do pretend thereunto, viz.
that of the Papal Monarchy, that of the Presbyterian Democracy, and that of
the Independents by Particular Congregations, or Gathered Churches.

2. But we are assured by the undoubted testimony of Ancient Records and later
Histories, that this form of Government has been continued with such an
universal, uninterrupted, unquestioned succession in all the Churches of God,
and in all Kingdoms that have been called Christian throughout the whole
world for fifteen hundred years together; that there never was in all that time
any considerable opposition made there against. That of Aerius was the
greatest, wherein yet there was little of consideration, beside these two
things: that it grew at the first but out of discontent; and gained him at the
last but the reputation of an Heretic. From which antiquity and continuance,
we have just cause to fear, that to endeavor the extirpation thereof,

1. Would give such advantage to the Papists, who usually object against us,
and our Religion, the contempt of antiquity, and the love of novelty; that we
should not be able to wipe off the aspersion.

2. Would so diminish the just authority due to the consentient judgment and
practice of the universal Church (the best interpreter of Scripture in things
not clearly expressed; for Lex currit cum praxi:) that without it we should be at
a loss in sundry points both of Faith and Manners, at this day firmly
believed and securely practiced by us; when by the Socinians, Anabaptists, and
other Sectaries we should be called upon for our proofs. As namely sundry
Orthodoxall explications concerning the Trinity and Co-equality of the Persons
in the Godhead, against the Arians and other Heretics; the number, use and
efficacy of Sacraments; the Baptising of Infants; National Churches; the
observation of the Lord's Day; and even the Canon of Scripture it self.

Thirdly, in respect of our selves; we are not satisfied, how it Justice,
Ingenuity, and Humanity, to require the extirpation of Episcopal Government
(unless it had been first clearly demonstrated to be unlawful) to be sincerely
and really endeavored, by us,

1. Who have all of us, who have taken any Degree by subscribing the 39.
Articles, testified our approbation of that Government: one of those Art. 36.
Articles affirming the very Book containing the form of their Consecration to
contain in it nothing contrary to the Word of God.

2. Who have most of us (viz. as many as have entered into the Ministry)
received Orders from their hands: whom we should very ill requite for laying
their hands upon us, if we should now lay to our hands to root them up, and
cannot tell for what.

3. Who have sundry of us, since the beginning of this Parliament, subscribed
our names to Petitions exhibited or intended to be exhibited to that High
Court, for the continuance of that Government. Which as we then did sincerely
and really, so we should with like sincerity and reality, still (not having met
with any thing since to show us our error) be ready to do the same again, if
we had the same hopes we then had of the reception of such Petitions.

4. Who hold some of us our livelihood, either in whole or in part, by those
titles of Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, etc. mentioned in the Articles; being
members of some Collegiate or Cathedral Churches. And our memories will not
readily serve us with any example in this kind since the world began; wherein
any state or profession of men, though convicted (as we are not) of a crime
that might deserve deprivation, were required to bind themselves by oath,
sincerely and really to endeavor the rooting out of that (in it self not
unlawful) together wherewith they must also root out themselves, their estates
and livelyhoods.

5. Especially it being usual in most of the said Churches, that such persons
as are admitted members thereof, have a personal Oath administered unto them,
to maintain the honor* Immunities, Libertyes, and profits of the same; and
whilst they live to seek the good, and not to do any thing to the hurt,
hindrance, or prejudice thereof; or in other words to the like effect.

in respect of the Church of England: we are not satisfied how we can swear to
endeavor the extirpation of the established Government* no necessity or just
Cause for so doing, either offering it self, or being offered to our
understandings.

1. Since all change of Government unavoidably brings with it, besides those
that are present and evident, sundry other ^^^onveniences, which no wit of man
can possibly foresee to provide against, till late experience discover them:
We cannot be sure, that the evils which may ensue upon the change of this
Government, (which has been of so long continuance in this Kingdom, is so
deeply roo^ed in the Laws thereof, and has so near a conjunction with, and
so strong an influence upon the Civil State and Government, as that the change
thereof must infer the necessity of a great alteration to be made in the other
also;) may not be greater then the supposed evils whatsoever they are, which by
this change are sought to be remedied. For there are not yet any come to our
knowledge of that desperate nature, as not to be capable of other remedy, then
the utter extirpation of the whole Government it self.

2. Whereas the House of Commons have -- give advantage to this Malignant party
to traduce our Proceedings. They infuse into the people that we mean to abolish
all Church Government -- Remonst. 15. Dec. 1641. Exact Collect. page 19. The
Lords and Commons do declare, That they intend a due and necessary Reformation
of the Government and Liturgy of the Church; and to take away nothing in the
one or in the other, but what shall be evil, and justly offensive, or at least
unnecessary and burdensome. Declar. 9. Apr. 1642. Exact Coll. p. 135.
remonstrated, that it was far from their purpose or desire to abolish the
Church Government, but rather that all the members of the Church of England
should be regulated by such Rules of Order and Discipline as are established by
Parl^ament, and that it was Malignancie to infuse into the people that they had
any other meaning: We are loath by consenting to the second Article to become
guilty of such Infusion, as may bring us within the compass and danger of the
fourth Article of this Covenant.

3. Since it has been declared by sundry Statut. of Carlisle 25. E. 1. recited
25. E. 3.
Acts of Parliament, That the holy Church of England was founded in the state
of Prelacy within the Realm of England: We dare not by endeavoring the
extirpation of Prelacy, strike at the very foundation, and thereby (as much as
in us lies) cooperate toward the ^^ine of this famous Church; which in all
conscience and d^ty we are bound with out utmost lawful power to uphold.

Lastly, in respect of our Obligations to His Majesty by our Duty and oaths:
we are not satisfied how we can swear to endeavor the extirpation of the
Church Government by Law established, without forfeiture of those Obligations.

1. Having in the Oath of Supremacy acknowledged the King to be the only
Supreme Governor in all Ecclesiastical Causes and over all Ecclesiastical
Persons; and having bound our selves both in that Oath, and by our
Protestation, To maintain the Kings Honor, Estate, Jurisdictions, and all
manner of Rights: it is clear to our understandings, that we cannot without
disloyalty and injury to Him, and double Perjury to our selves, take upon us
without his consent to make any alteration in the Ecclesiastical Laws or
Government, much less to endeavor the extirpation thereof: Unless the
imposers of this Covenant had a power and meaning (which they have openly They
infuse into the people, that we mean -- to leave every man to his own fancy --
absolving him of that Obedience which he owes under God unto His Majesty, whom
we know to be entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law, as well as with the
Temporal. Exact Collect. ubi sup. p. 19.
disclaimed) to absolve us of that Obedience, which under God we owe unto His
Majesty, whom they know to be entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law.

2. We cannot sincerely and really endeavor the extirpation of this
Government, without a sincere desire and real endeavor, that His Majesty
would grant His Royal Assent to such extirpation. Which we are so far from
desiring and endeavoring, that we hold it our bounden dury by our daily
prayers to beg at the hands of Almighty God, that he would not for our sins
suffer the King to do an act so prejudicial to his honor and conscience, as
to consent to the rooting out of that estate, which by so many branches of his
That he will grant, keep and confirm the Laws, Customs, and Franchises,
granted to the Clergy by the glorious King S. Edward. And that he will grant
and preserve unto the Bishops, and to the Churches committed to their charge,
all Canonical Privileges and due Law and Justice; and that he will protect and
defend them, as every good King in his Kingdom ought to be Protector and
Defender of the Bishops and the Churches under their Government. Vide Exact
Coll. p. 290, 291.
Coronation Oath, he has in such a solemn manner sworn by the assistance of
God to his power to maintain and preserve.

3. By the Laws of this Land, See Stat. 25. H. 8. 20. and 1. E. 6. 2.
the Collation of Bishoprics and See Stat. 39. Eliz. 8.
Deanries; the Stat. 14. E. 3. 4. and 5. and 17. E. 3. 14
fruits and profits of their Lands and Revenues during their vacancies; the
Stat. 26. H. 8. 3. and 1. Eliz. 4.
first fruits and yearly tenths out of all Ecclesiastical Promotions; and
sundry other Privileges, Profits, and Emoluments, arising out of the State
Ecclesiastical, are established in the Crown, and are a considerable part of
the Revenues thereof; which, by the extirpation of Prelacy, as it is in the
Article expounded, or by subsequent practice evidenced, will be severed and cut
off from the Crown, to the great prejudice and damage thereof. Whereunto, as we
ought not in common reason, and in order to our Allegiance as Subjects, yield
our consent; so having sworn expressly to maintain the Kings honor and estate,
and to our power to assist and defend all Jurisdictions, etc. belonging to His
Highness, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm, we cannot
without manifest Perjury (as we conceive) consent thereunto.

4. The Government of this Realm being confessedly an Empire or -- Supremam
potestatem and meru^ imperium apud nos habet Rex. Cambd. Whereas by sundry
diverse old authentic Histories and Chronicles it is manifestly declared and
expressed, that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted
in the w^rld, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the dignity and
royal estate of the Imperial Crown of the same. Stat. 24. H. 8. 12. See also
1 Elizab. 3.
Monarchy, and that of a most excellent temper and constitution: we understand
not how it can become us to desire or endeavor the extirpation of that
Government in the Church, which we conceive to be incomparably of all other the
most agreeable, and no way prejudicial to the state of so well a constituted
Monarchy. In so much as King JAMES would often say, what his long experience
had taught him, No Bishop, no King. Which Aphorism, though we find in sundry
Pamphlets of late years to have been exploded with much confidence and scorn;
yet we must profess to have met with very little in the proceedings of the
late times, to weaken our belief of it. And we hope we shall be the less
blamed for our unwillingnesse to have any actual concurrence in the
extirpating of Episcopal Government: seeing of such extirpation there is* no
other use imaginable, but either the alienation of their Revenues and
Inheritances, (which how it can be severed from Sacrilege and Injustice we
leave others to find out) or to make way for the introducing of some other form
of Church Government: which whatsoever it shall be, will (as we think) prove
either destructive of, and inconsistent with Monarchical Government, or at
leastwise more prejudicial to the peaceable, orderly, and effectual exercise
thereof, then a well-regulated Episcopacy can possibly be.

. V. Of the other parts of the Covenant.
HAving insisted the more upon the two first Articles, that concern Religion
and the Church, and wherein our selves have a more proper concernment: We shall
need to insist the less upon those that follow, contenting our selves with a
few (the most obvious) of those many great, and (as we conceive) just
exceptions, that lie there against.

In the Preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Libertyes of the
Kingdom. Forasmuch as

1. No such limitation of our duty in that behalf is to be found, either in the
Oaths of Supremacy and Alleagiance, (which no Papist would refuse to take with
such a limitation) nor in the Protestation, nor in the Word of God.

2. Our endeavor to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and the
Libertyes of the Kingdoms, is required to be sworn of us in the same Article
without the like or any other limitation added thereunto.

3. Such limitation leaves the duty of the Subject, at so much looseness, and
the safety of the King at so great uncertainty; that whenever the People
shall have a mind to withdraw their obedience, they cannot want a pretense,
from the same for so doing.

4. After we should, by the very last thing we did (viz. swea^ing with such a
limitation) have made our selves guilty of an actual and real dimi^^tion (as
we conceive) of His Majesty's just power and greatness: the obtestation would
seem very unseasonable (at the least) with the same breath to call the world to
bear witness with our Consciences, that we had no thoughts or intentions to
diminish the same.

5. The swearing with such a limitation is a Testimony of the Subjects Loyalty
(to our seeming) of a very strange nature: which, the Principles of their
several Religions salved, the Conscience of a most resolute Papist or Sectary
may securely swallow, and the Conscience of a good Protestant cannot but str^in
at.

In the fourth Article,

1. We desire it may be considered, whether the imposing of

2. Whether the swearing according to this Article, does not rather open a
ready way, to Children that are sick of the Father, Husbands that are weary of
their Wives, etc. by appealing such, as stand between them and their desires,
of Malignancy, the better to effectuate their unlawful intentions and designs.

3. Our selves having solemnly protested to maintain the Liberty of the
Subject, and the House of Commons having publicly declared against the
exercise of an Arbitrary Power, with Order that their said Declaration should
be printed and published in all the Parish-Churches and Chappells of the
Kindome, there to stand and remain as a testimony of the cle^rnesse of their
intentions; whether the subjecting of our selves and brethren by Oath, unto
such punishments as shall be inflicted upon us (without Law or Merit) at the
sole pleasure of such uncertain Judges as shall be upon any particular
occasion deputed for that effect, of what mean quality or abilities soever they
be, even to the taking away of our lives, if they shall think it convenient so
to do, though the degree of our offenses shall not require or deserve the
same; be not the betraying of our Liberty in the lowest, and the setting up of
an Arbitrary Power in the highest degree, that can be imagined.



1. That we do not see, nor therefore can acknowledge the happiness of such a
blessed Peace between the three Kingdoms (for we hope Ireland is not
forgotten) as in the Article is mentioned: So long as Ireland is at War within
it self, and both the other Kingdoms engaged in that War.

2. That since no peace can be firm and well-grounded that is not bottomed
upon Justice, the most proper and adequate act whereof is, Jus suum cuique, to
let every one have that which of right belongs unto him; we cannot conceive
how a firm and lasting Peace can be established in these Kingdoms, unless the
respective Authority, Power, and Liberty of King, Parliament, and Subject, as
well every one as other, be preserved full and entire, according to the known
Laws and continued unquestioned customs of the several Kingdoms in former
times, and before the beginning of these sad distractions.

In the sixth Article we are altogether unsatisfied.

1. viz. that this Cause, meaning thereby (or else we understand it not) the
joining in this Covenant of mutual defense for the prosecution of the late
War, was the cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms; and that
it so much concerned the Glory of God, and the good of the Kingdoms, and the
Honor of the King.

2. If all the Premises were so clear, that we durst yield our free assent
thereunto, yet were they not sufficient to warrant to our consciences what in
this Article is required to be sworn of us; unless we were as clearly
satisfied concerning the lawfulness of the means to be used for the supporting
of such a Cause. For since evil may not be done, that good may come thereof;
we cannot yet be persuaded, that the Cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace, may
be supported; or the Glory of God, the Good of the Kingdoms, and the Honor of
the King sought to be advanced, by such means, as (to our best understandings)
are both improper for those Ends, and destitute of all warrant from the Laws,
either of God, or of this Realm.

Lastly, in the conclusion, our hearts tremble to think, that we should be
required to pray that other Christian Churches might be encouraged by our
example to join in the like Association and Covenant, to free themselves from
the Antichristian yoke, etc. Wherein

1. To omit that we do not know any Antichristian yoke under which we were
held in these Kingdoms, and from which we owe to this either War or Covenant
our freedom: unless by the Antichristian yoke be meant Episcopal Government,
which we hope no man that pretends to Truth and Charity will affirm.

2. We do not yet see in the fruits of this Association or Covenant among our
selves, any thing so lovely asto invite us to desire (much less to pray) that
other Christian Churches should follow our example herein.

3. To pray to the purpose in the conclusion of the Covenant expressed, seems
to us all one in effect, as to beseech Almighty God, the God of Love and Peace,

1. To take all Love and Peace out of the hearts of Christians, and to set the
whole Christian world in a combustion.

2. To render the Reformed Religion, and all Protestants odious to all the
world.

3. To provoke the Princes of Europe to use more severity toward those of the
Reformed Religion: if not (for their own security) to root them quite out of
their several Dominions.

4. The tyranny and yoke of Antichrist, if laid upon the necks of Subjects by
their lawful Sovereigns, is to be thrown off by Christian boldness in
confessing the Truth, and Patient suffering for it; not by taking up Arms, or
violent resistance of the Higher Powers.

. VI. Some Considerations concerning the meaning of the Covenant.
OUr aforesaid scruples are much strengthened by these ensuing Considerations.

First that whereas no Oath, which is contradictory to it self, can be taken
without Perjury; because the one part of every contradiction must needs be
false: this Covenant either indeed contains, or at leastwise (which to the
point of conscience is not much less effectual) seems to us to contain
sundry Contradictions: as namely, amongst others, these:

1. To preserve as it is, without change, and yet to reform and alter, and not
to preserve, one and the same Reformed Religion.

2. Absolutely and without exception to preserve; and yet upon supposition to
extirpate the self-same thing, viz. the present Religion of the Church of
Scotland.

3. To reform Church Government established in England and Ireland, according
to the Word of God: and yet to extirpate that Government which we are persuaded
to be according thereunto, for the introducing of another whereof we are not so
persuaded.

4. To endeavor really the extirpation of Heresies, Schisms and Profaneness;
and yet withal to extirpate that Government in the Church, the want of the due
exercise whereof we conceive to have been one chief cause of the growth of the
said evils; and do believe the restoring and continuance thereof would be the
most proper and effectual remedy.

5. To preserve with our estates and lives, the liberties of the Kingdom; that
is, (as in the Protestation is explained) of the Subject; and yet contrary to
these liberties, to submit to the imposition of this Covenant, and of the
Negative Oath not yet established by Law: and to put our lives and estates
under the arbitrary power of such as may take away both from us when they
please, not only without, but even against Law, if they shall judge it
convenient so to do.

Secondly, we find in the Covenant, sundry expressions of dark Common Enemies?
and which be the best Reformed Churches? mentioned in the first Article. Who
(in the fourth Article) are to be accounted Malignants? How far that phrase of
hindering Reformation may be extended? What is meant by the supreme Judicatory
of both Kingdoms? and sundry other.

Thirdly, by the use that has been made of this Covenant,

1. Whereas we are to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in this Kingdom,
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God,
and the example of the best Reformed Churches:

1. The Reformation in Worship (whereby we could not suppose any more was
intended (according to their former The Lords and Commons do declare, That
they intend a due and necessary Reformation of the Liturgy of the Church; and
to take away nothing therein but what shall be evil, and justly offensive, or
at least unnecessary and burdensome. Declarat. 9. Apr. 1642. Exact Coll. page
135.
Declaration) then a review of the Service Book, that the translations might be
in some places amended, some alterations made in the Offices and Rubricks; or
at most some of the Ceremonies laid aside for the reasons of expediency and
condescension) has produced an utter abolition of the whole form established:
without substituting any other certain form in the room thereof.

2. The Reformation in point of Discipline and Government intended (so far as
by the overtures hitherto made we are able to judge) is such, as we conceive
not to be according to the Word of God, nor (for any thing we know) according
to the example of any Church that ever was in the world (best or worst) since
the Creation.

2. In the second Article, our grief and fears had been less, if we could
have observed the extirpation of Popery, Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, to
have been as really intended, and set on with as much speed and animosity, as
the extirpation of Prelacy, and that which some call Superstition. But when we
see, under the notions of rooting out Prelacy and Superstition, so much
quickness used to fetch in the Revenues of the Church, and the sacred
Utensils, (no otherwise guilty of Superstition, for ought we know, then that
they are worth something) and on the other side, so little yet done toward the
extirpation of Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, (as things of less
temporal advantage.) We cannot dissemble our suspicion, that the designers of
this Covenant might have something else before their eyes besides what in the
beginning of the Introduction is expressed; and that there is something meant in
this Article, that looks so like Sacrilege, that we are afraid to venture
thereon.

3. In the third Article

1. Although we should not otherwise have apprehended any matter of danger or
moment in the ordering of the particulars, in the Article mentioned: yet since
M. Challoner in his Speech, and others have made advantage thereof to infer
from that very order, that the defense of the Kings Person and Authority ought
to be with subordination to the preservation of the Rights and Privileges of
Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdom, which are in the first place,
(c) From whence it is most evident, that the Rights and Privileges of the
Parliaments and Liberties of the Kingdom are in the first place to be
preserved. Answ. to Scottish Papers, 18. Nov. 1646. page 21.
and before it to be endeavored; We hope we shall be excused, if we dare not
take the Covenant in this sense; especially, considering that if the Argument
be of any force, it will bind us at least, as strongly to endeavor the
maintenance of the Kings Person, Honor and Estate in the first place, and the
rest but subordinately thereunto; because they are so ordered in the
Protestation: And then, that Protestation having the advantage of preceding, it
will bind us more strongly, as being the first obligation.

2. Whereas some have been the rather induced to take the Covenant in this
particular by being told, that that limitation, in the preservation and defense
of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms was not to be understood
exclusively: yet when we find that the House of Commons in their answer to the
Scottish Papers, do We observe you mention the defense of the King twice from
the Covenant, yet in both places leave out In the preservation and, etc. page
39. and 46. a maine clause, without which the other part ought never to be
mentioned. page 56.
often press that limitation, as without which the endeavoring to preserve
the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority ought not to be mentioned; it cannot
but deter us from taking the Covenant in this particular so understood.

3. Especially being told in a late pamphlet, that the King not having
preserved the Liberties of the Kingdom, etc. as of duty he ought, is thereby
become a Tyrant, and so cease to be a King, and consequently that his
subjects cease to be Subjects, and owe him no longer subjection. Which
assertion, since we heartily detest, as false and scandalous in the
supposition, and in the inference seditious and divelish; we dare not by
subscribing this Article seem to give the least countenance thereunto.

4. But it strikes us with horror to think what use has been made of this
fourth Article; concerning the punishment of Malignants, etc. as by others
otherwise; so especially by the Corrector of a speech without doors, written
in the defense of M. Challoners Speech: Who is so bold as to tell the
Parliament, that they are bound by their Covenant* (for the bringing of evil
instruments to condign punishment) to destroy the King and his Posterity; and
that they cannot justify the taking away of Straffords and Canterburies lives
for Delinquency, whilst they suffer the chief Delinquent to go unpunished.

. VII. Of the Salvo's.
THe Salvo's that we have usually met withal, for the avoiding of the
aforesaid scruples, either concerning the whole Covenant, or some particulars
therein of special importance: We find upon examination to be no way
satisfactory to our Consciences.

The first is that we may take the Covenant in our own sense: but this (in a
matter of this nature, viz. an imposed promisory Oath, in the performance
whereof others also are presumed to be concerned) seems to be

to the Nature and end of an Oath, which unless it be full of simplicity,
cannot be Sworn in Truth and Righteousness, nor serve to the ending of
controversies and contradictions, which was the use for which it was
instituted, Heb. 6.

2. Contrary to the end of Speech: God having given us the use of Speech for
this end, that it might be the interpreter of the mind; it behooves us as in
all other our dealings and contracts, so especially where there is the
intervention of an Oath, so to speak as that they, whom it concerns, may
clearly understand our meaning by our words.

3. Contrary to the end of the Covenant it self. Which being the confirmation
of a firm union among the Covenanters, that by taking thereof they might have
mutual assurance of mutual assistance and defense: If one may be allowed to
take it in one sense, and another in a contrary; the Covenanters shall have no
more assurance of mutual assistance each from other after the taking of the
Covenant, then they had before.

4. Contrary to the Solemn profession made by each Covevanter (in express
terms in the conclusion thereof) in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher
of all hearts, that he takes it with a true intention to perform the same, as
he shall answer it at the great day.

2 This will bring a scandal upon our Religion,

1. That we practice that our selves, which we condemn in the Papist, viz.
Swearing with Jesuiticall equivocations and mental reservations.

2. That we take the glorious and dreadful Name of God in vain; and play fast
and loose with Oaths: in as much as what we swear to day in one sense, we may
swear the direct contrary to morrow in another. And

3. It will give strength to that charge which is laid to the Presbyterian
party, in special, both Haeretia nec Deo, nec hominibus ser^^^t fidem. --
Speciatim h^^ addo, Calvinistas in hac re deteriores esse qu^m Lutheranos. Nam
Calvinistae nullam servant fidem: Jura, perjura. -- Lutherani moderatiores
sunt. Becan. 5. Manual. Controv. 14. n. 4. and 6.
by Jesuits and Invent Oaths and Covenants for the Kingdom, dispense with
them when he pleases, swear and forswear as the wind turns, like a godly
Presbyter. Arraig. of Persec. in Epist. Ded.
Sectaries; that there is no faith to be given to Protestants, whatever they
swear; because they may swear one thing in their Words, and in their own sense
mean another.

The second way is, to take the Covenant with these or the like general
Salvo's express^d, viz. So far as lawfully I may; So far as it is agreeable to
the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land; Saving all Oaths by me formerly
taken, etc. But

1. We believe this mocking of God would be so far from freeing us from the
guilt of Perjury, that thereby we should rather contract a new guilt of most
vile and abominable Hypocrisy.

2 It seems all one unto us (the thing being otherwise supposed unlawful) as
if we should swear to kill, steal, commit adultery, or forswear our selves, so
far as lawfully we may.

3. If this would satisfy the Conscience, we might with a good Conscience not
only take the present Covenant, but even subscribe to the Council of Trent
also; yea, and to the Turkish Alcoran; and swear to maintain and defend either
of them, viz. so far as lawfully we may, or as they are agreeable to the Word of
God.

second Article in particular, in the branch concerning the extirpation of
Church Government, we are told that it is to be understood of the whole
Government, taken collectively and in sensu composito, so as if we do
endeavor but the taking away of Apparitors only, or of any other one kind of
inferior officers belonging to the Ecclesiastcall Hierarchy, we shall have
sufficiently discharged our whole promise in that particular without any
prejudice done to Episcopacy. But

1. Neither the composers of the Covenant by their words, nor the imposers of
it by their Actions, have given us the least signification that they meant no
more.

2. Yea rather, if we may judge either by the cause or the effects, we may well
think there was a meaning to extirpate the whole government, and every part
thereof in the Article expressed. For

1. The Covenant being (as we have no cause to doubt) framed at the instance of
the Scots and for the easier procuring of their assistance in the late War, was
therefore in all reason so to be framed and understood as to give them
satisfaction, and (considering what themselves have By the Covenant, both
Houses of Parliament, and many thousands of other His Majesty's Subjects of
England and Ireland stand bound as well as we to hinder the setting up of the
Church Government by Bishops in the Kingdom of Scotland: And that we as well
as they stand bound to endeavor the extirpation thereof in England and
Ireland. Scots Declar. to the States of the United Provinces, 5. Aug. 1645.
recited in Answer to the Scots Papers, page 23.
declared) against Episcopacy, we have little reason to believe the taking away
Apparitors, or any thing, less then the rooting out of Episcopacy it self,
would have satisfied them.

2. The proceedings also since the entering of this Covenant in endeavoring by
Ordinance of Parliament to take away the Name, Power, and Revenues of Bishops
do sadly give us to understand, what was their meaning therein.

Fourthly, as to the scruples that arise from the Sovereignty of the King, and
the duty of Allegiance as Subjects; we find two

1. The former, by saying (which seems to us a piece of unreasonable and
strange Divinity) that Protection and Subjection standing in relation either to
other, the King being now disabled to give us protection, we are thereby freed
from our bond of subjection. Whereas

1. The Subjects obligation (Jus subjectionis) does not spring from, nor relate
unto the actual exercise of Kingly protection; but from and unto the Princes
obligation to protect (Jus Protectionis.) Which obligation lying upon him as a
duty which he is bound in conscience to perform, when it is in his power so to
do; the relative obligation thereunto lies upon us as a duty which we are
bound in conscience to perform, when it is in our power so to do. His
inability therefore to perform his duty does not discharge us from the
necessity of performing ours, so long as we are able to do it.

2. If the King should not protect us, but neglect his part, though having
power and ability to perform it; his voluntary neglect ought not to free us
from the faithful performance of what is to be done on our part. How much
less then ought we to think our selves dis-obliged from our subjection, when
the Non-protection on his part is not from the want of will, but of power?

2. The later (wherein yet some have triumphed) by saying that the Parliament
being the supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom, the King, wheresoever in person,
is ever present there in his power, as in all other Courts of Justice: and that
therefore whatsoever is done by them, is not done without the King, but by him.
But craving pardon first, if in things without our proper sphere we hap to
speak unproperly or amiss; We must next crave leave to be still of the same
mind we were, till it shall be made evident to our understandings, that the
King is there in his power, as it is evident to our senses that he is not there
in his Person: Which so far as our natural reason and small experience will
serve us to judge, all that has been said to that purpose can never do.

For, first, to the point of presence:

1. We have been brought up in a belief that for the making of Laws the
actual The old forms of Acts of Parliam. were, The King wills, provideth,
ordains, establishes, grants, etc. by the assent of Parliament, etc. See
Statutes till 1 H. 4. After that, The King, of the assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and at the special instance and request of the
Commons of this Realm, has ordained, etc. See Statutes 1 H. 4. till 1 H. 7. A
form of such Petition of the Commons, see 1 R. 3. 6. Prayen the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, that where, etc. Please it therefore your
Highness, by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
this your present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, to
ordain, etc.

No Bill is an Act of Parliament, Ordinance, or Edict of Law, although both the
Houses agree unanimously in it, till it has the Royal Assent. Ancient
Customs, page 54.

Assemblee de ceux troys Estats est appellee un Act de Parliament: car sans
touts troys nest ascun Act de Parl. Finch Nomotech. fol. 21.

We admit that no Acts of Parliament are complete, or formally binding without
the Kings assent. H. P. Answer to David Jenkins, page 6.


Royal assent was simply necessary, and not only a virtuall assent supposed
to be included in the Votes of the two Houses: otherwise, what use can be made
of his Negative voice? or what need to -- Which if your Majesty shall be
pleased to adorn with your Majesty's Royal assent, (without which it can
neither be complete and perfect, nor --) Stat. 1. Jac. 1.
desire his Royal assent, to that which may be done as well without it?

2. The Stat. 33. H. 1. 21.
Statute, providing that the Kings assent to any Bill signified under his great
Seal shall be to all intents of Law as valid and effectual, as if he were
personally present, does clearly import that as to the effect of making a Law,
the Kings Power is not otherwise really present with the two Houses, then it
appears either in his Person or under his Seal: Any other real presence is to
us a riddle, not much unlike to that of Transubstantiation: an imaginary thing,
rather devised to serve turns, then believed by those that are content to make
use of it.

3. Such presence of the King there, when it shall be made appear to us either
from the writs, whereby the Members of both Houses are called together, or by
the standing Laws of the Land, or by the acknowledged judgment, and continued
practice of former and later ages, or by any express from the King himself,
clearly declaring his mind to that purpose, we shall then as becomes us,
acknowledge the same, and willingly submit thereunto.

And as for the Argument drawn from the Analogy of other Courts, wherein the
Kings Power is always supposed to be virtually present, under submission we
conceive it is of no consequence.

1. The Arguments a minore and a majore are subject to many fallacies; and
unless there be a parity of reason in every requisite respect between the
things compared, will not hold good: A Pety Constable (they say) may do
something which a Justice of Peace cannot do: And the Steward of a pety
Manor has power to adminster an Oath, which (as we are told) the House of
Commons it self has no power to do.

2. That the high Court of Parliament is the supreme Judicatory, we have been
told it is by virtue of the Kings right of presiding there, he being Dominus
Rex habet ordinariam jurisdictionem, dignitatem and potestatem super omnes qui
in regno suo sunt. -- Ea quae jurisdictionis sunt and pacis -- ad nullum
pertinent nisi ad coronam and dignitatem Regians, nec a corona separari
possunt. Bracton cited by Stamford, lib. 2. cap. 2.
the Supreme Judge, and the Members of both Houses his Council: Which being
so, the reason of difference is plain between that and other Judicatories in
sundry respects.

1. The Judges in other Courts are deputed by him, and do all in his name, and
by his authority; and therefore the presence of his power in those Courts of
ministerial Jurisdiction is sufficient, his personal presence not necessary,
neither has he any personal vote therein at all. But in the high Court of
Parliament, where the King himself is the Supreme Judge, judging in his own
name and by his own authority, his Power cannot be presumed to be really
present without either the actual presence of his person, or some virtuall
representation thereof signified under his great Seal.

2. The Judges in inferior Courts, because they are to act all in his name,
and by his Authority, do therefore take Oaths of fidelity for the right
exercising of Judicature in their several places; sitting there, not by any
proper interest of their own, but only in right of the King, whose Judges they
are, and therefore they are called the Kings Judges and his Ministers. But in
the high Court of Parliament, the Lords and Commons sit there in Council with
the King as Supreme Judge for the good of the whole Realm; and therefore they
are not called the Kings Judges, but the Kings Council: and they have their
several proper rights and interests peculiar and distinct both between
themselves, and from that of the Kings; by reason whereof they become distinct
For in our Laws, the Clergy, Nobility, and Communalty are the 3. Estates. --
We your said most loving, faithful, and obedient Subjects, (viz. the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons) representing your Three Estates of
your Realm of England, 1 Eliz. 3. -- the State of the Clergy being one of the
greatest States of this Realm. 8 Eliz. 1.
Orders, or, as of late times they have been styled (in this sense as we
conceive) See Finch supra ad lit. [d].
three distinct Estates. Each of which being supposed to be the best
Conservators of their own proper interest; if the power of any one Estate
should be presumed to be virtually present in the other two, that Estate must
needs be in inevitably liable to suffer in the proper Interests thereof. Which
might quickly prove destructive to the whole Kingdom: The safety and
prosperity of the whole consisting in the conservation of the just rights and
proper interests of the maine parts, viz. The King, Lords, and Commons,
inviolate and entire.

3. The Judges of other Courts, for as much as their power is but ministerial
and merely Judicial* are bounded by the present Laws, and limited also by
their own Acts: so as they may neither swerve from the Laws, in giving
Judgment, nor reverse their own Judgments after they are given. But the High
Court of Parliament, having (by reason of the Kings Supreme Power presiding
therein) a Power Legislative as well as Judicial, are not so limited by any
earthly Power, but that they may change and overruled the Laws, and their own
Acts at their pleasure. The Kings Personal assent therefore is not needful in
those other Courts, which are bounded by those Laws whereunto the King has
already given his personal assent: but unto any Act of Power beside, beyond,
above, or against the Laws already established, we have been informed, and it
seems to us very agreeable to reason, that the Kings Personal Assent should be
absolutely necessary: Forasmuch as every such Act is the exercise of a
Legislative rather then of a Judicial power; and no Act of Legislative power
in any Community (by consent of all Nations) can be valid, unless it be
confirmed by such person or persons as the Sovereignty of that Community
resideth in. Which Sovereignty, with us, so undoubtedly resideth in the person
of the King, that his ordinary style runs, -- Our The Crown of England has
been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but
immediately to God in all things touching the Regality of the said Crown. --
16 R. 2. 5. Omnis sub eo est, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo. Parem
autem non habet Rex in regno suo, quia -- Item nec multo fortius superiorem aut
potentiorem habere debet, quia sic esset inferior suis subjectis. Bracton.
conten. 1. Rubr. 36.

-- Cui (...), legibus ipsis legum vim imponendi potestatem Deus dedit. Finch
Nomotech. in Epist. Dedic. to K. James.


Sovereign Lord the King: And he is in the Oath of Supremacy expressly
acknowledged to be the only Supreme Governor within his Realms. And we leave
it to the wisdom of others to consider, what misery and mischief might come to
the Kingdom, if the power of any of these three Estates should be swallowed up
by any one or both the other, and if then under the name of a Judicial there
should be ye really exercised a Legislative power.

4. Since all Judicial Power is radically and originally in the King, (who is
for that cause styled by the Laws Fon^ Justitiae. Bracton. By War to intend
the alteration of the Laws in any part of them, is to levy War against the
King, and consequently Treason by the Statute of 25 E. 3. -- because they are
the Kings Laws. He is the fountain from whence in their several channels
they are derived to the Subject. Master Saint John's Speech concerning the
Earl of Strafford, page 12.
The Fountain of Justice) and not in any other Person or Persons, but by
derivation from him: it seems to us evident, that neither the Judges of
inferior Courts of ministerial Justice, nor the Lords and Commons assembled
in the High Court of Parliament, may of right exercise any other power over the
Subjects of this Realm, then such as by their respective Patents and Writs
issued from the King, or by the known established Laws of the Land formerly
assented unto by the Kings of this Realm does appear to have been from him
derived unto them. Which Laws, Patents and Writs being the exact boundary of
their several Powers, it has not yet been made appear to our understandings,
either from the Laws of the Realm, or from the tenor of those Writs by which
the Parliament is called, that the two Houses of Parliament have any power
without the King to order, command, or transact; but with him -- Et ibidem
vobiscum colloquium habere, tractare super dictis negotiis tract: vestrumque
consilium impensur: Writ to the Lords.
to treat, consult, and advise concerning the great affairs of the Kingdom. In
which respect they have sundry times in their Declarations to His Majesty
called themselves by the name of His great Council. And those Laws and Writs
are (as we conceive) the proper Topic, from which the just power of the
Honorable Houses can be convincingly deduced: and not such frail Collections
as the wits of men may raise from seeming Analogies and Proportions.

VIII. Of the Negative Oath.
WE are not satisfied, how we can submit to the taking of the Negative Oath,

1. Without forfeiture of that liberty, which we have sworn and are bound to
preserve. With which liberty we conceive it to be inconsistent, that any
obligation should be laid upon the Subject, by an oath not established by Act
of Parliament.

2, Without abjuring our Every Subject by the duty of his Allegiance is bounden
to serve and assist his Prince and Sov^raigne Lord at all seasons when need
shall require. 11 H. 7. 18.
natural Allegiance, and violating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance by
us formerly taken. By all which being bound to our power to assist the King, we
are by this Negative Oath required to swear, from our heart, not to assist him.

3. Without diminution of His Majesty's just Power and greatness, contrary to
the third Article of the Covenant; by acknowledging a power in the two Houses
of Parliament, in opposition to the Kings Power. Whereas we profess our selves
unable to understand, how there can be any lawful power exercised within this
Realm, which is not subordinate to the power of the King.

. IX. Of the Ordinances conc^rning the Discipline and Directory.
Royal Assent,

1. As are*contrary to the established Laws of this Realm contained in such
Acts of Parliament as were made by the joint consent of King, Lords, and
Commons.

2. Nor so only, but also pretend by repeal to abrogate such Act or Acts. For,
since Ejusdem est potestati^ destruere cujus est constituere, it will not sink
with us, that a lesser power can have a just right to cancel and annull the
Act of a greater.

Stat. 1. El. 1.
3. Especially the whole power of ordering all matters Ecclesiastical being by
the Laws in express words for ever annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm. And upon what head that Crown ought to stand, none can be ignorant.

the Discipline, first.

1. If under that title be comprehended the Government also: we cannot submit
thereunto* without consenting to the eradication of a Government of reverend
Antiquity in the Church. Which (notwithstanding the several changes of
Religion within this Realm) has yet from time to time been continued and
confirmed ^y the Pu^lique Laws and Great Charters of the Kingdom: then which
there cannot be a more ample testimony that it was ever held agreeable to the
Civil Government and the Su^jects liberty. Which also the successive Kings of
this Realm at their several Coronations have solemnly sworn to preserve. And
the continuance whereof for sundry reasons before (upon the second Article of
the Covenant) specified, we heartily wish and desire.

2. But if the word Discipline be taken (as it is in the first Article of the
Covenant) as contradistinguished unto the Government: there is something even
in that also, wherein we are not fully satisfied, viz. the leaving of so much
power in so many persons, and those, many of them of mean quality, for the
keeping back of thousands of well-meaning Christians from the benefit and
comfort of the blessed Sacrament. An Austerity, for which there appears not
to us any probable warrant from the Word of God: B^^ which seems rather
repugnant, as to the general principles of Christian prudence and charity, so
to the directions and practice of S. Paul in particular; who in a Church
abounding with sundry 1 Cor. 5. 1. etc.
errors and corruptions both in faith and manners, (having first given order
for the excommunicating of one only person that by shameless continuance in a
notorious sin had brought a foul scandal upon the Gospel) sufficing
himself then with a general proposal of the great danger of unworthy
communicating, remitteth every other particular person to a selfe-examination;
without any order either to 1 Cor. 11. 28. etc.
Ministers or Lay Elders to exclude any from the holy Communion upon their
Examination.

As to the Ordinance concerning the Directory in particular: the Book of
Common Prayer.

1. Which by our Subscriptions most of us have approved: with a solemn promise
therewithal* in the public Service to use the form prescribed therein, and
no other.

2. Which, according to our said Subscription and Promise, and our bounden duty
according to the Statute in that 1 Eliz.
case provided, we have hitherto used in our Churches, Chapels, and other
Oratories, to the great benefit and comfort of our souls.

3. Which we verily believe not to contain any thing which (with such
favorable construction as of right ought to be allowed to all manner of
Writings) is not justly defensible; which has not been by learned and godly
men sufficiently maintained against such exceptions as have been heretofore
taken thereat; and which we are not confident (by the Assistance of Almighty
God) we shall be able to justifi^ (as occasion shall be offered) against all
Papists, and other oppugners or depravers thereof whatsoever.

4. Which is established by an Act of Parliament, made (in peaceable times) by
as good and full authority as any under heaven can have over us. Which does so
weigh with us, that as it freeth us from the necessity of giving in any
particular exceptions against the Directory or any thing therein contained: so
it lays an inevitable necessity upon us of continuing the form of Prayer
therein enjoined, and of not admitting any Directory or other form to the
prejudice thereof, till the said Act shall by the like good and full authority
be repealed.

In which Statute there is not only an express Command given to all Ministers
for the using of the same; but there are also sanctions of severe punishments
to be inflicted upon such of them as shall refuse so to do; or shall preach,
declare or speak any thing to the derogation or depraving of the Book of Common
Prayer, or of any thing therein contained, or of any part thereof: with
punishments also to be inflicted upon every other person whatsoever (the Lords
of the Parliament not excepted) that shall in like manner declare or speak
against the said Book; or shall by deed or threatening compel or otherwise
procure or maintain any Minister to say open Prayer, or to minister any
Sacrament in any other manner or form then is mentioned in the said Book; or
shall interrupt or hinder any Minister in the use of the said forms, as by the
words of the said Statute more at large may appear.

Which Statute also has had such an universal powerful influence into the
succeeding times, that in all such Stat. 23. Eliz. 1. and 29 Eliz. 6. and 35
El. 1. and 2. and 3 Jac. 4. and 5.
Statutes as have been since made against Popish Recusants, the refusing to be
present at Common Prayer, or to receive the Sacrament according to the forms
and rites mentioned in that Book, is expressed as the most proper legal
character, whereby to distinguish a Popish Recusant from a true Protestant. In
so much that use has been made of that very Character in sundry Acts, since
the beginning of this present Parliament for the taxing of double payments upon
Recusants.

THus have we clearly and freely represented our present judgment concerning
the said Covenant, Negative Oath, and Ordinances; which upon better information
in any particular, we shall be ready to rectify. Only we desire it may be
considered, that if any one single scruple or reason in any the premises
remain unsatisfied, (though we should receive full satisfaction in all the
rest) the Conscience would also remain still unsatisfied. And in that case, it
can neither be reasonable for them that cannot satisfy us to press us, nor
lawful for us that cannot be satisfied to submit to the said Covenant, Oath
and Ordinances.

QUINTIL. Quis damnaverit eum, qui duabus potentissimis rebus defenditur, Jure
and mente? ROMANS 14. 22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that which
he allows.
THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 23. marg. read Haeretici. page 24. l. 12. read Ecclesiastical. p. 24. l.
27. r. declared against Episcopacie) p. 26. l* ult. marg. r. Hen. 3. p. 28. l.
24. r. be inevitably.


