SUTTONS HOSPITAL: WITH The Names of Sixteen Manors, many Thousand Acres of
Land, Meadow, Pasture, and Woods; with the Rents and Hereditaments thereunto
belonging: The Governors thereof, and number of Scholars and others that are
maintained therewith. AS ALSO, The last Will and Testament of Thomas Sutton
Esquire, Founder of the said Hospital: With the particular Sums by him
bequeathed, for repairing the Highways of several parts of this Kingdom for
ever, and what he gave to the poor of several Parishes, and other charitable
uses amounting to above 20000. pounds. WHEREIN, Many Thousands at this day are
intressed; and the knowledge and example hereof very useful for all sorts of
People.

The Copy hereof was taken out of the Prerogative Court; and is printed by the
Original, according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by BARNARD ALSOP dwelling in Grubstreet, 1646.

SUTTONS HOSPITAL.
CHARITY, of the three Theological Virtues, by the uncomptrolable testimony of
St. Paul the greatest, has in these our days, upon whom are (or may be
supposed to have been) come the ends of the World amongst them all, of all
so^ts has been least regarded. The consciences of some particular persons,
sealed with the true Seals of Peace and Purity, to their own everlasting
comfort, and the sensible good of their fellow members remaining, have left to
Posterity notable marks of their Godly Devotion, whose steps few have followed

This paucity of well-doers agrees well with the Scripture, where (every man
receiving according to the works he has done in his body it is said few shall
be saved. Indeed it is not to be marvailed at, that Charity waxes cold in
these times, where Avarice has gotten the upper hand; Christ himself long
since prophesying that toward the end of the World it should be so. All States
generally are corrupted: each man preferring his own private interest, before
the common care of his distressed brethren; not measuring any thing, but by the
rule of his own profit.

To insist longer upon these common places would be over-tedious to the Reader,
and not much availeable, but rather hurtful, as wherein he may behold the
Worlds miserable thrift, and so become a Sectator thereof, whilst in the mean
while he made shipwreck of his Conscience, and hazard the perdition of Heaven
and his own Soul. Let us therefore walk into the Valley of Lillies, where
Christ with his true and everlasting delights is ready to entertain us.

Hereunto wishes alone avail not; though in themselves commendable. Quiddam
altius in desiderio: There is something more to be desired. With this godly
desire we must join sanctity. Holiness of life is it, whereby we are
acceptable before God.

Naturally we are inclined, to wish well to our own selves. Nemo odit carnem
suam. But to this well-being, well-doing is required. Quid oportet me facere,
was well propounded by that Holy Convertite in the Acts; What must I do, to
attain everlasting life? For to this end by the free grace of God we are
delivered from the bondage of Sin and Death, That we may serve him in
holiness. Surely the yoke of the Old Law was insupportable, in respect of
flesh; yet that yoke was not so taken off by our Savior, that we should think
our selves free from all manner of yoke. Iugum meum dulce and l^ve. My yoke is
sweet and light; yet a yoke. He that sustains the world, bears part with us:
therefore an easy yoke. As easy notwithstanding as it is few undergo it. How
culpable therefore the most part of Mankind is in refusing to be coupled in
this sweet yoke, and to draw together with Christ who bears the heaviest part
thereof, it is more than to be lamented. Not a Fountain, but an Ocean of tears,
is here to be desired; to wash away this guilt. Ex fructibus, by their fruits
you shall know them, is the Cognizance, whereby the good are discerned from the
bad: the surest mark of all others, whereby either God or Satan may claim
their own.

If therefore we would be accounted and taken for the true servants of God, we
must wear this cognizance: we must labor to make our Election sure, by
bringing forth such fruits, as proceed from a Faith working by Love. But this
Badge is so seldom seen among us, as it may well be supposed, that God has
here but a very few servants.

Let us desire the Almighty for his great love to Mankind, that He will more
and more kindle the small spark of Charity that is amongst us, that it may
break forth into a bright flame of brotherly love, and wholly involve us in the
zeal of Gods house. Then may we joyfully burn incense to the God of Israel, and
offer up our vows without fear* For the merciful man has cast his bread upon
many waters, and the Lord has assured him a reward. Now it is time to commend
to Posterity, the true praises of that truly worthy and never to be forgotten
Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Sutton, the right Phoenix of Charity in our times: who
mounting up to the highest top of Gods holy Hill, and gathering together the
Aromatical spices of Love and Compassion, has consumed himself in the fire of
fervent zeal toward Gods poor Saints, who setting all worldly respects
either of Alliance or Consanguinity, far behind his Love to God and his poor
brethren in Christ, has made them (in effect) the Heirs of al^ those great
riches wherewith it pleased the Lord to bless him. This Godly Act of his has
herein especially approved it self, for that he never stuck at any cost, nor
let slip any occasion, which might further, or establish it, to the benefit of
the poor people. The greatness of the gift and the religious care taken for
confirmation thereof, with the pious forwardness of our good Sovereign in the
advancement of so good a Work; are at large set forth in a more full Volume,
amongst many other notable Reports, by a Reverend, famous, and learned Judge of
this Land; whereunto, when it shall be published, I refer the courteous Reader
for his more ample satisfaction. In the mean time briefly take this.

The late dissolved Charter House by Smithfield, not long since belonging to
the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain of the Kings
Household is well known to be a very large and goodly Mansion, beautified with
spacious Gardens, Walks, Orchards, and other pleasures; enriched with diverse
dependencies of Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, and very fitly seated
for wholesome Air, and many other commodities.

This commodiousnesse of sight, and largeness of circuit, gave occasion to
this worthily renowned Gentleman Mr. Sutton, to affect this house, as the only
fit place, wherein to lay the Foundation of his Religious designs. For he had
before that time a settled determination to erect an house in Hallingbury
Bouchers in the County of Essex, to be an Hospital for such poor Men and
Children, as He himself in his life time, or the future Governors of the same
Hospital, should nominate and appoint to be lodged and relieved.

As also for a Schoolmaster and Usher to teach the children to read and
write, and instruct them in their Latin and Greek Grammar: for a Divine
likewise, to preach the Word of God unto them all, and for one Master to govern
all those people belonging to that House.

And to that end and purpose, he had, upon earnest Petition, procured himself
ability by virtue of an Act of Parl. begun and holden by Prorogation thereof at
Westmin. in the County of Middlesex the 9. day of February, in the 7. year of
His Majesty's Reign over England, etc. and there continued to the 24. day of
July then next following. To erect and build in the said Town of Hallingbury
Bouchers such an House for an Hospital, as is immediately before remembered; and
that the said House should be called The Hospital of K. James, founded in
Hallingbury in the County of Essex, at the humble Petition, and at the only
cost and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire And that the Archbishop of Canterbury
that then was, and other Reverend Prelates of this Realm, and their Successors
in their several Seas, the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Ellesm^re, Lord
Chancellor of England, and such as should succeed after him to be L.
Chancellors, or L. Keepers of the Great Seal of England, the Lord Treasurer
that then was, and those that should succeed in that Office, with diverse other
select persons both of the Clergy and Laity, in such manner as you shall find
them set down in the said Volume of Reports, whereunto I refer you, were by the
said Act of Parl. elected, nominated, and appointed the first and present
Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of the said
Hospital. But afterward, upon more mature deliberation, finding this great
Mansion of the Charter House, far more convenient for his purpose, then that of
Hallingbury could be, he was an earnest Suitor to my Lord of Suffolk to buy that
house of him; acquainting his Lordship with the change of his mind concerning
Hallingbury, and his great affection to make the Charter House his Hospital.
To this Petition of his, it is not to be doubted, but that my Lord gave the
more ready and willing way: because the chief end thereof was the glory of God,
and the relief and comfort of a great number of poor people. Long the matter
was not debated between them: but the price being concluded, the Bargain and
Sale was assured.

The Sum disbursed for this purchase, came to thirteen thousand pounds: which
was paid down in hand, before the conveyance was sealed.

Having thus assured the state of this great House to him, and his Heirs, he
makes humble suit to his Majesty, to grant him license to erect and establish
his intended Hospital and Grammar School, and other his godly and charitable
uses, in the said late dissolved Charter House; as in a more commodious place,
then that of Hallingbury. Hereunto the King readily yee^ded, being graciously
affected to so charitable a work.

The better therefore to encourage and enable this Heroical Gentleman, to
prosecute this good mind to the full perfection; it pleased his Majesty out of
his most Royal disposition, to grant his Letters Patents unto him, thereby
authorizing him to the uses last mentioned, as in his Letters Patents more
fully appears.

Now therefore with alacrity this business goes forward. The Reverend Father
in God, George Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Lord Elsmore Lord Chancellor
of England, Robert Earl of Sal^sbury, Lord high Treasurer of England, John the
Elect Bishop of London, Lance^ot now Bishop of Ely, Sir Edwa^d Cook Knight
chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Thomas Foster Knight, one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Common Pleas, Sir Henry H^bart Knight and Baronet,
Attorney General^, John Overal now Dean of the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul
in London, George Mountain, Dean of the Collegiat Church of Westminster, Henry
Thursby Esquire one of the Masters of the Chancery, Ieffery Nightingale Esquire Richard
Sutton Esquire John Law Gentleman, Thomas Brown Gentleman, and Master of the
Hospital of King James, founded in Charter House, within the County of
Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton
Esquire are elected, nominated, and ordained by the Kings most excellent Majesty in
his Letters Pattents granted (as aforesaid) the first Governors of the Lands
Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of the said Hospital of King James founded in
Charterhouse.

And further power is given to the said Governors, as you may find more at
large in the said Letters Patents.

Hereupon diverse Lands by him formerly purchased, are made and past over to
this Hospital, for maintenance of the poor people there to be relieved.
Preparations is made for fit Lodgings and other necessaries; and all things go
onwards, with as convenient speed as may be, to the wished end.

Now for the Readers better information and content, it will not be amiss to
set down what Lands they were, and in what Counties, which were made over and
annexed by Mr. Sutton to the said Hospital. Thus therefore they are named, as
they follow in order, viz. All those his Manors and Lordships of Southminster,
N^on, little Hallingbury alias Hallingbury Bouchers, and Much Stanbridge in the
county of Essex, with all their and every of their Rights, Members, and
Appurtenances whatsoever.

Also all those his Manors and Lordships of Bastingthorp, alias Buslingthorp
and Dunnesby in the County of Lincoln, with their and every of their rights,
members, and Appurtenances whatsoever.

Also those his Manors of Santhorp alias Saltrop, alias Haltrap, Chilton, and
Blackegrove, in the County of Wilts, with their and every of their rights,
members, and appurtenances whatsoever: and also all those his Lands and Pasture
Grounds called Blackegrove, containing by estimation two hundred Acres of
Pasture with the Appurtenances in Blackegrove and VVroughton, in the said
County of Wilts: and also all that his Manor of Missenden, otherwise cal^ed
the Manor of Missunden, in the Parishes of VVroughton, Lydi^rde, and Tregose
in the County of Wilts, with all his rights, members, and appurtenances.

And all that his Manor of Elcombe and Park, called Elcombe Park, with the
appurtenances in the said County of Wilts.

Also all that his Manor of VVatlescote, alias VViglescete, with the
appurtenances in the said County of Wilts.

And also all that his Manor of VVoscote alias VVesc^te, with the
Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts: and also all those his Lands and
Pastures, containing by estimation 100 Acres of Land, and 60 Acres of Pasture,
with the Appurtenances in Wiglescote and Wroughton in the said County of
Wilts: and all that his Manor of Vffcote with the Appurtenances in the said
County of Wilts: and also all those his two Messuages, and 1000. Acres of Land
2000. Acres of Pasture, 300 acres of Meadows, and 300 Acres of Wood, with the
Appurtenances in Brodehinton in the said County of Wilts.

And also all those the Manors and Lordships of Camps, alias Camps Castle,
otherwise called Castle Camps, with the Appurtenances, situate, lying, being
and extending in the Counties of Cambridge and Essex, or in either of them, or
elsewhere within the Realm of England.

And also all that his Manor of Balsham in the County of Cambridge with all
and singular the rights, members and appurtenances thereof whatsoever. And also
all those his Messuages and Lands situate, lying, and being in the Parishes of
Hackney and Tottenham in the County of Middlesex, or in either of them, with
their and every of their rights, members, and appurtenances whatsoever, which
said Message was lately purchased of Sir William Bowyer Knight, and the said
Lands in Tottenham now or ^ately were in the tenure or occupation of William
Be^ning Yeoman. And also all and singular the Manors, Lordships, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Services, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Advousons,
Patronages of Churches, and Hereditaments of the said Thomas Sutton whatsoever,
situate, lying, or being within the said Counties of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts,
Cambridge, and Middlesex, or in any of them with all and every their rights,
members, and appurtenances whatsoever (except all his Manors or Lordships of
Littlebury and Hadd-stocke, with their appurtenances in the said County of
Essex.) But alas, what perpetuity can be looked for in this world where there
is no certainty but of change. In this great expectation of all men, whilst
our eyes and minds are occupied with admiration of the work Death steals away
the Master workman: but not unprovided, as having his Viaticum sealed up unto
him in the peace of a good conscience. Many prayers of the Saints went up
before him, to prepare a place for him against the day of his dissolution; and
the corruptible Mammon, which he had here employed to the relief of Gods
Servants on Earth, begot him friends to entertain him in Heaven. So he fell
asleep in the Lord, leaving the rest of his pious intendments, to be performed
by his trusty Executors, Mr. Richard Sutton and Mr. John Law. Behold, here a
perfect Israelite! This is a good work, but he has not not set his rest on
this only. He has grown up from Faith to Faith, to the accomplishment of many
other singular works of Charity: whereof his last Will and Testament gives such
ab^ndant testimony, that it needs no other splendor than it se^fe.

Upon this respect, I will make no other Proeme to it, then a gentle invitation
to the Reader to peruse it, lest otherwise I might seem to show the Sun at
Noon Day, or persuade credit, to apparent demonstration. Thus it follows.

The last Will and Testament of Thomas Sutton Esquire.
IN the Name of God, Amen. The 2. day of November. in the year of our Lord God,
1611. I Thomas Sutton of Camps Castle in the County of Cambridge Esquire,
being weak in body, and of good perfec^ mind and memory, thanks be given to
Almighty God for the same, Do make and declare this my last Will and Testament
in manner and form following, that is to say: First, and principally I commend
my Soul into the hands of Almighty God, trusting through his mercy, and by the
precious death and passion of my Savior, and Redeemer Jesus Christ to be
saved, and to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven for ever. And my body I will to be
buried where and in what sort it shall seem meet and convenient to mine
Executor or Executors, and Supervisor or Supervisors of this my last Will and
Testament, with the least pomp and charge that may be.

Item, I give to every one of the Children of Richard Coxe, late Bishop of Ely,
who shall be living at the time of my death, ten pounds a piece, of lawful
money of England.

Item, I give to the children of Ellenor Ask, late wife of Rob. Ask of
Aughton in the county of York Esquire the sum of one hundred pounds of good
and lawful money of England to be equally distributed amongst them.

Item. I give the poor town of Berwick upon Tweed one hundred marks of
lawful money of England to be distributed amongst the poor there by the
discretion of the chief governor and preacher there for the time being to be
paid within one year after my decease.

Also I give to Andrew Westwoods wife of Newcastle upon tyne, or to her
children, or to so many of them as shall be living at my death, ten pounds to
be bestowed equally amongst them.

And I give to the poor people of Stoke-Newinton, in the County of Middlesex
Ten pounds to be distributed by the Constables, Churchwardens, and Person of
the same Town, for the time being to their most needy, people there.

Also I give to Mr. Gray dwelling in Yorkshire, sometimes servant to Ambrose
Earl of Warwick, or to his children, if any of them be living at my decease, 40
l. of good and lawful money of England, to be distributed equally amongst
them, within 6 months after my decease. Also, I give to the children of my Aunt
White, or to so many of them as shall be living at my decease, 100 marks to be
equally distributed amongst them within 6 months next after my decease.

Also, I give to William Cocket, Son to Will. Cocket, late Alderman of the City
of Lincoln, 100. l. of lawful money of England.

Also, I give to the children of John Copeland, late of Skillingthorpe in the
county of Lincoln, or to so many of them as shall be living at the time of my
decease, 100. l. of lawful money of England, to be equally distributed amongst
them, saying unto Eliz. Copeland, for my meaning is, that she shall not have
any part of the said Legacy of 100. pounds. And unto the said Eliz. Copeland I
give the sum of 100. l. of lawful money of England to be paid unto her at the
day of her marriage, or within one year after my decease.

Item, I give unto lane Upton one of the Daughters of Eliz. Upton, late wife of
Hamond Upton of Wamfleet in the county of Lincoln Esquire the sum of 50. l. of
lawful money of England.

And to every other of the children of the said Elizabeth, who shall be living
at the time of my decease 20. l. a piece of lawful money of England, to be
paid within 6 months next after my decease.

Also, I give to the c^ildren of one Skeleton, late of Low^h in the county of
Lincoln, and sometimes toward the Henneages of Heniton, in the said county,
10. l. to be equally divided amongst them.

Item, I give to the children of Tho. Pinner, late of Mi^cham in the county of
Surrey Esquire or to so many of them as shall be living at my decease, 20. l. to be
equally distributed amongst them.

Item, I give to the children of Henry Tutty late Gunner in Berwick, or to so
many of them as shall be living at my decease 10. l. of lawful money of
England, to be equally distributed amongst them.

Also I give to my Niece Elizabeth Allen, 200 l. of lawful money of England.

And to every of her children which shall be living at my decease, 100 marks a
piece.

Item I give to Simon Baxter if he be living at my death 3000 l. of lawful
money of England, if not then I give the same sum to his child or children, to
be equally divided amongst them.

Item I give unto Francis Baxter if he be living at my death. 500. marks of
lawful money of England, if not I give the same sum to his child o^ children to
be equally divided amongst them.

Item I give unto each of my Servingmen to whom I give wages with my Cook that
shall be alive at my decease, 13 l. six shillings and eight pence over and
above their wages then due.

Item I give to so many of my maidservants as I have in my house at the time of
my decease, 5 marks a piece over and above their wages.

Item, I give unto the children of Reinold T^mps my late servant, if any of
them be alive at my death, 10 l. to be distributed amongst them.

Item, I give to the fishermen of the Town of Oastend in the Low Countries 100
l. of English money to be given and distributed amongst the poorest fishermen
of that Town, or for want of a competent number of them to call in some other
of that Town to have a share of the said 100 l. by the descretion of the
Governors of that Town and his assistance and the Person and Minister there
for the time being, the same to be paid within one year after my decease.

Item, I give toward the mending of the Highways between Islington and
Newington in the County of Middlesex Twenty six l. thirteen shillings and 4
pence, of lawful money of England to be employed and bestowed by the good
oversight of mine Executor or Executors the Constable of Newington, and the
Churchwardens there for the time being, the same Highways to be amended made
and helped within one year after my decease.

Item, I give toward the amending of the highwayes between Ashd^n and Walden
in the County of Essex called Walden Lain one hundred pounds of lawful money
of England: And toward the amending of the highwayes between great Lynton in
the County of Cambridge and the said Town of Walden, threescore six pounds 13.
s. and 4. d. of lawful money of England. And I also give toward the amending
of Horseth-Lane 60. l. of lawful money of England.

All these works next before recited I will shall be overseen and guided by the
two head Constables, thereunto next adjoining the Treasurer of Walden, and the
Persons of Ashden, Hodstock and Horsheath, and the Constables of the same
Parishes for the time being: And the same several sums to be employed and
the said highways so to be amended so far as the same sums will extend
within on year after my decease.

Also, I give toward the amending of the Bridges and the ordinary highways
between Southminster and Malden, in the said County of Essex, the sum of 100
l. of lawful money of England, and the same work to be overseene and guided
by the two head Constables thereunto next adjoining and the Persons or Vicars
of South-Minster and Malden for the time being, and the same money to be so
employed, and the highways so amended within one year next after my decease.

Item, I give to Mr. Robert Dudley, Alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne, or to his
children, or to so many of his children as shall be living at the time of my
decease 30. l. of lawful money of England, which he owes me.

And I will and do earnestly charge mine Executor or Executors, to deliver into
the Treasury or Chamber of the City of London 1000. pounds in current money of
England with such care and foresight to be had, that such Bonds or Assurances
be taken of the Lord Major, and Aldermen of the same City, that for the time,
shall be by learned Council in the Law, as the same may be safe, and for ever
go and be converted to these uses following: that is to say, That the said
1000. l. be yearly lent and put forth to ten young Marchant-men not having any
great stocks of their own, being young men, and of honest life and
conversation, and towardly in their Trades, that is, to every one of them 100.
l. for a year, without paying any thing for the same; And these ten young
Merchants to be chosen and appointed by the Lord Major and Aldermen of the said
City that for the time shall be, and the Dean of the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul in London for the time being. Provided as before that none have or
continue the said 100. l. so appointed above one year.

Item, I will, and give to the children of Justinian Crome Draper, sometimes
dwelling in the City of Lincoln, or to his childrens children, if any of them
shall be living at my decease, 20. l. of lawful money of England, to be
equally divided amongst them.

I give also to the wife and children or child of Martin Wather^e Dutchman,
sometime dwelling at the sign of the White-Bear in Buttolph Lane, London, if
any of them be living at the time of my death 10. l. to be equally divided
amongst them.

Item, I give to the next Kinsman, or Kinswoman of Henry Vavering Dutchman,
Smith, sometimes dwelling in Barwick 3. l. 6. s. 8 d.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Sir Francis Popham Knight. as well in respect and
good will which I bear unto his wife, being the daughter of my late deceased
dear wife, the sum of 2000 Marks of lawful money of England upon condition
nevertheless, and so that the said Sir Fran^is Popham, add the said Lady Anne
his wife, give a sufficient discharge, and a general release to mine Executor
or Executors, as well for that sum, as also for the receipt of all the rest of
her part of portion of the Plate, Money and Household Stuff already paid, and
de^ivered to them, or to their use, as appears by several Bills, or Notes,
subscribed with mine own hand, which I do think to be the very true half and
better half of the said Plate, Money, and Household Stuff, part whereof was
delivered by one John Frishborn, my late Servant to Sir John Popham ^night,
late Lord chief Justice of England at his late house in Chancery Lane; the rest
of the Household Stuff, as Chaires, Stools, Bedsteeds, Kitchin-stuffe Tables
and such like, was delivered by the said Fishborn to Sir John Pophams Servants
at Newington, 1000 pounds in money paid in this sort, viz.

To Sir John Popham by his Servant Straker upon the said Sir John's Bill before
marriage 300. l. which Bill after the marriage I returned to the said Sir John
Popham, 700. l. were paid to the said Sir John Popham upon the marriage by one
Mr. Anthony Law late dwelling in Paternoster Row, London, the better moity of
the Plate due to Sir Francis Popham received by one Master Clarke sometimes
toward the said Sir John, and now a Councellor at Law of the Middle Temple, as
I guess.

Item, I give to my welbeloved Friend Amy Popham 200. l. to be paid to her at
the day of her marriage, or when she shall accomplish the age of 18. years.

Item, I give to Francis Popham, Mary Popham, Elizabeth Popham, Jane Popham,
and Anne Popham, all daughters of the said Lady Anne Popham, 100. l. a piece,
which several sums I will shall be paid them at the days of their marriage,
or when they shall accomplish the age of 18. years, And my will and meaning is,
that unless the said Sir Francis Popham, and the said Lady Anne his wife, do
or shall give to mine Executor, or Executors, a general acquittance or release
to the effect above mentioned, that then as well the said Legacy of 2000. Marks
so wiled to be given to the said Sir Francis Popham, and the Lady Anne his
wife; as also the other several Legacies given and bequeathed to every of the
said children of Sir Francis Popham, and the Lady his wife, shall remain, and
be to the use of mine Executor or Executors, to be wholly dispo^ed and given by
them within one year after my decease, partly to the amending of High ways,
and partly to poor Maidens marriages and partly to the releasing of poor men
that lie in prison for debt, and partly to the poor people of mine intended
Hospital when it shall please God that it shall be established and erected. And
where perhaps it is, or may be supposed that the said Sir Io. Popham has paid
300. l. to Sir Rowland Hayward of the City of London Alderman, as a due debt
unto him, upon the Bonds of John Dudley, and Thomas Dudley; I protest before
God, that I paid the whole 300. l. to the said Sir John Popham in this sort, to
be paid over to the said Sir Rowland Heyward, viz. 200. l. by my Servant John
Fishborn, and 100 l. by one Henry Best Scrivener near Temple Bar: There was a
demand made by Alderman Ducats Executor for 400. l. owing to the said Alderman
upon the Bonds of John Dudley and Tho Dudley, for Copper, for the use of the
Earl of Leicester, which the said Earl transpor^ed into Spain, which debt was
paid to the said Alderman; For I my self was a Messenger from the said Earl to
the said Alderman to let him understand that Mr. Bainham my Lords special
Officer and Receiver should discharge them presently, and after it was
discharged the said Alderman demanded interest for the forbearing of the 400.
l. which as I remember Thomas Dudley discharged; Mr. Juctice Owin as I
remember, who had the doing in the Testament of Alderman Ducket, promised to
deliver in the said Bond to Sir J. Popham then being Attorney, which I do
believe he did: And where Mr. John Gardener brother to my late wife, by his
last Will and Testament did give unto Anne Dudley (now wife to Sir Francis
Popham) 200. l. to be paid to her at the day of her marriage, the same 100 l.
was, and is paid by me at or before the day of her marriage, viz. In a Chain of
Gold being fourscore seventeen pounds ten shillings in Gold, and for the
fashion paid to Mr. Padmore Goldsmith in London 50. s. which compleats the 100.
l. for the which amongst other things which I delivered in trust have no
acquittance.

Item, I give to Mr. Jeffery Nightingale Esquire the Sum of 40. l. of lawful money
of England.

Also, I give to my Cosen Will. Stapleton, Son of Sir Richard Stapleton Knight
100. Marks.

Item, I give unto the children of Sir Francis Willoughby Knight, 100 l. of
lawful money of England, to be equally distributed amongst them.

Item, I give unto John Law one of the Procurators of the Arches, London, 200.
pounds.

And to Mr. Thomas Brown 10. l. to make a Ring.

Item, I give to the wife and children of John Gardener, my late wifes Nephew,
if they be living, after my decease, being the Mother and two Sons, 200. Marks
to be equally divided amongst them.

Item, I give to the poor people of Hadstocke, to be distributed amongst them
by the Churchwardens and Constables there for the time being 20. pounds.

Item, I give to the poor people of Littlebury, and to the poor people of
Balsham, to be distributed as before to either Town, twenty pounds.

Item, I give to the Person and Churchwardens of Balsham aforesaid for the
time being to buy a Bell withal, to be hanged up in the Steeple to amend the
Ring there 20. pounds.

Item, To the poor of Sout^minster 20. pounds.

Item, To the poor of little Hallenbury 20. pounds.

Item, To the poor of Dunsby in the County of Lincoln 20, pounds.

Item, I give to Robert Wright Poulterer of little Hallenbury Five pound.

Item, I give to Widow Ask, late wife of Robert Ask of London Goldsmith 20.
l. which she owes me.

Item, my will and meaning is, that there shall no interest or increase for
money be taken after my decease, so as he or they by whom any Sums of money are
or shall be owing, do pay the principal debt within one half year next after
my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the poor prisoners within the Prisons of Ludgate,
Newgate, the two Compters in London, the Kings Bench and the Marshalsea, the
sum of 200. l. to be paid and divided among the same Prisoners by even and
equal portions.

Item, I give to Susan Price at the day of her marriage 40. l.

Item, I give to one Collins of the Town of Cursall in Essex Five pounds.

Item, I give to my good Friends Mistress Heyward, and Mistress Low, either of
them 10. l.

Item, I give to Margaret Woodhall my God-daughter the Sum of 20. pounds.

Item, I give to all other my God-children five pounds a piece.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Masters and Fellows as the Corporation of
Jesus College in Cambridge the Sum of 500. Marks of lawful money of England
to be employed, used, and bestowed for or in some perpetuity, for and to the
use, benefit, and behalf of the said College, Master, Fellows, and Scholars,
in such sort, manner and form, as by the discretion of the Bishop of Ely for
the time being, the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge for the time being, the Master
and Fellows of the said College for the time being, and my Executors
hereafter named or the Survivor or Survivors of them, if they be living when
the bestowing of the said Sum shall come in question, shall be thought best and
most convenient.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Master and Fellows as the Corporation of
Magdalen College in Cambridge the Sum of five hundred pounds to be employed
used or bestowed for or in some perpetuity for and to the use, benefit, and
behalf of the said College, Master, Fellows and Scholars there, in such
sort, manner and form, as by the discretion, privity, and consent of the
Vice Chancellor in Cambridge for the time being, the Master of Trinity College
in Cambridge for the time being, and the Master and Fellows of the said
Magdalene College for the time being shall be thought best and most convenient.

And I will that all my great Chains of Gold, and all my Jewels of what kind
soever they be, shall be sold by mine Executors and Supervisors hereafter named
toward the better and speedier payment of my Legacies, and performance of this
my last Will and Testament.

And my will and meaning is, that all the Legacies by me in this my Testament
and la^ Will given and bequeathed and for the payment of much whereof there is
no certain time set down shall be paid within two years next after my decease
at the furthest.

Also, I give for and toward the building of mine intended Hospital Chapel
and School-house the sum of 5000. l. if I do not live to see it performed in
my life time.

And I desire in the Name of God my Feoffes and my Executor or Executors within
two years after my decease, or sooner if they may conveniently (if it please
not God I live to see, and cause the same my determination to be performed and
accomplished) to see and cause the same to be performed and accomplished.

Also, I give the residue of the years which I shall have at the time of my
decease in one Close called the Withies, lying within the Town and Fields of
Cottingham, in the County of York, to the Major and Aldermen of Beverley, or to
the Governor of the same Town, and his Assistants for the time being to this
end and purpose, that they shall distrubute, or cause to be distributed, the
yearly profit arising of the same over and above the yearly Rent payable to the
Kings Majesty, amongst the poorest people dwelling within the said Town of
Beverley.

Also, I give to the Major and Aldermen of the City of Lincoln for the time
being all such profits and revenewes, as shall arise and grow of the Parsonage
of Glentham within the County of Lincoln and all the residue of the years that
shall remain after my decease, to this intent, that they shall distribute and
bestow, or cause to be distributed and bestowed the same amongst twenty of the
poorest people that shall then be dwelling in the said City, with the consent
and privity of the Dean of the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, or the Recorder of
the same for the time being (they the said Major, Aldermen, Deane and Recorder
foreseeing that the Parsonage be letten for their most benefit.)

Item, I give unto the Treasury or Storehouse of mine intended Hospital to
begin their stock with, and to defend the rights of the house 1000. l. of
lawful English money.

And I give to every one of my Feoffes whom I have put in trust about my
intended Hospital) to whom I have not given any thing in this my last Will)
the Sum of 26. l. 30. s. 4. d. of lawful money of England.

Item, I give to Amy Popham, if it please God she live to keep house, three
Fetherbeds, and so many pair of Holland sheets, with the Boulsters to them,
and so many Hangings of Tapistry as will furnish her a Bedchamber: The rest of
my Household Stuff I will shall be sold by mine Executors for the speedier
payment of my Legacies and performance of this my last Will.

Item, I give to the widow Tassell of Balsham the sum of 5 l. of lawful
money of England, and to Thomas Lawrence the Elder of the same Town, 5 l. of
like lawful money of England.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the brother of Percivall Graung my late servant
deceased the sum of 20 l. of lawful money of England.

And of this my last will and Testament I make and ordain Richard Sutton of
London Esquire and John Law one of the Procurators of the Arches of London my
Executors charging them as they will answer at the last day of Judgment that
they or one of them in the absence of the other endeavor themselves with all
earnestness and diligence to see this my will performed according to my true
meaning and charitable intent.

And I make Overseers of this my last will and Testament, the Reverend Father
in GOD George Abbot Arch Bishop of Canterbury unto whom I give and bequeath
the sum of ^0 marks of lawful money of England or a piece of plate of that
value at his election and choice.

And also Lancelot Androes, Almonizer to the Kings Majesty, my other
Supervisor and Overseer of this my last Will and Testament, unto whom I give
and bequeath the Sum of 30. l. of like lawful money of England, or a piece of
Plate of that value at his election and choice.

Item, my will and full intent and meaning is, that if any person or persons
whatsoever, to whom I have in and by this my last Will and Testament given and
bequeathed any Legacy or sum or Sums of money, shall any ways gainsay impugn
contradict, or impeach this my last Will and Testament, that then all and every
one so impugning contradicting impeaching or gainsaying this my last Will and
Testament, and every of their children and kin folks to whom I have in and by
this my last Will and Testament given and bequeathed any Legacy or Sum or Sums
of money, shall have no part nor portion of any such guilt, Legacy, or bequest,
but shall utterly lose the same, and be utterly barred thereof as if no such
Legacy, Gift or Bequest had been given unto him, her, or them, by this my last
Will and Testament (any thing before in these presents mentioned or contained
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.)

Item, I give and bequeath to Richard Sutton, one of my Executors before named,
the Sum of 100. l. and to Mistress Law over and besides the Legacy before to her
given, I give the sum of 40. l. to make her a Gown withal.

Item, I give to Mr. Hutton the Vicar of Littlebury 20. l. To the town of Camps
Castle where I dwell to be distributed amongst the Poor of the same Parish ten
pounds.

Also to the Poor of the Town of Elcombe to be equally distributed amongst
them the Sum of 10. l.

Item, I give and bequeath those my Manors of Littlebury and Hadstock in the
County of Essex to the right Honorable the L. Thomas Howard Earl of Suffolk,
and to his Heirs for ever and upon condition that he do well and truly pay or
cause to be made to my Executors before-named or to the Survivor of them the
Sum of 10000. l. of lawful money of England within one year next after my
decease. And if he shall refuse to pay the said Sum of 10000. l. for the said
Manors, then I give and bequeath the said Manors of Littlebury and Hadstock
to my said Executors and to their Heirs for ever. And then I will and devise
that the said Manors of Littlebury and Hadstock shall be sold by my said
Executors or the Survivor of them to the uttermost price and value that they
may be sold for, and the money coming of the sale thereof, together with as
much more as shall make up the same Sum the full Sum of 20000. l. I will shall
be employed and bestowed by my said Executors, or the Survivor of them with the advice of my Supervisors aforementioned, in some good works and charitable uses
for mine intended Hospital and for poor people, or otherwise as they in their
wisdoms and discretions shall think fit.

Item. I give to Mr. Flud Parson of Newington the Sum of 13. l. 6. s. 8. d. And
to the wife of Benjamin King of Southminster 6. l. 13. s, 4. d.

Item, I give to Thomas Averel if it shall be found that he has dealt
faithfully and plainly with me in my business the sum of 10. l.

Item, I give unto the wife of Mr. Ingry of Littlebury 3. l. 6. s. 8. d.

Item, I give unto Sir Henry Hubberd Knight. the Kings Majesty's Attorney General,
a piece of Plate of the value of 10. l. And to Mr. Locksmith his Clark the Sum
of 10. l.

Item, I give to the poor of the Parish of Hackney 10. l.

Item, I give to Bridget Law the Sum of 10. l. And to the Lady Altham daughter
to Mr. Auditor Sutt^n the sum of 20. l.

Item, I give to Sir Edw. Philips Master of the Rolls a piece of Plate of the
value of 20. l. And to Sir James Altham one of the Barons of the Exchequer one
piece of Plate of the value of Twenty pounds.

Item, I give to my late wives kinsman Guy Godolphin the sum of 10. l.

Item, I give to the right honorable my very good Lord the Earl of Suffolk
the Sum of 400. All the rest of my goods, Chattels and Debts not before given
and disposed, I give and bequeath to my intended Hospital, to be employed and
bestowed on and about the same, according to the discretion of the Feoffes of
my said Hospital, or the greater part of them: In witness hereof, I have
hereunto set my Hand and Seal the 28 day of November. above written, Thomas
Sutton. Memorandum, that the same Testator did acknowledge this his Will
written and contained in these 19. leaves to be his last Will and Testament,
and that his Hand and Seal set thereunto is his own Hand and Seal, and that he
had heard it read, and was acquainted with the Contents of it the said 28. of
November. above-written in presence of Us, John Law, Leonard Houghton, Alexande^,
Longworth, Thomas Hall. The mark of Richard Pearce. The mark of Tho. Johnson,
Primo Decembris, 1611. idem recognitum per testatorem coram, Jo. Crook, Quarto
December. 1611. recognit. to be the Testators last will. Before me Hen. Thoresby.

A Codi^ill to be annexed to the last Will and Testament of Tho. Sutton Esquire
made and declared the day whereon he dyed, being the 12. of December. 1611.

Item, he gave and bequeathed to Mr. Judge Crook, one of the Judges of the
Kings Bench at VVestmin. the Sum of 10. l. And to Mr. Henry Thoresby one of the
Masters of the Court of Chancery the like sum of ten l. And to Mrs. Sutton of
London Widow, the sum of 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. to make her a Ring.

Also he gave to Mr. Hutton Clark and Vicar of Littlebury, the advousion or
next presentation to the Parsonage of Dunsby in the county of Lincoln. Also he
did then publish and declare before Mr. Flud Parson of Stoke-Newington, in the
County of Middlesex, Robert Petit, Alexander Longworth, John Parsons, and
Thomas Johnson his Cook that he had made his Will, and thereof had made and
ordained Richard Sutton of London, Esquire, and John Law his Executors.

FINIS.

