The DOOR of SALVATION OPENED By the Key of REGENERATION: OR A TREATISE
CONTAINING The Nature, Necessity, Marks and Means of Regeneration; As also the
Duty of the Regenerate.

By GEORGE SWINNOCKE, M.A. and Pastor of Rickmersworth in Hertfordshire.

Matthew. 18.3. Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as
little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

Non est via ad regnum sine primitiis regm: nec sperare porest coeleste regnum,
cui neque super propriam regnare concupiscentian adhuc datur. Bernard.

LONDON, Printed by John Best for THO. PARKHURST at the Three Crowns in the
lower end of Cheapside, over against the great Conduit. 1660.

To the right worshipful Sir Charles Herboard Knight, To the Worshipful Richard
Franklin Esquire John Beresford Esquire Edward Ironside Esquire Richard Beresford Esquire And
to the Gentlemen, Yeomen, and the rest of the inhabitants of the parish of
Rickmersworth.
IT is the custom of our Country (and if I mistake not, a Statute Law of the
Nation) that children should be kept and maintained by those places in which
they were born. This book, (which treats of the Babe of grace) was conceived
in your Parish, brought forth in your Pulpit, and now presents it self to
you, (not for your protection and patronage but) for your perusal and practice.

I confess that I am bound to many of you in courtesy, to all in duty, and I
know not better how to express my thankfulness to some, and my faithfulness to
all, then by dealing uprightly with you in the concernments of your souls. Romans
1.9
God is my witness whom I (desire to) serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his
Son, that without ceasing, I make mention of you always in my prayers: And can
through the strength of Christ, much more rejoice in one of your conversions,
then in all your possessions. Ye know what a large Epistle I have already
written to you (I beseech you to read it often, To the Reader, in Hell and
Heaven epitomized:
and) O that the Lord would write it within you. We live in days that are full
of division; but all that have any face of religion, or form of godliness, will
acknowledge the things which I have written to you, to be the commandments of
God. My chief work is, and has been to preach unto you Repentance toward God,
and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, which are of such infinite weight in order
to your unchangeable welfares. And could I prevail with you heartily to
embrace those essentials of Gods word, I should have confidence of your joyful
appearance in the other world. It Is a sign of a very foul stomach, to loath such
solid food as those vitals of Christianity are, and to pick at Kickshaws or
Sallads, (I mean either) the newfangled opinions of some upstart way, or the
vain flourishes of humane wit. O how gladly would I stand forth to your
comfort at the judgment feat of Christ! which that I may, I earnestly request
you again and again (in obedience to your blessed Savior, and for the sake of
your precious souls) to ponder and practice these three particulars. Consider,
that they are not only commended to you by your weak and dying Minister, but
commanded you by your Maker, who will within a short time reckon with you for
the performance of them.

First, Make conscience of, and be diligent about the means of grace; neglect
not secret, private or public ordinances. Your bodies may as probably live
without diet, as your souls without duties. This is Gods way by which he
infuseth grace where it is wanting, and increases grace where it is. As the
head by the nerves and sinews as organs, conveyeth animal spirits to the whole
body; So does the Churches head Christ Jesus by ordinances convey his Spirit
and grace to his members. Does not experience teach you, that your hearts are
like water, though heated a little while over the fire of the means of grace,
yet are no sooner taken off, but they are returning to their former coldness?
Mariners that swim against wind and tide, must row hard and continue at it, if
they intermit but a little while, how far and how forcibly are they carried
backwards! It is not unknown to you (if ye have any knowledge in spiritual
affairs) how busily and unweariedly the Devil, world and flesh are drawing you
to hell; it highly concerns you to be always, by duties, fetching in supplies
from above, if ever ye would arrive at heaven. I do not wonder that many in our
perilous times, (who live above duties) are given up to sensuality or
blasphemies. The Papists say that if they can get the Protestants out of their
strong holds of Scripture, into the open fields of Councils and Fathers, they
should quickly be able to foil them. If Satan can prevail with men but to
throw away the Word of God (which is the sword of the Spirit,) and the prayer
of faith (which engages Christ himself in the combat) he will never doubt the
conquest. While men wall in the Kings high way, between Sun and Sun, they have
the protection of the Law; if otherwise, it is at their own peril; If you keep
the way of God, he will be your guard; but if you wander and leave him, no
wonder if he leave you. And certainly woe will be to you, when God departs
from you. A dreadful night of darkness must needs be expected, when this Sun is
departed.

The ministry of the word is called the salt of the earth. Mat. 5.
Saints are called Doves; Who are those that fly as doves to their windows! Now
the property of Doves, is to be exceedingly in love with a salt-stone. Kites
and Rooks care little for it, but Doves are mightily incited to it: Graceless
persons neglect and despise the means of grace, but they that ever enjoyed God
in them, cannot but set a due price upon them. The beggar, the poor in spirit
will know that door again, at which he has received a good dole; I will never
forget thy precepts, for by them thou have quickened me.

Secondly, Mind the religious education of your children. Bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. It was the wish of Crates, that he were
upon the top of the highest hill in the world, that from thence he might cry
out against monstrous parents, that toil to leave their children great
estates, but take no care what manner of persons they should be which should
enjoy those estates. I doubt not but ye are careful to breed your Sons
Gentlemen, or to bring them up to trades, that they may know how to live a few
days in this world; but alas how few of you are solicitous, to breed them new
creatures, and to bring them up to Christianity, that they may know how to live
for ever, in the other world! I remember that Augustine speaks mournfully, Some
praise my father for being at such cost (even beyond his estate) in my nurture,
but alas his care was to make me an orator, not to make me a Christian. I am
confident, many a child bemoans that, now he is damned in hell, which the
Father did when he was converted on earth. I cannot condemn the education of
children according to the quality of their parents, nor their bringing up to
particular callings (this latter I am sure is a duty) but that which is first
should be last, and that which is last should be first. Your greatest care, and
that in the first place, should be to seek the Kingdom of God, for your selves
and children, and then other things shall be added to you; Caleb gave his
daughter the upper and the nether springs. O labor that yours may with Jacob
have the dews of heaven as well as the fatness of the earth.

Elisha wept when he saw Hazael, 2 Kings 3.12, 13.
and foresaw that he would slay young men, and dash the children against the
wall: do nor some of you give far far greater occasion of weeping (if possible,
tears of blood) in slaying and murdering the souls of your dear children,
teaching them by your patterns, to live like Heathens and Atheists! Believe it,
God commits the charge of, and will account with you for all the souls in
your families. Genesis 4.3, 10, 11.
When Cain had flain his brother Abel, God called to him, Where is thy Brother
Abel? And Cain said, I know not, am I my Brothers keeper, And the Lord said,
What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the
ground. And now thou art cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to
receive thy brother, blood at thine hand. So suppose God should whisper one of
you in the ear, Cruel Father, Careless Master, Where is thy child or servant,
that dyed so many months or years ago? You may possibly think what Cain spoke,
Lord I know not (whether in heaven or hell.) Holy Greenham says, that many
men's children shall follow them up and down in hell, cursing them and crying
out of them, for neglecting to instruct them.
Was I their keeper? (O think of it with speed and reform.) May not God reply
very truly, Cursed sinner, vile wretch, What have thou done? The voice of thy
child, of thy servants soul-blood cries to me from hell. And now thou art
cursed from hell, which has opened her mouth to receive thy sons, thy servants
soul at thine hand. Friends, Friends, what will you do, when God shall thus
deal with you, for your neglect of relative duties! Possibly ye may think I
deal too sharply; but truly the reason is because I know that sin will not deal
mildly, either with you or yours; And should I not give you warning, the blood
of your own and childrens souls, would be required at my hands. Good Lord that
ye did but believe what it is to be guilty of others blood! Heathens and
Infidels provide for the body and temporal well-being of their children; and
what do many of you more? Bears that bring forth misshapen whelps, will by
licking them, bring them to a better form. Your Children are brought forth
enemies to God, and are by nature children of wrath, and heirs of eternal
death; does it not behove you to strive that by religious nurture, they may
become children of the promise, and heirs of eternal life.

Thirdly, Make sure of Regeneration; be never satisfied, till ye can upon
Scripture grounds affirm that your natures are regenerated. This, this is the
one thing necessary, Your All hangs upon this hinge. If this be not done, ye
are undone, undone eternally. All your profession, civility, privileges,
gifts, duties are ciphers, and signify nothing unless Regeneration be the
figure put before them. It is Regeneration that will make you the sons of God,
the members of Christ, the temples of the Spirit, that will give you an holy
improvement, of all providence, a right to all the promises, and at last the
purchased possession. It is Regeneration that will teach you to live like men,
like Christians, like Angels in the love and fruition of the infinitely blessed
God. O the price of this pearl is not known in this beggarly world!

A grave and wise Counselor of France (being desirous in his old age, to
retire himself) was entreated by the King, to write down some directions, and
leave with him for the more prosperous government of his Realm. The Counselor
took some paper, and wrote on the top, Moderation; in the middle, Moderation;
at the bottom, Moderation; Demosthenes being asked what was the chief thing in
an Orator, answered Elocution; and being demanded the same question three
times, what made an Orator, he still gave the same answer. Aug. ^pist. 56. ad
Di osc.
Augustine being demanded, what was the greatest requisite of a Christian: What
was the first, second, and third? still answered, Humility, Humility, Humility.
Truly, what the Counselor said of Moderation, the Grecian of Elocution, and
the Father of Humility, I shall say of Regeneration; If you ask me, what is the
chiefest thing in the world, for a man to mind? What is that which is worthy of
all his time, and strength, and thoughts, and words, and actions? I answer,
Regeneration; If you demand What is that which is of greatest necessity, and
excellency, that brings in the greatest profit, delight and happiness? I
answer, Regeneration. He that has this has all that is worth having, the
having of this is heaven: He that wants this, has nothing: the whole world
cannot make up the want of this, the want of this is hell. O Sirs, your
everlasting making or marring, depends upon your sincerity, or hypocrisy in
this. Of what infinite consequence is it therefore to you (in whatsoever ye
come short) to make sure here. Alas when ye come to throw your last cast for
eternity, how will the stoutest of you do, to look death in the face, without
Regeneration in your hearts? God has in an hundred texts of Scripture, devoted
all unregenerate ones to the unquenchable fire, and can any of you think to
make him a liar? Believe it, as soon as death landeth you at the other world,
you will have other thoughts of God and his Truths, then now ye have.

For your help in this work, which is of such absolute indispensable necessity
unto your never dying souls, I commend to you this Treatise, beseeching the
blessed God: to make it serviceable unto your salvations. Ignatius when he
heard a clock strike, would say, I have one hour more to answer for; I must
tell you that ye have eighteen hours, eighteen Sermons more to answer for. When
they were preached, they had from some of you a favorable attention; now they
are printed (it is not unknown what providence brought them to the press) I
wish they may have within you all an effectual operation, that both the Author
and his labors may appear to your joy at that great and terrible day.

These things being signified, Act. 20.32.
I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to (bring
you home who are out of Christ and to) build you up, (who are in Christ) and to
give you an inheritance among them which are sanctified: And subscribe myself,

Your Servant for Jesus sake, GEORGE SWINNOCKE.
January, 10. 1659.
THere is now published two excellent Treatises of Mr. Jeremiah Burrough's, one
on the fifth of Matthew, being many Sermons preached at Cripple gate, upon all
the Beatitudes.

And Gospel-Revelation in Three Treatises, viz. 1. The Nature of God. 2. The
excellency of Christ. And 3. The excellency of Man's Immortal Soul. Both
published by Will. Greenhil, Will. Bridge, Philip Nigh, John Yates, Matthew
Mead, Will. Adderly. Both sold by Tho. Parkhurst in Cheapside.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
AS there are two things which commend a place, the fruitfulness of the soil,
and the pleasantness of the situation, the one suiting the necessities, and the
other the comforts of life: So there are two things which commend a Book; the
worthiness of the Matter therein handled, and the skilfulness of the hand that
contrived it; upon both accounts this gracious Treatise justly deserves with
good men acceptance and value; The matter thereof, (viz.) The Doctrine of
Regeneration being of most absolute necessity to the being of a Christian; and
the manner of handling it being so quick and elegant, as cannot but convince
the Judgment, and gratify the Palate of the most serious Reader: It being
like the Land of Canaan full of milk and honey; a sweetness which does both
nourish and cleanse. And as once David did consecrate the Spoils of the
Gentiles to the building of the Temple; So has the Author adorned this his
Spiritual Treatise with a sanctified application of many pertinent Histories in
humane Authors, to the attempering thereof the better unto the most delicate
minds.

I shall not detain the Reader by any discourse on Regeneration, the Nature and
the Necessity whereof I find so fully handled in this Book; but shall commend
the perusual thereof unto all sorts of Readers: It being so written as may by
Gods blessing be very likely to Convince and Convert those who are strangers to
Regeneration, if they will bring but Self-love to the reading of it, and as may
fill the mouths and hearts of those who are partakers of so great a benefit
with praises unto God their heavenly Father by gracious Adoption, and unto the
Lord Christ, their Second Adam, and spiritual Father by powerful Regeneration;
to whose blessing I commend the Work, the Author and the Reader,

ED. REYNOLDS.
January 31. 1659.
To the READER.
Christian Reader.
IF there be any thing of importance, it is the working out of Salvation; Phil.
2.12
if there be any way or method to work it out, it is by Sanctification; 2 These.
2.13.
Which Sanctity begins in Regeneration, and ends in Glorification. The first of
these, is the subject of this ensuing Discourse. Regeneration, or the New
birth, has various titles and appellations in Scripture, yet all pointing to
the same thing, as it was the same Messiah, though represented by several
types; sometimes Regeneration is called the new creature, Gal. 6.15. it is indeed
a creation, because it is beyond the sphere of natural causes to produce; and
it is a New creature, (...), in opposition to the old man; yet it is not new
for substance, Ipsam sane, animam esse nemo sanae mentis ignorant. Bern.
but qualities. Sometimes Regeneration is called a Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. It
is a rising from sin Aug. Tom.
; there can be no rising to glory, till there be first a rising from sin.
Sometimes it is called a transformation. Romans 12.2. (...), Be ye transformed, by
the renewing of your mind. In the incarnation Christ did assume our humane
nature; in Regeneration, we partake of his divine nature; by Baptism we have
Christ's Name; by the new birth, his image; the change wrought in the new birth,
is wonderful; the man is alter idem, like Caleb, of another Spirit: It is said
of Alex. Severus, that he could play on the viol, he could carve, or paint, but
after he was Emperor, he was never seen to do any of these things, it was
below him: So though man by nature be proud, malicious, expert in all the works
of the flesh, yet when once he is begoten of the seed of the word Jam. 1.18.
now he is quite altered, ad changed from what he was. 1 Cor. 6.11. but yet
every change does not denominate the new birth; there may be an external,
partial, temporary change, yet all these may be false conceptions, then ^birth
implies a new heart, Habet, suos impetus pietas. Quin ti^s dec. 6.
the will like the primum mobile, is carried with an holy violence, heavenward;
and the affections, as the other orbs move along with it; before this new
birth, there are spiritual pangs; though there is magis and minus, all have not
the like pangs; all feel the same hammer of the Law, though some are bruised
more by it then others. Regeneration has an universal influence, Grace
perfumes and consecrates the whole soul; though the Saints are Regenerate but
in part, yet in every part, 1 These. 5.23. This New birth is not arbitrary but
necessary. Jo. 3.7. you must be born again; other things are for convenience,
this is of necessity Generatus damnatus nifi regeneratus Austin.
; better never have been born, if not born again; Generation damnes without
Regeneration; the new birth is a glorious birth; it is (...) from above, Joh.
3.7. A true Saint is of the blood royal, he is born of God. 1 John 3.9. That
is the best pedigres, which is fetched from heaven. Regeneration is the
signature, and engraving of the Holy Ghost upon the soul; the new born
Christian is decked with the spangles of holiness, the Angels glory; the new
birth is a victorious birth. Whatsoever is born of God, (...), overcomes the
world. 1 John 5.4. It conquers the worlds music, and fornaoe. The new birth is
an happy and a joyful birth; at our first birth we come weeping into the world,
but at our new birth, there is cause of joy, now we are begotten unto a lively
hope. 1 Pet. 1.3. How may we leap for joy, when Christ is formed in our hearts!
it is matter of joy that Christ took our flesh, but it is greater joy that we
partake of his spirit; we are to calculate our nativity from our new birth. The
Persians did solemnize with triumph regum natalitia, the birth days of their
Kings; oh how may Christians with gladness remember and celebrate their
spiritual birth day; I mean that time when they began to be born of water and
the spirit: To conclude, this new birth is an everlasting birth. 1 John 3.9.
His seed remains in him, he who is truly Regenerate, dies not the Second death.
The new born creature never grows old, he outlives death Rev. 20.6. on such
the second death has no power. This is that we are most nearly concernd in; O
that all the disputes of the times, about Pedo baptism and Church Membership
might at last be reduced to this, How shall I do to be regenerate? how shall I
get a better heart? how shall I procure evidences for heaven? these questions
will help to make Converts, whereas others wake only Scepticks and Opinionists.
The temper of most men in our age, is to have hot brains, and cold hearts;
their religion evaporates into fume, and froth, and may be likened to those
ears which run only into straw; but I shall need say the loss, the doctrine
of Regeneration being so amply, and accurately handled in the following
Treatise. For the author of this work, though I have not had much knowledge of
him, yet by that little converse had with him, I judge him to be a man of a
serious and gracious spirit; it is excellent when the vessels of Gods house
retain in them a relish and savor of that Good wine which they pour out to
others. This piece I hope may be very profitable, and may serve with the
blessing of God, to be an alarm to awaken drowsy consciences, that they sleep
not the sleep of death; which that it may, is the prayer of him who is,

Thy Friend and Servant in the Lord. Thomas Watson.
From my study at Stephen Walbrook. Ian. 26. 1659.
THere is extant likewise of the Authors of this Treatise, an excellent Book
entitled, Heaven and Hell Epitomized. The true Christian Characterized. As
also an Exhortation with Motives, Means, and Directions to be speedy and
serious about the work of Conversion.

An Exposition on the whole Book of Salomons Song, commonly called the
Canticles: Wherein the Text is explained, and useful Observations raised
thereupon. By John Robotham, Preacher of the Gospel. Both sold by Tho.
Parkhurst at the lower end of Cheapside.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
IN how happy a time do thou live, when God sends so many, and so powerful
Messengers, to call thee from the ways of sin and death! And how miserable and
unexcusable will thou prove, if thou be after all this a stranger to the life
of faith, of holiness! If nature had made thee a spiritual person, a child of
God, and an heir of heaven, this Doctrine of Regeneration might then be
received as strangely as it was by Nicodemus, and as neglectfully as it is by
careless worldlings, and as disdainfully as it is by unbelieving and malignant
enemies of the Holy Ghost. But sooner may you hope to find a new way into the
world or a state of nature, besides the way of humane birth, then to find
another way into the state of grace, and the Kingdom of Heaven, beside the New
birth, by the Spirit. Nature proclaims its own vitiosity, to every diligent
observer. He that is so carnal as not to observe it, in the crosseness and
rebellion of his soul against God, and the worlds captivity to self and flesh,
one would think should yet be so rational as to observe it, in the confusion
and inordinate behavior of men to one another; While self is exalted against
the good of friends and Neighbors, yea and against the common good, and that
so uncurably as the wars and calamities of the Nations do signify. For whence
come wars and fightings among men? come they not hence? even of their lusts
that war in their members? Jam. 4.1. But the corrupted soul is so conform to
the worlds corrupted state, that it is no wonder if he perceive no need of a
Restorer, and so be in heart an Infidel upon that account; As a man born blind,
may think the world has no great need of the Sun, because his eyes are so
conform to a state of darkness, that the night seems to him as good as the
day. As all the creatures which we daily see, condemn the Atheist that denies
their Creator: So all the spots and blemishes of the creatures, especially the
universal pravity of mankind, condemns the Infidel, that seeing not Original
sin and misery, denies the necessity of a redeemer: And the holiness of
renewed souls about him, does further condemn him, that does not acknowledge
the sanctifier, who is the Cause. The Reparation of vitiated nature, is a
mysterious, but glorious work of God, which Angels desire to pry into, and all
the Regenerate rejoice in and admire, as having themselves been made partakers
of so sweet and excellent a share. The Kingdom of darkness is a confederacy of
wicked Angels and men, that are all ruled by one malicious principal Governor.
( Matthew. 12.24, to 30. and 25, 41. etc.) whose work is to mar the work of God,
that nature may not attain its primitive and proper end. And the Kingdom of
Christ, is the holy society headed by him, that has made it his undertaken
work, to be the repairer of depraved nature, and to destroy the works of the
Devil, and to remove impediments, and conquer opposition, and carry on his
healing work, that nature may yet attain its ends, in despite of sin, and
death and Hell.

As ever you would not be guilty of contemning this wonderful work of Natures
Reparation, Elevation, and Perfection, see now that you overlook not the great
necessity of it in your selves, where one would think, as it does most nearly
concern you, so it should be most easy to you to perceive it; No part of nature
is so deploratly vitiated as the soul of man, (except the Devils.) This was thy
case that read these words, (as well as mine and all men's else:) and if thou
art not Restored by renewing grace, it is thy case still, it is Satan's business
to keep thee from observing it, lest the knowledge of thy misery should waken
thee to accept and mind the cure. If he can make thee forget it, or deceive
thee by flatterers, and by a seeming formal outside religiousness, and quiet
thee in thy misery, till there be no remedy, but time is past, and mercy gone,
then is he the conqueror, and has the prey he aimed at, and thou art lost for
ever.

Thy salvation or damnation lies on thy escaping this deceit, and the
presumption, security, and impenitencie, that are its consequents; For this
end, thou have the plain directions of Gods word, the frequent warnings, the
close convictions, the fervent exhortations of his Ministers: If the Spirit set
in, and these prevail, and thou give up thy self unreservedly to the Lord,
thou art a happy man, and has received the beginning of life eternal.
Regeneration must give thee a new nature, suitable to the heavenly Doctrines
and duties, propounded in the holy Scriptures, or else they will seem strange
and toilsome things, and thou will savor them no more then thy food when thou
art sick. Till thou art Regenerate, and have a new heart and Spirit, thou will
still disrellish those saving truths that call thee higher, and put the upon
selfdenyal and a holy life; especially when they are closely applied to thee
for these ends: Thou will disrelish all spiritual prayers and conference,
especially when they discover and condemn thy unsanctifyed carnal state: And
thou will secretly or openly have a malignant distaste or opposition against
the Regenerate, that live by that renewing sanctifying Spirit, to which thou
art a stranger, and wilt look on them as a people that condemn thee by their
lives, unless thou can cheat thy self into a persuasion, that they are but a
company of singular, proud, selfconceited people, and really no otherwise
regenerate then thy self. And all the Religion and wisdom and good ^arriage,
which thou have, without this spiritual change, may easily be thy delusion, but
will never serve for thy Salvation, yea heaven it self would be to thee no
heaven, if it were set open to thee, and thou had not the heavenly nature, to
suit to the heavenly employment and felicity. This is the business of a
converting and confirming Ministry, and of the spirit and grace that works by
them; and this is the business that above other business, lies upon thee in
this present world: even to work now in thy soul, that holy love to the most
blessed God, who is love it self, which may cause thee here to thirst after his
presence, and to seek his favor, and to do his will, and may fit thee
delightfully for ever to enjoy him, and everlastingly to be solaced in the
beholding of his glory, in the feeling of his love, and in his heavenly
praises, and the fulfilling of his will. An unregenerate, unholy soul is as
unfit for this, as thy mortal enemy to lie in thy bosom, or as toads and
serpents, to be the familiar companions of men; or as thy Ox or Ass is to feed
with thee at thy table, and lie with thee in thy bed. Employments and
Enjoyments must have a suitable nature; if the Spirit fit thee not here for
heaven, in this life which is given thee purposely for that end, its pernicious
folly, to hope for a heaven, for which thy unsanctifyed nature is unfit; and to
promise thy self a felicity, of which thou art incapable, and which indeed thy
very heart does hate. Thou love not holiness here, nor the very imperfect
Saints that have it; how much less could thou love the infinite holiness of
God, who hates thy sins ten thousand times more, then the most severe and
sharp reprover hates them! If thy eyes cannot look upon the smallest candle
without offense, how then would they endure to look upon the Sun, and that in
the nearest access unto its glory? And if here thy enmity to the holy will of
God be such, that thou please not him, and he and his ways are displeasing
unto thee; how incapable art thou of Heaven, which is a state of mutual full
delight, where the Saints do perfectly please the Lord, and are perfectly
pleased in him and his pleasure? Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8. They that are after the
flesh, do mind (or savor) the things of the flesh; but they that are after the
spirit, the things of the spirit: To be carnally minded is death, but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace; Because the carnal mind is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be: So then,
they that are in the flesh cannot please God. And that which is born of the
flesh, is (but) flesh: As that which is born of the spirit is spirit. Joh. 3.6.
It is therefore undeniable, that till you are born of the spirit, and so made
spiritual, all your Religion and civility leaves you but enemies to God, and
in a state of Rebellion against his will, and consequently in a state of death;
Baptism which is the Sacrament of Regeneration, does signify this change, and
contain your profession, and engagement to the Lord. But if you have not the
Regeneration of the Spirit, as well as of the water, and the answer of a good
conscience as well as the washing of the flesh, you differ from Heathens and
Infidels, but as covenant-breakers differ from them that never entered into
covenant with Christ at all.

But I must not stand too long instructing you at the door, when my business is
to call you in, and to tell you that here is a Message to you from the Lord; A
Treatise of Regeneration, the most necessary Subject, in a style so clean and
close, in words so pertinent, plain, powerful and pressing, that undoubtedly by
a serious impartial perusal, joined with sober consideration and prayer, thy
soul may receive unspeakable commodity. Though I know not the Author, I am so
far acquainted with the spirit appearing in this Discourse, that I dare assure
thee he had very much help from heaven; and dare encourage thee to study this
savoury Treatise, as that which contains most certain, sound, and necessary
doctrine, directly tending to the saving of thy soul, without any tendency to
Heresy, Schism, or uncharitable cenforiousness: A Doctrine necessary for the
learned or unlearned, the rich and the poor, the honorable and the base, and
for men of all degrees and ranks: which if it had been more heartily studied,
and inculcated in public and in private, by all Preachers of the Gospel,
instead of the humane inventions, and Canons, and Opinions, and interests of
their several Sects, the Church and the consciences of the Pastors and their
Flocks had been now much wholer and sounder then they are. Believe it, whatever
thou art, thou shall never be saved for being a Lord, or a Knight, a Gentleman,
or a rich man, a learned man, or a well-spoken eloquent man; nor yet for being
a Calvinist, or a Lutheran, an Arminian, an Anabaptist, a Prelatist, a
Presbyterian, an Independent, or a Protestant formally and merely as such, much
less for being a Papist or of any such grossly deluded Sect: but as a Regenerate
Christian it is that thou must be saved, or thou can have no hope. If once
this renewing Spirit have taken possession of thy soul, and thou art made
partaker of the Divine and Heavenly nature, and art become a living Member of
Christ, thou shall be saved, though thou know not whether Diocesan Bishops,
Metropolitans, Primates and Patriarks, or only Parochial Bishops be most
agreeable to the mind of God; and though thou know not whether any other Book
than the Bible should contain the Liturgy of the Church; and though thou know
not in a hundred controversies of the times, about Orders and Forms, and
Ceremonies, and smaller points of doctrine, which party it is that is in the
right. Holiness will save thee without the formalities of this party or of
that, but formalities will not save thee without holiness.

To you that are Regenerate I shall say but this, keep very honorable and
thankful thoughts of your spiritual birth; Live now as the sons of the Eternal
God, and as the heirs of everlasting life: Set your faces now toward Heaven,
as those that see the grave at hand, and the vanities of this world all
vanishing into smoke, and as those that are resolved to have heaven or nothing.
Away with the sins, the baits and company that formerly were your desire and
delight. And seeing even the first hour of your conversion, there is joy in
heaven before the Angels for your sakes, for shame walk not in too much
dejectedness and despondency, but keep a harmony and concent with heaven,
seeing you are so highly concernd in the matter of their joy. And pray still to
the Lord of the harvest, that he will mind the forsaken nations of the earth,
and continue his kindness to this unworthy Island: in sending forth more such
Laborers into his harvest, as this reverend Author is here manifested by his
works to be; and that he will double his spirit on the messengers of grace,
that with faith they may speak the words of faith, and with life may speak the
words of life, and that the immortal seed which is sown by their hand, may
bring forth many sons to God, and spring up plenteously unto eternal life. And
among others, remember him, then whom scarce any is more obliged to be thankful
for the prayers of the Saints; even

The most unworthy Servant of the Lord, among them that have found mercy to be
faithful. RICHARD BAXTER.
January 31. 1659.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 21. for unto, read into. p. 21. l. 29. dele a, p. 46. l. 9. for
is r. in, p. 64. l. 19. for power r. porter, p. 93. l. 7. for there is much r.
though much, p. 102. l. 21. for at r. of, p. 147. l. 22. for list r. lift.

THE Door of Salvation OPENED, BY THE Key of Conversion.
JOHN 3.3. Jesus answered and said unto him Verily, verily I say unto thee
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God


AS Isaiah is called the Evangelical Prophet because he does so lively describe
and foretell the death of Christ; so John may not unfitly be called the
Prophetical Evangelist; for though in his Epistles he shows himself an Apostle,
in his Gospel an Evangelist, yet in his Revelation he is a Prophet. The
Ancients do aptly ascribe the Eagle to him for his Ensign; because when the
other Evangelists begin with the Mediators Incarnation and Humanity, proving
him to be the Son of Man; he does at first fly out of sight, and begins
with the Saviors Deity, proving him to be the Son of God. And his whole Gospel
indeed is a demonstration of Christ's Divinity, which was occasioned (as
Ecclesiastical Historians record) by the heresy of Ebion and Cerinthus, who
denied it.

In this third Chapter we have first, Christ teaching Nicodemus, to verse. 21.

Secondly, John^s testimony concerning Christ, to the end.

The Text is Christ's speech to Nicodemus; Nicodemus had seen Christ's miracles,
and thereby was convinced to come unto him; Christ lets him hear his oracles,
that thereby he might be converted, and come unto him: Nicodemus in the second
verse had called Christ Rabbi, and confessed him to be a Teacher sent from God;
Christ in purfuance of that Office, sets him his lesson, assuring him that he
must learn it in the School of earth, or he can never be removed to the
University of Heaven.

In the words we observe two general parts.

First, An Affirmation, or the necessity of Regeneration, Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Secondly, Its confirmation or the certainty of that assertion; Verily, verily,
I say unto thee.

In the Affirmation we may take notice of two particulars;

1. The universality of the persons, A Man, that is every man; the proposition
is indefinite, and so equivalent to one that is universal.

2. The quality of the thing affirmed, Be born again; mending will not serve,
the whole man must be new made; Non unius partis correctionem, sed totius
naturae renovationem designat, says Calvin, It speaks not the reparation of
one part, but the renovation of the whole man.

In the Confirmation of it there are likewise two things considerable;

1. The manner of the expression, Verily, verily.

2. The Author of it, I say unto thee.

The meaning of the words.

Verily, verily,] that is, Amen, faithfully, (...), compara Mar 13.43. tum Luke
21.3. and Luke 9.27. cum Mat. 16.18. and Mar. 9.1.
truly; the word comes from the Hebrew Aman, which signifies True, Faithful.
It is used by the people as a ratification of their prayers, and testimony of
their desires to be heard, Jer. 11.5. 1 Cor. 14, 16. And when it is doubled, as
here by the great Prophet, it is a vehement asseveration, or strong
confirmation of the thing asserted: As if Christ had said, Nicodemus, Thou
may believe me; for truly, assuredly it is so; except thou art a new
creature, thou can never enter into the new Jerusalem. All Gods sayings are
of equal truth; but to some there is affixed a special note of certainty,
because of their extraordinary weight, and man's infidelity. Private Soldiers
may go with a common pass, but Generals and Commanders in chief have Trumpets
sounding before them. Verily, verily. All Orders and Warrants of Kings have not
their seals annexed, but those that be of greatest weight.

I say unto thee] I who am the Prophet of my Church, (...).
the Teacher sent from God, the true and faithful witness, fer whom it is
impossible to lie, I deliver thee this doctrine as a certain unquestionable
truth, that unless thou have a new being, it had been better for thee to have
had no being; for thou can never see the Kingdom of God.

Except a man] Let him pretend never so much, (...)
let his performances be never so many, let his privileges be never so great,
and his profession never so glorious, yet if he be not born again all these
will do him little good, for he can never see the Kingdom of God. The assertion
as I hinted before, is general; as every man is born of the flesh, so every man
must be born of the spirit, or it had been happy for them if they had never
been born.

Be born again] that is be renewed, (...)
and turned by the Holy Ghost from Nature to Grace, from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan to God, Acts 26.18. Except a man be inwardly and really
altered from what he was; except he become a new creature; Put off the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 24.
Except he be turned up-side-down, and walk Antipodes to his former way; except
the stream of his heart and life run in another channel, carry him toward
another haven, he can never arrive at Heaven: Except the image of the Devil be
razed out and defaced, and the image of God be imprinted on him, he can never
be saved: Except he be thoroughly and universally changed; his Understanding by
illumination, his Will by renovation, his Affections by sanctification, and his
Life by reformation, he can never obtain Salvation.

He cannot see] that is, enjoy; (...) Drus^animad. lib. 2. cap: 2.
he cannot have his portion in it, or ever attain the enjoyment of it. Videre
est frui. Vision in Scripture is frequently put for fruition, as Psa. 27.13.
Heb. 12.14. Isa. ^3.11. Psa. 34.12. Matthew. 5.8.

The Kingdom of God; (...).
] Gods Kingdom is twofold.

1. The Kingdom of Grace here, Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God is not meat a^^
drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 6.33.

2 The Kingdom of Glory hereafter, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Now except a man be born
again he can have no right to the privileges of the Kingdom of Grace, nor to
the possession of the Kingdom of Glory.

The Text being thus briefly explained, I shall glean some few ears by the way,
before I come to the full sheaf; which will afford, through the blessing of God
much spiritual food to our souls.

1. Observe, That Christ is very willing to instruct them that come to him,
notwithstanding their many weaknesses.

Nicodemus was short in his confession of Christ, and faulty in his coming to
him only by night; yet the meek Master overlooketh this, and presently falls
upon teaching his untoward Scholar. The tender Father does not turn his weak
child out of doors, but lends him his helping hand whereby he might be enabled
to go. As when a soul is in him, he does not refuse its gold because it wants
some grains, nor its honey though it be mingled with wax, Cant 5.1. so when a
soul is in the way to him, he does not reject it for its imperfections, nor
twit it with its corruptions, as those flies that love to feed on sores; but as
the loving parent beholds the Prodigal while he is afar off, runs more
then half way to meet him; and as the true Turtle chirpeth sweetly, that he may
cluck sinners nearer to himself.

2. Observe, A man may be a noble, knowing person, and yet ignorant of, and a
stranger to regeneration.

Nicodemus was a Ruler of the Jews, either one of the Sanhedrim, or great
Council, or one of the Rulers of their Synagogue; one that taught others, and
yet was himself untaught in this rudiment, this A B C of Christianity; how
childishly does he talk of this weighty truth? verse. 4. How can a man be born
when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mothers womb and be born?
How deep may a man dive into the mysteries of Nature, how sharp-sighted may he
be there, and yet as blind at a Mole in the things of Grace! Nature may in some
men be dung'd with industry, art, education, and example, and thereby show
fair, spread far, and overtop others, but yet manured to the utmost, it is but
Nature still: Its grapes will be the grapes of Sodom, and its clusters the
clusters of Gomorrah. The natural man like Zacheus is too low of stature to see
Jesus, he discerns not the things of God neither indeed can he, for they are
spiritually discerned, Cor. 2.14. The wisest Philosophers that could cunningly
pick the lock of Natures Cabinet, and behold much of her riches and treasure,
were mere Idiots and fools in the things of the Spirit, and understood no more
of these mysteries of Divinity, then a Cowherd does of the darkest precepts of
Astonomy. Water rises no higher then its fountain; the light within us, or
Nature, is but a rush candle, and cannot enable us to see the Sun of
Righteousness: the light without us, or Scripture, is the star to the wise men
leading us to the place where the Babe of Bethlehem lies. As the eye without
the optic virtue is but a dead member, so all humane wisdom without divine
inspiration is but learned folly and elaborate wickedness.

3 Observe, That regeneration is one principal thing which Pastors ought to
instruct their people in.

Jesus Christ (though the wind of Nicodemus words, verse 2 seemed to blow
toward some other coast, yet he) waves all other discourse, and speaks
directly and home to this, as the one doctrine necessary for his unregenerate
Disciple to learn: Regeneration and Salvation by Christ are the two substantial
dishes which the faithful Stewards of God set constantly before the Families
committed to their charges: Those that preach notions instead of such doctrines
do cursedly cozen their guests with flowers instead of meat, which may fill the
eye of the wanton, but not the heart of the hungry soul. Oh what a blessed
pattern have we here for our practices, when our Parishoners come to us, or we
go to them! what more weighty subject can we treat of then their Conversion!
without which they must be punished with everlasting destruction. Alas how
boundless and endless is that wrath to which they are liable, though their
hearts are insensible! therefore though their mouths do not call, yet their
misery does cry aloud to us to instruct them in Regeneration, as ever we
desire they should escape Damnation.

BUt the Doctrine which I principally intend, is this:

Verily, Verily I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God. He or she, that is not experimentally acquainted with the
Second Birth, cannot possibly escape the Second Death. Make you a new heart,
and a new spirit; for why will ye dye O house of Israel! Ezekiel. 18.31. The old
heart will unquestionably carry thee to hell, the place of the old Serpent. He
must have a new spirit that will go to the new Jerusalem. Except ye be
converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
God, Matthew. 18.3. There must be a change from Nature to Grace, before there can
be a change from Grace to Glory. Heaven is the Fathers house, Joh. 14.2.
provided for none but his children, such as are born of him; a man must be
taken out of the wilderness of Nature, and planted in Eden, the Garden of the
Lord, before he can be transplanted into the true Paradise.

For the illustration of this truth I shall show first what this Regeneration
or New Birth is, and then give you the Reasons why none can avoid the Second
Death, unless they are acquainted with the Second Birth.

For the first, Regeneration is a work of Gods Spirit, whereby he does out of
his mere good pleasure, for his own glory, and the salvation of his Elect, at
first renew the whole man after his own image, by the Ministry of the Word. I
shall explain this definition by taking it in piece; and observing in it the
several causes of Regeneration. When Arras hangings are opened and unfolded,
their richness will appear.

First, I call it a work of Gods Spirit; here is the efficient principal cause
of it. The Babe of Grace in this respect calls none on earth Father. It is by
the Spirits overshadowing the soul, that this New creature is conceived and
brought forth; godliness is not natural, but adventitious to man; not by
propagation, but by donation. Man cannot generate himself naturally, much less
regenerate himself spiritually; they which are born of the flesh contribute
nothing to their own beings, neither do they which are born of the Spirit,
bring any thing to their new beings, unless it be a passive receptiveness, as
they are reasonable creatures. Some read the Text, and not unfitly (for the
original will fully bear it, Except a man be born ((...)) from above or from
heaven; and therefore in the fifth verse of this third Chapter of John Christ
tells us, Except a man be born of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God; and in Tit. 3.5. it is called a renewing of the holy Ghost; so
1 John 12.13. Jer. 31.18, 19.2 Cor. 3.5. 1 Pet 1.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Pet.
2.9, 10.

This work is sometimes called a transplanting out of the natural wild
olive tree, and ingraffing it contrary to nature into a true good Olive Tree,
Romans 11.24. out of the first into the second Adam; now the Cions cannot
transplant or ingraff it self. It is termed a new creation, 2 Cor. 5.17. To
create or bring something out of nothing is beyond the power of the strongest
creature it is above the strength of all men and Angels to create the least
pile of grass; God challenges this as his prerogative royal, Isa. 40, 26. As
the old heaven and earth were the work of his hands, Genesis 1.1. so are the new
heavens and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, Isa. 65.17. Austin said
truly, To convert the little world, Man, is more then to create the great
world. It is further styled a Resurrection from the dead, Ephesians. 5.14. and 2.5.
It is a great work to recover a dying body, a far greater to restore one that
is dead to life, but the greatest of all to enliven a dead soul; in the former
there is no opposition, in this there is much. In spite of man and devils to
pull down the ugly rotten frame of sin, and set up the lovely lasting Fabric
of sanctity, requires no less strength then Omnipotency. The Almighty God
puts forth the exceeding greatness of his power in forming the New creature,
Ephesians. 1.19, 20. nay the same power which he did in raising up Jesus Christ
from the dead, who had beside the watch of Romans, and the malice of hell, such
an heavy weight as the sins of the world to keep him down.

Repentance and Faith are the two chief ingredients in this rare composition,
and neither of them are such drugs as grow in Natures Garden; no, they are
fetched from far: It is God that gives to the Gentiles repentance unto life,
Acts 11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25. The stones will as soon weep as man's heart of stone,
unless he that smote the rock force water out of it, by turning it into a heart
of flesh for Faith also it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29. None
come to the Son, but such as are drawn by the Father, Joh. 6.44. He alone that
caused iron to swim, 2 King. 6.6. can keep the humbled sinner (that is pressed
down with the burden of innumerable iniquities) from sinking in the gulf of
desperation.

To part a man from his dearest carnal self, and to make him diligently seek
the destruction of what before he sought the preservation; to make him cut off
his right hand, and pluck out his right eye, hate father, mother, wife, child,
name, house, land; u^ do all he had done, go backward every step he had gone;
see things with a new light, understand things with another heart, and in the
whole course of his life to swim against the stream and tide of nature, and
winds of example; to bring a soul to this I say (which is all done and much
more in conversion) requires the infinite God's operation: Flesh and blood can
neither reveal these things to a man, nor work these things in a man, but the
Father which is in heaven.

The Minister, like the Prophets servant, Instrumentum non movet nisi moveatur.
may lay his staff on the dead child, but he cannot raise it to life till the
Master comes. Paul may plant, and Apollo water, but God only can give the
increase, Cor. 3.6. Without him we can do nothing, John 15.3. We may preach out
our hearts, unless God affords his help, our people will never be holy. As
Protogenes when he saw a picture in a shop curiously drawn, cried out, None but
Apelles could do this: So when thou see the beautiful image of the blessed
God lively portrayed on the soul, thou may say, This is the finger of God:
None but a God could do this.

Secondly, I say Whereby God out of his mere good pleasure, here is the
impulsive or moving cause of Regeneration; Of his own will begat he us again by
the word of truth, Jam. 1.18 Gods good will is the highest moving cause of this
gracious work; 'twas not any foresight of Faith or good works, not any thing
without him that turned the scale of his thoughts for thy purity and peace, but
only his own good pleasure and pity, Ezekiel. 36.21, 22. therefore he is said to
give a new heart, verse 26, 27. because he bestows it freely, not for man's
merit, but from his own mercy: The gift of grace is merely of grace; For we our
selves, says the Apostle, were sometimes disobedient, foolish, serving diverse
lusts and pleasures; But after that the kindness and love of God our Savior
toward man appeared; Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost, Titus 3.3, 4, 5. so Ephesians. 2.1, to 6. verse. If you
would know the grand reason why some are taken (by the net of the Word, let
down in the sea of the world) when others are left; why some like wax are
melted before this fire of Scripture, when others like clay are hardened; why
some have the light side of this glorious pillar toward them, when others have
the dark side of it; why the same path of the red sea is salvation to some,
when it is destruction to others; why the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven
are revealed to babes, when they are hid from the wise and prudent: I must give
you the same reason which Christ himself does, Even so Father, because it
seems good in thy sight, Matthew. 11.27. his will and mercy are the cause of
all our felicity, Rom: 9.18. 1 Pet: 1.3. Deuteronomy: 7.7, 8. Grace chooses thee, Rom:
11.5. There is a remnant according to the election of Grace; so Ephesians: 1.5.
Grace calls, 2 Timothy: 1.9 Who has called us according to his purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ before the world began; so Gal: 1.15. Grace
distinguishes and differenceth thee from others, By the grace of God I am what
I am; 1 Cor. 15.10. Grace justifies, Rom: 3.24. being justified fre^ly by his
Grace; Grace glorifieth, Ephesians: 2.8. For by grace are ye saved; Grace does lay
both the foundation and the top-stone of glory: that deserves the thanks and
praise of our beginning, progress, and perfection in holiness. Every step in
our ascent to mount Sion is freestone; Every link, as one observes well, in
the golden chain of man's salvation, is richly enameled with Free Grace. O how
lively does this lovely Attribute play its part from first to last in the
recovery of lost man!

Thirdly, Here is the instrumental cause. I say, by the Ministry of the Word.
Of his own will begat he us again by the word of truth, Jam: 1.18. Scripture is
the ordinary means of conversion; The Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto
salvation, Romans 1.16. God indeed is a free agent, working when, in what manner,
and by what means he pleases; though he tieth us to means, he does not tie
himself to means; he does sometimes make relations the instruments of
Regeneration; some by being matched to Christians, have been married to Christ;
some matches which have begun in the flesh, have ended in the spirit; therefore
the Apostle tells the beleiving Wife, she knows not but she may save her
Husband; and the beleiving Husband he knows not but he may save his wife, 1
Cor. 7.16. 1 Pet. 3.1 God has made pious education effectual for childrens
conversion: The mornings draught of wholesome instruction has preserved many
young ones from infection by, and perdition with others, 2 Timothy: 3.15. Prove.
22.6. Some Masters have also been spiritual fathers to their servants; there
are those that by being of the family of the faithful, have come to be of the
family of Faith, Acts 10.1. Josh: 24. God sometimes converteth by sufferings;
Affliction like the Shepherds dog has brought those home into the fold of
Christ which went astray like lost sheep: God has cast some Manasses and
Prodigals that were hard metal, into some hot fire, and thereby melted them
and fitted them to receive his own impression and image, Luke 15. 2 Chronicles:
33.11, 12, 13.

But usually the Minstry of the word is the pen in the hand of the Holy Ghost,
with which he writes the Law of God in the heart. The Law of the Lord is
perfect converting the soul, Psalm. 19.7. It Is the incorruptible seed of the
word, which by those spiritual husbandmen is thrown into the soil of men's
hearts, that through the influence of the Son of righteousness and dews of
heaven springs up in grace and holiness.

1 Pet. 1.23. Ordinarily there is no other way to beget grace, then the word of
grace, and it tends not the least to Gods dishonor (nay, rather the weakness
and meanness of the instrument in such cases commends the workman) because he
has manifested this to be his pleasure, it pleased him through the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21 He will give
light to the world only by the Sun, though he could do otherwise; therefore as
some observe, though light were made the first day, yet the Sun was not made
till the fourth day, to show that God could give light to the world without a
Sun. Thus God could convey the Spiritual light of holiness without the Sun of
scripture, but it is his will to make that his ordinary means. It is the word
which makes clean the filthy, John 15.3. which sanctifies the unholy, John
17.17 which begets grace in those that were graceless, Acts 2.37. For this
cause it is called the ingrafted word, James 1.21. for as the Cions of a good
apple grafted into a crab-tree stock does change the harsh sour nature of it,
and makes it sweet and pleasant, so the word preached (for of that he
speaks, verse 19.20.) can change the stony, cannal, earthly heart of man, and
make it soft, spiritual and heavenly.

Some have indeed been converted by reading, as Luther, Augustine, Junius and
others confess they were; but most commonly it is by hearing, that men's souls
come to live, Romans 10.14. There is a blessing for Readers, and there may be a
fish or two caught in the net, that is let down in an heap, but that is rare:
it is not the net lapped up together, but haled out at length and spread all
abroad, that brings in the draught: So it is the spreading out the word, the
dilating on the matter in hand, which usually catches souls

The Law like John Baptist prepares the way of the Lord by opening and
searching the festred wounds of the finner, by making him sensible of his
sores, his sins and misery, and heartily desire a Physician, a Redeemer, Romans
7.9. then the Gospel perfecteth the cure by pouring oil into the wounds, and
binding them up by acquainting the soul with, and interesting him in the free
and rich mercy of God in Christ. 2 These. 2.14. The Law like Moses brings to
the borders, but the Gospel like Joshua leads into Canaan. Thus the
Scriptures (as is wittily expressed by one) are the bells which ring all in,
which call people into the Church of God. The Poets speak of music which has
made stones leap into walls; this word of God has turned stones into flesh, of
stones it has raised children unto Abraham.

Fourthly, Here is the formal cause of regeneration, whereby God does at first
renew the whole man after his own image: now because this is the cause which
does specifically difference a thing, and this being opened, its nature will
best appear, I shall speak the more to it, and observe in it these four
particulars.

1 The act, renew, 2 The Subject, the whole man, 3 The pattern, after his own
image, 4 The season or time, at first.

1 For the act I call it a renewing (and so does the Apostle, Titus 3.5. Ephesians.
4.23, 24,) upon a double account; partly because in Regeneration nature is not
ruined, but rectified. The Convert is the same man but new made: The Faculties
of his soul are not destroyed, but they are refined; the same Viol, but new
tuned. Christ gave not the blind man new eyes, but a new sight to the old ones.
Christ did not give Lazarus a new body, but enlivened his old body: So God in
Conversion does not bestow a new understanding, but a new light to the old; nor
a new Soul, but a new life to the old one. The powers of the man are like
streams not dried up, but turned into another Channel. The truth is, that man
by his fall from God is so exceedingly degenerated and polluted, that repairing
and mending will not serve, he must be wholly and thoroughly new made, as the
house infected with the leptosie, scraping would not do, it must be pulled
down, and new set up, but as when an house pulled down is new set up, we use
possibly the same timber and stones, and materials which were in it before,
only they are new squared and polished, what is rotten or amiss in them is
pared off, and what is wanting (as several things will be) are added: So when
this new building of Regeneration is erected, the Spirit of God makes use of
the old substantial materials (the soul and its faculties, the body and its
members) which were in man before, only polisheth and purifieth them, and
squareth them according to the rule of Gods word, it hews off what is unsound
and sinful, and bestows that grace and holiness which is needful, He takes
not away our beings, but the wickedness and crookedness of our beings, and
adds a new gracious beauty which we had not before We put off the rags of the
old man, and put on the Robes of the new man and continue in regard of
substance the same men.

Again, I call it a renewing, partly because of the great change which is
wrought in a man converted. New things differ much from old for the better. O
how wonderfully does the new born soul differ from his former self! As Saul
when he received the spirit of courage became another man, 1 Samuel 10.6. so does
the Christian when he receives the spirit of grace: He is not in some sense
the same man he was before, he lives a new life, he walks in a new way, he
steereth his course by a new compass, and toward a new coast. His Principle is
new, his Pattern is new, his Practices are new, his Projects are new, all is
new: He ravels out all he had wove before, and employeth himself wholly about
another work. What a change is there when the blind see, the deaf hear, the
dumb speak, the lame walk, the dead live, when the Lion is turned into a Lamb,
darkness into light, sickness into health! why all this and more is done in
Regeneration, when a sinner is changed into a Saint: It is therefore most fitly
called Conversion, Acts 15.3. which is a term borrowed from travelers, who
being out of their way turn about, and so get into it, leaving the way in which
they were, and taking another (if need be) quite contrary to it. The sinner is
born with his heart and face toward the flesh, the world, and hell, and with
his back toward God, holiness and heaven, and so he goes on a many years
possibly till God convert him, and turn him about; then his back is toward the
former, his face and heart toward the latter; his whole life before was a
departure (every action being a step) from God; his whole life now is a drawing
nigh every duty; being a nearer approach to God.

A man and a beast differ much in their lives, but a natural and regenerate
person differ far more; even as so far as the Spirit of God, which is the
principle of a Christian life differs from the rational spirit of a man.

Extraordinary and strange things are called new, Acts 17.19. Jer. 31.22. Well
may the Convert be called a new creature, the work of Conversion making such a
wonderful alteration, that carnal men admire it: They think it strange that ye
run not with them to the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. nay those that
are thus renewed, wonder at themselves, Being called out of darkness into his
mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. Woeful darkness makes it wonderful light: As a
man that has been all his days kept in a dark prison and never beheld the
Sun, when he comes to be set at liberty, and see the light, he stands amazed,
wondering at it.

2 The Subject (I call it a renewing of) the whole man: As in our fist birth,
not one part or member is born, but every one: so in our second birth the whole
man is new born. By our first birth the whole man is polluted, and therefore by
our second birth the whole man must be purified. Original sin defiles the
whole man, from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet; and
Regeneration refineth the whole man, soul, body and spirit, Romans 3.13, 14. 1
These. 5.23. The plaster must be as broad as the sore: the leaven of grace does
season the whole lump. Old things pass away, and behold all things are become
new, 2 Cor. 5.17. The water of life within is not like a Spring which arises
in some parcel of ground, and terminateth in the same; but like the Ocean which
compasses about the whole (little) world of man: As when Gods laws were
written in Tables of stone, The Tables were written on both their sides, on the
one side and on the other were they written, Exodus 32.15. the Tables were
written all over, they were full of the Law: so the spiritual Tables have the
Law, the image of God written on every side, body and soul, every part of each,
an inward conformity in the heart, an outward correspondency in the life.

In the new creature, though every part be not throughout sanctified, yet he is
sanctified in every part throughout; he has a perfection of parts, though not
of degrees.

Regeneration like the Sun goes through the twelve signs of the Zodiac; there
is nothing hid from the heat thereof; it moves in, and works upon every
faculty of the soul and every member of the body; but the image of God is
principally in the soul, or the inner man, Heb. 8.10. Romans 7.22. Ephesians. 4.23. As
the heart being the forge of the spirits, is the chief seat of a natural, so
also of a spiritual life: The Kings Daughter is most glorious within (though
her clothing without be likewise of wrought gold) there Satan before had his
Throne; it was as a child's pocket full of trash, or as a ditch full of mud and
dirt; but now Christ will make that place the s^at of his Empire, and fill it
like a Cabinet with precious jewels: and indeed the soul being spiritual, is
principally ^apable of his image who is a spirit.

I shall show how the soul in its faculties, and the body in its members, are
both renewed.

In the soul I shall cousider, 1 The Understanding to which the spirit of God
makes its approach in the first place, inlightning it in the knowledge of sin
and the Savior, Ephesians. 4.23. The understanding to a man, is as a window to an
house, which before being continually shut, and little light appearing, 'twas
no wonder that the heart lay so sluttishly, and was so full of the deeds of
darkness; but now God renews the soul in knowledge, after the image of him
that created him. Col. 3.10. before the god of this world had blinded the mind
that it could see neither the emptiness of the world, nor the preciousnesse of
the word, nor the lothsomness of sin, nor the loveliness of the Savior, nor
the vanity of the creature, nor the excellency of the Divine nature; but
whereas the man was blind before, now he sees; being made spiritual he judges
all things, 1 Cor. 2.14.15. He judges the things of heaven to be far better
then the things of earth, the concernments of his soul much more worth then the
concernments of his body; and the affairs of eternity far more precious then
the rattles and trifles of time, and all by reason of the new sight bestowed on
him. Satan truly carries men hoodwinkt to hell, as Higlers carry their fowls
in Dorsers to the City, where they are killed, that they cannot see one foot of
the way, neither know they whether they are going; but God does not carry men
blindfold to bliss; but as in the old, so in the new creation he begins with
light.

The Undestanding in Regeneration is illuminated to see two things especially
Sin to be the greatest evil, and God in Christ to be the greatest good; and I
verily believe the mistake of the man before about these two things were a
principal cause of the many miscarriages in his heart and life: Before he
looked on sin through the Devils spectacles, and beheld that strumpet dressed in
her gaudy attire of pleasure and profit, whereby she was to him as the
forbidden fruit to Eve, pleasant to the eyes; But now he beholds sin through
the glass of the Law (in its opposition to the blessed God, and his own
happiness) stripped naked of all those counterfeit and borrowed ornaments, and it
is the evil of evils, sinful sin indeed. He judges it worse then diseases or
disgraces, then losses or crosses, yea, then Serpents or Devils, Rom 7.13. Heb
1.25 Dan. 3.17. and 6.10. Formerly he ^aw no such hurt in sin that Professors
were so shie of it, and Preachers so hot against it, that the Son of God must
die, and the greatest part of the world be damned for it: but now he has other
thoughts of it, for he sees its contrariety to the Lord, and his precepts, and
subscribeth unfeignedly to the righteousness of the Law; Before he saw little
desireableness in the infinitely amiable God; He saw no form nor comeliness in
him, that when he beheld him he should desire him, Isa. 53. He wondered what
made others so much in love with him; his voice was to a Christian, What is thy
Beloved more then another Beloved, that thou do thus follow hard after him,
forsake all for him, dedicate thy self wholly to him, that thou prayest so
fervently, hear so diligently, servest him so cheerfully, art so careful to
please him, so fearful of offending him! he judged him happier that had plenty
of the creature then him that had God in Christ for his portion; but now his
mind is enlightened ^o know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, John 17.3 He sees such beauty in his being, such equity in his laws,
such infinite excellency in the Divine nature, such unspeakable felicity in the
fruition of his favor through Jesus Christ, that he esteems his very life,
yea, all that he is worth for this and the other world, as Jacobs in Benjamin,
to be bound up in the love and life of God, Psalm. 73.25. and 63.3.

Secondly, The Conscience is also renewed; to this Faculty the Spirit makes its
address in the next place; the Conscience of the man naturally was so hard and
obdurate, that as ice, through the extremity and continuance of a great frost,
you might have drive^^carts heavy laden over it and it would not break; though
mountains of lusts more heavy then lead lay upon him, he complained not, Ier.
8.6. But now his Conscience is as the water which has such a tender film of
ice upon it, that yeildeth at the least touch; a small stroke of sin makes an
impression upon it; before it was seared with a red hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. and
past feeling, Ephesians, 4 17, 18, 19. as that member which the Chyrurgeon
intends to cut off is so mortified by means applied to it for that end, that
it feels not the Saw or Instrument which parts it from the body; so the
conscience was by custom in sin so cauterised, that it felt not the sword of
the Spirit; neither Ministry, nor Misery, nor Miracle, nor Mercy could prevail
with it; but now it becomes tender and flexible, a little prick with a pin is
painful to it; as the eye it is offended with the smallest dust, 2 Chronicles.
22.19. it is void of offense toward God and man, Acts 24.16. Before, it (like
Micaiah to Ahab) never spoke good to the man, but frighted him with fears, and
terrified him with the preapprehensions of his eternal torments; it followed
him to bed and board, and dogged him day and night like a Sergeant to arrest
him, at the suit of the most High, for the vaste debts which he owed to the
Divine Majesty. The man and his conscience were like fire and water; they never
met (if the hands of conscience were not tied down by force) but they fought:
Like some contentious couple they were always scolding one with another, and
striving for the mastery: The endeavor of conscience was as the Angel to Balaam
to stand in the sinners way with a drawn sword, and stop him in his cursed
course; the care of the sinner was to serve conscience as Herod did the
Baptist, even to cut off its head, for having a tongue in it so bold as to
check him for his crimes, Heb. 2.15. Romans 2.15. Heb. 9.14. But now conscience
being sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, is purged from dead works, and so
being purified is pacified. The creditor now is satisfied by the payment which
the surety has made, and thereby the debtor is discharged. Conscience now
waits on the Christian, not as a Sergeant to molest him, but as a Servant to
assist him to its utmost power. The Convert and his conscience are now like two
in consort that keep tune and time together, or as some loving Husbands and
Wives, who strive most which shall please the other best; Conscience strives to
please the Christian by asking the Law at God^s lips, and making Scripture its
Counselor; the Christian strives to please his conscience by yielding hearty
subjection to its holy counsels, Heb. 9.14. 1 Timothy 1.5. Rom 5.1. The renewed
conscience gives the new creature more solid comfort in one duty, then the
natural man (though he equal Methuselah's age) has all his days, Phil. 4.4.

Thirdly, The Will is also renewed; the Will before was carnal, crooked,
stubborn, rebellious against God and his will; the works of the Devil he will
do, Joh. 8.44. And as for the word which thou have spoken to us in the name of
the Lord, we will not do it, Jer. 44.16. It is resolved for evil and against
good, Ephesians. 2.3. John 5.40. This is Satan's Fort-Royal. wherein he continually
secures himself in the unregenerate, when he is in a skirmish beaken out of the
outworks by some sudden conviction; and in this, as Samsons in his hair, his
whole strength lies; Take away Will, and you take away Hell. But this faculty
is now made pliable and flexible to the Divine Majesty: It is made so
spiritual, regular and consonant to the will of God, that the Convert may
safely (if humbly) say with Luther, Lord, let my will be done, because it is
thy will: God and the godly man do now as two friends will and nill the same
thing, Psalm. 40.6, 7.

As the Will is a servant, it is now cheerfully subject to its Master in
heaven; its voice is, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts 9.6. And, speak
Lord; for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3. do but show it your commission from
the King of Kings for what you require, and it presently does obey, not dispute
your commands.

As a Master (for it is a Centurion in authority, which has many at its
command, it says to one faculty go and it goes; to another come and it
comes; to a third, do this, and it does it) it rules now according to Divine
Writ, and gives Laws to all under it, according to the Orders which it
receives from God its Commander in chief; were the Christians power but
answerable and equal to his will, he would be as holy on earth, as he shall be
in heaven, Psalm. 119.5. Romans 7.15, 18, 19.

The iron gate indeed of man's Will is far from opening of its own accord; the
Will is hardest won of any Faculty; it is like the strong fort of Zion in
Jerusalem which Joshua himself could not surprise; the Son of David alone can
do it: But the Spirit of God does powerfully, though sweetly, incline it to
choose God, and for God. The Understanding discovering to the Conscience the
necessity, excellency and benefit of proclaiming and prosecuting an open and
eternal war against all sin, and of accepting and embracing an everlasting
covenant with God in Christ, and of submitting to the guidance and government
of the Spirit; conscience does in the name of God, whose Officer it is, charge
the will to close with these things; the will, (the spirit striking in)
yields contentedly, and resolves accordingly, God persuades this Japhet to
dwell in the tents of Shem.

4 The Affections are likewise renewed: The Understanding and Will (the
superior Officers) being won, these like faithful, private Soldiers, readily
follow their leaders, or as dutiful handmaids they obey the commands of their
Master and Mistress: They are called by some the shapings or formings of the
will in several motions, according to the object presented; so that the will
like the Sun moving heavenward, these like Sunflowers must necessarily follow
its motion.

Before these affections were in several regards full of corruption, but now
they are purified for the Masters use. Before, they were carried out toward
wrong objects; hatred was set upon God, Romans 1 30. his word Prove. 1.29. Psalm
50.17. and people, John 15.19. Love was bestowed on sensual delights, Psalm
4.3. Jer. 5.31. 2 Timothy 3.2. and 4. and sin, Micah 3.2. Prove. 1.22. But now the
man loathes what formerly he loved, and loves what formerly he loathed: though
sin were the luscious meat, which did so exceedingly please his pallat, that
his teeth were always watering after it, and he rolled it as a sweet morsel
under his tongue; yet (now he serves it, as Amnon did Tamar) the hatred
wherewith he hates it is far greater then the love wherewith he loved it. Psalm
119.104, Romans 7.15. he cannot see this knife with which he had cut the throat
of his precious soul and dearest Savior, but his eye affects his heart with
sorrow and anger, O it is a killing look which he now gives his most beloved
lust; he cannot meet this brat of hell; this ugly guest in any room of the
house, but his heart rises against it: And as hateful as God was to him
before, Psalm 14.2. Romans 8.5, 7. yet now he alone is the savoury meat which his
soul loves Psalm. 18.1. and 73.25. If this dish stand on his table, though all
others be removed, he has that dish which he loves best.

His joy before in the creatures, is now in Christ, Amos 6.13. Prove. 2.14. Romans
5.2, 3, 4. Phil. 4.4. his sorrow was before for sufferings, but it is now for
sin, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10, 11. His fear was before lest he should lose his flocks, or
his friends, or outward mercies; but now it is lest by sin he should lose Gods
favor, Psalm 4:6. Isa. 8.12, 13.

His desire was before enlarged after go'd as hell, but now it is after grace as
heaven, Hos. 7.14. Psalm 42.1. Matthew. 5 6. Psalm. 63.1. The desire of our soul
is thy name, and to the remembrance of thee, Isa. 26.8.

Before, the affections were also carried out inordinately after objects that
were lawful: The man was like to be drowned in the shallows of lawful
enjoyments; when he joyed in the creatures he would over-joy, and turn thereby
his mirth into madness, when he loved his relations he would over-love them,
and change thereby his love to them into self, or soul-hatred: so for his
anger, Ephesians. 4.26. it would exceed its limits, even where it was lawful. For
these passions of the mind are like the water of the sea, useful and
profitable if kept within their bounds, but if they overflow the banks they are
very hurtful, and threaten a Deluge: but the regenerate person does moderate
and rectify these affections, Col. 3.1. 1 John 2.15. 1 Cor. 7.29.30. He
keeps his fire so watchfully, that it does not burn his house.

Besides, the affections were corrupt before, in regard of the contrariety
which is in them: They did torture and tear the child of disobedience; one
drawing him one way, another plucking him the contrary way; but grace composeth
the affections which could never agree one with another; before Conversion hope
and fear, joy and grief, humility and resolution were repugnant each to other;
but regeneration makes them good friends; when the new creatures heart leaps
with hope of heaven, he is then fullest of fear, lest he should displease God;
when he is mourning for sin he can rejoice in his Savior, as the heavens can
shine and shown at the same time, he can be meek and fiery, as Moses, Numb. 12.
humble and resolute, as Paul, and yet not like Rebeckah have two contrary
Nations struggling within him. The understanding, will and conscience are the
chief strings in the soul, to which all the rest are tuned; now they being by
the spirit set up to their due height and holiness, the affections are wound
up accordingly, and so make a complete harmony of the whole, and yields a
grateful sound in the ears of God.

5. The Memory is renewed. This master of the Rolls, or keeper of the ancient
Records, was formerly as a grate suffering the pure and clear water to go
through, retaining only the mud and filth; but now it is like a fan casting
away the chaff, and keeping the good corn; it was before as a sive letting the
fine flower go through, and holding still the bran; but now it is like the Ark
wherein the two Tables are safely laid up. The sanctified man's memory is a
spiritual Treasury: he lays up the things of God (as Mary) in his heart,
Luke 2.19. and as occasion serves brings them forth, and lays them out in
his life; he remembers the commandments of God to do them, Exodus 20. Psalm.
109.16.

Indeed (as the rest so) this faculty is renewed but in part; and therefore as
in the best room a spider may set up her cobweb, in the best garments there
will be dust, so in the best memory there may be somewhat which is bad and
filthy, but the cleanly Christian no sooner spieth it, but he sweeps it away.

This work of Regeneration does also reach to the body, the strong Castle of
the soul being taken and sanctified, the Town of the body commanded by it
presently yields. The wheels and poises being right within, the hand of the
Dial will go right without. When Satan sat on the Throne of the soul, as King,
the members of the body, (which the Holy Ghost terms in unregenerate persons
weapons of unrighteousness, Romans 6.13.) were his Militia, and employed to
defend his unjust Title, to execute his ungodly designs, to perform his hellish
pleasure, the head to plot, the hands to act, the feet to run, the eyes to see,
the ears to hear, the tongue to speak for him: but as when an enemy is
conquered, and a Magazine in War is taken, the General makes use of those Arms
and of that Ammunition for his service, which before were employed against him;
so the strong man Satan being beaten out of his strong holds by Christ the
stronger then he, the members of the body which before were instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, are now instruments of righteousness unto God, Romans
6.13, 16. The eyes which before were wanton, open, and full of adultery, 2 Pet.
2.14. are now locked down fast with a covenant not to look after a maid, Job
31.1. They are turned away from beholding vanity, Psalm. 101.3. The ears which
before were as deaf as the adder, not hearing the voice of the heavenly
charmer, do now hearken to what the Lord speaks, as soon as the wandering
sheep is brought home to the fold of Christ, he is known by his ear-mark, He
hears Christ's voice, and follows him, John 10.27. Psa. 85.8. The breath and
speech which before were corrupt, stinking, as proceeding from rotten lungs, an
unsanctified heart, Romans 3. is now sweet, seasoned with grace; for the man's
inward parts are sound, Anatomists teach us that the heart and tongue hang on
one string; The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks
of Judgment; for the Law of God is in his heart Psalm 37.30, 31. his lips speak
the language of Canaan. The sound of the metal discovers it to be silver, His
very speech bewrays him (as they said of Peter, Matthew. 26.73.) to belong to
Jesus: His feet before made haste to shed blood, they ran to evil, were the
Devils Laquey to go on his errands, Romans 3.15. Prove. 1.16. but now they are
turned to Gods testimonies, they run the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.1,
59 His hands before were full of oppression, violence, bribery and extortion,
Psalm. 26.10. Prove. 6.17. Satan's servants to make up that work which he cut out
but now, they are lifted up to Gods Law and word: thus in their places are all
the faculties of the soul and members of the body Obedients to Gods Precepts,
and serviceable to his Will.

Thirdly, I observe in this formal cause, the pattern; it is a renewing of the
whole man after the image of God; Man's loss and misery by his fall consists
in these two things. 1. He lost Gods image and likeness. 2. Gods favor and
love: Now that the second Adam might recover us to Gods love, he does imprint
on us Gods image; for likeness is the ground of love. Therefore the regnerate
are said to be partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and the new man
which they put on in conversion is said to be after God, and after the image of
him that created them, Ephesians 4.23. Col 3.10. The Law of God is written in their
hearts, Heb. 8.10. which Law is nothing but a conformity, or likeness to the
nature and will of the Lord. The corrupt image of Satan and the old Adam is
defaced, therefore it is called a putting off the old man, Col. 3.9. Ephesians.
4.23. the pure image of God is introduced, therefore its called a putting on
the new man, Ephesians. 4.24. which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, and a being holy as God is holy, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. And indeed all
these new born children do so far as they are regenerate completely resemble
their father: Their godliness is nothing but Godlikeness, a beam of the divine
glory, a representation of Gods own perfections: As the wax bears the image of
the seal, and the glass of the face, so does the new creature bear the image of
his Creator. David was a man after Gods own heart, because a man in some
measure after Gods own holiness.

Fourthly, I observe in this formal cause the season, I say it is a work of
Gods Spirit, whereby he does at first renew the whole man after his own image.
These words at first, do distinguish regeneration from Sanctification.
Sanctification is a constant progressive renewing of the whole man, whereby the
new creature does daily more and more dye unto sin and live unto God:
Regeneration is the birth, Sanctification is the growth of this Babe of Grace:
In Regeneration the Sun of holiness rises, in Sanctification it keeps its
course, and shines brighter and brighter unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. The
former is a specifical change from Nature to Grace, Ephesians. 5.8. The latter is a
gradual change from one degree of grace to another, Psalm. 84.7. whereby the
Christian goes from strength to strength till he appear before God in Sion. As
Creation and Preservation differ, so do Conversion and Sanctification; Creation
is the production of something out of nothing; preservation is a continued
Creation, or Creation every moment in a new edition: Conversion is a new
Creation, 2 Cor. 5.17. The making of new heavens and new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness: Sanctification is a continued Conversion, or conversion
every moment, in a newer and more correct edition. Thus much for the formal
cause of Regeneration, A renewing of the whole man at first after Gods image.

Fifthly, Here is in the definition the Final causes of Regeneration, The glory
of God, and the salvation of his elect. The first is the more, the other the
less principal end. They are both joined together in God's decree and
intention, and in the Saints calling, and the execution of his decree. The Lord
made all things for himself, Prove. 16.4. but especially the new creation that
being his Masterpiece and choice work, is particularly designed for the credit
of the Workman; All thy works shall praise thee, O God; and the Saints shall
bless thee, Psalm. 145.10. All Gods works do praise him, even the earth, and
heavens, and bruits analogically after a manner, by serving him in their places
and stations, and giving others matter and occasion of praising him. Sinners
may praise him formally after their manner, as Trumpets make a loud noise, but
are filled only with wind; but Saints only can praise him properly after his
manner, in such a way as he accepts; praise is the highest, the most
excellent part of Divine Worship; Now excellent speech becomes not a fool,
Pro. 17.7. as every sinner is; But praise is comely for the upright, Ps. 33.1.
The water of Saints praises is drawn out of a deep spring, the heart, and so it
is sweet and pleasant This is God's great end in sowing the precious seed of
grace, that he might reap a crop of glory, Acts 15.14. God did at first visit
the Gentiles, and take out of thim (mark!) a people for his name. He makes them
partakers of his Nature, that they might be a people for his name. So Isa.
43.21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise.
God formed all the people in the world for himself, for his own praise; Even a
Pharaoh is created and advanced that God might be exalted, Romans 9.17. But this
regenerated people is the people, which God principally designeth for his own
praise. This people I have formed for my self; other people I have passed by
like old pieces of metal, leaving them in their dust and rust; but this people
I have thrown into the fire of my Word, have cast them anew, and made them
vessels of gold, meet for my own service and glory. They shall show forth my
praise: They; Alas others may praise him ignorantly, as the arrow hiteth the
mark, but knows not its own motion; or forcedly, as he squeezes confessions
from them of his Justice and strength when they are under the rod or upon the
wrack, Exodus 9.27. And this is no thank to the Will of man, but to the power of
God who like the Huntsman uses the rage of the dogs to his own end, and makes
the wrath of man to praise him, Psalm. 7^.10. or at best they praise him but
notionally, and by hearsay, as one born blind may commend the Sun, or a
stranger the Country he never saw. How far short must these come, when no
creature can do God right, or limb out his vast perfections in their several
dimensions! surely these must do him wrong, and blot his name with the most
curious pensil of their most studied praises; but this people shall show forth
my praise. Alexander would have none draw his picture but Apelles, or cut his
statue but ^ ysippus, because none else had art enough to do it well. Certain
it is, none have skill and wisdom to show forth God's praise, but that people
which he formed for that purpose: This people which have felt the weight of
their sins, and smarted with wounds in their souls; this people, which have
sometime been terrified under the apprehension of my unspeakable fury, and the
expectation of the unquenchable fire; this people, that have seen their
corruptions in their colors, suffered divine terrors, given themselves over
for dead, damned creatures, and then were by bottomless mercy drawn out of the
depth of misery, translated out of death and darkness into the Kingdom of light
and life; this people which I have purchased with the blood of my Son,
beautified with the graces of my Spirit, interessed in rich promises, entitled
to the heavenly possession; this people which have been carried like the
Ambassadors of the King of Babylon into the temple, 2 King 20.12. and seen all
the richness and glory thereof, the pleasures and comforts therein, tasting me
to be gracious, sitting under my shadow with great delight, solacing their
souls with the means of grace, and rejoicing in hope of eternal glory; this
people shall praise the greatness of my power, the manifoldness of my Wisdom,
the sweetness of my Love, the sureness of my Word, the riches of my Mercy, the
freeness of my Grace, the beauty of my Image, the preciousness of my Christ,
and all this upon their own knowledge and experience. O the Hosannah's, and
Halelujahs, the praise, and glory, and honor, and thanks which this people
shall give to the Lord, and to the Lamb for ever! The harps of Saints are tuned
to these songs on earth, but who can conceive what ravishing music they will
make in running division on these several notes in heaven! Surely, surely, the
greatest revenues of praises which come into Gods Exchequer, are from the
hearty acclamations of his sanctified and saved ones; as they receive the
choycest mercies, the love of God, the blood of Christ, pardon, peace, grace,
glory, so they return the highest praises.

The building of man's body is so stately a structure, the rooms in it so
curious, the hangings and furniture so rich and costly, embroidered as with
needlework, that the owner of the house has a considerable rent of honor paid
for it: I will praise thee, says David, for I am fearfully and wonderfully
made; my substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and
curiously wrought in the lowest part of the earth, Psa. 139.14, 15. The setting
up of the new creation, as it is more glorious, the image of God's own
perfections (though it be imperfect in this life) the heart of a Saint being
bespangled like the heavens, with those glistering stars of graces, and his
life being a legible comment on the divine Law, so it brings the author a
larger income of honor. This is the Lords doings, and it is mavelous in the
godly man's eye, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 17. 1 Pet. 1.3. but when the good work now
begun shall be finished, then Gods praises shall be perfected: when the
foundation of this spiritual Temple is laid in this world, they cry grace,
graces; but when the top-stone shall be laid in the other world, then they
shall cry Glory, Glory; Blessed are they that dwell in that house, they ever
praise him: in that Temple does every one speak of his glory. Therefore the
Psalmist observes that when the Lord shall build up Sion, then he shall appear
in his glory, Psalm. 10^.6. While his Church is building, he is glorious; but as
the Sun under a cloud, not appearing so to the beholders, we can see but little
of his infinite beauty, because of our weak eyes, and receive but little of his
infinite bounty, because of our narrow hearts; but when Sion shall be built up
in heaven, our eyes shall be strengthened to see the King in his glory, to see
him as he is, and the water-pots of our souls enlarged and filled up to the
brim, with those streams which make glad the City of God; then the Lord shall
appear in his glory, then he shall have the honor of all his Attributes, the
praise of all his Providence, and the glory of all his Perfections; for then
he shall appear in all his royalty, embroidery, magnificence and glory. When
the Saints shall have sailed in the vessel of their Savior, through the
boisterous waters of Men's wrath, Devils rage, and the Laws curse, and be safely
landed in Heaven, then God shall have his full price of honor and glory for
their fraught

The other end of Regeneration, namely, The salvation of the Elect, is
purposely omitted here, because it will be fully spoken to in the next Head,
the first Reason of the Doctine. So much for the description of Regeneration.

In the next place I shall speak to the Reasons why there is a necessity of
Regeneration in every man that would obtain Salvation.
FIrst, Because every man must be prepared for (before he can be admitted into)
that holy place. We say in Philosophy, Nature does nothing per saltum; the
ground is prepared for an harvest, by being dunged, ploughed, and sowed; it is
as true in this point of Divinity; the god of Nature will not save a man per
saltum, not remove a swine out of a Stie immediately into a Dining Room, not
take a sinner reeking in his lusts, and presenly invest him with a Crown of
life; no, the man must be prepared by Regeneration or holiness in part, for
salvation or holiness which is perfect. The heathen King would not admit
Virgins to his bed till they had been purified, Esther 2.12. and surely the
King of Kings will not receive any into his nearest and dearest embraces, till
they are cleansed from all pollutions both of flesh and spirit.

Every man by his first birth is polluted, mere darkness, not receiving the
things of God, Ephesians. 5.8. mere hardness, as unable as a stone to move in the
ways of God. Ezekiel. 36.26, wholly captivated under the dominion of sin and
Satan, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. and hereby is unprepared for that holy place. The most
godly father begets an ungodly child, Adam begat a son after his own (not
Gods) image, Genesis 5.3. The white Halegens hatch black young ones. Though the
Wheat be threshed, fanned and parted from the straw and chaff, yet when sowed,
it brings forth Wheat both with stalk and husk. That which is born of the
flesh is flesh, John 3.5. now flesh and blood (especially in this depraved
sense) cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 15.

A raker in Privies is not fit for a Kings presence, but Regeneration prepares
the soul (by purifying it) for heaven, it makes the creature meet for the
inheritance of the Saints in light Col. 1.12. We scald and season vessels with
hot water, and thereby fit and prepare them to hold wine, or some precious
liquour: so God seasoneth the soul with grace, and thereby prepares it for
glory. Grace and glory differ not specifically, but gradually grace is aetas
infantilis gloriae, as learned Davenant calls it the infancy of glory. Glory
is the maturity or full growth of grace the same state is an higher stature:
grace is glory inchoate, glory is grace consummate; therefore as clothes by
lighter colors are fitted to receive a deep scarlet die, so Christians by
grace or Regeneration are prepared for glory and salvation.

The Grammar teaches the Scholar to construe and pierce, and that fitteth him
in time for the University. Regeneration teaches the Christian, what mediate
Communion with God means, and that fitteth for immediate Communion.
Regeneration makes us capable of the beatifical vision, Matthew. 5.8. not as a
mere condition, but as a necessary disposition in the agent toward its object,
as the sensitive faculties are required to the act of sensation, as well as
sensible objects.

And indeed heaven would not be heaven, that is, a place of happiness to them
which are not fitted for it by holiness. We say of men brought up in the
Country, that they would not delight in the honors and pleasures of a Court,
because such things would neither suit their education or dispositions: so men
who know no other heaven, then to eat and drink, and sleep, and roar, and
revel, and like swine to wallow in the mire of sensual lusts, would never
delight in that place of Spiritual and Angelical pleasures; for it would suit
neither their sinful breeding, nor sensual natures. If their sore eyes which
are continually running with a thume of corruption, cannot without pain behold
the starlight of holiness in the Saints, how can they with any delight see God
face to face, and behold that blessed Sun in his eternal noontide of purity and
glory: Therefore, as they that are to live in another Country are fitted for
it by learning the Language, Customs and Carriage of people in that Country:
So God will have them who are to live in the heavenly Country learn before
hand the work of the Citizens there, namely, how to please, praise, glorify
and enjoy his Majesty,

Secondly, Every man must be regenerated, or he cannot be saved, because all
that attain heaven must be interested in the purchaser of heaven: Those that go
to that place must be united to, and have a part in him that laid down the
price; though man may be a possessour of heaven, yet Christ alone was the
purchaser of it. We have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus, Heb. 10, 19. Acts 4.12. 1 John 2. ult. He alone is the Jacobs ladder
reaching from earth to heaven, by the help of which the Christian may ascend
thither; all other deeds of conveyance will be found forged, and all claims
made to the undefiled inheritance which are not under him, are false (therefore
heaven is called the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. because bought with the
precious blood of Christ) for till a man's person be justified it can never be
glorified: the guilt of sin must be removed, or the sinner cannot be saved; the
soul must be reconciled to God, and accepted as righteous in his Son, or it can
never dwell with God, and be made glorious as his Son.

There are two changes indispensably requisite in all that would be saved, The
one is the change of a man's state, or a moral change, when of a bondsman to sin
and Satan he is made a freeman, John 8.36. when of a slave to the Devil, he is
made the Son of God; when he is brought from under the covenant of works to be
under the covenant of grace; when of an enemy to God he is reconciled to him by
the death of his Son; when though he were far off, he is made nigh; though he
was not beloved, yet now is beloved; though he was a child of wrath, is now a
vessel of mercy, John 1.12. Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 9.23. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. The
other is the change of a man's nature, or a Physical change, when the whole man
is renewed after the image of God. The former is relative, this is real; the
former is the change of his condition, this of his disposition; the former
change is wrought in Justification, this in Regeneration; now the change of a
man's nature is absolutely necessary, because till this be wrought there is no
change of a man's state; the person is unjustified while the nature's
unsanctified: For though Christ be the purchaser of the pardon of sin, of peace
with God, of perseverance in grace, of an inheritance in glory, yet it is only
for those that are in him, that is, really united to him There is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. A Virgin has no
right at all to the honors and treasures of a man (notwithstanding some well
wishes toward him) till she be married to him, and become one flesh with him;
so a Christian has no right at all to the great and good things which are
Christ's, till he be married to the Lord Jesus, and become one Spirit with him:
Union is the ground of communion; probably when the flood came, many hung about
the Ark, but the waves quickly washed them off, those only that were in the Ark
were saved; thus all that hang only about Christ, the true Ark, by a general
profession, will be drowned, will be damned when the deluge of wrath comes;
they only that are in him by a real implantation shall be saved. Now, says the
Apostle, and observe it Reader, if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature,
2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore regeneration is required, because by it the creature is
planted into Christ; Regeneration cutteth the man off from his own stock, and
grafteth him into the Lord Jesus; Regeneration troweth the siner off from his
own bottom, and builds him on the Savior, as a sure foundation: Regeneration
is as it were the Minister which marries Christ and the soul together, therein
the soul gives it self unfeignedly to Christ, and Christ gives himself really
to the soul; and thereby the sins and weaknesses of the soul, the Wife, become
the Husbands; and the riches, and righteousness, the home, and heaven of
Christ, the Husbands, become the Wives.

When God converteth a sinner, he sends his Messenger (as Abraham his
Steward) to provide a Wife for his only Son; the Minister, like the servant
with Rebeckah, treats with the soul, telling it how infinitely blessed his
Masters Son is, how rich, even the heir of all things; how beautiful, even the
fairest of ten thousands, and altogether lovely, how exceedingly this marriage
will be for its advantage; upon this (the Spirit striking in) the soul
consents to take Christ for its Lord, and Husband, and so becomes the Spouse
of the God of Isaac, and has heaven entailed on it for a Jointure.

I proceed now from the Explication to the Application of the Doctrine; and it
may be useful to us several ways.
FIrst, By way of Information: If without Regeneration men and women can never
attain Salvation; then it informs us in the first place, how gross and how
great is the delusion of graceless and irreligious persons. How exceedingly do
most sinners cheat and cozen their own souls! Reader, it may be thou art a
Drunkard, a Swearer, a Scoffer at godliness, an Atheist in thy heart, in thy
soul, and yet thou hopest to get to heaven. O desperate delusion! I tell thee,
either this Text which I write of, and which is the word of the true and living
God, must be false (which the Devil himself is not so great a Blasphemer as to
think) or thou art a brand for the unquenchable fire. Do but look into the
black list of those that are for utter darkness, and thou may read thy very
name written there in broad letters, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the
unrightous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived (O
soul-cheater) neither Forn cators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, no^ Extortioners shall inherit the kingdom ^f God.
See Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Gal. 6.7, 8. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. Friend, I could name forty
texts of Scripture which pass sentence of everlasting condemnation on thy soul,
and yet thou think in despite of God and his word to be saved. I assure
thee, profane wretch, thou come short of hundreds which shall come short of
heaven. Many bid fair (to the eyes of men) by civility, morality and common
grace, but come not up to the price, to Regeneration, and so miss of that
place; thou art every day adding sin to sin, drunkenness to thirst, posting in
the road to hell, and yet say, that thou shall arrive at heaven! well, within
a few days it shall be tried whose words are truest, God's or thine.

But if thou may be convinced of thy soul-flattery, before it bring thee into
endless misery; I shall show thee the utter impossibility of thy salvation
while thou remainest in this condition. There are four gates through which all
must go that get into the new Jerusalem, every one of which is shut, locked,
barred, and bolted against thee.

1. They that get to heaven must go through the gate of Election. As all that
were not reckoned by Genealogy, were put by the Priesthood, as being polluted,
Ezra 2.62. so all are excluded eternal life, whose names are not written in the
Lambs book of life, Rev. 20. ult. Whosoever was not found written in the book
of life, was cast into the lake of fire. Now this gate of Election is shut
against profaneness; thou have not the least ground to imagine that thou art
elected whilst thou art unconverted, because God decreed all them to be
sanctified, whom he decreed to be saved; Mark that, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. Who has
chosen us to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
truth. The end and the way were both in Gods thoughts together. Those whose
names are registered in heaven, their natures are regenerated on earth. Whom he
did predestinate, them he also called, Romans 8.30. The first rise (says one)
and spring of mercy is Election, which breaks out by effectual Calling, and
so flows down in the channels of Faith and Holiness, till it lose it self in
the ocean of glory. Vocation is the outward expression of God's inward
intention to save a sinner, or the first impression of the seal upon the wax;
therefore Election and Vocation are both conjoined, Rev. 17.14. nay, the one is
put for the other, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. because they are inseparable companions; so
that if thy name be written in the book of life, thy nature would be renewed to
live a spiritual life, 2 Timothy 1.9. 1 Pet. 1.2. Therefore (Reader) if ever thou
reachest heaven in this estate of unholiness, thou must make a blot not only
in the Bible, but in the very Book of Life.

2. All that get to heaven must go through the gate of Christ's Passion; There
is no name under heaven given among men by which we may be saved, but the name
of Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12. And it is the death of Christ which purchases
eternal life for Christians; as the sown seed by dying brings forth a
plentiful increase, so Christ by dying brings many Sons to glory, Joh. 12.24.
Heb. 2.10. but this gate is shut against thee; for those for whom Christ
purchased glory, for them he purchased grace. The Son of God laid down the same
price for both; so that if ever he deliver thee from the condemning power of
sin, he will deliver thee from the commanding power of sin, Tit. 2.14. He gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works; so Luke 1.71, 72, 74, 75.
Ephesians. 5.25, 26. He gave himself for his Church (observe the end) that he might
sanctify and cleanse it. He died for sin, that all his might dye to sin, Joh.
17.19. he poured out his heart blood, that God might power down his holy
Spirit. His name is called Jesus because he saves his people from their sins,
Matthew. 1.21. not only from the punishment, but also from the power of their
sins. Now can thou think (O Atheist!) to make Christ an half Savior, as the
Papists do, a Purchaser of pardon, but not of purity! then questionless thou
can be but half saved, and have the greatest part of thy misery still upon
thee, to wit, thy slavery to sin. But surely thou can not think, that when
Justification and Sanctification are joined together in the purpose of the
Father, and the purchase of the Son, it shall be in thy power to part them
asunder.

A third gate through which all must go that get to heaven is the gate of
Scripture. The Promises are the gracious deeds and evidences which Saints have
to show for their right to that glorious inheritance: And it is cursed
presumption to expect heaven without a promise. Now God has in (many places
excluded thee, but in) no place promised heaven to thee. Look from the
beginning to the end of the Bible, and thou shall not find one good word
spoken to thee; there are woes and curses, threatenings and judgments, which
thou may challenge as thy part and portion, but no promise or saving blessing.

All the promises of salvation are conditional, Matthew. 5.8. and 11.28. John
3.16. yea including and expressing this very condition of conversion. He that
believes shall be saved, says God, Mark 16.16. And repent that your sins may
be blotted out, Act. 3.19. the body and soul do specifically constitute the
whole new man, and upon those two hinges of Faith and Repentance do all the
saving promises in the Bible hang; therefore thy expectance of the benefit of
the promise without the performance of the condition is soul-damning delusion;
Thou may like a dog snatch at the children bread, the Promises, but assure
thy self thou have no part nor lot in these matters.

This, Reader, is the difference betwixt presuming and believing; he that
believes, finding in his own soul the conditions mentioned in the promises of
eternal life, (as namely, that he walks after the spirit, mortifieth the deeds
of the flesh, has his conversation in Heaven, Romans 8.1. Phil. 3.19. and the
like) relieth on Christ for pardon and life, upon the warrant and security of
his word and promise, Psalm. 119.114.145. He that presumes, looks that God
should perform his part of the promise in giving salvation, but never minds
whether he perform his part of the promise, in observing the condition. Let thy
conscience be judge whether thou art not such a presumtuous person, and
therefore do in vain look for the fruit of the promise.

4. All that get to heaven must go through the gate of mediate communion;
heaven must be nigh thee before thou can be in heaven; it is fellowship with
God in this world which fitteth for fellowship with God in the other world;
without holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12.14. because without holiness none
can see God, an unholy mind cannot behold him, an unholy will cannot enjoy him,
unholy affections cannot delight in him, an unholy man in heaven could not
find it a place of happiness, for it is not a Turkish Paradise, but a place of
holy pleasures; it is mediate communion which does capacitate the soul for
immediate communion; and as the weaker eyes may behold the Sun in its beams,
then in its glorious body at the highest in a clear day; so a smaller degree of
holiness will enable the soul to see God in the glass of his ordinances, then
to see him face to face. Now thou can not enjoy him in this imperfect degree,
much less in a state of perfection, If thou say that thou have fellowship
with him and walk in darkness thou lie, 1 John 1.6. Mark, If thou say
that thou enjoyest fellowship with God, and leadest a sinful life, thou
tellest a broad lie; all that enjoy the Ordinances of God, do not enjoy the God
of Ordinances; all that go to Church, do not meet with Christ: What cummunion
has light with darkness, or Christ with Belial? truly no more has God with
thy soul. Princes are not so prodigal of their intimate friendship and favor,
as to throw them away upon their foes. Thy carnal mind is emnity against God;
God is a professed enemy to thee, and therefore can they ever walk together till
they be agreed? now there is a necessity of walking with him before thou can
be translated to him, Genesis 5.21. or else thou have found out a nearer way to
heaven then the children of God went in.

Besides, the Scripture speaks plainly, that he who has a true hope of
heaven does purify himself as God is pure, 1 John 3.3. True hope begets and
increases holiness; now does thy hope cause thee to purify thy self, when
like an infant thou pollutest thy self, lie contentedly in thy filth and
never mindest cleansing?

Now tell me, Reader, whether thou do not sadly cozen thy self, in dreaming
of salvation without regeneration, when God predestined all to be conformable
to the image of his Son in purity, whom he predestined to be conformable to
the image of his Son in glory, Romans 8.29. when Jesus Christ suffered not only
to procure pardon, but for all his, freedom from the power of sin; when the
promises of the Gospel do express regeneration as the indispensable
qualification of all that shall be saved, Acts 3.19 and when thou art so far
from being capable of immediate communion hereafter, that it is impossible that
thou should in thy carnal estate have mediate communion with him here; can
thou continue in thy thoughts that heaven shall be open to thee, when the hand
of Almighty God has shut it against thee, and blocked up every way which leads
to it to keep the out? and how deceitful and desperately wicked is thy heart
to promise thee (if thou will serve sin and the world) the beautiful Rachel of
heaven, when after all thy slavery to thy lusts, thou shall be put off with the
blear-eyed Leah of Hell. Believe not, O Reader, The wicked one, if thou love
the life of thy soul; he may by his lying spirit in thy heart, as sometimes in
the mouth of Ahabs false prophets, persuade thee to go on in thy sinful
courses, and promise thee as he did Ahab that thou shall prosper; but if thou
do not perish if thou followest such counsel, the Lord has not spoken in
his Word. I tell thee man, God has no birthrights for such profane Esaus, nor
inheritances for such scoffing Ishmaels; Depart from me, will be the doom of
all that are workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.23. into heaven can in no wise enter
any thing that is unclean, Rev. 21.27. The earth may bear such wicked ones a
while, though not without groans to be eased of such burdens, Romans 8.22. but
heaven will never be pestred with them.

If thou did travel toward the West, thy reason would tell thee, there was
no possibility of arriving at the East, without turning about; yet thou go
in the broad way to destruction, and thy religion bids thee to expect heaven
without conversion. Well! see what God says to thee, and be confident that
what he speaks he will do, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. And it come to pass when he
hears the word of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace though I walk in the imaginations of my heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord
and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name
from under heaven O look to it, Friend, before it be too late; otherwise this
work of presumption will split thee eternally; for Christ himself has said,
that Except thou art born again, thou shall never see the kingdom of God.

SEcondly, If without Regeneration it be impossible to attain Salvation, it
informs us of the insufficiency of several things to speak a man's right to
felicity. For this is a certain truth, That whatsoever comes short of this new
birth, or whatsoever may happen to, or be in a man unregenerate, that is a
false evidence for our title to the undefiled inheritance, because Regeneration
is absolutely necessary.

Now there are nine or ten sandy foundations which many build their hopes upon,
all which come short of Regeneration (though most of them are good things, for
I speak not against them, but against resting in them as infallible signs of
sincerity) and therefore when the storm of death comes they will fail, and
then the house of their hopes will fall to the ground.

First, Civil practices are but a slender evidence of thy right to the holy
place: Civility is commendable, but without Sanctity it is not sufficient: A
mere civil and sanctified man differ, as much as a liveless picture, and a
living person. Thou may make a fair show in the flesh, and be wholly a
stranger to this life after the spirit: Paul was one of the strictest of the
Pharisees, concerning the righteousness of the Law blameless, even then when he
was out of zeal persecuting the Church, and in an unregenerate estate, Phil.
3.6. Those foolish persons that were denied entrance into the purchased
possession, were Virgins, they walked innocently and inoffensively, and had not
defiled their garments with gross pollutions, but yet were unconverted, having
(though some in their lamps) no oil in their vessels, Mat. 25. init. and
therefore were excluded the inheritance of the Saints in light.

The young rich man, who came to Christ, and told him that he had kept all the
commandments from his youth, Mark 10.20. probably had done much as to the
outward meaning of the Law, and to the outward motions of his life; for Jesus
beholding him loved him, verse. 21. and yet the man notwithstanding his specious
actions, had unsanctified affections, otherwise he would never have run from
Christ as heavily, as he came to him hastily, and put his corruptible silver
into the scales with, and suffered it to weigh down the incomparable Savior,
verse. 22. The Pharisee that boasted so much of himself, was likely guiltless of
scandalous sins, Luk 18.11. God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. His Religion, as
usually the Civilians, consisted in negatives; he thought all was well, because
he could say he was no fornicator, no cheater of men, but he might have added
that he was no believer, no child of God; for all his fair pretenses and splen
did practices, he was both an unjustified and unsanctified person, v. 14.

How often does sin reign in the inward, when it does not rage in the outward
man! A King is as truly a King in his Bedchamber and Closet in secret, as in
his Parliamentrobes or on his Throne in public: Now where ever sin has
dominion, there the man or woman is in a carnal condition, Romans 6.17.

How did vice domineer in the hearts of the Heathen, when nothing but virtue
appeared in their faces! Pride in Diogenes (says one) was but put up in a
slovens case when he trampled on Plato's carpets. And that renowned Curious that
supped on roots, had ambition for his sauce. Civility may arise from education,
example, shame or fear; but as neither of these is physic strong enough to
purge out corruption, but as weak remedies use to do, so these Lenitives give
more mastery to the disease.

Among beasts there are harmless Lambs, as well as hurtful Lions; among birds
there are innocent Doves, as well as ravenous Vultures, and yet they have all
the same specifical nature of Brutes: Among men, some have better nurture, and
(possibly from thence) better natures then others; some are churlish and cruel,
others courteous and civil; some mild and morally righteous, others mad and
desperately outrageous, and yet all may flow from the same humane nature. As
the same earth is in some plants bitter, in others sweet, in both earthly; so
the same humane nature may be in some more pleasing, in others more poisonous,
in both but humane, neither being partaker of the Divine nature: Some are like
swine in a fair meadow, more cleanly; others wallowing in the mire more dirty;
and both swine. Our Civil Law says of mixed beasts, Elephants and Camels, that
they do the work of tame beasts, but have the nature of wild ones: Such are
our mere civil men; their nature is wild, though their actions are tame. The
Bear, as is reported, brings forth most ugly and misshapen Whelps, but by
licking them brings them to a better form, yet they are Bears still: Thus all
men are ugly and notoriously vile by their births, all full of wickedness as
the ocean is of waters, good breeding, learning, living among them that are
godly, may lick them fair and civil, and put them into a better form, and yet
still they may remain unsanctified. The Lions which spared Daniel, were Lions
still (as appeared by their devouring others) though God did restrain them a
while, for the safety of his servant. A watercourse may be damned up or stopped
by a bank, though at the same time it has a violent inclination to run over. I
have sometime thought that a mere civil man is like a Capuchin Friar that
starteth back at the sight of money, as if it were a Snake or Serpent, but
carries a boy along with him that takes all (which the demure Friar refuses)
and complains neither of color nor weight; so the civil man in his life starts
back from sin, as if he durst not touch that venomous creature, but he carries
an heart along with him that receives in all (having no power to examine who
goes in or out) and without complaining either of color or weight.

Reader, it may be thou art no Drunkard, no Swearer, no Scoffer at godliness,
no Adulterer, no Liar; I wish we had more that came so far toward heaven; but
take heed of resting here, thou may be able to say all this and much more,
and yet in thee as in the young man, there may be one thing lacking, namely
this new life. He that went to make his picture stand alone, saw at last his
mistake, and cried out, Deest aliquid intus, there is something wanting within,
he meant life; so it may be in thee. Believe it there is a vast difference
betwixt restraining and renewing grace; the former may skin over and cover the
loathsome sore of sin, when the latter does search and cure it, Civility like a
black patch does hide the wound, but sanctity like a plaster does both hide
and heal it. It is possible that thou do not outwardly abound with the same
corruptions which others do, because thou have not the same temptations: Thy
heart may be a vessel full of poisonous liquor, which may remain undiscovered
till thou have a temptation to broach it. Thy lusts may be as great Rebels
against God, though they lie lurking in the secret trenches of thy heart, and
dare not for fear or shame appear in the open field of thy life.

Thy Civility is a mercy, and thou art bound to bless God for it. But Oh take
heed of trusting to it as a sure evidence of thy good estate; for certainly it
proves not seldom a more neat and cleanly way to endless and easeless woe.

Secondly, A glorious Profession is no infallible evidence of thy right to
life. It is good to profess Christianity: Religion is so noble, so bountiful a
Master that none need be afraid to be counted her servant. We must confess
Christ before men, if we would have Christ to confess us before his Father and
the holy Angels, Matthew. 10.31. he that disowns his colors, deserves to be
cashiered the camp: But confession of the mouth must be accompanied with
conversion of the heart, or it will not save; that is but the shadow, this is
the substance of Religion. A Christian in name, and a Christian in nature, do
exceedingly differ. The profession and the power of godliness differ, as leaves
on a tree, and good fruit; a tree that has fruit will have leaves; a man that
has the power will have a form of godliness; but as some trees (as the Ivy)
are never without leaves, yet never bear good fruit while they live; so many
profess Christ all their days, who never bring forth fruit worthy of repentance
and amendment of life. Some defy the Devil with their lips, who Deifie him in
their lives. There may be gaudy signs at the door where there is not a drop of
good wine in the Cellar. Apothecaries boxes have glorious titles, even when
they are altogether empty. Many Christians in our days are like a curious
bubble, smooth and shining without, but nothing save wind within; professing
that they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient,
and to every good work reprobrate, Tit. 1. ult. A man may wear Christ's livery,
and do the Devils drudgery: Judas called Jesus Master, yet betrayed him. Thou
may, like the Jews, put a Crown on Christ's head, a Scepter in his hand, and
bow the knee to him, as if he were thy King, and yet all be but in mockery;
thou may crucify and put him to death for all this, by thy sinful ungodly
life. Silver looks white, and yet draws black lines; thy profession may be
fair when thy practices are foul. Sin is so ugly that it is ashamed of the
light, and therefore walks not openly as Christ, for fear of the people (though
for a different reason from his) lest it should fright them from continuing its
friends; but as a theif it goes abroad in the night, and then with vizards and
false beards (unwilling to be known who they are) even with a form of
godliness, 1 Timothy 3.1, 5. An Hypocrite like a Bankrupt, the less substance he
has, the more show he makes. The Ostrich has great feathers but cannot fly.
Christ compares him to a tomb, which is without comely, within unsavory.

Good does not always appear with the same beauty, being clouded with
corruption; so evil does seldom appear in its native deformity, but like
Jezabel, fills up the wrinckles of its face with artificial dawbery. When
Absalom intended his unnatural rebellion, he pretended Religion; he had a vow
which he must pay, 2 Samuel 15.7. When Simeon and Levi designed murder and death
to the Sechemites, they hang out devotion for their colors; They may not marry
their Sister to one that was uncircumcised, Genesis 34.14. Thus many lead Religion
about as wandering cheaters do a monstrous woman, whom they no way affect,
merely to get money by it, for their own praise or profit, but do not entertain
her as their Mistress, giving her the power and keys of their hearts.

When Religion is in fashion, many will dress themselves by her Looking-glass;
Joab himself, though a man of blood, will learn her language; see how exactly
he speaks in her dialect, 1 Chronicles. 19.13. If the Jews prospered, the Samaritans
and they were kindred. The rising Sun is adored by the Persians. Summer brings
in not only herbs and fruits, but Butterflies and Caterpillars which feed on
them, and attire themselves with the livery of the season: So in the prosperous
estate of Religion many Summer birds will wait on her, and court her out of
love to her portion not to her person; but these like Pirates put their vessels
into the colors of nations which they abhor, not to serve them faithfully, but
to rob them the more easily. As Samballat and Tobiah made show to help, when
their aim was to hinder the Jews. And truly such a lamp or blazing profession
will quickly go out for want of oil in the vessel, this inward Regeneration.
Thy rotten house will fall when these earthly props of treasure or honors which
shroud it up, are taken away: Like the Moon thou may shine brightly the
former part of the night, but set before morning.

The Hare when she is hotly pursued betakes her self to some beaten path, not
for any love she has to it, but that there by the scent of passengers she may
lose her scent, and take off the dogs: So many profane persons that have robbed
the State, being pursued, betake themselves to the Church path, not for
devotion, but that they might lose the scent of their vileness, and take off
their prosecutors.

Thy profession, Reader, is one of the weakest foundations imaginable to build
upon; for thy practices may every hour give thy profession the lie. The Pope
professes himself the servant of servants, and yet even then exalts himself
above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. And he that professes himself so
humble as to do service to the meanest Christian, is yet so proud as to take
merit from Christ himself. Every one that is clothed in black is not a Scholar,
nor every one that wears a sword a Soldier; neither is every Professor a true
and upright believer. Pharnaces sent a crown to Caesar, when at the same time he
rebelled against him, but Caesar sent back the crown, with this message, Let him
return to his obedience first, and then I will accept the Crown: Thus God will
not be graced with our crowns of profession, unless that be crowned with a
gracious conversation; He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that in the heart, whose praise is not of men but
of God, Romans 2.28, 29.

Thirdly, Spiritual Privileges are no sure sign that thine eternal estate is
safe; we read of them that were Israelites, to whom pertained the adoption, the
glory, the covenants, the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
Promises; whose were the Fathers, of whom, as concerning the flesh Christ came,
who is over all, God blessed for ever, Romans 9.4, 5. and yet many of them
perished notwithstanding all these great Privileges. Paul had glorious
privileges when he was a graceless person, Phil. 3.5, 6. Thou may enjoy
Sermons, Sacraments, Sabbaths, seasons of grace, the society of Saints, and yet
miss at last of salvation. All that are in a family are not children, though
they possibly feed at the same table, and lodge in the same chamber. All that
enjoy Church-ministry are not Church Members; Doeg may set his foot within the
house of God as far as David. Judas may partake of the same privileges with the
Apostles, and yet be a devil the outward Court was larger thent he inner; and
so Gods visible Church takes more in then his invisible. Tares may be in the
same field with wheat, enjoying the same benefit of the Sun, rain, and earth,
and yet are tares still. The Jews boasted much that they were Abraham's
children, Matthew 3. and yet Truth it self tells them, that they were of their
father the devil, Joh. 8.44. Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature, Gal 6.15. Where the new creation is wanting, spiritual
privileges are but as seals to a blank, and signify little. Regeneration is
the figure, which if missing, they as ciphers stand for nothing.

The voice of many among us now, is like to the voice of the Jews heretofore, 1 Samuel 4.3. in time of their distress; Bring us the Ark, say they, that that may
save us, when alas they were destroyed by the Philistines for all their Ark: So
thou Reader, when conscience frighteth thee, or death comes nigh thee, probably
speak in thy heart, come bring me the Ark, that that may save me; bring me
the Sacrament that shall save me, thou runnest to thy Baptism, to thy Sabbath,
to privileges, and thence concludest that thou can not be condemned; when
alas, thou may go to hell fire for all thy Font water, and to eternal
torments though thou have often been at the Lords Table, Matthew. 7.22. Baptismal
water is not ever the laver of regeneration; many sit at the Lords Table, which
do not taste of his Supper. All in the Church may hear the word of Christ, but
few hear Christ in his word. It is ordinary to enjoy the Sabbath of the Lord,
but not so to enjoy the Lord of Sabbaths. Outward privileges are of great
value in themselves, but like a jewel which some speak of, they lose their
virtue if put into a dead man's mouth; they are of no efficacy or benefit to thy
soul whilst thou continuest dead in trespasses and sin: Unregenerate Israel was
to God as Ethiopia, Amos 9.7. for all their privileges; Gentiles regenerated
are called Jews, Gal. 6.16. and Jews unregenerated are called Gentiles,
Amorites, Hittites, Sodomites, Ezekiel. 16.3. Hos. 12.7. Isa. 1.10.

Spiritual privileges always commend God to us, but not us to God. Their abuse
will be a dreadful increase of thy damnation, but their bare use will be a
pitiful plea for salvation. How many live all their days under the means of
Grace, that never get one dram of grace in the use of the means; Corazin,
Bethsada and Capernaum, who had the privilege to hear Christ's oracles, and to
see his miracles, were sad seals to these truths, Matthew. 11. for they were
lighted to the chambers of utter darkness with the torches of Ordinances. Rest
not in this Reader, for thou may be lifted up to heaven in the enjoyment of
Privileges, and cast down to hell for mis-improvement of them. Thou may like
the Decii leap into the gaping gulf at noon day, or like the Egyptians follow
the pillar of fire into the deep and perish; nay, which is saddest of all, as a
ship which is sinking, the more it is laden (though it be with silver and gold)
the deeper it sinketh; so the higher thy privileges, if thou perishest the
deeper thy perdition. Thou may fly like Joab to the Altar of privileges,
but if thou art unregenerate, he that is greater then Solomon will pluck thee
thence, or slay thee there. The unsuitableness of thy life to the discoveries
of his love, does but tell him to his face, that thou art not careful to answer
him in his matters; that thou will not serve his Son, nor worship the Mediator
whom he has set up, and hereby thou do but (notwithstanding thy preferment)
provoke him the more, and cause him, as Nebuchadnezzar the oven, to heat hell
seven times hotter: Thy privileges, like oil and pitch, will make that fire to
scald and scorch the more terribly. Weeds in the garden are sooner plucked up
then weeds in the highway. No trees are more surely for the fire then those
which are planted in Gods own vineyard and bear not fruit.

Fourthly, Great Gifts and Parts will not speak thy right to glory. Edifying
Gifts and sanctifying Grace do abundantly differ. Thou may have a clear head,
and yet an unclean heart. We read of them that were famous for gifts and parts,
and infamous for profaneness; who might preach profitably, and yet were workers
of iniquity; who had the gift of casting out devils, and for all that were cast
to devils, Matthew. 7.22, 23. Ministers may, like Noah's Carpenters, build an Ark
to save others, and be drowned, be damned themselves: They may carry a lanthorn
which may enlighten others, while they go in the dark themselves: Thou may as
a landmark direct others in the right way, and never set a foot thy self in
it. How holily did Balaam prophecy, and yet how hellishly did he practice!
surely, like a burning-glass he has fired many others by his heavenly
language, yet he himself never fired. Many have gifts from God, who never have
the gift of God, John 4.10. The Raven was an unclean creature, yet she was
serviceable to zealous Elijah.

Gifts may be in their eminency, where sin is in its predominancy; the Toad
has a pearl (say some) in its head when the whole body is poisonous. The Devil
can speak excellently; We know thee, O thou art the holy one of God; and these
are the servants of the most high God: for natural parts and gifts questionless
he surpasses all the men on earth, and yet he is a devil still. The Panthar
has a sweet-sented breath, but a rotten heart. It is possible to pray like a
Saint, to preach like an Angel, and yet to practice like a Devil* The course of
thy life will speak much more for thee, then the discourse of thy lips. Though
thy gifts be never so great, and thy parts never so glorious; though thou
speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and have not grace, this new birth,
thou art like sounding brass and a tinckling cymbal.

Thy parts may flow from Nature not from Saving-grace; men indeed, as blades,
are all made of the same metal, yet differ much by means of temper; some are
more soft and smooth, more keen and sharp; others more dull and blunt, more
stiff and stuborn; for though it be confessed the soul of Solomon, as created and
infused, differs nothing from the soul of Nabal, yet being to work by bodily
organs, her actions resemble her instruments; a man cannot make such good
letters with a blotting, scragged, as with a good pen; the better the tool is,
the better the work is done with it. Some children take more after their
parents then others: Though Nature has little to give, yet she deals more
bountifully with some then with others.

Now what a gross mistake is this, for thee to take the crabs which grow in the
common hedge-rows of Nature, to be fruits of the Spirit, as if they grew in
Gods own nursery. Know thou not that the false Prophets were admired by men
for their parts, and abhorred by God for their impiety?

Friend, thou may like the ten Spies go over the promised land in thy
contemplations, view the Country, taste the fruit, and commend it highly to
others, tell them that the land is good, it flows with milk and honey, and
for all this never enjoy one foot of it. Parts and piety differ specifically;
gifts like the moon have some glimmering borrowed light, but no enlivening
heat, when Grace like the Sun has a clearer native light, and a quickening
refreshing heat. Men indeed, like the true mother, may have the dead child of
gifts put into their arms, whilst they are asleep in the night of this life,
and think that they have the living child of grace; but when they awake in the
morning of death, they will find the contrary. For though thy gifts glister
like gloworms in the dark night of this world, yet (if separated from grace) in
the day of the other world they will all vanish, and disappear; oh then 'twill
be known that one dram of grace is more worth then a world of gifts.

Fifthly Thy sacred performances are not a sufficient evidence for heaven.
Observe Reader; I shall not condemn, nay, I do highly commend thy external
obedience to the divine precepts, though thou should be unregenerate:
because few come so far. Athanasius wished That all were hypocrites, and that
there were none but such, as at least resembled Saints. It is good to wait at
the Pool; Christ may come as he did to the Cripple, and heal thy diseased soul.
It may be as much worth as thine eternal weal, to ly as the blind man did, in
Christ's way; he may speak and begin such aspiritual sight in thee, as may end
in seeing God as he is: But I am now telling thee, that it is ill trusting to
bare duties, as signs of thy salvation; for thou may mind personal,
relative, secret, family, public duties, and yet be unregenerate and perish.
He that does not these things, is certainly not good; but he that does them
cannot thence conclude his estate to be gracious.

Thou must do all as to the outside which a Saint can do, or thou can not be
an hypocrite (for an hypocrite is the perfect picture of a godly person) now
because an hypocrite which is unregenerate, may go so far; therefore these
things are not sure signs of saving grace.

The Pharisees gave alms, made long prayers, fasted, and some of them twice in
a week, and yet you know what Christ says, That except our righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we should not inherit
the Kingdom of God, Matthew, 5.20. They were some (especially) so frequent at
their duties toward God, so righteous in their dealings with men to the eyes
of others, that the Jews had a common saying. That if but two in the world were
saved, the one should be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee; and yet, if thou will
believe the Lord Jesus, he that goes not beyond them both, shall come short of
heaven: And the reason is plain, because they were not regenerated: Their
practices were seemingly good, but their principles really bad. The tree was
corrupt, and therefore could not bring forth good fruit, Mat. 7.17. The
Israelites did seek God daily, says the Prophet, they delighted to know his
ways, they asked of him the Ordinances of Justice, and they delighted in
approaching to him, Isa. 58.2. they there heard and prayed, and both with
seeming delight, nay, they joined fasting to prayer, verse 3. farther, they
add mourning to fasting, Zac. 7.4, 5. and yet all this, was but the face, the
shell, the appearance of Religion, and thereby of no acceptance with God. If
any beast were sacrificed by heathens without an heart, 'twas accounted ominous
to the person for whom it was offered as in the case of Julian: now all the
sacrifices of hypocrites, are without an heart, Isa. 29.30.

It is recorded, that in a certain Island to the Southward of Celebes, night by
night among the trees do show themselves swarms of fiery worms, which make a
show and give such light as if all the twigs of the trees were lighted candles,
and the place the starry sphere and yet all this is but an appearance; truly
thus formal persons may seem by their duties both lightsome and fiery, and yet
be but a semblance and flourish.

Low moorish grounds bring forth some course grass, but it is from springs from
below, when the high meadows bring forth fine grass, being fed with the clouds
from above. The hypocrite may bring forth some course fruit, (as Egypt from the
overflowing of Nilus) from the earthly springs, and the overflowing of a
natural conscience, which will be by no means pacified when duties are omitted;
but the Regenerate man brings forth better fruits; like Canaan he flows
with milk and honey, being fed with the showrs of heaven, and watered with the
dews of Divine grace.

Thou may imitate the actions of a gracious man, yet be without grace; as
the Ape imitateth the actions of reasonable men, yet is without reason; or as a
Tragedian acts the part of a passionate man, but is all the while without
passion. Some men have wrought hard at duties, when a naturally enlightened
Conscience, not God, has been the Master to set them on work they would, but
cannot neglect duties at so cheap a rate as others, as he said, Solicitor
nullos esse putare deos. I could find in my heart to think there were no God,
but could not: As they say of the Wolf in the body, if you feed not it, it will
feed on you: so if Conscience, when its mouth is opened, should not be fed with
duty, it would feed on them, and therefore to keep it from gnawing them they
stop its mouth with performances, though they never do them from a renewed
Principle. Do not therefore Reader hang the weight of thy soul upon such weak
wyers, since men do so ordinarily take the way of duties no otherwise then
Amaziah did the way of the garden-house, 2 Kings 9.27. merely for necessity (to
escape an enemy that followed him) wherein he was at length pursued and slain.

Remigius, a Judge of Lorraighn, tells us how the Devil gave some in those
parts money, which at first appeared to be good coin, but being laid up, and
when need was, taken out to be spent, it proved to be nothing but dry leaves.
Reader, I wish it may not be so, but it is possible for thee to drive a great
Trade in duties, while thou live to hoord up a a great heap of those riches,
and they may seem to be current coin, good silver, to have the image and stamp
of the King of heaven upon it, but when thou come to die, that thou art to
spend it, for then thy works will follow thee, and God will give thee according
to thy works, it may then prove but dry leaves of no worth, or profit to thee.
Though these unsound bottoms hold out well enough in a fair sea, when they are
put to no stresse, yet stormy weather will quickly discover their rottenness.

Not a few take up duties only because they were educated in such a Religious
manner, not from any relish or savor which they find in them; and truly
'twill be an easy matter to part him and his work, who never took any pleasure
in it.

The stone for a time may against its nature be mounted upward, but when the
force of that impressed virtue which moved it is spent, 'twill fall downward
according to its nature. Partridges that are hatched under an hen may walk with
her, and answer her call for a time, but anon they fly away and show what they
are. Reader, I write not these things to dishearten thee from duties which are
the body of Religion, but to quicken thee to mind Regeneration which is the
soul of it.

Sixthly, The commendation of others, though they be real Saints, will not
prove thee to be in a state of salvation. The holiest man's confidence of thee
is a pitiful evidence that thou shall be happy. How many have there been in
the City who made a great noise, were cried up by their knowing judicious
neighbors to be very rich, and to be worth thousands, when on a sudden we have
heard of their breaking, and being worse (as we say) then naught! so many even
by them which are godly and discerning, may be counted rich in grace, rich
toward God, and on a sudden either by some temptation or at their dissolutions
they break, and God takes away from them what they seemed to have. How was good
David mistaken in Achitophel? Surely he thought him Gods Favorite, otherwise
he would never have made him his familiar and bosom friend; It was thou, O man,
mine equal, my friend, and my acquaintance; we took sweet counsel together, and
walked to the house of God in company, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.

How was Simon Peter deceived in Simon Magus who believed, wondered at the
miracles which were wrought, and was baptized, but notwithstanding that, was in
the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity! Acts 8.13, 20.

How was holy Paul mistaken in Demas! Luke the beloved Physician and Demas
greet you, Coloss. 4.14. there he ranks him with one that was eminently
religious; but Philemon, verse. 24. he puts him before Luke, and calls him his
fellow-laborer; yet 2 Timothy 4.10. (which Epistle was the last of all Paul's
Epistles) Demas has forsaken me, having embraced this present world; he
turned, as some write, Idol-priest, he followed the chase till he met with the
honey, and Jonathan-like, then left the pursuit.

How much were all the holy Apostles deceived in Judas? If Peter, as their
mouth speaks of their faith, Judas is included, Joh. 6.69. We believe and are
sure, that thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. When he speaks of their
good works, Judas is not excepted; Behold we have forsaken all and followed
thee, Matthew. 19.27. Further, when a Traitor is mentioned, Judas is not
suspected, his carriage was so fair that they were more jealous of their own
hearts then of him, Mat. 26.22. and yet he was a Traitor, a Devil.
Infallibility was never annexed to the godly man's choice.

Dedalus made an image that moved it self by art, which made the spectators
believe that it had a living principle; the Hypocrite may walk so exactly,
perform duties so devoutly, that Saints may judge such motions to flow from a
principle of spiritual life. Because men have the exact resemblance of
Christians, therefore godly men (who are charitable abroad, and censorious at
home) judge them to be true Christians: Now in regard there may be a
resemblance of a Christian in external actions, where there is not the essence
of Christianity in internal sanctified affections; therefore they, though they
sin not, yet sometimes they err in their judgments.

1 Samuel 16.6, 7. When Samuel came to Jesse (being sent to anoint a King) and
sees Eliab a proper handsome person, he presently cries out, Surely the Lords
anointed is before him; but mark what God says, Look not on his countenance,
nor the height of his stature, for I have rejected him; for God sees not as
man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance, but God looks on the
heart. So when godly men see their neighbors lovely in their lives, civil in
their practices, high in their profession, strict in performances, they
according to their duty say (inwardly at least) Surely the Lords anointed is
before him; these are the blessed of the Lord, anointed to the Kingdom of
heaven; but God may often answer them, Look not on their profession or their
performances, for I see their hearts that they serve not me, but themselves of
me.

We read of Zeuxes the Painter, that he drew grapes so to the life that he
deceived the birds, who came flying to them, and pecking at them, as if they
had been real grapes. Certainly a graceless man may have such a complete form
of godliness, that those who are gracious cannot but judge it to be accompanied
with the power, when indeed it is but the picture. When there was a famine in
Samaria, a scarcity of good food, the fourth part of a cab of Doves dung (which
might be the quantity of a pint) was sold for five pieces of silver (twelve
shillings six pence of our money) observe at what an high rate that which was
nothing worth was valued at in a famine; truly so, there is such a scarcity of
true godliness, that godly men (who exceedingly long for the advancement of
Christ and Christianity in men's hearts and houses) prize and encourage any
thing that comes near it, that looks like it, or has any tendency toward
it; But that which is highly esteemed of men, may be abominable in the sight of
God, Luke 16.15.

Reader, do not thou (as some Tradesmen) live altogether on thy credit with
others. The most cunning takers of money that are (though they take notice of
every piece) are sometimes deceived, and take bad money (such as will never
endure the touchstone) for good coin. What a poor comfort will it be to thee
when thou art hungry, and naked, that others think and speak that thou art fed
and clothed? he that trades highly, and lives wholly upon trust, seldom holds
out long; look therefore not so much at others commendation, but at thy own
Regeneration, for that is it alone which accompanies Salvation. It is a favor
that thou do so walk as to have godly men's good word, but for all that thou
may be a stranger to this regenerating work, and then it is not the wind of
their breaths that can blow thy soul co the haven of bliss.

Seventhly, Thy confidence of thy own good estate, is no infallible evidence.
The world, as they are mistaken in Repentance, taking it to be only a little
sorrow for sin, though no aversion from it, or detestation of it, be joined
with it; so they are also in the nature of Faith, esteeming it to consist in
the strength of persuasion, and that who ever can be confident that Christ died
for him, and that he shall go to heaven, does believe unto salvation; whereas
the difference between a deceiving and a saving Faith, does not consist in the
strength of perswafion, but in the ground of it. Matthew. 7.3, ult. the two
buildings might be of equal height and beauty, the difference lay in the bottom
and foundation: An Hypocrite may sail toward heaven with a full gale of
confidence, nay the strength of that wind does over-turn the vessel; for were
he more dubious, he would be more anxious about his recovery, and so more
likely to be saved. There is (says the wise man) that makes himself rich, yet
has nothing, Prove. 13.7. That is, there are some that are full of confidence,
rich in assurance, that the love of God, the blood of Christ, the undefiled
inherithnce are theirs, when indeed they have not one grain of grace, nor any
true ground of their joy and peace, but are very beggars. The Apostle Paul
speaks of himself, That he was alive without the Law, Romans 7.9. (even then
when he was liable to its curse and lash) he had high thoughts of his present
holiness, and great hopes of his future happiness, He was a jolly fellow,
cock-a-hoop, taking himself to be somebody; his motto was, Omnia been, All is
well, when indeed every thing was ill, and there was but a step between him and
hell: he had much false peace, though he had no true purity; His way was right
in his own eyes, but the end was the way of death, Prove. 14.12. He was alive
without the Law; his ignorance was both the mother and nurse of his confidence;
just like a blind man encompassed about with bloody enemies, or in a place full
of Serpents and poisonous creatures, yet thinks himself safe because he does
not see them. Or as a man in a Lethargy, he feels no pain, though he be very
near the pangs of death. Christ told the Jews, Ye say God is your Father, but
ye have not known him: So these say, God is their Father, Christ is their
Husband, Heaven their home, when they know neither.

As every wicked man's conscience is morally evil, and stained with sin, so many
times it is naturally evil, that it does neither check him, nor judge him for
his sin. One main work of conscience is to give evidence either for or against
a man; now conscience may bear false witness against its neighbor; the godly
man, either through ignorance, or misinformation, not judging by a right rule,
or not using that rule rightly: And conscience may give in false testimony on
the behalf of ungodly men, either through its blindness, sleepiness, security
or searedness. Conscience by nature does flatter the sinner, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Conscience may be seared, when it is not settled, and asleep when the sinner has
no true rest. Some men serve their consciences as David did Vriah, make it
drunk that they may be rid of it; when it has begun to storm, they speak to it
by some carnal diversions, as Christ to the rough sea, Peace, be still, and if
then a calm ensue, they are safe. While the Devil the strong man armed keep the
house all is quiet, Luke 11.21. Conscience having often warned them of their
sins and misery, and being still resisted, at last grows weary, and resolves
to give them over to their own ways and woe. These men strongly persuade
themselves that all is well, and yet stoutly persist in all that is ill, but
they fall from the high turret of presumption into the bottomless gulf of
perdition.

The worst men have not seldom the best thoughts of themselves, both as to
their present and future estates. How confident was the Pharisee that his
condition was safe for the present! Luke 18.11. when he was in an estate of
wrath; and what assurance had those Prophets that they should be admitted into
Paradise! Matthew. 7.21.22, 23. How boldly did they bounce at the door, but
entrance was denied, as the Jews of old spoke peremptorily, We shall neither
see sword nor famine, though God himself had foretold both, Jer. 5.12. so many
now speak presumptuously, they shall neither see Laws curse, nor Gods wrath,
death nor damnation, when God himself has ensured them to all in their
conditions. They cry peace, peace, when sudden desolation is ready to seize on
them, as travail on a woman with child, which they cannot escape, 1 These. 5.3.
The mirth of these men was never ushered in by godly mourning. Their
expectation is raised high, but its foundation is not laid low.

Nero shut up the Temple of Janus, tanquam nullo residuobello, as if no
Relics of war remained says Sueton, when at the same time the Empire was at
Civil war within it self.

How ordinary is it for men whose Consciences are past feeling to brag that God
and they are good friends (not knowing when they ever fell out) when at the
same time he is at war with them, walks contrary to them, and is preparing for
them the instruments of eternal death! Like Agag to the very hour of execution,
they are confident of a Pardon, and go with their hearts full of hopes into the
very place of despair. They die willingly (as they tell us) and their
neighbors commend them, saying they died like lambs, when rather like Solomon's
ox, who goes to the slaughter, so died they, going to the den of roaring
Lions, and the place of Dragons. They had no Bands in their deaths who were in
bondage to the devil, Ps. 73.4.

As a man that is asleep upon the Mast of a Ship, he is in a golden Dream, and
his thoughts upon large Revenues, rich treasures, Kingdoms and Diadems, which
he has already in his own possession, but in that very hour wherein he is
solacing himself in his vain imaginations, a storm arises, the man is tumbled
off the Mast and drowned: Thus many have golden dreams, strong presumptions of
their salvation, when alas they do but befool themselves, are all the while
upon the brink of hell, and are tumbled into it before they are aware.

Reader, look to this likewise, that thou build not on such a weak bottom; for
this may happen both to profane men and to hypocrites. It is said of Pigmalion
that he drew a picture so lively, that he deceived himself, and taking the
picture for a person fell in love with his own picture. I tell thee thou may
spin so fine a thread, and weave so curious a web of painted cloth, feigned
godliness, that thou may deceive thy self, and take it to be fine linen,
the righteousness of the Saints, and may thence gather, that thy soul is
safe, when in all thou do thou art unsound. If confidence or not doubting our
estates, will prove them out of danger then the ignorant, stupid, seared
sinners, must certainly be saved, which the Scriptures flatly deny. Socrates
who lived according to his natural conscience, died with much calmness and
confidence, speaking of those who put him to death, that they might kill him,
but could not hurt him; yet was without the knowledge of Jesus Christ, in whose
name alone is salvation.

Eighthly, To follow the light within thee, or to obey the Dictates of a natural
conscience is no sound evidence for heaven. A man may follow the light within
him to the chambers of utter darkness. The Jesuit in the Quaker would make
this the infallible testimony of a man's uprightness and sincerity, nay, he
plucks Christ from his Throne, and sets the light within him in his room,
making it more then a mark, even the meritorious cause of salvation; but
Reader, I shall clearly prove, that it is so far from being worthy of our
affiance, that it is not so much as an evidence for heaven, because conscience
by nature is corrupted, as much as the other faculties. Their minds and
consciences, says the Holy Ghost are defiled, Tit. 1.15. The nature of
conscience is good, but the conscience of nature is evil. It savours not the
things of God, it is not purged with the blood of Christ, it is wholly blind in
the matters of Christianity, nay, it is a Rebel against God. Now if I follow a
blind guide, am I ever like to enter in at the straight gate? Is it rational
arguing that I am in my Princes favor, because I obey my Captain, when he is a
traitor?

I do not say that a natural conscience has no good in it, but I am sure it is
in the account of God an evil conscience opposing and resisting him.

Like an ignis fatuus (as pure and perfect a light as the Quakers make it) it
leads men out of Gods high way into those bogs and quagmires wherein they
sink and perish. I question not, but the heathens did follow their polluted
consciences in their idolatrous practices. And sure I am, that Paul might thank
his corrupt conscience for persecuting Jesus Christ. I verily thought, says
he, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Christ, Acts 26,9.
Mark the words, they are full of weight, Paul's conscience told him 'twas his
duty to suppress Christianity. Was not his obedience to the commands of this
conscience a sad sign that he was to be saved? Further Christ tells his
Disciples, John 16.2. That they who killed them, should think they did God good
service. Observe, here was pure light within men, that made them think that
they did God the greatest service in doing his Church the greatest disservice.
Tertul. tells us, that Maximinian the Emperor esteemed Christianorum sanguinem
diis gratissimam esse victimam: the blood of Christians to be an acceptable
sacrifice to the gods. Is any man so mad, as not to think, that if such a Pilot
steer, the ship by answering to its motion must needs be cast away,

Saul would out of conscience have slain the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.2. and
broken the Covenant which had been sworn to by the Israelites. His conscience
was evil, and could not speak his condition to be good; an evil conscience will
call bitter sweet, darkness light, evil good. It will leave plain precepts, and
walk by extraordinary Providence, Isa. 36.18, 19, 20. Jer. 50.7. It prefers
a strong impulsion of its own spirit before that word which is the will of Gods
spirit, Isa. 36.9, 10. it esteems a supposed Revelation above that Scripture
which is indoubtedly of Divine inspiration, 2 Pet. 1.19. It places often most
of its Religion in Penance, abstinence, and outward acts of mortification, in
external signs of humility, will worship, and neglecting the body, Col. 2. ult
of many of which God may say as to the Jews, Who has required these things at
your hands, Isa. 1.12. It makes men keep a a great stir about cuffs, ribbands,
hatbands, (as the Pharisees about pots and cups) when their hearts are full of
pride and malice, robbing even Christ of the glory of our redemption, and
hating Christians for not daring to join in their cursed opinion. Friend, will
following such a conscience speak thee to be a true Christian!

Conscience is indeed a rule, but regula regulata prius quam regulans: such a
rule as must be ruled by Gods word, before it can be a right rule for our
works. To the Law and to the testimonies, if conscience speak not according to
this word, it is (because there is much pretended) no true light in it.
Scripture is the compass by which conscience must bend its course, or else
'twill never land its passengers at the desired haven. It is no farther liberty
of conscience (but licentiousness) then it is regulated by the Scripture. One
office of conscience is Magistratical, and Legislative, to command and give
Laws to man. We read of the heathen, that in regard of their consciences, They
were a Law to themselves, Romans 2.14. Conscientia mill Reges, mill leges: But
though conscience be a King over the other faculties; yet it is a subject and
subordinate to God; and therefore as a Deputy Lieutenant, it must command its
inferiors, according to the directions which it receives from its superior;
otherwise as a King which commands out of his Dominions, it is not to be
obeyed. God has indeed given conscience a large Commission, it is a deputy
Deity in the little world, man; The government of the soul lies for a great
part upon its shoulders.

It has an universal negative voice, nothing to be done without its assent,
Romans 14.2. ult. but not an universal affirmative voice to enjoin what it
pleases; when it is regulated by Gods Law, then and not till then, it can
govern well our hearts and lives.

Bernard says excellently, Bern de cons. i. l. 1. cap. 9.
We must consult with conscience, as also to consult with Scripture; the Bible
is the book of life according to that the books of our consciences may be
copied, or corrected. Let us therefore says he, compare our book with Gods
book, lest in the last day our books be found false and faulty, when they come
to be examined.

Copies are no further valid and authentic, then they agree with the Original:
neither is conscience any farther to be trusted, then it accords with the word
of truth: it is an under-Officer, and therefore if it wave its Commission, and
use its power against its Prince, it is to be informed not obeyed. The Law
natural must be hearkened to, so far as it agrees with the Law moral. It is
the greatest idolatry in the world, says Reverend Mr. Rutherford, to make thy
self the idol, and as bad a Papacy as that at Rome, to make a Pope of thy own
conscience. The light of Scripture is infallible, but not so the light of
nature; yet how ordinary is it for men in our days (like the men of Sechem,
Judge. 9.46.49.) to fly for shelter to this hold of the idol Berith, and to
think themselves safe, if they can say the light within them (they might more
truly say, the Prince of darkness) moves them to deny all ordinances, to call
Christians Devils, and limbs of Antichrist, to set up a Christ within them, in
opposition to that righteousness which he wrought without them: but as that
hold was fired over the Sechemites heads, and they perished in it: so these men
and their consciences, if the Lord do not turn them, shall burn together.

Thou see now Reader, that men may follow their natural Judgments into
eternal Torments; do not therefore follow conscience blindfold, but first set
that watch by the Sun dial of Gods word; for then only 'twill go true, and
according to it thou may work.

Ninethly, To join with this or that party, or to hold this or that opinion, is
no sure evidence of salvation; all the sign which some have of their sincerity,
is their schism and separation from the people of God, and public Ordinances.
They fancy, for indeed it is but a fancy, that to leave the good old way
prescribed by Christ, and travel^d in by the Saints in all ages, and to take a
by-way over hedge and ditch (found out by themselves, or some others, whose
persons they have in admiration) is the nearest and surest way to heaven. How
many list themselves under the colors of Quakers or Anabaptists, or Episcopal,
or Independents, or Presbyterians, fighting (in expressions at least) against
all that are of a different judgment, and being confident of the goodness of
their cause, think it impossible for them that are engaged in it to miscarry.
Reader, if thou art one of these, I must tell thee, for all this thou may be
unconverted, whatever thy cause or opinion be, or whoever be the head of thy
party or file-leader, if Regeneratian be not thy Banner, and Christ thy
Captain, thou shall without question be conquered, and as certainly die an
eternal death, as thou live a natural life.

Creeds do not make Christians; nor are opinions, be they never so new, signs
of new affections; rather e contra. Divisions and side-takings do rather speak
a brutish and grazing (as Nebuchadnezzar's) then a gracious heart. Godw. Jew.
Antiq. lib. 1.
How many persons were there in the days of Christ, who differed from others in
their principles! The very Scribes and Pharisees differed in some things, the
Essenes differed from them both, the Sadduces from all three, the Herodians
from all the former; yea the difference amongst many of them was so wide that
they could not meet together in divine worship; now how weak had it been for
either of these from their dividing from men on earth, to have inferd their
dwelling with God in Heaven? When for ought I know, he must go beyond them all,
that will be saved, Mat. 5.20.

Thou may be of that party, which has the greatest name for purity, and yet
when thou die, not enter into peace. I will, for thy sake, suppose the
opinion which thou hold to be true and sound, and the party to which thou
joynest to be holy and solid, yet neither of these is regeneration. Alas the
new birth does not consist in a sound head (though it be a mercy if thou holded
the pattern of wholesome words) but in a purified heart; not in siding with the
truth, but in being sanctified by the truth.

The five foolish Virgins associated with the wise, and yet were unregenerate
and wicked. Judas kept company with Christ and his Apostles, and joined with
them in Acts of devotion, and yet was a son of perdition. Vermin crawl among
roses, but are without their savor and sweetness. Spiders fasten on rich
hangings, yet are full of poison. Dross and gold, smoke and fire, dregs and
wine, chafe and corn are joined together, yet do abundantly differ.

Thou may like the mixed multitude seem to turn thy back upon Egypt, and
embarque in the same bottom with the true Israelites, and yet (as they) come
short of Canaan.

Tenthly, and lastly, Some seeming good affections do not necessarily speak a
man's good condition.

Every shining stone is not a Diamond, nor is every flashy affection from
regeneration. Some say there is no precious stone but has its counterfeit. I
think there is hardly any grace but has its Ape. I will instance in some few
affections which thou may have, and yet miss heaven.

Thou may wonder at the excellency of the word, and yet be a stranger to the
efficacy of it. Luke 4.22. All bare him witness and wondered at the gracious
words which proceeded out of his mouth. All wondered at the savior, but all
were not wounded for their sins. All wondered at his gracious words, but many
wanted his gracious work. Ezekiels Sermons were to some of his hearers as
lovely songs, and yet they continued impenitent in their sins. Some people
nibble at the bait of the preachers oratory, when their souls are never caught
with the hook and authority of Scripture. Ezekiel. 3^.^1, 32.

Thou may be full of joy under the word, and yet be empty of grace. Herod
heard John gladly. Mark 6.20. others received the word with joy. Mat. 13.20. Do
godly men rejoice in the word of the God? Psalm 119.110, 111. verse. Truly so
may others; they may seem to warm themselves at the same fire with Saints, to
drink the same heart-chearing wine, and yet their wine is drawn at several
taps. The unregenerate man's joy flows from a common gift or illumination; the
regenerate man's from special grace or sanctification. Thou may be enlightened
and taste the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb 6.4, 5.
Mark, an unsanctified man may taste the word of God, and as Cooks taste of
their sauces, it pleases them, but they spit all out, let nothing down,
receive no nourishment from it. The truths of God and thoughts of heaven, may
pass through thee, as water through a pipe of lead, leaving only some dew of
flashy and washy joy, not soaking into thy heart, as water into the earth, and
making thee soft and fruitful. As a poor man in a sleep sometimes thinks that
he is highly promoted, sumptuously feasted, exceedingly enriched, and O how is
he delighted with such imaginations! and indeed all that such thoughts produce,
is only some sudden joy, no alteration in the man, nor resolution to walk
answerably to such dignity, for all is but a dream; so thou may think
sometimes of the excellency of the mercies which God has promised, of the pure
rivers of pleasures which Christ have purchased, and O how may thou be taken
with them, imagining that they belong to thee! but all the effect which they
work, is only some short joy, no real change, or settled purpose to crucify
the flesh, despise the world, and deny self for the hopes of them, for all is
but a fancy.

Thy joy may be a say of that which thou will not buy, as being loath to go to
the price; and a taste of that on which thou shall never make a full meal. The
full bargain may not be driven between God and thy soul, and then thou can
not take this joy as an earnest or in part of payment.

Thou may sigh and mourn for thy sins, and yet be unacquainted with godly
sorrow. ^t is not seldom that men hang down their heads like bulrushes, when
they are rooted in the mire of pollution.

Possibly under some sharp affliction, thou may cry out of thy corruptions,
as the pig squeaks under the knife: So did Pharaoh, as metals melt in the fire
(and harden out of it) but still unregenerate, Exodus 9.

Ahab humbled himself under the threatening of God, but like a Fox in a trap he
looked sadly, merely to get out; for at the same time he was an enemy to God,
and quickly after went up to Ramoth Gilead in defiance of him, 1 King. 21, 22.
chap.

It may be thou have had some pang of conviction, which like a qualm has come
over thy stomach, and made thee sick a little at present; but thou do by the
strong water of some carnal contentment settle it again; the bad humors of thy
lusts were only stirred, not vomited up. Judas had a great gash in his soul,
and yet not one drop of his bad blood let out He was tortured at the heart by
legal attrition, but not turned unto holiness by Evangelical contrition; his
heart was only battered as lead by the hammer, not bettered, or melted by the
fire, to be cast into Gods mould, Matthew. 27.

A vessel of wine is troubled by being removed, but the Lees remaining, it
retains and quickly returns to its former savor; some smarting Providence,
or searching Ordinance, may remove and trouble thee for a time; but thy
unsanctified heart remaining, thou will return to thy former savor; like Moab,
thou may be stttled on thy lees, and not emptied from vessel to vessel,
therefore thy taste remains, and thy sense is not changed, Jer. 48.11.

There are two words used by the Holy Ghost for repentance (...), Matthew 27.3.
Vox prima (...) um (...) in (...) par^^m sumi t^r. ^eza
and (...), 2 Timothy 2.25. the former signifies sorrow for a fault committed,
the latter After-wit, a change of the mind, or making wise for the future. The
former may be in the unregenerate; but as they say of Castor and Pollux, if
they are divided they are ominous and fatal; so say I of these, if lamenting
sins past be not joined with loathing and leaving sin for the time to come, it
is not repentance unto life. Some by their repentance think they get a new
privilege to sin; as that Lewis of France who would swear and then kiss his
crucifix; swear again, and kiss it again; and as the Drunkard gives himself a
vomit, and then he is the fitter and freer to fall to his cups again; thus some
men's sorrow is a message sent to heaven, to entreat leave that they may sin;
but this is far from the sorrow which is never to be sorrowed for.

Thy sorrow for sin may be forced out of thee (as water out of a still) by the
fire of affliction, not come freely from thee, as water out of a spring. Let
thy conscience be judge, had thou not rather be at thy carnal mirth, then
spiritual mourning? Many of the Jews could mourn sadly in their distress,
though they were not sanctified; now violent actions will not speak thy natural
inclination.

Or thy grief may be like a land-flood which cannot hold long; for a day thou
may afflict thy soul, for a day thou may hang down thy head like a bulrush,
Isa. 58. A bulrush whilst the wind blows bends downward, but the wind
ceasing it percheth up again: Whilst thou art tossed up and down with the
boisterous billows (as one not accustomed to the ocean) thou may be sea-sick,
but when thou art off from the waters thou art well again. The vessel of thy
soul is always leaking, but that pump of sorrow is not always going.

Thou may like the woman of Tekoah, feign thy self a mourner, 2 Samuel 14.2.
when in truth thou art none: Thou do not dive to the bottom of thy heart (as
the Indians at the sea for jewels) to fetch thence thy pearly tears; thou
criest not to God with thy heart when thou howlest on thy bed, Hos. 7.14. Thy
waters may not be drawn from the deep well of a broken and contrite heart:
Every Sacrifice thou offerest may be as Ephraim, a silly dove without an heart,
Hos. 7.11.

Thou may fear sin, and yet sin may be thy Favorite. The vengeance in sins
tail may be frightful to thee, when the venom in its body and nature is not at
all distasteful to thee. Like the burnt child thou may dread the fire of sin,
not because it soots and blacks thee, but because it scorches and burns thee.

There is so much light left still in man's Understanding, which is called the
candle of the Lord, that he cannot but see a God, and this God clothed with
wrath and judgments against sin and sinners, and thence he (though
unconverted) may sometime be full of fear and horror. Caligula used all the art
he could, to blow out this light, and fortified himself with all the arguments
he could get against a Deity, but could not accomplish his ends; for as often
as it thundered, he was miserably affrighted, and would run under a bed. So we
read that Felix an Heathen trembled when Paul reasoned of judgment to come,
Act. 24.25. Sin in its doomsday dress, as it is clothed with fire and fury, may
be terrible even to the ungodly. And the consideration of this, may make them
leave many sins, that do not loath any sin. The Mariner throws overboard
those goods in a storm, which he wishes for, and it may be gathers up in a
calm. As a man in a fever loves drink, yea longs much for it, yet dares not
meddle with it, because 'twill make him worse; The sinners in Sion (says the
Prophet) are afraid, fearfulness has taken hold on hypocrites; Why, what is the
matter? Who can dwell in everlasting burnings? who can abide devouring flames?
Isa. 33.14. Mark, it is not, Who ever abused such an ocean of love? who ever
despised such a matchless life? who ever provoked such a gracious Lord? but who
can dwell in everlasting burnings? The sting of sin to the unregenerate is
punishment, and the sting of punishment to the regenerate is sin, Exodus 9.28.
Hos. 14.1. to fear sin as it brings an heavy rod, usually proceeds from
nature; but to fear sin, as it is a wandering from an holy rule, can proceed
only from grace.

Truly as Phaltiel parted with his wife Michal (whom Saul had injuriously taken
from David and given unto him) so unregenerate men part with their sins; when
David came to the crown, he sends for Michal, Phaltiel dares not disobey the
King, but he brings her on her way weeping, and bemoaning his loss; he looks
after her as far as Bohurim; many a sad thought he had for her, when she was by
force divorced from him.

Thus unregenerate men may leave their lusts, when they are afraid to keep
them, but many a longing heart they have after them, and are not by choice but
constraint separated from them. As parents, they go to the funeral of those
children of their corrupt hearts, with no small sorrow. Sickly persons forbear
some meats, which they love dearly, because those meats do not love them; they
either feed their diseases, or are hardly digested. Some sinners dare not feed
in their actions on some sins, which are as sweet to their affections as the
honey and the honey comb, because they fear that they will rise in their
stomachs, and the reckoning will be too heavy for them to pay.

Or possibly thou art entering upon some solemn act of devotion, and upon that
account at present forbearest thy corruptions, as some write of Serpents, they
lay by their poison when they go to drink, and afterward take it up again.
Thou may like Abraham to his servant, bid thy sin stay below, while thou
go up to the mount to worship, Genesis 22. and when the duty is done, return to
it again.

Reader, do not rely upon these affections which thou see may be in them
which are not regenerated: for as the Sorcerers seemed to do as much as Moses,
but did nothing in reality, so thou may seem to do as much as a Christian,
when all is but counterfeit. Thy fear of sin may be forced, not flow freely
from thee. Fearfulness has taken hold on the hypocrites. Isa. 33.14. as a
Sergeant takes hold on a bad debtor, or an armed man on a coward, being more
bold then welcome. Thou may fear sin as the Medes and Persians the Jews, when
the fear of the Jews fell upon them, Esther 8.17. when the presence of this
fear, is as Christ's presence is to the Devils, a torment to thee, Mat. 8.29.

Nay, thy fear may be only for a fit, like a mushrom which grows up in a
night, and perishes the next day. The people when they saw Amasa weltring in
his blood in the way, stood still; but he being quickly removed, they went on.
When thou think of others weltring in their soul-blood in hell or see the
judgments of God upon others, thou may be afraid, and stand still a little
at present; but these thoughts being soon removed, thou may go on in the way
of thine own heart.

It is reported of Cassander that he trembled at the sight of Alexanders
Statue, when Alexander was dead, and Cassander had gotten possession of
Macedonia. The regenerate man when he sees with the eye of faith, the curse of
the Law, the wrath of God, the torments of hell, his flesh trembles for fear
of them, and he is afraid of Gods righteous judgments, though they are all
dead to him, he being not under the Law but under grace; but it may be it is the
life in them, and their power to hurt thee, which makes thee afraid of them.

Friend, in all these passions thou may but like a Stage Player in the robes
of a Prince, act the part of a Christian, and therefore can not thence
conclude thy right to the revenues of his place. The whole life of a man
unregenerate is but an interlude. Regeneration alone can make a man live in
good earnest.

Reader, if thou art a civil person, a great Professor, enjoyest the outward
Privileges of the Gospel, aboundest in Duties and Performances, if God has
given thee gifts and parts, if godly men commend thee, and thou art sometimes
confident of thy own good condition: If thou walk according to thy natural
light, and joynest with them that fear the Lord: If some good affections like a
flash of lightning, on a sudden surprise thee (though most of these are good)
yet do not hence conclude thy undoubted right to salvation; for all these may
consist with unregeneracy, and Christ tells thee That except thou art born
again, thou can not see the Kingdom of God. As the Alchymists gold appears
as good as the true gold, but it will not endure the seventh fire, nor comfort
the heart as a cordial; both which the true gold will; so if all these should
meet in thee, they would make thee look like a Saint; but believe it, they will
never endure the fire of Scripture (which must shortly try thee whether thou
art true gold or counterfeit) nor comfort thy soul as a cordial when Physicians
shall give over thy body.

THirdly, If without Regeneration, none can attain salvation; it informs us
of the difficulty of salvation, that it is an hard thing to get to heaven: it
is no easy matter to be regenerated and made holy; and therefore it is no easy
matter to be glorified and made happy. Where the gate is straight, it is hard to
get in. If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the sinner and ungodly
appear! 1 Pet. 4.18. The Apostle there intends not the uncertainty, but the
difficulty of the salvation of the godly. If it be so hard for them to be saved
that have passed the Pikes, shot the Gulf, gone through the pangs of the new
birth, and traveled a considerable part of their way heavenward: how hard will
it be for them who are not yet set out, that have not taken one step in the way
to life!

The sleepy world indeed dream that men may go to heaven without so much ado,
they look upon civility to be sanctity, wordly sighs to be godly sorrow, not
doubting their estates to be faith in Christ; and if they can but spare a
little time and now then from the world, and the flesh to mumble over a few
night Petitions, they hope with the help of these bladders to swim through the
Ocean of Divine fury to heaven. Or if they come short of these fig leaves
(wherewith many of Adams children endeavor, though in vain to cover their
nakedness) yet if they have the warning-piece of sickness, before the murdering
piece of death be shot off, that they can but cry Lord have mercy upon us, or
tell their neighbors that they are sorry for their sins, or get a Minister to
pray with them, then all must be well, and they must as sure go (when they die)
to God and Christ, as they lived to the flesh and the Devil. But stay friends,
a little, there are more words then one to this spiritual bargain between God
and your souls; there is a work of Regeneration to be done, or else ye are
undone eternally; ye must be thoroughly and universally new made, or else ye are
marred for ever. Christ would never have commanded men to strive as to an agony,
to enter in at the straight gate, Matthew. 7.13. to work out their salvation with
fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. To labor for the food which endures to
everlasting life. John 6.27. If it had been such an easy thing to have reached
heaven. Things of such excellency are not obtained with such facility. Pebbles
lie common, but pearls are hardly come by. They must trravel far, dig deep,
work hard, that will get the golden mines. The way to hell lies down hill, a
weak body may run down hill, but it is hard to go up hill to Mount Sion.

Friend, I write not these things to discourage (alas I need not, there is not
a straw in the way to heaven, but thou if unconverted stumblest at it, when
thou can leap over blocks in the way to hell) but to awaken thee out of thy
carnal security, and to quicken thee to seriousness and industry about that
which is of such unspeakable concernment to thy soul; Our first births are many
times accompanied with hard labors, ushered in by sharp throws and bitter
pangs. Our second births are always harder: O the terrors and horrors, the
convictions and convulsions, the tremblings of soul, and lancings of
Conscience, the thundrings from the Law, the lightnings from hellfire, with
which often this new creature is born! It is hard labor indeed which brings
this babe of grace into the world.

I have read of Melancthon, that when he was first converted, he thought it
almost impossible for any man to withstand the evidence and authority of the
word of God, whereupon he told one of his friends, that when he came to preach
he would make work among souls; but after some years spent in that calling,
being demanded what success of his labors; he answered that Old Adam was too
strong for young Melancthon. Alas, friend, possibly thou may think that thou will turn to God hereafter, and thereby prevent thy burning in hell for ever:
Believe it, it is not so easy to turn from sin to God as thou imaginest:
Conversion is another manner of thing, and more hard then most men think; thou
could sooner create a world then make thy self a new creature. The
resurrection of thy body if it were dead in the grave, were an easier work then
the resurrection of thy soul to newness of life.

As the birth of the natural, so the birth of the spiritual man requires
infinite strength. It is God, not the midwife, that takes the child out of the
mothers womb, Psalm. 22.9. The hand of God alone can open that door, and let the
lettle infant into the world, Genesis 29.31. otherwise the womb would be its tomb;
So the birth of the new man is wholly from God; and the power wherewith he
effects it, is both miraculous and Almighty.

Reader, if thou do take a brief view what things are wrought when any one is
new made, and how little he does contribute to them, nay, how opposite he is
against them, thou may perceive that neither Regeneration nor salvation are
easy.

Thy mind must be enlightened to see both sin and the Savior; now is it easy
to open the eye of the blind? who can do it, but he whom Augustine calls
totus oculus all eye? When Jesus gave sight to one that was born blind, the
Jews themselves could not but acknowledge him a worker of miracles, John
9.6.16. What then will the scattering the mists of ignorance, and dispersing
the clouds of darkness which gather and thicken about our understandings by
nature, speak the sun of righteousness to be! Ephesians. 5.8. Thy heart also must be
thoroughly humbled; stone must be turned into flesh. And O it is not easy to
melt such hard metal, when thy heart naturally is like clay hardened both by
the Sunshine of mercies, and fire of judgment, that no change of weather can
make that stone to weep. Ezekiel 36.26.

Besides, the strong holds of sin must be cast down, thy old friends must be
deserted and prosecuted with implacable hatred, as irreconcilable enemies;
those beloved lusts, which are at thy right hand, and have such a large room in
thy heart, must be cut off and parted from thee. Thy dilectum delictum, the
Isaac of thy corruption, which is the child of thy warmest affection, in which
thou have taken such great delight, and from which thou have promised thy self
such large returns of profit, pleasure, or preferment, must be laid on the
altar, and have the sacrificing knife of mortification thrust into the heart of
it, and its blood poured out before the Lord. Man, is not this an hard saying!
(as they spoke in another case) who can hear it? an hard Lesson, who can learn
it? thy lust will not like a lamb go silently to the slaughter, but it will
roar and rage, fight stoutly for its life with many many carnal arguments, and
even rend thy heart with its hideous outcryes. Who can tell the struggling of
this beast before 'twill be brought to the block? Dives and his dishes, Balaam
and his wages, Achan and his wedges, Herod and his Herodias, the young man and
his great means are not easily separated. O how difficult is it to wean the
child of disobedience from those breasts which he has sucked so often, and
with so much complacency, and to divorce them which like man and wife have been
ravished with each others love: in works of Art its hard to build, easy to
destroy; in works of nature a tree which has been many years growing may be
cut down in an hour: but in works of sin its otherwise; man's weakness can
easily build them up, but Gods power can only throw them down. Pompey, when
the Romans said, That if Caesar came to Rome, they saw not how they could
resist his power, told them, That if he did but stamp with his foot on any
ground in Italy he would bring men enough both footmen and horsemen to do it;
but when Caesar was coming with his Army, Phaonius bid Pompey stamp with his
feet, and fetch the Soldiers which he had promised; but all was in vain;
Pompey found it more difficult then he thought: for Caesar made him first flee,
and then in a fight totally routed him. The devil persuades men that they may
defer their regeneration till their dissolution, and then 'twill be an easy
matter to foil their spiritual foes; but alas, they find it not so easy to
mortify earthly members, and destroy the body of death, when their souls
adversaries with united strength encounter them fiercely, and conquer them
eternally.

Further, all thy earthly comforts, whether friends, relations, name, estate,
limbs, life, must be laid at the feet of Christ, hated for his sake, and parted
with at his call and command, and that for the hope of such things as thou
never saw, nor art ever like to see while thou live. Is not this, Reader,
an hard chapter, to forgo an estate in hand for something only in hope, to
throw away present possessions and follow Christ thou know not whither, to
receive an inheritance thou know not when?

And as thy sins and thy soul must be parted asunder, so thy Savior and thy
soul must be joined together; faith must follow repentance, thy own
righteousness must be esteemed as dross and dung; the weight of thy soul and
burden of thy sins must be laid on the naked cross of Jesus Christ. Now for
thee who art by nature so extremely in love with thy self, to loath thy self;
and for thee, notwithstanding thy discouragements from the number and nature of
thy sins, the threatenings and curses of the Law, the wrath and righteousness of
God, to cling about and hang upon the Lord Jesus, and resolve, though he kill
thee, yet thou will trust in him; surely this is not easy; the work of God in
infusing justifying faith, is as great as in faith miraculous; This is the work
of God, says Christ, that ye believe in the name of him whom he has sent,
John 6.29. The work of God, not only in regard of its excellency, because no
work in man is more pleasing to God, then believing on his Son, but also in
regard of its difficulty, because none but a God can enable a man to believe;
the bird can as soon fly in the egg, as thy soul mount up by faith toward
heaven, till the Almighty God assist thee.

Further, all the commands of God must be heartily embraced, some whereof are
as contrary to flesh and blood as fire to water; Self, which is thy great idol,
must be denied; the world with all its pomp and pride, in comparison of Christ
refused; principalities and powers rencountred and foiled, thine enemies loved
(and if killed, it must be with kindness) godliness owned, though much
disgraced by others, truth followed close, though it threaten to dash out thy
teeth with its heels, a buffeted Christ with his naked Cross preferred before
weighty Crowns; things which reason cannot comprehend, believed; and which none
ever obtained, labored for. Friend, are these easy things? what think thou?
add to all this the consideration not only of thy weakness and inability to do
these things, but also thy wickedness and contrariety to them; thou art not
only deprived of good, but all over depraved with evil; The imaginations and
thoughts of thy heart are evil, only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.5.
Thou do resolvedly and obstinately refuse good and choose evil, Eccles. 8.11.
Jer. 44.16. The hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil,
Eccles. 8.11. observe how full that text is, man is resolved to have his
minion, his lust, though he have wrath and death and hell into the bargain; as
the mother of Nero, being told that her son would be her death if ever he were
Emperor, answered, Let him kill me, so he may reign; so they say, Let sin
reign, though it kill us, though it damn us; The heart of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil. If thou were only empty of God and grace, the
work were more easy; but thou art an enemy to grace and godliness; thy carnal
mind (which is Lady Reason her self, thy highest natural excellency) is (not
an enemy, for such an one may be reconciled, but in the abstract) emnity
against God. Thou hate God, Romans 1.30. His people, 1 John 3.12. His precepts,
Prove. 1.25, 29. His Son, John 15.25. and all for his sake; thou fightest
against him daily, sinnest in defiance of him continually, entailest thy
quarrel upon thy posterity, carriest it with thee into the other world (if thou
die unregenerate) and there art throwing thine envenomed darts of blasphemy,
and spitting thy poison against the Most High to eternity. Now be thy own
judge, is it easy to cure that Patient who thus desperately hates both
Physician and Physic? John 3.5.

Water indeed (says one) may somewhat easily be dammed up, but no art nor
labor can make it run back in its own channel. It was by a miracle, that the
river of Jordan was driven back; and it is no less then a miracle, that the
tide of sin which ran so strong should be turned, that the sinner who before
was sailing toward Hell, and wanted neither wind nor tide to carry him
forward, should now alter his course, and tack about for Heaven; This is hard;
it is not more strange to see the earth fly upward, and fire move downward,
then to see a sinner walk contrary to his nature, in the ways of grace and
holiness. Now, Reader, is not that man worse then mad, that either delayeth or
dallieth about his conversion, upon supposition that he can do it easily enough
hereafter, when all this which I have written must be wrought in regeneration,
and when he is not only empty of, an enemy to, but even emnity against it all!

Though the work of conversion (and therefore the way to salvation) be thus
difficult to all, yet to some it is more difficult then to others. In respect of
God, indeed, quoad Deum, one is as easily converted as another; for infinite
power and mercy know no difference; but quoad nos, in respect of us it is more
hard to bring some toward holiness and heaven then others: where the matter is
most rugged and untoward, its harder to bring it to a good and comely form.
Some pieces of timber are more knotty then others, and therefore not so easily
squared and fitted for the spiritual Temple and heavenly Jerusalem as others;
all spiritual children are not brought forth with the same strength and labor.

I shall mention three or four sorts of persons who are not so soon as others
persuaded to real and unfeigned piety; and truly, my end is, that they may be
powerfully roused, and effectually renewed before they be eternally ruined.

First, The mere civil moral man; This man, Narcissus like, dotes on himself,
and thereby is hardly brought to deny himself; the more the tooth is fast'ned
to the gum, the harder it is to part them; the more the man like a tree is
rooted in the earth of self, the more difficult to stock him up. The civil man
looks on himself in the glass of scandalous sinners lives, and finding his face
so clean and fair in comparison of theirs, he falls extraordinarily in love
with himself, which many times proves his destruction: He takes his civility
for sanctity, that which is less then the shadow for the substance; and without
question, it is not easy to make him eager after godliness, when he is
confident he has it already; a profane person is (not seldom) sooner convinced
and converted then this conceited civilian: for that man will sooner
acknowledge himself sick; but this Patient, though sick unto death, looks on
himself as whole, and so to have no need of a Physician. In this sense, I
suppose, the words of our Lord are spoken, That Publicans and Harlots go into
the Kingdom of God before Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 21.31.

As a ship that is under sail, though in a contrary course, is sooner brought
about, then one that lies aground in the Harbor can be lanched forth; so he
that is in motion, though in a sinful conversation, is often sooner reduced,
then he that lies still in the thoughts of his own good condition. As I can
sooner overtake a child that runs from me, then my shadow which tarrieth
nigh me, so its easier to recover a gross offender, then this shadow of the
Civilian; for though he run not so far from grace as the other, yet he will be
sure to keep his distance. He uses his outward unblameableness as a shield to
fence off the power of godliness; he usually compares himself with them that
are very evil (as a coward choosing a weak adversary) and because he much
excels them, therefore concludes that he is very good. Reader, It is far
from my thoughts to discourage civility, much less to encourage open impiety,
(though the whole will of God must be taught, what use soever corrupt hearts
will make of it) but to make thee watchful, that thy outward harmlesness prove
not a hinderance to inward holiness.

Secondly, The Hypocrite is one who is with more difficulty then ordinary
converted; Hypocrisy is like a fistula, which has a very small orifice, but
many turnings and windings in the body (like coney-burrows) so that it is very
hardly discerned and cured; this man seems to be what a Saint is indeed; and
because he is like a godly man, performing the same duties, and forbearing the
same iniquities, as to the external part, therefore he gathers, that he is one
indeed; but he embraces a cloud instead of Juno; he appears to be near the
Kingdom of God, but never cares to come at it; as a parallel line, he keeps a
scantling with the way of godliness, but never meets with it: There is some
particular exception which this man has taken against Christ and his ways,
that though he may often cheapen, yet he seldom buyeth the pearl of price; he
escapes storms and Pirates at Sea, and makes shiprack in the Haven, where
destruction is no less sure, but much more miserable; he escapes the gross
lusts of Publicans and Harlots, and yet is further then both from eternal life.

It is harder to convince this man of his sins then others. If I tell a
drunkard, a swearer, or an adulterer of his transgressions, and the necessity
of conversion, this man's foul conversation is a forcible conviction to him,
yea, and his own conscience will (possibly) fly in his face, take part with
me, and give evidence against him; but if I tell an Hypocrite of the necessity
of sanctification, and pursue him with the pieces of the Law, he presently
betakes himself like the beasts to his den of duties, and therein shelters
himself; nay his natural conscience being fed and bribed with a few
performances, may plead for him, at least not say a word against him.

Besides, when this man is convinced of his lost estate, its harder to break
this man's heart then another; for his heart has not only a natural
hardness, but an extrordinary acquired hardness, such an hardness as is
acquired by duties and ordinances. Now as where the Sun is most powerful, there
are the hardest mettalls, so where the Sunshine of spiritual blessings is
most plentifully enjoyed, and thus wretchedly abused, there are the hardest
hearts. No softning like Gospel softening, no hardening like Gospel hardening.

Tell a man that never heard of the Gospel or very seldom (when he is convinced
of his sins and misery) of the love of God in sending his only Son into the
world, to die, that poor sinners might not perish; tell him of the infinite
love of Christ, in giving himself a Sacrifice for his soul; how freely Christ
invites him, how fully he provides for him, how willing he is to accept him,
how welcome he will make him, O how this man sometimes falls a weeping,
wringing his hands, and renting his heart, that ever he should abuse such love
and mercy, refuse such incomparable merits, walk in the whole course of his
heart and life unworthy of such a blessed, glorious, holy, and gracious God,
the word of God does wound this man to the soul; but say all this and much more
to an Hypocrite, his heart is like the rock not at all moved. The promises of
God do not cleanse him from pollutions, but they are as physic to which his
body has been much used, which stirs him not at all, nor purges away any ill
humors. Threatenings do not work with him, be they never so dreadful and
terrible, as a Smiths Dog, being accustomed to it, he can sleep securely,
though the sparks of the Forge fly about him, nay though the flames of hell
flash in his face.

Reader, if thou should be one of this sort, for the Lords sake mind
soundness with speed; for hypocrisy will harden thine heart insensibly, and
every day widen the breach betwixt God and thy soul.

Thirdly, The rich man. The man that is rich in this world is hardly brought to
mind the riches of the other world; his heavy load of earth does much hinder
him in his journey to heaven; His riches claspe about his affections, as the
Jvy about the Oak, sucking out the heart of it, for its own leaves and
berries. This man takes up with his present possessions; in comparison whereof
he disesteemeth the Saints reversions. As a Vessel that is exceedingly laden,
when it meets with storms and tempests, is with more difficulty kept from
sinking then one which has but just enough to ballast it; so its more hard to
keep him from sinking into hell, that has a great estate, then him that has
according to Agurs wish, neither poverty, nor riches. And the reason is
because, though spiritual comforts run low, this rich man is contented in
regard that his temporal comforts run full-tap. He makes up the absence of
Christ, with the presence of creatures, when (it may be,) poverty might cause
him as the prodigal to think of returning to his fathers house, where is
spiritual plenty.

Quintus Aurelius, in the days of Sylla, had a fair Grange, which lay
convenient for some great person, which caused him to be put in among them that
were to be put to death; but as soon as he saw his name among those that were
in the list, he cried out my Land at Alba has killed me.

Some men's Lands have cost them their lives, and been the knife to cut the
throat of their bodies; but many a man's gold has lost him his God, and been
the knife to cut the throat of his soul. Rich men like pamperd horses are the
more unruly, leaping over the hedges of divine precepts, the hardlier kept
within their bounds because full fed; the young man's silver lost him his
precious soul; He went away from Christ sorrowful, because he had great
possessions; (Had the man been poor for a few days, he might have been rich for
ever; but alas his wealth here through the wickedness of his heart caused his
everlasting want) whereupon Christ tells us; How hardly shall a rich man enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven! I say unto you that it is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of an Needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 19.23, 24. Heaven is a stately Palace with a narrow portall,
through which this Camel with his thick bunch of clay can hardly get. It is
observed amongst Anglers, that Pickerils are not easily, nor often caught. A
man may catch an hundred Minums before he take one Pickeril, and the reason is,
he preyeth at pleasure on the lesser fish, and therefore seldom has any
stomach to bite at the bait; so it faireth with rich men, their stomachs are so
cloyed with the things of this world, that they have no appetite to the
dainties of the word, when the poor are Gospellized. They contentedly take that
for their portion, which God intended only for their pension, and make their
wealth their throne to sit down upon with delight, which God designed for their
footstool, and the faithful laid at the Apostles feet.

In some fenny places in England (its storied) where they are much troubled
with gnats, the people hang up dung, to which when they fly they are caught
with a net provided there for that purpose. The dung of profit is the Devils
bait, with which he catches many persons. Well may it be called the Mammon of
unrighteousness, for it both prompteth them to many sins, as well as pierces
them through with many sorrows. Gregory says that (sitting in the sea of Rome
when it flourished) he trembled every time he thought on that text, Son,
remember that thou had thy good things in thy life time, lest his outward
plenty should be all his portion.

If Reader, thou art wealthy, be watchful over thy heart, lest like Birdlime
it hinder the wings of thy soul from mounting up to heaven. What the Egyptians
said of the Israelites, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness has
shut them in, Exodus 4.13. may fitly be applied to many men that are wealthy;
They are entangled in the world, this wilderness has shut them in; like Lot's
wife they set out for the Zoar of heaven, but their hearts hanker after the
Sodom of earth, and so they look back and perish in the way. Ah it is rare
indeed to be very rich and truly religious. Such men are often taken out of the
world, before the world be taken out of them.

Be careful, O Friend, if the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee in earthly
enjoyments, that they prove not heavenly impediments; that his mindfulness of
thy body, do not make thee forgetful of thy soul, lest thy wealth like Achans
wedge of gold cleave thy soul in sunder.

Fourthly, The old sinner is not easily converted, but (like an old maid, when
married) has harder labor then ordinary. The longer the ground of man's heart
lies fallow, bringing forth nothing but weeds, unploughed up by repentance,
the harder it grows, and with the more difficulty is broken up. 'Twas hard to
cast out the Devil who had for a long time possessed the man; the Apostles
could not do it, and when Christ himself did it, 'twas not without much renting
and raging, Mark 9.21, 26.

Common experience tells us, that a ship the longer it leaketh, the harder it
is to be emptied. An house the longer it goes to ruin, the worse to repair; a
nail the farther it is driven in, the harder to get out; Christ raised two to
life in the Gospel (besides others) one was a maid newly dead, Luke 8.54. to
whom Christ spoke but little, Maid, I say unto thee arise, and the work was
quickly done; the other was one who had been dead so long till he stunk; now
mark what work there was to enliven him, Joh. 11.41. Christ weepeth, groaneth
in spirit, prays to his Father, then turns to Lazarus, and cries with a
loud voice, Lazarus come forth. (I only allude to it) When the sinner has been
but few years dead in sin, a low voice of Christ can raise him up, but when a
man has been not four days, but forty or fifty years rotting in the grave of
corruption that he stinks in the nostrils of others, it must be a loud voice
indeed which must quicken him. How hard is it to turn the old swine, the old
drunkard, to temperance; and the old goat, the old adulterer to chastity!
though they be so old that their bodies cannot act them, yet their hellish
hearts affect them; when they have nothing left but the dog-dayes of their age,
their bodies full of sores, yet their souls are fuller of sins.

The longer the tree stands in the ground, the more it roots, and the faster
it setleth it self; so that though a child might sometime have removed it, yet
now all the men in the Parish cannot pluck it up. Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are
accustomed to do evil.

Custom in sin takes away all conscience of sin, and hardens the heart more
against God and godliness: As a youth when he first comes to be Apprentice to
some handicraft trade, his hand is very tender, and no sooner is it set to
work, but it blisters, and puts him to pain; but he continuing long at the
trade, his hand hardens, and he can follow his work, not only without pain,
but with much pleasure: so when a man is a young sinner, conscience is tender,
like a a queasie stomach, troubled much with the least thing that offends it;
but continuance in sin makes conscience seared and brawny, that afterward the
sinner like the Ostrich, can digest iron, and like the Turkish slaves feed on
Opium, and his stomach not at all recoil or complain.

It is reported of the Cretians, that when they cursed their enemies, they did
not wish fire in their houses, nor a dagger at their hearts, but that which
would bring greater woe, ut mala consuetudine delectentur, that they might
delight in an evil custom; for custom is not another nurture, but another
nature and that which is natural is not easily reduced.

Some say there is no transplanting trees after seven years rooting. I am sure
it is hard to transplant them out of a state of nature into a state of grace,
who have been seventy years rooting in the earth; old servants will not easily
leave their masters, they will many times have their ears boared, and be
everlasting slaves rather then be made free.

It Is with old sinners (says one) as with them who have lived long under a
Government, Gurnals Armor.
they like to be as they are, though but ill, rather then to think of a change;
or like those who in a journey, have gone out of their way all day, such will
rather take a new path over hedge and ditch, then think of going so far back to
be set right.

Old sinner, for the sake of thy soul, proceed no further; know thou not
that every step thou take in thine unconverted state makes thy condemnation
more deep, thy condition more dangerous, and thy conversion more difficult? Is
it not high time for thee to begin to work out thy salvation, when the sun of
thy life is setting; Ah, it is one of the saddest spectacles in the world, to
behold a man full of silver hoary hairs, that is void of a golden sanctified
heart; surely of all men alive, thou have cause to abound in sorrow, who do
to this day abide in thy sins.

THe second Use which I shall make of this doctrine, shall be by way of
Examination. If without the second birth thou can not escape the second
death, nor obtain eternal life; Then, Reader, Try whether thou art new born or
no; commune with thy heart, and see whether this work be done, that thou may
know how thou shall fare in the other world; Wherefore brethren give diligence
to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. The first fountain of our
felicity is election; and the manifestation of this is our calling; by vocation
God brings to pass in time, what he appointed from eternity: As a word is an
outward thought, and a thought an inward word; so vocation is outward election,
or election put into act, and made visible; and election is inward vocation, or
Gods intention to convert and save; Election is eternal calling; Calling is a
temporal election; so that by ensuring thy calling, thou ensurest thy election;
make thy calling sure, be not satisfied to let thy salvation hang in suspense,
to follow Christ as the people followed Saul trembling, not knowing how it
shall fare with thee, but strive for full assurance that an abundant entrance
may be ministered unto you, into the kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 1.11.

I have read of an old wicked Usurer, who had nothing in his mouth, but It is
good to be sure; if his servant went to receive money, he would follow after
him, and being asked the reason, would answer, It is good to be sure. If he had
told his money once, he would do it a second, yea, a third time, saying, It is
good to be sure. If he locked his door himself, he would arise out of his bed
to feel it locked, still pleading for his reason, It is good to be sure, It
came to pass that this man fell desperately sick, his servant calls to him
(desirous to make him sensible of his sins) Master, have you been at prayers?
yea John, says he; Sir, said the servant, go to prayers again; you know It Is
good to be sure; That Is more then needs, says the Usurer, I am sure enough of
that. Truly this man's heart is the resemblance of most men; they are all for
security in bargains, sales, and purchases; if they buy an inheritance on
earth, how sure will they make it! the tenure shall be as strong as the brawn
of the Law, or the brains of Lawyers can devise; what Bonds, Deeds, Fines,
Recoveries, Leases, Evidences, and (if any scruple) collateral security are
there to ensure it! but alas who ensures the inheritance above! how few are
there that take any pains to secure their right to those everliving pleasures!
Like Jacob (though in another sense) men put their right hand of care, caution,
and diligence, upon the younger Son the body, and their left hand on the elder
the soul: How few make their calling and election sure!

But Reader, if thou would make sure thy predestination, and
fore-appointment to glory, it must be done by making sure thy Regeneration, and
translation into a state of grace. Thou can not ascend into heaven and see
thy name written in the Lambs book of life, but thou may descend into thine
own heart, and see it by the seeds and principles of a spiritual life; as if
any man would know whether the sun shines or no, he need but look on the
ground and see the reflection of its beams, and not on the body of the Sun,
which will but the more dazzle his eyes; the pattern is known by the picture,
the cause by the effect, the original by the copy, Election by regeneration;
the soul that is conformed to Gods Law, may know that he is enrolled in Gods
list. If I have chosen God, I may safely conclude that God has chosen me.

The Historian reports how a Senator relating to his son the great honors
decreed to a number of Soldiers, Tacitus.
whose names were written in a book; the Son was importunate to see the book;
the Father showed him the outside; it seemed so glorious that the son desired
him to open it; by no means, says the Father, it is sealed by the Council;
then says the son, Tell me if my name be there; the Father says, The names
are secret to the Senate; the Son studying how he might get some satisfaction,
desired his Father to declare the merits of those inscribed Soldiers: which the
Father doing, and the Son consulting with his own heart, found himself to be
none of them. Reader, though the Book of life (which includes the names of
those whose heads are destined to glorious Diadems) be secret, yet the deserts
of those inscribed there are open; they are as a chosen generation, a peculiar
people, so also an holy nation, a royal Priesthood, a called company, a
sanctified society, a regenerated remnant; they are culled out of the world,
called by the word, separated for the service of the Lord; they are born of the
Spirit, brought up in the Spirit, and they walk after the Spirit. The taste
therefore which I now set thee, is to try whether thou are one of these,
whether thou art born again without which thou can not see the Kingdom of God.

Now though the commandment of God be argument and reason enough to a Christian
why he should examine himself whether he be in the faith or no, 2 Cor. 135. for
a true subject dares not deny any coin which has the image and stamp of his
Sovereign upon it; yet I shall give thee two or three thoughts to stir thee up
to the trial of thy self.

First, Consider that thy All hangs on this hinge of regeneration. All that
thou art worth for thine unchangeable estate in the other world depends on
this. This is the foundation of that hope, that building which reaches to
heaven; now it is dangerous to err in fundamentals; the stability of the building
depends on the strength of the foundation. For a man to go out of his way at
the first setting out, is saddest of all. Regeneration is the beginning of
Christianity in thee; nay thy interest in all the unsearchable riches in
Christ, stands on this; if regenerated, then thy sins are pardoned, thy
person accepted, God is thy Father, Jesus Christ thy Husband and Savior, the
Spirit thy Comforter, the Promises are thy portion, Heaven thy home; but if
thou art not adorned with the pious fruits of Christ's Spirit, thou art not
interested in the precious fruits of his merits; therefore make sure here. God
will deal with thee to eternity according to thy having or wanting this. Now
does it not concern thee to beware of cozening thy self here, when a mistake in
this will make thee miserable for ever? if ever any tresses had need be strong,
then surely they which draw such a weight as thine endless welfare. Where men
intend to dwell long, thy build strong. Soldiers use tents which have no
foundation, because they intend but a short stay in them; thou look for a
City which has a foundation. Friend, has thy expectation of it any
foundation! would thou build slightly for a dwelling of eternity! Zeuxes
being asked why he was so exact in painting, answered, Because he painted for
eternity. Lines which concern eternity had need be exactly drawn; and deeds, and
marks, and all things indeed which concern eternity, had need to be exquisitely
done. If a Merchant venture all his estate in one vessel, and where there is
much hazard in the voyage, how full of fear and care will he be, lest the ship
should miscarry, himself and his family be ruined! many a sad thought will he
have in the day as sour sauce to his food, and possibly many an aching heart in
the night to keep him waking. He is even like to be beside himself, so much is
he perplexed; and ask him the reason, he will tell you, I think I have cause,
All that I am worth is ventured in that bottom; should it be lost and perish,
we are all lost, my wife, self, and children must all perish: Thus the man
lives in little ease both day and night, till at last he considers with
himself of what concernment the safety of that vessel is to him; he resolves,
and accordingly goes to the Ensurers Office, and ensureth his whole estate,
and then he is satisfied; those fears which like weights hung on the clock of
his heart, and would not suffer it to rest, are now taken off, and he eats his
bread with cheerfulness, and drinks his wine with a merry heart: he can in all
conditions be contented, because his All is ensured.

Thus Reader, Regeneration is the vessel, in which all that thou art worth,
not for this present perishing, but for the other everlasting world is
ventured; if that be sound, thine endless welfare is safe; if that be feigned
and lame, thou art lost for ever. How caust thou take any comfort in the
abundance of fading creatures, whilst thy All, thine Eternity is in danger! O
go to the Ensuring Office, bring thy riches, thy silver to the balance of the
Sanctuary, and thereby try whether it has its full weight.

Man, what say thou to this reason for self examination? is it not of
unspeakable weight? and I shall show thee that it is of unquestionable truth.
Does not the living God tell thee that except thou art born again, thou shall
not see his Kingdom? Does he not say expressly that without are dogs? Rev.
22.15. The fathers house is only for children; Dogs must be without doors.
Pharaohs court admitted of vermin; but I can assure that Gods will not; Into
it can in no wise enter any thing that is defiled or unclean, Rev. 21. ult.
Impure persons can never get into the most holy place. Heaven must be in thee,
before thou can be in heaven. It was a good inscription, which a bad man wrote
on the door of his house, Per me nihil intret mali. Let no evil pass through
me: whereupon said Diogenes, Quomodo ingredietur dominus. How then shall the
Master get into his own house? That inscription without question agrees with
the celestial habitation; There is nothing there but what is holy. The
Creator is essentially, infinitely and eternally holy; the father is holy,
John 17.11. the holy child Jesus, Acts, 14.27. the holy Ghost, Acts, 21.11. the
creatures there are holy, the holy angels, Mark 8.38. the saints or holy men
and women, Heb. 12.23. The work and eternal employment there is holiness; the
servants wait on their Master without sinning, as well as without ceasing; the
song there is Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, Rev. 4.8. can thou
therefore think without holiness to get thither?

Secondly, Consider that God will try thee. He knows now what thou art,
whether dross or gold, and he will shortly bring thee to the fire and make thee
known, both to thy self and others. Though the waters of thy corruptions may
run for a time under ground, and be hidden from the eyes of men, yet they will
at length appear; Thou art at present all Crystal to God (he needs not, as
Momus would have, a window into thy breast) for he sees thee thoroughly; he
sees thy inwards more perfectly then thou and others can see thy outward
parts. The fining pot is for silver, and the furnance for gold, but the Lord
tries the heart, Prove. 17.3. He has a thread, which leads him unerringly
through the labyrinth of thy heart. He needs no serious inquisition about
thee; for he knows thee by immediate intuition. He walks through the road of
thy heart every hour; therefore it concerns thee not to balke it.

He will try thee probably, in life; but certainly at death and judgment; and
should not thou then try thy self? God may try thee in life by prosperity,
he may give thee strong meat, and thereby examine thy stomach whether it be
good or bad; he may let the world flow in upon thee, to try how thy affections
will flow out upon it; Believe it, rich wines will try thy brains. It is sad of
Pius Quintus (so called because) that when he was a mean man he was looked upon
as a good man, Magistratus indicat virum.
and had great hopes of his own salvation; but when he came to be a Cardinal he
doubted much about it, and when he was a Pope he altogether despaired of it;
thus the place does often discover the person. Hot waters will manifest whether
there be life in a man or no; and a full great wind will try whether the
vessel of thy soul be ballasted with grace or no. Its said of Caius Caligula,
there was never better servant, nor worse Master. Poisonous and profitable
roots are both discovered in summer, though they were hid all the winter. That
corruption which lay in the body undiscerned when the season was cold, breaks
out either in the face by pimples, or in the other parts, by some disease when
the weather is warm. But it is more likely that God will try thee by adversity,
God tells Jerusalem that he would search her with candles. Zeph. 1.12. That
is, as exactly as men search with candles, prying into every corner of the
house (so God of the heart) bringing forth their secret ways, revealing their
hidden wickedness, the words imply both the manner how exactly God would do it,
and the means how terribly he would do it, by some dreadful judgment; he would
kindle a fire and search them by the light of that fire. Reader, if thou will
not search thy soul by the Sun-light of his word, expect that he should search
thee by the candle light, the fire light of his dreadful works. The flail of
tribulation will discover the chafe from the wheat; and the fire of
affliction, the dross from the gold. Sharp weather will try whether thy body be
sound or sickly. A storm will discover the Mariner, and a battle the Soldier.
God led Israel about in the wilderness to try and to prove them, Deuteronomy. 8.16.
Affliction is like Solomon's sword, that discovers which is the true, which
the false mother; or like Simeons sword which pierces through men's souls, that
the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.

Now friend, if God will try thee by some sharp affliction, is it not better to
prevent this by self-examination? It may be God may try thee by disgrace, or
loss of thy whole estate, or by loss of liberty, limbs, or life; now how will thou do to bid adieu to all earthly comforts for Jesus Christ; to welcome a
prison, kiss a stake, smile at torments, look a violent death in the face with
color in thy cheeks, and courage in thy heart, to endure this fiery trial by
God, that did never try thy self before hand! If thou have run with footmen,
and they wearied thee, how will thou do to run with horsemen? Jer. 14.5. If
self-trial in thy chamber or closet (where are none but God and thy conscience
to be witnesses, and Scripture to be judge of the controversy) be so irksom
and grievous to thee, how tedious will thy trial be by flames and torments?
Believe it, when thou come to the fire, 'twill be known whether thou art a
full or an empty pitcher. Blessed Bilny, tried his finger by himself in the
candle, before his whole body in the flames at the stake. O gather your selves
together, says the Prophet, Zeph. 2.1. Gather your selves together, before the
decree bring forth, before the day pass, as the chaff before the fierce anger
of the Lord come upon you. Tremelius reads it, Excutite vos, verumque Excutite.
Examine, unskin your selves, rip your selves up, dissect, anatomize your
intrails; its doubled, to show the fervency and earnestness of God for it, the
necessity and weight of it, and man's antipathy and averseness to it, before the
decree bring forth, etc. before the judgment which is now in the womb of the
threatening come to the birth of execution. O, Friend, search thy self
faithfully, or be confident that God will search thee dreadfully. Now, as Job
told his friends, Is it good that God should search thee out? Job 13.9. Is it
good that he should as a Surgeon, eat out thy dead senseless flesh by some
stinging corrosive, and cure thee of thy lethargy by putting thee into a
violent feavor? The Scholar that will not scan his own verses, and try them by
the rule, finds that his master can make him do it under the rod. If God have
thoughts of everlasting favor toward thee, he will force thee to know and try
thy self by some seasonable fire; he will so shake the tree, that it shall be
known whether the fruit be rotten or found.

If God should not try and discover thee to thy self in this world, yet he will
certainly in the other world, at the night of death, and in the day of
judgment: Death will try thee, that will be strong physic which will fully
discover thy constitution. Two or more children play together all day; but when
night comes, one child goes to his father, the other to his father, every one
to his own father; it may be they were very like one another, that strangers
knew not, yea, nor neighbors to whom they belonged, whose child was this, or
whose child is that; but when night comes, one father owns his child, takes
him home; the other father calls his child to him, takes him into his house:
Thus, while men live they are not so well discovered, whether they are of God,
or of their father the Devil; but when the night of death comes, they are tried
to whom they belong: He that is born of God goes to his Fathers house; He that
is of his father the Devil, goes with Judas to his own place. Rottenest stuffs
are oftenest watered, the deformedst faces are usually painted, but the shower
of death will wipe and wash all off.

Now if thou would be gathered to thy father in peace, examine and prove thy
self; make sure that there be some good thing in thee toward the Lord thy God:
O how sad will it be for thee, who art now asleep, to awake (like the Jailer)
at the midnight of death, and to find thy evidences for the new birth (as he
his prisoners in his own apprehension) missing! what an earthquake and
heartquake will then possess thee! how pale and trembling will thou spring into
the presence of God, in the other world for thy particular judgment! Ah, how
sad will it be to err to mistake then, when an error can never, never be
mended, when a mistake will prove soul murder, an everlasting miscarriage! O,
it is bad for the vessel of thy soul to leak, to mistake in the shallow waters
of life and time; but, O how sad will it be to be mistaken at an hour of death,
and thereby to leak in the Ocean of Eternity! Speed in his Chronicles
observes, that in the days of Henry the eighth, Campius, the Popes Legate
came through the streets of London with twenty mules laden, to show his pomp;
but as the triumph passed through Cheapside, the beasts stumbled, brake their
collars, cast their coffers, and then the lids flying open, discovered his
riches to be nothing but old shoes and boots, torn stockings, old iron, and
tottered rags. I tell thee, Reader, though now thou may be wondered at for
thy spiritual wealth; yet as soon as thou stumblest into the other world,
'twill be tried, 'twill be known whether they be real or imaginary riches.

Paul told his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.19. I will come to you shortly, and will
know, not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power: for the Kingdom
of God is not in word, but in power: What will ye? shall I come to you with a
rod, or in love? O Friend, not Paul, but Jesus Christ himself will come to thee
by death shortly, and will know, not thy speech, in being puffed up with a
shadow of profession, but the power, and try whether thou have the substance of
Religion. Now, man, what will thou? shall he come to thee with a rod, or in
love? shall he send good Angels to guard thee to Heaven, or evil Angels to drag
thee to Hell?

When David was going to encounter with Goliath, he told Saul, that he could not
go with the armor which Saul had put on him, because he had not proved it, 1 Samuel 17.39. And dare thou enter the list against a far greater enemy, even
death, with that armor which was never proved? be confident, if thou fightest
without armor of proof, death will foil thee.

The day of Judgment will try thee; then naked breasts will be in fashion, and
God will rip thee open before the world; nay, if thou will not now examine thy
self to thy conversion, he will examine thee then to thy confusion. When the
Judge shall be a consuming fire, and the whole world be in a flame, and thou be
tried by a fiery Law, Hebr. 12.28. 2 Peter 3.10. Deuteronomy. 33.2. 'Twas a sharp kind
of examination by which Paul was examined, Acts 22.14. The chief Captain
commanded that he should be examined by scourging. It Is a sad kind of
examination by which many Countries examine Malefactors, upon the wrack,
putting them to exquisite pains.

Reader, Remember that if thou do not examine thy self at this day, God will
examine thee at the last day, and 'twill be an examination upon the wrack, an
examination with scourging; it will be a word and a wound, every blow will
fetch blood; every interrogation will be a stabbing, stinging, killing
question: When Christ shall say to thee, Sinner, how did thou dare thus to
cozen and undo thy soul! what madness possessed thee thus to dally about
matters of infinite and endless moment! Had thou examined thy self according
to my word, and found thy self lost, there had then been some hopes of life;
but I tell thee now it is too late: Well, I Will rip thee open before Angels and
men, and cause thy conscience with its gnawing worm and stinging gripes to
examine thee eternally. The fire of hell shall try what metal thou art, that
will prove thee to purpose. O friend, think of this seriously and speedily, for
that day of Christ will declare thee; and Alas, alas, who shall abide the day
of his trial, or who shall stand when he appears? for he is like refiners
fire, and as fullers soap. All things are naked and open to the eyes of him
with whom thou shall then have to do. If thou art afraid to venture a trial in
the low Court of Conscience, where his Word shall be thy Judge, with what fear
and trembling will thou appear at his bar, when he that searches thine heart,
tries thy reins, and will reward thee according to thy works, shall sit upon
the Bench: Therefore cast up thy accounts before God and thy soul, whilst there
is hope of making all even; lest thou do as some Tradesmen, who neglect so long
to cast up their books, till at last their books cast them up.

Thirdly, consider it is possible to know whether thou art new born, or no. I
do not set thee to beat the air, or to work at the labor in vain. A Christian
may be assured of his regeneration and thereby of his salvation. They which
have the law of God written in their hearts, may be able to read it. David,
when his deeds and evidences were not blotted with his foul offenses, could
discern them clearly, Thy law is within my heart, Psalm, 40.8. When the Sun
arises he brings his natural light with him, whereby he is discovered to
the world. A diamond set in a goldring brings such an orient sparkling with
it, that it causes men to discern it; truly so the Sun of righteousness when
he arises in the soul, brings a spiritual light along with him, which
helps the new creature to behold him, and the Diamond of Grace casts such a
sparkling luster in the heart of a Christian, that it thereby becomes visible.

Regeneration makes a wonderful change and alteration; now great alterations of
State are not without observation. Does a Kingdom change its Governor, a cruel
arbitrary Tyrant, that fleeced them, and slew them at pleasure, for a mild
merciful peaceable Prince, that rules them with a righteous scepter, and not
take notice of it? Can a creature change his master, sin and flesh, for Christ
and his Spirit; his work of serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. for
serving the Lord with singleness of heart, and not observe it? When the man is
new made, Christ comes into his heart with his Spirit, Graces, Gospel: great
Guests when they come into an house, have many eyes upon them; the King of
Glory does not come with such a train and retinue in secret; the gradual change
from grace to grace is not so visible; but a specifical change from nature to
grace is undoubtedly sensible: when the ground that before brought forth
nothing but weeds and thistles, comes to bring forth wheat; an ordinary person
may perceive the difference, though how this wheat grows is not so
perceptible. Every new creature does not know the time, nor manner, nor means
of his conversion, but every one may know that he is converted: The mother does
not know how she comes to be quick, but she knows that she is quick, for the
feels the child to stir in her womb: how the shadow moves on the dial we
cannot see, but that it moves we see plainly, in that its opposite at night to
the place where it was at noon. Though conversion be not ever sensible in the
act, yet it is sensible enough by its effects; and the reason why it is not in
all alike visible, is because it is not in all alike violent. God converteth
some by Boanerges, sons of thunder; others by a Barnabas, a son of consolation;
to some he comes, as on Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. with thundrings, lightnings, and
a great noise; to others, as to Elijah, with a still small voice, 2 Kings
19.12. The Spirit falls down on some, as on the Apostles, like a mighty rushing
wind, or like fire shaking and scorching them, Acts 2.2, 3. on others, as on
Jesus Christ, in the shape of a Dove, dealing mildly and meekly with them: The
Jailer is brought home by an earthquake, and an heartquake, Acts 16.29. when
the door of Lydia's heart is opened softly, and Jesus Christ enters in
without any noise, Acts 16.14. Some in a sown are revived only by pouring a
little hot water down their throats, whereas others must be rubbed hard and
beaten sore before they will come to themselves again, Cant. 6.12. Ere I was
aware, my soul made me like the charints of Aminadab.

Some have been infamous for pleasure in sin, and such are usually made more
apprehensive of the pain due to sinners; God brings all home by weeping
cross, but them especially that have been most wicked: The Physician is forced
to give strong physic to such sturdy strong patients, otherwise it will not
work: A man that is an old finner, is like one that has had a bone long out of
joint, and its festered, this man must feel much pain before it be brought into
its right place.

Sometimes God intends to list a soul high with spiritual consolations, and
to prepare it for them, he lays it low with legal humiliation: We throw the
ball hard against the ground, when we intend that it shall bound high; Paul was
forcibly cast to the earth, before he was favorably caught up to the third
heaven.

Some are designed to be high in holiness, eminent patterns of piety to others,
and such are often filled with sorrow, and do more then others feel the smart
of sin: When the workman will make his building high and exact, he lays the
foundation deep and low.

God is not limited, he deals with men as he sees good; it is his will (and
that is reason enough) that all his children should not be brought forth with
the same pain: He has several medicines (whereof some are more sweet, others
more sour) for the cure of their spiritual maladies, and he applies them as
it pleases him.

Now when the Spirit of God works most forcibly, then the man perceives it
most sensibly: Besides, some men and women have had inclinations toward God
and godliness ever since they came to any knowledge; they sucked the milk of
grace betimes from the breasts of their parents, I mean their religious
education: Obadiah feared the Lord from his youth, 1 Kings 18.12. Timothy from
a child knew the holy Scriptures; The dews of grace were dropped from Heaven
upon their souls early, in the morning of their age; and in such cases
conversion, as to the time and manner of it, is under a cloud: For as he that
is locked up in some dark dungeon, may easily discover the moment of time, when
either the least beam of the Sun, or glimmering of daylight did break in upon
him; whereas he that is always in the open air, is sensible that the day is
broke, that the Sun is risen, but cannot tell you precisely when the day
sprang, or the Sun rose; so some that have been betimes put out apprentices to
the devil by their parents, been taught that hellish trade of sin, and nurtured
in obstinacy and Ignorance, being locked up and fettered in the Dungeon of
darkness, as Peter in prison; these men may easily remember the time, when the
day star from on high did visit them; when the Angel of the Covenant came upon
them, and caused a light to shine about them, and raised them up, and caused
their fetters to fall off, the prison door to fly open, and commanded them to
arise and follow him; but those that were ever in the open air, brought up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord: (like vessels, when new seasoned with
holiness) those cannot tell you the day when salvation came to their souls;
they can tell you that day is broke, but when they know not; one thing they
know, that where as they were blind, now they see, but how they came by their
sight they cannot certify you; they can tell you, that they are sanctified,
but the season of it they cannot tell. Reader, though the time and manner of
this work makes the knowledge of it more easy and sensible to some then to
others, yet to all it is possible.

Gods precepts speak it possible; God requires of his people such things as
would be to no purpose, if they could not be assured of their grace and purity:
He commands to examine themselves, whether they are in the faith or no, 2
Cor. 13.5. Now to what purpose or end should the Law of God be produced, the
persons heart and life compared with it, witnesses be examined, the man thus
arreigned in the Court of Conscience, if the matter in debate could not be
brought to an issue, if it could not be known whether he be sanctified or not?
God bids us make our callings and elections sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. therefore they
may be ensured: We are enjoined to pray with confidence, and to call God
Father, Heb. 10.22. Matthew. 6.9. which certainly none can do, if none can know
that they are his children.

The Apostle tells us, that we must rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 3.1. and that
always, 1 These. 5.16. even in tribulation, Matthew. 5.10. which who can do, if
he know not whether God be his friend or enemy?

Besides, the promises of God show it possible, John 14.21. I will love him
(that keeps my commandments) and manifest my self unto him, says Christ,
Isa. 60.16. Psalm. 50. ult. and 85.8, 9. now what Gods mercy promises, his
truth performs.

The helps likewise which God affords us, speak this feasible. The scripture
sets down the signs of the men and women which are sanctified, and which
shall be saved. And hereby we know that we know him if we keep his
commandments. To know that we know him, is to be assured that we know him, 1
Ioh. 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the
son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, Mark, they did believe
before, yet St. John writes that they might believe; they had before the faith
of adherence, John writes to them that they might have the faith of assurance.
The Sacraments are also given as broad seals, and the Spirit as the privy seal
of heaven, to ensure salvation, Romans 4.11. Ephesians. 1.30.

In a word, the patterns and experiences of the Saints speak this possible;
that which others have acquired, is not impossible to us. The children of God,
have been assured of their adoption, that God was their father, Isa. 63.16. 1
John 3.2. Though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not,
doubtless thou art our father, thou O Lord art our father, and our redeemer.
They have been assured of their justification, Job 13.18. Psalm. 45.24.
perseverance in grace, 1 These. 5.25. Romans 8.35, to the end. Of their right to
glory and salvation, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that when the houses of our earthly
tabernacles shall be dissolved, we shall enjoy a building of God an house not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. So 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Job. 19.25. 2 Timothy 1.12. And all this assurance of adoption, justification, perseverance in
grace, fruition of glory, which Saints have, does proceed from their assurance
of their regeneration, 1 John 3.14. We know that we are passed from death to
life, because we love the brethren. Regeneration or holiness is the first
fruits which do ensure the harvest, and the earnest which does confirm the
bargain and ensure the full sum.

Now Reader having given thee some motives to quicken thee to try thy soul, I
shall lay down the marks, and bring thee to the test. And they shall be taken
from the nature and effects of regeneration.

First, examine thine heart by the nature of this true holiness. Now there are
two things in the nature of this new creature. In every birth there is
Generatio unius and corruption alterius, says the Philosopher, something
generated and something destroyed; so in this new birth there is the production
of grace, and the destruction of vice; the life of righteousness, and the death
of sin; the setting up of the Arc, and the throwing down of Dagon. The
sinfullness of our souls by our first births, consists in their aversion from
God and good, and in their conversion to the evil one, and evil; in having the
image of Satan imprinted on them, and the image of God blotted out of them. The
sanctity of our souls by their second births, consists in their conversion to
God, and their aversion from sin, in having the image of the Devil razed out of
them, and the image of the Savior stamped on them. As we have born the image
of the earthly, so we must bear the image of the heavenly. And these two parts
of the good part, are like two Buckets in a Well, as the one (namely the
interest of God) comes up, the other (namely the interest of sin and Satan)
goes down; the higher the Sun gets, the more still it scatters the
darkness.

First, there is in this new nature a dying to sin. The Apostle calls it a
putting off the old man, Ephesians. 4.22. and a dying to sin, Romans 6.11. Conversion
like the ship-mans fatal star, is never seen but before the wrack and death of
sin. The spring of grace is a living fountain and cleanses it self of mire and
dirt. Grace like Christ increases, and sin like the Baptist decreaseth. The
expression of the holy Ghost about this is worthy our serious consideration,
Romans 6.6. Knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin; for he that is
dead is freed from sin. Lo, here, sin is served by Christ the same sauce, which
it formerly served Christ, Sin crucified him, when he came in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and he slays it when he comes into the soul by his Spirit; but
in the words of the Apostle observe, Sins appellation, and its execution. For
its appellation, it is called, first the Old man; partly because it is derived
and propagated from Adam, the eldest of men; partly in comparison of
renovation, and renewing the whole man. It is called secondly, the body of sin,
partly because man's corrupt nature, like a body or stock, brancheth forth into
diverse actual sins as members, Col. 3.5. Gal. 5.19. partly because of the
strength of it, as also because men are as much naturally in love with their
sins as with themselves. But take notice of the execution of this old man of
this body of sin in the regenerate. The old man is crucified: Sin like an old
man in them which are new made, does decay and decline every day; it is every
hour growing weaker and weaker, and nearer to its grave and utter abolition.
Regeneration gives sin its deaths wound, though as those that are crucified,
it dies lingringly, yet it dies certainly. Sin (like a man in a consumption)
in a converted person is always wasting and dying till at last it is quite dead.
One that is mortally wounded sprawleth and moves for a time, but afterward
gives up the Ghost; so sin, while Saints live, though it be mortally wounded
does rage and stir, but it abateth in strength and dies with them.

St. De civit. dei. l. 8. c. 6.
Augustine relates of the Serpent that when she grows old, she draws
herself through a narrow hole, and by this means stripping off her old skin,
she renews her age: Ambulare in peccatis est sic versari in pec catis ut i^
voca^ione sua ordina ria. Dave^ in Col. 3.
Truly thus the Christian is made new, by putting off the old coat of the old
man.

The Scripture speaks expressly, He that is born of God, sins not, 1 John
3.9. that is constantly; sin is not his design or employment; and cheerfully,
sin is not his delight or element; for sin is against his new nature; now a man
can do nothing against his nature cordially or constantly; Sin may rebel within
him, but it cannot reign over him; he looks on sin as his greatest enemy, and
therefore it is impossible that he should converse with it in a way of amity.
Nay, as fire and water, heat and cold never meet but they fight; so this new
life is in continual war with every lust; the new creature is like unto God, Of
purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. the evil of sin cannot
ordinarily get a good look from him; he cannot meet this ugly guest in any
corner of his house, but his heart rises against him; he considers what a
Lord sin displeases, what a Law sin transgresses, what a beautiful image sin
defaceth, what a glorious name fin dishonoreth, what a lovely loving Savior sin
buffetted shamefully, and tortured cruelly, what a precious soul, and peerless
salvation sin was like to have lost him eternally. And Oh it is a killing look
which this soul gives his dearest lust: Ah thinks he, that ever my nature
should hatch and harbor such hideous monsters, that ever my heart should be a
polluted bed to breed and bring forth such a poisonous brood: 'Twas my iniquity
that bid defiance to the highest Majesty; 'twas my corruption which scourged
the back, wounded the head, nailed the feet and hands, yea pierced the very
heart of Jesus Christ; my wickedness was the weight which caused his bloody
sweat; my lust was the murderer, which put to death that Lord of life; 'twas my
covetousness which betrayed him, my cowardliness which condemned him, and my
cruelty which executed him; and shall I be a friend to that Traitor, which was
such a foe to my Redeemer! Well, whatever it cost me, through the strength of
Christ I Will have justice upon these murderers; through the help of heaven these
brats of hell shall have their brains dashed out: his great care is every day to
conquer his corruptions. The body of sin and death to which he is tied, is as
noisome to his soul, as a dead body to his senses. Lust is as burthensom to him
as a withered arm, which hangs on a man like a lump of lead. Never did prisoner
more ardently desire to be rid of his fetters, then this Saint to be freed from
subjection to his sins: The distressed Jews did not groan so much under their
Egyptian slavery, as this true Israelite for spiritual liberty; O wretched man
that I am, says he, who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death? Romans
7.29. His great end, and endeavor in every providence and every Ordinance, is,
not the repression but the ruin of this evil of sin. If the Sun of mercy shine
warm upon him, he makes use of it to put out the kitchen fire of wickedness:
When God folaceth his spirit with extraordinary kindness, the sacrifice of
thanksgiving that he offers up is the beast of some sin, which he lays on
the Altar, and pours forth its blood before the Lord: When the storm of
affliction arises, he enquireth for the Jonah which raised the tempest, and
endeavors that he may be cast overboard, and drowned.

And as he makes use of divine Providence, so likewise of divine Ordinances,
for the weakening his corruptions.

In prayer, like the sick child, he points at the place of his pain; he
indicteth, accuses and condemns sin, and entreats that it may be executed;
his prayers and tears are his daily weapons, wherewith he fights against his
most inward and secret wickedness. When he perceives lust like Adonijah,
usurping the throne of his heart, he goes in to God, as Bathsheba to David,
sighing, and saying, Did not my Lord promise his servant, that the true Solomon
should reign in my soul? that Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace should sway the
scepter in my spirit? And now behold his foes, which thou have sworn to make
his footstool, have traitorously aspired to the Crown, and forcibly made me
subject to their commands. As Esther, he is very desirous of these Hamans
destruction, and watches continually for a fit opportunity to present his
Petition to the King of Kings for that end; and when in any duty he sees the
God of glory to hold out the golden Scepter of mercy toward him; O, then he
beggeth for justice: If I have found favor in thy sight, O King, and if it
please the King; let the life of my soul be given me at my Petition, and the
death of my sins at my request: Did thy dear Son die for sin, and shall thy
poor servant live in sin? shall not these thine enemies, which would not have
thee to reign over me, be slain before thy face? Order my steps by thy word,
and let not any iniquity have dominion over me, Psalm. 119.133. Thus by prayer,
as by one main piece of his spiritual armor, he becomes prevalent. The Romans
overcame their enemies sitting, (that is, the Senate by their prudent counsels)
but the Christian kneeling, by his holy valor he wrestleth with God, and
through the power of Christ gets the victory, 2 Cor. 12.6.

And because the devil of some lusts will not be cast out without fasting and
prayer, therefore he joyneth fasting to supplication, and tries to starve his
corruptions: Beforehand he fitteth himself for that day of purging out his ill
humors, by the preparatory potion of meditation. The consideration of his sins,
how bloody and heinous in their nature, how crying and crimson in their
circumstances, makes his physic work the better. He thinks before, The day
of mourning for (offending) my father is coming, and then I will slay my
brother Jacob, my dearest and nearest sin. This man brings under his natural
body (which he may lawfully cherish) that he may abate the strength of the body
of death; as men sometimes in a fever open a vain, and let out their blood,
(though it be not bad) that they may weaken their enemy.

In reading and hearing the Law of God, he sets his lusts naked before that
sword of the Spirit, that they may be hewn by the Prophets, and slain by the
words of Gods mouth; He desires that it may pierce deep to the dividing of soul
and spirit, of the joints and marrow, and to the discovering of the thoughts
and intents of his heart: His voice to the Minister, is like the Prophets to
his neighbor, Smite me I pray thee, and likes him best, that in smiting wounds
his sin most: he approves of that Surgeon that searches his wounds
thoroughly, though he put him to pain; he rejoices that the Preacher reveals
to him his errors, that he may follow them with Hue and cry till they are taken
and punished, and so Gods pursuit of him may be prevented: If the Minister give
him a bitter pill of reproof, he does not, like a queasie stomach, favor his
malady, and loath his medicine, but takes it down willingly, knowing, that
though such things be not toothsom, yet they are wholesome, and that they must
be bitter things that breaks the bag of worms in his stomach; sweet things will
nourish and cherish them: He is glad that the word is fire, that thereby his
dross may be consumed; that it is water, because his heart thereby may be
washed and purified; He hides the word in his heart, that he may not sin
against God, Psalm. 119.11.

He goes to the Lords Supper, that the blood of his sins may be shed by the
blood of the Savior; The Cross of Christ is the souls armor, and sins terror;
there is life in it for the death of sin. Pliny says, that the fasting spittle
of a man will kill Serpents; Sure I am, the blood of Christ applied by faith,
will mortify sin, and therefore the Saint frequenteth the Sacrament. He goes
to it, as Naaman to Jordan, to be cured of his spiritual leprosy; when he
approaches the table of the Lord, and sees (in the bread broken, and the wine
poured out) by faith Jesus Christ crucified before his eyes; O how his heart
burns within him, in hatred and indignation against his sins, and in desires
after, and delight in his Redeemer: He beholds there the knives of his pride,
unbelief, hypocrisy, malice, and the like, all redded in the blood of the
Mediator; and now his eyes sparkle with fire and fury, and his soul swells
with wrath and revenge against them; were but his hand answerable to his heart,
I mean his power to his will, he would put sin to as much pain, make it suffer
as much shame, cause it to undergo as cursed a death as ever Jesus Christ did.
Now this frame of spirit, exceedingly pleasing to the King of Saints; he
bespeaks the soul at the Sacrament, as Herod did the damsel, Ask of me what
thou will, and I will give it thee to the half, nay, to the whole of my
Kingdom. The soul having before consulted with his regenerate part (for this
was a pious plot laid before, only put off till a convenient day) asks the
head of some lust in a charger; the King sends presently, commands
execution, to be done accordingly; The new creature does now with a joyful
heart look up to Heaven, and says, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has
this day avenged me of mine enemy; would to God that all the enemies of my Lord
the King, and all that rise up within me against thy Laws, were as that one
Lust!

He also withdraws those things which have fed his spiritual diseases, he
takes away the fuel, that he may put out the fire; he hates the very cup out of
which he formerly drank his loathsome physic; he cuts off those pipes which
have supplied his Adversaries; he avoideth the occasions of evil; he knows
that his corrupt heart is gunpowder, and therefore, wheresoever he goes he is
fearful of the least spark; He hates the garment spotted with the flesh, Jude
19. He endeavoreth that his raiment may not only be preserved from burning,
but (as the three childrens) from sienging: He is a true Dove that does not
only fly from the Hawk, from sin, but will not so much as smell of a feather
which falls from the Hawke; he abstaineth from appearances of evil; he dares
not come near the brow of the hill, so far is he from falling to the bottom.
Thus the sanctified man uses all means for the murdering of his sins.

Now, Reader, consider, how is it with thee; have thou applied these several
particulars to thy self? What say thou? Is it thy endeavor by every
providence, and thy end in every ordinance, to mortifiethy corruptions, and to
bring those Traitors to execution? Is it thy design to cover sin, or to kill
sin? do thou pray against sin (as Austin confessed he did before his
conversion) as one afraid that God should hear thee, and grant the request (not
of thy heart, but) of thy lips? or is the death of thy sins the very desire of
thy soul? an unconverted man may put up many prayers, but no desires against
sin.

An unregenerate person fights against sin, Livy.
as the Athenians against Philip of Macedon, with words rather then with
swords: Or as some that openly prosecute the Law against a Malefactor, and yet
favor him underhand; so this man makes a show of pursuing sin unto the death,
accusing, arraigning it, witnessing against it in prayer, and desiring
judgment; but inwardly he so minceth the matter, takes off the edge of the
evidence against it, as one resolved that it shall live: His expressions cry
out of sin, as the Jews of Christ, Away with it, away with it, it is not worthy
to live, Let it be crucified; but his affections call with much more ardency,
as Pilate, Why should it die? what evil has it done? we find no fault in it;
or at lest (as Austins heart) Not yet, Lord, not yet: A little longer he would
willingly laze upon the bed of lust: A little more slumber, a little more
steep, says this spiritual sluggard. Truly, all this show of warring against
sin, is but false fire, which (you know) can do no execution.

Fencers, at a prize, sometimes ply one another so home, and strike so hard,
that they seem to be in earnest, when they are all the while but in jest; their
intentions are to please the people, and thereby to advance their profit, by
getting a little money, but not at all to wound one another, at lest not
dangerously; a slight wound possibly may happen. Thus unsanctified men combat
with sin; they seem by their praying, reading, hearing, to aim at its death, to
be in earnest, when indeed their intentions are to carry on their own interest,
and their resolutions, that however they may raze sin slightly (for their own
ends) not to wound it deeply. Friend, I know not, but God knows, whether it
be thus with thee or no: Do thou by civility, by the performance of duties,
by attendance on ordinances tell the world that thou would crucify thy
corruptions, when such a thing is not in thy retired thoughts? as Caligula with
banners displayed, battle ranged, trumpets sounding, set his soldiers to
gather cockles: Or do thou enter the list against thy lust, as David against
Goliath, reckoning to kill, or be killed, resolving through the help of heaven,
the ruin of the uncircumcised Philistine?

Is the fight between thy judgment and thy will? between thine enlightened
conscience, and thy affections, or btween the spirit and flesth, the law in thy
mind and the law in thy members, the regenerate and the unregenerate part?

Do thou hate and fight against sin as sin, (...). Arist. Rhet.
and so against every sin? for all true hatred is against the whole kind: Do
thou loath it as much when it rises in thy heart, as when it rages in thy
life, in thy dearest friends, as in thy bitterest enemies? It was said of
Anthony, that he hated a Tyrant, not tyranny; do thou abhor the disease or
the patient? can thou say as David, I hate every false way? Psalm. 119.104.
Universality in this is a sure sign of sincerity. Herod spits out some sins,
when he rolls others as sweet morsels in his mouth. An hypocrite ever leaves
the Devil some nest-egg to sit upon, though he take many away: Some men will
not buy some commodities, because they cannot have them at their own price, but
they lay out the same money on others; so hypocrites forbear some sins, yea,
are displeased at them, because they cannot have them without disgrace or
diseases, or some other disadvantage, but they lay out the same love upon other
sins, which will suit better with their designs. Some affirm what the Sea
loses in one place it gains in another so what ground the corruption of the
unconverted loses on way it gains another. There is in him some one lust
especially which is his favorite; some King-sin, like Agag which must be spared
when others are destroyed. In this the Lord be merciful to thy servant, says
Naomi. But now the regenerate laboreth to cleanse himself from all pollutions
both of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. Grace is like Caesar who would admit of
no superior; nay, like oil twill allow of no mixture. Sin may be in the Saint
as rawness and illness in water, but the fire of Grace works it out by
degrees, sending it forth in the scum. The least drop of water is contrary to,
and opposed by fire, as well as the full vessel; so the least sin is contraty
to, and opposed by Grace is well as the greatest: The shepherds dog forces the
whole flock to fly, but has a special eye to one sheep to which he is
directed by the staff or a stone from the shepherd: Or as the hounds (says a
Divine) drive the whole herd of Deer before them, yet have a special eye to one
Deer which is singled out by the dart of the Huntsman, that however others may
escape, yet that shall be killed; so regeneration though it work in the soul a
detestation of, and a resolution against every sin, yet the severest exercise
of this hatred and opposition is against the man's beloved and delightful sin,
resolving however others should escape, yet this shall be put to death. As the
Syrian commanded his Soldiers to fight neither against small nor great, but
against the King of Israel; so truly the bent of the sanctified heart is most
against this royal King-sin, as that sin whereby God has been most dishonored,
and his soul most deeply wounded.

Ambrose relates a story of a dog, In Hexam lib. 6. c. 4.
whose Master being slain by one of his enemies, he lay by him all night, with
great lamentation, howling and barking. In the morning many came to see the
dead corpse, amongst whom was the murderer, the dog no sooner saw the Homicide,
but presently fell upon him. Friend, is thy greatest hatred and anger against
thy Saviour-and-soul-murderer, that Master-sin in which thou did formerly
take the greatest pleasure? Can thou say as David (observe that character of
uprightness) I was upright before him, and kept my self from mine iniquity?
Psa. 18.23. Mark, from mine iniquity. The godless man though he do much, will
be sure to fail here; and the godly man will strike home here, wherever he be
favorable; An horse that is not sound, but founderd, will favor one foot, if
not more; the Lapwing (some observe) will cry, and make a great noise, but it is
when she is farthest from her nest; the Hypocrite may keep a great stir about
many sins, but there is one sin which he medleth not with. Dr. Reynolds on Hos
14. sermon. 3
There is, says a learned Divine, no greater argument of unsound repentance
then indulgent thoughts, and reserved delight and complacency in a master sin.
As some grounds are most proper soiles to breed and nourish some particular
weeds; So are some men's hearts for some particular sins: As Cains for envy,
Corahs for arrogance, Pilates for Cowardliness, the young man for covetousness;
and this sin is ordinarily the greatest block in the way of conversion; rather
then men would leave this sin, they have lost Salvation. Mark 10.22. John 12.42
43. The Devil holds them as fast by this one link as by ten thousand; As it is
with a Rabbits skin, it comes of very well, till it come to the head, and then
there is haling and pulling, and much ado before it stirs; So the creature may
do much at the command of God, but there is old stir and pulling, before this
sin be separated from him; if this be once done thoroughly, the man is converted
truly; for nothing but a saving work, can cause a man to loath that sin which
he loved as himself: And therefore an uncoverted person will ever be false in
this. Jehu may throw down the idolatry of Baal, but not the Calves at Dan and
Bethel: The young man in his worldliness, Herod in his uncleanness; Balaam in
his stubbornness, must be excused. The converted soul is in this most careful;
as Craumer, he will put that unworthy right hand first in the fire, with which
by his subscription he had so much dishonored Christ and Religion. Mahomet the
Great, Turk. Hist.
first Emperor of the Turks cut off his fair Irenes head with his own hands,
in whom he had so exceedingly delighted, to assure his Bashaws that he had
rather promote the public peace and good then please and satisfy his own
passions. The true Christian is a far greater conqueror, and out of love to
God and his own Salvation, obtains a more lawful and noble victory over the
Mistress of his affections: He knows no sin be it never so near or dear to
him, worth hazarding the loss of Gods favor, and his eternal welfare for; And
therefore though his sin be an Absalom, concerning which corrupt nature, like
David gives a special charge, Spare the young man Absalom: Deal gently with him
for my sake: He sees, like Joah, that the way to scatter the army of lusts, is
to slay the General, this commander in chief; And therefore he resolves to
make sure work of him, and for that end takes three darts and strikes him
through with them all, when one would have done the deed.

Reader, I confess I have been much larger in this head then I intended; but if
thou examine thine heart faithfully and prudently by it, thou will have no
cause to be sorry for it; I have read that it was wont to be the way of trial,
whether land belonged to England, or Ireland, by putting toads or serpents, or
other venomous creatures into it; If they lived there, the land belonged to
England; if they died, to Ireland: sure I am, thou may try whether thou at
present belongest to heaven, or to hell, to a Covenant of Works, or to the
Covenant of Grace, whether thou art converted or unconverted: if venomous lusts
do live in thee thou art English land, in a state of nature and wrath; if they
die daily in thee, thou art in Christ and belongest to the Land of promise. Yet
I would not be understood as if I meant that Godly men are never overtaken with
sin, or that corruption never gets the better of them. For I know, that the
purest on earth are holy but in part: they are like watermen rowing hard
against the stream of corruption, but through a sudden and violent blast of
temptation, they may be driven backward: But observe, this is violent against
their fixed and deliberate resolutions; their obedience to the law of sin is
forced as to an Usurper, not free as to a liege Lord. Ahab indeed sold himself
to sin. 1 King. 21.20. bat Paul was sold under sin. Romans 7.14. The former was a
volunteer, and agent, the latter a prestman, a mere patient. Augustine sets
out the difference between sin in the regenerate and unregenerate, by a
comparison of Tarquine and Lueretia, Peccatum factum est de illa non ab illa.
Aug. de civit. dei.
where (speaking of her ravishment) there were says he, two bodies but one
guilty of adultery, and concludes the sin was committed upon her, not by her.
Consonant to which is that of the Apostle. For that which I do, I allow not:
for what I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do: Now if I do what I
would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me, Romans 7.15.
to 21. The converted person, like the betrothed Virgin, is forced; he cries
out, and therefore in Gods account is innocent. Our committing sin will not
speak us unsanctified, but our submitting to it will.

Secondly, There is in this new creature, as a dying to sin, so also a living
to God in all ways of obedience, Romans 6.11. As the old man is put off, so the
new man is put on; besides the expulsion of sin, there is the infusion of
holiness: An habit or principle of grace is bestowed on the soul, whereby it
breaths after, exercises and delights it self in the ways and worship of
God; there is an inward frame and disposition infused into the new Creature,
different from, nay, contrary to his former inclinations: The stream of his
heart and life before ran swiftly after the flesh and the world: The creature
sat upon the throne in his inward man, commanding all things at pleasure;
earth was the man's heaven, the world lay in his heart, and all the man's
affections and actions were ordered and disposed for the advancement of that
interest. But now the tide is turned, the waters run in another channel; the
Lord is exalted in his affections, as his chiefest good; and in his
conversation, as his utmost end; the Law of God is written in the heart, and
commented upon in the life; the inward man is of a good constitution, and the
outward man of a good complexion: Grace is a tendency of the soul Godward; his
understanding knows God to be the greatest good, John 17. His will chooses
him, his affections love him, his desire is after him, his delight is in him,
his fear is of him, his trust is on him his care and endeavor is to walk worthy
of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, Joh. 17.3. Psalm. 16.5, 6. and 73.25, 26.
Isa. 7.8. Psalm. 37.4. Genesis 42.18. like the Sunflower, he follows the motion
of the Sun of righteousness.

Now, Reader, try thy self; Art thou alive to God? Do thou take him in
Christ for thy happiness, and make him thine end? Is it thy business and trade
to do his will; thy calling and employment to finish his work? Is thy heart
devoted to his fear, and thy life to his honor? how art thou affected to his
word and worship? Do thou perform duties out of love to God, with complacency
in God? It it thy meant and drink to obey his precepts? How is thy soul ravished
with the sweetnesses of his promises? Art thou joyful in the house of prayer?
Is the Sabbath thy delight? Is the Scripture sweeter to thee then the honey and
the honeycomb? At the Sacrament, can thou fit under Christ's shadow with great
delight, and find his fruit sweet unto thy taste? Do thou esteem the yoke
of thy Savior easy, his service liberty, his ways ways of pleasantness, and
all his paths peace? Can thou say, One day in Gods Courts is better then a
thousand elsewhere? Have thou found that it is good for thee to draw nigh to
God? If thou were put to thy choice, had thou rather solace thy soul with
sensual recreations, or in communion with the Father and Jesus Christ his Son?
Examine thine heart; for if thou have the divine nature, divine and spiritual
things will be natural, and so pleasant to thee: A man whose nature is
covetous, how exceedingly does he delight in viewing and feeling money! as the
Roman Emperor would putt off his clothes and tumble up and down in heaps of
silver: If a man's nature be proud, how exceedingly pleased is he in the cap and
the knee, in being flattered and respected? it is meat and drink to him (as we
say) to be reverenced in men's carriage, and honored in their language; men love
those things a life, because they suit with their natures: So when a man has a
new nature, a spiritual holy nature, things which are spiritual and holy, will
be acceptable to him, because they are suitable to his nature; the word will be
welcome, prayer will be pleasant, ordinances will be as savory as food to the
hungry; the man will love the habitation of Gods house, and the place where
Gods honor dwells; though his flesh be weak, his spirit is always willing.
He may be weary at a duty (that the wheels of his soul should so be clogged with
the dirt of infidelity, and make him to drive so heavily) but he is never weary
of duties; though corruption and Satan now dog him at, and disturb him in his
performances; yet it is the comfort of his soul, that he now drags them in
chains after the triumphant chariot of Grace; and he rejoices to think how he
shall leave the body of death behind him, at the entrance of his soul into the
Capitol of Glory: His heart leaps now, when his feet do but creep in the way of
obedience: when he goes to the house of God, it is with the voice of joy, unto
the altar of God, yea, his God and excceeding joy.

Whatsoever a man does from an ingrafted propensity, he does it not only in
sincerity, but also with alacrity: He delights in it, as the fish in the water,
as the mole in the earth, it is his proper element; God, and the things of God
are his element; He would still be, and live in this element: He delights to
know God, to worship him, to believe in him, to meditate on him, to sanctify
his day, to glorify his name, to observe his Laws, to view his children; he is
never so well as when he is walking with God: if there were no heaven to prefer
the obedient, and no hell to punish the disobedient, yet he would fear the
Lord, and delight greatly in his commandments.

But on the other side, speak, Friend, Art thou listless and dead to spiritual
things? are they irksom and tedious to thee? Probably the commandments of God
are bonds and cords; the Sabbath thy toilsom day, not a day of rest and
refreshment, the Sanctuary is thy prison, the service of God is snuft at by
thee, and wearisom to thee; thou art glad that the duty is done, the day is
over, thy conscience quieted, like a Tenant who is glad his rent is paid to his
Landlord, but took no pleasure in parting with his money; thou rejoycest at the
end, not at the beginning of thy duty; thou countest Amen the best word in a
prayer, not because it is the fruit of thy faith, but because it puts a period
to thy petitions; the Blessing is the best part of Divine Worship; thou
esteemest no part to be before it, because that is last, and nothing comes
after it.

Religion, is but (possibly) thy by-business, and a Lacquey to thy lusts, a
pass and a convoy which thou have need of in thy traveling through the world.
It may be thou go to duty as a Bear to the stake; it goes against the hair
with thee to walk in the way of holiness, though necessity compel thee
(sometimes, or) once or twice a day to take a turn in the path of piety:
Conscience will roar unless it may find rest in some outward performance.

Or thou may now and then perceive good company walking in the narrow way
which leads to life; and so, as travelers care not if they go a mile or two
out of their way for company, especially if the way be fair and the company
pleasing; so thou may go out of thy own way sometimes, and walk a little with
the Saints for company.

Reader, be faithful to thy soul: A real fire differs from a painted one by
its heat; and so does the real from the painted Christian by his heat, life and
delight in the service of God. If thou art alive to God, thou art given up to
all the Laws of God, thou exercisest thy self therein to keep a conscience void
of offense toward God and men. If thou art a Christian indeed, the image of
God is imprinted on thee; now this image consists in knowledge, righteousness
and true holiness: Righteousness conforms thy heart to the whole Second Table
of the moral Law; Holiness conforms it to the whole first Table, and Knowledge
compleats this conformity to both. The regenerate man is not maimed, no part of
the new man is wanting: He cuts not off the garments of holiness in the midst.
Agrippa may be half a Christian, Herod may do many things; but Zacharias and
Elizabeth walk in all the statutes and ordinances of the Lord, blameless: And
David will fulfill all the wills of God: Luke 1.6. Act. 13. Perfect holiness is
the reward of the Saints in heaven, but it is the desire and endeavor of the
Saints on earth; O that my ways were directed to keep thy commandments! As a
resolved Traveller that is upon a journey of necessity, whether the way and
weather be fair or foul, he goes on, by honor and dishonor, by evil report
and good report, until he appear before God in Sion. He lifts at the latch
when he cannot open the door; he has respect to all Gods commandments. He
obeys every Law of both Tables in his will, though he break the Law of both
Tables in his works. As the hearts and wills of the Athenians were with Sylla
without the walls, when they were (besieged by him, and) kept, in their bodies,
within by force: So the Saints are with the whole Law in their hearts and
intentions, even then when they are forced to fail, in regard of their hands
and execution, Romans 7.13, 14. Paul's three adverbs speak a substantial
Christian, Tit. 2.11.

Some are first Table-men, zealous for Religion and duties toward God, but
cold and careless in point of righteousness and justice in their dealings with
men. Others are Second Table-men, very just and righteous toward men, yet mind
not Religion toward God; but the true Christian is complete in all the will of
God, Phil. 4.12. Integrality is the true note of integrity. The Philosopher
says, Dolus latet in universalibus.
That deceit lies in universals; the Divine says, That sincerity lies in
universals. We trust, says Paul, that we have a good conscience, because we
desire in all things to live honestly, Hebr. 13.18.

An Hypocrite is like some books of little worth, because they are imperfect,
something is wanting; those commands which will suit with his ends shall be
taken in his way, as Jehu did the precepts which enjoined the rooting out of
Ahabs family, but those which cross his designs must be cast by as that precept
to Jehu, of rooting out the Idolatry at Dan and Bethel. Thus this unconverted
person indents with God, as some servants with their Masters, This work he will
do, and this work he will not do; and thus while he breaks one command
resolutely, he breaks all reductively. The commands of the Law are all
copulative, they hang together like a carcanet of ^ewels, break one off, and
all fall with it. Or as one article of a lease being broken, the whole lease is
forfeited. He that breaks one with resolution and confidence, obeys none out
of conscience. He that disobeyeth God wilfully in one command, shall find that
he disobeyeth God wholly in all. He that keeps the whole Law, and offends
in one point, is guilty of all. James 2.

Reader, If thou should sit at table and see a man pidling at his meat,
picking and choosing, this he liked, that he disliked, thou would conclude,
surely some ill humors are predominant in him, his body is unsound. So when
thou art pidling at the table of the Word, picking and choosing among the
commands of God, this thou likest, it is easy; that thou dislikest, it will
cost thee some pains, or tend to thy discredit: May thou not gather that
corruption is too much prevailing in thee, and thy soul is unsound? Be it known
unto thee that thou art a Traitor against the King of heaven, if thon clippest
or refusest any piece which has his impression and superscription.

Secondly, Examine thy self by the Effects of regeneration. I shall name three
Effects of it, by which I would request thee to search and try thy soul.

First, The new born child desires and savoureth the means of grace. The
unconverted man being dead spiritually, has no appetite to, nor taste of
spiritual food; but the living child has both; As new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2.2. The babe of Grace as soon as born, does
cry for the breast: He can no more live in his soul without duties, then in his
body without diet. The infantheir prefers his milk before his largest
Manors: A famine of the word pincheth and paineth him more then a famine of
bread and water: David's banishment from the Temple was his forest trouble, and
a far greater affliction to him then his forced absence from his dearest
relations.

O the hunger of this gracious soul after Scripture! I opened my mouth and
panted, for I longed for thy commandments, Psalm. 119.131. The big-bellied
mother does not long more then this new born child: The poor prisoner does not
beg more heartily for bread, then he for spiritual food, Psalm 42.1, 2. and
63.1.2. Dr. Harris o^ New heart.
A Divine observes excellently on that fore-quoted place, 1 Pet. 2.2. a
threefold difference between the bad and good in their desires of the Word.

1. The regenerate desires the Word as the babe does milk: How is that? he
desires it as his livelihood when he is new born though afterward he is more
playful, and every noise may call him off from the breast; but when new born,
nothing can satisfy but the breast; so an hypocrite may desire the word when
there is nothing to call him; but when the world and the word come in
competition, he will follow his earthly, whatever become of his heavenly
business; but a new born child prefers it before thousands of gold or silver.

2. The new born child desires the word in its plainness, The sincere milk of
the word, without mixture, as the child desires the mothers milk without
sugar; whereas another desires the word in its gaudy dress, lofty language,
partly out of pride scorning the simplicity of the Gospel; partly out of
cowardice, because the naked sword of the word, drawn out of its gaudy
scabbard, pierces deepest.

3. The new born creature desires the word for a good end, That he may grow
thereby in grace and holiness; another man may desire it that he may grow in
ability to discourse, or the like; but this man that he may grow in faith,
love, and sanctifying graces. Besides, hunger being his sauce, makes the word
sweet to him, he esteems the word of Gods mouth more then his appointed food,
Job 23.12. Mark, not then varieties, or superfluous fare, but then daily and
necessary food; the former might be spared, but this for the preservation of
life is necessarily required; but Gods word was before this, Spiritual dainties
are most delightful to them that have special grace. And truly it is no wonder
that the child does so exceedingly long for and love that which is (as it
were) his father, I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou have
quickened me, Psalm. 119.93. Some men say they shall never forget such a friend
the longest day that they have to live: What Is the reason? they will tell us
they were nigh death either by fire, or water, or some disease; and under God,
such men saved their lives; so says David, I Will never forget Gods Law the
longest day I shall live: why? what is the matter? Alas, I was nigh death, next
door to eternal damnation; there was but a thin paper-wall of life between me
and everlasting woe, and under God the Word helped me, it saved my soul. I will
never forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened me. If Alexander
could say, That he was more bound to his Tutor Aristotle, then to his Father
Philip; because he had only his being from the latter, when he had his
well-being from the former, and therefore he prized him so much: How much
therefore does the true Christian value that word which is instrumental to his
being in Christ here, and his everlasting welbeing with Christ hereafter?

So for prayer, the regenerate person cannot live without it, and fellowship
with God in it: He is like a full vessel (his heart filled with complaints
against sin, with longings after Christ and his likeness) if you will not give
it vent, 'twill burst. Prayer is his breathing Godward; without breathing the
body could not live, it would be inflamed and burnt up with the heat of its own
entrails; no more could the soul, unless the Saint should breath often toward
heaven, crying, Abba, Father. Spiritual breath was the first sign of Paul's
spiritual birth, Behold he prays, Act. 9.11.

So I might speak of other Ordinances of God; for there is a constant trade
driven between the Convert and heaven, which is carried on by several
commodities; and if this commerce were broken off, he could not subsist: He
finds the means of grace as needful to keep grace and soul together, as meat
to keep life and soul together: his heart, though fired with this spiritual
life, is like green wood which will burn no longer then its blown with the
bellows of Ordinances.

Reader, How do thou find thine appetite unto the bread and water of life?
do thou hunger after the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, Commonion of Saints, and
the Lords day? can thou feed on them with delight? do thou rise from Table
with an appetite, longing to sit down again? Can thou lay as the Psalmist, I
watch, and am as the Sparrow upon the house top? Psalm. 102.7. Observe, the
Sparrow upon the top of an house looks on this side and that side of the
house, it looks this way and that way, and round about if he can spy any
corn, and food; and when it can see any, it flies to that place, and pecks it
up; so, do thou watch for, and resort to the Ordinances of God which are the
food of thy soul? what say thou? It may be thou art for high language,
oratorical expressions; such Sermons only are pleasing to thee; the dish must
be set out with many flowers, on which thou look more then at the meat.
Believe it, as there is no greater sign of a foul stomach then to loath solid
meat, and to pick sallats, or feed on ashes; so there is hardlier a greater
sign of an unsanctified heart, then to loath the solid food of the word, and to
pick the flowers of man's wisdom in a Sermon, or to feed on the world.

Or possibly thou art one of the newfangled opinionists of our unhappy times
that are above Ordinances. I must tell thee, That to live above Ordinances, is
to live below a Saint. He that does not reckon the means of Grace his greatest
privilege on this side the place of Glory, may well question whether ever he
enjoyed God in them: methinks the beggar should know that door again at which
he had a large alms, a full bait, James 1.18, 19. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3, 4. A child
indeed may forbear his meat either in a fit of sullenness, or under some
disease; but if he be a child, his dogged fit will be over, he will get the
mastery of his distemper, and fall to his food again.

Secondly, The newborn creature grows in Grace; the picture of a child
grows not, but a living child does: After generation follows augmentation;
the same word which breeds the new man, feeds him, and enables him to grow
thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. As the same blood, of which the babe is bred in the womb,
strikes up into the mothers breasts, and by a further concoction becomes milk,
and so nourishes it: The good seed of the word falling into the foil of an
honest heart, makes it abundant in the work of the Lord: Common Grace,
sometimes like Joshua's Sun, stands still; but usually like the dial of Ahaz,
it goes ten degrees backward; when special grace, like the morning light,
shines brighter and brighter to perfect day, Prove. 4.18. First, the blade,
next, the ear, then the full corn: first, they who are begotten of God, become
little children, next young men, then old men and fathers, 1 John 2.1, 12, 13,
14.

The unfound Christian, is like the Manna for the Israelites daily use, which
did corrupt and putrify; or like a pond of water which quickly dries up; when
true Christianity, as the Manna in the Ark, does keep sweet, and as the waters
of the Sanctuary is up first to the ankles, then to the knees, then to the
loins, and at last became a River so deep that none could pass over it, Ezekiel.
47.3, 4, 5.

If Grace be true, there is a natural tendency in it to growth, as there is in
seed cast into the earth: There is vertually in a little plant, the bigness and
height of a great tree, toward which it is putting forth it self with more and
more strength every day. So there is in that seed of Grace planted in the soul
at conversion, vertually that perfection of grace which Christ has appointed
that man unto, toward which its putting it self forth every day. He that has
clean hands, grows stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. They go from strength to
strength till they appear before God in Sion, Psalm 84. This River of living
waters runs along (notwithstanding many turnings and windings) till it empty
it self into the Ocean, and grace commence glory.

The grain of mustard seed grows into a tree, and the smoking flax is blown
into a flame: The least spark of true holiness cannot be put out by all the
blasts of men and devils; but will like the coal-fire wax the hotter for the
waters of opposition, and never leave aspiring till it be joined, and become a
pure and perfect flame.

He was never good man that mends not, Hal medit. and vows p. 7. medit. 44.
(says that holy Bishop) for if he were good, he must needs desire to be
better; Grace is so sweet, that whoever tastes of it, must needs long after
more; and if he desire it, he will endeavor it; and if he do but endeavor,
God will crown with success. Gods family admits of no dwarfs, which are
unthriving, and stand at a stay, but men of measures: Whatever become of my
body, or my estate, I will ever labor to find somewhat added to the stature
of my soul.

The children of God are therefore compared to trees, which are thriving and
profitable, as to the fruitful vine, the fat olive, the seasonable sapling
planted by the Rivers of waters; for he abides in Christ; and whosoever
abides in him brings forth fruit, John 15.4. The branch which seems to
belong to the vine (by hanging on it) yet is dead, will wither and perish; but
that which is alive in the vine will partake of its sap, and thereby thrive and
flourish.

Indeed all Christ's Scholars are not of the same form. All gracious men are not
of the same growth: as in the natural body, some parts have more beauty and
strength then others; so in the mystical body of Christ, one member may be more
eminent in spiritual strength then another: God does not give Grace as he did
Manna, by the homer; one star differs from another in glory: but though all
the children of God are not of the same strength and stature, yet they are all
thriving children; and as some write of the Crocodile, they grow while thy
live: As all pieces of land are not alike fruitful, some bring forth thirty,
some sixty, some an hundred fold; but all the good grounds are fruitful, and
return the seed with advantage, every one brings forth some fruit.

It is confessed also, that a true Christian does not grow at all times alike; A
violent wind may force those waves for some time backward, whose natural
motion is forward. Natures retraction of it self from a visible fear, upon a
sensible danger, may make the pulse of a Christian (that beats truly and
strongly in the main point, the state of the soul) to intermit and faulter at
such a time. Peter was far from thriving when he denied his Master; first, with
bare words, and then with curses and oaths: And so was David from growing,
when he first commits adultery in person, and afterward murder by a proxy:
But mark, as children under a fit of sickness, grow not at present, but after
their recovery shoot up the more for it: and as trees stand at a stay in
winter, but in spring shoot forth to purpose; so the child of God, though he
may have his declensions, yet afterward he recovers himself, and his distemper
being removed, he falls to his food, and gets strength apace; nay, the greater
his fall was, the greater his rise; the lower the ebb and decrease, the higher
the tide and increase; as we see in Peter, who though he denied Christ out of
cowardice, Eusebius.
came afterward to own him with courage, and that to the loss, not only of
his liberty, but his very life: And David, who could once imbrue his hands in
another man's blood, would not afterward drink of that water, the fetching of
which had but endangered blood.

Reader, How do thou find thine heart to thrive in holiness? do thou like
a dead stake in an hedge grow, but it is every day more rotten? or, do thou
like a living tree grow bigger and better, extending in the branches, and
increasing in fruit from the sap which thou derivest from Christ thy root? Art
thou like those Seducers which Paul speaks of, that grow worse and worse; like
a carcass, more unsavory every hour then other? or, do thou like the moon,
always increase in the light of purity till thou come to the Full of Glory?
Art thou ever pressing forward toward the price of the high calling of God in
Christ? Or do thou slide backward with a perpetual backsliding? Art thou one
of them that boast they are still the same, as loose, as deboist as ever, no
changling unless it be from one lewd company or loose course to another? like
the Camelion, thou can turn into any color but white; into any thing but
what thou should be: truly, thou art far from the Kingdom of Heaven.

Friend, Let conscience speak, Was the time with thee, when thou could not
suffer half a day to pass without duties; nor a duty without communion with God
in it? thou did constantly either meet God, or miss God in an ordinance: thou
could not hear an oath, but thou wast sensible of Gods dishonor, nor speak an
idle word, but thou wast fearful of divine displeasure: God and thy soul like
two intimate friends did walk together. And is it now otherwise? can thou
neglect prayer and the word, and never be troubled at their want? or if thou
mind any performance, art thou indifferent whether or no God affords his
presence? Can thou hear others lash out with their lips, and give thy self
liberty for vain and frothy language, yet none of these things move thee? O
Friend, consider whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works: for
surely it is sad to see the days grow shorter and shorter, to see a body
wasting away every day more and more of a consumption: And how sad is it to see
a soul declining in regard of spiritual strength! If thou fall forward, thou
may help thy self; but if thou fall backward, as old Eli did, thou may undo
thy self; thy fall may prove thy downfall. Remember, that a vessel of true gold
will wear brighter and brighter to the last; when a cup which is only gilt
will grow paler and paler, till all the gilt be of: Take heed thou be not like
an apple, fair in the outside, and rotten at coar; for then thou will corrupt
farther and farther, till thy outside be like thine inside, and God discover
thee to be unsound all over.

Thirdly, the newborn creature endeavoreth to make others gracious. All living
creatures have a tendency and inclination to beget others, and propagate their
own kind. Adam when polluted, begets a son after his image; truly, so does the
Christian (in his desires and endeavors) as soon as he is purified. No
sanctified soul did never make a Monopoly of his Savior; like the wall, he
receives warmth from the Sun of Righteousness, and reflecteth it on them that
are near him.

An Hypocrite, who has no true grace himself, cares not how little others
have: He is like a dead coal, whatever be nigh him is never warmed or quickened
by him; but the sincere soul wishes, that all were altogether as he is; and as
a live coal he kindles others.

All good is diffusive of it self, and the more of goodness in any, the more of
diffusiveness. If Peter be converted, he will strengthen his brethren; if David
be reduced, he will teach sinners Gods ways: None are more desirous of children
then they who have God for their Father.

The true Christian that has tasted God to be gracious, and found good
entertainment at his table, cannot but commend his hous-keeping to others, and
advise them to accept of the same cheer.

As the sun refreshes many with his warm rays, especially them that are near
it; so does the Saint benefit many by his fervent prayers for them, occasional
counsels and constant pattern to them, but especially those that are of his own
family. There indeed are his most cherishing beams, and enlivening influences.
O how diligent is he that the King of Saints may have his throne in every heart
within his house! Like the Be, he goes to the flower of this duty, and to the
flower of that Ordinance, sucking some honey, some soul-sweetness, and then
carries all home to his hive, to his family: He will study and strive that his
cottage may become a Church, his house Gods lesser heaven: It Is a mercy to be
his Wife, he will labor that Christ may be her Husband: It Is an happiness to be
his children, he will endeavor that God may be their Father: It Is a privilege
to be his servant, he will do his utmost that such may be heirs of salvation.
His house is an healthful air for the souls of others to breathe in.

Grace like fire cannot be hid; you may as soon conceal musk in your hand, as
grace in your heart. The turning of a sinner from evil to good, is like the
turning of a bell from one side to another which reports its own motion. The
Convert is resolved, (as Elijah) to show himself, and in this among the rest,
in bringing more customers to that shop, where he had such cheap and kind usage.

The Devil was no sooner fallen, but he labored to draw man to the same
wickedness and wretchedness with himself; the dead in sin are no sooner raised
to spiritual life, but they endeavor to draw others to the same holiness and
happiness with themselves; These things I write unto you that ye may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship (which is the only good
fellowship) is with the Father and Jesus Christ his Son, 1 John 1.3.

The child of God cateth not his morsel alone, but loves company; he is very
covetous to make Proselites unto Christ. We have a saying, That he was unworthy
to be born, by whom another is not born: Sure I am, he may question whether he
were ever born again that does not labor that others may be so also.

Reader, Try thy self by this touchstone; art thou an heavenly Merchant to
ingross spiritual commodities to thy self? or art thou desirous that others
should share with thee? Is the voice of thy heart like Cains? Am I my brothers
keeper? or like Moses, Would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and
that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them? Can thou stand ^y and see
others lose their God, and Christ, and souls for ever, and not be at all
troubled, so thy stakes are saved? Dan. 6.14.
or do thou with Darius labor hard to keep poor creatures from the roaring
lion? and with Abraham pray heartily that poor Sodomites may be preserved from
fire and brimstone? Is it all one to thee whether thy neighbors and relations
sink or swim, be sinners or Saints, be saved or damned? truly then its a sign
thou art not born of God; for were thou his son, thou would endeavor by thy
prayers, pattern and precepts, to raise up seed to thine elder brother Jesus
Christ.

Reader. Credo, Domine, vera fide, etsi languida fide. Oecolampad.
It is far from my thoughts to disown or discourage the least degree of grace.
I know that the Embryo in the womb is reckoned toward a child; the break of
day a part of the day: A palsy, shaking hand is a true hand, and may receive a
jewel as surely, though not so steadily as another hand: A weak hand of Faith
is a true faith, and may receive the pearl of price as certainly, though not so
cheerfully, as a strong Faith. If thy desires after these particulars be
sincere and accompanied with suitable endeavors, it will speak much for thee:
I am not bringing thy graces to the balance to weigh them, that I may know
their quantity and degrees, and how rich thou art; but to the touchstone, to
try them that thou might know their quality and truth, whether thou art poor
in spirituals, or poor in spirit; whether thou art worth any thing or nothing,
for thine endless estate in the other world.

To sum up this Use, I would request thee to be so great a friend to thy
precious soul, as to be impartial and faithful in its search and trial. Look
much at the constant bent and inclination of thy heart: One act will not speak
an habit; nor a few good or bad motions, an holy or evil heart. Thou may have
some cogitations of heaven, when thy conversation is not in heaven. The air is
light, yet not a lightsom body, because it is lighted by the presence of
another; when that is removed, its dark, as in the night: So if thy light of
holiness in any of the forementioned particulars, be only like a flash of
lightning, for a fit, it is a sign the root of the matter is not in thee. On
the other side, thou may have flesh in thee, and yet thou not be in the
flesh. Thou may be in the right way to heaven, though thou art sometimes
stopped and hindered in thy journey. A stream or vent of a river may be to go
downward, yet the River may be dammed up for a while, but 'twill rise higher
and higher, and at length beat down and overcome that which hinders it; so if
the tendency of thine inward man, its ordinary frame and temper be but toward
God and the Divine nature, be not discouraged, though there may be the mud of
corruption to stop the stream; for this living water of grace, will be so
beating upon it, that twill overpower it, and ride triumphantly over it. But
be sure that thou bring the matter in debate to an issue, by no means desist
till thou bring it to some result. If Satan can but persuade thee either to
daub about it (for his his speech will be like that of Peter to Christ, Master,
pity thy self) or to leave the question still in doubt, he knows that he
shall spoil the working of all this Physic, be it never so good. I know that
thine heart will be as hard to be kept to it, as an eel in thine hands;
therefore serve thine heart, as the Judge serves the Jurors at an Assize.
First, they are sworn to be true and faithful in deciding and determining the
difference between party and party: next, they hear the evidence and proofs on
both sides: After that they are shut up together, and have neither fire, nor
candle, nor bread, nor drink allowed them, till they are agreed on their
verdict, which when they have done they bring it into the Court, and there it is
entered and recorded. Go thou and do likewise: when thou art got into thy
chamber, first make thine heart to engage and promise before the Judge of the
whole earth, that it will, through the strength of Christ, be true and faithful
in determining this weighty controversy between God and thy soul, Whether the
land of promise belong to thee or not; next let conscience be called (which is
as ten thousand witnesses) and speak what it knows, of thy right and title to
that estate according to the known Laws of the Lord; and if thou love the
life of thy soul, do not wink upon that witness, or fee him underhand to make
him to mince the matter, and be partial in his testimony. Foolish pity here, is
soul-damning cruelty; but tell him, he is upon his oath, and in the presence of
the infinite God, and charge him to speak the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth. O do but give conscience leave to be faithful at this
time, and twill be thy friend to eternity: When the evidence is thus examined,
let nothing hinder a verdict; call upon thy heart again and again, whether it
be resolved for thee or against thee; till this be done, give thy self no rest:
if one day will not serve, take two; never give over till it come to an issue
one way or other. Of what infinite concernment is this to thee, when all that
thou art worth for the other world depends on it! When thou art agreed of a
verdict, let it be entered and engrossed in the Court of Conscience; namely,
that such a day thy title to the inheritance of the Saints in light was tried
before the Judge of quick and dead; and upon a full hearing of evidence on both
sides, such or such a verdict was brought in. If thy heart find for thee, how
may this fill thee with joy, that thy name is written in the book of life! it
may keep thee steady in the greatest storm, that thou art an undoubted heir to
the eternal weight of glory, When the waters of affliction overtake thee, and
the Devil throws his stones into them to trouble them, and make them muddy
(that thou may doubt and distrust thine eternal felicity) how quickly may the
remembrance of such a verdict upon full evidence settle them again, and how
clearly may thousee thy sincerity like a true diamond sparkling gloriously at
the bottom of those waters! thou might gather, Once in Christ and ever in
Christ; and I was once in him, therefore I can never be out of him. O Friend,
thy privileges are high and unspeakable, and therefore thy practices should be
holy and answerable: But I cannot stay to speak farther to thee here; my work
grows in my hands already much beyond my thoughts, yet I shall speak to thy
dignity and happiness in the second subject of consideration, under the first
Use of Exhortation; and to thy duty and holiness in the second Use of
Exhortation, if the book swell not too big.

But Reader, if thine heart find against thee that thou art not born again,
what can thou say for thy self, why sentence of eternal death should not be
awarded and executed upon thee according to Law, yea according to the Gospel?
Have thou read the reasons of the Doctrine, and the first use of Information?
and do thou not see the absolute indisponsable necessity of Regeneration, in
all that would be saved? Has not the God of truth (as it were) confirmed it
with an oath, Verily, verily I say unto thee, that except a man be born again,
he cannot see the kingdom of God? Can thou think to make the author of this
Text a liar by getting to heaven in an unregenerate condition? Do thou
believe that the thoughts of his heart stand for ever, and the counsels of his
majesty be established to all generations? Suppose thou should dye this day!
(Alas how many diseases attend thee! the feet of those that carried others to
their long homes, are ready to carry thee also) Good Lord, what will become of
thee for ever, ever, ever! Art thou able to dwell in everlasting burnings?
can thou endure unquenchable flames? For the sake of thy precious soul,
hasten out of this Sodom, this natural estate, which will undoubtedly be
punished with fire and brimstone: For thine help herein, I have written the
next Use, which I earnestly beseech thee as thou would leave this world with
comfort, and look into the other world with courage, that thou give it the
reading (thou know not what an hour may bring forth) and the Lord give it
his blessing.

THirdly, This doctrine may be useful by way of exhortation, and that to two
sorts of persons.

1. To the unregenerate: If without regeneration men and women can never obtain
salvation, then it exhorts thee, Reader, if in a state of nature, to mind
and labor for this second birth, as ever thou would escape the second death.
Do thou not perceive by the word the living God, That except thou art
converted, thou can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God! Matthew. 18.3.
Alas! what then is like to be thy case, should thou die in this condition?
Assure thy self, that all thy Friends and Lands, honors and pleasures; yea, all
the help which this whole world can afford thee, cannot keep thee one quarter
of an hour out of Hell.

This Law, this standing Law of Heaven, That except a man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God, is like the Law of the Medes and Persians, which
cannot be altered; By their Law, That which was written in the Kings Name, and
sealed with the Kings seal, might no man reverse, Esth. 8.8. Friend, is not
this written, not only in the name, but with the very hand of the King of
Kings, (I say unto thee) and sealed with his own seal, Verily, verily? and
do thou think, poor worm to reverse it, to turn the truth of the Eternal God
into a lie: I tell thee, (and I would speak it with reverence to the highest
Majesty) that God himself cannot do it. It Is his perfection, that it is
impossible for him to lie, Tit. 1.2. His hand cannot but make good, what his
mouth has spoken. His will and word have joined regegeration and salvation
together, and his faithfulness and truth will not suffer them to be parted
asunder. Therefore think of it timely, and turn to God truly; otherwise there
is a necessity of thy perishing everlastingly.

Thou do not know, as strong and lusty as thou art, how soon death may come
behind thee, and throw thee; and, O 'twill be thine eternal overthrow: though,
as on Sodom, thy morning be Sunshiny; yet thou can not tell how soon it may
overcast; nay, it may be followed with flakes of fire before night. Sure I am,
that God has given thee no lease of thy life, and that others have died of the
same age and likeliness tolive; and why thou should promise thy self a
privilege beyond others, that thou shall live longer, I know no reason, unless
this, That the Devil and thine own heart have conspired together to murder thy
soul, by getting thee to future, and put off thy conversion till thou come to
Hellfire, and then thy ruin will be past remedy. Suppose the same voice
should come to thee which did to Hezekiah; Set thine house in order, for thou
shall die, and not live: (meaning speedily) What woulst thou do? thy house is
not in order; thy soul, Man, is all out of order, and therefore death would
come to thee, as Abijah to Jeroboams wife, with heavy tidings, with such news
as Samuel brought to Eli, which will make thy ears to tingle, and thine heart
to tremble. Ah, how will he do to die, that never knew how to live! The black
Usher of death will go before, and the flaming fire of Hell will follow after.
Did thou but believe the word of God as much as the Devils do, thou could
never depart this life in thy wits, who have not led thy life according to Gods
will.

One would think, the noise of this murdering piece, of this great Cannon,
Death, (though it should not be very near thee) might awaken and affrighten
thee: when that deluge of wrath comes, that the fountain of fury from below is
broken up, and the flakes of fire from above are rained down, thou have no Ark,
no Promise, no Christ to shelter thy self in: For Regeneration is the plank
cast out by God himself, to save the sinking sinner, by bringing him to the
Lord Jesus, and thou want it. Do thou not see that thy Sentence of death
(if thou continuest so) is already passed in the High-Court of Heaven, entered
and engrost in the Book of Scripture! and God knows how soon the word of
command may be given to some disease for thy execution.

What comfort therefore can thou take in all the creatures, while thou
want this new creation? It is reported of Xerxes, Plutarch. in vit. Themist.
the the greatest of the Persian Monarchs, that when the Grecians had taken
from him Sardis, a famous City in Asia the less, he commanded one every day at
dinner to cry before him with a loud voice, Sardis is lost, Sardis is lost. It
seems to me, that thou have far more cause to have a Friend without, or
Conscience within to be thy Monitor, every day, and every meal to sound in
thine ears, Friend, Thy Soul is lost, Thy Soul is lost.

Certainly, such a voice might mar thy greatest mirth, sauce every dish with
sorrow, make thy most delicate meat a medicine, and thy sweetest drink
distastful to thee. O, did thou but know what it is to lose thy soul, thy
God, thy Christ, thine Heaven, and all for ever; thou would in the night be
scared with dreams and visions, and in the day be frighted with fears and
terrors.

When Vriah was bid by David to go down to his house and refresh himself; he
answered, The Ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and
the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields: shall I then go into
mine house to eat and drink and lie with my wife! As thou live, and as thy
soul lives, I will not do this thing. 2 Samuel 11.11. Mark, The good man could
take no pleasure in relations or possessions, because the natural lives of
others were in danger; nay, he forswears the use of those comforts for that
very cause. How then can thou solace thy self with lying vanities, when thine
Eternal life is (not in jeopardy, but) lost really, and thou can not assure
thy self one day for its recovery!

Should thou see a condemned prisoner (which knows not whether he shall be
hanged on the morrow, or the day after) hawking or hunting, sprucing himself,
or sporting with his jovial companions; what thoughts would thou have of such
a man? would thou not think, surely this man is mad, or desperate! were he
not beside himself, he would mind somewhat else, since he is so near his end.
But, Friend, turn thine eyes inward, and see whether there is not infinitely
more reason, why thou should wonder at thine own folly and madness, who art
by the word of the dreadful God condemned, not to be hanged, but to be damned;
not to the gallows, but to the unquenchable fire, and can not tell whether
this night, or to morrow morning justice shall be done upon thee, and yet thou
art buying and selling, eating and drinking, pampering the perishing body,
never minding or thinking what shall become of thy poor precious soul to
eternity!

The wise man's advice is, that if thou art indebted to men, and liable to their
arrest and imprisonment, thou should not give sleep to thine eyes, nor
slumber to thine eyelids, before thou have made thy peace, Prove. 6.1, 2, 3, 4.
What speed should thou then use, when thou art infinitely indebted to the
Almighty God (at his mercy every moment, liable continually to be arrested by
that surly Sergeant Death, and by him to be hurried into the dark prison of
Hell) to agree with thine Adversary while thou art in the way; and to get the
black lines of thy sins crossed with the red lines of Christ's blood, and so for
ever blotted out of the Book of Gods remembrance! As the Chamberlain of one of
the Persian Princes used to say to him every morning, Arise, my Lord, and have
regard to the weighty affairs for which the great God would have you to
provide. So say I to thee, Awake, O man, out of thy carnal security, and have
regard to the great end, for which thou wast born, and the great errand for
which the great God has sent thee into the world.

Reader, that thou might avoid the endless woe of the damned, and attain the
matchless weal of the saved, I shall do two things in the prosecution of this
exhortation. I shall both give thee some helps toward regeneration, and remove
some hindrances.

First I shall offer thee three helps unto holiness, and thereby unto Heaven.

Secondly, I shall answer three objections, which probably may arise in thine
heart.

If thou have any real desire, after thine eternal welfare, ponder them
seriously, and practice them faithfully; And the good Lord make them
successful. O how happy might it be for thee, if the getting of a regenerated
nature, were the main task of thy whole time! Believe it thou will have no
cause to repent of it.

For the helps toward Regeneration, and thereby toward Salvation:

The first help to Regeneration, Serious Consideration.
1. THe first help which I shall offer thee, is, serious consideration. He that
goes in a wrong path, and never thinks of it, will not return back or turn
about, though the farther he goes, the greater is his deviation and danger. A
serious consideration of the evil and end of thy way, were a cheap prevention
of eternal and endless woe. Observe I say, Consideration; Consideration is, an
Act of the practical understanding, whereby it reflecteth upon its actions and
intentions, and comparing them with the rule of the word, proceeds to lay its
command upon the will and affections, to put what is good in execution.

This was hinted by chewing the cud, under the law; and the beasts which did
not, were unclean; and indeed it is the excellency of a man above a beast, that
he may in a rational discursive manner, meditate on things which concern his
salvation, and by chewing the cud, get some nourishment to his soul. It is a
pondering the sayings of Christ, Luke 2.19. It is to the soul what digestion is
to the body, it is not the quantity of meat, but a good digestion which
nourishes and strengthens the body. For they which eat much and cannot digest
it, instead of repairing, they ruin nature; so it is not the great knowledge of
the truths of God, but the serious consideration and practical application, of
them, which nourishes and strengthens the soul; Without this, men's knowledge
be it never so much, is but like rain in the middle region, or fire in the
flint, unprofitable, and to no purpose at all.

I say serious consideration; The thoughts must dwell upon Divine weighty
truths; Surely men if they should do thus, would undo all they have done; but
when the thoughts of God, and Christ, sin and holiness, death and judgment,
heaven and hell, pass speedily through them, as travelers through a Country
making no stay, no wonder if they cannot give any account of the worth and
virtue of them. It is not the hasty shower, but soft snow which soaks deep;
whilst the former goes off as fast as it comes on, the latter gently creeps
into every chink of the ground.

It is with the truths of God, as with a salve; if a man have never so precious
a salve, which will help a dangerous mortal wound in twelve hours, and he do
nothing but lay the plaster (which is spread with this salve) on the wound,
and take it off presently, twill never heal the wound; if ever it eat out the
corruption and cure the sore, it must lie on some considerable time together,
the best salve under heaven, will not otherwise do the wounded man good. So if
a man turn his thoughts upon the loathsome nature of sin, the unspeakable danger
of sinners, the misery that he is liable to, whilst he continues carnal; the
mercy that he might obtain if he were spiritual; the alsufficiency of God, the
excellency of godliness, the purchase of Christ, and the promises of the
Gospel, every of which is a precious medicine to cure soul maladies; yet if his
thoughts do not stay upon them, if they are only glancing thoughts off and on,
like lightening, flashing on the conscience and away, they will never heal thy
spiritual diseases. That messenger which would dispatch business of weight, and
concernment, must not call at a door, and then be gone, but he must go in, sit
down, and make some stay there.

This serious consideration, Friend, I propound to thee as an excellent receipt
for the recovery of thy dying soul. I considered my ways, (says David) and
turned my feet to thy testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. Some translate the Original, I
looked on both sides upon my ways, I considered them every way, and turned my
feet unto thy testimonies: I considered that I was wandering like a lost sheep,
and then I returned unto the fold of God.

Conversion begins at consideration; Because he considers, and turns
from all the transgressions which he has committed, he shall surely live, he
shall not die, Ezekiel. 18.28. The Mariner who is running his vessel against a
rock, if he consider it, and steer another course, he does thereby prevent a
desperate shipwreck.

When David would stop the enemies of God in their full career of wickedness,
he lays this block in their way; Commune with your own hearts, and be still,
Psalm. 4.4. Self-communion is one special help to sinconfusion, and sound
conversion. The Prodigal came to himself, before he came to his Father: He
considered what a fool he was, to feed with swine upon husks, when he might eat
bread as a son in his Fathers house: He considered what a mad man he was to
feed on the short commons of the world, and endure the slavery of the Devil,
when he might feast on the exceedings of the Gospel, and enjoy the liberty of
the children of God. After this serious considera, he comes to this solid
resolution, I will arise and go to my Father, Luke 15.17, 18. and accordingly
went and was welcome.

Truly, Reader, It Is inconsiderateness that does both defile thee, and damn
thee; the want of consideration causes men to abound in sin.

The people committed falsehood; the thief comes in, the troop of Robbers
spoileth without, Hos. 7.1. There was ground full of weeds; but mark, the
reason was, because it lay fallow, 'twas not ploughed up with consideration:
They consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their wickedness, verse.
2. They consider not that I remmeber and record all their omissions,
commissions, the corruptions of their hearts, transgressions of their lives,
and write them down with a pen of iron, and point of a diamond, Jer. 17.11. and
will bring them forth in the day of slaughter. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 1.
As the foolish bird Pliny speaks of, called Struthiocamelus, which thrusts her
head into a thicket, conceiving that no body sees her, because she sees no
body, and so becomes a pray to the Fowler: So the Adulterer, the Thief, the
Drunkard, and the like, consider not that God sees them plainly, hates their
sins perfectly, can turn them into hell presently, and thereby become bold in
wickedness; they hide God from themselves, and think that they are hidden from
God: They consider not in their hearts, that he remembers all their wickedness.

Friend, when thou see a man in a frenzy, or one in Bedlam tearing their
hair, biting and cutting their own flesh, what do thou say? Surely, this man
wants the use of his reason, could he but use that, without question he would
never do thus: May not a gracious man, that beholds thee tearing, lancing,
stabbing and wounding thy precious soul with worldliness, swearing, athism, or
uncleanness, upon as good ground say, Surely this man wants consideration;
did he but consider what a jealous God he provokes; what bowels of love he
spurneth at; what a hell of sorrow he provideth for his long home, he would
never do thus! The Ostrich leaves her eggs in the dust, not considering that
the feet of the Passenger will crush them to pieces, because she is deprived of
wisdom, and wanteh understanding, Job 39.14, 15, 17. The sinner leaves his
soul naked, and liable to all dangers imaginable, because he is void of true
wisdom, and lives without this serious consideration, Isa. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. They
consider not the conclusion, and therefore are confident in the commission of
sin: They consider not their last end, therefore they come down mightily, Lam.
1.9.

A Divine writes well, how subtle Satan is to hinder men's consideration. Satan
(says he) is very jealous of the sinner, afraid every Christian that speaks to
him, Gurnals Armor, part 1. page ^2^.
or ordinances he hear should inveigle him; by his good will he should come at
neither; No, nor have a thought of heaven or hell, from one end of the week to
the other; and that he may have as few as may be, he keeps him full handed
with work. The sinner is grinding and he is filling the hopper, that the mill
may not stand still. He is with the sinner as soon as he wakes, and fills his
wretched heart with some wicked thoughts, which as a morningdraught, may keep
him from the infection, of any savor of good, that may be breathed on him by
others in the day time. All the day long he watches him, as the Master would
do his man, that he fears will run away. And at night like a careful Jailer, he
locks him up again in his chamber, with more bolts and fetters upon him, not
suffering him to sleep as he lies on his bed, till he has done some
mischief. Ah poor wretch? was ever slave so looked too? as long as the Devil
can keep thee thus, thou art his own sure enough.

Now as that Father said of the Gospel, that it must needs be excellent,
because Nero prosecuted it with so much violence; so this consideration must
needs be an excellent help to holiness, because the Devil does prosecute it
with such implacable hatred; if he can keep this door of thy soul shut, he
fears not Christ's entrance into thy heart.

I have sometime read of a religious father, that had a deboyst lewd son, that
was a great grief to him; when the father was on his death bed, he made this
son to promise him, that he would be every day of his life, half an hour alone
by himself. The son making some conscience of his solemn engagement to his
dying father, used afterward to retire himself daily, for that space of time,
where at first he busied himself vainly, in thinking of the honors and
delights of the world; but afterward he began to consider, what end his father
had in binding him to such retiredness, and then thought of his own folly, in
wandering from God, and embracing a dying and lying world; and the Spirit
striking in with those meditations, he became a new man. O that, Reader, thou
would go and do as he did. Is it not an easy remedy? If God should require
ten hours, every day, to be spent in secret, about thy soul and salvation, I
profess to thee, I know not how thou could spend thy time better, or so well.
I am sure twere worth the while; O Friend to be amongst Devils, in everlasting
torments, or with Christ in everlasting pleasures, are other manner of things
then thou can imagine; but I do request of thee, on the behalf of God and thy
soul, but one half hour every day, that thou would retire thy self into thy
chamber, or closet. (The beautiful bridegroom is bashful, and comes seldom to
his Church. Cant. 4.11. or any Christian in a crowd) and there consider
seriously, of some things which I shall from the Lord propound to thee. Let not
the cheapness of the receipt make the refuse it; thou see sometimes that
simple herbs, that grow in our own gardens, cure those distempers, which
costly drugs fetched from far cannot: As the Generals servant said to him, when
he raged and fretted at the counsel of the Prophet, for the cure of his
Leprosy. If the Prophet had bid the do some great thing, would thou not have
done it, how much rather when he says wash and be clean 2 Kings 5.13. so say I
to thee, if I should request more time in a day, if I should desire far greater
things of thee, for the killing of that Leprosy, which otherwise will kill
thee, would thou not do it? Ah did thou but know the price of a Christ,
thou would sell all to buy that pearl; did thou but know the wrath of a
just, holy and infinite God, thou would do any thing, do all things possible
to escape it. How much rather when I desire only one half hour in a day for
serious consideration. If thou will not do this for the avoiding of Hell, do
thou not deserve to burn for ever? think of it, Reader, whoever thou art, I am
very loath to leave thee before I have prevailed with thee; do thou not
sqander away, many an hour vainly, nay sinfully in working out thy damnation,
and will thou not spare one half hour in a day, to work out thy salvation in?
how many years have thou spent in the service of thy brutish flesh, and is half
an hour in a day, when thou art not sure to live a week, too much for thine
angelical spirit? What say thou? Will thou promise thy Maker and Redeemer,
that thou will do this; whose advantage is it like to be thine or mine? If thou
art wise, thou art wise for thy self, but if thou art a scorner thou alone
shall suffer, Prove. 9.12. Well, if thou will not grant me this little time,
thou art like to grieve for the refusal eternally. And truly if thou will hear
God in this, I have hopes that he will hear thee in far greater; Set thine
heart therefore to all the words, which I speak unto thee this day, for it is
not a vain thing, but it is for thy life, Deuteronomy. 12.46, 47.

I Shall, upon presumption that thou will for thy souls sake use that cheap
help of Consideration, assist thee by laying down five particulars, as subjects
of thy most serious thoughts; and I know not one of them but has such weight,
that when thou are considering (if the blessed God vouchsafe a meeting) it may
do the work.

The first subject of Consideration, The misery of the unregenerate, matchless,
endless.
FIrst, Consider the misery which thou lie under, or art liable to, whilst
thou art unregenerate.

And were I but able to charge and discharge this great gun fully, it might
probably fire thee out of all thy sinful holds, and force thee to seek unto
Christ for help. But as the Roman said of his fellow-Citizen, That he was
beyond all expressions wicked; so may I say of thee, that thou art beyond not
only all expressions, but all conceptions wretched. No ink is black enough to
describe those dismal clouds of fury under which thou live in this world! But
O, what tongue can tell the thousandth part of those fiery torments, to which
thou art liable in the other world!

While thou live thou art a cursed sinner, and when thou die, thou shall be
a damned creature.

While thou live thou art a cursed sianer; that roll of curses twenty cubits
long, and ten cubits broad, is thy right, Zach 5.4. Thou art a breaker of the
Law, and out of Christ, and therefore an heir of the curse and wrath of the
Lord.

The curse of God hangs every moment over thine head; like a Blood-hound it
follows thee where ever thou go; as thy shadow it accompanies thee
whatever thou do; thou art continually under the dropings and spouts of the
Almighty Gods indignation, and can as soon slye from thy self as from it,
till thou art regenerated.

Thou art cursed in all thou have; whether they are natural, civil, or
spiritual enjoyments, they are all cursed to thee.

For thy natural parts, thy wit, memory, knowledge, head, heart, are all cursed
to thee. They are employed in the service of Satan, and with them thou fightest
against God and thy soul. As Jehu against his Master, so thou marchest
furiously against thy Maker with his own Soldiers. Thy Memory is Satan's
treasury, thy Will an agent for hell, thy carnal mind enmity against God; the
Handmaids of thy affections, like Hagar crow over their Mistress, and make even
thy Reason a slave and Lacquey to thy sensual lusts; all thy natural endowments
are Satan's ornaments; and as the more sharp and keen the weapon is, the more
mischief the murderer does with it; so the more witty thou art, the more wicked
thou art, thy wisdom being from below, earthly, sensual, devilish, Jam. 3.15.

For thy civil advantages, Thy wealth, credit, house-delights, friends are all
cursed to thee. Thy riches make thee the greater rebel, and thereby further
thine eternal ruin: Thy fullness breeds forgetfulness. Where the richest Mines
are, the earth is most barren: Thy wealth is like fuel to feed thy wantonness.

Thine Honor like wind puffs up the bladder of thine empty heart with pride:
The more God lifts thee up, the more thou casts him down; the respectful
breath of thy neighbors, does but blow the vessel of thy soul toward Hell.

Thy pleasures are prejudicial to thy precious soul; like the wasp thou
drownest thy self in those pots of honey; and as the silly fish swimmest merrily
down the silver streams of Jordan, till thou fallest into the dead sea and
perishest.

Thy Relations and friends if wicked are cursed to thee; they breathe on thee;
and thou take the infection, wanting this preservative of regeneration: They
are actually what Michal was to David (intentionally in regard of Saul) snares
unto thee.

Thy house is cursed. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked,
Prove. 3.33. what ever cost be there, there can be no true cheer, for there is
Gods curse which mars all; this will either rot the timber, and pull it down,
or undermine the foundation and blow it up. Possibly there may be in thine
house a loving wife, lovely children, many servants, stately rooms, costly
furniture, dainty fare, great earthly delights: But man, The curse of God is
there; A spoonful of this like Copris will turn all thy wine into ink; thy sea
of honey into gall and wormwood: How can thy sweetest dish be savoury, when the
curse of God is thy sauce? Or thy most sugared cup be pleasant, when the curse
of God lies like a toad swelled at the bottom? or thy finest raiment delight
thee, when in every suit there is the curse of God, like a plague sore? or how
can thy most beautiful building content thee, when this curse of God on thee
for thy wickedness turns it into a prison to keep thee (who art in the bond of
iniquity) till the hour of death, the time of thine execution?

There is a place which some speak of in the West Indies, where there is
extraordinary luscious fruit growing, but the inhabitants are so scorched with
the heat of the Sun by day, and multitude of gnats stinging them by night, that
they cannot either eat or digest their sweet meats with any comfort; for which
cause the Spaniards call the place, Comfits in hell: Reader, what delight can
thou take in thy table though it be spread with various earthly enjoyments when
every dish is served in with the scorching wrath of God, and stingings of a
guilty conscience. As a feast to him that sat under a naked sword, as wine to
a condemned malefactor, as Dives dishes followed with the unquenchable fire, so
are all the comforts of this inferior creation to an unregenerate person.

Thou art a curse to thy children; its ill to have relation to thee, who art
under the indignation of God. The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.
Isa. 14.20. so Job 5.3, 4. If thy children are good, thou art their grief; if
wicked, thou will make them worse. The best of them may smart temporally for
thine iniquities. When the body of the tree faleth, the branches fall with it,
Exodus 20.5. and O how much more is it to be feared, that thou will draw them
after thee both to sin and Hell!

It is not safe to be thy neighbor; if it be ill to dwell near him whose house
is on fire; surely it is not good to be nigh him who is under Gods fury. When an
overflowing storm sweepeth away the wicked, the tail of it may dash at their
best neighbors: Though they shall not perish with thee, yet they may smart for
thee.

Thy name is cursed; The name of the the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7. Thou
may be honorable in the esteem of thy graceless neighbors, but thou art
contemptible in the account of Christ and his members; and when ever thou
die, thou will go out like a candle, leaving behind thee a stinking savor
in the nostrils of the Saints.

Thy calling, what ever it be, is cursed! thine eathly employment proves an
heavenly impediment. Thou art cursed in the City, and cursed in the field;
cursed in thy basket, and cursed in thy store; cursed in the fruit of thy body,
and the fruit of thy land, and increase of thy kine, and flocks of thy sheep;
cursed when thou come in, and cursed when thou go out: The Lord will send
upon thee cursing, vexation and rebuke in all that thou set thine hand
unto, until thou be destroyed and perish quickly, because of the wickedness of
thy doings, whereby thou have forsaken the Lord, Deuteronomy. 28. init. and per tot.

As thy natural parts and civil advantages, so also thy spiritual privileges
are cursed to thee, till thou turnest from sin.

^hou enjoyest Sermons, Sacraments, Sabbaths, seasons of Grace, and like the
Spider, suckest poison out of those sweet flowers: Roses, some say, kill
horse-flies. Is it not sad, that those precious mercies should hasten and
increase thy misery! Thine unregeneracy, like some desperate disease, turns
those medicines which are administered to cure it, into the nourishment and
confirmation of the sickness it self; the word of God is the savor of death
unto death unto thee, ^ Cor. 2.18. Thou surfeitest of that bread of life, then
which no surfeit is more dangerous; thou growest black and wanzy in the
sunshine of the Gospel; the table of the Lord is to thee the table of devils;
the leaven of thy unregeneracy turns that passover into pollution; Christ
himself is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, 1 Peter. 2.8. This Sun
of Righteousness, which the sound eye of the regenerate beholds with much
pleasure, is not beheld by thy sore eyes without much pain. The Red Sea of his
blood, through which the true Israelites pass safely into the celestial Canaan,
is destruction to thee, being an uncircumcised Egyptian. The very Grace of God
is turned by thee into wantonness, Jude verse. 4.

Thou make sour vinegar of that sweet wine, and make use of those gales to
help thee to Hell, which were sent to help thee to Heaven Unto thee who art
unbelieving and defiled is nothing pure, Tit. 1.15. As the Earth has the
greatest cold in the bottom of it, when the Sun shines on it with the greatest
heat to qualify it; So is thine heart dead and cold under all the warm
influences of ordinances.

What a dreadful condition art thou in, that those privileges which are choice
blessings to others, should be cursed to thee, and greaten both thy sin and
suffering. The fruit of those trees which stand in the Sun, grows greater,
then of those which grow in the shade; so do thy sins under the Gospel of
Christ, wax greater, then of those which want it, Matthew. 11.21, 22, 23. Hebr.
10.28, 29. And as these sacred advantages increase thy corruption, so also thy
destruction: When the physic which should remove the distemper cooperates with
it, it brings death with the more speed and pain. No creature more terrible
then fire, and no fire so terrible as that which is taken from the Altar: Take
fire from the Altar and scatter it over the City, Ezekiel. 10.2. they thought the
fire of the Altar had been only for the expiation of sin, Calv. in loc.
but God makes them know, that it was for the desolation of their City.

But thou art not only cursed in what thou have, but also in what thou do.

All thine actions whether inward or outward, whether worldly or religious, are
all sinful and cursed; Like the Leper under the Law, thou taintest what ever
thou touchest, and make it unclean. Thy thoughts, the firstborn of thy soul,
and thy purest offspring are all vain; thine heart is a sink of sin, an ocean
of corruption; and therefore is ever sending forth, and bubbling up mire and
dirt; The imaginations and thoughts of thy heart are evil, only evil, and that
continually, Genesis 6.9. Thy words are wicked, the inward wheels of thy spirit
being disordered, the clock of thy tongue cannot strike true. The inward
dunghill reaketh, and sends forth its stench much this way, Romans 3.13, 14. Thy
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; The poison of Asps is under thy lips;
thy throat is an open Sepulcre, like a grave, when opened, sending forth noisome
and stinking exhalations.

Thy calling is not without its corruption; The ploughing of the wicked is sin.
Prove. 21.4. Thy very eating, drinking, sleeping, buying, selling, what ever
thou do is evil; though such actions are indifferent in themselves, (for all
indifferency lies in generals) yet, as done by thee from wicked principles,
and for wicked ends, they are stark naught: Nay, thy very religious actions are
sinful and unacceptable to God: The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. Thine incense stinks of the hand that offers it;
therefore the heart of God cannot away with it, Isa. 1.13, 14, 15. and 66.3.
The vessel of thine heart is not clean, and God will not taste of the liquor
which comes out of it; because thy person is not accepted, thy performances
are all rejected; Thou art in the flesh, and therefore can not please God,
Romans 8.8. Thy duties are done without heart or heat, and being dead carcases,
without spiritual life, must needs be unsavory.

Thus, man, art thou miserable, who art in a state of nature; thine
unregenerate heart being like some filthy fen (or as some write of the Lake of
Sodom) which continually sends up poisonous vapors. O, into what dangerous
Dilemmas does thine unregeneracy bring thee! If thou enjoyest the means of
Grace, by abusing them thou increasest thy misery, Hebr. 10.28. If thou
neglectest them, thou leavest thy self without remedy, and perishest
unavoidably, Prove. 29.18. Romans 10.15. If thou art in prosperity, the sunshine
thereof does but ripen thee for ruin, (as the Sun the grape) for the
wine press of the Lords wrath, Prove. 1.31. Psalm. 69.22. If thou art in
adversity, the fire thereof does but harden thine heart of clay, 2 Chronicles 28.22.
Thy misery (as Plutarch writes of drums to Tigers) makes thee mad; Plutarch.
lib. de uper sat.
thou frettest like one in a frenzy, 2 Kings 6.33. against the Lord; If thou
rejoycest, thy laughter is from the teeth outward; Is not thine heart many a
time heavy when thy looks are lively! Prove. 14.13. Does not conscience, when
thou like Belshazar, art carousing in thy cups, spread forth an handwriting
before thee, a black List of thy sins, and Gods wrath, which turns all thy
mirth into mourning? at best thy laughter is but like the crackling of thorns
under a pot, which makes a short blaze and busling noise, and then vanishes
into smoke and ashes, Dan. 5.5, 6. Isa. 57.21. If thou weepest, thy tears are
puddle-water, and so thy worldly sorrow here, but a pledge and earnest of thy
sufferings hereafter: If thou live long, thou heatest Hell the hotter; every
day treasuring up wrath upon thine head against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. If
thou die soon, thou make the more haste to Hell, taking a short cut to thy
long and doleful home.

If thou look upward, thou may see God frowning, and his wrath revealed
from Heaven against thee, Romans 1.18. thou may behold (as it were) the Heavens
and their Host ready every moment, to discharge Gods curse like a thunderbolt
upon thee; if thou look downward, thou may see hell gaping, (as the earth
did to Corah) and opening its mouth wide, to swallow thee up quick; if thou
look within thee, thou may see conscience, (which thou have abused (as the
Philistines did Samson) by putting out its eyes, causing it to grind at the
devils mill, and making sport with it) resolving when it shall recover its
strength, to be avenged on thee, and to make thee perish though it perish with
thee. If thou look without thee, there is no sight but what may call thee to
sighs and sobs. If thou look upon the creatures, are not they armed with
stings and murdering Instruments, on the behalf of their Creator, and always
ready to let fly at thee, who art a Rebel against his Majesty? If thou look
into Scriptures, there is a table richly spread (which they that are born of
God sit at) with Adoption, remission, peace, love, the purchase of Christ, the
comforts of the Spirit, which thou as the unbelieving Lord may see, but shall
not so much as taste of. Thou may see a Cherubim there with a flaming sword,
to guard that tree of life, and keep thee out of that pleasant Paradise. Nay,
thou may behold there the plagues and judgments, the pain and punishments
which the righteous God threatens against and will execute upon thee, and all
in thy condition; In a word thou may, as it were, find thy very self
mentioned in the forlorn hope for Hell, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21.6, 7.

While thou live, thou art fed like a beast by a common providence, and art a
mere stranger to all the saving promises. If at any time thou fingerest the
unsearchable riches in Christ, like the riches which Solomon speaks of, they
make themselves wings and fly away from thee; thou go every day without thy
guard, being turned naked into the wide world amongst legions of Devils, and
soul-damning lusts, to be rent and torn in pieces (like a silly Hare amongst a
pack of Hounds) and none to shelter thee, or call thee off: Many dangers attend
thee every day, many miseries every moment; when thou go out or come in,
lie down or risest up, still are those frightful hel-hounds watching for
thee, and waiting only for leave from God (O that his long-suffering might be
unto thee salvation!) to drag thy soul into the lake of fire. There is but an
hairs breadth (as it were) between thee and hell.

And O when thou die, man, what will thou then do? as soon as that Captain
death strikes the first stroke, whole Armies of woes will fall upon thee.

Reader, I have told thee somewhat of thy lamentable portion in this life;
though none can give thee a full Inventory of thy personal wretched estate. One
would think that every line under this head, should be as a dagger stabbing
thee at the heart, and that if there were nothing else but these small guns (I
call them so comparatively) of miseries in this world, the fear of them should
cause thee to fly, as the distressed dove to the clifts of the rock, the
wounds of a crucified Christ. But this is not all, the murdering-piece, the
great Ordnance is yet behind: I must hasten to write of thy misery in the other
world, which thou poor wretch (though now without fear, yet) art hastening to
feel.

As while thou live thou art a cursed sinner, so when thou die thou art a
damned creature. Here I confess I shall fail much more then before; for no pen
can describe, no pencil can delineate, though both did it in blood, to the
utmost of humane wit and Art, the thousand thousandth part of that pain which
thou shall there undergo. I have read of a Court, where it was made death to
mention death. Surely the word Death must needs sound dreadfully in thine ears,
because when it comes it will strike and that home; 'twill both kill thee and
damn thee, 'twill part thy body and soul for a time, and God and the soul to
eternity; 'twill send thy body to the grave, and thy soul to hell: Thy
condition now is lamentable and dangerous, but then, O then 'twill be
irrecoverable and desperate: Thy deaths-day will be thy doomsday, wherein the
guilty prisoner of the soul shall be fetched out of the noisome goal of the
body, and appear before the Judge of the whole earth, and from him receive a
sentence of eternal death, and then be hurried by frightful Devils to
execution. It is storied of Charles King of Sweden, a great enemy of the
Jesuits, that when he took any of their Colleges, he would put the younger
sort of them into his Mines, saying, That since they had wrought hard above
ground, he would now make trial how well they could work under ground: Truly
thus Satan will serve thee, when thou have wrought hard for him on earth, he
will pay thee thy wages in the dark vaults of hell, and make trial how well
thou can work there: Ah, who would serve such a Master! Look to it and
remember that thou wast warned of it: For if thou die naturally, before thou
live spiritually, thou die eternally.

Austins prayer was, Hack me, hew me, burn me HERE, but spare me HEREAFTER,
Spare me hereafter. Alas, what will thy condition be? Thou art in hell upon
earth, for thou live without God, whose gracious presence is heaven; and in
hell after death; thou shall never be spared here nor hereafter; now thou art a
cursed sinner, and then thou shall be a damned creature; thy best is past, and
thy worst to come, though thy best portion is a poor pittance, a few brutish
pleasures.

I come now to thy misery in the other world.
ETernal death will teach thee six lessons, though now neither mercy nor
misery, neither fair means nor foul means can prevail with thee to learn them.

First, It will teach thee the vanity of this world: Thou now see it written
with the finger of God in his word, in capital letters, Vanity of Vanities, all
is Vanity, Eccles. ^.3. yet thou will not believe it. As it is reported of a
Gentlewoman, that being told so, answered, It Is true, Solomon said so, but he
tried the world first, and so will I: Thou will try the world also before thou will trust the Word. But be confident, in the other world thou will find God
true to thy cost, when thine honor, which now is but the breath of thy neighbor
(a thin cabinet of air which every one has a key to but thy self) shall be
blown away: when thy wealth which has great eagles wings to fly from thee
here, shall not have so much as a small Sparrows wings to follow after thee
there; and when all thine earthly comforts, for which thou sellest thy soul and
thy Savior, shall (as the Pharisees did Judas) leave thee in the greatest
extremity, and bid thee look to thy self.

Then possibly thou will say as Cardinal Wolsey when he was out of favor with
his Prince, and left by him to the rage of his enemies, If I had served my God
as faithfully as I have served my King, he would not have served me thus: So
thou will think, If I had served my God as faithfully as I have served the
world, he would not have served me thus, to leave me in my greatest need to the
rage of scorching flames, to the fury of roaring lions, and tormenting devils;
if I had served my Savior, as faithfully as I have served my sins, I should
have received other manner of pay.

But for all thy faithful service to the world and thy flesh, they will forsake
thee: Thou may then cry to the things of this world, which have so much of
thy time, and heart, and trust, and which are indeed thy god, as those
Idolaters did to their Idolgod, O Baal hear us: O riches hear me, O friends
hear me, O pleasures hear me, O merry-meetings, hear me, O relations hear me!
yea, if thou should continue crying never so long, thou could not have the
least help: Were it possible for them to speak to thee when thou art in the
other world, it must be the same answer which the King of Israel gave a poor
widow in her distress; Help my Lord the King, says she: If the Lord help not,
I cannot help, says the King; such would their answer be to thee, If the Lord
help not, we cannot help. But friend, what will thy case be when they cannot
help, and God will not help? what a poor helpless creture will thou be for ever.

Secondly, It will teach thee the severity of the Lord. Now possibly thou
know what the pain of the teeth is, or what the fury of a fevor, or what the
violence of the gout, or what the wrack of the stone is, but not what the wrath
of the Lord is; though these things speak it somewhat, yet thou do not
believe it at all; but then feeling will be believing. Suppose every part of
thy body, were as much tortured as ever thou have felt any one part, and that
for ten thousand years, how heavy would it be to bear? This were but a
fleabiting to what thy body must undergo in hell. And yet the torments of thy
soul, will be the soul of thy torments; in the other world thou shall know,
what the worm that never dies, what the fire that never goes out, what
blackness of darkness, what to be tormented day and night, what weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, what destruction from the presence of the Lord,
what the wrath of the lamb mean. Mark 9.43, 44. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.

O it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 12.31.
His wrath is as the roaring of a lion. Amos, 3.4. as a terrible earthquake,
which makes the hills to quake, Psalm. 18.7, 8. as the rage of a bear robbed of
her whelps. Hos. 13.8. It is a devouring fire, the most terrible of all Gods
creatures. Tophet is prepared of old for unregenerate ones it is prepared; he
has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath
of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it. Isa. 3. ult. Fire which
is so irresistible, that thou art but straw and stubble before it; so
intolerable, that thou will moan and mourn, sigh and sob under it; so
unquenchable that when it is kindled in Gods anger, it shall burn to the lowest
hell. Deuteronomy. 32.6. This fire I say, will speak a little what that great fury is
which thou shall feel.

I have read that a frown of Queen Elizabeth killed Sir Christopher Hatton,
Cambden. Elizab.
the Lord Chancellor of England What then will the frowns of the King of
Nations do? If the rocks rent, the mountains melt, and the foundations of the
earth tremble under his wrath, what will thou do?

When God shall with one hand, strike thee according to his infinite anger, and
with his other hand support thee by his infinite power, to feel the stroke of
that fury, who can express or conceive what thou shall endure? When thou
considerest, that the wrath of God has thrown millions of Angels our of
heaven, drowned a whole world, destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and
brimstone, opened a flood-gate of matchless miseries, and let them in upon
Adams posterity, thou may conceive a little what it is: But when thou
considerest, that this cup of the Lords wrath, made Jesus Christ, (who in his
person was true God) when he did but sip of it, to be all over in a bloody
sweat in a cold winters night, and that in such abundance that the clods of
blood trickled down from his face to the ground, and when he drank it off, to
cry out in bitterness of soul, and anguish of spirit, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me! what apprehension will thou have of the indignation of the
Lord? Well, all this must fall on thee, if thou die in this estate: how
dare thou any longer to provoke the Lord to anger? art thou stronger then he?
1 Cor. 10.22. The Roman would not contest with his Sovereign that could command
Legions. Will thou by sin contend with that God, Matthew. 18.^, 18. and 21.13.
Jude 6, 7, 12. ver. Mark 9.44.
who can command fire to burn thee, chains to bind thee, brimstone to choke
thee, Lions to tear thee, Serpents to sting thee, scropions to scourge thee,
darkness to fright thee, Devils to wrack thee, Worms to gnaw thee, millions of
woes to seize on thee, and Hell to hold thee to feel all this for ever? Ah! who
knows the power of thine anger? according to thy fear, so is thy wrath, Psalm.
90.11.

3. It will teach thee the woeful nature and fruits of sin. Now thou can mock
at mischief, and sport with sin, as if it were nothing: but Good Lord! what
thoughts will thou have of thy most pleasureable wickedness, in the other
world, when the sensual delightful streams thereof shall be dried up with the
scorching heat of Gods wrath, and nothing left but the mud of horror and
vexation! Sin dogs thee up and down all the while thou live, as the Fowler
does the flying bird, (conscience will ever now and then give thee a gripe,
have a fling at thee whether thou will or no) but when the bird settles, then
the gun goes off; so when thou art settled in thine own place, then expect the
murdering piece. After thy death, the vermin of thy lusts will crawl in thee,
and feed upon thee.

Thou shall see all thy millions of sins like an Army set in order, and
marshald in rank and file before thine eyes, and every one with their envenomed
arrows, poisonous bullets, and wounding weapons set in array against thee.
First, Original sin, the Commander in chief, marches up in the front; after
that, thine innumerable actual transgressions, thy carnal-mindedness, unbelief,
pride, adultery, hypocrisy, drunkenness, swearing, lying, malice, hatred,
envy, unrighteousness, atheism, blasphemy, profanation of the Lord's Day,
undutifulness to parents, unthankfulness for mercies, unprofitableness under
the means of Grace, incorrigibleness under afflictions, thy secret, private,
public sins; thy omissions, commissions, thy personal, relative sins; all
these, and many which thou now never think of, shall let fly whole vollies
of shot upon thee.

Then thou will know that it is sin which has made thee so like to Satan; that
it is sin which has separated God and thy soul; that it is sin which has shut
heaven against thee; that it is sin which has brought thee into Hell; that
though sin be delightful in the act, yet it is dreadful, it is damnable in the
end; O 'twill be sin indeed there. Now thou walk lightly under the weight of
those grievous sins which make the whole Creation to groan, but then thou will
feel sin to be a burden too heavy for thee to bear.

A massy piece of timber floating upon the waters and swimming, may be drawn
this way or that way by one man; but when it is once grounded he cannot stir
it, 'twill be so heavy: So now thou art born up with the streams of worldly
comforts, thy sins are easy and light; but when thou come once to touch at
land, at thy long home, they will be so poisonous for their nature, and so
ponderous for their weight, that thou will cry out sadly, and despairingly,
(what Paul did sorrowfully, yet believingly) O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death! Romans 7.24.

The god of this world now blinds thine eyes, that thou neither see their
number, nor color; but in that long long night of blackness of darkness, all
those Ghosts will walk, and then they will be ghastly indeed. Those arrows of
sin which now thou shootest out of sight, will then fall down upon the head of
the Archer.

4. It will teach thee the worth of a Savior; when thou feel the want of a
Savior, thou shall know by woeful experience the worth of a Savior. Sickness
now probably teaches thee the worth of health and pain, the comfort of ease;
truly, those torturing pains, and wracking diseases, with which thou shall be
eternally affected, will teach thee, (though 'twill be a miserable learning)
the great price and worth of the Physician of souls.

Jesus Christ is more worth to a Saint in this world, then the whole world: If
all the rocks were rubies, and all the dust gold, or the whole Globe a shining
Chrysolite; yet he would count all but dross and dung in comparison of Christ;
nay, of one hours, or moments communion with him. But thou see here no such
virtue in his blood, no such value in his passion, no such beauty in his
person, no such excellency in his precepts: But when thou shall feel the wrath
of God, the curse of the Law, the torments of Hell, the poison and sting of
sin, then a Redeemer will be a Redeemer indeed.

Now the Son of the ever blessed God tendereth himself to thee with many
entreaties, goes after thee up and down, night and day knocking at the door of
thine heart (with all his graces, comforts, and fruits of his death) by the
ministry of his word, the motions of his spirit, multitudes of temporal and
spiritual mercies; but thou unworthy wretch, slightest both him and his
precious Attendants, and esteemest thy shop and stock, thy corn and carnal
comforts far before him: but when thou shall see, what a weight of glory, what
Rivers of pleasures others enjoy, through the Savior, and thy self feel more
torment and pain then thou can now possibly think or fear, for want of a
Savior; surely, thou will have other manner of thoughts of him then now thou
have.

'Twould be as much worth to thee as Heaven, now to know Jesus Christ and him
crucified; but 'twill be the Hell of thine Hell to know him there. O, how
deeply it will cut thine heart with horror to think that that Christ (whom thou
shall see at his Fathers right hand) waited on thee till his head was wet with
the dew, and his locks with the drops of the night, called frequently, and
fervently after thee, Turn, turn, O sinner, why will thou die and run thus upon
thy ruin! and yet thou were as deaf as an Adder, and would not hear the voice
of that sweet Charmer.

5. It will teach thee the preciousness of time: Eternity will learn thee the
value of time; when in that long evening and night which shall never have a
morning, thou shall remember and consider, that thou had a day of Grace: O,
Thou will think, Time was when I had the tenders and offers of all that love
and life, mercy and merits, heaven and happiness, of which yonder blessed souls
are possessors; when mercy came kneeling to me for acceptance, Grace came a
begging at the door of my heart for admittance, it followed me to bed and
board, abroad and at home, beseeching me for the love of God, for the sake of
my poor soul, to turn from lying vanities to the living God: how often did the
Minister with many entreaties invite, exhort, beseech me to pity my dying
soul, to leave my damning sins, 2 Cor. 6.2.
and heartily to embrace my loving Savior with all speed, assuring me, from
the word of the Eternal God, that then was the only accepted time, then was
the only day of Salvation! but I despised and deferred all, I thought I had
time enough before me; and woe, and alas, it is now too late; the sun of my life
is set, the gate of mercy is shut; I did not work in my day, and now the things
of my peace are for ever hid from mine eyes. Alas, ala^, poor creature, what
will thou do in such an hour?

Now thou want ways to spend thy time; were it not for the Alehouse, or
good fellowship, or some sinful or vain sports, thou could not tell what to
do with thy time: Now thou esteemest it as a mere drug that hangs upon thy
hand. How many a precious hour do thou throw away, though the revenues of the
whole world cannot purchase or call back a moment! but then thou will cry, as
that foolish Lady on her deathbed, who wantoned it away in her life time,
Plutarch. in Pelopid.
Call time again, Call time again, but all in vain. When thou art once entered
upon thine Eternity, there can be no recalling of Time.

I have read of Archias the Lacedemonian, that whilst he was carousing in his
cups, amongst his jovial companions, one delivers him a letter purposely to
acquaint him that some lay in wait to take away his life, and withal desired
him to read it presently, because it was matter of concernment; O, says he,
Cras seria, serious things to morrow, but he was slain that night: so whilst
thou art wallowing in the mire of sensual pleasures, a messenger from God is
sent purposely to tell thee that Satan and Sin lie in ambushment to murder thy
soul, and withal entreats thee to mind it speedily, that thou might
prevent it; but thou cryest (at least in thy heart and practice) Serious things
to morrow, Repentance, Faith and Holiness hereafter; but before that hereafter
come, thou art in Hell; and then present time will be precious, when its past.

Thou will then remember how exceeding careful thou wast to plough and sow thy
ground in its season, and how mad and foolish to put off the ploughing up the
fallow ground of thy heart, and sowing to the Spirit, till the season of Grace
was past.

6. It will teach thee the knowledge of Eternity, though indeed this Lesson
will be ever learning by thee, and never learned: Thou shall suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire, Jude v. 7. and be tormented day and night for ever
and ever, Rev. 14.10.

Thou would not burn an whole year, no not one day in one of thy Kitchen
fires for a Kingdom. But O then thou shall be in a ten thousand times hotter
fire, and for ever. Ah! Who can dwell in everlasting burnings! who can endure
unquenchable flame! Isa. 33.14.

It is written of the Lord Chancellor Egerton, that going through Westminster
Hall in Term time he saw written upon the wall (by one that was fearful he
should be oppressed by a potent Adversary) Tanquam non reversurus, as though he
should never return more: Truly, when thou art once cast into that prison, thou
shall never come out; As the cloud is consumed and washed away; so he that
goes down into Hell returns no more, Job 7.9. The worm there dies not, and
the fire there never goes out; there is blackness of darkness for ever: The
smoke of thy torments will ascend for ever and ever, Matthew. 18.10. Jude 7. Rev.
14.10, 11. O, Friend, did thou but know what this eternity of torment is,
thou would howl and roar, and never rest day nor night whilst thou art
unconverted. It is an age of ever living in death and pangs, and yet never
expiring, a circle of sorrows which knows no end, an extremity of pain which
shall have no period: when thou have layn under those unconceiveable torments
as many millions of ages as there are creatures great and small in Heaven,
Earth, and the vast Ocean, thou shall not be nearer coming out, then the first
^oment thou did go in. Now thou think Prayers are long, Sermons are long,
and Sabbaths are long, and duties are long; But how long will thou think
Eternity to be? Now thou say, The Preacher is long-winded; but, ah! how
long-winded will Hell be when it shall hold thee ever, ever, ever to feel the
stroke of infinite power and anger.

Thus, Reader, while thou live, thou art a cursed creature, and when thou
die, a damned sinner: In life thou art cursed in all thou have, in all thou
do; after death thou shall know the vanity of the world, the anger of the
Lord, the woeful nature and effects of sin, the worth of a Savior, the
preciousness of time, and what a boundless bottomless Ocean Eternity is.
Consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, when there is
none to deliver you, Psalm. 50.22.

But possibly, thou (Reader, though unregenerate) do not feel this curse, nor
fear this wrath; therefore thou think all is false: But answer me this
question, Does not the word of God speak more of thy misery, both in this and
the other world, then I have or can speak? And can thou imagine, that thine
unbelief shall make God a liar? I tell thee, the same Scripture of truth, which
speaks of thy misery, speaks of thy stupidity, 1 These. 5.3, 4. That thou will even mock and scoff when thou art told of it, 2 Pet. 3.2. truly, thy
sottish senslesness is the chain by which Hells Jailer holds thee so fast. The
sick Patient that feels his pain, is in an hopeful way of recovery, when he
that is dangerously sick and senseless, is usually given over for dead.

It is observed of those that are taken with the frenzy (the disease being got
into the cockloft of reason) that the more the disease does affect them, Arist.
so much the more secure they are, careless of any thing, presumptuous in all
things, fearful of nothing, as having lost the use of common sense: So is it
with thee; the more sinful, the less sensible; the more the dust of sin flies
up into thine eyes, the more blind thou art now; but when death comes, 'twill
clear up thy sight. Pliny says of the mole, Oculos incipit operire moriendo,
quos clausos habuit vivendo.
that though she be blind all the time of her life, yet when she comes to
die, she opens her eyes. Truly, though now thou shuttest thine eyes, and art
blind in these things, yet within a few days thou shall come to die, and then
thine eyes will be opened, and thou will see all these things, and very much
more as clearly as the Sun at noonday.

Therefore, Friend, what do thou say now to this first subject of
consideration, The misery which thou lie under, and art liable to whilst
thou art unregenerate! Would any man that were not mad continue quiet in such
an estate one moment! Ah, who would live one hour under such a torrid Zone, for
a world! Do thou believe, that as they whom God blesses are blessed indeed:
so they whom he curses are cursed indeed? When Christ cursed the fig tree, how
speedy and effectual was it! the Disciples say, How soon is the fig tree
withered away! Matthew. 21.19, 20. So will it be to thee, as certain, though not
so sudden; like a moth, 'twill devour thee surely, yet (it may be) secretly,
that thou shall take no notice of it; Let conscience speak, Art thou contented
to be night and day, where ever thou go, and whatever thou do, under Gods
curse in this world? if not, then acquaint thy self NOW with God, and be at
peace; and good (a blessing instead of a curse) shall come to thee, Job 22.21.
But if thou can bear Gods curse so patiently here, not sinking under it,
being kept above water with the skin-deep bladers of common blessings; yet what
will thou do hereafter, when all these shall be parted from thee? Can thou so
quietly in the other world hear that voice, and feel the execution of that
verse, Go thou cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels for ever! Matthew. 25.41. If thou can not, Agree with thy Adversary
quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the Adversary
deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou
be cast into Prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out
thence, till thou have paid the nttermost farthing, Matthew. 5.25, 26.

The second subject of Consideration, The felicity of the Regenerate.
SEcondly, Consider the unspeakable felicity which thou mighst enjoy, if thou
were one regenerated. Thy happiness would be far greater then my tongue can
declare, or thine heart desire. Blessedness is so full a word, that it
comprehends all the good which the rational creature can wish; and truly thou
should have it in its full weight. As before thou wast above all expressions
Cursed, so now thou should be beyond all comparison Blessed. Thy gleanings
should be better then the most prosperous worldlings Vintage, the worst estate
that thou should ever be in, would be far more leligible then the best estate
of the greatest Emperor on earth that were unregenerate.

Every blessing written in the book of God would be thy birthright if thou were
born of God; thou should be blessed with the blessings of the throne and of
the footstool, with all things that belong to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3.
No evil should come to thee, there shall no evil happen to the just, Prove.
12.21. No good should be kept from thee, The Lord shall give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11.
If earth can make thee blessed, thou should be blessed; Blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the earth, Matthew. 5.5. If heaven can make thee blessed,
thou should be blessed; Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.3. If all things could make thee blessed, thou
should be blessed; Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life,
or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. two last verses.

Reader, I shall do my utmost so to set forth the felicity of the regenerate
(which no pen can fully) that thou may admire it; How goodly are thy tents,
O. Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel! Numb. 24.5. and not only, as Balaam,
desire their deaths, Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my latter
end be like his, Numb. 23, 10. but also endeavor to live their lives, and to
have thy conversation like theirs.

While thou continuest in this world thou should be a blessed soul; and when
thou entrest into the other world thou should be a glorions Saint.

In this world thou should be a blessed soul in every condition into which
thou could come, in every relation in which thou do stand, at all times,
and in all places whatsoever.

All the Providence of God should be profitable to thee.

If Gods hand were enlarged in mercy, thy heart should be enlarged in duty: If
God should prosper thee in temporals, the streams of his bounty should lead
thee (as the water course, either upward to the spring, or downward to the
ocean) to the source and fountain of all thy happiness. Thy heart would still
be in heaven, where thy best things were, even then when thy body were busied
among earthly good things, 1 Cor. 7, 29, 30, Phil. 3.19.

Some observe of the seed called Henbane, that it kills all birds save
sparrows, and to them it is nourishing food; and they give this reason, because
their veins are so narrow, that the fumes of the seed cannot pass through
them, to their hearts: truly thus twould be with thee, though thou sands of
others are poisond with their worldly portions, because the fumes thereof
penetrate into their vitals; but if riches increase, thou should not set
thine heart upon them, nay thou should get nourishment from them. As
Jehosaphat, the more honor and wealth thou had, the more thy heart would be
lifted up in the ways of God. 2 Chro. 17.5, 6.

If thine estate were but little, yet twould be perfumed with love, and that
lump of sugar in thy cup, would make the liquor sweet, be it never so small. As
the waters which flow from the hills of some of the Islands of Molacca, taste of
the Cinnamon and Cloves which grow there, so should thy gift though it were but
water, taste of the good will and special grace of the giver. Thy little with
the fear of the Lord, would be better then the riches of many wicked men, Psalm.
37 15. As a little ring with a very costly Diamond in it, is far more worth
then many great ones without it; so thy estate though it were but a penny,
should be joined with the precious jewel of that love which is better then
life, and enjoyed by special promise, and thereby be infinitely more worth then
the thousands and millions of others, bestowed merely from common bounty, and
enjoyed only by a general providence.

If the black frost of adversity overtake thee, thou should as Conies thrive
the better; thy soul being hail, thou would become thereby the more healthy.
By affliction thou should be partaker of Gods holiness. Heb. 12.10.

The waters of affliction should wash out the diri of thy corruption, and the
more they increased they would raise thee, (as the flood the Arc) higher above
the earth, and mount thee nearer to heaven. Torches burn the better for
beating, Spices smell the sweeter for pounding, Vines bear the more for
bleeding; and the more thy soul were kept down by those weights (like the
Palm Tree) the more thou should grow. That scouring and rubbing which
fretteth others, should make thee shine the brighter, Psalm. 94.12. Divine
corrections should make thee learn thy sacred lessons.

It is said of the Lacedaemonians, that when all other people were undone by
war, they only grew rich; Truly thus when ungodly ones are the worse for
outward miseryes, and wants, like Ahaz in their distress, they sin more against
the Lord; thou should thrive the better, grow the richer in grace and good
works; The diminution of thy temporal, should be an addition to thy spiritual
estate. Job 36.9, 10. As spring water smoaketh, when other waters are dried up,
because that is living, and these are dead; nay it is observed, waters arising
from deep springs, are hotter in winter then in summer, the outward cold
keeping in and doul ^^g the inward heat. So the waters of thy graces should not
only continue (having a living principle) when the Sun of calamity scorcheth
and dries up the dead ponds of unregenerate professors, Mat. 13.21. but also
increase in spiritual heat, Job 17.8, 9. Philip. 1.14.

If the Devil assaulted thee with temptations, they should never be for thy
perdition but probation, Rev. 2.10. The Captain of thy Salvation would so
strengthen thy soul with the Shield of Faith, and Sword of the Spirit, that
thou should not only defend thy soul from all deadly wounds, but offend
thine Enemy, and be more then a Conqueror over Principalities and Powers
through him that loves thee. It would possibly be grievous and terrible to
thee to be tempted; but if God did not see it needful, he would not suffer it;
nay, if he could not make it useful, he would not send it: by those thorns of
the flesh he would prick the vein, and let out the rank blood of thy spirit.
It is said of Telephus, that he had his impostume opened by the dart of an
Enemy which intended his hurt. Truly, so God would make to thee the fiery darts
of the Devil, though they were intentionally mortal, to be eventually
medicinal, 1 John 5.18. The evil one should not touch thee, that is, with a
mortal or deadly touch. As a sound tree shaken with the wind, thou should
not fall, but root thy self the ^^^ter; thou should like Sampson fetch meat
out of the Eater, and out of the Strong sweetness; thou should get honey even
out of this roaring Lion; thy Regeneration, like Pollium, would be a special
preservative against the poison of that croocked Serpent.

Nay, when thou should fall into the evil of sin, even that should turn to
thy good. God (no thanks to thee) like the skilful Apothecary, would make
wholesome treacle of such poisonus drugs. If thy corruption should at any time
get the mastery, and break out in thy life, thou should be so well purged by
the Physician of souls, with the bitter Aloes of Repentance, that as those who
have had ill humors of their bodies, getting head, and breaking out in the
smallpox, and do well, thou should be the healthier in thy soul while thou
live; As a burnt child, thou should ever dread that fire: thy broken hone
being once well set, would be stronger then before; Compare 2 Samuel 11.4. and
15. with 1 C^ron. 11.18, 19. Mark 14.29. with John 21.15, 16, 17.
thou should after thy falls, walk more dependingly on Christ, more
compassionately toward others, and more watchfully over thine own heart.

What ever thy condition were, it should tend to thine eternal consolation:
Every wind that blew, whether the nipping Northwinde of adversity, or the
cherishing Southwinde of prosperity, should neither of them wrong thee; for
Christ would give them a charge concerning thee (as David his Captains
concerning Absalom) Do this young Convert no harm, no discourtesie, but deal
gently with him for my sake: yea, they should both blow a blessing to thy soul:
though the providence of God might be sometimes painful to thine outward, yet
they should be always profitable to thine inward man. Infinite love would send
all, infinite wisdom would temper all, and infinite power would dispose all for
thy benefit: the rod would ever be in the hand of a loving Father, and
therefore never used to ruin or harm thee, but ever to reform and heal thee.

As in the revolution of the Heavens, every Planet moves in its proper orb;
their motions are various, nay opposite; yet by the wheeling round of the
primum mobile, they are all brought about to one determinate point: And as the
wheels of a watch, though they move contrary ways, yet all serve to carry on
the end of the workman, to tell us the time of the day: So though the
providence and dealings of God be never so cross seemingly, yet they should
all tend to thine advantage really and finally, and to carry on Gods design,
which is thy spiritual and eternal felicity.

In a word, if afflictions did wait upon thee, if temptations watch against
thee, if mercies did flow in, or by iniquity thou did fall down, whether the
days of thy pilgrimage were cloudy or clear, shining or showring, whatever
weather thou travellest in toward thy Father House, All things should work
together for thy good, if thou did once love God, and were called according
to his purpose, Romans 8.28.

As all Gods providence should be profitable to thee, so also in all thy
performances thou should be acceptable to God.

When thou should approach the Lord of Glory, he would give thee a meeting in
the means of Grace; he would bid thee welcome into his presence, and warm thine
heart with his spiritual influences; thou might hear him speaking to the
solace and wonder of thy soul; O my Dove, show me thy face, let me hear thy
voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely, Cant. 2.14.

The Spirit of God would assist thee in all thy performances, enabling thee to
offer up to God what came first from God; and O how exceedingly would the
Father be taken with, and delight in his own child! The fruits of his Spirit
would be pleasant fruits indeed, Romans 8.26. Cant. 4. ult. Thou should in
every sacrifice give God thine heart, which he could not but take kindly at thy
hands; Thy prayer would be his delight, Sozomen said of Apollonius, (...) at he
^ever as ^ed that thing of God which was denied.
Prove. 15.8. Thy sweet breath would abundantly please him; no music could be
so melodious to thee, as thy prayers to him; thou should never ask any thing,
but he would grant it, either in specie or pondere, in money or money-worth:
The King of Heaven is not he that could do any thing against thee, as that
earthly King said, Jer. 38.5. Thy prayer should come before him like incense,
and the lifting up of thine hands as morning and evening sacrifices, which his
soul would smell a sweet savor in: His eyes would be always open upon thy
person with acceptance; and therefore his ears would be open to thy prayers
with audience, Genesis 4.4.

Thou like Esther should be arrayed in thy best raiment, the robes of thy
Saviors righteousness, and so appearing in the presence of the King, should
find such favor in his eyes, that thy Petition should be granted, and thy
request performed, though it were to the half, to the whole of his Kingdom.

Thy duties should be performed with suitable graces: At a Sacrament, or in a
Prayer thou should draw nigh to him by faith, Hebr. 10.22. Know thy distance
from him by godly fear, Hebr. 12.28. be made one with him by love, John 17.23.
which would enlarge thy heart in desires after him, and ravish thy soul with
delight in him, Psalm. 73.25. Job 22.26. and thou should walk with him
throughout the duty, with one foot of hope, and the other of humility.

Thus graciously should thou look up to him, and he would graciously look
down upon thee: little do thou think what powerful loadstones these Graces
would be to draw forth his love. Observe and admire; Thou have Taken away my
heart or behearted me. Hebr.
ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished mine heart with
one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck; How fair is thy love, my sister,
my spouse! how much better is thy love then wine, and the smell of thine
oinments then all spices, Cantic. 4.9, 10, 11. to the end.

Besides all thy performances would be perfumed by the Mediator: There would
indeed still be imperfection in thy graces (which are poured by the Spirit into
thy soul, as pure liquor into a foul vessel: Spring waters as they pass through
the veins of the earth will taste of the minerals which they there salute; so
would thy gracious actions have their faults and defects, because thou would
have still an unregenerate part; therefore duties, as they came from thee, would
not have a good savor) but Christ the Angel would stand at the Altar with
sweet incense, intercepting thy sacrifices and prayers in their passage to
heaven, purge away the iniquities of thy holy things with his own blood,
perfume thy duties with his infinite merits, and so present them to his Father
in his own name without the least defilement; and then, O then, how pleasing
and acceptable must they needs be to him! Revel. 8.3, 4.

As when a Servant is with a Master upon liking, he does his business so coldly
and carelessly, and is so indifferent about it, that his Master takes little
notice either of him or his work, and all that time is lost: But when he is
once bound, and the Indentures sealed, and his father engaged for his
faithfulness, the Apprentice falls to his work with another manner of spirit,
and the Master now esteems it as service, carries himself toward him as a
Master, resolves to teach him his trade, and his time every day goes on. So
whilst a man is unregenerate, he serves God so coldly, hypocritically and
carnally, that God accepts it not, nay loathes it; his performances they are as
the cutting off of a dogs neck, or the offering up of swines flesh, it is lost
service; but when In dentures are sealed in Regeneration, that the man is bound
to God by an hearty dedication of himself to his service, and Christ has given
a considerable sum with him, and undertaken for his faithfulness, then the foul
falls to Gods business with hand and heart, and God esteems it as service, and
resolves to teach him the trade of pleasing God on earth, that he may be fit to
do it in heaven.

All the Ordinances of God should be for thy good; If thou were but born again
and alive spiritually, thou should find the Word, Prayer, Singing,
Sacraments, Sabbaths, communion of Saints, to be both refreshing and nourishing
food to thy soul, though now thou can relish them no more then the white of
an egg, and receive no more good from them then from a dry chip; then they
would be as pipes to convey the water of life, to cheer and satisfy thy
thirsty spirit. If thou were a child weak in grace, Ordinances would be milk to
thee; if a strong man, they would be strong meat; though thy spiritual strength
were never so small, thou should find they would increase it. The father of
eternity would take care so to nurse and feed thee that thou should thrive, 1
Pet. 2.2.

As the head does by the organs of sinews or nerves convey the animal spirits
into the whole body, and with them both sense and motion: so thy head Christ
Jesus, would by those organs of Ordinances, convey spiritual life, sense and
motion to thee his member.

Thou might hear the Word with much spiritual hunger, and that being thy
sauce would make thee both fall to and relish thy food. When thou should hear
Christ speaking to thee, and opening the Scriptures, thine heart would burn
within thee, and as metal melted be ready for any mould which God would cast
thee into.

The Precepts of the word would be a light to thy feet, and a lanthorn to thy
paths, thou would love them for their purity, find them to be exceeding
pleasant, and turn thy feet into those ways of peace: Thine heart would in part
answer Gods holy Law, as the Counterpain the original Deed; and thou should
so behold the face of the Lord in the glass of his Word, that thou should be
changed into his image from glory to glory by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor.
3.18.

The threatenings of the word, though they portend and speak dreadful thing (as
Nebuchadnezzars dream) yet those fearful and faithful dreams would belong to
thine enemies, and the interpretation of them to them that hate thee. Those
doleful threatenings of Gods wrath, the delivering up of souls to go on in sin,
and the eternal torments of Hell, like drones would buz about thine ears to
keep thee wakeful, but could not sting thee to make thee woeful; were thou but
alive in Christ, thou should be dead to the Law and all its curses, Romans 7.4.

The promises would be precious also to thee, if thou were converted; thou
would have the mouth of Faith, with which thou should suck much warm
heart-cheering milk from those breasts of consolation, Isa. 66.11. To thee the
Promises would be encouragements to service; the threatenings, affrightments
from sin; the precepts, directions to sanctity; if thy heart were sorrowful,
the promises would enliven it; if secure, the threatenings would awaken it; if
full of doubts, the precepts would counsel and advise it. Of the Promises more
in the next Head.

At a Sacrament Christ would sweetly feast thy soul, bring thee into his
Banqueting house, and cause his Banner over thee to be love: when others feed
only upon Elements, thou should feed on the Sacrament, and find his flesh
to be meat indeed, and his blood to be drink indeed: when others stood at the
door, and are put off with some poor scraps (as much as they came for) thou
should be called in, sit at his own table, feasted with the fat things of his
house, drink of the rivers of his own pleasures, continue under his shadow with
great delight, and know his fruit sweet unto thy taste: when thou saw with
the eye of faith the board spread, and richly furnished with variety of
dainties, all the Cordials and sweetmeats of the Gospel; among the rest, with
that love which is better then wine, thou should hear a voice from the Spirit
within thee, Eat, O Friend, drink abundantly, O Beloved; which, how ravishing
it would be to thine ears, and how refreshing to thine heart, no tongue can
tell. O Reader, had thou ever found at a Sacrament what it is to sup with
Christ, and Christ with thee, thou would scorn the life of an Emperor for the
life of a new Creature.

In Prayer, God and thy soul would sweetly converse together. Thy petitions
would ascend up to him, and his righthand-kindnesses would descend on thee. In
this duty thou would call, turning his precepts into prayers, and he would
answer by turning his promises into performances. Many many a blessing should
thou obtain kneeling. This vessel would never return (though sometimes it might
seem to tarry long) but richly laden. The crop of Gods answer, would be far
greater then the seed of thy prayer, out of which it grew. The Prodigal desired
but the liberty of a servant, but the Father bestowed on him the dignity of a
son; the King asked life, and thou gave it him, yea a length of days for ever
and ever, his glory is great in thy Salvation, honor and majesty, have thou
put upon him. Ps. 21.4, 5. As a merchant in a morning, will get Five hundred or
a Thousand pound by a bargain, truly thou should by a duty in a morning, or
evening, get thousands, nay millions at a clap, increase of grace, a supply of
thy spiritual wants, the subduing of thy secret wickedness, peace of
conscience, communion with God, joy in the spirit, which are more worth then
the whole earth.

In brief, Christ would be thy Shepherd, feed thee in green pastures, lead thee
by the still waters, and take care that thou be fat and flourishing. As the
root sends up its sap through the bark to all its living branches, whereby
they continue living, and bring forth fruit; so if thou were but regenerated
and a living branch, thou should derive the sap of grace through ordinances
from Christ thy root, whereby thou should persevere in spiritual life, and
glorify God by bringing forth much fruit.

All the promises of God should be thy portion.

Reader, thou art not able to conceive the unsearchable riches, which are laid
up in the promises. Well may the Apostle call them exceeding great and precious
promises. 2 Pet. 1.4. The promises are the great Charter, containing all the
privileges which were purchased by Christ; like an apothecaries. shop, they
are full of various salves for every sore, of precious remedies for every
malady, of choice cordials to enliven thee with, spiritual consolation in the
saddest condition. One promise is of unspeakable worth. As every precious
stone, so every individual promise has its virtue and value. It is the saying
of one, Mallemus carere sale, coe^o, etc Selveccer. in Paedag. Christian.
We had better want meat, drink, air, light, all the elements; then that one
sweet sentence of our Savior, Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest. Mat. 11.28. Mr. Buroughs says that
there is more of God in that one verse, John 3.16. then in heaven and earth
beside, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. And
Mr. Baxter, I remember, In his Everlasting ^est.
has an expression to this purpose, That he would not for all the world, that
that verse John 17.24. had been left out of the bible, Father, I will also that
they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory.

One promise has revived the saints, when they have been almost dead with
sorrow, and held their heads up, that they have not sunk in deep waters. Melib.
Adamus in vit.
Beza was refreshed by that, John 10.27, 28, 29. Mr. Bilney that blessed
Martyr, by that 1 Timothy 1.15. Father Latimer at the stake by that 1 Cor. 10.13.
Mr. Robert Bolten, that famous preacher and eminent saint, was comforted under
a sad affliction by that Isa. 26.3. Now if one promise be so precious, how
happy should thou be (were thou but regenerated) to have an interest in all
the promises! That whole book should be thine, wherein every leaf drops myrrh
and mercy, love, and life: Thou might walk in the garden, where those choice
flowers, pleasant fruits, and sweet spices grow, and abundantly delight thy
soul with their fragrant smell, and luscious taste, The promise is to you, and
to your children, and to then that are a far off, and to as many as the Lord
our God shall call. Acts 2.39. Observe the silver thread upon which all the
jewels of the promises hang, To as many as the Lord our God shall call. When
thou art called and born of him, all the promises would be thy portion As all
the rivers meet in the Ocean, so all the promises meet in regeneration. I will
name two or three promises, that thou may see how well twould be with thee,
were thou once in Christ. All thy sins should be pardoned, though they were
never so great, and grievous, yet the blood of Jesus Christ would cleanse thee
from them. Did thou but know, what a great price was laid down to procure a
pardon, Heb. 9.22, 14. what dreadful punishments sinners undergo in hell, for
want of pardon, Jude 7. what sorrows and sighs, broken bones, and waterd
couches the Saints suffer, when they are but doubtful of their pardon. Psa.
38.1, 2, 3, 4. thou would say, O blessed is the man whose iniquity is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered; blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not
sin. Psalm. 32.1, 2. Now thou should obtain this blessedness, God would esteem
thee perfectly righteous. Solinus reports of a river in Boetia, which makes
black sheep (if washed therein) white; truly were thou never so black a sinner,
yet thou should be made white by the blood of the lamb, Rev. 7.14.

As all thy sins should be remitted, so thy person should be adopted. Thou
should of a child of wrath, become the child of God. Joh. 1.12. David
reckoned it a great honor to be the Son in Law of King Saul; Seems it (says
he to Saul's servant) A light thing to you, to be a Kings son in Law, seeing
that I am vile and lightly esteemed! 1 Samuel 18.23. O what is it then to be the
Son of God, of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords! Behold, what manner of
love has the father loved us with that we should be called his children! 1
John 3.1. The greatest admiration is too little for such infinite
condescension; yet this privilege should be thine. The boundless God, who has
millions of glorious Angels for his servants, would own, feed, cloth, protect,
maintain and portion thee as his son.

Thou should be sure to persevere in grace. Being once in Christ, thou
should be ever in Christ; though the wind should blow and the waves beat
against thee, yet thou should not fall, being built upon the true rock; The
very gates of Hell should not prevail against thee: Though thou mighst fall
foully, yet thou should never fall finally, because the seed of God would
remain within thee, 1 John 3.9. Phil. 1.6. 1 These. 5.23, 24. Thy life would be
hid in Christ, as the sap in the root, and therefore though thou might have
thine Autumn, yet thou should spring again. Thy stock of grace would not be
in thine own, but in Christ's hands, and for this cause thou could not
possibly prove (as Adam) a bankrupt. Though the flame of a zealous profession
might be abated, yet there would be fire on the hearth under the ashes; true
grace in thine heart; the love of God to thy soul would be everlasting love,
Jer. 33.3. The kindness of thy Redeemer to thee everlasting kindness, Isa.
54.8. The Spirit of Grace would abide in thee for ever, Joh. 14.16. The
Covenant into which thou should enter with God, would be an everlasting
Covenant, Hebr. 13.20. And in that very Covenant thy Savior would undertake
for thee, that thou should never depart away from him, but abide in him for
ever, Jer 31.33.34. and 32.40. Christ himself would be ever in thee; and Christ
(says one) may as soon die in Heaven at his Fathers right hand, as in the
heart of a Believer.

To sum up all the promises in one; God would be thy God: And how much wealth
is in this golden mine, would nonplus the tongues of all the men in the world
to express, and the understandings of all the Angels in Heaven to conceive.
This is the great New Covenant Promise, Hebr. 8.8, 9, 10. I will be to them a
God, and they shall be to me a people. The Author of all Promises is the matter
of this Promise: Surely, it is the Main, the Ocean, a large Promise indeed, when
it contains him whom the heavens and Heaven of heavens can never contain. The
Book of Promises is as a glorious Crown, but this is the most sparkling Diamond
in it.

Friend, do thou consider what it is to have God for thy God? All that God is
would be thine; the Father thine, to adopt thee for his own Son; the Son thine,
to purisie and present thee acceptable to the Father; the Spirit thine, to
dwell in thee as a witness, seal, and earnest of thine everlasting inheritance.
All that is in God should be thine; all his attributes and perfections should
be laid out for thy profit: His wisdom would be thine to direct thee, his power
thine to protect thee, his grace thine to pardon thee, his mercy thine to pity
thee, his goodness thine to comfort thee, and his glory thine to crown thee.
Thou can not imagine what a full good this one God is in himself, and would
be to thee. He would be to thee health in sickness, strength in weakness, light
in darkness, joy in sadness, riches in povery, honor in ignominy, freedom in
slavery, ease in pain, safety in dangers, and life in death. This one God would
supply all thy need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus, Phil.
4.19.

God would subdue thy corruptions, enable thee to overcome temptations, to be a
gainer by afflictions, to hold out under desertions, to improve providence, to
be the better for ordinances, to be filled with holiness, and fitted for
happiness: He would do more for thee then thou could ask or think, Ephesians.
3.20. Well might the Psalmist wonder at the riches of his portion, who had a
propriety in God. Psalm. 144. ult. Happy is the people that is in such a case;
YEA, HAPPY IS THE PEOPLE WHOSE GOD IS THE LORD. Ainsworth reads those words by
way of admiration; O happy is the people whose God is the Lord! As if the
Psalmist, Beatus ergo populus cujus Iehova est Deus. Tremel.
considering what he had said before, that it was an happiness to enjoy
children, cattle, and outward comforts, did from those streams ascend to the
fountain, and gathered by rational arguing; If they are happy that have their
sons growing as plants, and their daughters as polished stones, their barns
swelling, and their flocks thriving; O how happy are they whose God is the
Lord! If they are so blessed who have the Stars, how happy are they that have
the Sun? For in the presence of this Sun all those Stars must vanish and
disappear. Praedic^ populum beatum o^ haec bona^ Deo conti g^rint sed add^t mox
correcti^nem, ne q^i^ in h^s rebus terrenis fubsistat, and summan beatitudi n^^
pon^^ Mollerus in loc.
Mollerus takes the words by way of correction, Yea rather, Blessed is the
people whose God is the Lord. As if David had recalled himself, and with his
pen given a dash to all that he had said: Did I say that they were happy which
abounded with relations, possessions, and outward comforts? I recall my self,
Alas, they are not happy, in comparison of their happiness who have the Lord
for their God: yea rather hapyy is the people whose God is the Lord. By this
latter he cuts off the neck of his former expression. Some take the words
conjunctively, as if David had proclaimed them happy indeed, for whom the Lord
as their God does so liberally provide. The children must needs be happy that
have a Father that takes such care of them, and bestows so many outward good
things on them. Austin takes the words dis-junctively, as if the former part of
the verse, Happy is the people that is in such a case, were the voice of the
world; and the latter part of it, Yea, happy is the people whose God is the
Lord, were the choice of the Saints. And that Father explains himself to this
purpose. O vain and foolish speakers, O strange children: They have called the
people happy that are in such a case. -- But what say thou David? What
say thou O Body of Christ? What say ye O Members of Christ? What say ye O
Children of God? Because those vain Speakers, and strange Children have called
them happy that are in such a case: What say ye? And then he answers for
them, as the voice of all: O vaniloqu^, O silii alieni Beatum dixerunt populum
eui haec sunt -- Quid tu David? Quid tu cor^us Christi? Qu^ vos membra Christi?
Quid vos non filii alieni, sed Dei, Quoniam vaniloqui fili alieni, Beatum
dixerunt populu^^, Cui haec sunt. Vos ^^id dicitis? Beatus populus cujus
Dominus deus ipsius. Aug. in Psalm. 143. Tom. 8.
Happy is the people whose God is the Lord.

Thus happy, Reader, should thou be, if thou were once regenerated. That God
in comparison of whom the whole Creation is as nothing, would be thy God. O how
eminently, how infinitely, would thou be blessed, in having so rich, so vast,
so boundless a good for thy God.

Thou should be blessed in thy body, that should be the temple of the Holy
Ghost, and part of the mystical body of the Son of God, and so nearly and
closely united to him, that neither death, grave, nor dust, should ever be able
to separate it from him, 1 Cor. 6.19. 1 These. 4.14, 16.

Thou should be blessed in thy soul, that should be ever fat and flourishing,
Psalm. 92.13, 14. like a watered Garden abounding in fruit; the smell of thy
soul would be as the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed.

Thou should be blessed in thy estate; that blessing which can turn a Prison
into a Palace, a Cottage into a Court, poverty into plenty, would be thy
portion; thou should be sure of necessaries, of enough to bear thy charges
till thou come to thy Fathers house, Psalm. 37.25, 26. and 34.11. Having
faith, thou should not fear a famine, but would be assured that he who feeds
the birds of the air, fodders the beasts of the fields, fills the bellies of
his Enemies with hidden treasures, would never forget his friends, or starve
his children: The Lord would be thy Shepherd, and therefore thou could not
want, Psalm. 23.1. As they that are well lined within, and have much good blood
and spirits can endure to go in cold weather with less clothes then others: So
thou being inwardly strengthened with the grace and love of God, should be
able to walk in the world comfortably with a less estate then others; If thou
should be thine own carver, thou would cut thy fingers.

If thy means were small, thy stomach should not be great. As the sheep can
live upon bare Commons, and thrive there where the fat Ox would be starved, so
in the midst of thy straights, thy contentedness would give thee a sufficiency:
when others who are strangers to grace in the midst of their sufficiency are in
straights, Job 20.22. True piety has true plenty, and is never without a
well-contenting sufficiency, for twill give him who has nothing the possession
of all things, 1 Timothy 6.6. Hab. 3.16.17. 2 Cor. 6.11. Thy dinner of herbs, with
the love and favor of God, would be better then a stalled Ox with his anger
and frowns. Prove. 15.15.16.

Thou should be blessed in thy children. The just man walks in his
integrity, and his children are blessed after him. Prove. 20.7. John's Children
fared the better for their fathers godlyness, thoug it were but counterfeit, 2
Kings 10.30. Surely then, The generation of the upright shall be blessed. Psalm.
112.2. When thou did leave them. God would find them, and require thy
children (for thy love to him.) much more faithfully then David did
Mephibosheth for Jonathans good will. Genesis 17.8. Act. 2.39.

Thy whole house would be the happier for thee, God blesses the habitation of
the righteous, Prove 3.33. Nothing can possibly be wanting, but it may be made
up by this blessing. If thou do hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God,
blessed shall thou be in the city, and in the field, blessed shall be the fruit
of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground and the fruit of thy cattle. Blessed
shall be thy basket and thy store, blessed shall thou be when thou go out,
and blessed shall thou be when thou come in. Deuteronomy. 28.1, to 14. verse.

Thou would be a blessing to thy neighbors, as a conduite yield clear water
for others comfort. If they were profane, they might be brought to mind piety
by thy precepts and pattern. If they were good, they would rejoice at thy
conversion to God, and like Abraham make a feast at the weaning of thee a child
of the promise from the breasts of the creatures.

Thou should be blessed in thy name. The memory of the just is blessed, Prove.
10.7. Thy name would be heir to thy life, as soon as ever thy nature were
religious, thy name would be reverend, and when thou die thou would go out
(of this world) like some sweet perfume, leaving a fragrant savor behind thee.

O Reader, how many sheets might I write, in relating thy felicity! How
honorable should thou be, having blood royal running in thy veins, and being
heir apparent to a Kingdom of glory! How rich, having a key to Gods treasury,
and being interested in the covenant of grace, which has more wealth in it
then heaven and earth! How comfortable, having the promises for thy cordials,
and being garrisond within with that peace of God, which passes all
understanding! How beautiful having the robes of the righteousness of God to
adorn thee, which is infinitely more comely then the unspotted innocence, either
of Adam or Angels! The infinite God would be thy God, blessed Angels thy
guardians, beautiful Saints thy companions, durable riches thy portion, the
flesh of Christ thy food, his own robes thy raiment, and his own mansion house
thine everlasting home.

Thou could not cast an eye, but it would see matter of mirth; nor send forth
a thought, but it would return with a report of mercy. Whether thou look up
to thy father in heaven, and his glorious attendants there, or look down to
his creatures on earth, and the signs of his manifold wisdom, and mighty power
here, or whether thou look into conscience or Scriptures, every thing, all
things would yield thee cause of comfort, and give thee occasion of inward
exaltation.

In all conditions, be they never so sad, thy soul would be safe, and thine
everlasting estate secure. The vails are uncertain, but the standing wages are
certain. What ballast is to a ship, that regeneration would be to thy spirit:
If the vessel be sound and well ballasted, though it may be tossed and rocked
with winds and waves, yet it shall not be ruined: So if thine heart were
stablished with grace, thou should be steady in the greatest storm; nay,
though thou were naked in deep waters, in the mighty Sea, yet Christ thine head
being ever above water, thou could not possibly sink.

When thou should come to die, and to throw thy last cast for Eternity, thou
might walk in the valley of the shadow of death and fear none ill, for God
would be with thee, Psalm. 23. When pale-faced death knocks at the door of thine
house of clay, by the hand of some mortal sickness, thou needst not be daunted
at his grim looks, but might boldly open to him, and bid that Messenger
heartily welcome, as knowing that he comes from a God in Covenant, to give thee
a passage into fullness of joy and everlasting pleasures.

Its reported of Godfry Duke of Bulloign in his expedition to the Holy Land,
that when his Army came within view of Jerusalem, beholding the high Turrets
and fair Fronts (which were the skelitons of far more glorious bodies) they
were so transported with joy, that they gave such a shout, that the very earth
was said to ring again. How might thine heart leap with joy, when thou upon thy
deathbed should with the eye of faith behold the stately Turrets, and pearly
gates of the New and Eternal Jerusalem!

Thou might contentedly leave thine earthly habitation for the Fathers
house, and joyfully bid adieu to thy corruptible silver and airy honors, for an
enduring substance, and an eternal weight of glory. How cheerfully might
thou forsake thy meat and drink, and all thy carnal comforts, to eat bread in
the Kingdom of Heaven, and to bathe thy soul in angelical delights! With what
courage might thou bid farewell to thy stately dwelling, dearest wife, most
lovely children, all thy kindred and acquaintance, to go to mount Sion, and to
the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which
are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just
men made perfect, to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant! Hebr. 12.22, 23,
24.

Thou should comfortably think of thy bodies being laid in the grave, to
sleep there till the morning of the Resurrection; for that bed would be sweet
to thee, being perfumed with the precious body of thy Savior for thee. And
with what joy might thou think of the day of Judgment, when thy body should
be awaken out of its sleep, united to thy soul, fashioned like unto the
glorious body of Christ, and both soul and body made perfectly blessed, in the
full enjoyment of God to all eternity. O the felicity of the regenerate! How
blessed are they whom God chooses, and causes by Regeneration to approach
unto him! Friend, Friend, Can the world do half this for thee? Why then do
thou spend thy strength for what is not bread, and thy labor for what will not
satisfy?

Will not God do all this and much much more for thee! Why then do thou
forsake the fountain of living waters, and hew unto thy self broken cisterns
that can hold no waters! Ah, did thou but know the gift of God, and who it is
that offers these things to thee, thou would ask of him, and he would give
thee living waters, John 4.10. Reader, what say thou to these things? Is
there not infinite reason why thou should speedily give a Bill of divorce to
thy most beloved lusts, and strike an hearty Covenant with the Lord Jesus? Art
not thou fully convinced of the matchless gain of godliness? Let conscience
speak; one would think such powerful arguments could not be denied; that so
many, and such costly Loadstones should draw thee toward Heaven, though thine
heart were as hard as iron or steel. If thou art for profit, man, here is
profit indeed, and to purpose. Thus whilst thou continuest in this world, thou
should be a blessed soul.

The Felicity of the Regenerate in the other World.
THough in what I have already offered, in the Name of the blessed God, I have
unspeakably out-bid Devil, World, and Flesh; yet to manifest thy folly, in
making and continuing a League with them, to thine extreme and unconceiveable
disadvantage, I shall endeavor to set before thee, though briefly, the far
greater felicity which thou should obtain in the other World.

As whilst thou continuest in this world thou should be a blessed soul, so
when thou enterest into the other world thou should be a glorious Saint.

And this, Reader, is the best wine which Christ keeps for his Ghests till the
last, though how good it is none can tell but they that have tasted it. Truly,
what Nazianzen said of Basil, I may say of this glorious Saint; There wants
nothing but his own tongue to commend him. The Subject is large and weighty;
and sure I am, that it would require the words not only of a Saint, but an
Angel to do it according to its worth. I shall only give thee a say briefly,
of that which glorified Saints enjoy fully.

First, thou should know what perfection of holiness is; if thou were but new
born, this one thought would fill thy soul with marrow and fatness, and cause
thy mouth to praise God with joyful lips. One dram of holiness infinitely
surpasses (in the esteem of a Saint) all the Kingdoms and Empires of this
world, how much then is perfect holiness worth? In heaven thou should have
it, There thou should be before the throne without fault, and serve him day
and night, in his temple, Rev. 14.5.

What price does a Saint set upon, and what pains does he take for a little
holiness. If thou would know why he hides the word in his heart, it is that he
might not sin against God; the purging out of sinful humors, is the end for
which he takes that physic. Why he reads and hears so diligently, it is that
he might be sanctified through Gods truth; cleansing is the reason why he uses
that water. Why he prays so frequently and so fervently, it is that he might
have a clean heart created, and a right spirit renewed within him: Grace is the
chief alms, for which he knocks and begs so hard, at the beautiful gate of
Gods Temple; why he goes to the sacrament, it is that he might grow in sanctity;
he goes to the death of his Savior, for the death of his sins; and his great
design in that spiritual feast is so to feed, that he might get some more
spiritual strength. Nay how contented can he be under very sad crosses, if they
may but make him more like to Christ, he can patiently bear the pain of lancing
and cutting, so it may but let out corruption. He can take bitter pills for the
removing of inward diseases, and the furthering of his souls health, and more
willingly spend all be has for the cure of his issue of sin, then ever the
widow did, for the cure of her issue of blood. Now Reader, thou should have
the vessel of thy soul filled with this water of life. One drop of which is so
precious, as thou have heard, to the regenerate. Thou should have a
perfection of degrees, as well as of parts, and enjoy so much of these true
riches, that thou should not desire one grain more. Thou should be a book
wherein the image of God should be written, in a fair large print, and there
should be no errata's in thee. Sin now is like the Ivy in the wall, cut it
never so much, yet it will sprout out again; but as grace mortifieth it here,
glory shall nullify it in heaven. Were thou in Christ, twould be no small
comfort to think the time is coming when thou shall never offend God more,
never deal unkindly with Christ more.

Thou should by blessed experience, know the truth of those Scriptures.
Whosoever is born of God sins not, for his seed remains in him, and he
cannot sin, because he is born of God. 1 John 3.9. Christ loved his Church, and
gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of
water by the word. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.

The body of death, should die with the death of thy body. Thou should not be
taken away in thy sins, but from thy sins; It would be impossible for thee to
sin there, because of thine happy sight of God there. Sin is an aversion from
God, and conversion to the creature. Now thou should enjoy such soul
ravishing sweetness in the blessed God, and that so fully, that thou could
not leave so excellent a good for any creature; thy graces here in their
minority, and nonage would be then in their maturity.

If that holiness which is but in part on earth, would be so beautiful in thine
eyes, that it would ravish thine heart more then all the glory of this lower
world, what would perfect holiness in heaven be?

If the picture or image of God, be so comely in its rough draught here below;
Ah, how lovely a piece will it be in all its perfections, when Gods Novissima
manus his last hand shall come upon it above! 1 John 3.2.

Secondly, thou should know what complete happiness is. Thine holiness and
happiness like twins, would grow up and come to their full age together; thy
perfect purity there, would cause perfect peace. Thy day of light and gladness
in heaven, could never be overcast with the smallest cloud, because sins that
are the vapors out of which they breed, could not ascend so high. Thy freedom
from evil would be full, thy fruition of good would be full, and therefore thy
felicity must needs be full. Thy body there would be free from the diseases,
and deformity to which it is liable, and with which it is affected here. The
errors of the first, would be corrected in its second edition. A body of
vileness shall be a body of glory.

All those miseries which fright and molest thee now, would then forsake thee.
No evil durst arrest thee, when thou shall walk in the presence of Sions King.
In this thou should be like irrational creatures, that thy misery should end
with thy life: And in this resemble the blessed Angels, that thou should
always behold the face of thy father.

In his presence is fullness of joy. When the Sun beholds the Moon, with his
full aspect, then the Moon is at the Full. In heaven the Sun of righteousness,
would ever look on thee, with his favorable face, in so full a degree that
thou should be at the Full of thy light, and happiness. God is an universal
good, the soul of man has a kind of an infinite appetite. It desires this
pleasure, and that treasure, and when it has them, it is like a dropsicall
body, as thirsty as ever; for those creatures having but a particular limited
goodness, can never satisfy but God will supply all the souls wants, because he
is infinite and universal good, and answers all things.

Thou should ever be at the wellhead; and therefore need not fear the
least want. Thine appetite there would be ever fresh after God, and thy
satisfaction ever full in God. God would be to thee any thing, every thing, all
things which thy heart could possibly desire. God is so sweet and satisfying a
good to his people on earth, that they have found the loss of other things
abundantly, made up in his favor and love, Hab. 3.16, 17. 1 Samuel 30.6. though
he communicated himself but in small drops, by slow degrees unto them; O then
what would God be to thee in heaven, when he would give of himself abundantly
and continually unto thy soul! If all the delightful objects, and pleasures
which the whole creation here below affords, were united into one, and
bestowed upon thee, and thou were to live a thousand years, in the enjoyment of
it, this were not worth one day in Gods courts in this world, much less one
hour, or one moments enjoying him in the other world. In his presence is
fullness of joy, and at his right hand, are pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16.
ult. Though all words are too weak to utter the Saints happiness there, yet
David speaks much in this verse. For quality there is joy, there is pleasure;
What can thou wish which is not contained in those two words? hope of future
joy made the man of sorrows contented under his shameful and bloody cross; how
comfortable will thou be when thou shall have it in hand?

For quantity, fullness of joy, or a torrent, of which thou should drink full
draughts, without interruption or intermission. Thy joy would be pure without
mixture, and perfect without measure. The Masters joy, or the joy of thy Lord:
In his presence, the fruition of God is the fairest flower in the Garland of
Honor, and that alone which gives complete satisfaction to the soul: He is the
Heaven of Heaven, and other things are but accessory to this Principal, yet
other things there would afford comfort, through the God of consolation.

The sights there would please thine eyes, for thou should behold not only
perfect Saints, but the pearless Savior; thine eyes should see the King in his
glory: there is a great difference between seeing a King in his ordinary
attire, and on his throne with his robes, and all his signs of Majesty. The
sight of the Saints would much delight thee, to see those heirs in the
possession of their inheritances: When Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, had
beheld the state and magnificence of the Roman Senators and People, he was so
exceedingly taken with it, that at his return from that City of Rome, being
asked, how he liked it, and what he thought of that state, he answered, That he
saw as many Emperors as Senators, and that it was a Commonwealth of Kings. Such
would Heaven be to thine eyes, a Commonwealth of Emperors and Kings, wherein
every Saint would have a robe of honor, a scepter of power, a throne of
majesty, and crown of glory. Surely, such sights would fill thee with wonder
and joy, to behold all the children in their Fathers house so richly clad, so
daintily feasted, and so highly advanced as they shall be there. But O the joy
which will possess thee at the sight of the Lord Jesus, who, as the Sun, will
shine gloriously indeed in the midst of those Stars, and as a Judge be known by
his robes, from all the Justices on the Bench. If it were so good to behold him
here in his estate of humiliation, and in his mourning weeds; what will it be
to behold him in his estate of exaltation, and in his bright, sparkling, and
glorious robes? Truly, that light will be sweet, and it will be pleasant to
behold that Sun.

As the sights there would please thine eyes, so the sounds there will please
thine ears; I have read of a Divine, that when he heard rare music on Earth,
he was much taken with it, presently cried out, O the ravishing music which is
in Heaven! How will thy spirit be taken, when thou shall hear the new song, the
song of the Lamb, sung by the pleasant voices, and played upon the harps of the
thousand thousands that are before the throne of God, who rest not day or
night, but say and sing, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is,
and is to come. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory and honor and power:
For thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were
created, Rev. 4, 8. and ult.

O how much might I expatiate here, and show thee, that whatever is requisite
to happiness would be enjoyed by thee there! If honor could make thee happy,
thou should there have an eternal weight of glory; such a weight, that if
thou were not upheld by the power of God, would press thee down. If pleasures
can make thee happy, thou should drink of the rivers of pleasures which flow
from the blessed God for ever; such pleasures as thine eyes never saw, thine
ears never heard, and thine heart can never conceive. If a gallant glorious
seat could make thee happy, thou should be happy: Thou should dwell in a
City, Rev. 21.19, 20.
whose Builder and Maker is God, its gates are of pearl, and its pavement of
pure gold. The house which thou should live in, is the Fathers house, that
house which the mighty Possessor of Heaven and Earth has erected with his own
hands, to be the place wherein he will show all his riches, magnificence,
grace, goodness and glory. If rest could make thee happy, thou should rest
from all thy labors, enjoy an eternal Sabbath; There the spiritual oppressors
cease from troubling, there the weary are at rest. If good company could make
thee happy, thou should have the society of all the Saints, sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the Prophets, Apostles, and all the children of God
in the Kingdom of Heaven, thou should enjoy the many millions of holy Angels,
the dearest Jesus, and the ever blessed God. If food can make thee happy, thou
should eat of the hidden manna, of the bread which came down from Heaven, of
the tree of life which grows in Paradise, and drink of the water of life,
Rev. 22.1, 2.
which is clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the
Lamb. If life can make thee happy, thou should have that eternal life, which
is from God, in God, and with God. In a word, whatever were needful for thee,
or could be joyful to thee, or desired by thee, in order to thy happiness, thou
should have it.

Thirdly, Thou should know the virtue and preciousness of the blood of
Christ: the Apostle does not without cause, when he compares the blood of
Christ with silver and gold, infinitely prefers it before them, and call it
precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.19. Indeed, it is that which as the diamond to the
ring, adds worth and value to what ever it is joined. The two Testaments are
precious, because they are both sprinkled with the blood, and confirmed by the
death of the Testator, Hebr. 9.16, 17, 18, 19. The Lords Supper is precious,
because it shows forth the Lords blood and death, 1 Cor. 11.26. pardon of
sin, peace of conscience, the affection of the Father, the sanctification of
the Spirit, are all precious, because they are the fruits and effects of this
precious blood, 1 John 1. and 7. Romans 5.1. Hebr. 9.14. Ephesians. 2.13. All our
comforts run in this channel, the blood of Christ is the stream which bears
them up, and brings them to us; yea, Heaven it self, and the Crown of Glory
have weight and worth from this precious sparkling stone. Heaven is the
purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. It Is the blood of Jesus which gives
boldness to enter into that holy place, Hebr. 10.19. The precious price paid
for it will speak it and make it a glorious place.

If thou were once regenerated, Christ would be so precious to thee at this
day, that all things would be dung and dross in comparison of the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus thy Lord; to them that believe Christ is
precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. O the price which true Christians set upon Christ. The
wise Merchant sold all for this Pearl. I have read that the Duke of Burgundy
had a Jewel, which was afterward sold for twenty thousand ducats. But Christ
to a Saint is better then silver, and more desirable then choice gold, more
precious then rubies, yea, then many millions of worlds.

When the Athenian Ladies were boasting to Phocion's wife of their Jewels; she
told them, My jewels are my husband Phocion. When Alexander was asked, where
his treasure was, he showed them his friends. Such a Jewel, such a Treasure is
Jesus Christ in the esteem of his Spouse, his Friends, Christ is all in all.

The pious soul is of the same mind with John of Alexandria, surnamed the
Almoner, when at the years end he had given all he had left to the poor, and
made even with his Revenues, he looks up to Heaven, and thanked God that he had
nothing left but his Lord and Master Jesus Christ; to whom he longed to fly
with unlimed and untangled wings. The face of none is so comely to the Saints
eye, the voice of none so lovely to his ears, the taste of nothing so pleasant
in his mouth as Jesus Christ.

But the Christian has a choice room in his soul, for the blood of his
Savior; He prizeth the shameful cross of Christ above the most glorious crown
of the greatest earthly Potentate, Gal. 6.14. Thus Friend, it would be with
thee here if thou were conveted, thou would determine to know nothing but
Jesus Christ and him crucified: O the honey which thou would suck out of the
Carcass, the death of this Lion of the Tribe of Judah!

When thou should consider, that this blood of Jesus Christ is that alone,
which has satissied Gods justice, Romans 3.25. Romans 5.9. Col. 1.20. Heb. 9.14.
Rev. 1.5, 6.
pacified his anger, justified thy person, sanctified thy nature, removed the
curse of the Law from thee, and thee from the eternal wrath of God, and
unquenchable torments of Hell, would it not be precious blood in thine esteem?
think of it, what a price thou would set upon it; but when thou should in
Heaven for ever behold the blessed body of Christ shining with incomprehensible
beauty far above the brightest Cherub; and consider, that every vein of that
body bled to bring thee to glory; when thou should see thousands and millions
in matchless and endless burnings, from which thou were delivered, and behold
thy body made far more glorious then the Sun in his high noon attire, and thy
soul filled brim-full with unspeakable joy; nay, every part of thy body and
soul enlarged to the utmost, and fully fatisfied with unconceiveable delight,
and thou should be confident and assured to enjoy this for ever, and know
clearly all this to be the travel of Christ's soul, and the fruit of his blood:
Friend, friend, what thoughts then will thou have of the blood of Christ!
Surely, 'twill be precious blood indeed; thou would have other manner of
thoughts of him that came by water and blood, then thou ever had here below.

The work of our redemption will be the matter of the Saints communion, and the
great subject of their eternal admiration. Their delivery from sin, Satan,
wrath and hell, into a state of liberty, love, grace, and salvation, by the
blood of Jesus, will fill their eyes, and hearts with wonder, love, and joy for
ever.

All the voices there shall sing, this song and all the vials there shall be
set to this tune. Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof, for thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred,
and tongue, and nation, and have made us unto our God Kings, and Priests. And I
beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels, round about the throne, and the
beasts, and the elders, and the number of them, was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice. Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and glory, and
blessing. Rev. 5.9.10, 11, 12, to end.

If the Queen of Sheba when she beheld the wisdom and magnificence of Solomon
was so transported that there remained no more spirit in her; how will thine
heart be transported to see the love and glory of the true Solomon, who wept,
and bled, and lived, and died to bring thee to heaven.

Fourthly, Thou should know what God is; and truly this would be no small part
of thy felicity: Knowledge is the excellency of a man and differenceth him from
a bruit; divine knowledge is the excellency of a Christian, and differenceth
him from a Heathen. The knowledge of humane things has been so highly esteemed
by some of the Heathen, that they have professed they would give their whole
estates to enjoy their books without interruption; what then is the knowledge
of divine things worth! Aristotle says, That a little knowledge of heavenly
things, though but conjectural, is better then much certain knowledge of
earthly things; what then is the knowledge of the God of heaven worth! The
excellency of the object does much dignifie the act.

In this world thou can see but little of him, thy sight is so weak, but
there thou should see him as he is, 1 John 3.3. Now the Christian rather
sees and knows God as he is not, then as he is; we describe him (for indeed
he is infinitely above all definitions) by way of negation to be a Spirit,
Infinite, Unchangeable, and the like; which particulars tell us what God is
not. He is a Spirit, that is, a being without a body; for God is not a Spirit
as the souls of men and as Angels are, I mean, not of such a substance: The
Spirit of God in that expression, God is a Spirit, Joh. 4. condescendeth to our
capacities, because we are not able to conceive of the nature of the blessed
God, as he is in himself, therefore the Holy Ghost does speak of God by the
most excellent beings which our understandings reach, as Spirits are; for God
is questionless such a spiritual being, as is far above the most enlarged
understanding. Besides, we are so clogged and piniond with flesh, that we know
but little, yea very little of our own spirits, much less what a Spirit God is.
But there thou should (if converted) know him fully, thy understanding should
be enlarged and satisfied.

Those scales which now hang about thine intellectual eye should then fall off,
and thou that did behold him upon earth in the galss of his Gospel, should
then see him face to face; as the Sun does by his beams and brightness so
enlighten the eye and the air, that we see thereby, not only other creatures
but its own most glorious body; so God would by the beams and beauty of his
majesty so irradiate thy mind that thou should see both the comeliness of
his creatures, and the brightness of his own being.

Thou should know the great mystery of the Trinity, the love of the Father,
the wisdom of the Son, the sweet fellowship of the Holy Ghost. That Riddle
which now puzleth thee should there be unfolded; thou should know how the
Father begat the Son, how the Spirit proceeded from Father and Son, and the
difference between the generation of the Son and procession of the Spirit.

Thou should know God in the unity of his nature; now the Saints know him
most by his Attributes, which indeed differ not at all from his Being; they are
but different manifestations of one individed essence, and distinguished by us
for our better understanding of the Divine Nature, but they are all the same in
him and in themselves, and then we shall know so.

Thou should know the Hypostatical Union, Ioh. 14.20
how the Son of God became the Son of Man; that wonder of wonders, Emanuel, God
with us, God and Man in one person would be clearly seen; all those knots would
be untied; thou should then plough with Gods heifer, and understand all his
ridles; thou should know all things in God that were to be known in a full
manner, in a large measure to thine infinite comfort and content. Thou should
know all this and far more for thy good.

If a little knowledge of God here be so pleasant to the soul, Psalm. 19.10
though it be but a glimpse of him in the dawning of themorning; what
satisfaction will the complete knowledge of him yield, to see that Sun at noon
day! If it be life eternal to know God and Jesus Christ imperfectly, what will
it be to know them perfectly, and so as to enjoy them fully! surely such
instruction will be better then silver, and such knowledge then choice gold;
this wisdom is better then rubies, and all that thou can desire is not to be
compared to it.

How much have many wasted their wealth, dried their brains, macerated their
bodies for a little knowledge of Nature, which when they had gone to their
utmost could not satisfy them; they might as soon have broke their necks as
their fasts by such knowledge; but of what inestimable value is the knowledge
of the God of Nature, is the knowledge of him in Christ here, and O of what
incomparable worth will it be to know him, as we are known of him; to see him
face to face! this will be without question the beatifical vision.

Fifthly, thou should know the extent and truth of all the promises in the
word which concern thy welfare in the other world. How various and how precious
are the promises which relate to heaven! God promises his children (such as
are born of him) large portions when they shall come to age, unto the measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ. And thou should then find that God
will make good his word to a title. He promises that they shall rest from
their labors, and their works shall follow them. That they shall be before the
throne, and serve him day and night, in his temple, and he that sits on the
throne shall dwell among them. That they shall hunger no more, nor thirst any
more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heart. For the Lamb which is
in the midst of the throne, shall feed them and shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Rev.
7.3. ult. He promises, that they shall be with Christ where he is and behold
his glory! John 17.24. That they shall not be hurt of the second death. That
they shall eat of the tree of life, which grows in the midst of the Paradise
of God. That they shall be clothed in white raiment, and not blotted out of
the book of life, but confessed before the father and the holy Angels, Rev.
2.7, 11. and 3.5. Christ promises, him that overcommeth will I make a pillar
in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him
the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem,
and I will write upon him my new name. Rev. 3.12. That they which overcome,
shall sit down with him on his throne, even as he has overcome and is sit down
with his father on his throne, Revel. 3.21. Look Psalm. 16. ult. and 17. ult.
Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 5.1. 1 Cor. 13.12. Mat. 8.11. 1 Pet. 1.4. Phil. 3.21. 1 Thessalonians. 4.2, ult. 1 John 3.2. Ephe. 5.25, 26.

All these promises and many more, shall be fully accomplished. There shall not
one good thing of all that the Lord has spoken be unfulfilled. The expectation
of the promises has filled several of Gods Children with ecstasies and
ravishments of spirit; what joy then will the possession of them bring? The
very thought of a promise has made them like Leviathan to laugh at the shaking
of Spears, at the threatening of their adversaries, nay to kiss stakes, and
smile at fire and fagots. O what then will the performance be! The promises are
large, but our straitened minds cannot understand their breadth, but then happy
experience shall teach us their full latitude; they are now like bones, which
have the sweetest meat upon them, and the sweetest marrow in them, but we are
not able here to pick them clean, nor to suck out half the marrow, but then we
shall taste and enjoy every thing in them. Now when we read of drinking of the
rivers of Gods pleasures, of dwelling in his house, of a kingdom, and thrones,
and scepters, and palms, and crowns of glory, and reigning with Christ for ever
and ever, our hearts are ready to faint, as Jacob at the news of his Sons
honor in Egypt; and as the Queen of Sheba, at the news of Solomon's wisdom,
believed it not: so we; What God look upon such sinks of sin, such clods of
clay as we are, and make our vile bodies like unto the glorious body of his
Son, and our souls like unto his blessed Majesty in holiness, beauty, and
delight! O what are we, and what our fathers houses that God should do any
thing for us! As Perillus when Alexander promised his daughter fifty talents
for her portion, cries, 'twas too much, ten were sufficient; And when David
sent to take Abigal to wife, she wondered at it, she counted it an honor to
wash the feet of his servants; 'Twas too much to be his wife. So we cannot but
count it a favor to wait upon his servants, to be his door keepers and stand
without; it is too much we think to be married to Christ, the eternal Son of
God, and to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. We can hardly be persuaded
that God will thus dignifie such worthless worms; but then seeing, and
enjoying, will be believing; then we shall say, It was a true report, which I
heard in the lower world, what God would do for poor creatures in heaven;
howbeit I believed not, till I came and mine eyes have seen it, and behold the
half was not told me; my glory and joy exceeds the fame which I heard.

Sixthly, Thou should enjoy all the forementioned good things, (and more then
I can speak or thou think) without intermission, interruption, and for ever.
The good things of this life are intermitted, partly by contrary and evil
things, as our health lost by sickness, our wealth by want; partly by necessary
diversions, the body must have sleep, and then we lose the comfort of the
creatures; but there thy day of comfort should never be overcast, for all tears
will be wiped from thine eyes, and thy fruition of God should be without
intermission, thou should ever stand in his presence, and behold his face,
thou should ever be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.16. Had thou here a confluence
of all comforts, yet because thy life is short, thy joy could not be long; but
there thy life will be an everlasting life, and thy joy therefore everlasting
joy. I will see you again and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no
man take from you, says Christ, Joh. 16.

Eternity will perfect thy felicity indeed; It is a boundless duration, without
intermission and end; Suppose that all the vast space between heaven and earth
were filled with sand, and once every ten thousand years, a bird came and
carried away a crum in her bill, what a long while would it be before this vast
heap would be carried quite away! but suppose after the bird had done that, it
was to come every ten thousand years, and take one drop of water out of the
sea, what a while would it be before it could empty the Ocean! but after all
this thou should have as long to continue in thy joy and delights, as at thy
first entering into heaven.

If thou should have but one glimpse of God, as he was passing by thee (as
Moses had) it were an happiness, beyond all that this world can give thee, but
thou shall there not have a transient view, but a permanent vision of God; thy
God would not pass by, but stand still, that thou should never lose the
sight of him. When the object would be so lovely, and the act so lasting, would
not thy spirit be cheerful and lively! As the damned shall be without all hope
ever to be released of their pains; so thou should be without all fear ever
to be deprived of thy pleasures. O who would not serve such a Master, that
gives after poor imperfect works done for him, such infinite eternal rewards!
It Is bottomless love indeed which gives such a boundles life.

Thus Reader, I have given thee a taste of that, of which thou (if regenerated)
should have a full draught. Whilst thou continuest in this world, thou
should be a blessed soul, blessed in thy body, in thy soul, in thy calling,
estate, relations, children and name. All the providence of God should be
profitable to thee; in all thy performances, thou should be acceptable to
God, all the ordinances of God should further thy good; The precious promises
(one of which excels the whole world) should all be thy portion. When thou
enterest into the other world, thou should be a glorious Saint; Thou should
be perfectly holy, and infinitely happy in the knowledge of the blessed God, in
finding the incomparable fruits of Christ's blood, and in experiencing the
extent, and certainty of Gods promises, and thou should enjoy all this not
for a year, or an age, or for a million of ages, but for ever, ever, ever. Now
what say thou to this subject of consideration? have thou not unspeakable
cause, by an hearty marriage, to close with the Son of God, and accept him for
thy Lord and husband, when he offers such matchless privileges here, and
such an heavenly jointure hereafter! Good Lord, is it possible for man to be
such an enemy to his soul, as to neglect such great Salvation! What an hard
stone is the heart of man, that neither misery nor mercy can move it. Ah,
Friend thou art bewitched indeed, if neither the wonderful woe of the
unregenerate, nor the unheard of weal of the regenerate can prevail with thee.

But before thou read farther, make a pause, and consider what is included
in these two subjects of consideration. The Heathen tell us, that such as
cannot be persuaded by profit or disprofit, are unperswadable. Think of it,
here is the greatest advantage imaginable, if thou will turn to Christ. Here is
the greatest damage conceivable, if thou continuest in thine ungodly course;
surely thou art resolved upon thine eternal ruin, or such reasons as these
are, will reform thee.

Ponder this seriously; if thou refusest the Lord Jesus as thy Savior, and
Sovereign, thou art a cursed damned sinner; if thou acceptest him thou art a
blessed, saved creature; in the one scale there is hell, in the other scale
there is heaven; upon the turning of either is the turning of thy precious
soul, its making or marring for ever; if thou will not embrace Christ upon his
own conditions, thy soul is lost; O the loss of a soul! thy God, thy Heaven is
lost; O the loss of a God! no eye ever saw greater losses; all other losses are
nothing to these; If thou do, thy soul is saved; how sweet is that word
Saved! Thy God, thy Heaven is gained; O the gain of a God! how savoury is that
sentence? read it again, If thou taken Christ, thy God is gained. Do thou
know what is included in the gain of a God? no, nor all the men on earth, nor
all the Saints and Angels in heaven; there never was such a gain before it, nor
ever shall be after it; Ah, who would not wade through thick and thin for such
a gain! What say thou? shall not things of such concernment as these are stir
thee?

It is reported of Adrianus an Officer under Maximinianus the Tyrant, Laurent.
Sur. in vit.
that beholding the constancy of the Martyrs he was earnest to know what it was
which carried them through with so much courage. One of them (there being two
and twenty at that time under the tormentors hands) answered, Eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive, what God has prepared for them that love him: 1 Cor. 2.9. Upon the
hearing of which words Adrian was converted, and sealed the truth with his
blood. Thou have heard much more concerning the happiness of the Saints in the
other world then one verse of Scripture; how art thou taken with it? Does the
joy there nothing affect thine heart, nor enlarge it in salleys out after it? O
that that joy, that glory, that house, that eternal heaven were mine! Does it
nothing resolve thee against sin, and for Christ? answer God in thy conscience.

Some write that forty one of Alexanders friends drunk themselves dead for a
crown of gold of One hundred and eighty pound weight which the King had
provided for them which drank most; God offers thee a crown of glory, not
corruptible as silver and gold are, but eternal; art not thou ashamed that
those swaggerers should cursedly lose their lives and souls for a fading crown,
when thou will not leave thy lusts, thy sins for an ever-flourishing crown of
glory!

O man bethink thy self whilst thou have time; and do not as profane Esau
prefer thy mess of pottage before these spiritual privileges, and the eternal
purchase. Cleopatra the Egyptian Princess told Marcus Antonius (when she saw
him-spending his time vainly and meanly much below the quality of a Prince) It
is not for you to fish for Gudgeons or Trouts, but for Towns, and Cities, and
Castles, and Kingdoms: So say I to thee, It is not for the to lie spending thy
time, and strength, and beating thine head and heart for an hoard of dust or an
heap of earth (which shall shortly take its eternal leave of thee) but for
spiritual riches, for durable riches and righteousness; it is not for thee to
busy thy self about toys and trifles, but about the image of God, the blood
of Christ, the Covenant of Grace, the Kingdom (...) Heaven, the eternal weight
of Glory; O these are worthy of all thy thoughts, and words, and actions, of
all thy time, and strength, and health, of all thy name, and estate, and
interest whatsoever.

If thou at a rational creature, Swinham Court of Wards and Live.
let reason prevail with thee, and show thy self a man of understanding. It was
the custom formerly in England to try one that was begged for a fool in this
manner; an apple or a counter, with a piece of gold was set before him; if he
take the apple or the counter, he is cast for a fool in the judgment of the
Court, as one that knows not the true value of things, or how to make choice
of what was best for him. Truly thus it is with thee; God sets before thee
the counters and carnal comforts of this world, the true gold and unutterable
happiness of the other world; nay, he lays before thee the eternal pains of
hell, and the eternal pleasures of Heaven, to try which thou will take: now if
thou will take a poor portion below, and leave the purchased possession above;
if thou will (to abide in thy sensual lusts) choose the torments of hell, and
refuse (by not submitting to the rule of Christ) the joys of heaven, art thou
not a fool in grain? surely the Devil will beg thee for a fool for ever;
therefore show thy self wise by choosing that which is of greatest worth. I call
heaven and earth to record this day against thee, that I have set before thee
life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that both thou and
thy seed may live, Deuteronomy. 30.19.

The third Subject of Consideration, The Excellency of Regeneration.
THirdly, Consider the excellency of that which the Lord requires of thee, for
the avoiding of that easeless, endless misery of the damned, and the attaining
the unspeakable and unchangeable felicity of the saved.

Reader, I pray thee speak to God in thine heart, and tell him what is the
reason thou art so willing to go to Hell, and so unwilling to go to Heaven:
Sure I am, as thou art a living creature (much more as a rational man) thou
have a natural inclination and propensity toward thine own good and felicity,
and therefore thou can not love Hell directly, as it is torturing and
wracking of thy soul and body, though thou do love it eventually, as it is the
end of thy fleshly, ungodly life. Well, I Will undertake for once to dive into
thine heart, and tell thee the reason of thy backwardness toward heaven, and
thy forwardness for hell: The reason is this, thou look on the power of
godliness as distasteful to thy flesh, or disgraceful to thy name; the yoke of
Christ is too strict; it is not the end that displeases thee (thou could
contentedly be happy) but it is the narrowness of the way, and the straitness of
the gate with which thou art dis-satisfied, 'twill not afford thee room enough
for thy beloved lusts; is it not so? let conscience speak; Well, I hope by the
help of God to make thee of another mind, when thou have thoroughly read this
Head, which I am now writing of.

It is the saying of Plato, That if moral Philosphy could be seen with moral
eyes, it would draw all men's hearts after it. Sure, sure I am that if
Regeneration, or the Divine nature were seen with divine eyes, 'twould draw
men's hearts, and heads, and hands, and all after it: All that ever struck at
it, did it in the dark, They spoke evil of things which they knew not.

Reader, what is that which God requires of thee? Is it not to leave thy
slavery to Satan, thy bondage to sin, and to accept and enjoy the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God? Is it not that thou should be divorced from sin
that misshapen monster, and spawn of the Devil, whose person is deformed, whose
company is defiling, and whose portion is damnation; and that thou should be
married to Jesus Christ, the fairest of ten thousands, the heir of all things,
who would adorn thee with the jewels of his graces, beautify thee with the
Imbroydery of his Spirit, wash thee with his own blood, array thee with his own
righteousness, and present thee to his father without spot, to be blessed in
his full immediate enjoyment for ever? Is it not that thou should cease thy
drudgery to Hells-Jaylor, live above the perishing profits, brutish pleasures,
empty honors of the world and flesh, and that thou should walk after the
Spirit, walk with God, warm thine heart at the flame of his love, bathe thy
soul in angelical delights, have thy conversation in Heaven here, and thy
habitation there hereafter. Is not this, Man, the sum and substance of what the
Lord requires of thee? and art thou not shroudly hurt? would not these things
exceedingly injure thee? Is not God a hard Master to desire such things of
thee? Ah, did thou but know the worth of them, had thou ever beheld their
excellency, or tasted the comforts which is in them, thou would scorn this
lower world, with all its pomp, and pride, and pleasures, for them, and befool
thy self to purpose for ever refusing or neglecting them.

I shall endeavor, in some few particulars, to show thee the worth and
excellency of that to which thou art so unwilling, and possibly thou may
thereby be convinced of thy madness and folly, in sticking at that which would
be thine honor and felicity. Pliny says, that an exact face can never be
drawn but with much disadvantage. Without doubt, Regeneration, or the new
Creation, can neither be admired, nor declared by any, no, nor by all the
Saints on earth, according to its worth: It is the beauty, glory, and wonder of
Saints and Angels in Heaven.

First, Regeneration is the image of God, who is an infinite and most perfect
good. Vide p. 36, 37.
Here, friend, at first flight I soar high. One would think, if I should speak
no more in commendation of it, here is enough to ravish thine heart with
admiring it for ever; it is the picture of Gods own perfections. Put on the new
man which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians 4.24. As
it is the same light that shines forth in the morning, which shines in the
body of the Sun in its Meridian, so its the same holiness that shines in its
degrees in the Christian, which shines in perfection in God. Regeneration
would make thee pure, as God is pure, Gods will is the rule, and his nature the
pattern of the Saints holiness. Heb. 1.3. Romans 8.
The coin has the image and impressions of the King. Christ is the express
image of his fathers person, and the Saints are conformable to the image of his
Son. The Church is Christ unfolded, Christ is not a monster, Mr Ball of faith,
p. 285.
the head and members are homogeneal, like to each other.

By Reason man excels beasts, by holiness he excels himself, inferior
only to the Angels in degree, and made like unto the Lord, as far as a
creature may be to his creator.

Now how excellent is the image of God! the picture of a King is esteemed, and
valued at an high rate; but what is the picture of a God! Some say that the
naked body of man was so glorious in his estate of innocence, that all the
beasts of the field admired it, and thereupon did homage to him. O how
beautiful and glorious is his soul become by Regeneration, the image of God,
that both Saints, Angels and Jesus Christ, are taken with it, and wonder at it.
He that would not hear, when the disciples were speaking and wondering at the
buildings of the material temple, but contemned it, did both hear, see, and
admire, at one piece of this spiritual temple; when Jesus heard the Centurions
words, he marvelled and said to them that followed him, I have not found so
great faith, no not in Israel, Mat. 8.10, 15, and 28. Nay Christ is so taken
with it, that his heart is ravished and lost with it, he he is behearted with
it, Cant. 4.9, 10.

It is observable that the blessed God after every days work in the creation of
the world, Genesis 1.
takes a view of what he had made, he saw it was good; but when he had made man
the sixth day, after his own image, and then took a review of his works, and
saw every thing that he had made, behold it was very good, or extreme good. So
good that it caused delight and complacency in God, and called for wonder and
contemplation from man; Behold it was very good; no doubt but the making of man
so noble and holy, did above all the visible creatures, so affect the heart of
God, that he liked the house much the better, because of so rare an inhabitant
which he had made to dwell in it. Therefore when he had made man, he made no
more, man being so fair a piece, such curious workmanship, that the infinite
God resolved to rest and delight in him. So when he creates a soul in Christ
Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. he rejoices over his new workmanship with
exceeding joy, and rests in his love, Ephesians. 3.17. But when he shall finish his
new creation (for he will print man's holiness in the second edition in a larger
letter, and fairer character, then it was at first) and bring it forth in the
other world, twill infinitely surpass the stately fabric of heaven and earth.
And O how, how will it take, not only perfect spirits, but even the God of the
spirits of all flesh! Friend, can that be less then eminently excellent, which
does thus ravish the heart of God himself, with admiration at it, and affection
to it! Would this tend to thy dishonor or disadvantage, to be made like unto
him, who is the foundation and ocean of all excellencies and perfections?

Secondly, Contraria ^uxta se p^sita magis cluces. cunt.
Regeneration is the destruction of sin the greatest evil; therefore it must
needs be excellent; Contraries put together will illustrate one another; the
baseness and loathsomness of sin, will be a good foil to set off the beauty and
loveliness of Grace. For which cause I shall speak the more to the filthiness
of sin: For as the better any good is, the more excellent it is to be full of
it: So the worse any evil is, the more excellent it is to be free from it.
Besides, dying to sin, being one essential part of Regeneration, I shall not at
all digress.

Now, Sin is the greatest evil in the world; there was none like it before it,
nor ever shall be after it. This Brat of the Devil is so vile and abominable,
that it is very hard to find out a name futable to its ugly nature. Those
terms by which it is called, of leprofie, spot, plague, vomit, mire, scum,
ulcers, issues, dead carcass, exhalation from a grave, the vessel into which
nature emptieth it self, filthiness, superfluity of naughtiness, the pollution
of a new born Infant, and many more; these all come far short of showing the
poisonous evil which is in sin: Therefore the Apostle, when he christens this
child of disobedience calls it by its surname, That sin by the commandment
might appear exceeding sinful, Romans 7.13. The Apostle there does discharge the
Law, and charge all upon his own lust, which by the commandment takes occasion
(as water at a bridge that stops and hinders it) to rage the more; or possibly
as a foul face by a glass, so sin by the commandment appeared to be exceeding
sinful. Mark, the Apostle does not say, that sin by the glass of the Law
appeared to be exceeding foul and filthy, or exceeding deformed and ugly, or
exceeding hellish or devilish, but exceeding sinful, this includes all them and
much more: Had he studied a thousand years for a name, he could not have called
it by a worse name then its own, sinful sin.

Luther says, that could a man but see perfectly the evil of his sins on
earth, it would be an hell to him; such a frightful ugly monster is sin.

Look on sin which way thou will, and it is exceeding sinful, the evil of evils.

Take it in its nature, it is a deviation from Gods Law, a wandering from his
word, a casting his Law behind the back; the Law is strait, sin is
crookedness, Psalm. 125.5. The Law is holy, sin is defilement, Romans 7.12. 2 Cor.
7.1. The Law is just, sin is unrighteousness, 1 John 1.7. The Law is liberty,
sin is bondage, Jam. 2.8, 12. 2 Timothy 2.26. Sin is a defacing of Gods image, it
blots and blurs that fair and beautiful writing; not only meritoriously, as it
provokes God to withdraw his Grace, but physically, Numb. 15.30. Romans 2.23, 24.
2 Samuel 12.12.
as one contrary expels another: Hereby it dishonours Gods name, and
reproacheth his Majesty; for what greater disgrace can be done to a Prince then
to tread his orders under foot, and tear, and scratch, and deface his picture!

Nay, Lev. 22.26. Zec. 11.8. Romans 8.7. Romans 1.30. 1 Sa. 15.23. Isa. 1.2. Romans
6, 16. Psalm. 14.1.
its a defying and fighting against God, a walking contrary to him, a daring of
him; it is enmity against him, loathing him, hatred of him, contrariety to him;
it is against his Soveraignity, and so is rebellion; against his mercy, and so
is unkindness; against his justice, and so is unrighteousness; against his
wisdom, and so is folly; against his will, Omne seccatu est deicidium.
and so is stubbornness. Were it strong enough, it would ungod him; were the
sinners power according to his corrupt heart, he would pluck God out of Heaven.
I would I were above God, says Spira. When the body of sin is nailed as a
thief on the Cross, yet even then it will rage (as he) and spit out poison
against Heaven.

Reader, Can thou find in thine heart to hug and embrace such a Traitor
against the gracious and blessed God! To stretch out thine hand against God (as
every sinner does) and strengthen thy self against the Almighty! Vid. Car. in
loc. 10 this purpose.
Job 15.25. Stretch out thine hand against God! No man should lift up a word
against God; our mouths should show forth his praise. Stretch out thine hand
against God! no man should lift up a thought against God; our meditations of
him, should be for him. Stretch out thine hand against God; every man should
bow down and worship before God, and be satisfied in what ever he says and
does. Stretch out thine hand against God! thou art bound to stretch out thine
heart, and hand, and tongue, to think, and speak, and act, and all for God, and
all little enough.

Take sin in its effect, and what evil is like it? Eccl. 1.3.
it is the cause of all other evils. Do thou consider the emptiness, vanity
and vexation in the creatures? the heavens fighting against man, the earth
bearing thorns and briars; the diseases in men's bodies, the burning Feavor,
watery Dropsy, aching teeth, running Gout, wracking Stone, renting Colic, the
quivering lips, trembling loins, ghastly looks of dying men; The horrors of
conscience, flashes of the infernal fire, curses of the Law, wrath of God,
torments of Hell, all these are the fruits of sin. All misery calls sin
mother; this is the root of bitterness upon which they grow; the wages of sin
is death, Romans 6.21, ult. and 5.12. that big-bellied word Death has all these
woeful brats in its belly, and Sin is the father that begat them: Sin turned
Adam out of Paradise, Angels into Devils, Sodom and Gomorah into ashes,
flourishing Families, Cities, Kingdoms into ruinous heaps: Sin shuts heaven
against man, laid the foundation of that dark vault of hell; Sin kindled the
fire of hell; Sin feeds it with fuel, and will keep it burning for ever: Oh
what an evil is sin! who would not hate it more then hell!

Is it good to play with such fire as sin is? did thou believe sin to be the
cause of all this, thou would never open thy heart or mouth more for it. Do
thou know that as where the effect is good, the cause is better; so where the
effect is bad, the cause is worse? Can there be worse effects then eternal
separation from God, and suffering the vengeance of eternal fire? how bad is
sin then which is the cause of them!

Take sin as a punishment, and it is the evil, the only evil; there is no
suffering like to this, to be given up to a course of sining. Reader, take heed
of continuing an hour longer in thine ungodly practices; it may be thou have
been ready to think it a great happiness to sin without control, to run in the
road of the flesh, and to meet with no rubs, to prosper though thou art wicked;
I tell thee (and think of it the longest day thou live, for it highly
concerns thee) that the infinite God never claps a more dreadful curse on any
man or woman on this side hell, then to give them up to sin: If God should give
thee up to the sword, famine, most painful diseases, to thy most cruel, potent,
and malicious enemies, to be wrackt by them at pleasure, these were nothing to
this, to be given up to one sin. When God has used his rods, scourging men,
and they will not reform, then he takes this ax, and presently execution
follows; to be delivered up to the power of men, may be the lot of Gods sons,
but to be delivered up to the power of sin, is the portion of Rebels, of
Reprobates.

This is the stinging whip with which God punishes Ephrahim; 2 Timothy 3.13. 2
^hess. 2.10, 11.
Ephraim is joined to Idols, there is his impiety; but what grievous punishment
shall he have for his Godprovoking Idolatry? Let him alone, Hos. 4.17. It is
not I will send the raging pestilence, or cruel famine, or bloody sword, but he
is joined to idols, let him alone; I will not have him disturbed or molested,
but he shall have his will, though it prove his everlasting woe, Romans 1.21, 22.
Psalm. 81.11, 12. Hos. 8.11.

It is a woe with a witness, 1 Cor 5. comp. with 2 Cor. 7.
for God to let thy lusts, like so many ravenous Lions loose upon thee, and to
lay the reins of thy sins upon thy own neck. We read of one delivered up to
Satan, yet he was saved; but never of any delivered up to their sins, but they
were damned.

It was a sad sight which Abraham saw when he beheld flakes of fire rained from
heaven upon the Sodomites; but it was a sadder which Lot beheld when he saw the
fire of hell burning in their hearts, and breaking out in their lives, and his
righteous soul was vexed therewith.

Reader, have a care that thou never in thy heart plead more for sin; who would
open his mouth for such a monster, when there is no evil like it! Does God
offer thee any thing to thy hurt, when he would make a separation between thy
soul and thy sins? does he desire any thing to thy disadvantage when he
desires thee to give a bill of divorce to sin, which is the sourse of all
sorrows, the only enemy of thy best friend the ever-blessed God, and to be
given up to which is the greatest plague, and punishment on this side hell:
Tell me, is not regeneration excellent, which kills such venomous serpents,
which executes such traitors, which mortifyeth these earthly members, and
dasheth these brats of Babylon against the wall.

Thirdly, the price paid for this pearl does loudly speak its excellency.
Reader, little do thou think what regeneration cost. I tell thee (and thou
may well wonder at it) The son of God came from heaven, suffered the
boundless rage of Devils, and infinite wrath of God, in man's nature, upon this
very errand, to purchase regeneration, and sanctification, for poor sinners.
Read and admire, Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation; but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1
Pet. 1.18, 19. See the worth of this ware, by that which it cost. The precious
blood of Christ; surely it was a jewel of inestimable value, which the Son of
God thought worth his precious blood.

As lightly as thou think of the death of sin, and the life of
righteousness, the Lord Jesus underwent more then any one in hell feels, to buy
them of his father for the sons of men. Ah none knows but God and Christ,
what it cost to buy off man's debts, and guilt, and to procure a new stock of
holiness, for his poor bankrupt creature to set up with again. Who his own self
bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, might live
unto righteousness. 1 Pet. 2.24. Had man kept his original purity, the Lord
Jesus might have spared all his pains. Tit 2.14. Ioh 10.10.
The second Adam came to restore that jewel to man, of which the first Adam
robbed him. This rare jewel, this choice mercy, was regeneration and holiness,
and this Christ looks upon as the full reward of his sufferings. He shall see
the travail of his soul, and be satisfied. Isa. 53.11. The truth is, Christ had
exceeding hard labor (the Greek Fathers call it unknown sufferings) he had
many a bitter pang, many a sharp throw; but for joy that children are born of
God, that those throws bring forth a numerous issue of new creatures, he
forgets his sorrows; He shall see the travail of his soul and be satisfied.

Consider friend, did Christ esteem regeneration worth^ his blood, to merit it,
and is it not worth thy prayers, and tears, and utmost endeavors to obtain
it? Did Christ come to destroy the works of the Devil which is sin, 1 John 3.8.
and will thou build them up? did the Lord Jesus come to build up the temple of
holiness, and will thou pull it down? did Christ think it worth the while to be
reproached, condemned, crucified, and all to make thee holy, and will thou be
such an enemy to the cross of Christ, as by continuing in sin, to deprive him
of that which he earnd so dearly? Why will thou bind thy self to be a slave to
Satan, when he redeemed thee with such a vast sum?

Did the merciful God send his son into the world to bless thee, in turning
thee from thine iniquity, and can thou look upon that great blessing, as thy
bondage? Acts 3. ult. Believe it, God had servants enough (even Angels that are
ever ready to do his will) to send ordinary gifts by; surely then it was some
extrordinary present that he thought none worthy to carry, and would trust none
with, but his only Son. God sent him to bless you, in turning every one of
you from your iniquities. I hope reader thou will have higher thoughts of
holiness, and worse thoughts of sin all thy days; surely the son of God was
not so prodigal of his most precious blood, as to pour it out for any thing
that was not superlatively excellent.

Fourthly, Regeneration and the renewing of man will appear to be excellent, in
that it is the great end of God in his works The more noble any being is, the
more excellent ends it propounds to it self in its working; thence it is that a
man has higher ends then a beast; the ends of a beast are only to please
sense, but the ends of a man are to satisfy his understanding. Hence also the
ends of a Christian are more excellent then the ends of other men; his being is
more noble, and so are his ends, To please, glorify, and enjoy God. How
excellent then is that which the infinitely perfect God makes his end! Surely,
the Most High cannot propound any low ends in his operations; he that is the
only wise God must have eminent designs and ends.

Now unclasp the secret book of Gods decree, and look into it as far as the
word will warrant thee, and thou shall find that in that internal work of
Election, God had the renewing of man after his image in his eye, and to be his
end; According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. As an
Artificer or Statuary, that has many pieces of stone all alike (hewn out of
the same Quarry) in his yard, sets some apart from the rest in his own
thoughts, intending to make some choice Statue, some special piece of them.

So when all mankind was before God, he did in his eternal thoughts set some
apart to be choice pieces, to be holy and without blame.

Go from Gods decree to its execution, from his inward to his outward actions,
and thou shall find thy renewing after his image to be still in his eye. In
thy creation he thought of thy regeneration^; Prove. 16.4. Psalm. 100.4, 5. Rev.
4. ult.
he made thee that he might new make th^^: Thou art a man, that thou might
become a Christian; God made thee a rational creature, that thou might be
made a new creature; He gave thee the matter, in giving thee a body and a
rational soul, that thereby thou might be capable of the form, which is the
impression of his image on both. There must be a tree before it can be hewed
and squared for some curious building. God did not make thee to eat, and drink,
and sleep, and toil in thy calling, but to honor him, and to live to him, which
are the actions of the new creature.

Trace God further, from creation to providence, and therein also thou may
observe this to be his end. Why does he send the warm Summer of prosperity, and
refresh thee with his clearing beams and influences, but to cause thee to
blossom, and bud, and ripen in the fruits of holiness? There is mercy with thee
that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. Why does he send the nipping winter of
adversity, but to kill the hurtful weeds of thy lusts? This is his end in
afflicting, even the taking avay of sin, Isa. 27.9. He uses the flail, that
the husks may fly off; when one key will not open the door of thy heart, he
will try another. Why does he interweave mercy and affliction, that his
providence toward the children of men are chequer-work, white and black,
black and white; mercy and affliction, affliction and mercy, but because his
infinite wisdom sees that this mixture will suit best with his ends, the
purifying and renewing his creature? If all the year were summer, the sap of
the trees would be quite exhausted; if all were winter, it would be quite
buried; If thou had nothing in thy body but natural heat, it would burn thee
up; if nothing but moisture, it would drown thee; therefore thy radical
moisture allayeth thy natural heat, and thy natural heat gives bounds to thy
radical moisture; and each well tempered, make an excellent constitution of
body. If thou had nothing but mercy, thou would be wanton and conceited; if
nothing but misery, thou would be too much dejected; therefore God sends
mercy to make thee cheerful, and misery to keep thee awful. The good Physician
tempers his drugs wisely, and weighs them exactly, and so prescribes and
gives them as they may best conduce to the carrying on of his own end, the
spiritual health of his Patients.

Fifthly, Regeneration will appear to be excellent, in that it is the special
work of God himself.

Grace is the immediate creatue of God; man can ruin, but not renew himself;
Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God, John 1.13. Man may lay some claim (though there also God is
the principal) to the fatherhood of our fleshly beings; but God only can lay
claim to the fatherhood of our spiritual beings. Holiness is a beam of light,
darted forth from none but the Sun of righteousness; We are his workmanship,
Ephesians. 2.10. His workmanship both by way of efficiency and excellency.

How beautiful is that structure which has such a Builder? what a rare work
must that be, which has such a workman! Surely, that is a choice plant which
is of Gods own planting. O who would not be in love with so fair a child for
the fathers sake!

The creation of our outward beings, as we are men, Job 10.8, 1.10.
is the work of God, Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me, Psalm. 119.77.
God makes every man as well as the first man; Nature and natural causes are
nothing but the order in which, and the tools with which he is pleased to work.

Now this work of God is excellent; it is the Masterpiece of the visible
Creation; Man is the fair workmanship of a wise Artificer, says one Heathen:
The bold attempt of daring nature, says another. One of the Ancients calls
man The Miracle of miracles; Another, The measure of all things, A third, The
worlds Epitome, The world in a small volume.

The body which is the worst half of man, Psalm. 1 ^9 14.15.
is curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth, and made in secret; (as
curious workmen, when they have some choice piece in hand, they perfect it in
private, and then bring it forth to the light for men to gaze on) In thy book
were all my members written, Psalm. 139.14, 15.

A skilful Architect who is to set up some stately building, will draw a model
of it in his book, or upon a table, before he will adventure to set it up, to
be sure that it shall be done exactly. So to show what an exact piece the body
of man is, God is said to work it by the book. But the soul, which is Gods work
too, is a more exquisite piece; the body is as it were the sheath, Dan. 7.15.
the soul is the glittering sword; the body is but the cabinet, this is the
jewel; it is by this that man claims kindred with the Angels in Heaven, and
surpasses all creatures on Earth.

Consider then, if this work of Gods hands, this visible Creation be so
excellent, how excellent is the invisible Creation, the creating man in Christ
unto good works! Surely that is curious work, workmanship indeed.

The Tables of stone, hewed immediately by the hand of God, and on which he had
with his own fingers written the Law, was such a piece, that mortal eyes could
not behold it without astonishment and admiration: What a rare Manuscript was
that, where the book, the matter, the writing were all of Gods own making and
doing! But the writing of the Law in the fleshly tables of the heart, by the
Spirit of God, is much more glorious.

I am very willing, Friend, to convince thee of the excellency of Regeneration,
and therefore would speak more to this head. Think of what thou please, which
thin eunderstanding can judge excellent, and thou shall find the image of God
far more excellent.

Is wealth excellent? Luke 16.11 1 Timothy 6, 7. Mat 6.19, ^0. Prove. 8.18.
this is the true riches; others are but the shadow, this is the substance;
other riches are but for a short time, these are for ever, durable riches and
righteousness: Other riches will go only (as brass farthings in some particular
places) in this beggarly low world of earth; but these (like gold and silver go
in all countries) are current coin even in the higher world of Heaven.

Is wisdom excellent? this is wisdom, the fear of the Lord is the beginning
(the word fignifieth the apex, the top, the perfection) of wisdom, Prove. 1.7
Job 28.2. The pious man is the prudent man: He alone can judge rightly of
things, set a due price upon things, propound to himself the noblest ends, and
use the best means; therefore he is called by way of eminency, A man of wisdom,
Mic. 6.9. The knowing subtle Pharisees for want of this, were but learned
fools, Matthew. 23.17. Sinner and Fool are Synonima's in Scripture: The English
word Fool is thought to come from the Greek (...), which signifies wicked.

Is beauty excellent? Grace is the greatest beauty; the beauty of holiness,
Psalm. 110.5. O how comely is the new creature! never any saw it but fell in
love with it. The Spouse of Christ is the fairest among women: Thou art all
fair, my love, thou art all fair. Cant. 4.1.
Godliness is such a beauty, that as I have said before, God himself is taken
with it. Sin is a spot, a defilement; this beauty is inward, it sits upon the
face of the most noble part of man, the Soul, and thereby is the more comely;
its lasting, not liable to the rage of a disease, or wrinckles of old age, but
always increasing (whilst here) to a greater perfection.

Is pleasure excellent? Godliness is pleasant; ^rov. 3.17
Regeneration brings the soul to its center in which it must needs rest. The
very work of serving God is a reward in it self; in the keeping of them
(meaning Gods commandments) there is great reward: Observe, P^^ 9 1^.
in keeping of them: The service of God affords such satisfaction that Gods
servants would not leave it for all this world, though they were to receive no
recompense in the other world. The Precepts of God are sweeter then the honey;
how sweet then are his Promises?

Is life excellent? This is the true life. ( Eternal life, says Augustine, is
the true life. This is the seed, the beginning of eternal life, Joh. 17.3.) All
unregenerate men are dead, are but walking ghosts, or moving carcasses; their
souls are but like salt to keep their bodies from putrefaction for a season.
The Heathen said of a vicious man that lived to be old, Multum jactatus est,
no^multum n^vi gavit. S^n ad Panlin.
alluding to Mariners, He was much tossed ^p and down, but sailed not at all.
All the time of thy natural life, till thou art converted, is lost: Paul dates
his life from his regeneration. We count not a tree living for standing in a
garden, if it bring not forth fruit.

Is honor excellent? Holiness is honorable; Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord
of Hosts, Psalm. 93.5. It Is more honor to be a Member of Christ, then to be
Monarch of Christendom. Godliness is the honorable livery which Christ
purchased for, and bestowed on the society of Christians: He gave himself for
his Church, that he might present it to himself a GLORIOUS CHVRCH without spot
or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.25, 27.

In a word, holiness is the honor and excellency of God himself, Exodus 15.11.
He is said to be glorious in holiness; he is called rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.3.
but glorious in holiness; his Mercy is his treasure, but his Holiness is his
honor. He swears by his holiness, Psalm. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my
holiness, that I will not lie unto David. Great persons (though sinfully) will
swear by their titles, by their honors, by that which they glory most; inthese
are their oaths that are most binding with them. The great God (in whom is no
iniquity) swears by his holiness, as his crown glory, his great excellency.
He is above thirty times called The Holy one of Israel. This is the excellency
which Angels, and perfect spirits in heaven, and Saints on earth do so much
admire him for, Is. 6.3. Rev. 4.8.

Nay, as gold, Exodus 24. and ^0.^5. ^^v. 6.^^ (...) 16 23. Ps. 105.42. Isz.
5^.10. Pr. 1^5 17
because it is the most excellent metal, is laid not only over p^uter and
brass, but also over silver it self; so because holiness is the excellency, the
perfection of God, its laid not only over his Servants, his Sanctuary, his
Services, his Word, his Works, his Sabbath, his Temple, and every thing that
belongs to him, but also over all his other choice Attributes; his Power is
holy power, his Mercy is holy mercy, his Wisdom is holy wisdom; Holiness is the
perfection of all his excellent Attributes. For were it possible (which is high
blasphemy for any to imagine) for those Attributes to be separated from his
holiness, they would degenerate, his Wisdom into craft, Gurn. Ar. par. 2. p.
2.9.
his Justice into cruelty, his Mercy into foolish pity, and his Sovereignty
into tyranny; it is the Holiness of God which poiseth every one. O the
excellency, the excellency of holiness, who knows its worth!

Reader, what do thou think of this third subject of consideration! The
excellency of regeneration, and holiness, which God requires of thee, for the
avoiding of hell, and attaining of heaven! Tell me, does God require any thing
to thy wrong? If God required of thee to live a thousand years on earth, and to
spend all that time in hunger, cold, nakedness, disgrace, pains, and
imprisonment, or otherwise thou should not escape unquenchable burnings, and
enjoy eternal life, thou were worse then mad if thou did not accept of, and
obey such a command. How hearty and thankful then should thy acceptance be of
Jesus Christ to be thy Lord and Savionr, of dying to sin, and living to, and
delighting thy self in his blessed Majesty, which is all he desires of thee! O
do not refuse when thou art so well offered. Is it possible that thou can
read so much of the excellency of regeneration, how it is the image of the
glorious God, the destruction of the evil of evils, the fruit of the death of
Jesus Christ, the end which infinite wisdom propounds in his workings, the
special workmanship of Gods own hands, the high honor and perfection of the
mighty possessour of heaven and earth, and thy soul not be in love with it, nor
breath after it, O that I were regenerated! O that my soul had those true
treasures, those spiritual pleasures, that wisdom, that life, that honor, that
beauty, that excellency, which no tongue can commend sufficiently! O that the
pure image of God were imprinted on me! O that Christ might see the travail of
his soul upon me, and be satisfied!

I have read that when Zeuxis the famous painter had drawn his masterpeece, the
picture of Helena, Nicostratus the Athemian painter beholding it, stood amazed
at its rareness, and admired the exquisiteness of it: There stands by a rich
ignorant wretch, who would needs know what Nicostratus discovered in it worthy
of so much wonder, O Friend (says he) had thou my eyes, thou would not ask
such a question, but rather admire it, as I do. It may be Reader when thou
see the Saints admiring the beauty of holiness, ravished with the excellency
of Gods image, so extremely taken with it, that they read, hear, watch, fast,
pray, mourn, weep, suffer any thing, all things to enjoy more of it, thou art
ready to wonder what they see in holiness worthy of such admiration, and such
diligent endeavors; but I tell thee, Had thou their eyes, instead of
wondering at them, thou would wonder with them, I, and work with them too, and
that hard, for holiness.

The fourth Subject of consideration, The necessity of Regeneration.
FOurthly, Consider the absolute necessity of Regeneration; if it were not so
excellent, yet it is a thing of absolute necessity, and therefore must not be
neglected. It is not a work of indifferency, which may be done or may not be
done, but a work of indispensable necessity, which must be done or thou art
undone for ever. Reader here is an argument, which neither the flesh nor world
nor devil can answer, and therefore it must not be denied. It is indeed so
fruitful a blessing, that if thou have this thou needst no more; every thing
that is worth ought, is in the womb of it; but it is so needful that if thou
have not this, thou have nothing; the whole world cannot make up the want of
this.

There are many things, about which (possibly) thou spendest much time, and
take much pains, which are nothing at all necessary in comparison of this.

Riches are not necessary; the want of temporal, may be supplied by the
fruition of spiritual riches: Thou may be poor in the world, and yet rich in
faith, and heir of a Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Nay, riches are so far from being
absolutely needful, that they may be hurtful to thee. Thou might, as the
Reubenites, should thou have good land here, take up short of the Land of
Promise. Christ calls riches thorns, Matthew. 13.22. and surely it is hard to
touch them and not to prick thy fingers; How hardly shall arich man enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven!

Pleasures are not necessary; He that has little but misery here, may find
mercy hereafter. Though Job had his sores and pains, yet he had a right to the
pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore: He that endured hunger, cold,
thirst, nakedness, watching, fasting, weariness, painfulness; that was
scourged, imprisoned, stoned, yet was a chosen vessel unto God, and heir to a
crown of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.23. to 29. Acts 9.15. 2 Timothy 4.6. Besides,
pleasures may be hurtful to thee; those bees have their stings as well as their
honey; and many feed so plentifully on such luscious food, that they surfeit
themselves. Aristotle speaks of a piece a ground in Sicily, which sends forth
such a strong smell of fragrant flowers, to all the fields thereabout, that
dogs cannot hunt there, the scent is so confounded with the smell of those
flowers. Earthly pleasures do not seldom hinder our scent and sense of
spiritual delights.

Honors are not necessary: A man may be condemned and lightly esteemed by men,
and yet be commended and highly esteemed by God. Disgrace may be the way to
glory; Joseph went through a prison into a palace; and Jesus from a shameful
cross to a glorious crown. Honors also may be hurtful to thee. Some climb so
high, that they break their necks: Those that are in high places are apt to
have their heads giddy, and thereby are in great danger of falling. Hamans
height and glory brought him to be high at last on the gallows.

Friends and relations are not necessary: He that is friendless on Earth, may
be a favorite of Heaven; when no man stood by Paul, the Lord was with him, and
strengthened him; when David's father and mother forsook him, God took the care
of him. When those Stars vanished, the Sun arose. These also may be hurtful to
thee, thou may catch their diseases; Ammon was the worse for Jonadab, and
Ahab the more wicked for Jezebel.

Health is not necessary: A distempered body may have an healthy soul: When the
outward man decays, the inward man may be renewed day by day. No disease, so
it be not spiritual, can keep the Physician of souls from visiting his
Patients; sanctified sickness is far better then unsanctified soundness.

Nay, life it self (which is far more worth then all the foresaid particulars)
is not necessary, but in order to this spiritual life of Regeneration; If that
work be done, a man by losing his life may be a gainer. Some by yiedling up
their Leases, which were but for term of years, have got the Feesimple, the
inheritance for ever; by parting with their natural lives, they have got
possession of eternal life. But Friend, Regeneration is absolutely necessary.
The Emperor told the Mariner (when he would have dissuaded him from going to
Sea, Necess^ est u^ eam, neut vivan.
because the waters were rough, and it might endanger his life) It Is more
necessary that I go then that I live. I tell thee, it is more necessary that
thou live spiritually, then that thou live naturally; thy riches, honors,
pleasures, health, friends, are but toys and trifles to Regeneration; and
truly, life it self is little or nothing worth, but as it makes thee capable
of getting and enjoying this. O what a poor empty shadow is the life of the
greatest Prince, that is a stranger to fellowship with God, which Regeneration
brings the soul to?

The reason why these forementioned things are not necessary, is partly,
because the want of all these things may be made up in the enjoyment of God;
Verily, I say unto you, that ye who have followed me in the Regeneration,
Matthew. 19.28.
when the Son of man shall sit upon his throne, shall also sit upon twelve
thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel: There is no man that has left
house, or brethren, or sisters, Mark 10.29, 30.
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the
Gospels; but he shall receive an hundred fold in time, houses, and brethren,
and sisters, and mothers, and children, and land with persecution, and in the
world to come life everlasting. The regenerate, though never so poor, naked,
disgraced, sickly, yet in the Sun they have all those beams, and much much
more. As Alexander told Parmenio (when in the beginning of a battle, he was
earnest with him to send some forces to regain their weapons and baggage then
newly lost) Let ussecure the main battle; for if the field be won, we shall
recover all our baggage with advantage. So if the soul be safe, being by
Regeneration grafted into Christ, if thou winest the main battle against sin
and Satan, thou will recover those with advantage. Those things are not
necessary, partly, because the want of them will not undo a man for ever; a
man's eternal estate may be secured, though those things be removed; but
Regeneration is indispensably necessary, because nothing can make up the want
of it; not all the golden Mines in India, not the sweetest Paradise of earthly
pleasures, not the highest chair of state, nor friends, nor kindred, nor
health, nor strength, nor life, can make up the want of this: If this be
wanting, thy God is wanting, thy Christ is wanting, thy heaven, thy happiness,
thy All is wanting. The want of this will undo thee for ever; 'twill make thee
miscarry in the Ocean, this leak will sink thee eternally: It is a standing Law
of Heaven, That except a man be converted, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 18.3.

There is in regard of the ordination of God, as great a necessity of
Regeneration, as of Jesus Christ; for what advantage can thou have by all the
riches and revenues of the Son of God, till by Regeneration thou art married to
him, and made one with him? Observe, Reader, this fourfold necessity of
Regeneration.

It is See the necessity of it farther in the reasons of the doctrine, and the
first use of Information
necessary in regard of Gods precept, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? Ezekiel.
33.11, 31, 32. Isa. 1.16, 17. Jer. 3.1 Hosea 14.1. James 4.9. There is a
necessity, either of hearing Gods voice, or feeling Gods hands; either the
commandments of God must be obeyed by thee, or the judgments of God must be
inflicted on thee: It is a Gospel-precept, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. now Gospel-precepts
must be minded by all that would partake of Gospel-priviledges.

It is necessary in regard of the purpose of God; Elect according to the fore
knowledge of God through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience, and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2. Though God did not choose
men because they were holy, yet he chose men to be holy; though he appointed
not men to be saved, because they were Saints, yet he appointed men to be
Saints, and then to be saved.

It is necessary in regard of the passion of Christ; he died for sin, that men
might die to sin; he laid down his life, that men might lay down their lusts;
his passion is a City of Refuge to the Penitent, not a sactuary to the
presumptuous; God intended it to help men out of, not to hold them in the mire
of sin; He is the Author of eternal salvation to them that obey him, Hebr. 5.9.
He died because men were sinners, but he died that men might be Saints; He
suffered, the just for the unjust, to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. Now man and
God can never be brought together, till the emnity which is in the heart of man
against God be removed. If ever thou have Christ for thy Priest, to satisfy
Gods Justice for thy sins, it is absolutely necessary, that thou accept him for
thy Prince, to subdue thee to his service. Had Christ come to procure man a
pardon, Gur. Arm. ^par, ^17.
and not to restore his lost holiness, he had been a minister of sin, and
instead of bringing glory to God, he had set sin in the throne, and only
obtained a liberty for the creature to dishonor God without control. Again
says the same accurate writer, In vain do men think to shroud themselves under
Christ's wings, from the hue and cry of their accusing consciences, while
wickedness finds a sanctuary in them. Christ was sent from God, not to secure
men in, but to save men from their sins.

It is necessary in regard of the promises of God. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, turn to me, says the Lord of hosts, and I will turn to you, says the
Lord of hosts, Zach. 1.3. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Jam.
4.8. If ever God draw nigh to thee in mercy, thou must draw nigh to him in
duty. He that shall have the reward must do the work. The precepts of God must
be written on the heart, otherwise the promises of God shall never fall down on
thine head. Isa 1.16, 17, and 55.7. 1 King. 8.35. Prove. 28.13.

Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God, Matthew. 5.8. It Is the
pure heart alone that has the assurance of the pure heaven.

Thou see now I hope clearly the absolute necessity of Regeneration; what
therefore can thou think to do without it? O ponder this again and again,
that there is no escape, no evasion; God will not vary from his Law.

Thy dying to sin is necessary; sin must die, or thy soul cannot live; If ye
live after the the flesh ye shall die; but if ye through the spirit do mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13, 6. Gal. 6.6, 7. Surely thou
can not think that Heaven will be a stye for swine, or a kennel for dogs that
feed on filth and carrion. Believe it, if any iniquity be let go, thy life must
go for its life. The Jaylors paid dear for letting Peter escape, Act. 12. Herod
commanded them to be put to death. Truly so dear must thou pay for the escape
of sin; 'twil bring the second death, even eternal death upon thee: be thy sin
as near and as dear as Isaac it must be sacrificed; be it never so small, it
must not be spared. Caesar was stabbed with bodkins. I have somewhere read that a
man and a Crocodile never meet, but one dies: It Is certain, sin and the soul
never meet but one dies; if sin live, the soul; dies; if sin die, the soul
lives; there is no parting stakes, or retreating upon equal terms. Maurice of
Newport told his Soldiers, when he had sent away his boats, that there was no
flying, the Spaniards being before them, and the Sea behind them, Either ye
must eat up and destroy those Spaniards, or drink up this ocean. Friend, such
is thy case, either thou must destroy thy sins, or drink up the bottomless
ocean of the Lords wrath.

Answer me seriously; thou will say thou do not love such a man, so well as
to be hanged for him. Do thou love sin so well as to be damned for it? Do
thou love thy Drunkenness, and Swearing, and Uncleanness, and scoffing at
Godliness, so well as to burn eternally in hell for them? Do thou love thy
pride, and worldliness, and lustful thoughts, and Atheism, and carnal
mindedness, so well as to be tormented day and night, for ever and ever for
them? A very Coward will fight, when he must either kill or be killed. Willt
not thou fight manfully, when sin will kill thee, if it be not killed by thee?
Ahab out of foolish pity, gave Benhadad his life, when he ought to have slain
him: but the requital which Benhadad made, was to kill Ahab, 1 King. cap. ult.
v. 31, 34. such a requital sin will make thee if thou favor it. (...) the
masculine article shewe^h that its to be referred to (...) Mr. Manton on ^ude
p. 38.


Follow after peace and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14. Observe how peremptory, God is in that place, that without holiness no
man shall see God. It is not said that without peace, no man shall see God, but
without holiness no man shall see God. Peace may be broken in the quarrel of
truth and holiness, and yet for all that a man may see God. Jeremiah was a man
of contention, and yet a man for the beatifical vision; but they that are not
holy cannot see God. A pure eye only can see a pure God. As the eye which has
dust in it without, or thick vapors stopping the nerves within, cannot see,
except it be cleansed from the one, and purged from the other: So a man, the
eye of whose mind is clouded with the mist of sin, cannot behold God, till he
be cleansed. The Christians happiness in heaven, consists in such a vision of
God, as shall make him like God, 1 John 3.2. but a dusky glass cannot represent
an image. When the Sun of righteousness shall shine upon a pure Crystal glass,
a clean unspotted soul, twill cause a glorious reflection indeed.

To wind up this fourth subject of consideration. Reader, Affairs of absolute
indispensable necessity, should, like weighty things, make a deep impression
upon thy spirit. Urge thy soul often with this; that of all things in the
world, regeneration is the one thing necessary; Let conscience press it on
thee, I must be converted, or condemned; here is the word of the living God for
it, and such a word as cannot possibly go unfulfilled. O my soul, what say
thou to it? Except thou art born again, thou can not see the Kingdom of God.
There is a necessity of thy turning in time, or burning eternally. How will thou answer this text and many more, in the other world? Can thou think to
make the infinite God a liar, and in despite of him and his word to escape
hell? O do not deceive thy self; God will be true, though every man be a liar:
therefore set about this work, that is thus absolutely needful, before thou art
irrecoverably woeful.

Friend, I would advise thee to do as the Patriaches did; Joseph had told them
that Except your younger brother come with you, ye shall not see my face. Jacob
their father would have them (notwithstanding this express assertion) to
venture into Joseph's presence, without their brother. But what said Judah? Genesis
43.2, (...).
The man did solemnly protest unto us saying, Ye shall not see my face, except
your brother be with you. If thou will send our brother with us, we will go
down, but if thou will not send him, we will not go down; for the man said unto
us, Ye shall not see my face except your brother be with you. So, do thou
consider, and lay it home to thy soul, that the great God of heaven and earth
has said, that except regeneration be with thee, be in thee, thou shall not
see his face with comfort; and though thy deceitful heart and the devil may
wish thee to venture into his presence, in the other world without it; yet do
thou reply, the almighty and faithful God has solemnly protested unto me, that
except regeneration be with me, I shall not see him face to face, and enjoy the
beatifical vision. Therefore if I be regenerated, I will go and look death,
judgment, God and Christ in the face, with courage and comfort; but if I be not
regenerated, I may (...) go, lest I die, lest I be damned eter^^^y. For God
has said unto me, Follow after holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord.

The fifth subject of Consideration, The Equity of Regeneration or living to
God.
FIfthly, Consider the Equity and reasonableness of that which God requires of
thee. I shall now appeal to thine own conscience whether there be not all the
reason in the world, that thy main work night and day should be to please and
glorify the Lord; if all come from him, should not the honor of all be given
to him? if he be infinite in wisdom, should he not in all his providence be
adored? if he be infinitely faithful, should he not in all his promises be
believed? if he be the first cause, should he not in all his precepts be
obeyed? if he be infinitely holy, should he not in all our approaches to him be
reverenced? if he be infinitely just and powerful, should he not in all his
threatenings be feared? if he be infinitely gracious and perfect, should he not
be heartily loved?

Religion is the highest reason, therefore conversion is called conviction,
Joh. 16.10. When a man's mouth is stopped, and his mind fully satisfied of the
reason of living to God, that he has nothing to object against (...) then he
is convinced. Rom 12.1
The offering upon thy soul and body unto God as a living sacrifice, is called
rational or reasonable service.

I shall offer thee three or four Questions, and I do verily believe that if
thou seriously consider them, thou can not but be convinced, that there is
all the reason in the world that thou should presently turn from sin unto God.

First, Is there not all the reason in the world, that the work should be for
the service and honor of the workman? that he who planted the vineyard, should
eat of the fruit of it? that he who made thee, should be served by thee? he who
owes the ground and builds an house, may rationally expect the benefit and
use of it; may not God thy Landlord who has reared and set up thine earthly
Tabernacle, appoint what conditions he pleases in the Lease which he grants
thee, how his own house should be employed, not to such and such sordid sinful
uses, but to the service and glory of his Majesty? is it rational that Gods
house should be employed to the Devils use?

Thy creation is such a tie to subjection that thou can never answer it; Ps.
100.22.
Serve the Lord with gladness; he has made us, and not we ourselves; David's
prayer is to this purpose, Thine hands have made me and fashioned me, O give me
understanding that I may keep thy commandments, Psa. 119.77. and 95.6. Isa.
43.7. Let thy conscience be judge, would not thou esteem it injustice for
another to have the honor and use of thy works, or of thine house? the Law
which is built upon reason, gives thee the service of thine own goods, houses
and lands; and why shall not God have thy service? with what face can thou
deny him that sowed, liberty to reap?

Secondly, Is there not all the reason in the world, that he who lives wholly
at another cost and charge, that is fed, clothed, preserved night and day,
protected at home and abroad, supplied with all necessaries, relieved in all
his exigencies, delivered in all his extremities by another, should live wholly
to him and do him service?

Do thou not know that thy being, and all thy comforts depend on God every
moment? that every bit of bread, every breath of air, every hours sleep, nay
every minutes abode on this side hell is altogether from his bounty and mercy;
that thou can not speak a word, nor think a thought, nor lift an hand, nor
stir a foot, nor open thine eyes to see, or thy mouth to eat or drink without
him? It Is his visitation that preserves thy spirit. Job 10.12. In him thou
live, movest, and have thy being; He is thy shield to defend thee from evil,
many mischiefs would daily befall thee; men would kill thee, devils would drag
thee to hell (O how they long for thee, and how ready they are to seize thee!)
did not the Lord curb and restrain them. Alexander told his Soldiers, I wake
that ye may sleep; Sure I am, he that preserves thee never stumbereth nor
sleeps; The Lord is the Captain of thy Lifeguard, to protect thee, and thy
Sun to refresh thee, and therefore do thou not owe him the glory of those
mercies, which his free grace bestows on thee! Thou do a little under God,
for the feeding and clothing of thy children and servants, and therefore
think that no duty, no service, is great enough for thee. O how infinitely
art thou bound to God for all thy time, health, strength, food, raiment, house,
friend, and every good thing that thou enjoyest! and yet may not God look that
thou should make it thy business, to serve, please and glorify him! It Was a
good vow of holy Jacob, If the Lord will be with me, and keep me in the way
that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come
again to my fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. Genesis 28.20,
21. Truly do thou say as he did, Since the Lord is the God, that keeps me in
all my ways, that gives me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, he shall be my
God. O do not give him ever cause to complain, Hear O heaven, and give ear O
earth, I have nourished, and brought up a child, and he has rebelled against
me, Deuteronomy. 32.15.

Thirdly, Is there not all the reason in the world, that wares, or houses, or
any other thing should be for the use, and service of him that paid a dear
price for them! If thou should buy a beast at an high rate, thou would
think thou could never have service enough of him. Friend, Thou did cost
the blood of the Son God, Jesus Christ bought thy service at a dear rate. Thou
art not thine own, thou art bought with a price; therefore glorify God in thy
body and spirit, for they are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. Thou needst not grudge the Lord
Jesus thy time, and talents, thy thoughts, and words, and estate, and the
utmost which thou art able to do. Alas he paid dearly for it, He died that he
might be Lord of dead and living, that whether we live we should live unto the
Lord, or die, we should die unto him. Romans 14^, 8. O how little is thy service
worth, that Christ should purchase it with such an infinite sum!

We say of some children, they had need to be dutiful children, they cost their
mothers dear; many sharp throws, and great danger of death. O how dutiful had
thou need to be, who did cost Christ such hard labor, such throws from God,
and men, death and devils! thou art never able to conceive what a price thy
Redeemer paid, what pain he suffered to procure thy service, and will thou deny
the Lord that bought thee? Pliny says that blood will quench fire; should not
the blood of Jesus Christ quench the fire of thy lusts? In all countries, the
ransomer of a bondsman is to be his Lord; no slavery so great as thine was, no
price ever paid so great for liberty; therefore no service so great as that
which thou owe. If thou had done all that he commands thee, thou had
done but thy duty, and might say thou were an unprofitable servant; what art
thou then that never did any thing? O think of it seriously; Redemption by
the blood of the Savior, is a bloody obligation to service, and if thou
continuest a rebel, twill be a bloody aggravation of thy sin. What evil has
Christ done to thee, that thou walk contrary to him? Ah friend, to render
good for evil, is divine; but to render evil for good, is divelish.

Fourthly, Is there not all the reason in the world, that he who has bound
himself Apprentice to a Master, promised solemnly to be his faithful servant,
sealed Indentures before witness, engaged himself by vows, covenants,
protestations and oaths, should perform his promises, and walk in every thing
answerable to his bonds and obligations? Wast not thou in Baptism solemnly
dedicated to the service of God? Did not thy parents seal the Indenture on thy
part before the Lord, Angels, and Men, that thou should live according to the
Laws, and for the glory of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? Have not thou
listed thy self under the colors of Christ the Captain of thy Salvation, and
sacredly tied thy self to obey his commands, and to fight under his banner
against the devil, world, and flesh? and will thou run from thy colors, and
turn to thine enemies, and conspire and fight against Jesus Christ? It was a
custom in the Primitive times, that such as were baptized, did wear a white
Stole (a ceremony signifying the purity of life which the baptized were to
lead) Now there was one Elpidophorus, Fulgentes animas vest^s quoque candida
signat.
who after his baptism turned a persecutor; Muritta the Minister who baptized
him, brought forth in public the white Stole which Elpidophorus had worn at
his baptism, and cried unto him, O Elpidophorus! This Stole do I keep against
thy coming to Judgment, to testify thy apostasy from Christ. So be thou
assured, the water with which, the Minister by whom, the people before whom
thou wast baptized, will rise up against thee in Judgment, if thou do not
walk in newness of life. Luther speak of one, that when tempted by the devil to
sin, answered, that she was baptized, and could not yield to him. Remember that
thou have received thy Saviors press-money, and therefore may not fight
Satan's battles. Wast thou never partaker of the Lords Supper? Did thou not
then with John stand by the cross of Jesus Christ, and behold his blessed body
bleeding under the knife of his Fathers wrath? how 'twas wounded for thy
transgressions, bruised for thine iniquities, when thou did take a sacred
oath to be the death of those sins, which were the death of thy Savior, and to
live to him that died for thee; when thou did espouse Christ and his quarrel
to thy self, and engage to live and die with him; and can thou like a
dishonest wife, run a whoring after thy heart-idols, and forget the Covenant of
thy God?

Was there not a time when thou did lie upon a sick bed, and in thine own
apprehension wast nigh the gate of death? when thy sinful fleshly life began to
fly in thy face; and O the thoughts which thou had concerning thine
appearance before God in the other world, and thine endless estate there when
thou did pray hard, O spare me a little, Lord, spare me a little, that I may
get some grace, some spiritual strength before I go hence and be no more seen:
when thou did promise, O if God would then hear thee, and try thee a little
longer in this world, thou would turn over a new leaf, lead a new life,
forbear thy former corruptions and evil companions, mind the service and glory
of the infinite God, and thine own eternal good? And is all this nothing, now
God has heard thee, and delivered thee, should not thou now hear him, and
obey him? Did thy sik-bed promises die when thou did recover? Psalm. 66 13,
14. and 116. 3, 4, 9.
O follow David's practice, I will go into thy house with burntofferings: I will
pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I
was in distress.

Theodoricus Archbishop of Colen, Aen^^d. Sylv lib 2. com. de reb. Alphon.
when the Emperor Sigismund demanded of him the most compendious way to
happiness, made answer, in brief, thus, Perform when thou art well, what thou
did promise when thou wast sick. Friend, look back upon the time when the
guilt of thy sins perplexed thee, the fear of death surprised thee, and the
horror of Hell began to lay hold on thee, and remember the promises which then
thou did make; and as ever thou would have God trust thee again, be true to
thy word; be not as the marble, watery and moist in such stormy weather, and yet
still retain thine hardness.

These are I suppose, rational questions; and surely thou can not but be
satisfied of the equity in them. Well, art thou resolved to the obey the
counsel of God, and to live like a rational creature? Surely, here is a
threefold, nay, a fourfold cord, which is not easily broken. Can thou slip
those oaths as easily as Monkies do their collars and break these bands in
sunder, as Sampson did his cords? O consider that man was possessed with a
devil, whom no cords could hold; and without question thou art also, if such
bonds, oaths, obligations as these are, cannot hold thee, do not draw thee to
the Lord, and bind thee to his commandments.

To end this first help to holiness, which is serious consideration, I must
request thee to read it again, and weigh the particulars which I have offered
to thee. If thou will ever be taken, I should think that one of these baits
should catch thee; either that the necessity of Regeneration should drive thee,
or the felicity of the regenerate draw thee, or the misery of the unregenerate
affright thee, or the equity of regeneration persuade thee unto holiness. Here
are all sorts of arguments imaginable; if thou art ingenuous, here is love and
mercy to melt thee; if thou art stubborn, here is endless and easeless misery
to move thee; if thou art for the best things, here is excellency for to allure
thee; if thou art rational, here is equity to prevail with thee.

Friend, what shall I say to thee? or wherewith shall I overcome thee? Has not
the world conquered thee with arguments which had not the thousandth part of
that weight which the least of these has? and shall not thy Maker, Preserver,
Redeemer, prevail with thee by setting before thee, the horror of hell, the
happiness of heaven, the beauty of his image, the reasonableness of his
service, and the indispensable necessity of thy being his servant? Is it
possible that thy soul, so closely besieged round about, with fear, and fury,
and fire on the one side; with favor, and love, and life on the other side,
should not surrender unto Christ? What objection can thou have which here is
not answered? What good can thou desire, which here is not offered? and why
will thou not yield?

It is thy privilege that thou art a subject capable of Gods image: It was
man's primitive purity, Genesis 1.26. oh. 3.6. Gen 6.9. Col. 3.10. Psa. 17. ult.
that he was adorned with the image of his Maker; (Ah, what a glorious shining
piece was he when he came newly out of Gods Mint!) it is man's unspeakable
misery that he has lost Gods image; his recovery here consists in having
Gods image imprinted on him in part; and his felicity and pefection hereafter,
in having this image stamped on him fully and completely. And can thou then
be unwilling to be made like unto the blessed God? Surely, sin has bound thee
strongly, and Satan possessed thee strangely, if none of these things overcome
thee. Friend, Art thou not desirous to fare well in the other world? then
ponder these Subjects of consideration seriously and frequently, when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up; when thou go out, and when thou come
in; thou little think what such serious frequent thoughts may produce.
Whilst David was musing, a fire was kindled within in him, Psalm. 39. Consider
what I have said, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

The second help to Regeneration.
An observation or knowledge of those several steps whereby the Spirit of God
renews others souls, and a pliable carriage and submissions to its workings
and motions in thine own soul.
I Come now to the second help which I promised toward Holiness and
Regeneration, and that will branch it self forth into these two particulars.

First, An observation or knowledge of those several steps, whereby the Spirit
brings home wandering sheep into the fold of Christ.

Secondly, A pliable submission to the workings and motions of the holy Ghost,
as at any time he makes his addresses unto thee.

For the first of these, thou art to understand that conversion is not wrought
all together and at once, but by decrees; as in the generation of a child,
first the brain, heart, and liver is framed, next the bones, sinews, nerves and
arteries, then the flesh is added; so in regeneration, first the sinner has
the seed of repentance and faith in the sense of his sins and misery, and the
sight of the mercy of God in Christ; then some desires after Christ; next some
affiance on Christ, and after these an hearty acceptance of Christ as Lord and
Savior.

The match between Christ and the soul, is not hudled up in haste, Christ first
goes a woing. The Father offers a large portion with his Son; the creature
considers his terms, how lovely his person is, what his precepts will be;
what advantage he shall have by the marriage, and by a deep and powerful energy
of the Spirit, consents to take him for his Lord and husband.

First, the first step is Illumination. The spirit of God does in the first
place open the eyes of the blind, Vide more of this p. 24, 5.
and turn men from darkness to lght; here is illumination; and then from the
power of Satan to God; here is regeneration. Act. 26.18. Before the Sun of
righteousness arises on the soul, there is a daybreak of light in the
understanding, John Baptist, who was the forerunner of Christ, and sent to
prepare his way before him, did it by giving knowledge of salvation, Luke 1.76,
77.

It is observable, that in the covenant of grace, the mind is still spoken of
to be renewed before the heart. Heb. 10.8, 9. Jer. 31.33. For it is by the
understanding that grace slips down into the affections.

Satan indeed that cruel Jailer, secures his captives in the dark dungeon of
ignorance. They are strangers to the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them. Ephesians. 4.18. When that uncircumcised Philistine has taken any Sampson
prisoner, the first thing he does, is to put out his eyes; when this is done,
he can make sport enough with him. The evil spirit strikes men blind as the
Syrians were, and then leads them whither he pleases; But the good spirit opens
their eyes, and shows them that they are in their enemies hands, liable every
moment to be murdered, and then sets bread and water before them. Conversion is
called a translation out of darkness into mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.3.

The sinner travelleth in the dark night of his natural estate, and mistaketh
his way, (he loses himself in the mist of ignorance) but when the morning
comes, the man sees that he has gone in a wrong path, then he befools, and
is displeased with himself, and turns about. All the while the creature has
his understanding darkened, he walks in the way of the flesh and the world,
and believes that to be the right way to happiness; but when the spirit of God
enlightneth the mind, the man sees that he was exceedingly mistaken, begins to
wonder at his own folly and wickedness, to abhor himself, and change his
course; I will bring the blind by a way which they knew not; Isa. 42.16, 17.
I will lead them in paths that they have not known; I will make darkness light
before them (then what follows?) they shall be turned back, they shall be
greatly ashamed.

Till the understanding of a man be enlightened to see the deformity of sin,
and the beauty of holiness, he will never heartily loath and grief for the
former, love and long for the latter. As it is in some hot climates, though the
Sun shine very hot there, yet when there is no entrance for it into men's
houses, twill not scorch or heat the inhabitants; sin is of a scorching nature;
but when the understanding, (which is the window into the house) is kept shut
that it can have no entrance into the heart, no wonder if the sinner feel no
pain.

God has made the same organ for seeing and weeping. It Is the eye of knowledge
which affects the heart. Zach. 12.10.
They shall see him whom they have pierced and mourn, sight of sin does precede
sorrow for sin; as soon as ever the infant comes into the light, it cries,
though all the time it was in the dark prison of the mothers womb it was quiet.

Secondly, Ioh. 16.9, 10.
the second step which the spirit takes, is conviction, to convince the sinner.
The sun which did before enlighten his mind, does now slide down with its
heating and scorching beams into the conscience: That knowledge which the
sinner had of his sins before, was speculative, but now becomes practical,
making sin like a lump of lead upon tender flesh, that the conscience is
exceeding pressed and oppressed with it.

Conviction is the application of the nature of sin, and danger of sinners to
himself in particular, which before he knew in the general; as in the twilight
before the Sun arises, a man may see abroad, but he cannot see in his own
house; but when the Sun arises a man can see both abroad, and at home within
his own doors: So before the Spirit approaches the soul in a way of
conviction, the sinner could see abroad, he knew that the soul that sins
must die, that they which do such and such things, cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God; he knew these things in the general, but he could not see in his own
house, in his own heart, that he himself was a great sinner, a dead, a damned
creature; for though he would in his prayers acknowledge that he had broken the
Law, and was thereby liable to the wrath of the Lord, yet he did it but
customarily and formally, not believing what he spoke; for should another man
come to him, and tell him, O Friend, you daily provoke God, and are every hour
in danger of hell, he would fly in his face, and tell others, that he was a
very uncharitable man, and all because the sinner could not see in his own
house; but when the Sun of righteousness arises, the sinner can see within as
well as without doors; he sees the heinous nature of his own sins, and the
grievous danger of his own soul.

The Spirit of God convinces the sinner of four things.

First, the Spirit convinces him of his great and innumerable corruptions. The
man before knew in the general, that all have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God, and would confess himself a sinner formally, and slightly; but
now he feels himself a sinner, and finds experimentally that he is a polluted
poisoned creature. The Spirit of God holds the glass of the law, before the
eyes of his soul, and makes him whether he will or no, see what dirt and
deformity is in the face of his heart and life. Without the law there is no
transgression, and without the knowledge of the law there will be no
conviction. As one of the persecutors in the days of Queen Mary, searching an
house for a Protestant, askd an old woman in the house, Where is the Heretic?
she points to a Chest of linen, upon which stood a lookingglass, and bid him
look there and he should see him; he looked there, and still asked Where is he?
She meant that he himself was the Heretic, and in the glass he might see
himself. So before the Holy Ghost came to convince this sinner, if the minister
at any time had preached against pride, unbelief, carnal-mindedness,
hypocrisy, and the like his voice was, Where are these men? Surely the
Minister meets with such and such in his Sermon; but now the spirit in his
conscience speaks to him, what Nathan did to David, Thou art the man. Thou
art the proud, carnal, hypocritical, cursed sinner, which the word of God
means, and the man cannot deny it. The Holy Ghost pulls off his rags, and
plasters, and makes him see all his nakedness and sores; it lanceth his wounds
before his eyes, and now he beholds the venomous matter and corruption which
is in them, that he little thought of before.

Formerly he esteemd himself to be sound, comparing himself with them that were
worse, or not minding the inward meaning and extent of the law of God; but now
by the law the spirit brings him to the knowledge of sin, Romans 7.7. It shows
him the depravation of his nature, how full it is of pollution, even as full as
ever toad was of poison; how empty it is of all good, nay what an enemy it is
to God and godliness; it shows him the abominations of his heart, how the
imaginat ons and thoughts of his heart have been evil, only evil, and that
continually; the provocations of his life, how full that has been of lusts and
sins, even as the firmament of stars; it shows him the evil of his thoughts,
of his words, of his deeds, his omissions in his closet, in his family; his
commissions abroad, at home; it shows him his idolatry, in setting up Self as
his God, in bowing down to it, and worshipping it, his adultery in going a
whoring after the creatures, loving, fearing, and trusting them more then the
creator who is blessed for ever. It shows him how he has dishonored the
name of God, grieved the spirit of God, undervalued the Son of God, violated
every command of God; how he has sinned against the first command in not
worshipping and glorifying God as the only true God, and as his God, and in
giving that honor to others, which is due to him alone; against the second, in
not worshipping God, according to the word, but according to the traditions of
others, or his own inventions; against the third, in not reverencing the name,
word and works of God; against the fourth in not sanctifying the Sabbath to
Gods service, but profaning it, either by idleness or worldly labors, or
omission of duties, and ordinances; against the fifth, in not carrying himself
according to his duty, toward them that are above him, equal to him, or below
him. Against the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth, in wronging his
neighbors, either in regard of life, chastity, goods, name, relations, either
in thoughts, words or actions.

It shows him the darkness of his understanding, the stubbornness of his
will, the disorderedness of his affections, the hardness of his heart, the
searedness of his conscience, the mis-improvement of his outward parts, how his
eyes have beheld vanity, his ears been open to iniquity, all his senses been
through-fares to sin, all the members of his body instruments of
unrighteousness, how from the crown of the head to the soals of his feet there
is no sound part in him, nothing but wounds, bruises, and putrified sores.

It is not one or two sins that trouble this sinner, but innumerable evils
compass him about; whole swarms of these Bees fly in his face and sting his
conscience; it may be one sin did first set upon him, some sin against the
light which God had given him; and now that creditor has cast him into prison,
all the rest come and clap their actions upon him to keep him there; his sins
in his dealings with men, in his duties to God, his sins against seasonable
corrections, against merciful dispensations, his sins against the motions of
Gods Spirit, against the conviction of his own spirit, against light, love,
purposes, promises, they all compass the sinner round that he cannot escape;
now he sees the ugly loathsomness of all his lusts, how they are against an
infinite God, against a righteous Law, against a precious soul, how by reason
of them he is wholly unlike God, and become the very picture of the Devil; and
truly now he is far from having those flattering thoughts of himself, and
favorable thoughts of his sins which formerly he had; for sins part, it is
abounding, polluting, poisonous, sinful sin; He sees the wrinckles of this
Jezabels face under her paint, and O how ugly is she in his eyes; and for
himself, he is more out of love, then ever he was in love with himself. Some
say after they have had the Smallpox that they come to see themselves in a
glass, they look so ugly by reason of their spots that they cannot endure to
see themselves: Truly this poor sinner beholding himself in the glass of the
Law, and viewing those hellish spots of sin all over his soul and body, he
abhors himself in dust and ashes.

This is the first thing the Spirit convinces the soul of, and that is sin;
When he is come he shall convince the world of sin, Joh. 16.8. God never cured
a spiritual Leper but he caused him to fall down first and cry out, unclean,
unclean.

Secondly, The Spirit convinces him of his miserable and dreadful condition.
Now the commandments of God come to the soul, sin reviveth, and the sinner
dies. He thought before that he was whole, a sound man, to have little need of
a Physician, but now he both sees his sores, and feels his wounds.

Ministers before had frequently told him of his dangerous damnable estate, but
he had a shield to keep off all their darts; He was not so bad as they took him
to be; somewhat they must say for their money; and besides though he were as
bad as such precise censorious Preachers would make him to be, yet God was a
merciful God, and Jesus Christ died for sinners, and he hoped to be saved as
well as the best of them; but now God comes to him as he did to Adam after his
fall, Adam, where art thou? Have thou eaten of the tree of which I said unto
thee thou shall not eat? Sinner where art thou? Do thou know what thou art
doing, and whether thou art going? how dare thou profane my day, blaspheme
my name, scoff at my people, neglect my worship, cast my Laws behind thy back,
and hate to be reformed? Dare thou provoke the Lord to anger? art thou
stronger then he? how will thine heart endure, or thine hands be strong in the
day that I shall deal with thee? Do not know, poor dry stubble, that it is a
fearful thing to fall into my hands? for I am a consuming fire. Now the sinner
hears the voice of God, and is afraid: Alas, alas, thinks he, I am a dead, a
damned man; the Almighty God is angry; the weight of my sins at present is
heavy, but the sufferings which I am every moment liable to are infinite and
eternal. O that I should ever be born to do as I have done! Now the lightnings
of divine fury flash in his eyes, and the canons of the Laws curses thunder in
his ears; he sees a sharp sword of pure wrath hanging by a slender thread of
life over his head; he feels the stingings of his sins, those fiery serpents
at his heart. There is no rest in his flesh because of Gods anger, nor
quietness in his bones because of his sins; the arrows of the Almighty are
within him, and the poison thereof drinks up his spirit; the waves and billows
of God go over his soul, and he sinketh in deep waters; God writes bitter
things against him, and makes him to possess the sins of his youth: Now the man
is calmed, he will hear what God speaks: before, though God himself had told
him out of his word what a wicked wretched man he was, he would not mind it,
but storm and rage at it; he was like a wild Ass snuffing up the wind, and as
an untamed heifer impatient of the yoke; he would kick and fling like a mad
man, What he give credit to the doctrine, and submit to the severe discipline
of a few whimsical Puritans, that must be wiser then all their neighbors! no
not he, though they showed him the very hand of God in Scripture to those
warrants which they desired him to obey. But now he is of another mind, for the
Law has shut him up under sin and guilt, Gal. 3.22. The Law has pent him in,
and shut him up that he cannot possibly get out: As Lions, Bears and wild
beasts are tamed by being shut up, and kept in, so the Law causes wrath, Romans
4.15. shuts the sinner up under it, and keeps him in, that his former starting
holes cannot help him, and thereby tames him.

While he was unconvinced of his sins and misery, his conscience was seared,
not troubled at all the threatenings which were denounced against him; but now
his conscience is sore, touch it which way you will you put him to pain; tell
him under this conviction, of his drunkenness, or swearing, or atheism, or
eagerness after this world, and heartlesness about the things of the other
world, his neglecting God in secret, of not instructing and praying with his
family, tell him how cold and customary he was in his devotion, saying to
others that they took more pains for heaven then they needed to do, of his
justifying himself in his transgressions, and taking part with Satan against
his own soul; he cries Guilty, Guilty, when such Bills of indictment are read
against him; but every word in them is a deep wound to him; the wolf in the
breast, and worms in the belly do not cause half that pain which his wickedness
does by gnawing in his conscience. Tell him of the Gospel, how infinitely
merciful God is, and how inconceivably meritorious Christ is, and how freely
the glad tidings of the Gospel are offered to all; O this touches him to the
quick, the sword of the Gospel cuts him more to the heart then the sword of the
Law. O, says he, This, this is my death, were it not for this I should have
some hopes of life; but alas, I have abused mercy, which is the only friend I
have left; I have despised Christ, and neglected the great salvation which was
tendered to me in the Gospel; Vile creature that I am, Mercy, Love and Grace
came many a time woing me! how did Jesus Christ himself with pardon and life
come beseeching me, begging of me to open my heart and let him in, and yet
cursed wretch that I was, I denied him! when the world could lie warm in my
bosom all night, and sin get a good room in my soul, yet my Savior must stand
without, and not be thought worthy to be let in! I have most unworthily spurned
against his bowels of compassion, scorned his sweetest and most affectionate
persuasions, most desperately refused the only means of my recovery; and
therefore I, what shall I do? whether shall I go? If one man sin against
another, the judge shall judge him; 1 Samuel 2.25.
but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? If I had sinned
only against my Creator, my Redeemer might have satisfied for me, but I,
wretched I, have sinned against my Redeemer, and therefore who shall entreat
for me? O the frights and fears, the horrors and terrors which this poor
creature suffers under the sight and sense of his sins and guilt; but the
fore-thoughts of an everlasting miscarriage in the other world sinks him quite
down, that he is able to hold up no longer. Thus the Spirit first plougheth up
the fallow-ground of the heart, before he casts into it the seed of grace; he
first captivates the sinner, and brings him into a spiritual dungeon, under
chains of guilt and horror, that the very irons enter into his soul before he
proclaims liberty to the captive, Isa. 61.1, 2.
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound: Some indeed are brought
lower then others with legal terror; but surely, not a few have sailed to
Heaven by the very gates of Hell. God is resolved that men shall feel sin
either here or hereafter.

Thirdly, The Spirit convinces him of the impotency and weakness of all the
things in the world to help him; that in the whole garden of Nature there is
never an herb which can make a salve to heal his wounded conscience. Now the
sinner is scorched with the heat of Gods wrath, he is like a man in a burning
fever, full of pain, and he tumbleth and tosseth from one side of the bed to
the other, trying and hoping for ease; he goes to this carnal comfort, or that
humane help to have his pain abated, and his sores cured, but none of them will
do; as fast as he claps on those carnal plasters, the Spirit causes his
conscience to rub them off.

It may be first the man uses foreign drugs; he being troubled in conscience,
goes with Cain to the building of Cities, to earthly employments, that the
noise of the hammers might drown the voice of conscience; that his mind and
body being occupied about other things, conscience might have no time nor
leisure to proceed in preaching its cutting Lectures; or else like Saul, he
runs to his music, to carnal contentments, to merry meetings, jovial
companions, his preferment or pleasures in the world, or some carnal diversion,
if it be possible to turn the water of his thoughts into another channel, and
so to keep that mill from going which makes such a clacking dreadful noise in
his ears, and threatens to grind him to powder. Thus sinfully foolish is man;
as soon as ever a fire is kindled in his soul, which would aspire to heaven, he
runs with his buckets to earthly springs, and fetches water thence to
quench it; the throws of the new birth do no sooner come upon him, but he, like
some simple women, takes cooling things, which cause his labor to go back
again. But the Holy Ghost (for I am now speaking of one in whom the Spirit
goes through with the work) makes all these things empty to him; the virtue of
those poor cordials is soon spent, and now the man is as sick as before.
Conscience for all these interruptions, still follows him with its Hue and
Cry by a warrant from Heaven, for the breach of Gods Statutes, that the sinner
can house nowhere in any of these worldly comforts, but conscience is at his
heels, raising the Town upon him, and gives him no rest; the man finds this
physic but like hot water to one in a cold fit of an ague, which warms a
little at present, but makes his hot fit the more violent.

When the sinner finds that his exotical drugs will not cure him, he will try
in the next place Kitchen physic, he will be his own both Doctor and
Apothecary; he hops that his praying and grieving, and trouble of mind, and
resolution to be better, will satisfy Gods justice, and pacify his own
conscience, and heal it thoroughly. O how the man endeavors to lick himself
whole! man is a proud creature, unwilling to beg or borrow of his neighbors,
very solicitous rather to make a poor shift with what he has of his own. The
Mariners will row hard in a storm to get to shore by their own power, before
they will awake Jesus with Save us Master, or we perish.

But the Spirit convinces him of the insufficiency of all his prayers, and
tears, and duties to appease God, or satisfy his Law; the Spirit shows him
the narrowness and shortness of all his rags, how they cannot possibly cover
his nakedness; conscience tells him that by his very duties, he is so far
from paying his old score, that he runs further in debt: Alas, says
Conscience, thy very duties may damn thee; He who is of purer eyes then to
behold iniquity, sees a thousand holes in thy best coat; the holy God sees
sins enough in them to send thee into Hell for them. Can thou, poor beggar,
with thy counterfeit farthings think to pay an infinite sum? Can thy poor
finite performances satisfy infinite Justice for the violation of his
righteous precepts? And for thy resolutions of better obedience, can thou
think that future obedience can satisfy for former disobedience? No, though
thou could offer thousands of rams, and ten thousands of rivers of oil; nay,
though the firstborn of thy body; all these could no: be a propitiation for
one of the least sins of thy soul; no, no, the redemption of a soul is more
precious; for all these it must cease for ever.

Thus God ferrits the sinner out of all his Borows, and causes the poor
Prodigal, while he is wandering from his Father, to find a famine in all the
creatures. As a General that besieges a City, does not only play in upon it
with his Cannons and Grenades, but also secure the several passages, stop all
provision that no relief can come to it, then they will yield upon his terms:
So when the Spirit besieges the soul, it often plyeth it hard with the
batteries of the Law, and always stops relief from coming in, either from
the world, or a man's own righteousness, and then, and not till then will the
creature yield upon the terms of the Gospel.

Fourthly, The Spirit convinces him of the willingness, sutableness, and
al-sufficiency of Jesus Christ to help and heal him.

The sinner now in his burning fit is very thirsty; like Hagar, he sits
weeping, for his bottels are empty, and his creature comforts are found by
experience to be broken cisterns which can hold no water, he knows not what
to do; how can I see the death of my soul? thinks he. When the sinner is
brought to this strait, the spirit of God opens his eyes, to see a well of
salvation, even Jesus who delivers from the wrath to come.

The spirit discovers to the sinner that though his wound be dangerous,
because the God whom he has provoked, is resolved, either to have his law
satisfied, or his eternal wrath endured; yet that it is not desperate; for
there is Balm in Gilead, and a Physician in Israel that can heal his soul.

It convinces him, that Christ is a suitable help, bread to the hungry, water
to the thirsty, rest to the weary and heavy-laden; that he has a precious
salve made of his own blood, which is a proper and pecular remedy for his sores.

It convinces him that Christ is an alsufficient help, that he can supply all
the souls wants, be they never so many, and bear all the souls iniquities be
they never so weighty, that he is able to save to the uttermost those that come
unto God by him. Heb. 7.25.
It presents to the soul his fitness and fullness in regard of his natures,
and offices, and the impossibility of his being unfaithful to this great work
of saving poor sinners, for which he came into the world. It shows the sinner
the infiniteness of Christ's merits, and his omnipotency to help because he is
God: the examples of other wounded diseased persons, who surrendered themselves,
to the care of this Physician and were cured; He shall convince the world of
righteousness because I go to the father, and ye see me no more. John 16.9, 10.
That is, the world shall be convinced that there is righteousness enough in me
to satisfy both the law and lawgiver, in that I shall appear in my fathers
presence, and that with acceptance: he would not send an Angel as his officer,
to roll away the stone, and release the surety out of prison, the grave, and
bring him before the Judge with so much credit and countenance, if the law were
not satisfied, and the debt fully discharged. Heaven could never have held me;
ye would have seen me upon earth again, if I had not done that work perfectly,
which the Father gave me to do. He shall convince the world of righteousness,
because I go to the father.

It convinces him that Jesus Christ is exceeding willing to save poor sinners;
that he is joyful that any will accept him for their Savior; that he came from
heaven to earth, was born meanly, lived miserably and died shamefully, merely
upon this errand, that he might seek and save them that are lost, that he
inviteth him; to come to him and promises that he shall be welcome; that he
calls them that go from him, but casts away none that come to him.

Thus when the prodigal is in a far country, and cannot fill his belly so much
as with husks, that he is ready to perish for hunger, he is showed and convinced
that there is bread enough in his Fathers house. When the sinner is like the
Israelite in the wilderness, beholding the curse of the law like the Egyptian
behind him, and pursuing him hard, the red sea of divine wrath before him, into
which he is hastening, his crimson and bloody sins like mountains on each side
of him, incompassing him round, that he knows not what to do, then the spirit
bids him look up to Jesus, and he shall see the salvation of God.

The third step which the spirit takes, is anhelation, to cause the soul of the
convinced sinner, to breath and pant after Jesus Christ; breath is the first
effect of life. Conviction has emptied his stomach of creature confidence and
self righteousness, made him poor in spirit, and O how hungry he is after the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, the bread which came down from heaven! As the
thirsty ground cleaves and opens for drops, as the heart pants after the
water brooks, so pants his soul after Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever,
(thinks he) O when shall I come and appear before him! His voice is (like
Rachel) Give me children or I die; Give me the holy child Jesus or I die; or
like Abraham, Lord, what will thou give me if I go childless? Ioh. 12.21
O what will thou give me if I go Christiess! or like the Jews to Philip, Sir,
we would fain see Jesus. Mat. 28.5.
If the Angel should meet him, he might bespeake the soul as he did the woman,
I know what thou seek, thou seek Jesus which was crucified. O the ardent
desires, the vehement longings, the unutterable groans, which this poor
creature has after his Savior! as David, he cries out, Who will give me to
drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem! Where is that blessed guide, that
can lead me, and help me to drink of the water of life!

Methinks I see how Jesus Christ presents himself to the eye of the dejected
souls understanding, in all his glory and gallantry, in his sutableness unto
the sinners indigencies, and sufficiency for all his necessities, with the
freeness of his mercy, the fullness of his merits, and the sweetness of his
love; how he appears before the soul with all his retinue and train of graces,
comforts, his blood, his spirit, the favor of God, freedom from sin, wrath,
hell; on the one hand of him there stand his gracious promises of pardon,
peace, adoption, sanctification, heart-chearing love, and everlasting life; On
the other hand of him, there stands his precious precepts of self denial,
crucifying the flesh, walking after the Spirit, despising the sensual
pleasures, honors, and profits of this world, and delighting in God, walking
with him, having the conversation in heaven, and rejoicing in hope of glory. In
the middle, there stands the fairest of ten thousands, adorned as a bridegroom
with his richest attire, glistering with the jewels of those graces, with which
his humanity is adorned, in a greater degree then the heavens could, though
every star in it were a glorious sun; but O how the diamond of his deity
sparkleth in the souls account, that millions of worlds would be but a
muck-heap to it. Ah how lovely is he in the sinners eye! How infinitely
ravishing to his heart! How blessed are those souls (thinks this sinner) that
are interested in such a Savior! Vnc^nceiveably, happy is that spouse which
has so beautiful, so accomplished, so lovely, so loving an husband; God is
hers, earth is hers, heaven is hers, all is hers; holiness is her nature, and
happiness is her jointure. O that I, O that I might be so blessed as to be
called to the marriage supper of the Lamb! Who can express the vehement,
violent longings of this man after Christ, as the loadstone of his affections,
as the only center of his soul, the proper remedy for all his maladies; had he
the beauty of Absalom, the renown of Solomon, the wealth, the worth of the
whole world, like the wise Merchant, he would sell all to buy this pearl of
price, and think it the best bargain that ever he made; nothing is so dear to
him but he will give it; nothing is so difficult but he will do or suffer for
Christ; he is of the same mind with the Martyr, None but Christ, none but
Christ. It is reported of a woman that was in these throws, that she should
say, I have brought nine children into the world with as much pain as most
women, yet I would bear them all over again, and bear them all my days for
Christ.

There is mention made of a bird in Egypt, near Nilus, called the bird of
Paradise, which they say, if it be once ensnared is unquiet, and mournful till
she be delivered: so is this convinced sinner, now he feels himself entangled
in the bonds of iniquity and snares of the Devil, he is unquiet till he be
delivered. Talk to this man of his respect and friends, and riches in the
world, they are as the white of an egg, or a dry chip without any savor,
relish, or nourishment to him; but tell him of Jesus Christ, an able Surety to
discharge all his debts, O that is the savory meat which his soul loves; As a
man that is sick and extremely pained, when you talk to him of his calling or
estate, he hears not, he regards not; but tell him of one that can cure him
of his disease, and ease him of his pain, then he will hearken to you; thus
it is with this sinner; all his delight is in hearing of Christ, all his longing
is to hear from Christ. The poor prisoner that is condemned to be hanged, and
has sent a messenger to sue for a pardon, never longed so much for his return
with joyful news, as this poor creature for an interest in the Mediator.

Thus the Spirit having convinced the soul of its beggary and nakedness,
bondage and misery, causes it to breathe and long after the riches, liberty
and righteousness which is in Christ.

The fourth step is lamentation; the soul that breaths after a Savior, is
truly broken for his sins; his groans after liberty are accompanied with grief
for his slavery: Now the clouds gather and thicken over the soul, and fall down
in tears; his sorrow under the conviction of his misery was legal, but now it is
for his abuse of mercy, and so Evangelical. His heart before was as a cloud
broken by a thunderbolt, being torn in pieces violently, and making a mighty
noise; but now like the cloud melted by the shining of the Sun upon it, it
dissolves down sweetly into a fruitful shower. Vemo possit poenitenti^m ager^,
nisi qui speraver^t indu ge^tiam. Amb
He looked on sin before as it was damning, as that which would cast his soul and
body into hell, but now he looks on sin as it is defiling, as that which makes
him unlike to God, and as that by which he has abused love and mercy; and the
consideration of this warmeth his heart, and kindly thaweth it. The man has
now some small hope of mercy, and that, like the nearer approach of the Sun,
softneth that earth which was hardened under the frost of legal terrors.

The pump of the sinners heart was dry, till the water of gospel grace,
apprehended and hoped for, was poured in, and then it sends forth abundantly.
He returns now to God with supplication, weeping, and mourning; As Joseph, so
this sinner seeks for a place to weep in; He goes into his chamber, falls
down before God, and pours out his heart at his eyes and tongue; He accuses,
shameth, condemns, abhors himself because of his sins: He does not
dissemble his birth, but acknowledges the pollution of his conception. Behold
I was shapen in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5.
and in sin did my mother conceive me; He confesses the transgressions of his
life, Psa. 58.3
that he has gone astray from the womb, that ever since he was able to go, he
went astray: He acknowledges his transgressions, and is sorry for his sins;
with Ephraim, he smites upon his thigh, saying, What have I done? with the
Publican, he beats on his breast, crying out, God be merciful to me a sinner;
With the Prodigal he is ashamed to look up to God, yet sighs out, Father, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am unworthy to be called thy
child. He throws himself down at Gods feet, bemoaning himself thus, Lord, I
am the greatest of sinners, less then the least of all thy mercies; I have
defaced thine image, broken thy Laws, sinned against thy majesty; against thee,
thee, I have sinned and done evil in thy sight; I have done the work of Satan
thine enemy, and my wages is nothing but death; how thou please to deal with
thy worthless creature I know not, but however thou deal with me, thou art
righteous, and I will lay my hand on my mouth; If thou say that thou have no
pleasure in me, ^o here I am, do with me what seems good in thy sight; yet, O
save my soul; ten thousand Hells are my portion; but if out of thy bottomless
mercy thou shall pluck my feet out of this bottomless misery, my soul shall
admire thy free Grace, my tongue shall sing aloud of thy rich mercy; and O the
obligations which this vile wretch shall have to be faithfully and uprightly
serviceable to thy majesty!

His contrition runs all along parallel with his confession; his heart
works more then his lips and hands; his affections are much more self-abasing
and humbling then his expressions; he sees him whom he has pierced, and
mourns; Calvary is a Bochim, a place of weeping to him; his eyes are so full,
that though Christ be nigh him, yet like Mary, he cannot see him for tears;
never fountain sent forth water more freely then this sinner does godly sorrow;
when he considers what he has done, how he has sinned, what a God he has
greived, sorrow and grief overwhelm his spirit.

The fifth step is implantation into Christ; the Spirit now leads the child
by the band unto Christ, nay, grafteth him into Christ. The soul being
convinced of the necessity it stands in of Christ, of the endless misery which
it must undergo without Christ, of the al-sufficiency that is in Christ, how
willing, how able he is to bind up the broken heart, and to save the sinful
soul, does by the help of the Holy Ghost venture its self, and its everlasting
estate up-Jesus Christ, resolving to stand or fall, live or die at his feet.

The sinner is now between hope and fear, not knowing how he shall fare. As the
four Lepers that were shut out of the City in the famine of Samaria, considered
with themselves, If we enter into the City, the famine is in the City, and we
die there; Kings 7.3.
and if we sit still here, we die also: Now therefore, come and let us fall
into the Host of the Syrians, if they save us alive, we shall live; and if they
kill us, we shall but die; and accordingly they went to the Syrians camp, found
food there, and lived. So the sinner pondereth in his heart, If I go to the
world, and the lying vanities thereof, I perish, vanity of vanities is written
upon all its enjoyments, the famine is there, there is nothing that is bread,
its whole shop cannot afford a plaster which can heal my wounded conscience;
if I sit still in this condition under the weight of mine iniquities, I perish;
they will unquestionable sink me into Hell; now therefore I will fall into the
hands of the Lord Jesus; If he save my soul, I shall live; if he deny to
receive such an unworthy wretch as I am, I shall but die, I can but perish, I
will therefore venture; and accordingly the soul goes to him, and finds life
in him; I have sometime thought, that when the sinner is come thus far, he
carries himself much like Esther: When the King had made an irrevocable decree
for the destruction of her self and people, what does she do? she fasteth, and
prays, and sends word to Mordecai, I will go in unto the King, which is not
according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish, Esth. 4. ult. Thus the poor
brokenhearted sinner, perceiving that the King of Kings has made a Decree,
That the soul that sins shall die eternally, and he is a grievous sinner, he
fasteth, he mourns, he prays, and at last resolves; Well, I will go in
unto the King, though it be not according to the Law (which shuts me up
under guilt and wrath) If I perish, I perish; possibly he may hold out the
golden Scepter of Grace, and I may live in his sight; thus the poor creature
goes, makes supplication believingly, and prevails.

The Devil now lays all the blocks he can possibly in the souls way, to
hinder its journey to Christ. As when the woman talked to her husband of going
to the Prophet for the enlivening of her dead child, he presently endeavors
to dissuade her, that 'twould be to no purpose: Why will thou go, it is neither
new moon nor Sabbath? but yet she went, and had her child restored to life.
Thus, To what purpose should thou go to Christ? (says the Devil to the
penitent sinner) Can thou think that so holy and righteous a God will have
the least respect for such a wicked notorious hell-hound as thou art? I tell
thee, he has sent thousands, that never sinned as thou have done, into Hell,
and can thou have any thoughts of Heaven? Thou have done my work all thy
days, and now look for a reward from God; No, no, I Will pay thee thy wages in
blackness of darkness for ever; if thou had intended for life, thou should
have minded it sooner; thou have days without number broken the Law, and many
a time rejected the Gospel, and now it is too late; God called, and thou would
not hear; now thou may call long enough, for he will not hear thee; he tells
thee as much with his own mouth, Prove. 1.25, to 32. Therefore thou may spare
thy pains, and prayers, for all will be to no purpose; Surely, thou have a
impudent face, and a brazen forehead, to expect such choice blessings as pardon
and life from that Christ whom thou have persecuted in his people, rejected in
his Laws, preferring the world and thy flesh before him, and daring him to his
very face. Thus he that was the sinners tempter to those sins, turns his
tormentor for them, and he that when the soul was posting to Hell, bid it not
doubt of Heaven, does, now the creature is creeping toward eternal life,
persuade him, that it is impossible to escape eternal death: But notwithstanding
these discouragements, the sinner will go to the great Prophet of the Church
for the life of his dead soul; He thinks It Is true, I am a grievous sinner, but
I know that he is a gracious Savior; I see nothing but misery and hell in me,
but I see mercy and heaven in him; for my warrant, Mat. 11.28.
I have ^his precept, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy-laden; for
my encouragement, I have his promise, I will give you rest; Ioh 6.33.
him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out. I will therefore go what
ever come of it, and lay my self at his feet; if he condemn me, and spurn me
into Hell, I Will justify him; peradventure he may lend me his hand, and raise me
up with hope of Heaven; others have gone to him, and he has bid them welcome. O
the rings and robes, the kisses and embraces, which many returning Prodigals
have had of him! who knows but he may be gracious to me! if he had not been
willing that poor sinners should live, he would not have dyed; if he had been
unwilling that I should come why does he call me? Well, what ever come of it, I
will go; it may be I may be hid in the day of the Lords wrath. Thus Faith at
first stands but on one weak foot.

I suppose, that when the sinner is in this condition, the very command of God
(enjoining him to believe in the name of his Son) is a special instrument in
the hand of the Spirit to draw him unto Christ; like Abraham, he being called
of God, obeyed, not knowing whither he went; he being called of God to cast
himself on Jesus Christ, obeys, not knowing how he shall speed.

The Disciples, when they hear Christ speaking to them in the morning, Cast on
the other side of the ship, and ye shall find, answer him, We have fished all
night and caught nothing, nevertheless at thy command we will let down the net.
So the penitent man having tried this and that means, and found no water, no
meat, no solid food for his hungry and thirsty soul, hears at last Christ
calling to him, Ho every one that thirsts, come to the waters, buy wine and
milk without money, and without price; cast thy sins, thy soul on me, and thou
shall find rest; Lord, thinks he, I have tried creatures, and they cannot help
me; I have tried duties, and they cannot ease me; I have taken much pains and
caught nothing; and should I come to thee, would thou open thine eye upon
such a wretch! my unworthiness makes me mistrust the success, nevertheless at
thy command I will do it, and now he comes in his sinking estate to take hold
on the arm of the Lord which the Gospel stretches out to him, and thereby he
is saved.

The last step is a resolution of the sinner to give up himself to all the Laws
of Christ, or an hearty acceptance of the Redeemer as Savior and Sovereign.
The heart of the man is so melted by Evangelical sorrow for sin, and the heat
of Gods love to his soul, that he is like soft wax for any impression; God may
command him what he pleases, he cleaves to the Lord with full purpose of
heart: Before, he was like the Prodigal, he must go as far as he could from his
Fathers house; the orders there were too pure, the Laws there too strict, the
discipline there too severe; he travelleth therefore into a far Country, but
now the man is hungry, he will submit to do the duty of a Son, so he may but
have the childrens bread and diet; nay, now he is come to himself, it is his
meat and drink to do the will of God: he sees such equity in Gods will, such
beauty in his worship, such excellency and comfort in his ways, that he would
not part Jesus Christ and his holy precepts (which he now savoureth) for all
earthly pleasures; he is tied so firmly to his Master with the bond of
unfeigned love, that Satan himself will but work at the labor in vain, when he
goes about to separate him and his service.

He writes Holiness to the Lord upon his body, soul, estate, family, relations,
and all that he has, thankfully acknowledgeing Gods propriety in all, and his
own felicity to consist in improving all for God. He considers how infinite
his obligations to God are, what an hell of endless horror he is redeemed from,
what an heaven of love and happiness he is called to, and wishes that he had
or could do something worthy of such a God. And because he has nothing more or
better, he gives himself to God: as Aeschines when he saw his fellow-schollers
give their Master Socrates large presents, being poor, and having nothing to
give, went and gave himself to his Master, acknowledging that he was his
devoted servant.

The sinner before was unbroken, and so as unfit for subjection, as the
unbroken colt for the saddle, but now the heart being humbled, the ear is
heedy to whatever God speaks; Lord what will thou have me to do? Acts 9.6.

It is with an humbled, M. Fenner of the kiling power of the Law.
and with an unhumbled sinner, as with two men that are going to market,
whereof the one has need, he and his family are in extreme want, ready to
perish for bread; now this man will go, what ever weather come; if it rain
never so fast he will go; when he comes there, whatever the price be, he will
buy; though he pawn his clothes, he will have bread; why? he is like to famish
for want of it, bread he comes for, and bread he must have. The other has no
great need, therefore if he like the weather he will go; if not, he will stay
at home; if he goes, when he comes to the Market, he will buy, or forbear, as
the price of things pleases him; he is indifferent, whether he lay out his
money or no; if commodities are held at an high rate, he will go as he came,
and buy nothing, and all because he has no need; he can do well enough without
them; thus an humbled sinner sees, nay feels his extreme need of Christ,
that he must perish everlastingly, without an interest in him, and therefore
what ever it cost him, he will have Christ; he is resolved to deny himself, to
crucify the flesh, to hate father, mother, house, name, land, all for Christ,
let God hold the price of his Son never so dear, he will sell all but he will
buy this pearl; and what is the reason? truly because this man has need; he
knows the absolute necessity which he stands in of Christ, that none but
Christ can deliver him from the weight of his sins, the Almighty Gods fury, and
the vengeance of eternal fire, therefore a Savior he comes for, and a Savior
he will have, what ever commands or prohibitions are joined with him; but an
unhumbled finner feeth not his extreme need of Christ, and therefore though
when he hears of the infinite perfections in Christ, and the unspeakable
pri^iledges which the regenerate have by Christ, he will acknowledge that the
wares are good, he has nothing to say against them, but the price is too dear,
he will not come up to it, and why? truly because he sees not his need of
Christ; he thinks he can do well enough without Christ. If God would let him
serve Christ, and the world, and flesh with him, he would not care much, if he
did buy; but if he cannot have Christ at his own price, farwell Christ, and
pardon, and mercy, and God, and eternal life, Mat 9.12.
farwell for ever for him, and all because the man is an whole man, unbroken,
unhumbled. But you have read in the former steps, that the sinner before he
comes thus far, is thoroughly melted, and therefore he is for any mould which
God thinks good.

Yet I believe that a man or woman, whom the Spirit of God has brought over to
Jesus Christ, does by the new nature bestowed on them, or the law of God
written within them, resolve upon all known duties, and against all known
iniquities, more out of love to God and holiness, then out of any slavish fear
of wrath and hell. The man sees by the law the contrariety of sin to the image
of God, and consequently to his own real and spiritual good, whereby there
arises within him not only an estrangedness from, but an emnity against sin;
though it were the object of his affections before, yet it is the object of his
passions now. So for duties, the soul is brought through working of the Spirit,
to approve and delight in the good and perfect, and acceptable will of God,
Communion with God, and conformity to God, are the utmost of his desires, and
endeavors. O how willingly does this Christian take upon him the yoke of
Christ, not complaining of its uneasiness, but of his own unholiness.

The man formerly was as a Virgin; before marriage she stands upon her terms,
she will indent with her Sweet heart, what shall be settled upon her, and how he
shall deal with her, or else she will not have him; but now Christ by his
spirit has prevailed with the soul, and it is heartily willing to take him for
better for worse, to resign up all to Christ, to part with all for Christ, to
take all from Christ, to be disposed in all by Christ, in a word it promises
with the whole heart, to be a loving, faithful and obedient wife, and now the
match is made, nay the Savior and the soul are actually married together. And
O what an happy joyful day is this? If Aaron when he met Moses, was glad at his
heart, how glad is this poor soul, now he meets with the Messiah! The Father
accepts him for his child, the Son accepts him for his spouse, the Spirit has
given earnest already to have the Christians heart for his everlasting
habitation; the Devils in hell are vexing, the Angels in heaven are singing,
the Saints on earth are shouting, for it is meet that they should be merry; for
this son was dead and is alive, was lost and is found, was a cursed sinner, and
is become a blessed Saint.

So I have dispatched the first branch of this second help to regeneration;
namely, an observation of those several steps whereby the wandering sheep is
brought home. I come now to the second branch of this help, which is a pliable
submission to the workings and motions of the Spirit, when the Spirit at any
time makes his addresses to thy soul.

Reader, I must earnestly beseech thee, if thou have the least spark of love to
thy soul and endless good in the other world, that thou be more tender of the
motions of the Spirit, then of the apple of thine eye. When the Holy Ghost
comes to thy soul by its motions to good, thy kind entertainment of it, may
(be as much as thine eternal happiness is worth and) probably invite the Spirit
to stay with thee, perfect the work, and abide in thee for ever; whereas if
thou should grieve or quench the Spirit, and affront this Ambassador which is
sent to treat with thee about terms of peace between God and thy soul, he may
be called home, and thou never hear of him more.

We read in Genesis 2.2. Incubabat aquis. Iun. Genesis
That the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. Several read the
words, The Spirit of God was sitting, or hatching upon the waters: It is a
Metaphor taken from birds or hens, they sit and move upon their eggs to hatch
them, and bring them forth, and when they are hatched, they still sit and move
upon them, to cherish and bring them to perfection. So the Spirit of God sat,
or moved upon that face of the deep, that by his motion or incubation, he might
hatch and bring forth out of that vast Chaos the several kinds of creatures.
Thus the Spirit moves upon thy heart, he sits upon, he broodeth on thee,
that he may hatch and bring thee forth a new creature: Therefore consider what
thou do, and how thou carriest thy self toward him; fowls when they have
been much disturbed, have left their eggs and never hatched them, they have
come to nothing; should thou resist the Spirit in his operations, or quench
him in his motions when he is brooding on thy soul, he may take its eternal
flight from thee.

When the Spirit comes to thy soul by its motions, dissuading thee from sin,
or stirring thee up to holiness, Jesus Christ then knocks at the door of thy
heart; every motion is a knock from the hand of Christ; if thou hearkenest and
openest, he will come in and sup with thee; but if notwithstanding his
knocking, thou will not hear, though he comes upon an errand so infinitely for
thine advantage, he will depart away in a distaste, (as neighbors when they are
so uncivilly used) and thou may never hear of him more.

Thou art apt to complain that thou want help to turn from sin, and to turn
unto God: I tell thee when the Spirit moves and works within thee to mind
thy soul, and thine eternal estate, he offers thee his help and assistance;
and if thou hearkenest to, and obeyest his motions, thou shall have his help.
As he was teaching, the power of God was present to heal them, Luke 5.17.
Whilst the Son of man was teaching, at that ni^k of time the power of God was
present to heal men's bodies; so when the Spirit is moving, at that very time,
the power of God is present to help thy soul; now if thou take that time,
thou may be an happy man for ever; If when the winds blow fairly for men's
voyage, they then hoise up their sails, and be going, they may through the help
of the wind, be at their Haven in convenient time; but if they neglect the
opportunity, and will not lanch out whilst the wind offers its help, they
may be dead before they have another wind, and so never go that voyage: Thus
if when the gales of the Spirit blow, and offer thee their assistance for
Regeneration and Salvation, thou then presently lanchest out, and compliest
with its motions, through its help thou should be seasonably and safely
landed in Christ, and at the Haven of Heaven; but if thou then lie still, and
neglectest this opportunity, God knows but thou may be dead before the
Spirit blow so favorably for thee again.

Solomon tells us, that there is a time for every purpose under Heaven, and a
time to be born, Eccles. 3.1, 2. There is time for every purpose, that is, an
opportunity when the work may be done best, and with most advantage, yea, when
it must be done, or shall not be done at all; now such a time, such an
opportunity there is for the new birth; there is an accepted time, 2 Co^. 6^
Psalm. 3.6 and 55.6.
a time when God may be found, when he is near, a day of Salvation; this is
when the Spirit moves and stirs, and offers thee his help; if thou
passest by that time, and do not then strike in, thou may come as Esau too
late for the blessing; thou may, as some idle persons that are tippling and
drinking in an Alehouse when they should be in the market, let slip thy
opportunity, and find it too late to buy the wine and milk in the Gospel.

It is one great misery of men and women, that they observe not, neither
improve their opportunities; The turtle, and the stork, Ier. 8.7.
and the crane and the swallow, they all know their opportunity, and their
time; but the generation of mankind neglect theirs; O that thou had known in
this thy day the things which concern thy peace! Opportunity is a transient
thing, it is quickly gone, but it brings a lasting treasure along with it,
which if neglected, can never be recovered; time is all the while a man lives
on earth; but opportunity is only when the Spirit moves, Me ye have not
always, says Christ.

Friend, thou will make hay while the Sun shines, I mean improve opportunities
for the good of thine outward estate; when the heavens offer thee their help,
then thou will cut thy corn or hay, and make it, and carry it in: For thy soul
sake, do not neglect the Spirit when he offers thee his help for a spiritual
harvest: when the Holy Ghost moves, like the Angel, upon the waters, then, at
that nick of time, if thou steppest down, art pliable to its motions, thou
may be healed.

The Spirit of God is a tender thing, says one; grieve it once, and you may
drive it away for ever; Grieve not the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. much less quench
it, least of all resist it; Masters of a calling will not be checked, 1 These.
5.19. Acts 7.51.

The Client by losing a term, has lost his Suit; Saul by losing his
opportunity, lost a Kingdom, 1 Samuel 10.9, 13. Reader, the way to lose the
Kingdom of Heaven, is to neglect and slight the motions of the Spirit, the
only opportunity for thy Salvation.

For thine help herein, I shall direct thee how to demean thy self toward the
Spirit, when he makes his addresses unto thy soul for thy regeneration and
quickening; in which I shall take thee (as indeed thou art, in thine
unregenerate estate) for a patient dangerously sick, yea unto death eternal,
though thou think thy self whole, and the Spirit of God (as he is) for a
skilful, able and compassionate Physician.

First, I supose that this tender Physician, beholding thee very sick
(notwithstanding thy conceit that thou art well enough) and daily increasing
thy distemper, does come to thee, and acquaint thee that thou art a diseased
person, and that unless thou forbearest such and such sins, such and such
things, which feed thy disease, thou will make thy condition which is already
dangerous, to be desperate and incurable; I mean the Holy Ghost enlighteneth
thy mind to lee, and convinces thy conscience of thy sins and misery, that
whereas before thou thoughtst that thou wast rich, and increased with goods,
and had need of nothing; yet now thou see that thou art wretched, Rev. 3.1^.
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and that such and such courses
which thou take will unavoidably tend to thy ruin. Possibly thou art one
accustomed to wicked company, to the Alehouse, to deal unrighteously in thy
particular calling, to lay aside praying, hearing, reading, and the like
duties; now the Spirit of God in thy conscience, moves thee to lay down these
ungodly customs, which thou have taken up, and to take up these duties, and
performances, which thou have laid down, and convinces thee by the word, that
this is the will of God; O now Friend, look to thy self, that thou do not sin
against this light, nor play by that candle which the Spirit of God sets up for
thee to work by. If thou had a guest of any quality in thine house, and
should burn things of an ill savor in his chamber, which thou knew he
hated, or should fill the room wherein he lodges with filth, and
uncleanness, would thou not provoke him to speed away in a distaste; and to
resolve against ever coming at thine house again I must tell thee, that
should thou go on in the commission of those iniquities, and neglect of those
duties which the Spirit convinces thee of, it would be far more distastful to
the Spirit of God, then all the forementioned uncivil usage could be to an
Emperor. The Holy Ghost is compared to fire, Act. 2. (as the word quenching
implies) Now how is fire quenched and put out? both by throwing water on it,
and by taking away the wood from it. Should thou notwithstanding its checks
and convictions, continue in any way of open wickedness, thou throwest water
upon it; and should thou omit those holy duties, thou withdrawest fuel from
it; and therefore be confident, the fire will be quenched and go out.

By sinning against these convictions and light, thou art a professed defier and
darer of him, and may confidently expect that he should give thee up to
judiciary inward darkness, which is but the forerunner of utter darkness, Romans
1.20, 21, 22. Jam. 3. ult. Pro. 5.11, 12, 13. John 9.41.

If thou improvest that little stock of help (which the Holy Ghost affords
thee) well, thou may hope that thy master will trust thee with more, (every act
of obedience fitteth for greater obedience) but if thou squanderest that away
prodigally, by sinning against it, thou may look for no more.

Dear friend, be tender of the first motions of the Spirit; thou sit cold
and frozen in thy natural estate, now as ever thou would have a good fire to
melt thee kindly, to thaw thee thoroughly, to warm thy heart eternally, make
much of those sparks. As thou desire a spiritual flame, which may ascend to
heaven, take heed lest by presumptuous sins thou blowest out those sparks. As
the best way to quench the fiery darts of the Devil, that evil spirit, is to
reject them, to disobey them in the first motions, when the Devil first
kindles them, then throw water on them, then detest them, and that fire of
Hell will be quenched. So the readiest way to quench the fiery darts of the good
spirit, is to slight the first motions of it; if thou strive against these
first motions of him, he may never strive with thee more, Gen 6.3.

It may be, thou art a drunken wretch, an unclean person, a scoffer at
godliness, a swearer, a liar, a cheater by false weights, or measures, or the
like, and the Spirit of God, whispereth thee in the ear, Man, do thou know
what thou do? thou art in a lost estate, in a damnable condition; Turn at my
reproof (says God) and I will pour my Spirit upon thee. Pro. 1.23. Forbear
such sins, and I will assist thee for the recovery of thy soul. O now look to
thy self, venture by no means upon the forbidden fruit. I have read of one,
that being troubled with sore eyes, asked a Physicians advice; The Physician
told him, that if he did not forbear his drunken intemperate courses, he would
lose his sight; Vale lumen ami^um.
He makes no more of it, but presently cries out, Farewell sweet sight, farewell
sweet sight. He was resolved to lose his sight, rather then leave his sin. Thou
art diseased, the tender Physician comes to thee, without sending for, and
gives thee his blessed counsel without asking, and it is this, that thou must
forbear thy lewd sinful ways, or else thou will lose thy soul, thy Savior, thy
God, thine happiness for ever; Now will thou (by continuing in such courses and
rejecting his first counsel) say Farewell precious soul, Farwell dearest Savior,
Farwell blessed God, Farwell glorious Angels, Farwell perfect Spirits, Farwell
fullness of joy, Rivers of pleasures, Farwell to you all, I and farwell for ever.
Take heed what thou do with these first motions of the Spirit, lest he take
of thee his last leave and bid thee farwell for ever.

When a noble person should come to thine house, one by whom thou expectest to
be promoted highly, and enriched greatly, or one whose heir thou look to be,
how welcome would thou make such a man, especially the first time that he
comes to visit thee? and upon those very accounts, I mean for thy advantage,
he must have the best room, the best fare, the most pleasing language, the most
respectful carriage; all things must be done as much as possibly can be,
according to his mind, and nothing must be done which is known to be offensive
to him; and all, lest he should be provoked to forsake thee, to cast thee off,
and to do nothing at all for thee. Reader, is there not far more reason, that
when the infinite Spirit of the blessed God comes to thine heart, who only is
able to promote thee, to become the child of God, an heir of heaven, and to
enrich thee with the image of God, in Regeneration; that when he comes first
to thee, and for these very ends, thou should give him all the respects
imaginable, that thou should follow his counsel, forbear what thou know
grieves him, do what thou know will please him, lest he depart away from
thee, and do none of these things for thee? Saul by disobeying the counsel of
Samuel from God, concerning the slaughter of the Amalekites, did so grieve his
spirit, that Samuel tells him plainly, That God had rejected him from being
King. 1 Samuel 15.^3, ult.
And the text says expressly, That Samuel came no more to see Saul, until the
day of his death (that is never) nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul. Truly
now the Spirit of God delivers thee counsel, to destroy those notorious fins
(which if thou will thou can forbear) should thou spare those fat, those King
corruptions, though the Spirit of God may mourn for thee, that thou should be
such a wilful soul-murderer, and reject the counsel of God against thy self?
yet he may utterly reject thee, from being any of the heirs of the heavenly
Kingdom, and thou may see him no more to the day of thy death.

If thou live under the Gospel, I question not but the Holy Spirit does move
thee, to forsake thine ungodly comrades, thy scandalous crimes, and to set upon
prayer in secret, in private, Scripture and meditation, which I must tell thee
that if thou haft will at home (as we say) thou have power enough in thine
hands to do, again and again I pray thee to cherish and obey such motions, (the
Spirit makes short work with some) least he bid thee adieu, and clap such a
curse upon thee, that thou never clawest off while thou live, no not whilst
thou have a being.

It may be this skilful Physician proceeds further; he does not only show
thee thy disease, and tell thee what things are bad, what things are good for
it; but also gives thee Physic, in order to thy cure, and such Physic as
works to purpose, and makes thee heart sick indeed: I mean, the Spirit of God
proceeds from illumination to humiliation, it does not only convince thee of
thy wounds and putrified sores, but also lanceth and cutteth them, applies a
stinging corrosive to eat up thy proud flesh, and puts thee to great pain;
the Spirit shows thee sin and wrath in their colors, making thee see the
former more frightful then a devil, and feel the latter more painful at thy
heart then a dagger; possibly he takes thee and holds thee (as it were) over
Hell, making thee see the smoke of that bottomless pit, smell the brimstone,
and feel the scorchings of that eternal fire, that thou beginnest to sink under
the weight of thy wickedness, and to cry out, Mine iniquities are gone over my
head, Psalm. 38.1.
and they are a burden too heavy for me to bear; Those sins which were as
sweet as honey in thy mouth, are now taken down into thy belly, and they are
there more bitter then gall. The Law charge thee home with its great guns,
that thou fear and tremblest, and know not whither to fly for succor.

If thou art come thus much of thy journey, I would bid thee welcome so far; and
would tell thee for thy encouragement, that these pangs and throws seem to
foretell the new birth to be coming; if thou suffer not the Devil and thy
corrupt heart to be at thy labor, to try their experiments, and tamper about
thee (for questionless, they would destroy both thee and the babe of Grace in
thy womb) but suffer the Spirit of God to be the midwife, and followest his
directions, I durst be the man that should prophecy an happy and fafe
delivery. But thou know that the condition of one in travel is very
ticklish; a little miscarriage may then undo both mother and child; therefore
it behooves thee now to be extraordinary careful what thou do and how thou
carriest thy self; it is as much as thy life is worth: For thy direction I
shall tell thee what thou should not do, and what thou should do.

Be sure that thou do not run to creatures for comfort: Foolish people when
sometimes an able Surgeon has laid some sharp medicine to their festered
wounds, which puts them to much pain, though, unless by such means the
rottenness of them be eaten up, and the corruption in them forced out, they can
never be cured, yet they are ordinarily so impatient, that they will not endure
it; but as this good woman, and that neighbor if they do not know a milder
medicine for such a sore; surely, say they, this medicine which the Doctor
uses, will never do it; we find the member or part very angry, and extremely
raging; and then some one or other acquainteth them with gentler means, which
they presently apply, and thereby skin over their sores before they are half
searched, that afterward the wound either breaks out again, and puts them to
more pain if ever they be healed, or else it keeps still in, overspreads the
body, and kills them. Thus, thus do too many with the Physician of their souls,
and thereby do often undo themselves. The Spirit of God applies the terrors
and consternations the Law, to make way, and prepare them for the dainties and
consolations of the Gospel; the good Samaritan pours wine into the wound to
search it, before he pours oil to heal it; now foolish men are impatient, not
able to bear such sad melancholy thoughts, (as they call them) and therefore
they often break away from the Spirit of God before they are thoroughly humbled,
and run to their earthly enjoyments, whereby they get some present ease, but
here or hereafter far greater pain.

It is reported of the Italians, that in a great thunder they ring their bells,
and shoot off their canons, that the noise of them might drown the voice of the
thunder. Thus do some with the voice of their awakened and terrified
consciences, they seek to drown it by the noise of worldly businesses,
recreations, or it may be ungodly delights; But surely, damning a soul is not
the way to save a soul.

Reader, did thou never know of any that were in a journey, and coming to
some deep dirty pochy lane, they thought to avoid it, and broke over the hedge
into the field? but when they had rod round and round, they could find no way
out, but were forced to go out where they got in; and then notwithstanding
their unwillingness, to go through that mirie lane, or else not to go that
journey. Truly so it is in thy journey to Heaven; thou art now come to this
deep lane of humiliation, through which all must go that will reach that City
whose builder and maker is God; do not think to avoid it, no not the least part
of it; for this is the narrow way and strait gate that leads to life: Suppose
thou should run to the world, or any thing here below, now thou beginnest to
be sensible of thy sickness and pain, and so in an hopeful way of recovery:
First, it is impossible that any of those things can cure thee; Miserable
comforters are they all, and Physicians of no value. Can a silver Slipper cure
the gout? or a golden Crown the headache? or the greatest Empire in the world
the pain of thy teeth? much less can these things cure the diseases of thy
soul: All the wrapping of thy foot, that has a thorn in it, though with never
such fine scarlet cloth, will be altogether ineffectual to ease thee of thy
pain; for the thorn must be pulled out; so must sin be plucked out, its guilt
removed before thou can possibly be eased: But my great reason is, (which I
desire thee to consider seriously) should thou throw off this medicine of thy
spiritual Physician because it is somewhat sharp, and run to the Empericks and
Mountebanks of the world, thou will provoke thy tender able Physician to leave
thee (for what man will bear such affronts) and where art thou then? what will
become of thee for ever? Those that work in Coal-mines find by experience that
the earth sends up damps which quench and put out their candles; and what
then becomes of the men that are there? they are often slain. Should thou
like Jonah, run from the presence of the Lord, to more pleasing employments
then the work of a through humiliation, either he will bring thee back again to
the same business by storms and tempests, or else such damps will arise from
thine earthly interruptions as will quench Gods Spirit, and eternally ruin thy
spirit.

The evil spirit I know will be busy to persuade thee to smother and put out
the sparks (which the good Spirit has kindled within thee) by heaps of
worldly rubbish and dirt: but take heed what thou do, for thy soul is at
stake; if those sparks should die, thou art like to live in hell fire for ever.
Observe how it fared with unhappy Felix. He was a Prisoner to his Prisoner, and
in a ready way to have been one of Christ's freemen, but now hells jailer was
like to lose one of his captives, (for I question not but Satan for fear of
losing him, trembled more then he) what therefore through the Devils advice
must Felix do? He must needs cure himself of his convulsion by an
abruptdiversion. When the Spirit struck in with the word and caused him to
tremble, he sends Paul away till another season, and we never read when that
time came. Had Felix struck in with the Spirit, when the iron of his heart was
hot, he might have been happy indeed, but he quenches those motions, which
were so likely to recover his soul, and thereby (in all probability) misseth
salvation.

Some say that Samsons mother was forbidden wine and strong drink, all the
while she was with child of him, partly because that wine and strong drink are
naught for the child in the womb. I am confident that carnal diversions, that,
To put back thy pangs by earthly affairs, much more by wine and strong drink,
is infiniely prejudicial to the babe of grace, and many to one but it may cause
thine eternal miscarriage.

Friend, that which in this case I would advise thee to do, is to betake thy
self to thy closet, or chamber, and there to fall down before the most high
God, and to accuse, indict, and condemn thy self for thy sins, pour out thy
soul before the Lord in acknowledging the pollution of thy nature, the
transgressions of thy life, with all their bloody aggravations, confessing the
righteousness of the law, and thy obnoxiousness thereby to the infinite and
eternal wrath of the Lord. O now is the only time to repent, with that
repeniance which is never to be repented of; if ever thou would draw water,
and pour it out before the Lord, it must be now the spirit has thawed the tap;
neglect this season, and it may freeze again speedily. When Nathan came from
God to David after his fall, (when he had lain in his impenitency many months)
and told him of his sins, and convinced him that he was worthy to die, what
does David do? does he run to his crown or honor, or power in the world? No.
Does he hastily snatch at the promises? No, but he goes to God (as appears by
the title and body of the 51. Psalm) bewaileth his original and actual sins,
condemns himself, justifies God, offers up the sacrifice of a broken
heart, beggeth hard for pardon and holiness. O do thou follow this blessed
pattern; if thy body were sick of a violent fever, and nature were so far thy
friend, as when thou wast in thy bed, to put thee into a fine sweat, and
thereby give thee hope of evacuating the ill humors (which cause thy disease)
through the pores, what would thou do in this case? would thou rise
presently, and run into the cold air, or would thou not rather abide still
in thy bed, and if need were, call for more clothes, to increase thy sweat,
whereby thy body might be perfectly cured? Thus it is in the state of thy soul;
thou art sick unto death; the Spirit of God is so much thy friend, as to help
thee to sweat out thy distemper by humiliation, and godly sorrow; twere a
madness in thee now to run to the open air of the world, or to do any thing
which might hinder this sweating; thy only way is to encourage and increase
it, by betaking thy self to thy chamber, and there to look into thy heart, and
consider how full it is of unholiness, to look back upon thy life, and consider
how contrary it has been to the Divin^law, to look up to God and consider the
Majesty, holiness, and mercy, which are in him whom thou have provoked; this is
the way to continue and increase thy humiliation, and thereby (for the spirit
delights to proceed in assisting those, that thus cherish his motions) to be
perfectly healed. Duties now are the Spirits pleasant garden, in which he will
delight to walk with thee; they are like bellows to blow up the heavenly fire
into a flame, or as oil to the lamps, which will keep them ever burning.
Philosophers tell us, that elementary fire wants no fuel, though culinary
does. Divines tell us that the Spirit of God needs not ordinances, for he is
infinite in power; but that he will not work without them where he affords
them, is manifestly his pleasure.

Reader, if thou art humbled as I have before spoken, thou look on thy self
as a vile creature, even as a dog; I would have thee now very careful, that
thou wait patiently (for the bountiful housekeeper of the world, is preparing
some good food for thee) and do not eatch too hastily at the childrens bread,
the promises, lest it be taken from thee, and thou meet with a blow. When a
wound is deep, there is much wisdom required to keep it some time open with a
tent, and not to heal it up too soon, lest its cure be imperfect. Do thou wait
Gods leisure, bemoaning thy sins, abhorring thy self, praying fervently for thy
soul, and be confident that Jesus Christ, who is already upon his way, will
arise upon thee speedily, with healing under his wings.

It may be that this tender able Physician, comes nearer to thee, he does not
only show thee the nature and danger of thy disease, and make thee (who were
before senseless) apprebensive of it, by feeling thy sickness, but does also
discover to thee an excellent and costly remedy, which has cured many of thy
very disease, and will unquesionably heal thee, if thou will but accept it
thankfully, and apply it prudently; I mean the spirit presents to thee, (when
thou art full of anguish and sorrow) that rare salve of the blood of Jesus
Christ, which spread upon a promise, is the only healing plaster for a
wounded conscience. He acquainteth thee with the alsufficiency of Jesus Christ
to save sinners; that he is a Savior of Gods own appointing, one in whom God
has given under his hand, that he is well pleased; a redeemer that has in him
infinite meritoriousness, because he is the only begotten of the father; if he
shows thee long bills of others debts which have been canceld by the blood of
Christ, and assures thee that he is not only able, but truly willing to save
thee, that he was wounded for thy transgressions, and bruised for thine
iniquities, and by his stripes thou may be healed: The Holy Ghost possibly
sets the King of Saints before thee, in all his robes, and riches, and
righteousness, (as it were) thus bespeaking thee; Come poor sinner, that lie
weltring in thy blood, hearken to me, and thou shall see what I can and will do
for thee; though by thy wilful breach of the Law, thou art liable to such
endless boundless fury, as thou could neither abide nor avoid; yet I will be
a Skreen between thee and the unquenchable fire. I Will satisfy the law, and
pacify my father, I Will not only deliver thee from sin and Satan, wrath, and
death, and damnation, but adopt thee for a Son, interest thee in that
inestimable treasure, the covenant of grace, and make thee an heir of the
eternal weight of glory; and all this thou shall have freely and surely, if
thou will but accept me thankefully and heartily for thy Savior and Lord. At
the hearing of which loving language thou probably art amazed, and ready to say
as Mephibosheth (when David told him that he should eat bread at his table
continually) What is thy servant that thou should look upon such a dead dog
as I am! Thou admirest the riches of Christ's merits, the freeness of his mercy,
and the happiness of his members; thy soul begins to be exceedingly in love
with him, and affectionately longing after him; O think thou, Had I but
Christ for my portion, though I were never so poor in temporals, I could be
heartily contented. Now Christian, the Kingdom of God is come nigh unto thee,
thou art now upon thy quickening, be but careful there, and thou art made for
ever. I know that thy broken heart is willing to go to Jesus Christ, but have a
care that thou carry nothing to him, that thou keep nothing from him; thy
miscariage in either of these, may quite break off the bargain between Christ
and thy soul, as near as it is driven.

I say, carry nothing to Christ; Thy next step must be quite out of thine own
doors; the Devil knows how to slay thee as well by thy righteousness, thy
mournful contrition for sin, as by thine unrighteousness, thy wilful commission
of sin, which made Austin say, That repentance damneth more then sin; nay, thy
trusting upon thy prayers, or tears, or any good in thee, does alter the nature
of them, and turn them into sin; in this many stick; they are hardly brought
off from their own bottoms. When men's houses are on fire, their covetousness to
save their goods has often lost them their lives; when men's souls are in a
flame, their pride to carry out with them their good prayers, and good desires,
and good resolutions, has lost them eternal life; they will pay some of their
brass-farthings toward the reckoning, and God therefore makes them pay the
whole shot.

O how unwilling is the creature to be beholden to Christ, his Surety, for the
payment of all his debts! though he be a mere bankrupt, yet he hopes he may
compound with his Creditor, and pay something toward his satisfaction; and
this arises partly from his ignorance of that righteousness which alone can
satisfy the Law, or pacify the Lord; For they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.3.
They were ignorant, first, how perfect that righteousness must be, for which
God will justify a sinner, that if there be the least spot in it, his pure
eyes cannot accept it; secondly, they were ignorant how complete that
righteousness is which the Law requires, how the Law reaches to the inward as
well as the outward man; how it damneth for the smallest idle word, wandering
thought, or complying motion of the heart with sin. Did they but know, that
that righteousness which pleases God for their justification, must answer the
Law in its full latitude, and all its dimensions, they would not offer their
drossy duties, no nor their golden graces for current coin, which being weighed
in that balance of the Sanctuary must needs be found infinitely too light.
Partly from his pride; For they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves
to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. Mark, They have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God; Proud man esteems it submission, a
condescension, to be beholden to Jesus Christ for remission and salvation; he
has (though a beggars purse, yet) a proud heart, and is loath to trouble Jesus
Christ so much, and to take all his mercies as alms, out of the basket of the
Redeemers merits.

Reader, now thou art in a storm, if thou love thy soul, do not run to
shelter thy self under the rotten house of thy own righteousness; for be
confident 'twill fall about thine ears, and thou like Zimri will perish in it.
The Law of man denies allowance from the Parish to them that have any thing of
their own to subsist by; and the Gospel of God denies allowance from the
righteousness of Christ, to all them that have of their own for their
maintenance.

Do not think to piece thy rags up with Christ's robes, for it will not be
allowed; go to Jesus Christ stark naked for his glorious raiment, altogether
poor for his precious riches; there is a necessity of being found wholly in
him, or wholly out of him, there is no medium. The Hare which being pursued,
trusts to her own legs, is torn in pieces by the Dogs, when the Coney that
runs to the holes of the rock is safe. The man that pursued by the Law,
leans on his own sanctity, loses his own soul, when he that flees to the
wounds of a crucified Christ is sure to be saved. Behold (says God) I lay in
Sion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, Isa. 28.16 1 Pet. 2.6.
a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation; He that believes on him shall not
be confounded.

As I would have thee careful that thou carry nothing to Christ; so also that
thou keep nothing from Christ. When Israel went out of Egypt to serve God,
there was not a hoof to be left behind. There must be no reservation, no
exception, but an absolute hearty dedication of thy self, and all thou have
unto Jesus Christ; if thou halfest or haltest now, thou art an undone man: As
Samuel asked Jesse, Are all thy sons here? and denied to sit down and feast
with him till all were present; so truly Christ will deny to close with thy
soul, to sit down and sup with thee, unless all thou have be present, and
unfeignedly devoted to his service.

But in a special manner, be careful that no sin be kept from the stroke of
Christ: As when Paul came to Ephesus, the whole City was in an uproar; so now
the Lord Jesus is coming into thine heart, there will be old stir among thy
corruptions; how strongly will they plead, if not for their forms open
allowance, yet at least for a secret inward connivance; little do thou think
how busy Satan will be for a writ of partition, that since he cannot prevail
for all thy heart, that yet he may be admitted an equal sharer with Christ; he
will tell thee, (but remember that he was a Liar from the beginning) that thou
may keep thy sins and thy Savior too; that Christ is not so strict, but that
for a fair agreement he will allow somewhat to the flesh. But I beseech thee,
not to think of any League with the least of thy lusts: Surely, if thou see
any loveliness in Christ, thou can not but judge every sin loathsome; besides,
he were a poor Savior, if he could not make thee amends for thy parting with
the most pleasureable or profitable sin. Who would think, that thou like David
should plead for Absalom, for sin when it seeks to bereave thee of thy crown
and life? Truly should thou gratify Satan so far as to hide any wedg of gold,
or Babylonish garment, any one lust I must tell thee, that one, be it never so
small, would like a little boy put in at a casement, open the door of thine
heart for many theevish lusts, and great ones too, to enter in. If thou allow
the old Serpent but room for his head, he will quickly wind in his whole body.
Sir Francis Drake, being in a dangerous storm upon the Thames, was heard to
say, Must I who have escaped the rage of the Ocean, be drowned in a ditch!
Surely thou may so far comply with Christ, as to take thy leave of scandalous
enormities; yet if thou reservest favorable thoughts toward any secret
iniquity, thou destroyest thy self. And it will be all one, whether thou art
slain by a small Pistol, or by a great Cannon.

Corruption may close with religion a great way (says a Divine) and hear
gladly and do many things; Dr. Reynolds on Hos. 14. ser. 7.
but there is a particular point of strictness, in every unregenerate man's
case, which when it is set on close to him, causes him to be offended and
stumble, as in the young man, and Herod. -- This is the difference between
hypocritical and sincere conversion. That goes far, and parts with much, and
proceeds to almost, but when it comes to the turning point, and ultimate act of
regenerate, he then plays the part of an unwise son, and stays in the place of
the breaking forth of children, as a foolish Merchant, that in a rich bargain
of a thousand pound, breaks off upon a difference of twenty shillings; but the
other is content to part with all, and to suffer the loss of all, to carry on
the treaty to a full and final conclusion, to have all the armor of the strong
man taken from him, that Christ may divide the spoils.

Reader, thou know upon what terms thou may contract a bargain with
Christ, for the saving of thy soul; that thou must not think to have him for
thy Savior, unless thou will accept him for thy Lord also. As Boaz told his
kinsman, that if he would enjoy the inheritance of Ebimelech, he must have Ruth
the Moabitess to be his wife; so say I to thee, if thou will have the
inheritance, the portion of Jesus Christ, thou must have his person for thy
husband, and resign thy self to be ruled by his precepts. The Jews that stayed
themselves upon the God of Israel, and yet continued rebellious, were more bold
then welcome. Isa. 48.1, 2. Now thou art come thus far, do not go back, and to
save a pin, lose a Kingdom. Thou may be confident that nothing can ever be
enjoined thee by Christ, but what is reasonable and honorable, tending to thy
real and eternal good, as well as his own glory; therefore now the Master is
come and calls for thee, do thou answer, Lo I come to do thy will O my God,
thy law is in the midst of my heart.

Friend, if the Spirit of God has been so favorable to thee, as to kindle
such motions (as I have mentioned) within thee, for the Lords sake, cherish
them, obey them lest thy quenching the Spirit bring thee to that fire which can
never be quenched. To day if thou will hear his voice, harden not thine heart,
lest he swear in his wrath, that thou shall never enter into his rest.

The third help to Regeneration.
A serious constant use of all the means of grace, which God has appointed for
the renewing of souls, with an expectation of a blessing from God.
THirdly, if thou would be Regenerated, Be serious and constant in the use of
all the means of grace (which God has appointed for the begetting souls unto
Christ) with looking unto God for a blessing.

Reader, Observe five particulars in this third help to Regeneration.

First, Use and attend on the means of grace. The ordinances of God, are the
Marts and Faires, whereat Christians must trade for grace. At them thou may
buy spiritual commodities, without money, and without price. The ever blessed
God has upon a twofold account, enjoined the use of his ordinances, partly out
of sovereignty over us, that we might thereby acknowledge that homage and fealty
which we owe to his Majesty; Partly out of mercy to us, that we might therein
receive of his Spirit and grace. By our attendance on ordinances, as by a
peppercorn, (for all that we can do is very little) we acknowledge of whom we
hold, and to whom we are bound, and also they are the door at which God gives
his gracious doles; The manna of the spirit does usually fall down in the dews
of ordinances. Thou have Gods command for thy warrant, Mat. 7.7, 8. Isa. 55.1,
2, 3, 5. and his promise for thy motive. In all places where I record my name,
there I will come and will bless thee, Exodus 20.24. And if thou would know
what blessing, what alms God gives at those places, There the Lord commands
his blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133.3. God gives not such
blessings anywhere as there; there are the mercies of the Throne; pardon, love,
peace, conversion, increase of grace, joy in the Holy Ghost; the kidneys of the
wheat, the finest of the flower, and the honey out of the rock of mercy. It is
said of Constantine, that he impoverished all his Empire to enrich
Constantinople. God does pass by other parts of the world as waste ground, or
as a wilderness; but the place where he records his Name is his garden: that he
will dung, and dig, and dress, and take care that it bring forth good fruit;
there he commands his blessing. It is an allusion possibly to great persons, to
a General, or an Emperor; Where the word of a King, is there is power: The
Centurion said, I say to one Soldier, Go, and he goes; to another, Come, and
he comes; to a third, Do this, and he does it. So God commands one
ordinance, Go and build up such a Saint, and it goes; he says to another
ordinance, Come and call home such a sinner, and it does it; Gods word and work
go together. Men cannot enable others, or give them power to obey them; they
may bid a lame man walk, or a blind man see, but they cannot enable them to
walk or see; God with his word gives strength to do the thing commanded; as in
the old, so in the new creation, He spoke, and it was done, he commanded, and
it stood fast, Psalm. 33.9. But there the Lord commands his blessing, even life
for evermore. The stream of Regeneration, or a spiritual life, which shall
never cease; but still go forward and increase, till it swell to, and be
swallowed up in the Ocean of eternal life, even life for evermore.

Thou hear, Reader, where thy wants may be supplied, through what pipes the
water of life is conveyed; do thou like the impotent man, wait at the porch of
Solomon's Temple, begging and expecting some alms, God may do more for thee (as
for him, Acts 3.2, 8.) then thou do ask or think.

It was as easy for Boaz (and it might have been done with as little charge)
to have given Ruth as much corn at first as would have yielded an Epah of
barley, and so have sent her away without any more ado; but he will have her
glean it, and then break it. So God could infuse Grace immediately, but he will
have men hear, read, and pray, attend on Ordinances, though not as masters, yet
as means of Grace; He gives earthly riches to them that are diligent in their
particular callings; so he gives heavenly riches to them that are diligent
about their general calling.

Secondly, Observe in this third help a serious constant use of all the means
of Grace appointed for this end; David in meditation finds the Spirit
kindling that fire, which at last broke out into an holy flame, Psalm. 39.3.
While I was musing the fire burned.

The two disciples at godly conference, found Jesus Christ to make a third;
while they were discoursing of him, he presents himself to them, causes their
hearts to burn within them, and opens their eyes to know him. Dead coals are
kindled by live ones; O it is good for thee to be among the Saints; Thomas by
missing one meeting did his soul unspeakable dis-service.

Cornelius at prayer in his house, Acts 10. initi^.
had a messenger from heaven, directing him whither to send for one to instruct
him in the way of Salvation; Prayer has been a prevalent Orator at the Throne
of Grace: Many that have gone thither with prayers and petitions, have come
away with praises and thanksgivings.

Jacob added tears to his prays, and as a Prince prevailed with God. He wept
and made supplication, and prevailed, Hosea 12.4. Music sounds best upon the
waters; such water of a sinner, mingled with the blood of a Savior, has
melted the very heart of God, A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will
not despise, Psalm. 51.17.

When Daniel was fasting his body, an angel is sent to feast his soul, Dan.
9.21. While some have been casting themselves down, God has been raising them
up. Papists on their fasting days deny themselves flesh, but have dainty fare,
costly sweetmeats. Thou may, Reader, if thou humblest thy self under the
mighty hand of God, expect that he should in his own time lift thee up: These
duties have helped to increase, and also to beget holiness.

The Eunuch was reading the Scripture, when Philip was commanded by commission
from the Holy Ghost, to join himself to his Chariot, and to instuct him in the
knowledge of Christ, Act. 8.33. Junius, by reading Joh. 1. Augustine by reading
Romans 13. were converted. The three thousand ( Act. 3.) by hearing, came to
love; and truly many thousands have found the Gospel of Christ preached, to
become the power of God unto Salvation. Cyprian confesses that he was
converted from idolatry, and negromancy, by hearing the history of the Prophet
Jonas read, and expounded by Cecilius, whom therefore he calls the father of
his new life. Faith and repentance are both wrought by hearing, Romans 10.14.
Acts 3.37. The wandering sinner is most frequently reduced by the Scripture,
either read or heard; God calls to him when he is running away, saying, Return,
Return, O Shulamite, Return, Return. In all Gods great works, there is
ordinarily, a word accompanying it, as in the creation God said, Let there be
light; when Christ raised Lazarus, Lazarus come forth; when he converted Paul,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? At the great day, Arise ye dead and come
to judgment; The Devil got in at first, into man's heart by his ear. The Dragon
bites the Elephants ear, and thence sucks his blood, knowing that to be the
only place, which he cannot reach with his trunk to defend. The Spirit of God
comes in with the word, 2 Cor. 3.8. Romans 1.12. Gal. 3.2.

As that word of God to Abraham, Sarah thy wife shall have a Son, Genesis 18.10.
That word I say gave birth and being to Isaac, when there was no likelihood or
possibility of his being; from his parents, so the word of God give a spiritual
birth, and being to men and women, when there is no likelihood or possibility
in nature, yea when their natures are in flat opposition and contrariety to it.

The word discovers our diseases, Romans 7.7. Jam. 2.9. makes us feel our
sickness, Romans 7.9. applies the medicine for our cure, Mat. 11.28. Isa. 55.1.
Romans 10.14.

The word kills sin, casts down Satan, enliveneth the soul, Ephesians. 6.15. Jer.
23.29. Rev. 12.11. Joh. 5.24. Joh. 17.17. Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 1.16. 1 Cor.
1.18. Jam. 1.18.

Thus thou see that the Physician of souls has several means for the cure
of thy malady; do not thou neglect any, neither reading nor hearing, neither
fasting nor praying, neither meditation nor godly conference, neither secret
nor private, nor public duties, for thou know not which may do the deed.
Christ may wait at that very door which thou keep shut, at that ordinance
which thou omittest, to enter into thy soul. If thou desire that he should
meet thee in any duty, do thou meet him in every duty. How foolish art thou to
take any one horse out of the team, when the load is so weighty, even thine
endless welfare, and all little little enough, to draw thine untoward heart
toward heaven. The Husbandman that has a piece of ground which lies at the
end of his fallow, still balked before, will be sure to plough that up, and
expects a better crop out of that, then out of any such quantity of ground in
the field. Reader, if thou have balked any of the forementioned duties, for thy
souls sake set upon it speedily, for undoubtedly thou may reap a greater
harvest by it then thou imaginest.

Friend, have a care of secret, private, public duties, for all must be minded
by them that would be new-moulded. How many thousands among us do wilfully
murder their souls! some poison them by crying enormities, others starve them
by the omission of duties. It was a pitiful equivocatiof the Duke D' Alva
(before Harlem, that promised the Soldiers their lives, and afterward killed
them with hunger) saying, That though he promised them their lives, yet he did
not promise that they should have food. Art not thou a cheater, and murderer of
thy foul, in promising it spiritual life, when thou denyest it the means of
life? As ever thou would have an harvest of grace, do thou plough up, and sow
the ground of thine heart, with all the means which God has ordained for that
end.

Thirdly, be thou serious in thine attendance on the ordinances of God. Be in
earnest when thou art about soul affairs, consider when thou art praying, or
hearing, or reading, or conferring with Christians, it is for thy life, it is
for thy soul, it is for eternity, and do whatsoever the Lord calls thee to do
for the quickening thy dying soul with all thine heart, with all thy might; for
there is no doing it in the grave, whither thou art hastening. When Samson
would destroy the enemies of God, He bowed himself with all his might. Judge.
16.30. When David was waiting upon the Ark of God, He danced before the Lord
with all his might. 2 Samuel 6.14. So when thou hear for the death of thy
sins, thou should hear with all thy might, Ezekiel 40.4. When thou prayest for
the life of thy soul, thou should pray with all thy might, 1 These. 5.17. Ah
how should they hear and read and pray for regeneration, that have but a few
days (nay hours possibly) to do it in, between whom and eternal burnings there
is but a little airy breath, and if they be not Regenerated before they die,
they are ruined, they are damned for ever!

A child may handle the mothers breast, and play with it, and kiss it, but all
this while he gets no good, till at last he lays his mouth to the breast,
gets the Nipple fast, sucks with his might and strength, and then he draws
nourishment; Reader, it may be, thou have minded duties, and frequented
ordinances, yet possibly have got no good by them; it is likely then that thou
do but play with them, dally about them, doing them as if thou did them
not; if ever therefore thou would get good by them, thou must be serious and
in earnest about them, do them with all thy soul, with all thy strength,
knowing that they are of infinite weight, and endless concernment to thee,
considering that if God do not now hear thee (in thy day of grace) he will
never, never hear thee; and if thou do not now hear him, thou shall shortly
never, never more have such an offer.

I doubt not friend, but thou art serious about toys and trifles; thou can
rise early and go to bed late, and work hard all day, and have thy mind
steadfastly occupied about these foolish things of the world, from which within
a short time, thou shall be parted for ever. How busy are vain men like a
company of Ants, to increase their heap of earth. O think of it, is it not pity
such a plant should grow in Egypt, which would thrive so well in Canaan? How
fitly, how finely would that seriousness and fervency which thou usest about
earth, become and suit with heaven! Ah twould be worth the while, to be most
covetous and sedulous about the things of God, and Christ, thy soul and
Eternity.

Fourthly, Be constant in the use of the means of Grace; pray and wait, hear
and wait, read and wait, watch and wait; In the morning sow thy seed, in the
evening withold not thine hand; for thou know not whether shall prosper,
either this, or that, or whether they both shall be alike good, Eccles. 11.6.
in every morning sow thy seed, pray, read, meditate; in the evening withold
not thine hand, do the same; for thou know not which shall prosper, at which
the Spirit of God will give thee a gracious effectual meeting for thy
conversion or salvation, or whether both shall conduce equally to thy spiritual
and eternal advantage; Do not expect, like the Hyperboreans, to sow and reap in
a day; allow some distance between seed time and harvest. Physic does not work
immediately when its taken into the body; be confident, thou shall reap in time
if thou do not faint.

Suppose thou were sick of some mortal painful disease, a dead man in thy own
and others thoughts; and an able faithful Physician should warrant thy cure in
time, upon condition that thou would follow his advice, and diet thy self all
the while; would thou not use all that he prescribed, and wait, and long to
be recovered? Thou wast wounded in a moment, but art not so soon recovered;
it is good to wait Gods leisure; what Christ said in regard of his coming in
Judgment, I say in regard of his coming in mercy, Watch therefore, for thou
know not when the Son of Man will come, whether this day, to morrow, or next
week; lose no time, Amici diem perd^di. Hodie non regnavimus.
neglect no opportunity; the Heathen Titus, could bewail the loss of that day
wherein he had done no good. Friends, I have lost a day; and will thou wilfully
lose half a day, when every moment is of more worth to thee then a Kingdom?
Naaman the Syrian washed seven times in Jordan; the six times washing could not
do it; 'twas upon the seventh time washing that he was cured of his Leprosy,
and his flesh came again like the flesh of a child. Do thou often bathe thy
soul in the waters of the Sanctuary; at one time or other (if thou faithfully
practisest this help) thou will find them healing waters; observe what Saul
lost by not waiting Gods leisure; Samuel had told Saul, 1 Samuel 10.8. And thou
shall go down before me to Gilgal -- seven days shall thou tarry, till I come
to thee, and show thee what thou shall do. This precept was enjoined Saul, I
suppose not because Samuel might be hindered by some necessary occasions, till
seven days were come, (which reason some give) but for the trial of Saul's
obedience to God in waiting his appointed time. Now Saul, 1 Samuel 13.8, and 13.
waited six days, nay, toward the latter end of the seventh day for Samuel;
but because he waited not full seven days he lost the Kingdom: Thou have done
foolishly, thou have not kept the commandment of the Lord thy God (says Samuel
to Saul) for now would the Lord have established thy Kingdom for ever; but now
thy Kingdom shall not continue, for the Lord has sought him a man after his
own heart.

O how sad was it that Saul should lose a Kingdom for want of two or three
hours patience! had he tarried a little longer, he had had the Kingdom for
ever; but is it not sadder if thou should lose the Eternal Kingdom of Heaven,
by not tarrying Gods time, by not waiting his leisure!

Reader, Lie at the pool, and give not over, till the Angel does move upon the
waters. When one of the Fathers had it suggested to him by the Devil, That it
was in vain for him to mind God, for he should never get to Heaven: Then says
he, I will follow hard after God, that I may enjoy as much of him as is
possible on earth. When Blind Bartimens was rebuked by the Disciples for
calling after Christ for his bodily sight, he cries the more earnestly, Jesus
thou Son of David, have mercy on me, Mark 10.15. What ever discouragements thou
meetest with in thine attendance on God in Ordinances, be like the English Jet
fired by water, and not like our ordinary fires, quenched by it; let them add
to, not diminish thy resolution and courage; let not one repulse beat thee off;
be violent, give a second storm to the Kingdom of Heaven. Parents sometimes
hide themselves to make their children continue seeking. He that would not at
first open his mouth, nor vouchsafe the woman of Canaan a word, does (upon her
continued and fervent Petitions) at last open his hand, and give her what ever
she asked; O woman, be it unto thee as thou will; continued importunity is
undeniable oratory.

And truly, if after all thy pains thou find Jesus Christ, will it not make
amends for thy long patience? Men that venture often at a Lottery, though they
take blanks twenty times, if afterward they get a golden basen and ewer, it
will make them abundant satisfaction. Suppose thou should continue knocking
twenty, nay, forty years, yet if at last, though but one hour before thou
die, thy heart be opened to Christ, and he be received into thy soul, and
when thou die Heaven be opened to thee, and thy soul received into it; will
it not infinitely requite thee for all thy labor! O think of it, and resolve
never to be dumb while God is deaf; never to leave off prayer, till God return
a gracious answer. And for thy comfort know, that he who begun his Psalm with,
How long will thou forget me, O Lord for ever! how long will thou hide thy face
from me! comes to conclude it with I will sing unto the Lord, for he has dealt
bountifully with me, Psalm. 13.1, and ult.

Fifthly, Be serious and constant in the use of all the means of Grace which
God has appointed for the renewing of souls, ^ Kings 18.3.6.
but expect the blessing only from God; Elijah when he had filled the trenches
with water, put the wood in order, laid the Sacrifice on the Altar, then he
looks up to Heaven for a blessing, and then fire came down from Heaven, whereby
God manifests his acceptance. So do thou, hear as for Heaven, sigh as for thy
soul, perform every duty as for eternity, attend on Ordinances with such
seriousness, as one that believes his unchangeable estate is at stake in them;
but when thou art doing them, and when thou have set all in order, then let
thine heart look up to Heaven for success, expect the fire of the Holy Ghost to
come down from above; be as diligent about duties and ordinances, as if they
could regenerate thee, and do all things; but depend on God, as one that
knows, that without him they can do nothing; Offer the sacrifice of
righteousness, and trust in the Lord: Trust in the Lord, and do good, Psalm.
4.5. and 37.9. Look on ordinances only as (for indeed they are no more then)
the order in which, and the instrument with which he is pleased to work; trust
in God will not consist either with the neglect of, or with trust in means.

Be thou but faithful in following these directions, and doubt not of Gods
benediction; expect that he who commands thee to seek, should enable thee to
find: Do not as unwise Archers, that shoot their arrows at random, never
looking to see them again; but as Jonathan, who when he had shot his arrows,
had one ready to fetch them again: Expect to reap the fruit of those duties
which thou sowest; Go to Gods house in the multitude of his mercies, Psalm. 5.7.
looking that mercy should give thee a meeting, and grant thee a blessing: I
will direct my prayer to thee, and will look up, Psalm. 5.3. that is, I will
trade, I will send out my spritual commodities, and expect a gainful return; I
will make my prayers, and not give them for lost, but look up for an answer.
God will bring man home by a way contrary to that by which he wandered from
him; man fell from God by distrust, by having God in suspicion; God will bring
him back by trust, by having good thoughts of him: O how richly laden might the
vessel which thou sendest out come home, would thou but long and look for its
return!

I come now to remove some hindrances, or answer some Objections which arise
in men's hearts against the truths delivered.

The first Objection answered; namely, Man's weakness and inability to turn unto
God.
THou may probably object against this Exhortation to mind Regeneration,
That thou have no power to leave and loath sin, to believe in, and submit to
Jesus Christ; Therefore, why do I call upon thee so earnestly? to what purpose
do I bid thee make thee a new heart, and a new spirit, turn unto God, and
embrace his only Son as thy Lord?

To this and the other subsequent objections, concerning Election, and thy
sinfulness in performing duties, I might answer only with the Apostle, Who art
thou that replyest against God, Romans 9.20. or with Eliphaz, Shall mortal man be
more just then God? shall a man be more pure then his Maker? Job 4.17. But I
will answer with Elihu, Suffer me a little, and I will show thee, what I have
to speak on Gods behalf; I will fetch my knowledge from a far, and will ascribe
righteousness to my maker. For truly my words shall not be false; He that is
perfect in knowledge is with me. Job 36.2, 3, 4.

First, I confess, See more of man's Impotency p. 111. to 117.
that thou art unable either to loath sin or love God, by thine own strength.
The precepts of the word speak man's duty, but Gods power; They teach us not
what we can do, but what we should do; because a man ought to pay his debts,
therefore it does not follow that he is able to pay them. Divine commands are
to convince men of their weakness, not to show their strength. I acknowledge
that by nature thou art dead in trespasses and sins, and can neither see, nor
hear, nor savor spiritual things, Ephesians. 2.1. Thou art without strength, Romans
5.6. not able to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. nor to speak a good word,
Mat. 12.34. nay, thou can do nothing that is acceptable to God, Joh. 15.3. or
profitable to thy self.

None can be aforehand with God. We cannot seek him, till we have found him; he
will be sought, that he may be found, and found that he may be sought, says
Bernard.

Secondly, I answer that the cause of man's weakness is from himself, the fault
is not in God. God made man upright, but he has found out many inventions,
Eccles. 7.29. What was there wanting on Gods part? He created man after his own
image, in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, he gives him a law to
direct him, a threatening to warn him, a promise to encourage him, ability and
power to carry himself uprightly. Man hearkeneth to Satan, distrusteth God,
despises the Law, tries new inventions, whereby he undoeth himself; Is God to
be blamed? Surely no. The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and then his
heart fretteth against the Lord. Pro. 19.3.

If thou urgest the objection farther, That one man sinned and the whole
generation of men suffer; that thy weakness proceeds not from thy fall, but
Adams; I answer, That a child may as well complain that his Prince is unjust,
because he is born the Son of a Beggar, or a Traitor; indeed it is an
unhappiness to thee, that thou art so descended, but not unrighteousness in
God. If God gave thy father an earthly estate of a thousand pound per annum,
and he prove a prodigal, and leave thee not a thousand farthings, will thou
blame God? Is he to be charged for thy fathers riotousness? truly thus it is in
spirituals; God gave Adam a sufficient stock, he wasted it by wilful disobeying
the command given him, and thereby leaves all his children poor and beggarly;
is God now in the least fault? Because thou have lost thy power of obeying?
should God therefore lose his right of commanding? a servant that makes himself
drunk, and thereby unable to do his Masters work, is not therefore disobliged
from his service. A prodigal debtor though he has spent his estate in drinking
and dicing, may justly be called upon, and sued for his debts.

But thou may say say, thou did not consent to trust thy stock in Adams
hands. I reply, Has not a father power to oblige and bind his son? Adam was
the father of all, and did bear without question, an extraordinary natural
affection to his children; His own interest was involved with theirs; he and
they lived and died, stood and fell together; he had full power over his own
will; Satan could not force him to sin; his obedience for all was no less easy
then for himself. There was nothing commanded him but what was equal and just,
and what he was thoroughly enabled to do. If Adam had stood, thou had shared
in his gains, which had been unspeakably great, therefore it is but righteous
that thou should share in his losses.

Besides, Shepherds since o^ convert edit. 5. p. 44.
though thou did not make any particular choice of Adam, to stand or fall,
for thee, yet God made choice of him for thee, who being goodness it self,
bears more good will to thee, then thou to thy self; and being wisdom it self,
made the wisest choice, and took the wisest course for the good of man. This
way made most for man's safety and quiet. For if he had stood, all fear of
losing our happiness had quite vanished; whereas if ever man had been lest to
stand or fall for himself, a man would ever have been in fear of falling; And
again, this was the surest way to have all our estates preserved; for Adam
having the charge of the estates of all the men that ever should be in the
world, he was the more pressed to look about him, left he should be robbed, and
undo so many thousands; Adam was the head of mankind, and all mankind are
members of that head; now if the head plot and act treason against the King,
the whole body is found guilty, and the whose body must suffer. If these things
satisfy not, God has a day coming, wherein he will declare his own righteous
proceedings, before Angels and men, Romans 2.4.

Reader, take heed of darkening counsel by words, or thoughts, without
knowledge; for we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth, Job
38.2. Romans 2.2.

3. I answer, That thine impotency lies in thine obstinacy. Thou pretendest
that thou can not, but the truth is thou will not, Luke 19.41. John 5.40.
Thou art resolvedly evil, and then fliest out against God himself, that thou
can not do good, Eccles. 8.11. Jer. 44.16.

Thy disease is deadly and dangerous; the Physician of souls offers thee his
help, and he is both willing and able to cure thee; now thou wilfully throwest
away his Physic, feedest on such things which thou (can for bear and)
know will increase thy disease, and then tellest the world that thou art not
able to cure thy self. Is this honest or rational dealing?

If a naked man be offered clothing, o^ a man ready to starve, food, and they
throw it away from them, and flatly deny to accept of them, who is to blame if
these perish with nakedness and hunger?

Thou had a poisonous egg from thy father, but the Serpent that stings thee
to death is from thy warming and hatching that egg in thine own breast; All the
men on earth, and all the devils in hell could not damn thee, were it not for
thy wilfulness in sin: And can thou expect that Jesus Christ should save thee
against thine own will? that he should carry thee to heaven whether thou will
or no? Believe it, a state of sin and wrath, is the matter of thine own choice.
The door which shuts thee out of the fathers house, is bolted against thee by
thine own hands.

Answer me this question, or else never more make this objection; Art thou
willing to turn from sin, unto God? Art thou willing to take the son of God for
thy Savior and Lord? If thou art willing, I am sure God is willing; he has
confirmd it with an oath. Ezekiel. 33.11. Jesus Christ is willing that sinners
should live, or he would not so willingly have died such a death; he has paid
the price of thy ransom, and offers thee an happier estate then that of which
Adam deprived thee. If thou art willing to accept of thy freedom thou may
have it. If any man will, let him drink of the water of life freely. Rev. 22.
And if thou art not willing, why do thou complain.

Fourthly, I answer, the fault is clearly in thy self, because thou neglectest
to do what thou have power to do; Thou have power, without any special grace,
to perform duties, to hear the word, to pray in secret, and with thy family, to
forbear thy wicked company, thy swearing, lying, drinking, scoffing at
godliness, and yet do not mind those duties constantly, nor forbear those
sins; shall a servant (friend, be thine own judge) which is trusted with five
pound to employ for his Masters honor, spend this in whoring and gaming, and
then blame his master for not trusting him with thousands? When man broke by
his fall, there was some stock left in his hands (not enough to set him up
again, but that) which might do him some good; now they spend this profusely,
they throw away those checks of conscience, which escaped the ruins of the
fall; they corrupt themselves in what they know, and wickedly refuse to do what
they can, and yet are so impudent as to fly in the face of the ever-blessed
God, that he does not give them power to do more.

Fifthly, thy weakness and impotency should drive thee to Christ for strength.
Lex data ut gratia quaereretur; gra tia data ut lex impleretur. Aug. de Spi. et
l. 1. cap. 19.
Thy misery by the first Adam should cause thee to mind thy recovery by the
second Adam; The word of God discovers to thee the necessity of regeneration,
thine own inability to do it, that thou might ply the throne of grace, fly
to Jesus Christ for help and succor. A man that is lifting a piece of timber,
and finds it too heavy for him, will call in help; thus the Law is a
Schoolmaster to drive thee to Christ. When thou considerest with thy self,
that thou must be regenerated, or damned in hell for ever, and that thou art
altogether unable to renew and sanctify thy self, how diligent should it make
thee, in attendance on Jesus Christ, for his Spirit and grace? How should
thou wait on thy redeemer, in reading, hearing, praying, meditating, using all
those means, which he has appointed for the conversion of thy soul?

The second objection answered: That unregenerate men sin in performing duties,
and attending on ordinances.
SEcondly, it may be, thou will say, You press me much to pray, and hear, and
frequent the means of grace; but I sin in doing so; I sin in praying, I sin in
hearing, and singing; and would you have me sin?

I answer; First thou sinnest in eating, and drinking, and following thy
calling, in not doing these things upon right principles, and for right ends;
and will thou therefore forbear them? thou will pamper and please thy body,
right or wrong, not only in the use, but even in the abuse of the creatures;
but how ordinary an excuse will make thee neglect thy soul?

Secondly, Regenerate men themselves sin in all their performances (though not
in such a manner as unregenerate ones do) and should they therefore lay them
down?

Thirdly, no pretense whatsoever can excuse from obedience to clear precepts
(remember also that the commands of God do not interfere or contradict each
other.) Now God expressly commands thee, though thou art in a natural estate,
to perform duties. Peter, when he had told Simon Magus, that he was in the gall
of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, yet he bids him pray to the Lord, Acts
8.22. if peradventure the thoughts of his heart might be forgiven him: our
sinning in duties cannot abrogate that Law of God which enjoins duties; as Gods
precepts are not measures of our strength, so they are not lessened by our
weakness. The Ninivites, though unregenerate (as some think) yet when threatened
with destruction, did both pray and fast, and found that it was not in vain,
Jonah 4.3.

Fourthly, thou sinnest less in performing duties then in neglecting them: If
thou art resolved to go on in a course of sinning, and damning thy soul, I know
not what to say to thee; the Lord pity thee; but if thou have any desire of
Salvation in a Gospelway, thou offendest far far less in waiting on God in his
Ordinances, then those do that refuse them; in performing duties without
suitable grace, thou failest in the manner of Divine worship; others that omit
duties, fail both in the matter and manner: thou owe God outward as well as
inward service; the confession of thy mouth, as well as the conversion of thine
heart; surely then, if thou give God the former, though without the latter,
thou do not sin so much as they that give him neither.

Fifthly, should thou neglect the means of grace, thou would make thy
condition (which is already dreadful) to be desperate; if ever God meet thee,
it must be in his own way, Romans 10.15, 17. Prove. 8. I believe thou scarce ever
heardst of any man converted, while he cast by the means of grace which God
afforded him.

Sixthly, If thy condition be so sad, that thou sinnest in all thou do, thou
have the more need to hasten out of it: Ah, who would be quiet one hour in such
an estate wherein what ever he does is abominable to God! Men, that are weak
and sickly, do not therefore forbear food, because they are not able to digest
it well, and it may possibly yield some nourishment to their disease, but do
therefore eat that they may get strength, and be enabled to overcome their
distempers.

Seventhly, God may meet with thee in the means of Grace. The Ordinances of God
are the golden pipes through which he conveyeth the oil of Grace from Christ
the olive tree: God does not bid thee to wait upon him for nothing; thousands
have found by happy experience, that they are blessed which watch at Wisdoms
gate, which wait at the posts of her doors, Prove. 8. latter end. The Ninivites
(when Jonah had foretold their ruin) fast and pray, saying, Who can tell if
God will repent and turn from his fierce anger that we perish not! Jonah 3.9.
So now God has foretold in his word the eternal destruction of all in thy
condition; do thou fast and pray, read and meditate; who can tell but God may
turn and have mercy upon thee, pour down his Spirit and holiness into thee,
that thou perish not! Thou may hear and read of the success of others; others
have found him in his house of prayer, and why not thou? The Mariner cannot
make either wind or tide, yet he lies ready upon the waters and waits for
them. The Husbandman cannot cause an harvest, yet he ploughs and sows, hoping
that the Heavens will help him; Thou can not heal thy self, wait therefore at
the means, Christ may come when thou little think of it and cure thee; God
delights to bless man's industry; his usual course is to meet them that meet
him; he has been found of them that sought him not, and will he hide himself
from thee when thou seek his face? for thine encouragement thou have his
word, (which is truth it self) That if thou seek him early, thou shall find
him, Prove. 8.17. Whilst there is life there is hope; thou live under the
means, O resolve to give God no rest till he give thee Regeneration.

The third and last Objection answered: If I be elected I shall be saved, let
me live never so wickedly, and neglect the means prescribed for my recovery.
THirdly, It is possible thou may object, That if thou art predestined to
life, thou shall be saved, though thou neglectest all these means of salvation;
and if thou art not elected, these will do thee no good.

I answer first, that this looks like the language of one already in Hell,
though it be found too too often in the mouths of swaggerers upon earth; in
evil things the Devil would make thee separate the end from the means; Think
not of Hell, but go on in sin, says he; in good things the means from the end;
never trouble thy self with holiness, yet doubt not of Heaven.

Secondly, suppose that thou should live and die in this desperate
conclusion, would not thou certainly be damned? without all controversy, in
the other world thou would find what a fine cheat the Devil had put upon
thee, by bringing thee into an opinion, which will bring thee inevitably into
destruction. Believe it, thou shall know in the other world who shall have the
worst of such cursed conclusions, God or thy self.

Thirdly, The Decree of God is a sealed book, and the names in it are secret;
therefore thy part is to look to Gods revealed will; namely, to make thine
Election sure, by making thy Regeneration sure: Do thou not know that secret
things belong to God, but revealed things to us and our children? O it is
dangerous to meddle with the secrets of Princes.

Fourthly, This opinion is not believed by thee, but is only pretended as a
cloak for thy wickedness and idleness; for if thou do believe that if God
has elected, he will save thee however thou live; why are not thy practices
answerable to such principles? why do thou not leave thy ground unsowed, and
thy calling unfollowed, and say, If God has decreed me a crop of corn I shall
have it, whether I sow my ground or no; and if God has decreed me an estate I
shall have it, though I never mind my calling? why do thou not neglect and
refuse eating and drinking, and sleeping, and say, If God have decreed that I
shall live longer, I shall do it, though I never eat, or drink, or sleep? for
God has decreed these things concerning thy ground, estate, and natural life,
as well as concerning thine eternal condition in the other world. When I see
that thou throwest off all care and means of preserving thy life on earth, and
expectest notwithstanding to continue alive, then I may believe that thy
forementioned thoughts are really such in regard of eternal life; but till then
I shall be confident that this conclusion is only a feigned plea in the behalf
of the Devil and thy carnal corruptions.

Fifthly, The word of God, which must shortly try thee for thine everlasting
life or death, does declare to thee fully and clearly, that God predestinateth
to the means as well as the end; where then will thou appear that neglectest
the means? that the means and end are joined together in Gods decree, is fully
proved to thee in the 53 and 331 pages of this book; therefore let not Satan so
far delude thee, as to make thee part them. I shall conclude my answer to this
objection (for truly it is so irrational, that I do not think it worthy of six
lines) with a story which I have sometime read; Ludovicus a learned man of
Italy, by sinful beginnings came at last to this conclusion, It matters not
what I do, or how I live; if I be predestined to life, I am sure to be saved;
if otherwise, I cannot help it. Thus with this desperate opinion he lived a
long time, till at last he fell dangerously sick, and sent for a skilful
Physician, earnestly desiring his advice; the Physician beforehand acquainted
with his opinion, told him, Surely it will be needless to use any means for
your recovery; for if the time of your death be come, it will be impossible to
avoid it: Ludovicus upon this began to consider of his own madness and folly in
neglecting the means for his soul, bemoaned his sin sincerely, took physic,
and was through the blessing of God recovered both in soul and body. O that
what I have written might work such an effect upon thy spirit! Consider,
Friend, if notwithstanding Gods Decree, means must be used for thy temporal
estate, should they not also for thine eternal estate? Be not wise in thine own
eyes, but fear the Lord and depart from evil; Labor to cleanse thy ways by
taking heed thereto according to his word, Prove. 3.7. Psalm. 119.9.

REader I have now finished this weighty exhortation which does so nearly
concern thy precious soul, and unchangeable condition in the other world. Thou
see how large an epistle I have written to thee with mine own hand; many an
hours sleep have I lost, to awaken thee out of thy carnal security; but I am
ignorant whether the work be done or no, which is of such unspeakable weight;
or whether thou art resolved to set upon it, through the strength of Christ in
good earnest. I preach to thee, I pray for thee, I desire and endeavor so to
live as to set thee a pattern; O that I knew what to do, that might be more
effectual for thy recovery. Friend, ponder seriously the truth and concernment
of the particulars delivered. Is there not infinite reason why thou should
speedily and heartily submit to the counsel of the Almighty God for the
enlivening of thy dying soul! What more weighty business have thou to do then to
set upon those things whereby thou may avoid unquenchable burnings, and arive
at fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore? Is thy ploughing or sowing, thy
buying or selling, nay thine eating and drinking, half so necessary as the
Regeneration of thy soul, without which the everliving God has told thee over
and over, that thou shall not be saved! O that thou did but believe what it
is to be in heaven or hell, for ever, ever, ever.

I have read of a woman, that when her house was on fire, she was very busy,
and wrought hard in carrying out her goods; but at last bethought her self of
her only child which she never minded before, (for eagerness about her goods)
but had left it burning in the flames, and then when it was too late, she
cries, and roareth out sadly, O my child, Ah my poor child! Truly thou art in
danger, thine everlasting estate is every moment in jeopardy, if thou now
busiest thy self wholly in scraping and carking and caring for thy body,
forgetting thy poor soul, leaving that to the fire, that shall never go out;
consider there is a time (I would say an eternity) coming when thou will think
of it, though then twill be too late, and then, O then, how sadly, how
sorrowfully will thou sigh and sob, howl and roar, and screech out, O my soul,
Ah my poor soul, how wretchedly have I forgot my precious soul! It is an
unconceivable mercy, that yet thou have a day of grace, wherein thou may
think of, and endeavor the good of thy soul. For thy souls sake, for the Lords
sake, O dear friend, mind it speedily; hear God now he calls, or then (though
thou call loud and long) he will never, never, hear thee. When the mother of
Thales urged him to marry, Diog. Laert.
he told her that it was too soon; she continuing still importuning him, he told
her afterward, that it was too late. Regeneration is thine espousal unto Jesus
Christ; the father of eternity calls upon thee, wooeth, beseeches,
commands thee, now while it is called to day, to accept of his own Son for
thy Lord and husband; do not, O do not say, It Is too soon, I will do it
hereafter. I assure thee before to morrow night, God may say It Is too late, and
then thou art lost for ever. Hear counsel and receive instruction, that thou
may be wise in thy latter end: lest thou mourn at last, when thy flesh and
thy body are consumed, (when thy soul is in hell tormented) and say, How have I
hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice
of my teachers, nor inclined mine care to them that instructed me! Pro. 19, 20.
Pro. 5.11, 12, 13.

An Exhortation to the Regenerate.
First, to give God the glory of that good work, which is wrought in them.
Secondly, to do what good they can to the souls of others, especially of their
relations.
I Come in the last place to a word of exhortation to the regenerate. If
without Regeneration, none can attain salvation, then O new born creature, it
highly concerns thee, to be thankeful to God, and to be faithful to men.

First be thou thankful to God; What will thou render to the Lord for this
great inestimable benefit? Is not thine heart ravished in the consideration of
that good will, which took such notice of thee a poor worm! Praise (says the
Psalmist) waits for thee in Sion, Psalm. 65.1. and well it may; for of Sion it
may be said, This and that man was born in her. Psa. 87.5, 6. An heathen had
three reasons for which he blessed God. One of them was, that he had made him a
man, a rational creature; I am sure thou have more cause to bless God, that
he has made thee not only a man, but a Christian, not only a rational, but a
new creature. They that are new born in Sion, have infinite reason to honor
God with the songs of Sion. If David praised God, Psa. 139.14, 15.
because he was wonderfully made, in regard of the frame of his body; what
cause have thou to praise him for the curious workmanship of grace in thy soul.
Thou can never give too great thanks for whom God has wrought such great
things. Do thou say, The Lord has done great things for me whereof I am glad,
Ps. 125.3. What joy is there at the birth of a great heir, or a prince! What
ringing of bells, and discharging of guns, and making of bon-fires, when those
infants are born to many crosses, as well as to crowns; nay and their Scepters,
wither, and crowns moulder away! O the joy which thou may have in God, who
art born a child of God, an heir of heaven, of a kingdom which can never be
shaken! Do wicked men keep the day of their natural births, with so much
pleasure and delight, when they were therein born in sin, and brought forth in
iniquity; when by reason of those births, they are obnoxious to eternal death?
and will thou not keep the day of thy spiritual birth with joy, whereby thou
art purified from thy natural pollution, and assured of entrance, into the
purchased possession where thou shall be perfectly purified?

It was the speech of Jonadab to Ammon, Why art thou lean from day to day,
being the Kings son? so say I to thee, Why art thou sad who art Gods son?
Rejoice O Christian, thy name is written in the book of life, thy soul has the
infalliable token of special and eternal love. It was matter of great joy, that
Christ was born at Bethlehem, Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy; For
to you is born this day in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ the
Lord, Luke 2.10, 11. but I tell thee it may be matter of greater joy to thee,
that Christ is born in thine heart. For notwithstanding the birth of Christ in
Bethlehem, thousands and millions go to hell; but Christ was never formed in
any ones heart, but that man went to heaven.

It is reported of Annello (who lately made an insurrection at Naples) that
considering how mean he was before, and to what greatness he was raised, he was
so transported that he could not sleep. O how should thou be transported with
the thoughts of that infinite happiness, of which thou art an heir! Serve the
Lord with gladness, come before his presence with singing, for it is he that
has (new) made us, and not we our selves; enter into his gates with
thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise, be thankeful unto him, and bless
his name, Psalm 100. per tot.

Give thanks to God in thine heart by an humble admiration, and in thy life by
an holy conversation.

First, Give thanks to God in thine heart, by an humble admiration of his
bottomless mercy.

If David when he considered the glorious heavens, which God had made for man,
cries out so affectionately, What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the
Son of man that thou do thus visit him? Psa. 8. Surely thou, when thou
considerest the work of grace and holiness, which God has wrought within thee,
and the place of glory and happiness, which he has prepared for thee, may
well fall down on thy knees, and looking up to heaven, say, What is man that thou
art so mindful of him! and what am I a poor son of man, that thou do thus
visit me! thou have made me but a little lower then the angels, and have
crowned me with glory, and honor; with grace and holiness. Who am I O Lord,
and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto! And this was yet a
small thing in thy sight O Lord God, but thou have spoken of thy servants house
for a great while to come. And is this the manner of men O Lord God? 2 Samuel
7.18, 19.

Friend, let free grace have the honor and glory of all the good bestowed on
thee, or expected by thee. Alas who made thee to differ from others? wast not
thou in the same lump of clay with them that perish? now that the potter should
make thee a vessel of honor, to be set upon the high shelf of heaven (as the
martyrs phrase is) when others are vessels of dishonor, and firebrands of
hell, have not thou unspeakable cause to wonder at his mercy, and good will
toward thee? That thy person should be justified, when others are under the
guilt of all their transgressions, is merely from mercy, Romans 3.24. Romans 5.18,
19. The free gift came upon all to justification of life. That thy nature
should be sanctified, when others are left in their filth and pollution, is
altogether from his grace and favor. Among whom we all had our conversation in
time past, in the lusts of our flesh, fullfilling the desires of the flesh, and
of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. But God
who is RICH IN MERCY, for his GREAT LOVE, wherewith he loved us, even when we
were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ: That in the ages to
come, he might show the EXCEEDING RICHES OF HIS GRACE, in his kindness toward
us, in Christ Jesus, Ephesians 2.1, to 10. That thou shall be saved with a great and
glorious salvation, when others shall be damned with a grievous and endless
destruction; that thou shall enjoy Rivers of pleasures, when others must be
tormented day and night, with intolerable pain, is only from Gods good
pleasure, Titus 3.3, 4. The jewel which inricheth thee is a gift, Joh. 4.10.
Faith justifies not as manus laborantis which earns a peony, but as manus
mendicantis that receives an alms or je^el by which the soul is justified and
enriched.
The hand which receives it is a gift, Phil. 1.29. It is worthy thy
observation, how full the Spirit of God is in excluding thee and every thing in
thee from having any hand in meriting thine acceptance here, or inheritance
hereafter; Not by works, Rom 9.11. Not of works, Romans 11.6. Not according to
works, 2 Timothy 1.9. without works, Romans 4.6. Now if mercy does all for thee,
should not mercy have the honor of all from thee? What did God see in thee
more then in others, that he chose thee to glory? What did he foresee in thee
more then in others, that he called thee by his grace? thou wast not only
empty of, but contrary to all saving good; many a motion of the Spirit did
thou neglect, many an invitation from Christ did thou reject; how long did he
strive with thine untoward heart, before he conquered it? how many a time did
he call, when thou would not hear? and knock when thou wast so far from
opening, that thou did bolt, and bar the door against him? How justly might
he have sent thee, as well as thousands of others to hell! what mercies did
thou abuse, what means of grace did thou misimprove! Yet who did he wait upon
thee by his unwearyed patience, woo thee by many a good providence, and at last
win thee to himself, notwithstanding all thy resistance! I tell thee, It is not
in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy.
Romans 9.16. O therefore admire mercy; say in thine heart, I was a blasphemer, I
was a persecuter, and injurious, but I obtained mercy, I thank God through
Jesus Christ my Lord. 1 Timothy 1.12, 13.17.
Now to the King immortal, invisible, eternal, be honor and glory; blessed be
God, who has begotten me again, to a lively hope of an inheritance that fades
not away. 1 Pet. 1.3. Wonder at Gods distinguishing mercy, Lord, how is it,
that thou revealest thy self to us, and not to the world! said the disciple,
John 14.22. Should not thou think, Lord, how is it that I, unworthy I, should
be chosen when others are rejected! that I should be called when others are
neglected! that I who came into the world! with the same rage against God and
godliness, and did many a day run with others to the same excess of riot,
should turn about, be in love with holiness, and run the ways of thy
commandments: when many many others still wallow in their wickedness, and are
every hour hastening unto hell, Lord! how is it that thou have revealed thy self
to me and not to the world!

Plutarch wonders how the fig tree, having that extreme bitterness in its
leaves, branches, and stock, should yet bring forth sweet fruit. Have thou not
more cause to wonder, how thou so extremely polluted, being in the very gall of
bitterness by nature, and having a fountain of poison in thee, should ever
come to bear good fruit, and send forth pleasant streams! truly, thou may
have the same Motto with the Olive, which grows in the craggy clifts without
moisture or rooting, A Coelo, From Heaven; Thou could never do it unless it
were given thee from above; therefore, as thy piety came down from Heaven, so
let thy praise go up to Heaven. Elizabeth wondered that the mother of the Lord
should come unto her house: O do thou stand amazed that the Lord of that mother
should come into thine heart! Give thanks night and day to the Father who has
made thee meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light, 1 Col.
12.13.

Secondly, Give thanks to God in thy life by an holy conversation. As thou
should see thy dignity and take comfort in it; so also, consider thy duty,
and take care about it; God has done singular things for thee, what singular
thing will thou do for him? The life of thankfulness consists in the
thankfulness of thy life. O the bonds, the infinite obligations by which thou
art tied to thy Savior! great things are bestowed on thee, and great things
are expected from thee; thy life should be answerable to thy birth and
breeding. Thou art born of God, have blood royal running in thy veins, art
brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; do not therefore stain
the House of which thou descendest, nor disgrace the Family of Faith to which
thou belongest. Should such a man as I fly! said Nehemiah: Think with thy
self, Should such a man as I, that am inroll^d in the Book of life, regenerated
by the Spirit of God, redeemed from my vain conversation with the precious
blood of Christ; should such a man as I dishonor my Father, grieve my Comforter
by frothy language, unseemly carriage, or being guilty of any thing in my
practices that is unsuitable to my great and honorable privilege: The Father
has chosen me to be a vessel of honor, shall I defile my self with the filth
of sin? The Son has bought me with a vast sum, shall not I yield my self up
wholly to his service? The Spirit has made my heart its habitation, and shall I
suffer in it the least unholiness? I can never pay God for his boundless love;
but I will endeavor to praise him by a spotless life.

O Friend, walk worthy of the calling wherewith thou art called, Ephesians. 4.1.
There is a comeliness peculiar to thine effectual calling: If a Scholar has
another manner of carriage then a Scullion, and a Courtier then a Carter;
surely a Christian must lead a different life from them that are dead in sins
and trespasses.

Thy calling is high, Phil. 3.14. and therefore thou should walk above the
men of the world: Men that are called to high Offices will carry themselves
answerable to their places; Princes do not live like Peasants. Thou art called
to be a Son of God, a coheir with Christ, a Citizen of Sion: The Son of a King
must, like Absalom, be without blemish from top to toe; That ye may be
blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, Phil. 2.15. Adoption is
a translation out of one Family into another, and does disoblige thee from the
Laws of Satan and his Family, and oblige thee to the rules and orders of Christ
and his House, into which thou art taken. Thou art called to be a King, Rev.
1.5. It is not for Kings to drink wine, nor Princes strong drink, Pro. 31. that
is, immoderately; such a sin is very bad in a Subject, but much worse in a
Sovereign; as a spot in scarlet is worse then in sackcloth. The transgressions
of others have much rebellion and obstinacy in them; but thy sins have more of
unkindness and treachery, as being against the Covenant: Thou art called to
reign with Christ in Heaven, O walk worthy of him that has called thee unto
his Kingdom and glory, 1 These. 2.12. Thou that have hopes to be like Christ in
glory, should labor, as for life, to be like him in grace, 1 John 3.3.
Plutarch in vit. Iul. Caes.
Caesar when he heard that Brutus conspired against him, would not believe it,
but said, He looks for this skin, meaning, he expects to be my heir, to
succeed me in the Empire, and therefore he will not be so unworthy as to plot
against me. Reader, has not Christ more cause to expect that thy present
deportment should be answerable to thy future preferment!

Thy calling is holy, 2 Timothy 1.9. and therefore thy carriage should be holy;
other callings may put glory upon a man, but cannot infuse grace into a man;
other callings may change thy condition, but this has changed thy disposition:
Thou art called to be a Saint, should thou not then live as a Saint? 1 Cor.
1.2. Alexander would often bid a Captain of his name, Recordare nominis
Alexander.
Remember that thou art called Alexander; that the Captain remembering his name
might do nothing unworthy of it: Truly, so say I to thee, Remember that thou
art called to be a Saint, to be a Christian, and do not by the unexemplariness
of thy life cause that worthy name by which thou art called to be blasphemed.

Thy calling is heavenly, Hebr. 3.1. and therefore thy conversation should be
in Heaven; it is from God, and therefore must lead thee to God. O how stately
is the deportment of wordlings, when they are called to high employments! how
little should all the things on earth be in thine eyes who art fixed in heaven!
Themistocles walking with one by the Seaside, and seeing a precious treasure
on the earth, said to his fellow-traveller, Do thou take it up, fer thou art
not Themistocles. If the men of the world, whose portions are in this life,
have their affections set on things below, and their conversations on earth,
remember that thy treasure is in heaven, and thine heart must be there also;
live as one that belongs to another Country. In a word, study, strive, labor,
endeavor, watch, pray, hear, read, meditate, that thou may in private, in
public, upon all occasions, in all companies, in all manner of conversation
show forth the praises of him who has called thee out of darkness into his
mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9, 10.

Secondly, As thou should be thankful to God, so also faithful to men; Thou
art converted thy self, do thine utmost to convert others. The Lepers coming
into the Syrian Camp, and finding food enough to relieve themselves and many
others ready to perish with hunger, they first feasted themselves, and
afterward say one to another, We do not well; this day is a day of good
tidings, and we hold our peace; if we tarry till the morning light, some
mischief will befall us: now therefore come, that we may go and tell the Kings
household, 2. Kings 7.9. The time was when thou like the Lepers, wast famishing
thy soul with the husks of the world; now God has fed thee with the fat
things of his house; do thou well to hold thy peace? Consider them that are
pinched with hunger, and call them to Gods Courts; tell them what large
provision he makes, how the table is spread, his oxen, his fatlings are
killed, all things ready; he wants only comers and company; thou do well
to take hold for thy self, but thou do ill if thou with-holdst from others.

Israel was commanded to pity strangers, because they were once strangers in
the Land of Egypt: Should not thou compassionate them that are strangers from
the Covenant of Promise, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, carried
captive by the Devil at his will, considering that thou wast in that house of
bondage, in as great slavery to Satan, and subjection to sin as others, and it
was nothing but Grace and Mercy that redeemed thee? Put them in mind (says
the Apostle) to be gentle, showing all meekness unto all men: Why, upon what
consideration? For we ourselves also were sometimes foollish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures -- but after that the kindness and
love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, 3 Tit. 1. to 8.

Wicked men are like those that are drowning, they catch hold on others, and if
it be possible, make them sink with themselves; godly men must be like candles,
which being lighted kindle others.

Grace is compared to oil, which is of a diffusive spreading nature; Matthew.
25.4.
and it does like the oil in the widows barrel increase by pouring out; the oil
never ceased running, till she ceased pouring: The more thou improvest thy
little stock of Grace, the more thy master will trust thee with. Peter Martyr
speaks of some mountains of salt in Cumana, which whilst they lay common for
the good of many never wasted, though Merchants carried away in abundance; but
when they were once engrossed to one man's use, they consumed away. He that has
greatest layings out for God, shall have greatest comings in from God. The
loaves increased not whilst they were whole in the basket, but whilst they were
breaking and distributing to others. Women's milk increases by drawing; if the
breast be not drawn, it will dry up. Prove. 11.14, 15.
He that sows liberally, shall reap liberally. Believe it, Friend, the only
way to make thy one pound, ten pounds, is by trading with it. I speak not of
thy intruding into the Ministers calling, but of dealing faithfully with the
souls of thy friends and relations in thy place and station.

Truly, one would think that every time thou considerest the dreadful danger of
poor sinners, thine heart should almost bleed within thee! Jesus Christ groaned
and wept for dead Lazarus. How did David mourn for dead Absalom! At a funeral,
though there be much cost, yet there is no cheer, because one is dead. What
bowels of pity should thou have toward them that are dead spiritually, nay
dying eternally! Do thou not remember, there was a time when no eye pitied
thee, when God passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood! yea
when thou wast in thy blood, he said unto thee Live; behold that time was the
time of love to thy soul; can thou now behold others wallowing in their
pollutions, weltring in their soul blood, and thine eyes not affect thine heart
with pity to them! Especially we that are parents, should use all means for the
Regeneration of our children and relations. We have a little sister that has
no breasts, what shall we do for her? said the Jews, Cant. 8.8. Have not we
little Children that have no Christ, no hope, no grace! O what shall we do for
them in the day that they shall be spoken for! When Samson had found honey in
the carcass of the lion, he did not only eat himself, but carried some to his
father and mother; thou have found honey and sweetness in the carcass of the
Lion, of the tribe of Judah, in a crucified Christ; will thou not endeavor
that thy relations and friends may share with thee?

Friend, can thou think without trembling on the unnaturalness of most
fathers and mothers, toward their children! All their care is to get earth
enough for them, but never mind the instating them in heaven; the Ostrich
leaves her eggs in the earth, Job 39.14, 15
and warmeth them in the dust, where the foot crusheth them, and the wild beast
breaks them; thus worldly men warm the fruit of their bodies in the earth, are
diligent to leave them dust enough, but consider not that the foot of Gods fury
will crush them, and the roaring Lion devour them, if they be not Regenerated.
O the many soul murders which worldly parents commit^! but if thou art born
again, I am persuaded, nay I am confident of better things of thee, thou dare
not but teach thy sons Gods ways, and labor that thy servants may be converted
to him. Christianity does not diminish, but rectify thy natural affection; it
causes thee to love thy relations, not less but better then thou did before;
grace makes thy love to run out toward their souls, and their spiritual and
eternal good. O what an honor and privilege is it, that thou may be
instrumental for the saving of souls! Jam. 5.2, ult. which that thou may be,
take these three words for thine help.

First, Be sure that thou set them a good pattern; let thy life be so exact,
that others may write after thy copy with credit. Look on thy self as new born
for this end, that thou might adorn the Doctrine of God thy Savior. Parents
and Masters are often authentic patterns, to all their inferiors; their zeal
will provoke many; and if they fall, as tall cedars, they beat down many
shrubs. O therefore do nothing of which thou may not say to thy family, and
neighbors, as Gideon to his soldiers. Judge 7.17.
Look on me and do likewise. It is reported of the Hares of Scythia, that they
teach their young ones to leap from bank to bank, from rock to rock, by leaping
before them, which otherwise they would never learn; and by this means, when
they are hunted, no beasts can overtake them. Do thou set others a pattern, in
the performance of duties, and in the exercise of graces, that others learning
by thine example, may thereby be secured from Satan the great destroyer.

The moral is good of the fable; The old crab bid the young one got forward;
Show me the way, says the young crab; the mother goes backward and sideling;
the daughter follows her saying, Lo, I go just as you do. Truly, thus thy
little ones will quickly imitate thy doings. Be careful therefore how thou
live, walk circumspectly, consider of every expression and action, not only
whether it be lawful, but also whether it be expedient and exemplary.

Thy religious pattern may do more good then the Ministers preaching; they
preach with their lips one day in a weak; but thou by thy life preachest all
the week long, 1 Pet. 2.12. Have thy conservation honest among others, that
they may glorify God in the day of their visitation, 1 Pet. 2.12.

Secondly, Let thy prayers be constant and instant for their Regeneration; How
can I see the death of my child? said, Hagar. Alas, how can thou see the
eternal death of thy dear children! When thou kneelest to prayer with thy wife,
children, and servants, and considerest that death will shortly break up thy
house, and then heaven and hell will claim their due; The Regenerate shall go
to heaven, the unregenerate to hell. Thou and they who live together, are
likely to be parted asunder for ever. Good Lord, How should thou pray for
them? with what fervency? with what importunity? Thou art new born, and know
that hell and heaven, are no jesting matters; John 4.23.
does not thine heart ache to think that any of thine should dwell in
everlasting burnings; O go to Christ as the Centurion for his sick child, Sir
come down ere my child die. Lord come down ere my poor children die for ever.
And as the woman of Canaan, Have mercy on me O Lord, thou Son of David, my
daughter is grievously vexed with a devil; Lord help me. If thou can do any
thing, help them. Lord pity poor children, and form thy dear Son in them; thus
carry thy little children to Jesus Christ, and entreat him to put his hands on
them, and bless them. Hannah by prayer obtaind a Samuel; O let us pray hard,
that all our sons may be as gracious as Samuel, and all our daughters as full
of good works as Dorcas. Zenophon said, he never prayed that his son might live
long, but that he might live well. Austin was a child of many prayers, and did
not perish.

Thirdly, Do thine endeavor to regenerate them by instructing them in the
precepts of God. David and Bathsheba were often droping instruction into their
son Solomon, 1 Kings 28.9. Prove. 4.3. to 10. Pious education has made an happy
renovation in several souls. Teach a child the trade in his youth, and he
shall not depart from it when he is old, Prove. 22.6. Others teach their
children to lie and steal, and to curse and swear. I have read a story of a
wicked mother that persuaded her daughter to yield to the lust of a rich man,
in hope that he would marry her; the daughter did yield, but quickly after fell
sick and died; the mother hereupon fell distracted, and cried out often, O my
daughters soul, O my daughters soul! I have murdered my daughters soul. If
others entice their relations to uncleanness, shall not we encourage ours to
holiness! Whilst this world lasts, the Devil will have servants; many many
fathers bring up their children to his hand. O wilt not thou endeavor that
when thou art dead, thy little ones may be a generation arising to praise God!
Truly, thy love to God must needs oblige thee to do thine utmost, that his vast
perfections, and infinite excellencies may be declared and admired throughout
all generations.

Melanthon on a day of prayer went out a little from his company very
sorrowful, and returned in a short time to them very joyful; of which Luther
asking him the reason, he gave this account, That there were young Captains
training up (for he had heard many children learning and repeating their sound
Catechism) which would defend the cause of Christ: The good man was exteamly
cheared, that though the Pope and Emperor sought to undermine the true
Religion, yet young children were learning to defend it. Sure I am, thou will
die with the more comfort, if thou can have hopes, that after thy decease the
blessed God shall be exalted, and his Gospel propagated in the place where thou
do dwell. And O what a glorious heaven upon earth will thy house be, if the
gracious God shall so prosper thy pattern, prayers and preceps, that (as thou
like the Sun, so) thy wife like the Moon, and thy children and servants like
the Stars, may all shine and sparkle with the light and heat of real holiness.

To end all, Look on thy children, servants, and neighbors, as passengers in a
boat, and do thou with thy fellow-converts row hard, make use of all winds,
improve every opportunity to land them all safely at the Haven of Heaven.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table, of the most principal matters contained in this
Treatise.
A
Our Affections by nature corrupt, Page 32. The Affections are renewed in
regeneration, p. 31, 32. Good Affections not always a sign of regeneration,
Page 97, 98, 99. Affiance on Christ what it is, Page 376, 377. Afflictions
sometimes instrumental for regeneration, 16. Afflictions will try men, 138, 139.
Afflictions make wicked men worse, 222. Afflictions are sanctified to the
regenerate. Page 246. Christians are bound to labor for Assurance, Page 130,
131. It is possible for the regenerate to be Assured of their Salvation, proved
by several arguments, Page 144, 145, 146.
B
The Body is renewed in regeneration, Page 35, 36. The Body of man is a curious
piece, Page 318. God alone can enable a man to believe. Page 12, 114.
C
THere is a great Change wrought in regeneration, Page 5. 20, 21. Two Changes
absolutely necessary in all that would be saved. Page 48, 49. Christ is willing
to instruct and encourage poor sinners. 6. Christ is the only way to heaven
47. Christ dyed to purchase holiness, for all those for whom he purchased
heaven. 33.54.312. The Damned see the worth of Christ by woeful experience. 234,
235. Nothing to be kept from Christ, or carried to Christ, by those that would
close with him. 407, 408, 409. The saved know the worth of Christ by happy
experience, Page 282, 283. Civility no sign of regeneration. Page 61, 62. A
Civil man is converted with much difficulty Page 118, 119. Confidence of a man's
good estate, is not a sure sign of regeneration. Page 85, 86. The Conscience is
renewed in regeneration. 27. To follow the dictates of a natural Conscience, is
not a sure sign of regeneration. Page 90, 91. Consideration is a special help
to regeneration. Page 194, 195, 196. Conviction wrought before conversion. 351.
What Conviction is. Page 352. The Spirit when he converteth a sinner,
Convinces him of four things: Of his sins. 353.354. Of his misery. 357, 358.
Of the insufficiency of all things in the world to help him, 362. Of the
willingness, sutableness, and sufficiency of Jesus Christ. Page 365. The sinner
rightly Convinced pants exceedingly after Jesus Christ. Page 368, 369. Our
Creation is an obligation to obedience. Page 338, 339.
D
MEn Deceive themselves in thinking to get to he aven without regeneration.
Page 51, 52. Death will try men thoroughly. 141, 142. Death may well be
terrible to the unregenerate. 226. Death will be comfortable to the regenerate.
Page 270. A man may abound in duties and yet be unregenerate 76. Wicked men sin
in performing Duties. 222. Though unregenerate persons sin in Duties, yet they
must not neglect them. 436. Vide Ordinances.
E
GOd Electeth to sanctification, whom he electeth to salvation. Page 53. The
objection, If I am elected I shall be saved how ever I live, answered. Page
440. Our Election ensured by ensuring our vocation. Page 131. The torments of
hell are Eternal. 238. The Saints happiness in heaven is Eternal. Page 293. The
Equity of living to God. Page 337, to 348.
F
THe difference between Faith and presumption, Page 56. Faith wrought in the
soul when it is regenerated. Page 375, 376. Faith is weak at first. 378. True
Faith accepts Christ as a Lord. Page 380. The unspeakable Folly of sinners,
in not turning to God. Page 298, 299.
G
THe free Grace of God, the only moving cause of reg^neration. 14. The Glory
of God, the final cause of regeneration. 38. How it is accomplished 39, 40, 41.
Communion with God on earth, required in all that would get to heaven. 56. The
wrath of God, known fully in hell. Page 229. The good word of Godly men, no
sign of Regeneration. Page 81, 82. That God will be the God of his people, is
an unconceivable mercy. 262, to 267. All Godly men grow in grace. Page 183. Not
always alike. 186. Not all alike. Page 185. Gifts no sign of Grace. 183. Gifts
and Grace differ much. Page 74, 75.
H.
HEaven not so easily obtained, as the sleepy world thinks for, 108 to 118.
Heavens happiness described largely. Page 273 to 300. Hells horror described in
six particulars Page 227 Hypocrites not converted without much difficulty, 119,
120, 121. Hypocrites are partial in their obedience, 177. Hypocrites have
usually some beloved sin. Page 166, 167.
I.
ILlumination, the first thing wrought in order to Regeneration Page 23, 349.
The Image of God is the pattern of regeneration, 36. The excellency of Gods
Image. Page 303
K.
THe Kingdom of God twofold Page 5, 6 A man may be knowing and yet
unregenerate, Page 7. A person regenerated is taught the Knowledge both of God
and of sin Page 23, 24, 25, 26.
M.
THe Memory renewed in regeneration Page 37. Ministers ought to instruct their
people in the nature of regeneration Page 8
O.
OLd sinners are not regenerated without much difficulty. Page 125, 126. Saints
mind Ordinances for the death of sin, Page 157, 158, 159. Ordinances are
delightful to the regenerate, 171, 172, 178 Ordinances are cursed to them that
continue in sin, 219, 220. Ordinances are profitable to Saints, 254, 255.
Attendance on Ordinances a great help to regeneration, 413. All Ordinances
(which are converting) to be minded by such as would be regenerated, 416.
Ordinances must be minded with seriousness, 420. With constancy, 422. with
expectance of a blessing from God. Page 426. Vide Duties.
P.
TO join with this or that party, no sign of regeneration. Page 95 Good
patterns helpful to convert men. Page 461. Perseverance in Grace the portion of
all the regenerate, Page 261. Our Preservation an obligation t^ serve God, Page
239. The bare enjoyment of spiritual Privileges no sign of regeneration, Page
69, 70, 71. A great Profession no sign of regeneration, Page 65 The Promises of
salvation belong only to the regenerate, 55, 332. The preciousness of the
Promises 258. All the Promises are the regenerate man's portion, 257. The great
Promise, 262. The full extent of the Promises shall be known to us in heaven,
290, 291. Our Promises to God must be minded, Page 343. Prosperity tries some
men. 137. Prosperity is cursed to men out of Christ, Page 215 All Gods
Providence are blessed to the regenerate, Page 244.
R.
Without Regneration there can be no salvation. 9. What Regeneration is, 10,
152, 170. Regeneration called a renewing in two respects, 19. In Regeneration
the whole man is renewed, 22. principally the inner man, 23. How Regeneration
and sanctification differ, 38. Regeneration prepares a man for heaven, 45. All
that a Christian is worth for the other world depends on his Regeneration,
133. Regeneration not in all alike visible. 146. Because not in all alike
violent Page 147. The Regenerate are dead to sin 152. alive to God 170. They
that are regenerated themselves will labor to Regenerate others, 189. The great
happiness of the Regenerate in this world, 243. and the other world, 273. In
all their performances they are welcome to God. Page 250. The excellency of
Regeneration, 300. showed in five particulars: It is the Image of God, 303. The
destruction of sin, 305. It cost the blood of Christ, 312. Its Gods end in his
works, 314. It is the special work of God himself, 317. The absolute
indispensable necessity of Regeneration, Page 52, to 60. 325. to 336. The
several steps by which a soul is regenerated, Page 348. Regenerate persons
should bless God. 445. In heart by admiring his mercy. 448. In life by walking
sutably. 452. The Regenerate should labor to convert others. 456. By their
prayers, patterns, and precepts. Page 456, 460, 461. Redemption a strong
obligation to obedience. Page 341. Rich men not regenerated without much
difficulty. Page 122.
S
SIn may reign in a civil man. 62, 63. A man may leave many Sins, and not loath
any Sin. 103. Beloved Sins hardly parted with, 104, 112, 167. Man by nature
exceedingly in love with Sin. 116. Saints dye to Sin. 153. To all Sin. 164, to
their beloved sin. 165. Sin will be Sin in hell. 232. Senslesness in Sin
dreadful. 240, 241. Sin the greatest evil showed in three particulars* 306, to
312. All Sorrow for Sin, will not speak regeneration. Page 99, 100. The Spirit
of God, the principal efficient of regeneration. 10, 11, 12, 13. The Spirit
when he regenerates, causes the soul to mourn for Sin. 372. The motions of the
Spirit must be cherished by all that would be regenerated 385. to 390.
Directions how to carry our selves toward the motions of the Spirit, in three
cases, When the Spirit convinces. 390. When the Spirit humbles the sinner.
396. When the Spirit persuades to believe. Page 404.
T
TEmptations profitable to Saints. Page 248. The preciousness of Time known in
hell. Page 236. It is a Christians duty to Try himself. 129. God will Try men
either here or hereafter. 136. The day of judge meant will Try men. 143. Some
marks to Try our estates by 152. Christians in the Trial of themselves should
proceed till they come to an issue. Page 194, 195.
U
THe Understanding is renewed in Regeneration. Page 24. To see two things
especially. Page 25. Universality a sighn of fincerity. Page 175. The
Unregenerate should mind Regeneration. 198. The misery of tht Unregenerate in
this world. 214, 215. In the other World, Vide hell. All that Unregenerate ones
enjoy, is cursed to them. 215. to 220. They sin in all they do. Page 221.
W
THe objection Touching man's Weakness, and inability to regenerate himself,
answered. Page 429, 430, 431. The Will renewed in Regeneration. Page 29. The
Word of God is the ordinary instrumental cause of Regeneration. Page 15, 418,
419. The emptiness of this World will appear in the other World. Page 228.
Books printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the three Crowns over
against the great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside.
Flio's.
A Commentary upon the Holy Writings of Job, David, and Solomon: That is, These
five, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs. Being part
of those which by the Ancient were called Hagiographa. Wherein the diverse
Translations, and Expositions, both Literal and Mystical, of all the most
famous Commentators, both Ancient and Modern, are propounded, examined, and
censured: And the Texts from the Original much Illustrated; For the singular
benefit of all that be studious of the Holy Scriptures. By John Mayer Doctor in
Divinity.

A Practical Commentary, or an Exposition with Observations, Reasons, and Uses,
upon the first Epistle General of John. By that pious and worthy Divine Master
John Cotton, Pastor of Boston in New England.

A Learned Commentary, or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians; being the substance of many Sermons
formerly Preached at Grayes-Inn, London, by that Reverend and judicious Divine,
Richard Sibbs, D. D. sometimes Master of Katherine-Hall in Cambridge, and
Preacher to that honorable Society. Published for the public good and benefit
of the Church of Christ, by Tho. Manton, B. D. and Preacher of the Gospel at
Stoke-Newington, near London.

TA DIAPHEPONTA; or Divine Characters in two parts, a^^tely distinguishing the
more secret and undiscerned differences between 1. The Hypocrite in his best
dress of seeming virtue and formal duties: and the true Christian in his real
graces, and sincere obedience. As also between the blackest weeds of daily
infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving grace; and the reigning sins
of the unregenerate, that pretend unto that godliness they never had; By that
late burning and shining Lamp, Mr. Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of Wrington
in Summerset.

A Commentary upon the Divine Revelation of the Apostle and Evangelist John: By
David Pareus, sometimes Professor of Divinity in the University of Heidelburg.
And specially some things upon the twentieth Chapter, are observed by the same
Author, against the Millinaries: Translated out of the Latin into English, by
Elias Arnold.

Quartoes.
A Theater of flying Insects, wherein especially the manner of right ordering
the Be is excellently described, with discourses Historical and Physical
concerning them; with a Second part of Meditations and Observations Theological
and Moral, in three Centuries upon the same subject, by Samuel Purchase, M. A.

Peoples Need of a living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr. John Frost, M. A. by
Mr. Zach. Crofton.

(...); or the Saints Worthiness, and the Worlds worthlesness; both opened and
declared, in a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that eminently Religious, and
highly honored Knight Sir Nathanael Barnardiston, Aug. 26. 1653. By Samuel
Faire-clough, Pastor of the Congregation at Ketton.

Holy things for holy men: or the Lawyers Plea nonsuited, etc. In some
Christian reproof and pity expressed toward M. Prynn's book, entitled, The
Lord's Supper briefly Vindicated, by S. S. Minister of the Gospel.

An Antidote against H. Hagger's poisonous Pamphlet, entitled, The Foundation
of the Font discovered: or a reply, wherein his audaciousness and sophistry in
arguing against Infant Baptism, Discipleship, Church Membership is detected,
his cavils against M. C. M. B. and M. Hall are answered, etc. By A. Houghton,
Minister of the Gospel at Prees in Salop.

Large Octavo's.
Four profitable Treatises very useful for Christian practice, viz. The Killing
power of the Law; The Spiritual Watch; The New Birth: Of the Sabbath. By the
reverend William Fenner, late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

Enchyridion Judicum, or Jehosaphats Charge to his Judges. Together with
Catastrophe Magnatum, or King David's Lamentation at Prince Abners
Incineration. By John Livesey Minister of the Gospel at Atherton.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian: a Day-book of National and
public, personal and private passages of Gods providence, to help Christians
to thankfulness and experience. By John Beudle, Minister of the Gospel at
Barnstone in Essex.

Mr. Robinsons Christian Armor.

The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, or the Doctrine of
Regeneration opened and applied; by George Swinock. M. A. Preacher of the
Gospel at Rickmersworth in Hertfordshire.

Heaven and Hell epitomized, the true Christian Characterized, by the same
Author.

Small Octavo's.
Catechizing Gods Ordinance, in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister at Buttolphs Aldgate, London, the second Edition corrected and
augmented.

The godly man's Ark in the day of his distress, discovered in diverse Sermons;
the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Moore.
Whereunto is annexed Mrs. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and
collected by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of
sickness. By E. Calamy, B. D. Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

The Gale of opportunity, and the Beloved Disciple, by Thomas Froysall.

The Wedding Ring fit for the Finger: in a Sermon at a Wedding in Edmonton, by
William Seaker.

Book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses made upon (Lights) by Robert
Farly.

Sion in the house of mourning, because of Sin and Suffering, being an
Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor of
Vpingham, in the County of Rutland.

The one thing necessary; by Mr. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook.

A Plea for Alms; delivered in a Sermon at the Spittle, before a solemn
Assembly of the City, on Tuesday in Easter week, April 13. 1658. by Mr. Thomas
Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook.

Moses unvailed, or those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of
heavenly things, pointing out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained;
whereunto is added the Harmony of the Prophets, breathing with one mouth the
mystery of his coming, and of that redemption which by his death he was to
accomplish. To confirm the Christian, and convince the Jew, very profitable and
full of comfort. By William Guild, Minister of Gods word at King-Edward in
Scotland.

The Sacred Ordinance of Ordination, by Imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery: As it was lately held forth in a Sermon preached at the solemn
Ordination of Ministers in the City of Norwich, June 11. Anno. 1656. By John
Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel at great Yarmouth.

Divine Principles, or a Scripture Catechism, etc.

Good Company; being a collection of various, serious, pious Meditations;
useful for instruction, consolation, and confirmation. By J. Melvin, Minister
of the Gospel at Vdimer in Sussex.

A Religious Treatise upon Simeon's Song; or instructions how to live holily,
and dye happily: By T. Woodriff, B. D. Pastor at Kingsland in Herefordshire.

Five Sermons in five several ways of preaching; the 1 in B. A. way, the 2 in
B. H. way, the 3 in Dr. M. and M. G. way, the 4 in the Presbyterian way, and
the 5 in the Independent way of preaching: by A. W. Minister of the Gospel.

The reformation, in which is reconciliation with God and his People: or a
Catechism unveiling the Apostles Creed, with Annotations; in which Faith,
Ordinances, and Government are professed as in the Primitive times, in
opposition to all Errors and Heresies. By W. K. Minister of the Gospel.

Prospering profaneness provoking Holy Conference, and Gods attention; several
Sermons from Malachy 3.15, 16, 17. by Zach. Crofton.

The Agreement and resolution of several Associated Ministers in the County of
Cork, for the Ordaining of Ministers.

Twelves.
Johnsons Essays expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies.

The Life and Death of Mr. Ignatius Jourdain, one of the Aldermen of the City
of Exeter, who departed this life, July 15. 1640. The second Edition published
and enlarged by Ferdina. Nicols Minister of the Gospel at Mary Acres, Exon.

The dangerous rule, or a Sermon preached at Clonmel in the Province of Munster
in Ireland, upon Aug. 3. 1657. before the Reverend Judges for that Circuit, by
S. L. Master in Arts, and lately fellow of C. C. C. in Oxon.

The woman's glory: A Treatise, first asserting the due honor of that Sex, by
manifesting that women are capable of the highest improvements. The second
Edition enlarged. By Samuel Torshel.

Twenty four's.
Groans of the Spirit, or a Trial of the truth of Prayer.

A Handkercher for Parents wet Eyes, upon the death of their Children, or
Friends.

There are going to the Press some new pieces of Mr. William Fenners, late of
Rochford in Essex, never yet printed, preserved by a special Providence, one of
which is a second part of his Wilful Impenitency; being five Sermons more that
he preached upon the 18. of Ezekiel, and the 32 verse.


