The Hands of God: OR KING DAVID'S CHOICE, Wherein are proved: 1. That the
least of evils is to be chosen. 2. That war is the worst of evils. 3. That
the Relation betwixt the King and Subject, is the nearest of all Relations. 4.
That Rebels are the worst of men.


As it was delivered in a Sermon,

By T.S. D.D.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

TO MY HONORED FRIENDS, SIR GEORGE CRAHAM, AND HIS VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY
ALICIA CRAHAM.
Sir, Madam,
YOUR desires are Commands, and have therefore the Obedience of

Your humble Servant, Thomas Swadlin.

The Hands of God.
2. SAM. 24.14. Let us now fall into the Hands of God (For with the Lord is
mercy, or, The Mercies of God are great,) but not into the Hands of Men.


IT is a Theme of humiliation, This is; so the verse begins, supra modum angor,
I am in a great strayte: Had it pleased some men of this Kingdom to have
followed King David's course, and considered with themselves six or seven
years ago, Whether had been better, by Petition to redress our presumed
grievances, or, by the Sword to remove some pretended evil Counselors, we
had not been put to this After-game with God; that innocence would have kept
us on our legs; now our repentance must restore us to our legs; and so it will,
I doubt not, if we will observe and do the Parts and Resolves of this Text,
of this humble Text: The Parts two, The Resolves four.

1. We have here a supplication, Incidamus in manus Domini, Let us now fall
into the hands of God; This gives up the first Resolve, and tells us, E malis
minimum, Division.
that of Evils, the least is to be chosen.

2. We have here a Deprecation, In manus hominum ne incidamus, Let us not fall
into the Hands of men, This gives up the second Resolve, and tells us, Emalis
maximum, that of all evils, War is the greatest.

Each of these parts has his reason; I shall account them for parts in my
discourse, and so I pray do ye; so shall you have an equality of Parts and
Resolves, four, and four.

3. The reason of the former is expressed; Let us now fall into the hands of
God; Miserationes enim cum eo, or, Misericordiae Dei multae; For there are
mercies with God, or, the mercies of God are great: This gives up the third
Resolve, and shows us Relatorum proximum, That of all relations, that betwixt
the King and subject is the nearest.

4. The reason of the latter is employed; Let us not fall into the hands of men,
Crudeles enim sunt, Sacrilegae enim sunt; For their hands are cruel hands; For
their hands are Sacrilegious hands: This gives up the fourth Resolve, and
points out V^rorum pessimum, the worst sort of Men,

When I have unfolded these particulers by way of explication, I find my self
bound by my Text to give you a double Application.

1. Vt in manus hominum incidimus, How and by what means we are fallen into
the hands of men? into their cruel hands, into their Sacrilegious hands; and
this will be Inquisitive.

2. Vt in manus Dei incidamus, How we may again fall into Gods hands, into
his merciful hands? and this will be Exhortative. Pars 1.


I begin with the first, the Supplication; Incidamus in manus Domini, Let us
Now fall into the hands of God: Now, so our translation reads it, and so the
purer Copy will beat it, ^ncidamus, Let us fall, i. e. Let us Now fall; for
it is the present tense: And it was then, and I would to God it were Now
presently to be done.

But though so, why Now? why not rather, Let us ever fall into Gods hands? yes,
let us ever fall into Gods hands, so King David intended; but Now especially,
so King David desired.

Now, that my young Subjects have forgot the cursed counsel of Achitophel, and
the bloody sword, and the unnatural conspiracy of Absolon: Now, that my old
Subjects are afraid of an enemy from abroad, and of a scarcity at home: Now,
that my young Cavalry presume upon their own strength and gallantry, and dare
meet the insulting enemy in the field: Now, that my old Senators despair
under their own weakness and infirmity, and dare not look the Rebell-enemy
in the face: Now, that there is but a step betwixt us and death, and God will
punish us all; you for your past Rebellion, and my self for my present
presumption: Now, rather then into the Hands of men, let us fall into the hands
of God.

This article of Time, in respect of King David's option, reflects only upon
his present election, of Famine, Plague, or War; yet because his thirst after
his Subjects good was eminent in the whole course of his Reign, as well in the
serene and calm days of peace, as in the boystrous and stormy nights of
War, I believe I shall not err, if I take leave to believe, that he intended
this (...) as a perpetual rule of Divinity for the youngest and eldest in his
Kingdom; and tells them,

That though they were 130000. strong, of men fit for War, besides children,
and youth, and aged; yet for all that they should not presume; for God could as
he pleased, tame them and cut them off: And though they were diminished, of
that numerous Army, even to one Cipher, why yet neither should they despair,
for God could, if he pleased, de vit. pat.
help and save them as well by few as by many. So Saint Augustine, Ne
desperando augeamus peccata, propositus est paenitentiae portus; Let us not
make up the measure of our sins, and fit our selves for destruction by
cowardice and desperation: Nor is this any way to encourage presumption, but
only to allay the other extreme; so the same Father again; Rursus ne sperando
augeamus peccata, positus est dies mortis incertus; neither let us make up the
measure of our sins, and fit our selves for destruction by precipitancy and
presumption; but Now, while we have time, and Now, though we have but this
time, let you and I, both young men and Maidens, old men and children, take out
the first letter from each scene of our age, from Puer, P. from Iuvenis, I.
from Vir, V. from Senex, S. and that will make us what we should be, Pius, and
fit for the best of choyces, To fall into the hands of God.

This yet, though the best of choyces, must be warily read, and as warily
understood, else we shall fall into error, if not into Heresy; for so were
the Anthropomorphites branded, and to this day for Heretics they go, because
from such places of Scripture as this, The hands of God, they presently
concluded, God had a body, and all the organs and instruments of a body.

From which Error, or Heresy rather have the Papists, as I imagine, drawn
their idolatrous imagerie of painting God the Father in the Image of an old
man, and his Son Christ like a little child in his hands.

But if. God has not hands of flesh and blood as we have, what hands has he
then? And how is it here said, let us fall into the hands of God?

Why you must understand this, and all such passages in St Bernards Catholic
answer, Omnia haec habet Deus, and nulla horum habet Deus, God has a body, and
all the organs of a body; God has not a body, nor any instrument of a body,
Effectu habet, Essentia non habet; Essentially he has none of these things,
Effectually he has them all.

To let pass all other, as not to our present purpose; what is the effect of
the hand? Why in relation to man, the effect of the hand is safety and
protection; so we say, and we say true in so saying, a Bird in the hand is
worth two in the bush, and one soul in the hands of God is better then 20 or
20000 souls out of his hands; so long as my child is in mine own hands, or
my wives, or my servants, he is safe enough from falling; but if once we put
him out of our hands, and trust him to the strength of his own weak legs,
poor fool, by and by he gets a fall, and breaks his face; so long as our
souls are in Gods hands, they are for all the world as he made them, pure and
upright; but if once he put them out of his hands, as God forbid he should, or
if once we pull them out of his hands, as God forgive us for it, we too too
often do, why then by and by we find out many inventions, as the wise man
speaks, and break the face of our souls. Eccles. 7.29.


More particularly and properly in relation to God; his hands signify
sometimes: 1. His eternal Counsel, so there; To do whatsoever thy hand had
determined: Act. 4.28.
His hand and Counsel all one there: Sometimes, 2. His actual power; so there
again; Act. 4.30.
Stretch out thine hand to heal and to do wonders; his hand and power all one
there: Ps. 104.28.
Sometimes, 3. Benediction, so there; Thou openest thy hand and fillest all
things living with plenty; Psa 32.4.
hand and plenty all one there: Sometimes. 4. Affliction, so there; Thy hand
was heavy upon me day and night; hand and heaviness all one there; and so
here; Let us now fall into the hands of God; i. e. our sins call for
affliction, and let God afflict us: our Church prayer in reference to this text
excellently, when thou will correct us for our sins O Lord, in judgment
remember mercy, and let us fall into thy hands and not into the hands of men.

I might give you more significations, and tell you of a manus dextra, and a
manus sinistra, of a manus sanans, and a manus saeviens, of a right and left
hand, of a saving and destroying hand, and many more; but this is the fairest
and shortest construction of Gods hands, as they refer to this Text.

And here I admire at King David's wisdom, and at David's piety. I. His wisdom
in making a virtue of necessity: 2. His Piety, in submitting himself equally
with his Subjects to an impartial misery: 1. His wisdom appears, in that he
made choice of what he could not shun; He knew he must into Gods hands, what
choice soever he made; and so must we: Naturally we must, and Legally we
must: First, by the course of Nature all things tend unto their own Center,
and therefore says Saint Austin, A te Domine sumus, and irrequietum est cor
nostrum donec in te revertamur, we are from thee O Lord, and we are restless
until we are with thee again: Secondly, by the course of Law too, every
thing must to his proper owner, Ps.
and says King David, Thy hands have made me and fashioned me,

Our souls are from Gods hands, and into Gods hands they must again, first or
last; from him we had them clean and holy, and they must not be the worse for
our wearing; from his hands as white as silver and pure as gold, we may not
dawbe them with Mercury, till they be as black as a coal, and ugly as a Toad:
from his hands as chaste as Susanna, S^san. 1.2 3.
when she refused the Elders, we may not make them foul and impudent as
Potiphars Wife when she enticed Joseph; Gen 39 9.
from his hands as sober as Noah before he discovered his own nakedness, Genesis
9.
we may not make them drunken as Lot, when he uncovered his daughters
nakedness: Genesis 19 33.
from his hands as constant as Joshua when he stood to his first Covenant with
the men of Gibeon, Josh, 9.19.
we may not make them perjured as those Jews, Hosea. 10.
who made a Covenant in sweareing falsely, we have no King, for what good can a
King do us?

No, God forbid, In such a pickle, they will never into Gods hands; Mat 25.30.41
never to his right hand amongst the sheep to go into everlasting life; but to
the left hand amongst the Goats, to depart into everlasting fire: From which
that you may be preserved, be you persuaded to entreat God, that you may fall
into his hands, his hands of sanctification, to keep you from sin, his hands
of protection, to keep you from, or deliver you out of War, and all other
dangers while you are here, and from hence, into his hands of glorification and
Salvation, to keep you at his right hand for ever and ever hereafter: And till
then, If it must be into his hands of affliction, into his hands only, for
that is but affliction; at no hand, into the hands of men, for that is
destruction also.

2. Thus King David expresses his wisdom, and thus secondly, he expresses his
piety: For herein he pitties his Subjects equally with himself; yea, he
preferres his subjects to himself, mark else what he says, Behold I have
sinned, I have done wickedly, but these Sheep alas! 2. Sam. 24.17.
what have they done? let thy hand O lord I pray thee, be against me and my
Fathers house.

And if he would have sacrificed himself for their weal, in taking the fault
solely upon himself: Lord! what would he not have done, in redressing all
grievances, for their welfare, and his own to boot? Is it possible for any
Grand or Close Committee of twenty five, or thirty, like that of Athens to have
such bowels of compassion upon their fellow subjects?

And that they might know it was no fraudulent policy, and to secure them of
all such fears and jealousies, he testifies his unfeigned piety in my text:
When God sent him the choice of his three sharpest arrows, Famine, War, or
Plague: Behold, like a Father pitying his children, as every good King does,
he declines the Famine, because that would have pintcht but the poorest sort,
he had storehouses of provision for himself, he declines the War also,
because then only the weakest should have gone to the wall; he had Garrisons
and towers of strength for his own security, and makes choice of the Plague,
which is Epidemicall, and Impartial, Et aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres, and knows no difference betwixt a poor man's Cottage, and a
Princes Palace: And yet it is the least of these Evils, because it is
Impartial, as Famine is not, because it is not malicious as War is.

And this brings me to my 2a. 1ae. 2a. 1ae. E malis minimum.
or my first Resolve, which says, E malis minimum, of evils the least is to
be chosen.

But soft, at first sight here I meet with a double stop, and it seems that
King David did not choose the least of evils: For says Saint Paul, It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of God; Heb. 10.31.
nor does this seem to be the least of evils, Susan 1.23.
for says Susanna, It is better for me to fall into your hands.

Yet now I think upon it, These rubs are easily removed; For Saint Paul there
speaks of contumacious sinners, and considers God as a severe Judge, punishing
presently and eternally; King David here speaks of himself, a true Penitent,
and considers God as a merciful Father, punishing here for a time, to prevent
a punishment hereafter, and for ever: Fearful for them to fall into the hands
of God, but for us, if we be like King David, Hopeful; so Estius, David
considerat Deum ut Patrem, In locum.
in hoc saeculo punientem; Apostolus ut Judicem, in hoc and futuro.

Again, King David here compares one evil of punishment with another evil of
punishment, and so better to fall into the hands of God, and to choose the least
and easiest, that we may avoyde a greater and heavier evil, Susanna there
compares the evil of sin with the evil of punishment, and prefers Maximum
paenae minimo c^lpae, the greatest evil of smart to the least evil of fault;
and so better to fall into the hands of man and suffer evil, then into the
hands of God, Romans 3 8.
and do evil; for we may not do evil though good may come of it, says the
Apostle, much less may we do sin to avovde pain, In malis paenae datur,
Juler.
in malis culpae non datur electio; so Lyra, and Paeter Martyr.

V. G.

A potent faction will bring down Lords as low as Commons, and the King as low
as a Lord; to effect this, they do by a cunning head frame an oath without
supreme authority to maintain an Army against that Army raised by supreme
authority, or to introduce and preserve a strange Religion, not above 120.
years old at most, thereby to extirpate a Church Government, which has
continued 1600. years without interruption, and founded by the Apostles, at
least, so confessed by the very adversaries; to preserve the Privileges of
Parliament, and liberty of the Subject without limitation, but the Kings person
and authority with limitations; all which is Treason by the Laws of this
Kingdom, and sin by the Law of God: (for none has power to impose an oath
but he that has power to draw the sword, and that power is only in the
King:) And then do with a violent hand force their fellow subjects to take
this Oath, or rather force it upon them under the penalty of plundering,
imprisonment, and penury.

In such cases as this, we must be ready, with the Prince of Coandy, when
Charles the ninth of France offered him his choice, either to come to Mass, or
be perpetually exiled or imprisoned; to Mass, quoth he, I will not come, for
that is sin; imprisonment, or banishment, inflict, Sir which you please, I am
ready to suffer it.

The noble Army of Martyrs speak this aloud in the silent rethorique of their
holy blood, That Maximum paenae malum potius eligendum, quam minimum culpa; It
is better going to Heaven in a fiery chariot, then to lie at ease in a sinful
couch.

And nature it self teaches us equally with the Scripture, in the Serpents
wisdom, to choose the least of evils; he will expose his whole body to save
his head; and when we are condemned, and may as we please make choice of our
punishment; the least of evils is to be preferred, if we believe the wisdom
or piety of King David; so it stands uncontrouled. Let us now fall into the
hands of God, and not into the hands of men; that was his supplication, and my
first part; this is his deprecation, and my second part.

Let us not fall into the hands of men, Pars 2.
so true he is to his own principles; Deliver me from the cruel man, O God,
deliver me from the wicked man, O God: i. e. from all men: for howsoever man
was created Homo homini Deus, a God to preserve and help his neighbor; yet
now he is degenerated in Homo homini lupus, and worse, into Homo homini Demon,
and worse yet, into Homo homini homo, because one man is worse to another, then
either Wolf or Devil could or can be: It past the Devils artifice to contrive
the Powder Plot; if the Jesuit had not put it in his finger, it had never have
been dreempt of, and it passed both the Devils, and Jesuits cunning, when Juno
raised a Typhon to rob Jupiter of his Nerves and Sinews; if the Puritan had not
put in his head, it had never been voted, much less executed.

And therefore I wonder not, that King David is so frequent in this kind of
Deprecation, Erue animam meam de manu canis, Authol.
Deliver me from the hand, i. e. from the power of the Dog; By this Dog,
Cressolius tells us is meant the Devil, whom the Gentiles feigned to be
Cerberum tricipitem, the three headed Porter of Holl: Certainly were they now
amongst us, they would say in their babbling devotion, From factions Lords, and
Rebellious Commons, and an Assembly of schismatic Divines, deliver us O Lord.

I do not say, From the Parliament, No, God forbid I should, it is the
greatest and venerablest Court under heaven; and too blame they were whosoever
they were, that called one Parliamentum indoctum, the unlearned Parliament,
another Parliamentum insanum, or Phreneticum, the madd Parliament, and a third,
Factiosum, or Phanaticum, The schismatic Parliament: For we do not always
give denominations a majore, but sometimes also, a meliore; and the loyalty and
wisdom of some Lords and Gentlemen, after they have suffered so much blood to
be shed, Cub.
may make this at last to be called, The good Parliament; God grant it the
best that ever was since Henry the first founded that honorably Assembly;

There were unlearned men in That, and Phrenetique men in the other, and
Phanatick men the third; and there are, God increase the number of them,
learned and loyal, good and great men in this.

And next to the hands of God, let me fall into the hands of a Parliament, so
long as it remains entire, and each party preserve their own privileges,
without entrenching one upon another, and not suffering a prevailing faction to
encroach upon the Prerogatives of Royalty, upon the liberties of Loyalty, upon
the essence of Episcopacy; for then the people must expect no Religion in the
Church, but what the prevayling Lords and Commons shall prescribe them, no
liberty in the State, no property in their Estates, but what the mercy of their
Fellow Subjects will allow them.

He is no true English man, that honors not, that fears not a true
Parliament; for the happiness of peace is the perpetual fruit of it, but such
a Parliament that crumbles it self into Conventicles, where a small Committee
shall have power to make rich men Delinquents, and loyal men Malignants, and
learned men both; for my part I neither fear nor honor, for the plague of
perpetual War is commonly the reward of it; and my prayer is, A perpetuo
bello, and perpetuo Parliamento libera regem Carolum, and subditos ejus Domine;
Let us fall into the hands of God, and not into the hands of men, for E malis
maximum, War is the greatest of evils.

It is my 2a, 2ae, aad my second Resolve, 2a. 2ae. E malis maximum.
and thus I undertake it: Peace is the greatest of blessings, and therefore War
is the greatest of evils, peace is the greatest of blessings positively, and
comparatively.

First, Positively it is the greatest of blessings; for it was the last legacy
Christ bequeathed his Church, (...), as Saint Basil calls it, his farewell
gift, a gift including all he had given before, or promised after his
departure; (...), a gift dropped from an higher world then this we breath in,
Joh. 14.26
says Saint Chrysostom. Peace I leave With you, my Peace I give unto you:
Peace he gave, knowledge he promised his Church, Peace he gave before,
knowledge he promised after his Ascension, The holy Ghost whom the father will
send in my name, Joh. 14.27.
he shall teach you all things.

Our blessed Master therein telling us, peace must have the precedence and
first place in our hearts: The best order certainly on earth, because the
only order observed in Heaven: The first place there is given to the Angels of
Peace, or Love; which are called Cherubim, the next to the Angels of Light or
Knowledge, which are called Seraphim.

But oh, the Enthusiasts of our age, as if they never meant to come thither,
they do most confusedly invert the order, for they will first have light or
knowledge, and that of Revelation; then Peace or love, and this to none but
them of their faction neither: so cross are they to Christ, that though he
do, yet they do not account peace the greatest blessing positively.

Secondly, the greatest yet it is, and that secondly comparatively too; I will
but run it over, my Wife is a blessing, but without peace in danger of a Rape;
my Child is a blessing, but without peace in danger of a Pyke; my Wealth is a
blessing, but without peace in danger of a Plunder; my Liberty is a blessing,
but without peace in danger of a Reformation; my King the best of blessings,
without peace is in danger of a Rebellion, and to be mistaken for an evil
Counselor.

That we may enjoy our Wives, our Children, our wealth, our Liberty, our
Religion, our King; my prayer is, Give peace in our time O Lord, and let us
fall into thy hands.

And because peace is the greatest of blessings, therefore War is the
greatest of evils; the greatest essentially, and the greatest effectually; the
Devil is the Author of it, and destruction is the end of it: God feldome
suffers it but for the greatest sins, Sacrilege and Rebellion: The
Israelites never knew the misery of War, until they had provoked God by
their inventions, Josh. 7.11, 12. 2 Samuel 15.21.
and Achans Sacrilege, and Absolons Rebellion were not the least of those
Inventions, nor the lowest of those provocations, only Jeroboams altering
Religion, 1 Reg. 12 31.
and extirpating the high Priesthood (which was the Jews Episcopacy) and in
their room instituting the basest and lowest of the people for a Presbytery,
was higher.

The best way therefore, as I conceive, for the Lords and Gentlemen of this
Kingdom, to remove this War is to give God and Caesar their own, the Church
her Patrimony, that is Gods due; and execution of Justice upon the Rebels,
that is the Kings due.

And as War is the greatest evil, in respect of the Author; so also in
respect of the End, for it seldom ends but in ruin and desolation: The
Philistims war put an end to Saul's life and Kingdom; 1 Samuel 31.5. 2. Reg.
10.7. 2. Reg. 17.23.
Jehues War swept away Achab and his posterity: The Syrians War set a
period upon Samaria; The Romans War gave a date to Jerusalem: It was War
that writ the sad character, Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit; and as he reckoned
up all evil men in Ingratum, so it may truly be said of War, Si bellum
dixeris and omnia dixeris, for it is attended by spoil and robbery, which
never leaves pilfering until it has squez'd out that abundance, which the
sponge of peace has sucked up.

Would yon see a short and small Map of Wars misery; in a word take it thus,
Imagine you see your Wives and Daughters ravished, your Infants tossed upon
Pykes or dashed against the stones, your dead Parents dragged out of their
quiet graves, your goodliest Cities on a flaming fire, your houses plundered,
your bodies dismembered, your Laws subverted, your Religion profaned, your
Churches defiled, and nothing to be heard or seen, but weeping and wayling
with mournful lamentation, one crying out Nulla salus bello, another, Heu
miseri qui bella gerunt; and tell me then, yea tell me now, if it be not high
time to say and pray, Let us not fall into the hands of men, but let us fall
into thy hands O God.

The reason follows, Pars 3.
which is my third part, For with the Lord is mercy; or The mercies of the Lord
are great, read which you please,

With the Lord is mercy: First, sometimes Promethean mercies, Jona 3.4.
to prevent a threatened danger, so in the case of Niniveh; their danger was
threatened, and themselves summoned to destruction within forty days: but who
can tell whether God will have mercy, if we repent, and we perish not? They
did repent, and God was merciful, and they did not perish: And here were
Miserationes, bowels of mercy, yearning as a Father does for his childs past
miscarriages, and keeping him from misery.

Secondly, sometimes Epimethean mercies, to deliver out of an emminent and
present danger; so in the case of Jerusalem, 2. Reg. 19.35.
the Assyrians besieged them, and intended to storm them the next morning; and
behold, the same night the Besiegers themselves were all dead corpses, and the
Beseiged were delivered: And here were Misericordiae, hands of mercy, pitying
as a Father does his childs present miseries, and snatching him as a Brand out
of the fire that he consumes not.

But be they Miserationes, preventing mercyes, or be they Misericordiae,
subventing mercies; They are Magnae in both respects, and each way very great.

Great certainly to David, when the men of Keilah intended to betray him into
the hands of Saul, and he was miraculously preserved. 1. Sam. 23.10.


Great certainly again to David, when Absolon by a great Conspiracy had
surrounded him and his handful of men, and he was miraculously delivered, and
the conspirators great Army as wonderfully destroyed, 2. Sam. 18.7.
not fewer then 20000. Rebels fell in that day.

So great are Gods mercies to his Anointed ones, especially when they are men
after his own heart, as King David was; He then either infatuates the Rebels
heads in discovering their plots, or else he intimidates their hearts in
cowardising their executions, and catching them in the same net which they
laid for others.

And are not his mercies as great to all the loyal subjects of his Anointed
ones? Abiathar, Zadoc, Ahimaaz, 1. Sam. 22.23.
Ittai, 2. Sam. 15 16.
and the rest were all safe in their constancy to King David; whereas Joab the
Lord General himself, with all his followers were all destroyed when they
revolted to Adonijah. 1. Reg 3.25.34.


And may not we upon these promises make use of King David's Amabaeum, and also
make it our Refugium? O praise the God of Heaven, for his mercy endures for
ever; which delivered King Charles from the madness of the people upon Jan.
10. 1641. for his mercy endures for ever; which delivered King Charles and his
loyal Gentry from the treason of (...) and the roaring of the Canon at
Edgehill, October 23. 1642. for his mercy endures for ever; which delivered
Queen Mary from the waves of the Sea, and the thundering of the Ordnance at
Burlington, February 13. 1642. for his mercy endures for ever; which delivered
King Charles from the King-catchers at Oxford, when they were so wrathfully
displeased at him, and as they thought had surrounded the City so securely
(...): for his mercy endures for ever; which delivered King Charles from the
assassination of Master Hugh Peter's and his fellow-levellers at Hampton Court,
November 11. 1647. for his mercy endures for ever. And many more, for his
mercies have been very great ever since, in maintaining us though our
maintenance was taken from us, and had been greater from the beginning, and
since, had not the Supinesse of some (the worst sort of loyal Subjects) and
the compliance of others (the worst fort of Rebels) hindered.

Notwitstanding that, we may yet turn King David's benedicite, into confidite,
and say, O trust in the God of Heaven, Jud. 13.23.
for his mercys are great: For as Manoahs wife said, If the Lord were pleased
to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering at our hands, neither
would he have showed us all these things, nor would he at this time have told
us such things as these.

Nor is the remembrance unseasonable at this time, or from this Text; though
the Text and time be both for Humiliation; for the end of humiliation is as
well to fortify our Faith, as to mortify our flesh; and to the strengthening
of our Faith be it spoken; had God an intent to deliver up the King and our
selves for a prey, he would not have given him and us so many deliverances, nor
have made of our enemies intentions so many discoveries.

Certainly his past favors are but pledges of his future; ^. Sam. 17.36.
so King David grounded an assured victory over Goliath the Philistim Giant,
upon his former experience of overcomming the Lion and the Bear; and now at
this time his hope breathes after a good success in the hands of God, because
his mercies are great.

And because in this choice, upon this ground, he had an equal respect to his
subjects with himself; it therefore follows, As the King studies his subjects
safety with the hazard of his health, so should subjects endeavor the Kings
safety with the hazard of their lives.

Which brings me to my 2a. 3ae. or my third Resolve, which shows Relatorum
proximum, 2a. 3ae. Relatorum proximum.
and says, That of all Relations that betwixt the King and Subjects is the
nearest, and thus I undertake it.

God has disposed several Relations amongst mankind, one betwixt the Husband
and Wife, a second between the Father and the Son; a third between the
Master and the Servant; and a fourth between the King and the Subject.

But which of these relations is the nearest, is not universally, though it may
very easily be determined: First, that betwixt Husband and Wife is
sacramental; for it is per pactum and faedus, by vow and covenant: Secondly,
that betwixt the Father and the Son is natural; for it is per semen and
sanguinem, the Fathers nature gives Being to the Son, and his veins are
filled with his Fathers blood: Thirdly, that betwixt the Master and the Servant
is political; for it is per autoramentum, by Indenture, the Masters head
directs the Servants hand, and the Servants hand feeds the Masters head.

But this betwixt the King and Subject is all; Sacramental, Natural, and
Political: First, Sacramental, for it is per dejurium, by the great Oath, we
have sworn to be loyal to him, and he has sworn to be loving to us (and
who but a faithless Rebel will break such Oath?) Secondly, Natural, for it
is per haereditatem, by succession; and he is, qua King, Pater patriae, and we
his Sons; The best blood we have, and the best life we lead, is, That we
are subjects to so gracious a King; (and who but a graceless Rebel will
violate such faith?) Thirdly, Political, for it is propter salutem, for
preservation; Et quia servati per Regem, ergo servi Regis; and we are
therefore the Kings Servants because the King is our preserver, and next to God
for our peace and plenty, thanks to the King: and at every Court Leet, not an
English man living but he enters into this service, and binds himself
Apprentice, not for years, but for life: As the Comic has it, Serva and
serviam, so long as the King denies us not protection, we must yield him
subjection: None but anunthankefull Rebel will dispute it, and therefore this
betwixt the King and Subject, is the nearest and strongest of all Relations.

Nor is it so only Formaliter, but also Firvaliter, and the nearest of all
Relations it is, as well in the Effect, as the Efficient, God is the Author of
it, and mutual weal or woe is the End of it: The Wife may offend, and the
Husband incur no danger, the Son may transgress and the Father never
smart; the Servant may be bad and the Master never the worse: but if the
Subjects sin, the King perishes: 1 Samuel 12.25.
If ye do wickedly, both ye and your King shall perish; there the King
smarts for the subjects fault, and if the King sins the subjects shall not
go scotfree; for here the King sins and the subjects dye: King David numbers
the people, and the people are diminished: the transgression his, the
destruction theirs.

Yet whether the cumbring of the people were merely King David's sin, or
mixtly his and theirs, (for they might have entreated him to have forborne this
muster) or if his sin only, yet whether it was not so his sin, as that it
was also the subjects punishment for former sins, is a question amongst
Expositors: and in my weak judgment, If the people had not a hand in this
particular sin, yet their former sins were the cause why God permitted his
Anointed to fall into this error.

So the Chapter begins; 2 Samuel 24.1.
And the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel; against Israel, not
against David; and because it was kindled against Israel, therefore God moved
David against them; or as the Margent expounds it, God permitted Satan; and so
it is said in the Register, Satan stood up against Israel, 1 Cron. 21.7.
and provoked David to number Israel.

Be it which it will, his or theirs; Saint Gregory is in the right; Mor. ^. 25.
cap. 20. and 23.
secundum merita subditorum, disponuntur acta Regentium, the hearts of
Sovereigns are disposed by God according to the merits of their subjects.

And what was the merit, or rather demerit, of the subject at this time?
Absolons conspiracy it could not be; for there dyed 20000 in that and for that;
nor could it be King David's adultery with Bathsheba: for that was private and
unknown; it was then, certainly it was Shebas Rebellion, none suffered for
that but Sheba himself; many more were in that combination; and fit they
should smart for such a sin, for God seldom suffers Rebellion to be
unpunished and go to the grave in peace.

Yea, Master Calvin himself tells us, Si pie regnent, summa est Dei
benedictio; si in Apostasiam aut Tyrannidem degenerent, flagella sunt Domini ad
punienda populi delicta, good Kings are nursing Fathers and Gods blessings,
badd Kings are Church-destroyers and Gods scourges.

I add, good Kings may accidentally for a while seem to be the peoples
scourges, a good King may raise a tax of Ship Money; King Solomon did so, 1
Reg. 10.22.
and seek to establish an uniformity of Religion in all his Dominions; King
Jehosaphat did so; 2 Cron. 17.7.
and neither of these are in themselves sins, not Shipmoney, else ask the
learned Judges, and let them ask their honest Forefathers: not uniformity in
Religion, for the Church was never so happy as when all the Churchmen were of
one accord; Act 2.1.
nor the State neither, as when all the Statesmen were like a City at unity in
it self; Psa. 12 2.
when the Pavement desired not to be the Roof, nor the Weathercock the
Foundation, nor the lower Hall the upper Parlor; but every stone was content
with his own condition, in that place, where the Master-mason had placed him.

Yet even from hence may bad subjects take occasion to rebel; and so that
which was no sin in the King is by wicked subjects made an occasion of the
highest sin in them.

And when people are come to the height of sin, Rebellion, which admits no
supreme, Sacrilege excepted: yet if we believe Optatus, and weigh Gods
punishments, by the weight of punishment judging the height of sin, we would
not except that; for he tells us, Rebellion is summum malorum, the sin
Paramount, Genesis 4.115.
that has no Peer: Caine for his Fratricide is but marked, and so dismissed
Niniveh that Sacrilegious City in stead of ruin, Jona. 3.4.
has a warning; Numb. 16.32.
but Corah and his accomplices for their Rebellion have a sudden and ma^chlesse
destruction; the earth coffins and buries them alive: Saint Austen goes
further, and charges the Dona^ists Faction (and Faction is evermore the usher
to Rebellion) with the sin against the holy Ghost.

No wonder then if the wrath of the Lord be kindled; and a wonder it is to me,
if when Gods wrath is kindled, and the King will hazard himself to preserve
his subjects, the subjects be not again reciprocally bound to preserve the
King with their own hazard.

Sure I am, Nature resolves it so, Scripture resolves it so, and not a Casuist,
not one, if my memory be right, is against it.

1. For Nature, look upon the Bees; they have a King if you believe Pliny;
L^b. 11. c. 17.
and a guard is ever about his person, to preserve him from a foreign
Invader, and a Domestic Traitor; If the Hornet will make his way, yet he must
dull his sting upon the subject, that he may not hurt the King: Capitis est
habenda ratio; quodlibet enim membrum naturae impulsu pro Capite vult
perlclitari, says Peter Martyr, 2 Samuel 18.3.
we must secure the King, as nature has taught every member to endanger it
self to preserve the head.

2. And that is one Scripture resolves this case, David the King having
rebellious subjects risen up in arms against him, resolves to go in person
against them: No Sir, it is not safe for you; for you nor for us neither, to
go into the battle; for if we fly away, they will not regard us, neither
will they pass for us, though half of us be slain; but now thou art better
then ten thousand of us.

Mark the Church-margent there (and it is the best Commentator upon the Text,)
signifying hereby, that a good Governor ought to be so dear unto his people,
that they will rather loose their lives then that ought should come unto him.

And the most glorious Epitaph that ever Abishai had is That which the holy
Ghost gives him, when he rescued King David from the hands of Ishi^benoh when
he thought to have slain David; 2 Samuel 21.17.
But Abishai the son of Zerviah succored him and smote the Philistim, and
killed him.

Nor are his Courtiers without their monument of praise, for saying, Thou shall
not go out with us to battle, lest thou quench the light of Israel; (Their
glory it was that they had such a revend esteem of the King, as to account him
their light) For the glory and wealth of the country stands in the
preservation of the godly Magistrate, Lies our Margent there.

Non quod libet, sed quod licet, laus est facere; so it ought to be, though
there were no other reason, but this very piety of the King; that he
supplicates the hands of God, as well for his subjects safety as his own,
because the mercies of the Lord are great; and deprecates the hands of men,
because their hands are cruel hands, because their hands are sacrilegious
hands.

It is my fourth part, the reason of this Deprecation; Pars 4.
But I have very little reason to speak much of this; the very speech of it
being little less then cruelty and sacrilege.

First, a cruelty to your ears to hear, how Master Charles Nucomin, Parson of
Trinity Church in Colchester, had his clothes torn off his back, and his Body
beaten with Cudgells and Halberts.

To tell you how Sir John Lucas (now Lord Lucas) was imprisoned, his doors and
walls battered, his windows beaten down, his gardens defaced, his Cattle
driven away, his Evidences torn; the very Vault, wherein his Ancestors were
buried, broken up, and the Coffins of the dead transfixt with Pistolls and
Halberts.

To tell you how Sir William Boteler of Kent was used and abused; his Stewards
hands burnt, with Match and Candle, because he could not for his ignorance, or
would not for his honesty, betray his Masters Treasure.

To repeat these and many more, and many worse then these, is a cruelty to
your ears: Nor can it do less then fetch tears from your eyes to remember
how Master Yeomans and Master Bourchier of Bristow, Master Tompkins and Master
Challoner of London, and that never to be forgotten William late Archbishop of
Canterbury, were murdered for Traitors, but cannot otherwise be remembered
then, the Most glorious Martyrs of this Inglorious Age: Qualia in tempora
reservasti nos Domine?

And having such speaking Presidents, both of Clergy and Laytie, neither is
that Priest nor that People worthy to live, who are afraid to dye in and for
this cause: This cause, wherein God, the King, and the Church are equally
involved.

Howsoever let it not be told in after Ages, That ever the English hands were
so cruel, as to outdoe the outrages of the Wilde-Irish, and all the
Barbarismes of the Goths and Vandalls. I dare not commit further cruelty upon
your cares.

Secondly, Nor dare offer so much Sacrilege, upon your Devotion, as to tell
you how Sacrilegious the hands of men have been upon holy Persons, Times and
Places.

1. The holy places of Canterbury, Rochester, Chichester, Winchester,
Westminster, and Exceter Cathedralls; how have they turned those houses of God
into Stables, for the Bodies of them, into Slaughter-houses for the Chancells
of them, into Butcher-rowes, for the Pulpits in them, into Chopping-boards for
the Communion tables; and the very Vaults, where lay the bones and ashes of
holy and royal men, into Draff-houses; Ah! If these things go on, where,
where will God have a place of public worship in England?

2. For Holy Persons, If Episcopacy be extirpated, Root and Branch; what
Priesthood, or Ministry, call it which you please, shall England have to
justify her self against Rome, and that other Thief of Geneva?

We have vindicated our selves against Rome, and tell the world, yes, and will
justify it, that imposition of Episcopal hands is essential to the
Ordination of the Clergy, and where it is wilfully wanting, there is no
Apostolical Church.

3. For holy Times, if Annunciation-day, if Christmasse-day, if Good Friday be
forgotten, as they are already voted down; how will our poor Posterity ever
mind the Incarnation, the Nativity, and Passion of our blessed Lord and
Savior? Or, 1 Timothy 1.15.
that ever Jesus Christ came into the World to save them?

Add but to this, the voting down of our English Liturgy, and without that how
shall our successors be ever catechized into the belief of a Trinity in Unity,
and Unity in Trinity? Where, where is it to be plainly learnt, but in the
Collect for that day, and in the Creed of holy Athanasins? And without
believing that, how shall our poor children be saved? Truly me thinks the
Lords and Gentlemen should have some care of their salvation.

I dare not commit further cruelty or sacrilege upon your ears or hearts:
Only, if such men there be, whose hands have been so cruel and sacrilegious;
you will, I am confident, you will give up the verdict of a Billa vera, upon my
2a. 4a, and my last resolve, which says,

That such men are virorum pessimi, 2ae. 4ae. Virorum pessimi.
the very worst sort of men; Quoderat demonstrandum; but need no other proof
then your consent.

So I pass from the explication to the Application of my Text: The first is
inquisitive, and asks, Appli. 1.
ut in manns hominum incidimus; how and by what means we are fallen into such
cruel hands, into such sacrilegious hands? Our sins you will not deny, are
the provoking cause; yes, our sins are, and every one of us must say with
that Prophet, Propter me hac tempestas, I am the cause of this storm; and I
pray God give us all, and every one of us grace, every one of us Personally,
and all of us Nationally to repent of our sins, that this sad sentence may be
revoked: (If you expect the politic cause, I dare not be too inquisitive,
lest my self be brought under an inquisition.)

For all war is a plague; but Civil War is the greatest of all plagues; yet as
great as it is, some ease it would be if we knew where to lay the blame of it;
And it is my misery, that I dare not determine, whether York or London did be
get it, whether the King or some body else must father it; no, I dare not; but
you my brave Christian Lords, Gentlemen and others, who have not lost your
Religion and reason, your courage and conscience, may: And I may without fear
of an inquisition propose a Riddle, ask a question, answer it, and unriddle it
who pleases.

Where then was the first guard? Where the first Committees? Where the first
Commissioners for raising men, Ammunition, and money? Where the first denial
of a legal and just proceeding upon Delinquents? Upon real Delinquents, not
imaginary; who the first intruder upon the others Rights by force and arms?
Who the first Seazor upon the others strength by Sea and Land? Who first raised
that Devil, the Militia, and would never lay him again? Who first raised an
Army to fetch up evil Councillors? Who first did, and still do avert all
honorable motions of peace?

He that can undo this knot, may easily say, who was the Father of this war:
None else will so carefully nurse the child; and upon his, or their skoare
must all the Rapines and robberies, all the murders and bloodshed of this
present Civil War be laid, when God shall make inquisition for this blood;
and there let it rest for me.

Unless to these you will join those fearelesse sons of their Grandsires
imprecations; one whereof was this.

Disspate thou, O God, the Counsels of such as deceitfully travel to stir
the hearts of the Inhabitants of either Realm against the other; let their
malicious practices be their own confusion.

If this fright them not into Loyallty and obedience, let them not be offended,
if I believe, they are therefore called Scoti, quasi (...), because they sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death: Non veniet anima mea in consilium
little, and my prayer is, and hope I you will join with me in it.

Let us no longer fall into, nor under the hands of men, of such cruel men, of
such sacrilegious men; but into thy hands O God, for his sake, whose hands were
stretched upon the cross for us, Jesus Christ, Amen. Appli. 2


And ut incidamus in manus Domini, how we may fall into the hands of God, my
next Application is to tell you, and to obtain this favor, to fall into Gods
hands, we must make use of our own hands. 1 Timothy 2.8.


In the words of St. Paul, levantes puras manus, lifting up pure hands: And
these in the exposition either of S^. Ambrose, who reads, sanctas manus, holy
hands, and holy hands they be, quando cor mundum est, Esaias. 1.15.
when the heart is clean, and sanctas attollimus manus, Esaias. 59.3.
and holy hands we lift up, when they are clean from slaughter, blood, and
cruelty; when they are free from Rapines, Robberies, and bribes, and in omnibus
bonis exercitatas, ad Elcemosynas inprimis effusas, when they are exercised in
all good works, especially in Alms.

Or of Cornelius a Lapide, puras levantes manus tum corporaliter eas abluendo,
ut Judaei, tum spiritualiter ab ira, etc. Pure hands we lift up when we keep
them clear from wrath and revenge, from Militia and Malitia, and all other
filthiness; Ac per Elcemosynas servando plenas, and keeping them full of
charity.

Or of Jansenius, would you fall into Gods hands, Eccles. 39.
as David did? Why then you must be as David was; and what was David? Why David
was validus manu, (the very signification of his name it is) strong of hand,
and validus manu est, qui valide ad dandum extendit manum, he is strong of
hand, who freely gives to the poor, and is full fraught with charity.

And how many objects of charity there are, the poor Gentry, the poorer
Clergy, and the poorest Sculdiery speak aloud; the poor Gentry and Clergy,
that are ashamed to make their wants known, and dare not do worse; men that
heretofore have been more blessed in giving (for they know it a more blessed
thing to give) and would not now be altogether unblest for want of receiving,
Psalm. 41.11.
and the surest way for your selves to be blessed is, to consider the poor and
needy, as the Psalmist speaks, and not put them to the impudence to beg;
consider them therefore, and at once bless them, and be blessed your selves.

The poor Soldiers, whose dismembered bodies, whose stormed backs, whose
starved bellies are Rethorique enough to persuade any Christians, who have
Philemons bowels of compassion, to refresh such Saints.

And when you have done this, Sermon. 93. de Temp.
hark what St. Austen says; Adversarios si volumus vincere, manus nostra,
i.e. actus nostri sint in Coelo, non in terris; would you overthrow your
enemies? then let your hands, i.e. your conversation be in heaven, Math. 5.45.
until you are like your heavenly Father; nor are you ever so like him, as
when you are merciful, as when you are charitable: Be ye merciful as your
Father which is in Heaven is merciful.

Hark again what holy Ephraem says, Expausione manus in oration nostra
quasi arcu armetur; let your prayer be armed with a Bow by the lifting up of
your hands; but let the arrow of charity be shot out of that Bow, if you intend
to hit your enemies.

Or would you have peace with your enemies, and not victory over them? It is
every good man's desire; why, charity I must tell you, is the best way for this
too; nor will this time of humiliation ever be complete and perfected to an
Accommodation, until your repentance, like a glorious Bride is led to Church
by the hands of faith and charity to her Groom; in this dress, as Ester in
her royal apparel found favor with Ahasnerus, shall your repentance find
favor, and obtain help of God in time of need.

Thus, thus shall the peace of God dwell in your hearts; and when the peace of
God is within, you may be confident the other peace will not be long without.

This, this is the best way that I know, how we may fall into Gods hands; even
by lifting up pure hands to God, and charitable hands to Gods servants: So
shall we have peace with, or victory over them that are risen up against us.

And my prayer is, Almighty God, take us out of the hands of men, out of their
cruel hands, out of their sacrilegious hands, and take us into thine own
hands, into thine own merciful hands, and as a pledge thereof, give us what
thou requirest of us, holy hands to appease thee, and charitable hands to
appease the poor, that so we may have peace with, or victory over thine and
our enemies, for his sake, who has already given us victory over our
spiritual enemies, and will hereafter over our eternal enemies, Jesus Christ
our Lord: To whom with the Holy Ghost, three Persons, one immortal only wise
God, be ascribed all Honor, Praise, and Power now, and for ever: Amen.

FINIS.

