THE Sovereigns DESIRE PEACE: THE SUBJECTS DUTY OBEDIENCE. By Thomas Swadlin.

London Printed 1643.

To the WORLD.
READER;
KNow who ever thou art, that these lines following were Sermons preached the
last Summer in St. Paul's, and St. B. Algate London: whether they contain any
doctrine that is not Catholic and Orthodoxall, they appeal to thee for
judgment: censure freely, I beseech thee. If praying for peace, which is the
Kings desire, and subject of the former Sermons, and preaching of obedience,
which is the subjects duty, and subject of the latter Sermons be at all
Malignity, at least malignitie enough for the Authors imprisonment, from Octo.
29. 1642. Until December 26. following, now eight weeks, and as yet unheard,
unseene: Till now I was not informed of any other fault I stood guilty of: But
now it pleased the L. Major of Land. upon my Letter to send for me, and tell
me the cause of my Committement, before whom when I appeared, I found one John
Levet a Tallow-Chandler my Accuser, upon whose information, as I conceive, his
Lordship was pleased to say, The cause of my commitment was, because I am an
enemy to sincerity; to which I answered, all the sincerity that either his
Lordship or my self had lay within our Breasts, and not to be judged of by
man. But you have opposed the Parliaments proceedings, replied his Lordship, to
which I made answer again; It did not appear so by my actions; for I had
been, and ever would be an humble Orator to Heaven for the blessings of
direction and success upon their consultations: and for mine own particular,
I thought the Parliaments of England, to be the supreamest Courts of Judicature
in the world: Yes, quoth Master Levet, So it seems, for just when the
Parliament set forth their late Ordinances, You preached a Sermon for Obedience
to the higher powers: I confessed it, and promised a Copy of it; and here it
is: To make me yet more guilty, I, but you pray for Bishops said the Lord
Major, To which again, I made answer; Yes my Lord, I had, I do and ever
would, until it pleased the King and His Great Council to alter the Common
prayer Book; and then if I could not comply, I could leave the kingdom: Have
you so, and do you so, and will you so replied the Lord Major? And so long as
you pray for Bishops, so long you shall be a prisoner: You see now upon what
terms you may have your liberty. To which once more I was thus bold; My good
Lord, I humbly thank you, but I dare not venture a double Duckart to a single
penny: Nature, Wife, Children do all strongly solicit me to accept of
liberty upon a^^ terms; but God, the Church, the King, mine own soul do all
charge me to refuse it, unless it be Christian: an Act of Parliament besides,
and mine own Oath lie upon me; and until the one be repealed, and the other
dispensed, I dare not leave praying for Bishops: And when I had said this, his
Lordship as I conceived, was moved with pity; for he said, I perceive you are
mistaken, and I will now rectify and better inform your understanding: That
Act of Parliament was made to confirm King Edwards Common Prayer Book; not
this which is now extant; for many prayers by the means of the wicked
Hierarchy are crept into this which never were in that: To which yet once
more, with his Lordships favor, I thus addressed my Answer.

But the prayer for the Bishops my Lord is in King Edwards Common prayer Book:
Well, well, Sir, said his Lordship, I am a Member of the House, and know the
Houses Intentions: To which last ^ ons: and so I was remanded to Prison; not
where I was before, Crossebie House, but where I am now, Gresham College:
whence I add these few words to the world, my Judge:

Happily his Lordship has done Right in my imprisonment; for I have
infirmities; for I am a man: but whether he has done aright, judge; For, for
iniquity, impurity, or impiety, more than what God and mine own soul are
privy too, I dare the world to tax me; for I and a Christian Protestant, and
fear not the Trial, summon me when you will, my name is

Thomas Swadlin.

THE SOVEREIGNS DESIRE:
PSALM 122 6. Pray For the peace of Jerusalem.


IF ever Prayer were necessary to be preached, it is now; now prayer, Common
prayer being so much preached down by common preachers, and spoke down by
common speakers.

If ever peace were necessary to be prayed for, it is now; now peace being so
much in fear by fears and jealousies.

If ever the peace of Jerusalem were necessary to be prayed for, it is now; now
Jerusalem being so much preyed upon, that it can scarce receive Tyth s or
Offerings: that it is now almost under another curse, (I hope none of Christ's)
a stone scarce left upon a stone; the superstructure of Epise pacie dis^onoured
and the subterstructure of the Inferior Clergy discountenanced.

And yet prayer is officium excellentissimum, the most excellent duty God
requires at our hands: For it is his glory;

And yet peace is Donum excellentissimum,

And yet Jerusalem is Subjectum excellentissimum,

And yet Jerusalem,

These are the p^rts of my Text; and of these parts by Gods assistance, and
your patience, I shall speak apart; And when I have so done, I shall give you
the ^

It is every good man's duty, to pray for the peace of the Church.

And because they are three such excellencies. I wish my self an Angels
tongue, that I might fasten them in their transcendency upon your hearts; But
alasse^ I am the meanest of my Tribe, and very conscious of mine own
infirmities, I shall though try my skill, and God Almighty give the blessing.

I begin with the first, Pray; And it is a most excellent duty: this, prayer
is, No man denies it; for it is necessary, for it is p^ofitable, there is a
necessity of it,

First, it is Necessary; For it is not only Documentum, a lesson, which we may
learn if we will; but it is Iussum, an Injunction, that we should obey,

The vulgar Latin reads those words of Christ thus, Orabitis, ye shall pray;
and Trem^lius thus, Orate, pray; both Mandatory. Mat. 6.


If it were but Ipse dixit, He has said it, It were enough to bind our
Obedience to it; This (...), though there were no more, might stop al^
oppositions with Pythagoras Scholars; because he has said it, It is true;
because he has said i^, we must do it.

But besides this Ipse dixit, He has said it: there is also an Ipse jussit,
Psa. 50.1 Matthew.
he has ^ommanded it, Call upon me; Yes, and an Ipse increpuit, He has chid
the neglect of it; Why sleep ye? Arise and pray that ye enter not into
temptation.

In a word there is a double necessity to pray; 1. Necessitas indigentiae, an
absolute necessity; 2. Necessitas praecepti, a respective necessity: God has
comm^nded it, so it is absolute, we cannot be supplied without it, so it is
respective; There is a Text for this too; ye fight and war, and get nothing,
because ye us kenot. Iac. 4.2.


Now if ye^ will add to this necessity by God imposed,

It is Saint Augustines note, Ille quod nos hortatur, propter nos hortatur; De
verb. Do. Ser.
when God bidds us pray, it is for our own profit; Prayer is like sowing of
Corn, and that promises increase at h^^vest: like a bill of Adventure; and
that brings a rich exchange, It is the very Ship that transports and returns
clothing for the back, food for the belly; gold for the p^rse, and grace for
the Soul: So that Father again, precatio ascendit, misericordia descendit;
Prayer is our Factor for Gods Mercy; It travailes, never without a saving
Voyage, and returns most commonly richly laden; Christ affirms it: Joan ^
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, etc.

If it be health, prayer, is Medi^amentum probatum, an approved Medicine, so
Sa^nt James: The prayer of Faith shall save the sick. Iac. 5.
If it be favor with Princes, prayer insinuates safest and soonest: Neh. 1.
So Nehemiah got favor in the sight of that great man; If it be victory in
War, prayer is the surest Enginer: you know how Israel prevaild against
Amalecke; it was when Moses held up ^ to stop the execution of Gods vengeance,
prayer is the best Advocate; so Moses held Gods hands, that his wrath could not
wax hot against the Children of Israel: xo. 32.11
If it be prevalence with God, Oration hominis est res omnipotentissima says
Luth. though Hyperbolically, yet devoutly; prayer is that Omnipotency, which
wrestles with God, and overcomes him; If it be peace between kingdom and
kingdom, prayer is the best Councellor, both to project it and obtain it; It
was not the wisdom, it was not the policy, it was the piety of the
Parliament, that obtained peace between England and Scotland; and may this
days piety obtain peace at home in England and abroad in Jreland.

But alas! p^lic.
we have little hope of it, since our piety it self is not at peace, some men's
piety is for common prayers; and that which other men call their piety, is I
fear me, altogether impiety against common prayers.

What will ye judge of that man's piety which said, our common prayer book is
unrighteous, ungodly, Idolatrous, blasphemous, diabolical; and what of that
man's, who said, maintain this book, but mistake me not, I do not mean, That
damned devilish Common prayer book, used by none but damned Priests; surely,
if this were zeal, it wanted a great deal of wisdom and piety both, to make
it a right zeal.

What do these men mean? do they think Common prayer is unlawful? They
cannot think so, if they think fairly either of the Old, or New Testament:
For in the Old Testament, God by himself and his Prophets prescribed a set
form of prayer; ^um. 6.^2, 23, etc
so to Aaron and his sons he gives a charge, and in that charge forbidds them
to bless the people as their own fancy lead them; and enjoynes them to
bless them after this very prescription, and no otherwise: The Lord bless
thee and keep thee, ^eut. 16.3, 15. ^os. 14.2.
etc. And so again; Thou shall say before the Lord thy God, Thus etc. And so
again, by the Prophet Hosea; Take with you words.

And in the New Testament St. Tim. 2.1.
Paul that great Apostle of the Gentiles commands Timothy thus: I exhort that
first of all, prayers be made for all men: Mark you, they must be made: i. e.
There must be set forms of prayer, and what Saint Paul enjoynes here by
precept, Cor. 12.
he does elsewhere by pattern, He prays thrice against the same infirmity;
and questionless too he used the same words: and so did his and our blessed
Master Jesus Christ; He prayed, and said the same words thrice: ^atth. 26.39,
40. Mat. 6 9.
O my Father, if it be, etc. and as he used a set form of prayer himself; So
He has enjoined us a set form of prayer too, saying, pray ye thus; Our
Father which, etc. And this prayer was ever had in veneration; and so was a
common and set form of prayer; only in this last age of the world, some
peevish people have excommunicat^d the one and the other.

Sure I am, that mighty learned man Master Calvine has given a mighty
commendations to our Common-prayer-Booke; when he says Non licet, It is not
lawful for our Pastors, or, They may not in their functions any way desert, or
depart from them: It is in his letter to the then Lord protector.

^ when we had in use no prayers, but our Common prayers, no religion but our
39 Articles; Yet then, God to show, how well he was pleased with our Religion,
and Common prayers, he gave Queen Elizabeth many personal and this Kingdom
one public deliverance, viz. 88. and so King James 1605. Our Common prayers
obtained the best of blessings then; and our Common prayers will obtain the
best of blessings now, Peace.

And that is Donum Excellentissimum, the most excellent gift, David teaches us
to pray for, pray for the peace: And this is my second consideration. And here
I shall inquire; 1 Quidpax, what peace is? and 2 the Quare impedit, by what
persons peace is hindered? 1a. 2ae.
and 3 Quo jure, how peace may be maintained when it is once obtained: And
first, What is peace? Peace in the proper acception of the word is no more then
an Acquiescence and cessation from public Hostility; so it is Pax forensis,
peace abroad, and from private enmity, so it is pax domestica, peace at home.

But the word here comprises all sublunarie and worldly blessings, deliverance
from the sword, and victory in battle, deliverance from famine, and plenty of
victuals; deliverance from Pestilence, and health in our houses: for so long ^s
the sword is brandishing, no peace in our borders, so long as famine is
stirring, no peace in our bowels; so long as the plague is reigning no pe^ce in
our bodies; and therefore pray we, Give peace in our time O Lord; even the
peace of health from the plague, and the peace of fullness from the famine, and
the peace of quietness from the sword; such an excellent thing is peace, that
it includes all worldly blessings.

Nay I dare say it is so excellent, that it includes all divine blessings too:
For as there is Pax temporis, the peace of time, which is, when our swords are
sheathed and turned into Mattocks, so there is Pax pectoris, the peace of
conscience, which we have when sin is pardoned; and pax numinis, the peace of
God which we obtain when Satan is conquered: all which God grant us through
Jesus Christ, Amen.

In a word, peace is either, First, Eternal, which we have in hope, Romans 5.1.
and must wait for the fruition of it till the next life; or Secondly,
Internal, which we get by faith in Jesus Christ: or Thirdly, External: and
this in a divine sense is a mutual consent, when all Preachsers preach one
holy truth, and all Believers profess one holy faith; that faith and this
truth meeting in one Jesus Christ: and morally it is this, A wishing love
within, and a working love without, when there is no grudging, no heart-burning
within, when there is no brawling nor bloodsheding without; for which let us
pray, Pe^ce in our time O Lord.

So excellent a thing is peace, that as by the Wine Press many Grapes are
pressed into one cup: that as in the kneading tub many grains are made into one
loaf, that as in the field many sheep are put into one fold, that as in the
womb many members are united into one body, that as in a Fabric many stones
are cemented into one building; so by peace, and peace only, are many Saints
made, united, cemented, and builded into one Church, pray we therefore, Peace
in our time O Lord.

For as those Grapes that are ungathered, and come not to the wine press, the
Birds of the air eat them; as the ears that are ungleaned, and come not to
the barn, the Beasts of the field devour them; as the Sheep that straggle in
the field and come not to the fold, the Fox worries them; as the arm that is
cut from the body, rottenness and putrefaction corrupt it, as the stone that
is shaken and rent from the building, it makes a deformity in the building, so
those Christians that are separated from the communion of Saints; those men
that make a fraction in a society, that make a commotion in a Commonwealth;
the Devil that foul of the air, that beast of the field, that Fox of hell,
eats, worries, and devoures them; pray we therefore, Peace in our time O Lord.

For what safety has the sheep that strayes from the fold? what strength has
the arm that is parted from the body? what beauty has the stone that is
scattered from the building? what sweetness has the Grape that is withered
from the Vine? Just so much sweetness, beauty, strength, and safety, has that
Christian, has that man, that divides himself from the ^^ity of the Church,
from the unity of the State, that breaks the bond of peace: pray we therefore,
Peace in our time O Lord.

So excellent a thing is Peace, Zach. 8.16 Luc. 10.5. 2 Cor. 13.11, etc.
that God in the Law commands it, that Christ in the Gospel commends it, that
S. Paul in all his Epistles, not one that I remember excepted, exhorts it, Romans
12.18. 1 Cor. 1.3. that God is called the Father of peace: 1 Cor. 14 33. that
Christ is called the King and Prince of peace, Isay 9.6. Heb. 7.2. that the
holy Ghost is called the Spirit of peace, Mat. 5.9.
Gal. 5.22. that the Saints are called the children of peace, John 13.35. that
the holy Trinity promises to crown it with the fatness of the earth, and the
dew of heaven. Romans 14 17.

And now my beloved, would you obey the law, or enjoy the Gospel? would you
have God to be your Father, Christ your Savior, or the holy Ghost your
Comforter, and the Saints your Companions? Would you see many days and inherit
the earth, and enjoy heaven? then pray, Peace in our time O Lord.

Peace is the only Sun that can disperse the Clouds of Schism and Faction
in the Church, whereby we may all keep the unity of the Spirit: Peace is the
only Sun that can expel all mists and fogs of quarrels and contentions in
the State, that we may all be happy and joyful, living like brethren in unity:
pray we therefore, Peace in our time O Lord.

Peace is the only Key to lock war out of our walls, and let quietness
into our borders, and keep the door so fast, that no headstrong Iehu shall
open by violence, that no cunning Jeroboam shall shut by subtilty the key of
David: pray we therefore, Peace in our time O Lord.

Peace is the only heart in our body, that can expel the sanguine humor of
revenge, and the melancholy distempers of revolt, and conserve in Temperance
the state of our body politic, and the state of his body mystical.

For if peace be gone, the Spirit is gone, for he is the Spirit of peace; and
if the Spirit be gone, Christ is gone with him; for nunquam divelluntur, they
are never asunder; He is the Prince of peace; and if Christ be gone, God the
Father is gone too; and how miserable that Church or State is, ^^om whom the
blessed Trinity is departed, Father, Son, and holy Ghost; judge your selves:
I pray God this be not our case now; and that it may not, pray you too, Peace
in our time O Lord.

Peace is the only spring in the year to blow out the malice of cold blood in
Winter, and to keep out the anger of hot blood in Summer, that the greenness
and tranquillity may ever flourish in a Church and kingdom, and that they may
ever flourish in this Church and State, pray we, Peace in our time O God.

Peace is the only virtue that S. Paul joins with grace in all his Epistles;
Grace and Peace q. d. you shall never have grace, unless you will entertain
Peace.

It was the speech of disordered spirits that said, Non pacem petimus superi,
^^^e gentibus iram; We beg not peace, we long for wars; for Nulla salus
bello, no good can come from war; Nulla fides pietasque viris qui eastr^
sequuntur, no piety, no fidelity in that people that delight in war, and love
to bathe their swords with the blood of men; Omnia pace vigent, we can never so
earnestly pray for grace, as in the time of peace; faith cannot be wrought by
the sword, heresies will not be consumed with Faggots; and those Disciples that
would have fire from Heaven to consume the Samaritans, because they would not
entertain their Master, Christ told them, Luc. 9.55.
they knew not of wh^t spirit they were of: If you earnestly desire grace, ^^ay
for peace, peace, not only with God, but also with man; For so long as thou
art in malice with man, thou can not be at peace with God; 1 Joan. 3.14.
For the best sign of peace with God, is to be at peace with man; We know We
are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren: pray we therefore,
Peace in our time O Lord.

You see what an excellent thing peace is; and being so excellent a thing, what
manner of persons think you are those, 2 a, 2 ae,
that hinder us from the fruition of it? why, that my next consideration is to
tell you.

And I must tell you there are many; so many that it would tire your ears to
hear, and my ton^ue to name them all; that we may come without weariness to
our journeyes end, I shall name you but the Ringleaders; and they are, first,
a Schismatic Corah in the Church: Secondly, A dislovall Absolon in the
State; Thirdly, An idolatrous Jeroboam in the Throne, Fourthly, A roud Haman in
the Court: and Fifthly, A covetous Nabal in the country.

Schism deposes the Church, Corah will obtrude his own opinions, his own
Enthusiasmes for as undoubted Truths, as the Articles of Religion established
by the Church, would have either many Churches, or no Church; many religions or
no religion; and this was Corahs case, he thought himself as holy and as wel^
inspired as Aaron; away therefore with the Schismatic, that Coachman, that
dares drive the Horses of the Sun; Prometheus was much to blame for it; he
had like to set the world on fire: It was heretofore the Angels dignity, it is
still his duty to muzzell this Ass.

Disloyalty dethrones the King; Judge 17.6
you may read in that sad sentence; In those days there was no King in Israel,
but every man did that which was right in his own eyes, and that was bad
enough; Judge. 18
for by that means, Mica brought in a new religion, the Tribe of Dan brought in
Burglary, rifling and robbing of houses; and the men of Gibea brought in
ravishing of women, Judge. 19.
even unto death: Israel was like B^bel for want of a King: and disloyalty to a
King is as bad; for disloyalty to a King whom God sets over a people, is
disloyalty to God: whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God;
and they that resist, R^^, 13.
shall receive to themselves damnation: From both which, confusion for want of
a King, and damnation, for want of loyalty to a King, that we may be preserved,
God conserve our King to us, and our loyalty to him: Amen.

Idolatry dethrones God: Deus si non unus, nullus; If God be not one, he is
none: Com. in Colos. De vera Rel. 37.
And therefore Saint Ambrose calls Idolatry, Crimen pergrave, a very, a very
heavy and crying sin; Origo impietatis as Saint Austine: the Fountain of
all impiety and misery both: Never had the Israelites known the misery of
captivity, but for their often provocations; and Jeroboams Idolatry was not the
least of those provocations; from which captivity that we may be preserved, God
keep us from idolatry.

Pride and covetousness evermore breaks the bond of peace, 4. and 5. 1 Cor. 6.
for covetousness says the Apostle, why do ye not rather suffer wrong? q.
d. Were but every one of you content to put up a little wrong, what peace would
there be in the whole City, in the whole Country? How would it flourish to the
credit of the Gospel, and comfort of your selves? but alas! you are so
wedded to the world that the value of a half^-penny sets you to the Law.

And for pride says Solomon, It is the mother of contention; pro. 13.10
did not men think themselves fitter to govern, then to be governed, to rule,
then to be ruled, we should never fail of peace:

Endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4
says the Apostle; and this bond is never or seldom broken, but either by the
proud man or the covetous: The covetous man thinks it too hard for his
pursestrings; the proud-man thinks it too hard for his heart strings, and so
both would have it a little easier, the one that he might not pay so much, the
other tha^ he might not obey so much.

Pride was the loss of Jerusalem, and covetousness of Constantinople: Had the
Christian Commanders yielded to one General; Had the Christian Grecians
yielded a seasonable supply, the Turk had never been Lord of the one nor the
other.

I pray God continue our King in content to Rule according to Law, and out
selves in humility to obey according to Gospel, that England may never be
lost, but live in peace, till Jesus Christ the Prince of peace come to
judgment. Amen.

You see the hinderers of our peace, Schismatic Kora's Disloyal Absolons;
Idolatrous Jeroboams, pro^^ Hamans, Covetous Nabals; I wish not those of ours,
their ends; if any such be amongst us; but I wish you to say to God deliver us
from them, Amen.

And so God will, if when we have obtained peace by the fervency of our
prayers, we will endeavor to maintain it by the industry of our pains: and
how it may be maintained, my next consideration is to tell you.

There are many preservatives of peace; I shall name them, 3a. 2ae.
which I conceive to be the chiefest.

Ca^oatur iracundia: si praecaveri non poterit, cohibeatur; Ambrose, take heed
of anger; or if you cannot prevent it from breaking out, yet restrain it: So
the Father goes on; Si praeoccupaverit mentem tuam iracundia, ne relinquas
locum tuum. If anger do possess your heart, yet do you keep the possession
of your place: locus tuus patientia, sapientia, ratio, Luke 21.29 Romans 32,
and what is your place? Your place is wisdom, reason, patience; In patience
possess your souls, as our Saviouradvises; Overcome evil with good; as Saint
Paul advises; At least soon recover your selves again; as Aristippus and
Aeschynes, two famous Philosophers, having fallen out, says the one to the
other, come shall we be friends? It is a shame for such as us to be enemies; I
with all my heart says the other; well remember I am the better man, and first
offered the peace, says Aristippus; I will says Aeschynes, and ever
acknowledge you so hereafter, because I the worst man first offered you the
quarrel.

I with all Christians to follow the example of these H^athens; and then upon
our prayers we should have, and by such means maintain peace.

Obliviscantur injuriae; Deleantur, let an Act of Oblivion be passed upon them:
and doleantur peccata, and let all those sins which hinder our peace be
repented of, for as Iehu asked Ieboram, what peace so long as the whoredoms of
Iesabell remain? So in vain do we seek for, or to maintain peace so long
as we live in sin: Repentance therefore in our time O Lord, that we may
successefully pray for and continually maintain the peace of our Jerusalem.

Reminiscatur paternitas and fraternitas, Pater spirituum, the Father of your
spirits, God, whom you are bound to obey in all things; but also Pater patriae,
the Father of your Country, whom you are bound to obey in all things, he
commands either according unto, or not contrary to the revealed will of God.

Obedience to Monarchy is an excellent conservative of peace, especially where
the Monarchy is bounded by an Aristocracie of Peers, and Democracie of
Commons and this mixture meeting in their command and observed in our
obedience; For then we shall neither fear Tyranny, nor Faction, nor violence;
and where neither of these three invade, there peace continues; but where
either of these encroach, there peace is dissolving; you may see it in Israel
in the Reign of Rehoboam; he would not hearken to the Counsel of his Sages,
and the Commons rebelled; and again you may see it true in Germany of late
days, when the Commons were weary of a well settled Government; But they would
have the free choice of sincere Ministers, they would be disburthened from
paying Tithes; They would have it believed that God revealed his will by
dreams: They would have all judgments civil to be by the Bible, or
Revelation from God; they would have all men to be equal in dignity: and what
followed? Confusion: that which was once the Garden is now the dunghill of the
world; That England never be made a like spectacle, God give us grace to
remember we have a King and to obey him; that we are brethren; as being all
subjects under that one King, as being all members of one Church, as being all
sworn by one oath, as being all professors of one truth; and shall brethren
fall out? God forbid; Abraham put an end to that quarrel, which was like to
arise betwixt Lot and himself; We are brethren: Genesis 13.
and I pray God we may ever endeavor to maintain and keep, what we now pray
for (because we are brethren, and all the sons of one man, King CHARLES) the
peace of our Jerusalem, etc.

Jerusalem is my third part, the most excellent Subject;

1. What is meant by Jerusalem? and, 2. Why Jerusalem is made choice of?
And first King David here saying, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, 1a. 3ae.
he means in the Letter, his own City; in the Type the State and Church of
Christ: and so Saint Paul calls the Church Jerusalem, Jerusalem on high, and
heavenly Jerusalem: so that the meaning is, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, i.
e. pray for the peace of the Christian Church and Commonweal, and especially
we, for the peace of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

But why for Jerusalem? why not, pray for the peace of Inda? 2a. 3ae.
Or pray for the peace of Israel? They we^e in no less danger, then Jerusalem;
and they greater than it by far; Judah was his kingdom; Israel was his people,
Jerusalem was but his City, though his Metropolis; some great reason surely
then, that Jerusalem is made choice of, rather than Judah his Kingdom, or Israel
his people; surely a Kingdom is better than a City; and the people of the
Kingdom better than either Kingdom or City.

Let us see then, what may be the reason that Jerusalem is made choice of, and
preferred before Judah or Israel?

Is it because, as the Orator says, the City is not the walls, the streets,
David says, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, he intends, pray for peace
amongst the people of Jerusalem?

This may be a reason; but this cannot be the maine reason.

Is it then because the people of Israel through out all the Land were bound
thrice the year, at Easter, at Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles, Deu.
16.16.
to come up and worship at Jerusalem?

This comes nigh the maine reason; especially if you receive for truth the
opinion of some, who say this Psalm was prophetically made to sing by the way,
when they went up by the steps to the Temple.

And yet this cannot be the maine reason; For at these three times, the Males
only came up; the women staid at home; and peace surely is as necessary, and
as necessary to be prayed for amongst women, as amongst men, amongst men and
women, as amongst men and men:

The maine as I take it, Jerusalem is named and not Judah, or Jsrael, is double.

Not so much because Jerusalem was the City and Throne of David, This is my
house, Psalm 132
here will I dwell; At this time, when David penned this Psalm, the Tabernacle
was there; but afterward there was the Temple too: and God is said to dwell in
both; the Tabernacle and Temple both: and both these being the Type of
Christendom, Jerusalem, where both these stood, is only made choice of, and
David saying; pray for the peace of JERUSALEM, intends thus much, O God make
all thy true Worshippers wheresoever over the face of the whole earth, to be of
one heart; and we must pray now; O God, send unity and unanimitie into all
Christendom.

Jerusalem is named; not the peace of Judah, not the peace of Jsrael, because
the peace of the State; i. e. of Judah and Israel, depends much if not
altogether, upon the peace of Jerusalem: i. e. the Church; you never see the
Church divided in opinion, but by and by you see the Commonweal running into
rebellion; when Micaiah the true Prophet was confronted by Zedekiah the false
Prophet, by and by the Kingdom lost his peace:

I could give you a sad instance of this in Germany; and a nearer instance of
this in England: but God has prevented the plot: and now pray we for the
complement of it, that our churchmen may be of one judgment for matter of
Doctrine; and of one heart for matter of affection; that once Prince, and
Peers, and people may go hand in hand, and we enjoy the peace of our
Jerusalem. Amen.

And now I am come to give you the sum of these three excellent parts of my
text,


In that point of doctrine, which I conceive to be the natural and genuine
issue of my Text: viz.

It is every good man's duty to pray for the peace of the Church; David prayed
for it, and he was a good man; for he was a man after Gods own heart, and yet
h^ took it for his duty; For while he exhorts others, he does not exempt
himself, saying, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and every man that is of
David's heart, and so I hope in God you are; if you are not, I pray God make you
so, must make David's duty his own, and pray for the peace of the Church.

As David did, so Christ did; Christ did not only leave it, or bequeath it, as
his best Legacy to the Church, saying, My peace I leave with you; but also
commends it, as the best thing for them to pray for; when first at their
commission and sending them abroad he charges them to pray (for it is not only
a votum, a wish, which is a kind of prayer; but also Oration, the expressing of
the heart by the tongue, which is a kind prayer) Pax domui, pax civitati huic,
peace be to this house, Peace be to this City: and secondly at his last
farewell, he prays himself, as the best, because the last prayer he made for
them, Pax vobis, Peace be to you: And every one that is Christ's Disciple, will
make the same prayer for the Church of Christ, which Christ did for his
Disciples, who then represented the Church, and say, O God, peace be to out
Jerusalem, peace in thy Church O God: As David did, as Christ did, so did S.
Paul: S. Paul began as I told you before, all his Epistles with grace and
peace; Grace and peace be to you from God the Father, and from our Lord jesus
Christ: and whosoever is of S. Paul's religion or condition, either an Apostle
of Christ, as all Ministers are, though by an inferior calling, or a
Christian, idest, a professor of Christian Religion, will say and pray as S.
Paul did, Peace to the Israel of God, peace to Jerusalem, peace to the Church
o^ Jesus Christ: yea, peace to the whole world; but especi^lly w^, peace in
England, Scotland, and Ireland. Besides these examples of David, Christ, and
Saint Paul (to whom I might add many more, if the time would not fail me) I
can give you reason, reason both of Policy, and reason also of Divinity, Humane
reason and Divine reason, to confirm this doctrine, viz. That it is every good
man's duty to pray for the peace of the Church; and the first I tender, is this:

Because where concord and agreement is in mind and wills, V. G This kingdom
of England was never so troubled by the ^rench, as when they had Scotland to
back them: and do they dare any more to trouble us, now we are sure of Scotland
to second us? Surely they dare not, unless it be for our own present
divisions, which invite them: and the best way to end these divisions is for us
to pray, Peace amongst us O God: and then if they do come and trouble us, yet
they cannot harm us, to that God forsake us not; and the best way to keep God
on our side, is to pray, Peace upon ^ur Jerusalem O G^d; peace in England, and
peace between England and Scotland, nor will I here leave out reland: Had the
Spaniard ever more ho^e to invade and infest us, as when they had a party in
Ireland? I pray God they have not too strong a party there now; if they have,
the best way to weaken the strength of their party there is, for our selves to
agree at home here; and then, when we are agreed here, (and (O God) when shall
we enjoy that day? when? when shall we see one heart, and ^ne mind, in our
head and body?) but when we do, then we need not fear France nor Spain, so
long as Scotland and Ireland are ready to take part with us against them, if
God forsake us not: and the best way to keep God on our side, is to pray for
peace, Peace be to our Jerusalem O God; peace between the three Nations, now
all but one kingdom, because all governed by one King, CHARLES, and long may
he govern them, England, Scotland and Ireland.

That Is the first reason; pray for the peace of Jerusalem: because concord and
agreement in mind and will, though but humanely, is a fair security from
danger to the State:

Because secondly, if you put this peace here praid for to his right Qu, not
only for Humane, Germany, and of long time has been in England to usher in
Arminianisme, that in the end they might bring in Papisme into the Church, and
then they were sure of Anarchisme in the State: Their plot has most unhappily
succeeded there in Germany, I pray God it may never take effect here in
England; and that it may not, let every good man do his duty, and pray, Peace
to our Jerusalem, O God: Even the peace of opinion in the hearts of all our
Clergy, that so there may be peace also in our Israel, even the peace of union
and affection in the hands of all our Laytie. It was Ieroboams subtilty to
keep ten Tribes to himself, by erecting a new worship of God: God keep us to
the old worship of God, by giving us days of peace.

It is every good man's duty to pray for peace, Divisam Ecclesiam, that Church
which was purchased by one, and but one blood, to become another Church, by
becoming other then one: and so is the State too, not its own, nor one, Vbi est
dissentio, when it has gotten a breach of peace: then no comme^^e abroad, then
no trading at home, and therefore beggary must follow: Beggary, the worst
condition in the world; to keep out which, from this yet flourishing kingdom,
let every good man do his duty, and pray, peace be to our Jerusalem.

I could give you instance of this unhappiness a far off, and a great way
hence, 2100 years ago, and as far bence: look else upon that grievous breach
amongst the Jews, when Manass^^ devoured Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses, and
both these, Ephraim and Manasses both fell upon Judah. Jsa. 9.21.


For this did not the Lord stretch out his hand still against them? still I
say, even so long, till Ephraim, and M^nasses, which could not keep peace at
home, were carried away captive with the other Tribes.

I could give you an instance nearer home; nothing has been the cause of so
many slaughters in England; as want of peace amongst the English.

To speak of the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, of the Lancastrian and Yorkish
line, would be but to tell you a story, which it may be, you know already ^s
well, if not better then my self; I pray God the like story of these times may
never come into any Chronicle: and that it may not, let every good man do his
duty, and pray, Peace to our Jerusalem O God.

It is every good man's duty to pray for peace, V. G. Judge. 27.


Eleven Tribes came out against Benjamin 400000 strong; and their quarrel was
good, for it was to punish, ravishing of a woman to death, yet they fell twice
before them.

The like is our case now in England, the King says, He takes up arms to
maintain the Protestant Religion, the just Privilege of Parliament, the true
property, and liberty of the Subject, his one just royal Prerogatives, and
Person, and who dares but believe what the King says, is true? and who can
fight in a better cause? The Parliament again says, That they are forced to
take up arms for the very same ends, and withal to punish the great
Delinquents, the Malignant Party, that have disturbed the peace of this
kingdom: and who would not, who does not believe the Parliament? who would
desire, who can fight in a better cause? The cause se^^eth alike on both sides,
alike good on both sides: but whether side has a good or bad cause, who
knows on which side the victory is like to fall? God orders battles, he
gives victory to whom he will, but commonly and ordinarily, he gives the
success according to the means that is used: In so much that if the worse
part be better prepared, if they have men more in number and more valiant, if
they have more store of ammunition and better, they are like to prove Gods rod
to punish his children; and when they have done that work, they are like to be
cast into the fire: But in the mean time to prevent the smart of this rod,
That the King may not fall before the Parliament, that the Parliament may not
fall before the King; I take it to be every good man's duty to pray, Peace be to
our Jerusalem O God: peace betwixt the Head and the Body, peace betwixt the
King and Parliament: And thus far having proved my Doctrine, I now apply it.

And first,

Against these yet I will not pray with S. Paul, would to God they were cut off
that trouble us: No, my zeal is not so hot, so furious: I do not wish them the
Hawks reward for his bold Magnannmitie and saucy temeritie, who for leaving
his own game, the Partridge, and flying too high at the Eagle his Prince, was
adjudged the next day to the Crown for the one, and the next day after to the
Hatchet for the other. I wish them not the Asses wages for his equal division
twixt the Lion, himself and the Fox; He was put to death, because he thought
the Lion, the King, worthy of no more then himself a subject: No, I wish none
of them these ends; I wish them not cut off with S. Paul, but as S. Paul
elsewhere advises me to pray for all men, so I pray for them, O God convert
them, that they may not longer be the troublers of, but the prayers for the
peace of our Jerusalem: If they will not be converted to us, then O God take
them from us, that we may enjoy what we pray for: peace in our Jerusalem: peace
within our walls, and prosperity within our Palaces.

For our brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee,
to which do you now say, Amen: and for our Elder brothers and Mediators sake,
Jesus Christ, may God be pleased to say Amen to our peace, Amen. For for my
part, I shall never make this day a day of objurgation, which our King and
Parliament, our blessed and peace desiring King, our wise and peace-working
Parliament has made a day of Humiliation, of Humiliation and devotion, of
Humiliation for our sins, and devotion to God for the diversion of the
rebellion in Ireland, and of the division in England.

And so for my second use, Hemistichium of King David's in this Psalm into that
Amabaeum of King David's in another Psalm.

O give thanks unto the Lord of Lords; for he is gracious, Ps. 136.1.
and his mercy endures for ever.

O give thanks unto the God of all Gods, for his mercy endures for ever.

O thank the Lord of all Lords, for his mercy endures for ever.

Which only does great wonders; for his mercy, etc. says he there.

And now let us go on, and say here:

O God by thy excellent wisdom, make Wars to cease in all lands; Jerusalem,
because thy mercy endures for ever.

O God by thy excellent power disperse the people that delight in War,
Jerusalem; because thy mercy endures for ever.

O God by thy excellent might, slay mighty Rebels, Achitophell into folly, and
send peace into our Jerusalem; because thy Mercy endures for ever.

O God by thy excellent goodness, remember us now we are in trouble, etc.

O God by thy Excellent greatness, deliver us from our enemies, Jerusalem,
because thy mercy, etc.

God of Heaven, when thou shall return thy spirit into us, etc.

And then we shall give thanks to thee who art the Lord of Lords,

Which that God may doefor us, and which that we may do to God; Jerusalem for
the Mediators sake betwixt thee and us, Jesus Christ the Righteous; To whom,
three persons, one God, be ascribed all honor and glory for the peace of our
Jerusalem. Amen.

FINIS.
The second Sermon.
ROMANS 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, etc.


THe first curse that ever fell upon Creatures, was for insurrection, for
insurrection against Soveraigntie: and those Creatures were the Angels; what
Angels they were Saint Peter tells you, saying, They were (...), Angels that
sinned: and what their sin was the Prophet tells you, 2 Pet. 1.4. Isa.
saying, They would be as high as the highest: i. e. They would not be
Subjects; and their punishment was, they were cast down into Hell:

The second Curse that ever fell upon Creature, was for insurrection too, and
for insurrection against Soveraigntie too, and that Creature was the Serpent;
the Serpent whom the Devil used and abused by subtlety to insinuate into,
Genesis 13
and deceive the woman: and what his punishment was, the Prophet Moses tells us
saying, he must creep upon his belly, and lick the the dust of the earth all
the days of his life.

And that sin of the Angels, and this sin of the Serpent was against
Soveraigntie Monarchical; For God is (...) but one; and Adam was the only Lord
of all Creatures upon earth.

I could descend and tell you, that another curse that fell upon man, was for
insurrection against Sovereignty Monarchical; Absolon by cunning and by
Courtship stole the hearts of the people, and by and by took up Arms against
his Father David, the King of Israel: and his curse was that which is due to
all traitors, he was hanged; only he was hanged by miracle, by the boughs or
branches of a tree; and now all traitors are to be hanged by law with an halter.

I could descend lower yet, and tell you, that Jerusalem was lost by
insurrection, and so was Constantinople too; for had those Christan Princes,
which undertook that holy war, yielded to one general Commander; had those
Citizens given Paleologus, a seasonable supply, the Turk in all probability
had never been Lord of the one, nor the other.

Nay I could descend lower yet, even to our own country, and tell you, had it
not been for Tonstaines insurrection (some call it a fraction or division;)
had it not been for Gnorthigernus and Mordredus insurrection; had it not been
for Mandubratius his insurrection, we had never been conquered by the Norman,
the Dane, by the Saxon.

Saint Paul saw the first of these by the eye of history; and for ought I know,
he saw all the latter by the eye of Prophecy, and fearing the rumors of his
own time, that Christianity was an enemy to Monarchy, might have brought such
a curse, as to make Christian Religion abortive, when it was yet but in
conception, he brought this water to cool this fire; Let every soul, etc.

I need not in these times of division to make any division of the words; you
to keep an order, they divide themselves:

Into a Precept; Let every soul be subject to the higher powers.

Into a persuasion; For the powers that be are ordained of God: or, There is no
power but of God.

In handling these words I shall require: 1 Qualis potestas, what Saint Paul
means here by the higher powers. 2 Qualis anima, who is meant by every soul?
for one malignant Church says, it is only Anima Laica, the Lay^mans soul,
that S. Paul here means by every soul: and thirdly, Quid subjectio, what is
meant by subjection? Or, if you will please to give me leave, I shall without
any wrong to S. Paul's intention, make his persuasion, or reason my proposition,
and his precept your application; his persuasion is, For there is no power but
of God: and my Proposition is, Every power is of God; his Precept is, which I
shall make your Application; Therefore every soul (every one of your souls)
must be subject to the higher powers.

I begin with the first; Every power is from God, and thus I discourse it, when
the people are governed by the most, the Commons.

Each of these powers where these powers govern by themselves a part in
several places or Nations, is from God; for there is no power but from God:
and the best of these three, where they are severed, is the first of these
three, the Monarchy, because it most resembles God; for God as I said ere
while, is (...) but one; but the best government is when these three meet in
one; and such is the happy government of this kingdom (and long may it be
happy in the government,) where we have not three Kings, but one King; but
three powers to govern one kingdom, to keep this kingdom from tyranny,
which is the ill of Monarchy; and from faction, which is the ill of
Aristocracie, and from Licentiousness, which is the ill of Democracie: but
these three meeting in one, though severally, they are equally and immediately
from God, yet jointly, the first only, Monarchy, is immediately from God, and
the rest from God, but mediately by the King. For the power of Monarchy was
never involved or invested in the people; it was a clear mistake by whomsoever
said, as will appear by and by: but the power in the people, whether
Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, is derived from, and created by the King; as
appears now by S. Peter, whether it be to the King as supreme; or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him.

And his supreme power of Monarchy is attained and obtained, either first by
inheritance, which is the best claim; or secondly, by donation, which is the
second best; or thirdly, by election, which is the third best: or fourthly, by
the sword, which is the fourth best, but the worst of the four best.

And these four degrees to the chair of State, are but tytles, a word
confounded by some body with power, a conditio sine qua non, that necessary
condition, which God uses, whereby to mount men to Soveraigntie, V. G. The
soul is not infused into the body, until the body be accommodated with all
natural dispositions of necessity required to make the body a fit receptacle
for the soul; nor is any Prince mounted to his throane, without those means
political, which are necessarily required to install him in his Throne; yet
for all this Bayard himself dares not but say, That the soul is infused or
created in man's body immediately of God; nor can any reasonable man justly say,
but that the power whereby Kings rule and govern States, is immediately of God.

And whereas S. Peter calls it (...) an ordinance of man; ^ Pet. 2.13
he means it only either, 1 Subiective, or 2 Obiective; or 3 (...), because men
are the subject, the object, and the end of it, but the fountain of it is God:
In a word, as I said before, the title to it is Humane, and by men; but the
(...), the jurisdiction, the authority, or as it is called in our translation,
the power of it is from God, and thus I clear it:

All power, especially Monarchiall, is from God, 1 Samuel 10.24.
so says Samuel of the first King Israel ever had; see ye him whom the Lord
has chosen: he divolves it altogether from himself, and from the people, that
we might not be gulled by the Papist, who says, royal power comes from the
Pope; or by the ^^abaptist, who says, it comes from the people: he says not
therefore see ye him whom I the Prophet Samuel have chosen: or, see ye him,
whom ye the people of Israel have chosen: but Quem elegit Dominus, whom the
Lord has chosen.

And says God himself, By me Kings reigno; and in that very word, Pro. 8.16.
(...), by me, we are told that the power of Kings is not a fortuna, by fortune
or a planeta by the Planets, or a populo, by the people, nor yet a se, by
himself, but a Deo, by God.

Christ makes it as evident in his answer to Pilate; Pilate began to chide him
with surrowes and frowns, because he gave him no answer, Joan. 18.
Know ^ho^s not that J have power to release thee, and power to condemn
thee? No, says Christ, thou could have no power over me, unless it were
given thee from above: and yet Pilate was but an inferior power, for Pilate
was but a Deputy; but because he was rightly deputed to that place by Caesar,
by the King; he says he could have no power over him, unless it were given
him from above, to let us know there is no power but from God.

I know Scripture needs no second, yet to set this point home, I add N^^^^ceo
Scripture, and Reason to Nature.

Nature is ingrafted by God, propter bonum regimen eorum, for their more
orderly government.

^^iefly, as the precept against murder, is by the law of nature from God, so
the authority of higher powers, to punish the evil and reward the good, is by
the law of nature from God: I further clear this truth by reason thus:

All power (especially Monarchy) is from God: for plenitudo, potesta^ (...), a
part of power, V. G Look upon that element which is highest and next to God,
the fire; it has a power, that element has, but what power is it? a power to
warm us, not to feed us: Look again upon that Element which is lowest, and
next to us, the Earth; that element has a power too, to feed us, but not to
cure us: look once more upon the two Medium Elements, the Air and the Water,
they have power to cure us, but not to bail us against Deaths arrest: or to
look upon the power in my Text, the King: if he be not, he ought to be (...),
and pater pa^r^^, the Leader of his people, as a Shepherd leads his sheep; and
the father of his country, why even then by his power, he can but enable us,
and enrich us, he cannot sanctify us: or if he be what he ought not to be,
(...), a Tyrant, what power has he then? why then he has power to kill our
body, he cannot touch our soul: and therefore, as I conceive, is that saying
of Christ. Fear not them that are ab^e to kill the body, but fear him which
is able to ki^^ both body and soul, and cast them down into h^ll fire.

Now as the Phil^sopher disputes, All second causes work by the virtue and
influence of the first cause, the smaller wheels of the Clock mo^e as they are
moved by the greater wheel; all streams and Rivers a^ from Fountains, so all
powers upon earth, because they are but part powers, are from God, because in
God only is all fullness of power.

All power is from God, Psa. 127 4 Genesis 21.
ye they are the gift of God: But here also I understand (...) besides nature,
as when Sarah the old wife of old Abraham conceived and brought forth Isa^c:
this was no work of nature, but the finger of God: and here also I understand
(...), Luc. 2.
above nature; as when the Virgin Mary conceived and brought forth our blessed
Lord and Master Jesus Christ: This was a thing altogether above natures
thoughts, nature never dreamt of it, for nature can dream of nothing, can
intend nothing but what is natural; and nature never saw or read of any
producing mankind, but either without the help of man or woman, as Adam of
the earth^ or woman without man, as Eve of Adam; or of man and woman, as our
selves; but that a Man should be borne of a woman without the help of man:
that a woman should compass a man, without the compass of a man; this was not
within the compass of nature; it was the work of God you see; all power is
still from God, and so is the power in my text, whether it be according to
nature, as in the election of Saul, or above nature, as in the anointing of
David.

I go on, ^sa. 4^.10, 11.
and say, thirdly, all power is of God, because God only can do whatsoever he
will do, or will have to be done; so by the Prophet Isaiahs, My counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure, I have spoken it, J will also bring it to
pass, I have purposed it, I will also do it: and so the false Prophet, the
Prophet Balaam spoke the same truth, Has God said it, and shall he not do it,
ha^h he spoken it, and shall he not make it good: and so said the Leaper, Number.
13.9 Man. 8.
Domine si vis, Lord if thou will, thou can q. d. whatsoever thou will thou
can do.

This receives some Objection, but a very weak one:

And this objection, weak as it is, receives this answer: To dye, to lie,

Nay, says the Objector, not so neither, Sodom, while Lot was in it, but to
have destroyed, Sodom while Lot was in it, was neither against Nature, Gens.
nor employed any wealtenesse: Therefore, etc.

And this replication receives this rejoinder; Sodom while Lot was in it: but
in the second, I dare not say, he could not, but I do say, he would not:
because he willed and decreed to manifest his mercy in saving ^ot, and his
justice in destroying Sodom: In the justice of his absolute power, God gave
Israel a Saul; In the Mercy of his limited power, God gave them a David; A
Tyrant, or bad King is his Rod or Sword to whip and punish us; and such Kings
we have had: A Father, or a good King is his Shield and Buckler to protect us
and defend us; and such a King we have now; and long and long may we have him:
but were he other then he is; both bad and good, as they are powers, they are
from God: For there is no power but of God.

Lastly; all power is of God: For God is the Creator of all things: i. e. of
the Title to power, by means: the means of men; and of the power it self
without means, from himself.

I have done with my proposition; All power is of God: and now I come to your
application, viz.

There fore let every soul be subject to the higher powers.

ANd here I am first to enquire Qualis anima? Patt. ^
Who is meant by every Soul? Omnis anima; Every soul; i. e. Omnis anima
laica; Every Lay Soul says that Malignan Church of Rome; As for the Clergy,
they are t^ee, and exempted from any such subjection; Saint Bernard determines
th^s against them; who writing to a cerraine Archbishop upon this subject,
quotes and cites these words of Saint Paul, Sit omnis animasubjecta; ergo and
vestra; quis vos excepit ab hac universalitate? Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers: and therefore you must: for who has excepted you; indeed
who can except you from this universalitie, Let every soul?

Saint Chrysostom is most luculent: Etiamsi Evangelista, etiamsi Apostolus,
etiamsi propheta, though thou be an Evangelist, though thou be an Apostle,
though thou be a Prophet; yet thou art within the verge of this precept; Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers.

I conclude this with that Answer, which the King of Denmark returned to the
Bishop of Rome, who threatened him with an excommunication, Esse nostrum a Deo,
Regnare a Deo and populo, a te (papa) nihil recipimus, nisi falsam and
Idolatricam religionem, quam tibi remittimus per praesentes; Our being we have
received from God; our Kingdom we have received from God and the people; from
thee O Pope, we have received nothing but a false Idolatrous Religion, which
we remit and send back unto thee by these presents; I beseech you, take you
heed that you make not popish opinions, your practice; yet I must tell you;
That soul that Rebels against the King, that beats Arms against the King is
as bad, if not worse, than that Soul that Excommunicates the King; for this
there is some, for that there is no color; He that excommunicates the King;
usurpes upon pretense of bringing the King to a sight of his sins: Now suth
evil may not be done, though such good may come of it; but he that rebels,
whatsoever he pretends, intends the destruction of the King; and the first of
these evils is badd, the latter far worse; for it adds to disobedience
against the King, disobedience against God; and so makes that sin which was
but one two, and the sinner liable to a double punishment, judgment and shame
in this world, damnation and torment in the next.

Nay, that it does not, says the Rebel; for the commands of the higher powers
do not oblige the Soul.

Yes that they do, says St. Paul, a true and loyal Subject under a bloody
and cruel Tyrant, though not directly, yet reflexly, though not Primario and
per se, 1a, 2ae,
Per concomitantiam, by dependency and subordinately.

The second causes bring forth natural effects, to the first cause: the Kings
laws are the second cause; our obedience is the natural effect, which we are
bound to yield, even in conscience, Romans 13.
where the Kings law, which is the second cause, is subordinate to the first
cause, which is the law of God.

Yea, if the thing commanded by the higher power, be a thing indifferent, in it
se^fe neither simply good, nor simply evil: that command more binds the
subject, then his conscience, and therefore the command of a thing simply good,
or the prohibition of a thing simply evil, the subject is bound in conscience
to obey: not that the obligation depends upon the will of man, but upon the
power of God: and because he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of
God, therefore for conscience sake the power must be obeyed.

^, but says the Rebel,

Neither, for howsoever a King may deal unjustly with his servants,

But what are we to do then? why then we may sugere, fly away: so David did
from Saul: if we do not, then we must pati, suffer, but at no hand may we
resist: No, Touch not mine anointed, says God: It is worth your marking, He
does not say, Ne perdas, kill not mine anointed, be he a good or a bad King,
which is the most you can do: but Ne tangas, touch him not, which is the least
that may be.

St. Paul implies as much in the next word, which is, power, and the King, and
command you a thing unlawful) not, obey him, not resist him, but be subject
to him: and this word how-ever it seems to imply lesser then obedience,
because in some cases it excludes the active part of it; yet indeed it implies
more then obedience, because in all cases it includes the passive part of it,
and it self, and honor too: so that when Saint Paul says, Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, he meants,

1 Let every soul honor the King.

2 Let every soul obey the King in things lawful and indifferent.

3 Let every soul be subject to the King in commands unlawful: that (...) let
every soul patiently suffer, where he cannot actually do.

These are my three last Stages I am to travel over, which I shall with all
truth and expedition dispatch, and then dismiss you: I begin with the first,
which is,

Let every soul honor the King: 1a. 3ae
and the honor which we owe the King is threefold: 1 Mentis, 2 Oris, 3 Operis,
in thought, in word, in deed: in thought, this is plain by those commands of
Solomon and S. Peter. Fear God and the King, 1 Pet. Ecc^s 10.20.
says Solemon: Fear God and honor the King, says S. Peter: yea Solomon is
yet more punctual in this particular, Curse not the King, no not in thy
thoughts: Now because there is no Medium betwixt doing well and ill, and
Solemon forbidding the ill, he commands the good therefore, and therefore we
must have a reverend estimation of the King; we must love him if he be good,
but we must honor him though he be bad, because whether good or bad, the King,
and so of God.

From this inward reverend estimation i^ though, Bathsheba, when Ad^niah
aspired the Crown, she, though the Queen, yet spoke reverent^y to King David,
1 Reg. 1.18.
saying, And now my Lord the King thou know it not.

Too blame therefore were they, 1 Reg. 12.15. 2 Samuel 16. Exodus 22.28.
that said, and much more too blame was he, that repeated it in print, To your
Tents O Israel, what portion have wo^^ Dav^d? what in the sonn^ of less? Too
blam^ was Sh^mei for cursing D^vid, for no man may curse the ^u^^r of his
people: the King is the father of his kingdom, and h^ that cur^eth his father
is to die the death: and it was heretofore a Canon Apostolic^ll, and it is not
yet repeal^d, That whos^ever reproaches the King, if he be a C^ergie man, is to
be deprived, if a Layman, he is to be excommunicated: and therefore whenever
thou peakest of Kings, speak (...) briefl^e or swee^ly.

And so shall you with more alacrity yield the King the third honor you owe
him, census v^ctigalis, Canonis, and Capitationu, the honor of custom from Me
chants and Strangers, the ho^our of his s^t Rent, and the honor of Subsidy or
Poll-money: They were sons of Belial that said, how shall this man save us? 1 Samuel 10.17.
and they despised him and brought him n^ presen^s; read the place: an if they
were sons of Belial, who offered the King nothing, think with your selves
what they are that bring in against the King?

You see the first duty you owe the King, honor, the honor of your heart, the
honor of your tongu^, and the honor of your hand.

The second duty is obedience in all lawful and indifferent things commanded.
Josh. 1.16.
All that thou command we will do, say the people to Moses his successor, I
sh^a: yet to let us know that this must not be stretched to commands unlawful
say the three Children, Dan. 3.18.
We will not serve thy God, O King, when Nebuchadnezzar commanded them to
worship his golden Image.

This obedience consists, Zenoph^
first in (...), in listening too, and being persuaded by the Kings words; Plato.
and therefore did he old Latin r^ad^ Obedo to obey, Obaudio, to give care
unto: and ^^ondly, in (...) doing his lawful e^^cts which his the com^le ^en^
of the former.

Which who o^^er resists to do, d^^^s ipso facto, become a rebel and
di^bedient: Quam qui facit, says Thucid des, p^ccarum nonefacit s^d^^pse ^otus
est peccatum; h^^h whosoever does, ^ed^th nor sin but ^e is sin, whol^y
sin: and Samuo give; t^^e re^s^n^^f it, 1 Samuel 15.23.
R^bel^ion or Dis^^e^ien^e is as the sin^^ of Witchcraft; and as a Witch may be
s^id to be a De^ill, so may a R^be^l be said to be sin.

S^ Bernard puts it as far, disobedience to an horitie is a piece of he sin
against the Holy Ghost: and in truth he had some reason as I can^we, for so
lay^ng; for disobedience to authority is against the light of nature, and the
sin against the Holy Ghost is so cal^ed, because it is against the l^gnt of
grace.

In a word, if the King commands not iniqui^y in temporals, as did Pharaoh to
the Midwive^; if he commands not mp^etie in spi^ituals, as did Nebu^adnezzar,
he must be obeyed by us, else to deny obed^e^ce, is to uphold, at least to
usher in ^ebellion; and that is the greatest dishonou^ to the King, and bring
first or last a great burden on the conscience: ^chit^phel for his evil
counsel against the King, was so struck in conscience, that he hung himself:
and David for but laying his hand upon the skirt of Saul's garment, he had
thereby so disqui^red his conscience, tha^ he could never again be in quiet
with himself, till he^nd Saul we^e f^iends.

And therefore much too blame are they who say with those rebels ^n the Psal^e,
Dirumpamus vincula, let us break their bonds; for when ^he bo^d of obedience is
broken, farewell safety: that we may live in safety, ^od continue our obedience
to authority; he that does not, he that will not, wha^soever he talks of
obeying God, is no true Ch^ist^an, because he is a lie; because he cannot obey
God, whom he has not seen, if he obey not the King wh^m he has seen; it
holds as well ^n obedience, as in love: you se^ the second duty you owe the
King.

The third is subject on: in case the King commands things unlawful, or does
things unjust, why even then where we cannot obedire, obey, there we must
f^rre, suffer, not f^rir^, resist.

It is storied of Theodosius, when h^ hea^d that his C^tizens had defaced the
brazon Image of his wife Priscilla, he was so incensed, that he presently
commanded his army to march with him, and such that City; the Citizens think
not of resisting, but dispatch an honest able man, though a Monk, Macedonius by
name, and he upon his knees speaks; Sir we know you are our Emperor, and have
just cause to be angry with your Citizens for def^c^ng the Image in brass of
your wife; but withal we beseech you to know you are a man and bear the image
of God, and so do yonder Citizens too, and God will have a just cause to be
angry with you, if you deface his living images.

I say no more of this, but God send us such Macedonius's in this age of fear
of war, and God make them as successful.

It is our duty so to pray, and I pray God we may pray so, that he may hear
our prayers and put an end to these days of division, by uniting the King to
his great Council in a gracious audience, and them to him in a gracious
obedience.

Or if this division must continue, which God forbid; but if it must, I must
yet pray every good Subject here to do his duty, and say, God bless King
CHARLES. Amen.

FINIS.
The third Sermon.
ROMANS 13.2. Whoesoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God, etc.


AB ineraet extra, ab infra et supra; from within and without, from above and
beneath; from heaven and from hell, does Saint Paul fetch arguments to persuade
obedience to the higher powers.

What those higher powers are I showed you the last time I appeared here,
Kings, in primo gradiu, as the supreme; and other Governors sent by him; what
obedience we owe those higher powers, I showed you then too: vi^^ Honor in^ 1
Thought, 2. Word, 3. Deed: 2. Subjection in commands unlawful. 3. Obedience in
commands lawful and indiffe^^^; In talibus non obedientes mortaliter peccant,
nisi foret illud quod ^^^^pitur contra praeceptum dei vel in salutis
dispendium. In all cases whatsoever, where the Kings commands stand not in
opposition to the ^aw of God, he must be obeyed; if they be but persons or
purses ^^^ommands, obedience must be performed; if the commands would (...) the
conscience, yet then the power may not be resisted; for to (...) the power is a
sin second to none but sacrilege; proximum sa^^^gio crimen, quod Majestatis
est, dicitur says Vlpian: The highest (...) against heaven is sacrilege, and
the next crime to this is rebellion against, or disobedience unto the Majesty
of earth, and indeed Saint Paul seems here to join them, saying, whosoever
therefore, etc.

Therefore: this word is illative, and carries you back and puts you to seek
for a wherefore to this: Therefore, wherefore then is it a so dangerous sin to
resist the higher powers? why the powers that are, are ordained of God, and
therefore they that resist the power, resist the ordinance of God, and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

In which words you have observeable two eminencies,

In the capital criminal, I shall enquire; first, quis quisquis, who is meant
by whosoever; secondly, quid opponere, what is meant by resisting; thirdly,
quare dei ordinationi, qui potestati; why, or how he resists Gods ordinance,
that relists the power.

In the capital penal, I shall inquire: first, quid ^ond mnatio, what is
meant by condemnation; secondly, quomodo ^^ferent, how they shall receive it.

The first of these sets out the excellency of the King, the other the
deformity of the Rebel.

I begin with the first, (...)
the capital criminal, the eminent sin, whosoever resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God,

All sins are not of an equal size: like dogs, some cry low, and some cry
loud; some whisper, and some trumpet in Gods ear; some provoke him to anger;
some to indignation.

If all sins were equal, all punishments would be a like, but the former of
these, Tully tells us in his paradoxes: and the latter of these equality of
punishment is Heretical; So Aquinas tells us in his sums, ^ 2. q. 73.
and so the scripture tells us too: first, in respect of punishment it makes a
great disparity; some shall be beaten with few, Zuk. 12 Mat. 11. Mat. 7.
and some with many stripes: some shall have an easier, others a greater
damnation: and secondly, in respect of sins, it makes as great a difference,
some sins are but motes, the infirmities of our brethren; others are beams,
our own hypocrisies; some are lesser things of the law, Mat. 13.23. (...) 7.13.
the tithing of Minte, Annis, Cumine, others are greater things of the law,
Judgment, Mercy, Faith; is it a small matter to grieve man, but that you will
greive God also? says the Prophet Isaiah. q.d. To greive man is a fault,
though but a small one, but to greive God is a great fault and therefore that
must needs be a great fault; which the committing of, at once greives both God
and man: of this there are many sorts.

To resist the higher powers is not the least of those sorts; because at once
that man resists both God and the King, whosoever he be, which is my 1 a 1 ae.

Whosoever; And who does Saint Paul mean here by whosoever? 1 a. 1. ae.
me ^^es he man, woman, child, layety, clergy, and the whole people? yes he
means them all, all whosoever; nay not so, says the conclave of Rome; the
Miter is above the Crown: the Pope may excommunicate him, and being
excommunicated, any man may kill him: and so says the consistory of Amsterdam
too; the thistle is above the Cedar, and the people may depose him; and being
deposed, he is but one of us.

Will ye give me leave a while to dwell here, and show you how Herod of Rome,
and Pilate of Amsterdam, though mortal enemies, and at deadly fend in all other
things, are yet sworn brothers in persecuting the Lords anointed; twixt these
two, sovereignty is crucisied, as Christ betwixt the two thieves: these two
like Sampson, foxes, though they look contrary ways, yet are joined by the
Tails, and carry firebrands to burn down Majesty.

The seditious Jesuit seeks to bring the crown under the P^pes neck, and
the peoples girdle. For says Bellarmine, pol^t capotestas, etc. 1. de Laicis.
cap. 6.
The civil power considered in the general without descending in particular,
to Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, is immediately from God only; and yet
by and by says he, this power is immediately in the whole multitude, as in the
Subject; and again every particular kind of Government is of the law of
nations, for it depends on the consent of the multitude to set a King over
them; and so again, regna non sunt, etc. Kingdoms are not of the law of God,
de altr cis, cap. 18,
but of the law of nations, and therefore are changeable, but the Popedom is
of the law of God, and cannot be changed: once more, it is not lawful for
Christians to tolerate a King, that is an infidel.

You may see by these few hints what the Jesuit aimed at, even that civil
power being in the people immediately, and in the Magistrate but procario, by
courtesy from them, it may, nay i^ must be taken from him (...) case of heresy
or infidelity: Papa enim potest, etc. Bel^l. 5. de sun^pont Cap. 6.
for the Pope may change Kingdoms, and take them from one, and bestow them on
another, as the chief spiritual Prince, if it been needful for souls
health: and if it were so, I wonder what king so just, but this great Physician
would find some distemper to let out the blood-royall.

Sure I am that Sixtus Quintus told Henry the third of France, Barelide potest.
Pap:
that he bad supreme authority overall King and Princes of the whole earth:
Plat in vita. Greg. 7.
and before him Gregorius the seventh, told the Emperor Henry the fourth, as
much Imperia, regna, etc. that he had absolute power to take away, and give
away, Empires, Kingdoms, Soveraigneties, and whatsoever mortal man had.

And this opinion has not wanted action. witness else that Pope that held the
crown between his feet, Hovedon. Ann. page 68^.
and having set it on the heads of Henry the sixth, and his wife the Empress,
presently kicked it of again, to let him know, he had power to depose him.

I could give you the like from other Jesuits, but the time passes me^ and I
will therefore name but one more for all: It is Mariana; and says he, Regibus
haec salutaris est meditatio, se ea cond tione vivere, ut non solum jure sed
cum laud, and gloria perimi poss^^t; It is an wholesome meditation for Kings
to think, they live in such a condition, that they may be killed, not only
lawfully, but to the praise and glory of the regicide,

And I would to God this were only their doctrine, the Jesuits, but alas,
this leaven has so wred many, and many of them who pretend themselves
reformers of the reformed Churches; For whereas Mariana the Jesuit, says cum
laud and no more; one factious statist goes futher, ^^^hanen.
and says cum praemio; if I had power, says he, to make a law, I would make
one law of reward and recompense to him that should kid a Tyrant; as men are
rewarded for killing wolves and bears.

Populus Rege praestantior est and m^lior, lib. de jure Regn^.
says the same Buchanan; The people are better then the King, and of greater
authority; the collective body has the same power over the King, that the King
has over any one person; They may arraign their Prince, and the Ministers may
excommunicate him, and says another of the same stamp, The power of the people
over the kings is the same of a general Council over the Pope, as a general
Council may displace one if he be an Heretic; so may the people depose the
other if he be a Tyrant; and a Tyrant he is says another, if he hinder the
bringing in of their discipline.

Nay, the Anabaptist goes further yet; the Gospel, says he, makes the office
of a Magistrate utterly unlawful; evangellicall perfection makes it altogether
useless and superfluous.

And he that speaks most moderately amongst them all, vindiciae contra
Tyrannos.
allows the institution only of God; the Constitution of the people, the
gi^ture of God; the seisin of the people, the Election of God, the Confirmation
of the people.

Will ye give me leave or rather, Dan. 5.21
give the Holy Ghost leave to answer these men? Breifely then: The most high
appoints whomsoever he will over the kingdoms of men; Pro. 8.15.
and therefore the Constitution so well as the institution is of God: By me Kings
raygn says God; and therefore the seisin so well as the guifture is of God:
Psalm. 189.20. Psalm. 23.3. 1 Chronicles. 8.4.
God anointed David with his holy oil, and set a crown of pure gold upon his
head: and therefore the confirmation so well as the election is of God: God both
chose, and made David King. And for the other objections? If the king be an
infidel or Tyrant, yet then he must not be deposed by any, but prayed for by
all, whosoever: all men must pray, and all that pray, must pray for kings; 1 Timothy 2.1
it is St. Paul's ^thortat on. And for what kings? for such kings as were then:
and was not Nero king then? and was not he a Tyrant? else there was never any:
A Lion, as St. Paul calls him: Dedicator damnationis nostrae as Tertullian: the
first Persecutour of Christianity.

And if such Tyrants were to be prayed for then by all men, whosoever; surely
then such a King as we have (and I pray God we may long have him) may not be
resist d^^ow by any whosoever. You have seen, who St. Paul means by whosoever;
very one; continue your patience; and my next consideration shall inform you,
what he means by resisting; whosoever resists the power. 2 (...).
The original is very empharicall (...) which coms of (...) which signifies
obsistere, which is here translated to resist. This word is a compound of (...)
the verb signifying ordino to order; and the Adverb, or the Preposition,
adversus, or contra against.

From that verb comes the Substantive (...) which signifies summ^^s
Magistratus, the chief magistrate, which is the King; and this word (...) or
(...), reaching both to laws and arms, (for so we read it in both) the
meaning of the word here is this, whosoever counterorders, or orders against
the laws or the arms of the chief Magistrate, he resists the higher powers
whether it be,

In subtilty of council; as Achitophel against king David; ^. 1 Samuel 16 21. 2 Samuel 2^, ^.3.
when ^^advised Absolon, first to go into his father concubines, that so he
^^ight be abhorred of his father; and then to choose 12000. fighting men to
pursue his father, and set upon him when he was weary, and (...) him; which
Council was so dangerous, that if it had taken effect, (and effect it had
taken, had not God disapointed it by the counter-councell of Hushai) it had
lost Israel the best king they ever had; but God reserved that king for better
days: (and may God preserve our King for many better days) and therfore^d
feated that machavillian stratagem, and because it was deseated in a peevish
mood that first Machavillian, being palsie-struck in his conscience, and given
over by God, he hangs himself God in his example telling all such
counter-councellours against the King, what death they may expect, at least
they do deserve.

If there be any such Achitophels in these day^s, within the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, France or Ireland, that do (...) council against the King
in his laws or arms, I pray God convert their persons, and confound their
plots.

In obloquie of speech as Shemei cursed king David s^ying, come out thou bloody
man and thou Man of Beliah, which treasonable tres^asse against him, howsoever
he forgave, yet God took it so much to heart, because it was against his
anointed that by an undream^t of, and unthought of way to this counter-orderer
of his wor^s against the king; he most severely punished it within few years
after, by a death little shameful and altogether as painful as hanging.

The common law of this kingdom allots hanging to such disordered speakers
against Soveraignety; and it is a cannon Apostollicall, that whosoever he be
that reproaches the King, if he be a clergyman, he be presently deprived, if a
layman, he bepresently excomunicated.

Such disordered tongues have evermore disordered soirits; Ex ab^nd^ntia cordis
loquituros; a wicked tongue proceeds from a wicked heart, and yet Solomon curbs
the heart, and will not suffer it in a thought to vilipend the King, and he
gives you this reason for it; for that that has wings will betray it: and a
greater then Sol^mon forbids the tongue to dishonor the King; thou shall not
revile the Ruler of thy people they must be prayed for, they must not be spoke
against; He that does it in an (...) a resister of the higher powers. And so
3: is He, and he especially, that forcibly opposes and oppugnes him with
Arms: This is a sin out of measure sinful; (...) Treason; and that is the
greatest Crime that can be; nor can the Judge be too Cruel in punishing it,
says Tully, and indeed noe wonder since a Traitor is a devil; so Christ
called Judas; David shows the heinousness of it, when he says, God forbidd I
should lay mine hand on the Lords anointed; and his heart smot him: i: e: his
Conscience told him, he had done amiss when he had but cut off the lap of
Saul's garment:

What a heinous crime is it then to take up arms against the King you may see
the horriblenes of this same, if you but view the terri^lenes of Gods Judgments
upon such sinners.

Absolon was Miraculously hanged for taking Arms against King David; and
aspiring his Crown: Core, Dathan and Abiram were swallowed by the earth for
but murmuring against king Moses: Pausanies was killed by his father, and
thrown to the dogs by his mother, for offering, and but offering to betray
Sparta to Xerxes: Ariobarzanes had his head cut off by the command of his
Father, because he would have betrayed his army into the hands Alexander:
Rod^lph Duke of Swevia fighting against Henry the 4. for his Empire, because
Hildebrand the Pope had excommunicated him, lost his right hand in the battle,
and being now leaving this wretched world to go into a worse, and breahing out
his distressed soul, he looks upon the stump of his Arm, fetches a deep
sigh, and cries out, behold, with this arm and hand did I wear allegiance to
my Sovereign Lord the Hen. q. d. This vengeance is justly fallen upon me,
because I am an (...) resister of the higher powers.

But what need I speak of resisters here? it were a good theme this in Rome,
or else where; but the English needs it not, as being the least ^^^^ery of
rebels in the world: never had any protestant divine in this land his hand in
treason, says a great knight of this kingdom; mark it, never any Protestant
divine, a Jesuited divine may, a Schismatic divine may; they may, and have,
at this time they have: but never had any Protestant divine, no nor any
Protestant lay-gentleman neither, as I believe; a lay-papist may, a
lay-brownist may, a lay-anabaptist may, but I believe never had any lay
protestant, no, whatsoever some malignant spirits here in this City say: that
these present Arms are against the King, yet sure I am the Parliament says
otherwise; they are for the King and Parliament say they, and ie. They are for
the King and kingdom, for they are now the Representative Body of the kingdom,
and according to their loyalty to their King, and their realty to their
kingdom, God reward them: It were a great sin in me to think otherwise, and
it is a great sin in them that do otherwise: for he that resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God.

And that I am now to show you in my 3 a. 1. ae. why he that resists the power,
resists the ordinance.

If there were no more then what is here, it were enough: St, Paul has said
it, and therefore it is true: but there is much more, and much more you will
find in the sense then in the letter, i^ you will look into the word: the
powers are of God; not only by way of permission, but a so of commission; not
by way of deficiencie, but of efficiency, not by way of sufferance but of
ordinance, not as plagues, diseases, and punishments, though so says the
Anabaptist: for the Apostle does not only speak the (...) but the (...) he
does not only say, they are of God, but he shows also how they are of God; not
as his scourging rods and judgments, but as his sacred ordinances: the powers
that be, are ordained of God.

Upon which words says Parcus explicat, quomodo dixerat, he declares how he
said, that all powers are of God; not certainly as wars and other mischeifs,
but as a wholesom^ order, which may supply the stead and represent the person
of God in the government of men, and therefore are the powers called, not only
the ministers of God, but also Gods; and that can by no means be spoken of
Gods scourges.

All inferior and subord^n te Magistrates, says Greg: Naz: are halft pieces
of God drawn from the head to the shoulders, or middle: but Kings are the
pictures of God at length, and represent him so propartionably, that as God is
our invisible King, so the King is our visible God; and therefore as they that
refuse the Kings coin, refuse the king, so they that resist the powers, 1 Pet.
2.3
resist the ordinance of God. Nor is that any bar to this truth, when St.
Peter calls the Magistrate an humane ordinance, or creature; for so the word
properly signifies (...), and it is Pareus's note, Humanam ordinationem seu
creationem vocat Apostolus magistratum, non causaliter; the Apostle calls the
magistracy an humane ordinance or creature, not in regard of the cause or
author, as if it were devi^^d by men; but in regard of the subject and object,
because it is born by men; In ^o^^ 13 Sol.
respects the government of men for the very word (...) creature or creation,
pr^^ves, that maiestyis Gods ordinance, for he only can create, (...) 45. Act.
3. (...). In Apolog.
impossible ost quod alicui creaturae conveniat creare, says Aqui^as; it is
impossible that power to create should be given to any ^reature; n^ therefore
says Irenaeus, cujus jussu homines nascuntur, ejus and jussureges
constituuntur; by whose appointment men are borne, by his appointment kings are
ordained, and therefore says Yert inde illis potestas, un^e spiritus; whence
they have their breath, thence they have their power; but they have their
breath from God; and therefore they have their power from God: and therefore as
they that resist the breath of man and take it away by murder, and the like,
resist the creation of God; do they that resist the power of the Magistrate, by
resisting against it, or the like, resist the ordinance of God.

Nor yet is that any bar to this truth; corrupt intruding into the Magistracte,
Hos. 8.4.
as Jer boams getting the kingdom by his own and the peoples rebe^ion; of
which God says, they have set up Kings, but not by me; and again.

Governors often use wicked administration, when they turn judgment into
wormwood, when they oppress the innocent, Act. 3.14
and deliver the holy and just to be put to death; as Pilate did our Savior;
this comes not down from the Father of lights; Ps. 94, 20
for what fellow ship has the throne of iniquity which imagine himischeife as
a law wi^h him? Yet for all this, the office and power it self is from God:
Joh. 19.10. lib. 4. de lib.
yet that is the true ordinance of God: so Christ told Pilate, Dens felicitatis
author, and d^tor, and says St. Aug. God that is the author and giver of
happiness, lib. 2 c. 10. indict. 11.
gives earthly kingdoms both to good and evil men: Potestas super omnes
homines dominortunt meorum pietati caelitus data est; says Gregory writing to
Mauritius and Augusta. Power over all men is given from heaven to my good Lord
and Lady: and to end this, says Musculus upon that Psalm. Psalm. 82.
vid^^^us hic; we see here that there is no Magistrate, whether good or bad,
but he is of the will of God; for he says of them all, and some of them, if
you read that Psalm, you will confess to be bad enough, ye are Gods: and
therefors as they that resist the s^bordinate Magistrate, the Judge, do ipso
facto resist the higher Magistrate, the King; because they are Judges by the
Kings Pattent; so they that resist the higher power the King, do ipso facto
resist the highest power, God; because they are Kings (and Gods) by the
ordinance of God. 1 Timothy 2.5. in psalm. 82.


Nor yet lastly, is that any bar to this truth; there is but one God; for they
are Gods, not by nature, but by name; Dij titulares called Gods; non natura
Dij. says Musculus; they are not Gods by nature, but because of their
authority to rule and judge, the dignity whereof has some divinity in it,
they are called Gods: Dij says Molerus, inpsal. 82.
quia Dei vicarij and officiarij; Gods they are called, because they are Gods
Vicars and Officers. Dij, says Calvin quia Dei personam sustincut; Justit. l.
4. c. 20. Sect. 4.
Gods they are called, because they represent the power of God; and therefore
as they who resist the representee of the King, do resist the King; so they
that resist the King, resist God; for they resist Gods ordinance.

I have not spoken this to flatter kings; no, no, they shall die like men; but
to inform you what a dangerous thing you do, and what a fearful sin you
commit, when you resist the king, for, for so doing you shall receive damnation.

And that is my (...) general part, (...).
which I called my Capital penal, or the eminent punishment du^ to that
Capital criminal, or the eminent sin; they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation: and here I am first to show you, (...).
what is meant by damnation.

The world is (...) and this word fignifies diversely according to the diverse
opinions of interpreters, sometimes it signifies condemnation or damnation, so
Beza and the vulgar latin; sometimes judgment; so the Syriac interpreter;
sometimes punishment, so Piscator, and this punishment is both eternal
inflicted by God, and temporal inflicted by the Magistrate. St. Chrysostom
and Theoph^lact, both understand it, cum a Deo tum ab hominibus paenas daturum,
he that resists the power shall receive the sentence of damnation from that
power, for violating the laws of that power, and the sentence of eternal
damnation from God, for violating the eternal law of God.

And a great deal of reason and equity there is in this; for he that
presumes, Psalm. ^^n. 4.
sins but against the justice of God; he says no more, but tu^h, God
regardes it not: he that despaires, sins but against the mercy of God, and
he says no more, but my sins are greater then can be forgiven the that
falls, sins but against the wisdom of God; but he that resists the power,
sins against the power of God; and so against all the attributes of God; for
therefore is God omnipotent, because is justice, mercy, and wisdom; and
therefore is God just, wise, and merciful because he is omnipotent; and this
man says as much as the veriest Atheist can say, there is no God: for he that
dares take arms against the King, would if he could take arms against God
too: and therefore as damnation is due to every sin, to especially to this
sin, the sin of rebellion.

And indeed it is inflicted upon this kind of sinner in a more fearful
manner then upon any kind of sinner.

For it is at once damnatio rei, nominis et parsonae; the damnation of his
goods; and they are confiscated, the damnation of his name to eternal infamy, a
traitor, the worst of names; and the damnation of his person; his body to a
pe^petuall shameful death, and his soul to an eternal painful death; from
all which God deliver us; and from all which that we may be delivered, God
give us grace to be true subjects, and ever to resist the higher powers: if we
do, we shall receive damnation.

And how shall we receive it? 2a. 2ae.
why that my last consideration is to tell you, any 2 a. 2 ae.

The word is (...) of (...) which signifies capio or accipio to take or to
receiv^^; i^ is given by Tremelius in auferent, ip si si by cond^^mationem
auseren^, they shall take to themselves damnation*

Which word howsoever it implies a willingness; yet (...) will they, nill, the
shall bear that punishment is imposed upon them; that punishment which is
imposed upon them here by the higher power upon earth, and that punishment
which shall be imposed upon them hereafter by the highest power of heaven.

All the unjust shall be reserved unto the day of judgment to be punished
says Saint Peter but chiefly them which walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanness, 2 Pet. 2.9.11.
and delpise government presumptuous, selfewilled, that are not ^ffraid to
speak evil of dignities.

But you beloved fear the criminal, and therefore you need not fear the
penal: for praise is for them that fear God and the King; which praise that
the world may know it does belong to you, pray you to God for the King, that
he may have no resisters but a loyal people, a faithful council, and a
quiet government till the the glory of his ^^^wne be exchanged into a crown
of glory, through Jesus Christ. (...).

FINIS.

