CALAMVS MENSVRANS: THE MEASURING REED. OR, The Standard of Time CONTAINING An
exact Computation of the YEARS of the WORLD, from the CREATION thereof, to the
time of the destruction of JERUSALEM by the ROMANS.

Stating also, and clearing the hid Mysteries of DANIELS 70. Weeks, and other
PROPHECIES, the time of HEROD'S Reign; the Birth, Baptism and Passion of our
SAVIOVR, with other Passages never yet extant in our English tongue.

In two PARTS.

By JOHN SWAN.

Cicero de Oratore. Nescire quid antea quam natus sis acciderit, Id semper est
esse puerum. London, Printed for John Williams, at the Sign of the Crown in
Paul's Churchyard 1653.

To the right Honorable BOLSTRED WHITLOCKE, Lord Commissioner of the Great
SEAL of ENGLAND.
MY LORD,
WHen I consider your Honors great employments, and what weighty thoughts and
deliberations those are encumbered with, who steer at the helm of so mighty a
Nation as this; I blush to think how much time I shall steal from the Public
good, by diverting your Lordships thoughts to a survey of this Chronology; and
if you please favorably to look upon it, you may make it rather a digression
to your other Business, then a supply of vacant hours. For if History be
called (as learnedly once she was) the Schoolemistris of life, what honor must
Chronology have, who is so near of kin to her, that she gave her both life
and eyes to walk by. What emboldens me to this attempt, my Lord is, the
opinion that your Nobleness is far more eminent then your Place, and you are
known to be so great a Maecenas to the Muses, as men begin to despair of any
miscarriage in their attempts, that are but able to entitle your Honor to
their protection. I have adventured to put it forth in a plain English dress,
in a phrase (not subtle enough to ensnare) but as far beneath your
Excellencies, as in esteem my scant Vicarage comes short of your Honors high
tribunal at Westminster. It will be no dishonor, I hope, to protect such a
Work where the learned Scaliger, Petavius, Calvisius, and others, have made
their Dedications as durable as the Matter they wrote of. I conceive what they
have outstript me in, by the luster of their own Names, shall be regained by the
worth of a Patron; and though I came after them in time, yet a Dwarf set upon
a Giants shoulders, may see further the^ he that bears him Pardon me, my Lord,
if in that Chapter concerning our Saviors Birth, I have spoken the sense of
Antiquity, rather then mine own. These great alterations, which are able to
arrest the eye of a sober Reader, will show you, that Providence has left many
Monarchs nothing but their Name; and to some few where you cannot find their
ashes, a Monument of Doing Well. But I keep you too long in the Porch; let me
crave pardon for this presumption in the first place, and then I will engage my
self that Posterity shall make as much of your Memory hereafter, as you can
possibly pay to Antiquity at present. So wishes

Your Lordships truly devoted Servant, JOHN SWAN.

To his learned friend Master JOHN SWAN, on his excellent pieece of CHRONOLOGY.
Brave Julius! How far distant from the, war,
Were the just Trophyes of thy Calender.
By that thou sought'st, but to improve thy own.
By the other to recall things clearly gone,
Time is a very Fugitive; and it was fit
What strength could not should be reduced by wit;
Thus Caesar having earth enough did try,
Homage from th'uncontrolement of the sky.
But History stood maimed and while she stood,
All promised succor, but few did here good,
Till Scaliger at length one eye restored,
And made that wonder of his wit adored
More then his solid reason, Making known
What Caesar of the World had left unshowne,
But this was not enough, Time straggling tried
To find his labrinth only by thy Guide.
Berosus, and Metasthenes, which be
The exploded Relics in Chronoligy
Find no reception now; Young Time is here
In perfect Puplage to thy Calender;
Thou trasest all his days, and let'st him know
He had a Nonage ere his wings could grow.
His Infancy was Golden, by which odds
'Twas sure enough he must descend from gods;
Had ignorant Zeal but framed him so, then he
(Discovered thus) had lost his Deitee.
These Works thy Children are, though he devoures
His own Sons daily, yet he must spare yours.
As untuned Songs and Music void of stops,
Such is Chronoligy, but for humane props
A strange confused Chaos; from whose womb
The mystie errors of disputes have come.
By thee those mighty Heroes proudly stand
As strict in time, as when they did Command,
And more observed perhaps, for ancient Wars
Could change their Monarchs into naught but Stars,
An Apotheosis was the least: But O,
We have no Calculation but from woe.
Farewell ye star fed tribe, for who can boast
That Stars are fixed, one Constellation lost.
Yet friend go on, till Saturn shall have hurled
His youth to kiss the dotage of the World.
John Harleston.

To the Author upon his Speculum Mundi, and this his learned and excellent
Chronology, The Standard of Time.
NOT long since Galilaeus did invent
The Telescope, a prying Instrument;
By which he did discover, as he thought
A Lunar World, and The Earth to wheel about
Betwixt the Orbs of Mars and Venus; strange!
And Sol stand still! This is a monstrous change,
Which I not understand, and think none can,
Unless he be a mere Copernican.
Indeed I Have seen such things to come to pass
Sometimes by help of Galilaeus Glass
As Joviall Stars, and Saturnine beside
About their Globes most wonderfully glide,
And Solar spots, and Venus like the Moon
To wax, and wayne, and do as she has done.
All these are true: But laying them aside
A clearer glass at last I have espied
Wherein the Face of all the World is seen.
What is, and like to be, and what has been,
So rarely polisht, so acutely pend,
It may be stained, or cracked, but none can mend;
It much delights me, and do learn thereby
To know my self, at least to rectify
My Judgment; For in truth there does abound
Things fit for knowledge easy, yet profound.
Another Treatise now our Swanlike Pen
Is pleased to publish, fit for learned men,
Wherein the course of Time from the Creation,
Is truly measured, and Christ's birth, and passion,
The secret meaning of deep Prophecies
Are now unfoulded, and their Mysteries
Discovered, Scaliger, we shall not need,
If once we do obtain this Measuring Reed.
Then thank our Author, a most learned man,
Sure when he dies, He will sing like the Swan.
JOHN BOOKER.

A TABLE of the Contents in the several CHAPTERS and Sections contained in
this First PART.
Chapter I. COntaining a breife Preface to the Reader, Page 1. CHAP. II. Of the
time of the Year in which the World was Created. p. 3. CHAP. III. That the Jews
or Hebrews, as well of old, as of lattertimes, accounted their Months by the
course of the Moon, p. 11 CHAP. IV. Of the ancient and Natural year, that it
was measured by the course of the Sun, though the Months were reckoned by
the course of the Moon, p. 19 CHAP. V. Of the Periods of time by which the
years of the World may be truly reckoned. As also of the Jubilees: how to
account them, where also to begin and end them. p. 25 CHAP. VI. Of the Julian
Period, and how to join the years of the World thereunto, p. 33 CHAP. VII.
Other Observations concerning the Times in their Periods, until the
Destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, p. 35 CHAP. VIII. The Periods
again considered, and all such doubts and scruples cleared as may arise
concerning the just length of any of them, together with answers to certain
other questions not impertinent. p. 51. In the former Chapter be eight
Sections. CHAP. VIII. Sect. 1. Of the time from the Creation to the end of the
Flood, p. 51 CHAP. VIII. Sect. 2. Of the second Period, from the end of the
Flood when the face of the ground was dry, to the Promise at the time of
Abraham's departure from Charran into Canaan, that it was a Period of 427.
years current, but not complete. p. 68 CHAP. VIII. Sect. 3. Of the third
Period from the promise at Abraham's departing out of Haran, to the coming of
the Israelites out of Egypt, that it was a Period of 430 years. p. 75 CHAP.
VIII. Sect. 4. Of the fourth Perod, from the coming out of Egypt to the
beginning of the building of Solomon's Temple, that it was a Period of 479 years
complete, or of 480 current, p. 78 CHAP. VIII. Sect. 5. Of the fifth Period,
from the foundation of the Temple in the fourth year of King Solomon; to the
Desolation thereof by Nebuchadnezzar. In which is also showed the true and
right account of the 390 and 40 years in Ezekiel, p. 87 CHAP. VIII. Sect. 6. Of
the sixth Period, from the Destruction of the Temple by Nebuchadnezzar, to the
beginning of the building thereof by Zorobabel in the second year of Darius
King of Persia. In handling whereof many things of note are discussed, and
Scaliger refused upon good and warrantable grounds, both out of Scripture and
other good Authors. p. 106 CHAP. VIII. Sect. 7. Of the seventh Period, from
the second year of Darius Hystaspis, to the twentieth year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, p. 115 CHAP. VIII. Sect. 8. Of Daniels 70 Weeks in the ninth
Chapter of his Prophecy, at the 24.25, 26, and 27. verses. An exposition of
them, together with a Confutation of Master Broughton, and others, concerning
Olympiads and length of the Persian Monarchy, p. 124 CHAP. IX. Of the LXX.
years in the Prophecy of the Prophet Jeremy, commonly called the 70 years of
Judahs Captivity, p. 155 CHAP. X. Of the time when Tyrus and Egypt were subdued
and taken by Nebuchadnessar, according to the Prophecies of Esaias, Jeremy, and
Ezekiel, p. 159 CHAP. XI. Of the number of Kings that reigned in Babylon during
the time of the Captivity. In the handling whereof the fragments of Berosus and
Megasthenes are examined, diverse errores of Scaliger discovered, and the truth
laid plainly open, p. 164 CHAP. XII. Of the first year of Cyrus, and of Darius
Medus mentioned in holy Scripture. p. 174 CHAP. XIII. Of Alexander the great,
signified by the Horn between the eyes of the Goat, Dan. 8.5. p. 176 CHAP.
XIIII. Of the four horns which came up in stead of the great horn broken off,
as was prophesied in Dan. 8.8, 21, 22. As also of the beginning of that Date of
the Kingdom of the Greeks so often mentioned in the Books of the Maccabes, and
in Josephus, p. 178 CHAP. XV. Of the little Horn in the eighth Chapter of
Daniel, at the ninth verse. And at the 2300 days that were givin it, verse 14.
p. 180 CHAP. XVI. Of the fourth Kingdom in Daniel, that it signifies the
Monarchy of the Romans, p. 182 CHAP. XVII. Of the Times and Distances of the
taking of Jerusalem by Pompey, Herod, and Titus, p. 188 CHAP. XVIII. Of the
time of Herod's reign, and of his Posterity, p. 192 CHAP. XIX. Of a true and
right year of our Saviors Birth and Baptism, p. 202 CHAP. XX. Of the day of
Christ's birth that it was kept, and on what Day, both among the Ancients, and
in the succeeding Ages, p. 212 CHAP. XXI. Of the reign of Tiberius, and of the
beginning and end of Pontius Pilat's government. As also of the Year and Day of
our Saviors Passion, p. 228 CHAP. XXII. Of Killing the Paschal Lambs, and
whether at Christ's death the Jews and our Savior kept the Passover upon one
and the same day, p. 237 CHAP. XXIII Wherein is showed the times of Vespasian
and Titus, together with the Destruction of Jerusalem. To which Chapter is
added a Chronologicall Table, and a Calendar for that very year wherein
Jerusalem was destroyed by the Romans. p. 241
CALAMVS MENSVRANS: OR, The measuring Reed.
CHAP. I.
Gentle Reader:
I Have undertaken a Subject which in it self cannot be enough commended: in
the handling whereof I have opposed no man out of any Singularity or Spirit of
contradiction, but only for the love of truth; which I doubt not but I may do,
and yet arrogate to my self nothing more then is meet. History is a Subject
commended I know by the most, as being the Herald of Antiquity, the Light of
Truth, the Life of Memory, and the Eye of the World: but Chronology is little
esteemed, few prize it according to the true value, and yet it is indeed the
very Eye of History. Alter Historiae oculus, as one speaks. And so another,
saying, Nulla historia lucem habet sine temporum serie: No history has Light
without a right order of the Times. Nor can it be thought the Holy Spirit of
God would be so exact in noting the Times (even to Months, Weeks, and Days)
in the sacred story, if the careful account of them were not to be regarded.
Sure I am, it can be no small confirmation of a man's faith, concerning the
threatenings and promises of God, and consequently of the whole Scripture, when
he sees how the Prophecies at their determined times came to be accomplished,
and how the linking of one period with another makes up such a chain as cannot
but mind us of the Providence of God in his Government of the World, eternally
foreknowing, and wisely disposing of what should be acted in future times.
Math. 24.15.
Our Savior Christ mentioning the Abomination of Desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the Prophet, says; Let him that reads understand. Revel. 13.18.
And in the Revelation, He that has understanding, let him count the number of
the Beast. Deuteronomy. 4.32.
And in the fourth chapter of Deuteronomy, even the conferring the Histories of
holy Scriptures, with the Narrations of other credible books is commanded,
that thereby Gods doings may be compared. Besides which, the exact handling of
these things makes it manifest that the Being of the World happened not by
chance, or was from Eternity, but that it had a beginning, and does tend also
toward an ending. So also the Prophecies concerning the coming of the Messiah
being hereby found to be accomplished, discovers to the Jews their blindness,
and stirs them up to mind their Conversion: I might say more, and show how
Scriptures seemingly jarring in point of time are here reconciled; many places
cleared, especially in the Books of the Judges, Kings, Chronicles, Ezra,
Nehemiah, Esther, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel: but let this suffice, and be
enough to show that there is great dignity and worth in Chronology; I think
not my pains therefore to be ill employed, nor shall doubt of their candid
acceptance among the courteous and ingenuous, to whom I commit them; hoping
they may give satisfaction to them, searching for truth as I have done. This is
all that in the first Chapter I thought good to mention, having written it on
purpose to be a Preface to the rest: Here therefore I put an end to it, and am
to proceed now as follows.

CHAP. II. Showing in what part of the year the world was created.
IN the account of times it is very necessary that there should be a proposed
point or mark from whence every reckoning may take beginning; that thereby the
years which have several times of beginning may the more truly be computed and
compared among themselves. Wherefore it cannot be amiss to set down something
concerning the time of the year wherein the world began; especially seeing
among Chronologers it is usual to refer their accounts either to the current
year of the worlds Creation, or of our Saviors birth. And now, concerning
this, there be chiefly three opinions.

SECT. I.
For first, Mercator and some others maintain that the world was created in
the very time of the Summer Solstice, and that in the beginning of time, the
Sun entering Leo, gave beginning to the year.

This (as is thought) was first hatched among the Priests of Egypt, who
observing the River Nilus to overflow about the Summer Solstice, adored it for
a God, esteeming the time of its inundation for an infallible beginning of
divine actions in things created; and thereupon, for the beginning likewise of
the year at the time of the worlds Creation.

But if this were the only cause, we may not unfitly say, that it was folly
and superstition which first set this opinion abroach, and therefore he is
worthy of blame who will go about to maintain it. And although Mercator in
his Chronology seems to allege some other reasons, thereby to uphold his
share in it, yet his chief reason is not sufficient: for it is grounded upon
that which is not granted, viz. that the flood should end about July, because
in the eleventh Month, which he supposes to be May or June, when the Olive
begins to put forth, the Dove brought green Olive leaves unto Noah into the
Arc.

To which it is answered that the word in Genesis 7.11. which he takes to
signify green leaves, may (as Expositors witness) as well be taken for
Branches, even such as has been used to make bowers with: which (according to
the translation of the Septuagint) is expressed by a word signifying a dry
stalk. Dr. Willet.
And so says a * Doctor in his Hexapla upon Genesis, Chapter the first,
question the 17. that the word in the Original is Gnalce, which (as S. Hierome
translateth it elsewhere) signifies the branches of Olives, and in the
Septuagint it is (...) a stalk without leaves.

That therefore which the Dove brought, might be some branch of the Olive tree
rather then the leaves, and so might the Flood end at the dead time of the year
rather then when things were fresh and flourishing.

But admit that the stalk or branch had leaves on it, yet it proves not that
it was about May or June, when the Dove found and brought it; because it is
Plin. lib. 16. cap. 20.
recorded of the Olive, that she Ioseth not her leaves as other trees do, but
is green and flourishing all the year. Such leaves therefore as it had before
the flood, it might have after the flood: for if they were new ones, they must
needs spring out in seven days; because the Dove was sent out but seven days
before, returning then as a Creature disconsolate, not finding any thing at all.

SECT. II.
Another opinion, is, that it was created in Autumn, and that the Sun (who
is the Index of time, by whose revolution we account our years) began his
course in Libra about the 26. day of October, if the reckoning be reduced to
our Julian year which is now in use.

Unto which opinion I gave my assent, when I first wrote of these things, and
had for it (as I then thought) many strong and forcible reasons, which I did
illustrate and lay open at large, building much upon the testimony of Josephus,
whom Calvisius and others strengthen from the words of the Chaldee Paraphrast
upon the first book of the Kings, the eighth Chapter, at the second verse: But
was most of all drawn to be of their side by joining with them in their
understanding of those texts of Moses in Exodus, Chap. 23. verse 16. and Chap.
34, verse 22, where first the Israelites are commanded to observe the feast of
in gathering in the end of the year, when they had gathered in their labors
out of the field; that is, the feast of Tabernacles in the seventh month: and
secondly are taught, that this feast was in revolutione anni, sive evolvendo
anno, in the revlution of the year or when the year is wheeled about. By which
a man would think that the year both ended and began again, about the feast of
Tabernacles: and that though the first month of the year mentioned, and so
commanded to be called, in Exodus the 12, at the coming out of Egypt, was
reckoned from the Spring; yet the year naturally did nevertheless begin from
Autumn, in the seventh month from that first.

SECT. III.
Howbeit upon more mature deliberation, I think them to be in the right, who
reckon from the Spring, and do therefore fairly lay down my former Tenet. For
first, that month which began from thence, is (in the 12. chap. of Exodus)
expressly called the First month of the year, as cannot be denied: The first
month, not as then appointed, but confirmed, for any thing that the text
affirms to the contrary; for seeing the Original does not say directly, let
it be the first month; it is every whit as right to understand the verb which
is wanting, to be as well a verb of the Indicative, as of the Imperative mood,
and of the present as well as of the future tense. Whereupon it will also
follow, that Moses (by Gods appointment) ordaining this month to be the first
month of the year, does make no new institution, but renews the old account
of the Patriarchs, which was discontinued in Egypt, by reason that the
Egyptians indeed began their account from their month Ptho, in Autumn, when
Nilus returned again into his river, as well as from that time which Mercator
takes up, when it first began to overflow: And indeed this word to you, calls
them back from the custom of Egypt. For that manner of reckoning which they
had seen there, was none of theirs: and therefore they being come from thence,
must know that it belongs to them to reckon thus, for To you this is the
beginning of months, Exodus 12.2.

Josephus therefore had small cause to say that Moses altered the old ancient
order of the year; especially, seeing he himself does likewise (in a manner)
affirm, how that the Hebrews reckoning from Autumn, do but as the Egyptians
did: Besides, Josephus having an eye to the beginning of the years of Jubilee,
which began from the seventh month after that month which Moses told them was
the first month of the year, was the readier to think (as the modern Jews since
his time have also done) that in regard of Ecclesiastical affairs the
beginning of the year was altered at the coming out of Egypt; but the old
ancient beginning stood still and was regarded in their affairs of civil
nature: whereupon he says that Moses did innovate nothing from the ancient
rite concerning the disposing of the year for buyings and sellings. In which
words (me thinks) he does a little stumble both himself and such as stick to
his testimony, in regard that the Nundinations and things of that nature
appertained to the Jubilee, which was not instituted until afterward. I find
therefore little in Josephus concerning this to build upon.

The Chaldee Paraphrast also is in this the same in effect with Josephus, and
is so much the more invalid, by how much the reckoning of the Chaldeans and
Persians is against it: both of which Nations accounted from the Spring, and
might first learn it from the Patriarchs ( Terah and Abraham) who we are sure
lived for a great while together in Vr of the Chaldees, and taught them (at
least Abraham did) the knowledge of the Stars, for so Berosus mentions: and
successively ever since Astrologers have accounted the revolution of the World
from the Suns entrance into Aries; where (in token of the beginning of the
year) the Persians set their God Mithras holding in his hand a naked sword.

Saint Ambrose says, to show that it was Spring when the World was made, the
Scripture speaks thus, Hic vobis initium mensium; this is to you the
beginning of months. Nor do other of the Fathers ( Eusebius, Basil,
Athanasius, Cyrill of Jerusalem, Augustine, Gregory Nazianzene, Damascene,
Beda, Isiodore,) besides late writters ( Luther, Johannes Lucidus, Bunting,
Lydiat, Polanus, Perkins, Willet, Alstedius and others) but affirm as much.
Beda makes mention of a Synod holden in Palestine by Theophilus Bishop of
Cesarea, in which was agreed that the World was made in the Spring: yea, and
among the Jews, Rabbi Joshua does earnestly defend the same Tenet against
another great Rabbi, who would that it should be made in Autumn.

And further, whereas God blessed the creatures, and bid them increase and
multiply, which blessing presently took effect, who knows not that for most
kinds of creatures, especially the fish and foul, the fittest time to engender
and increase is the Spring?

The time of the creation is also found from the History of the Flood, which
began on the seventeenth day of the second month of the year; which second
month agrees not to Autumn, but to the Spring: For first, by comparing the
order of Months here specified, with that order which God gave Moses command
to put in practice, it will well appear that the first month was reckoned from
the Spring; because it cannot be showed in any place of Scripture, when the
months are reckoned in their orders, (as the first, second, third, fourth,
fifth, etc.) that they take beginning from any other time. So that as Moses
accounted the first, second, third, fourth fifth, etc. from Nisan which began
in the Spring, in like manner did Noah reckon from the same time. And whereas I
heretofore thought that this order of the months could prove nothing, because
not above four of the months were known to have names till after the
Captivity; and must therefore either not be reckoned at all, or else be
reckoned in order according to their number, from whencesoever the reckoning
begun: I find it since to be no perfect answer: For even those four are
mentioned as well by the order of their number, as by their name, even before
the Captivity, when they had names to be called by, 1 Kings chap. 6. and chap.
8. Nor was it but so likewise, afterward, both with them and some of the rest,
1 Mac. 4.53. and chap. 9.54.
as in Josephus, and the books of Maccabees may be seen.

And then secondly, if it had been Autumn when the Flood began, the Flood
continuing much about a just and even year, it must needs end at such a time as
a man would think should be neither fit for the creatures to increase and
multiply, nor the earth (in those Northern parts of the world where the Ark
rested) to be dried up, no nor for the grass and herbs to grow for food, the
winter coming on so soon. Saint Ambrose therefore is so fully resolved
concerning this, that It is not to be doubted (says he) but that this second
month was in the Spring timewhen things increase and grow, the fields bring
forth, etc. and that God then sent the flood upon the wicked, when their grief
should be the greater, to be punished in their abundance. Which saying of that
holy Father seems to be warranted from the words of our Savior, Matthew. 24.37.
For it is true according to Christ's own Testimony recorded there, that they of
the old world were taken even in the midst of all their mirth.

And as for the foresaid Texts alleged out of Exodus they may (as some think)
be answered thus, viz. that the year as well as the month is naturally
divided into two chief parts: the one whereof is of the year beginning or
coming in; the other of the year ending or going out: for by this the year
seems to be compared to a Ring, which by a diameter is divided into two
semicircles, insomuch that when one half is ended by the course of the Sun
from one point of the diameter to the other; the other part must needs be taken
for the conversion or return until the Sun be come again to the first point
where as one year ends, the other begineth. Now then the seventh month is
fitly called the conversion or return; because the first half is then at an
end, and the year entered upon his revolution or return, and so the feast of
the Tabernacles (kept always in that month) was in exitu anni, in the going
out of the year.

Which answer to that Text I do in some sort approve, and could be willing to
think it might fully satisfy, if the year consisted of no more then two parts:
but because the year is divided into four quarters or Tekupha's, called (as I
shall show you afterward) the returns of the year, I think it a more perfect
answer to say; It is called the end and return of the year, not because it met
then with the natural head thereof, but because all the fruit of the year was
gathered in, and seed time began anew: And so it is with us, the Autumn is
counted the beginning of the year for matters of husbandry; and yet we in the
computation of our years begin in the Spring at the Annuntiation. The year of
Jubilee indeed began now, I mean at Autumn: but for all that, the month
wherein it began, is not called the first month but the seventh, Levit. 25.10.

And furthermore, whereas it is usually objected that the trees were created
with ripe fruits on them, and that the world was therefore made in Autumn: it
is answered; that in the Eastern parts of the world, some fruits are ripe in
the Spring as well as in Autumn, as is seen by the Harvest of the Jews, which
was never long after Easter. And without question Paradise had the pre-eminence
to be the best place that the world afforded, and might therefore have ripe
fruits sooner then the Jews had their yearly Harvest. To which may be added,
that the Arabians, Syrians, or Assyrians and Chaldeans do not begin their year
from Autumn, but from the Spring, as Simplicius witnesses upon the fifth book
of Aristotle's Physics.

But they have further to object,

But to this learned Langius has fully answered; saying that neither was it
ever defined of Moses, nor of Joshua, nor of any of the Judges, how much of the
Law should be read on any Sabbath, nor from what time of the year the reading
of the Law should begin again. It was indeed commanded of Moses that the
people of Israel should have the words and book of the Law always before their
eyes: but of that public reading it in the Synagogues, according to several
Sections and Divisions, he spoke not a word. King Jehosophat is found to be the
first who sent forth his Princes, to whom he joined Levits in Commission, who
going through all the Cities of Judah, taught the people in the Law of God: for
they always had the Book of the Law about them, 2 Chro. 17.7, 8, etc. From
whence is manifest, that in those times there were no ordinary Praelections or
Lectures thereof. But after the Captivity, more like it is, that Esdars (that
expert Scribe) divided the Law into parts, and instituted that order of reading
them which is still observed: and because when he began to read, it was the
first day of the seventh month, as may be seen, Neh. 8.2. therefore ever
after, the reading began from thence: and yet then, to speak truly, it is hard
to say what precise proportion Ezra observed for one reading, seeing (as the
third verse shows) he read therein from morning until midday; and might
therefore, rather afterward then now, proportion the whole into several
parts, if at all it were done by him.

I conclude therefore, that (notwithstanding the strongest and best objections
to the contrary) the world began at the Spring time of the year, and that on
the fourth day of the first Week the Sun was in the fourth degree of Aries:
which fourth day, according to the Julian year, was on the seven and twentieth
day of April; on which day the Sun was created, and set in the Firmament of
Heaven, as shall be further showed afterward.

Omnia cum vireant, tunc est nova temporis aetas:
Sic annus per ver incipiendus erit.
CHAP. III. That the Jews, as well of old, as of later Times, accounted their
Months by the course of the MOON.
IT is a plain and manifest truth, approved by testimony undeniable, that in
that age of the World in which our Savior Jesus Christ lived, the Jews
reckoned their months by the course of the Moon; and that on the fourteenth
day of that Moon which they accounted for the first month, their Pascha or
Easter was. This we have recorded by an authentic Author, as ancient as those
times; I mean Philo Judaeus, in his book of the life of Moses: Who speaking
there of the first month, and of the Paschal solemnity observed in it, says,
as the words sound in the Latin: Hoc ipso mense, circa decimam quartam diem,
cum plenus jam orbis Lunae futurus est, Paschatis solemn celebratur; that is,
In this very month, about the fourteenth day, when the Moon shall be at the
full, the solemn feast of the Passover is kept. And in another place,
speaking of the time when the Months began, he declares that their beginning
was from the first fight or vision of the Moon, viz. cum Sol incipit sensibili
splendore Lunam illustrare; When the Sun begins to enlighten the Moon so as she
may be perceived. And so also he did in the place first mentioned, calling that
the Novilunium, Quod Synodum Lunarem, sive Novae cujusdam Lunae, sequitur.

To this Author I may join Josephus, wherein is recorded that the fourteenth
day of the first month of the year, called Here Josephus acknowledges Nisau
to be the first month of the year.
Nisan, was evermore while the Sun was in that sign of the Zodiac which is
called Aries. Antiq. lib. 3. cap. 10.

And as this was the course and account of the Months in those times, so in
the days before; for when Jesus the son of Syrach lived (which was 230. years
before Christ) there was no other Index for the appointed Feasts on certain
and set days of the month, but what the Moon afforded. He therefore says, a
Luna signum esse diei festi: From the Moon is the sign of a feastivall day,
Ecclus 43.7.

The Author of the third book of Esdras, Chapter 1. goes higher; for speaking of
Josiah's solemn Passover, he says it was celebrated on the fourteenth day of
the first month, according to the course of the Moon; as in Hieroms Bible may
be seen. The like he repeateth afterward of another Passover, Chap. 7. verse
10.

Higher then thus goes Rabbi Moses, Ben Maimon, affirming that the Months of
the year were the Months of the Moon, and that in Moses his time they were so
accounted; evermore beginning (as Philo before had noted) from the first sight
or vision of the Moon. For the ancient manner was (...) even till the year of
Christ 500. about which time the Sapientes Gemarae ceased, as Petavius notes.

And hereupon it is that learned Langius says, Ritum hunc de sanctificanda
Neomenia a temporibus antiquissimis and Mosis ipsius deducit Maimon, quem
semper a Judaeis observatum fuisse docet, quamdiu Sapientes erant in
terra-Israelis: hoc est, ut ipse explicat, ad tempora Abai and Rabba. Aben Ezra
likewise says, upon Exodus 12. That the Lord gave commandment in the Law of
keeping the Feast at the appointed time. Dicit enim, Observa mensem Abib, ut
facias Pesah Domino; and si tempus Abib non fuerit inventum in medio mensis:
faciemus Pascha mense sequente.

But higher then all these, does the testimony of Elias Scripturiarius bring
us; who (as he is cited by that famous and illustrious Antiquarie Mr. Seldom,
in his accerptis) says, Praeceptum hoc sanctificandi Lunam exstabat seculis
antiquissimis, temporibus Noachi and Abrahami patris nostri. That is, This
precept of sanctifying the Moon, was exstant in the most ancient ages; even in
the times of Noah and Abraham our Father.

And thus we have testimony for times high enough; even to the times wherein
mention is first made of Months in holy Scripture, which testimonies will
neither allow the Months in the history of the Flood to be according to the
course of the Sun, nor grant that the Jews made use of the Period of
Calippus after the times of Alexander, as Scaliger sometimes taught; nor that
in Christ's time they used a Quaterdenarian Cycle, as Petavius would prove from
Epiphanius: For as I said before, according to the witness of the forecited
authors, the ancient manner was to begin the Month from the first sight or
vision of the Moon sanctifying that day; Solomon therefore would not so much as
lay the foundation of the Temple on the first, but on the second day of the
Month, because the first was holy. For as God appointed a time for his daily
and weekly worship, so he appointed general Feasts for his monthly and yearly
worship: He therefore instituted the New Moons, and first day of every year to
be accordingly observed. Blow the Trumpet (says the Psalmist) in the New Moon:
in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day. For this was a statute for
Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob, Psalm. 81.3, 4. By which he means the
feast of Trumpets, commanded to be celebrated on the first day of the seventh
Month, Levit. 23.24. And in the Revelation, this is certain, that after
Christ's time the Moon was trodden under foot by the Woman clothed with the
Sun, Revel. 12.1. By which is signified That that typical worship which for
the days thereof in the law of Moses had been regulated by the course of the
Moon, was now in the Christian Church, through the revealing of Christ laid
prostrate, abolished and gone: the Woman therefore treads the Moon under her
feet. Nor does the Psalmist again but justify this Lunar account, saying; God
appointed the Moon (...), for feastivall seasons: as Master Mede, in his
Comment upon the Revelation, renders the place; that is, as the Son of Syrach
before mentioned has expressed it; from the Moon is a sign of feasts, a light
that decreaseth in her perfection: the month is called after her name, Ecclus
43.7, 8.

And so indeed it is; For in Scripture a month is called in the Hebrew tongue
Iaerach, from Jareach Luna. And in Greek the word is (...), derived from (...)
which is Luna also. And so in Job accordingly the months are called Moons; as
thus, Quis ponetime juxta Lunas: hoc est, Menses antiquos? Job 29.2.

The month likewise is sometimes in the Hebrew called Hodes or Chodesch; which
word does properly signify A renovation: so that Chodesch is as much as
Novilunium, or Renovatio lunae, in regard that on the first day thereof the
Moon or month is renewed; in which sense it is used in 1 Samuel 20.5. and
expounded so by David Kimhi in libro Radicum, saying; and vocatur Hodes sive
Novus, quia renovatur Luna in eo die. This word is also used for the whole
month or space of time that is from one renovation of the Moon to another; and
has either an adject number of days past since the renovation; as prima luna,
secunda suna, tertia luna, decima quarta luna, etc. or else all the days are
spoken of junctim and together; as in Numb. 11.20. ye shall not eat one day,
nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days: but even a
month of days together.

This therefore made Kimhi, in the place before mentioned, say; Triginta dies
junctim vocantur Hodes, and dies primus solus vocatur Hodes.

However therefore the Grecians applied the word (...) or (...), to the first
day of their month, even when they reckoned them by the light of the Sun; yet
it was only proper and of right belonging to the first day of such months as
were rightly called months, and accounted by the course of the Moon. And so
also Master Lydyat says, in his book De variis annorum formis, c. 4. where
speaking of the word Neomenia, id est, Nova luna, this he adds; quae dictio
licet demum translata sit ad significandum initium qualiscunque mensis, non
solum lunaris; primo tamen and proprie de mensibus lunaribus, utpote
antiquissimo and naturali genere mensium, accipiendam neutiquam dubitari debet.

And thus are the Months fully proved to be Lunar. Against which I meet with
three Objections.

The first whereof is, Veader or another Adar: But the Scripture makes no
mention of any such month; and therefore it may be concluded that of old there
was no other intercalar. Adar indeed is mentioned, both in the book of Hester
and elsewhere, but with no note of distinction to signify which Adar it was:
whereas if there were two Adars, there would have been something added to know
which of them was meant?

Answ. And why so? it needed not, Adars in every year: it was only the
Embolismall year which had two Adars, and not the Common year: Beside which,
know also this; we find not in Scripture mention made of the thirtieth day of
any month: shall we therefore conclude that no month had thirty days.

But that the vanity of this Objection may further appear, this I say; that
though the Scripture give no express mention of the month intercalar, yet
some clear footings of it may be seen there. As for example, in the Prophecy
of Ezekiel at the first chapter, we find that the Prophet had a vision in the
fifth year of Jechoniah's Captivity, on the fifth day of the fourth month; and
that after seven days more (as in the Chapters following is mentioned) he was
commanded to lie on his left side 390. days, and to bear the sins of Israel;
after which he must lie on his right side 40. days more to bear the iniquity
of Judah: and yet in the next year, on the fifth day of the sixth month, he is
said to sit again among the Elders of Israel, chap. 8.1. Which could not be,
unless there were a month intercalar. For 40. days added to 390. do make
430. which was a greater space then could be any way from the twelfth day of
the fourth month in the fifth year, to the fifth day of the sixth month in
the following year, unless there were I say a month intercalar. Nor is this a
strange collection: for though these things perhaps were done in a vision, yet
that the Prophet might not tell the people a vain vision, nor deliver unto
them an unwarrantable Prophecy, he must upon necessity lie hid and be absent
from them so long as was the number of those days. And indeed by putting this
upon trial by calculation, I find all fully cleared: For in the year of the
Julian Period 4119. which was (as shall be afterward proved) the fifth year
of Jechoniah's Captivity, the first day of Nisan was on the twentieth day of
March; that year therefore must be annus Embolimaeus, and have thirteen
months, or 384. days. For if it had been twelve months, or 354. days, then
must the first of Nisan in the following year be on the eleventh of March,
which could not be because the fourteenth day thereof must not be before the
Vernall Equinox, which then was on the twenty seventh day of March. And
therefore the first of Nisan in the first of these two years was on the two and
twentieth day of March; and in the next, on the tenth of April: so will there
be space enough by the fifth day of the sixth month for all the days that the
Prophet mentions to be accomplished; otherwise not. And thus I am glad of
this objection, seeing it has occasioned a further confirmation of the months
mentioned in Scripture to be Lunar.

The next thing objected,

Whereto I answer,

But to help this, they say that the old Patriarchs had either an epact of five
days to be added to every year, or else that in every six years they made of
those five days an intercalar month, to which also the six hours would reach
in one hundred and twenty years: at which time they had also one month more
then in their ordinary and common years. Now this time Scaliger says was
called by the name of Cheled, but does very unaptly apply it to his purpose, as
Petavius proves against him. For Cheled is no more applyable to an age of an
hundred and twenty years, then to any other time or age, be it either more or
less; and is only belonging to the time or age of man's life of what length
soever it be: as may be seen in Psalm. 39.5. where that very word is used. Nor
again is that space of an hundred and twenty years, in the sixth chapter of
Genesis, spoken for any other purpose then to show the patience and long
suffering of the Lord to the old World; which the Apostle Peter calls the
waiting of God on them in the days of Noah, while the Ark was preparing 1 Pet.
3.20. Beside which, this is also certain; that if the sixth year
forementioned, were to have an intercalation in respect of the six hours, there
would be two intercalar months together; I mean in every one hundred and
twentieth year, as is apparent by dividing the said year by six. For 120.
divided by six, has twenty times six in it, and nothing remaining: whereupon
will further follow, that in every one hundred and twentieth year must be 420.
days; which were very absurd to grant. Nay further, were it so that the
ancient Patriarchs to avoid this absurdity, should be thought to reckon the
five days at the end of every year, and defer the six hours till the one
hundredth and twentieth year, by the which time those hours amount to the space
of one month; yet still is all built but upon conjecture: and that so weakly
as there is little or no show of probability in it; for if there were, then
would there be from the Creation to the Flood no odd years, but equal
divisions of 120. years apiece: which we know is otherwise, in regard that when
we divide the year of the Flood by 120. we have 95. remaining. They therefore
reckon far better who do not only account an Epact of five days at the end
of every common year, but do also intercalate a day in every fourth year,
making the Epact then to be six, which in the common year was but five. Howbeit
this still is no better then mere conjecture, and cannot clearly be affirmed
to be so indeed till after ages; and then, not so among the Jews, but among
some other Nations: for the month among the Jews was Lunar, as by the words
used in Scripture for a month (beside our other proofs) already mentioned,
does well appear.

But thirdly, Chapter of the first book of the Chronicles, that David appointed
twelve Captains of ordinary Legions to be over the Provinces, into which the
whole body of the Kingdom was divided, and these to serve in their courses
severally throughout the twelve months of the year. Or rather thus; King David
appointed twelve Captains of ordinary Legions to be the lifeguard of his
person, and these to serve severally in their courses throughout the twelve
months of the year; no more months being mentioned: for according to the
number of the months, so was the number of the Captains. Solomon likewise
appointed as many Stewards to provide provision for the royal Family, and these
(as the former) to serve severally throughout the twelve months of the year;
as in the fourth Chapter of the first book of the Kings may be seen. The year
therefore in those times had no more then twelve months: for if there were
thirteen, then for one months space, both the Kings person must be unprovided
of a Guard, and the royal Family destitute likewise of Provisions for their
sustenance.

Scaliger I remember, Ridicula est objectio, Scal. in Isag. can.
It is a ridiculous objection: and an objection, qua pertinaces contendunt,
mensem veterem Hebraeorum lunarem non fuisse. And indeed, he might well cry out
against it: For this objection is the same in effect with that to which I
answered first. And therefore this I say, that these Captains and Officers for
their number in relation to the twelve months of the year, were according to
the course of the common and ordinary years which had no more then twelve
months: but in the Embolismall year were 13. months nevertheless; and how
that odd month was supplied, is not at all in Scripture declared. The Jews say
that the month intercalar was esteemed but as momentum temporis, a point of
time, and in it they judged no civil matter: we may therefore be induced to
think it probable, that he whose Office fell to the twelfth month in the
common year, did likewise supply the service of the thirteenth month in the
Embolismall year, and yet in the institution of their Offices no more be
mentioned then every man to serve his month. For as Wolphius speaks, certe
major habenda fuit annorum communium ratio, quia plures sint, quam
Embolimaeorum. The like to which is also common with us in our year: for
whereas we intercalate a day in every fourth year; the day intercalated, and
the day before it, are both esteemed as one, both for matters of Law, Faires,
and the like.

And thus is this objection likewise answered: here therefore I conclude this
Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of the ancient and natural Year, that it was measured by the course
of the Sun, though the Months were reckoned by the course of the Moon
AS the Ancients reckoned their Months by the course of the Moon; which I have
already proved: so they reckoned their year by the course of the Sun; qui
(...), and proprie annus dicitur, says Petavius, lib. 1. c. 8. Petav. lib. 2.
de Doct. Temp. cap. 27.
And in another place, this they do, says he, necessario, ut aequinoctia,
caeterosque cardines, quas Tekuphas appellabant, observare possent, ut ne XIV.
Nisan aberraret. Which is but what the Jews themselves have registered in their
Thalmud; for if the Tekupha of Nisan fall into the sixteen day or after, that
year must be intercalar. And so says R. Moses, Ben Maimon, cap. 4. Kiddusch,.
2. Petavius thereupon affirms further, that the month is from the proper
motion of the Moon: but the year properly taken, and naturally, is of the Sun;
being defined from the simple conversion thereof. Annum cum dicimus, proprie
Solarem intelligimus: cum vero Mensem, lurarem. lib 1. c. 8. In which Book and
Chapter he also says, that other Nations as well as the ancient Jews, when
they came to the natural measure of any stable or fixed thing, used the Solar
year.

This then is the true and natural year, and in the Scripture called a year of
days: as may be seen in Jere. 28.3. For there that which we translate, within
two full years; is in the Original, within two years of days. The like to
which is also in the eleventh verse of the same Chapter: and in the first book
of Maccabees, the first chapter, at the thirtieth verse.

Expositours therefore have observed, See Ainsworth on Genesis c. 1. ver. 14. and
Gibbens, c. 5. Quest. 2.
that a year has the name in the Hebrew from Shanah, signifying a changing or
Iteration; which is in regard of the Suns returning after a years end, to the
same point of heaven where it first began: even as the month is derived from
Chodesch, which signifies to Renew; because at the months end the Moon is
again renewed; as in the former chapter has been proved. Neither is it found
in any place of Scripture, that these names or words are the one of them taken
to signify the other; but by the one is meant a year, and by the other a
month. Although therefore the popular or vulgar year might be measured by
months; commonly twelve, and sometimes thirteen: yet the fixed and natural
year, by which the months were always regulated, was measured by the course
of the Sun, and was a year of days; as in that before mentioned out of the
Prophet Jeremy well appears.

Now this year was evermore divided according to the Tekupha's or Quarters of
it; as is still observed by the Jews to this very day: who being zealous to
maintain the Customs of their Ancestors, do not only measure their months
by the course of the Moon, but their year by the course of the Sun, which they
divide by four Tekuph's or Quarters. The first whereof belonged to the first
month, which was Abib, called afterward Nisan: the second to the fourth
month, called afterward Thamuz: the third to the seventh Month, called
afterward Tisri; and the fourth to the tenth month, called afterward Tebheth.
So that on what day soever of our Julian year that Tekupha happened which pointed
out the Vernall Equinox, from thence must the year be reckoned as from its
natural head; for there the last year ended and the next began.

Nor are these Tekuphah's but mentioned in the Scripture: as the Tekupha of the
Spring Quarter at the Vernall Equinox when Kings go forth to battle, 2 Samuel
11.1. which as Moses says, was in the head or first Month of the year, By
which I mean, that the Month belonging to that Tekupha is there called the
first Month of the year.
Exodus 12.2. The Tekupha of the Summer Solstice, when Jeochniah was carried
captive, 2 Chronicles. 36.10. The Tekupha of the Autumnall Equinox, at the return
and end of the year for Husbandry affairs, and beginning of the Jubilee,
Exodus 23.16. Lev. 25.10 and Exodus 34.22. Only the Tekupha of the Winter
Solstice is not so plainly described; and yet some think it to be in Ezekiel.
40.1. But however, whether it be or no, it is not much material: for having
three, the fourth is not to be denied; in regard that as one Equinox is
opposite to another, so is the one Solstice also opposite to the other.

It was sometimes the opinion of Joseph Scaliger that only one Tekupha could
be found in Scripture: but percieving that to be an erronous conceit, he
plainly said Judaeos nihil antiquius habere Tekupharum, sive quadrantum quatuor
observatione. Against which, though Petavius excepteth, yet thus much I find in
him, as a thing which he grants, saying; Tekupha nihil aliud est quam
Conversio, sive cardo anni quadruplex, Lib. 2. c. 45. which is as much as he
shall need to grant in this particular: for if the Tekupha be cardo anni
quadruplex, then may we justly conclude it to be cardo anni, quando Sol primum
quatuor signorum ingreditur, Arietis, Cancri, Librae, Capricorni.

These Tekupha's in the beginning of the World, if they be reduced to the
course of our Julian year, were, the first of them on the 23. day of April in
the Evening, when the 24. day was begun according as the Jews account; the
second on the 25. day of July; the third on the 27. day of October; the fourth
and the last on the 25. day of January; by which I mean that there the fourth
or last Quarter of the year began, and was not ended till the 23. day of April
next after was finished. And why they be not still on those days, is because
the Equinoctial and Solstitiall points have anticipated and not kept their
places on those days and Months they were at the first: which anticipation is
not in regard of any error or irregularity that is in the motion of the Sun,
but because the Julian year agrees not thereunto, but is a little longer then
of right it should be: For the true Solar year (in the mean measure thereof)
does not consist of 365. days and full six hours; but rather of 365. days
five hours, 48 minutes, 39 seconds, and 41 thirds. By which length of the
Tropicall year, we find in one year an anticipation of eleven minutes, twenty
seconds, and nineteen thirds: which though it be at the first but a little,
will nevertheless in many years amount to the number of no few days, as we
see it does. For by the end of 127 years will be twenty four hours gained, with
thirteen thirds: thereby declaring that the day of the Vernall Equinox in the
beginning of the World, even till 95 years were ended, was in the common years
on the 23 day of April, though it be now on the tenth day of March; and the
Autumnall Equinox on the 27 day of October, though it be now on the 13 day of
September: Thus I say it was in the common years, though in the Bissextile one
day sooner.

And why I allow but ninty five years at the first for the alteration of a day,
is not because twenty four hours are gained in that time, but because the time
of the first Equinox was at the At which. time the first day of the World began,
reaching the very evening of the 2 c. day.
evening of the 23 day: And therefore though at the first, ninty five years
will bring the Equinox to a new day according to the Julian account, which
begins the day from Midnight; yet afterward we must not reckon that these
Tekupha's change their places so as to be on a new day after the same account,
till the end of the 127 years after.

I conclude therefore (this rule observed) that the Tekupha's change their
places one day by the end of 127 years, and must be therefore set either
backward or forward, according to the time propounded wherein we seek them:
which the late Jews not observing, have them now not in their right places,
although by them they still divide the year into four Quarters.

But of this enough: only let me add a Table, therein to show how much the
anticipation comes to in any year desired, from one to six thousand: And
after that another Table for the more ready finding the particular day of
either Equinox.

A Table by which may be found how much the Equinoctial anticipateth in any
year desired, from one to six thousand.
Years. Days. Hours. Minutes. Seconds. Thirds. 1 0 0 11 20 19 2 0 0 22 40 38
3 0 0 34 0 57 4 0 0 45 21 16 5 0 0 56 41 35 6 0 1 8 1 54 7 0 1 19 22 13 8 0 1
30 42 32 9 0 1 42 2 51 10 0 1 53 23 10 20 0 3 46 46 20 30 0 5 40 9 30 40 0 7 33
32 40 50 0 9 26 55 50 60 0 11 20 19 0 70 0 13 13 42 10 80 0 15 7 5 20 90 0 17 0
28 30 100 0 18 53 51 40 120 0 22 40 38 0 127 1 0 0 0 13 200 1 13 47 43 20 300 2
8 41 35 0 400 3 3 35 26 40 500 3 22 29 18 20 600 4 17 23 10 0 700 5 12 17 1 40
800 6 7 10 53 20 900 7 2 4 45 0 1000 7 20 58 36 40 2000 15 17 57 13 20 3000 23
14 55 50 0 4000 31 11 53 26 40 5000 39 8 52 3 20 6000 47 5 50 40 0

Another TABLE more readily to find the day of either Equinox, by knowing
either the year of the WORLD, year of the Julian Period, or common year of
CHRIST.
Year of the World Year of the Julian Period. Vernall Equinox Autumnall Equinox
Year of Christ. 1 710 April 23 October 27 0 96 805 April 22 October 26 0 223
932 April 21 October 25 0 350 1059 April 20 October 24 0 477 1186 April 19
October 23 0 604 1313 April 18 October 22 0 731 1440 April 17 October 21 0
858 1567 April 16 October 20 0 985 1694 April 15 October 19 0 1112 1821
April 14 October 18 0 1239 1948 April 13 October 17 0 1366 2075 April 12
October 16 0 1493 2202 April 11 October 15 0 1620 2329 April 10 October 14 0
1747 2456 April 9 October 13 0 1874 2583 April 8 October 12 0 2001 2710
April 7 October 11 0 2128 2837 April 6 October 10 0 2255 2964 April 5
October 9 0 2382 3091 April 4 October 8 0 2509 3218 April 3 October 7 0 2636
3345 April 2 October 6 0 2763 3472 April 1 October 5 0 2890 3599 March 31
October 4 0 3017 3726 March 30 October 3 0 3144 3853 March 29 October 2 0 3271
3980 March 28 October 1 0 3398 4107 March 27 September. 31 0 3525 4234 March 26
Septem. 29 0 3652 4361 March 25 Septem. 28 0 3779 4488 March 24 Septem. 27 0
3906 4615 March 23 Septem. 26 0 4033 4742 March 22 Septem. 25 29 4160 4869
March 21 Septem. 24 156 4287 4996 March 20 Septem. 23 283 4414 5123 March 19
Septem. 22 410 4541 5250 March 18 Septem. 21 537 4668 5377 March 17 Septem. 20
664 4795 5504 March 16 Septem. 19 791 4922 5631 March 15 Septem. 18 918 5049
5758 March 14 Septem. 17 1045 5176 5885 March 13 Septem. 16 1172 5303 6012
March 12 Septem. 15 1299 5430 6139 March 11 Septem. 14 1426 5557 6266 March 10
Septem. 13 1553 5684 6393 March 9 Septem. 12 1680

CHAP. V. Of the Periods of Time by which the Years of the World may be truly
reckoned. As also of the Jubilees; how to account them, where also to begin and
end them.
THe first Period is from the beginning of the Creation, in the latter end of
October, to the end of Noah's Flood; and contains the number of 1657. years
complete: the full end not being till the year 1658. was begun.

The second is from the end of the said Flood when Noah came out of the Arc,
to the promise made to Abraham at the time of his departure from Charran into
Canaan; and is a Period of Which in adding the Periods together must be added
to 1658 and not to 1657.
427. years almost ended.

The third is from the promise, at Abraham's departure from Charran, to the
coming of the Israelites out of Egypt, and does contain the just number of
430. years.

The fourth is from the coming out of Egypt till King Solomon began the
building of the Temple, in the fourth year of his reign; and is a Period of
479. years complete, or of 480. begun.

The fifth is from the first founding of the Temple to the destruction thereof
by Nebuchadnezzar, in the ninteenth year of his reign almost ended, in the
first year of the 48. Olympiad; and is a Period of 423. years, and about 103.
days.

The sixth is from thence to the time that Zerobabell began again to build it,
in the second year of Darius King of Persia; and is a Period of 68. years and
some days more.

The seventh is from thence to the beginning of Daniels LXX. weeks, in the
twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, when Jerusalem was again fully
restored, and the walls thereof built up and finished by Nehemiah, in a straight
of time: this being a Period of 65. years, as shall be afterward proved.

The eighth is from thence to the beginning of Christ's Ministry, in the
seventie and fourth Julian year, at the Autumn of the year of the Julian
Period 4742. and is a Period of 483. years: called by Daniel Seven weeks and
Sixty two weeks, as is recorded Dan. 9.25. These seven and sixty two make
sixty nine, and end at Autumn: but Christ was baptized on the sixth of
January before. In the beginning therefore of the seventieth (or last) week
exactly, between the first and second Passover after his Baptism, when his
Harbinger John had now finished his message, and was cast into Prison, (a time
precisely and purposely noted in the Evangelicall story) Christ first began to
preach in Galilee the Gospel of the Kingdom, and proclaimed himself to be
the MESSIAH. For after John was put in Prison, says Mark 1.14. Jesus came
into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and saying, (...)
The time is fulfilled (that is, as Master Mede expounds it, the last Week of
the seventy is come) and the Kingdom of God is at hand. From that time (says
Matthew cap. 4.17.) Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand. This was that day whereof Christ himself said at
Nazareth, that that Scripture was fulfilled: The Spirit of the Lord is upon me
because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, etc. and to
preach the acceptable year of the Lord, Luke 4.18.19. This the time and place
whence Saint Peter reckoned the beginning of Christ's Prophecy in his Sermon to
Cornelius: That word (says he) which was published through out all Judea, and
began from Galilee after the Baptism which John preached, etc. Acts 10.37.
Learned Scaliger also here has well observed: For though he expound Daniels
Weeks otherwise then I have done; yet this he says, Dimidium autem Septimanae
pertinet ad praedicationem Messiae, quod nemo ignorant: Scal. De Emend. temp.
lib. 6. edit. 1.
Praedicatio autem non a Baptismo incipit, quod hactenus omnibus persuasum
fuit, sed a vinculis Johannis Baptistae. Thus he; Who hereupon accounts from
the imprisonment of John, to the Resurrection of Christ, three years and a
half; saying, A vinculis Johannis and praedicatione ad Resurrectionem, anni
tres cum semisse. And again, Male hactenus tempus Praedicationis a Baptismo
definitum. Thus in his first Edition: and in his second, thus; Hinc incipit
(says he) praedicatio Christi. Meaning that from the imprisonment of John,
between the first and second Passover, was the beginning of Christ's preaching.

The ninth is from hence to the Passion of Christ, in the middle of this last
week, and is a Period of three years and six months: For in the fourth year of
this week (three years and an half after Christ Jesus began his Prophecy)
being made our High Priest, he offered himself upon the Cross a Sacrifice for
Sin, was dead, buried, and rose again: Then ascended up into heaven to be
installed, and to sit at the right hand of God, and from thenceforth to reign
till he have subdued all his enemies under his feet. The time of this Period is
confessed even by some among the Jews: three years and a half the glory of
God stood upon Mount Olivet and preached, saying, Seek the Lord while he may be
found, call upon him while he is near; as Rabbi Janna notes.

The next to this is the tenth Period, and is from the Passion of Christ to the
end of the last Jubilee at the Autumn of the year foregoing the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans, containing the number of thirty six years and and a
half, or thereabout.

This Rest or Jubilee was the last that ever the Jews saw in their own Land:
for in the next year after it was ended, their Temple and City was utterly
destroyed, and they themselves cast out, even in the year of the World 4074.
and year of the Julian Period 4783. Which year was also the seventieth year of
Christ, according to the common account: the 115. Julian year, the second year
of Vespasian, and year of Rome built 822.

And surely the Providence of God herein is clearly seen: for as they began
their account for Rests and Jubilees in the last year of Moses, six months
before they passed over Jordan, when they had conquered and began to possess a
part of that Land which God had given them for their Tribes to inherit: So in
like manner this reckoning ended with them when the time was at hand that it
should be taken away from them, and they cast out till the time of the fullness
of the Gentiles come, Luke 21.24. And to this, in one place, does Scaliger well
agree: for though in his fifth book De emendatione Temporum, he begins this
reckoning in the seventh year after they came into Canaan; yet afterward in his
seventh book, in his notes upon that Calendar called Computus Judaicus, he
plainly says; Ingressus Israelis in terram, est primus annus Septimanae. That
is, the entrance of Israel into the Land, is the first year of the Week: And so
I account; for the first year of the first Week was not ended until the
Autumn next after Joshua conducted the people of Israel over Jordan.

This last year of Moses was in the year of the Julian Period 3263. Number. 32.33.
when the Kingdom of Sihon King of the Amorites, and the Kingdom of Og King
of Bashan, was conquered and given to the children of Gad, and to the children
of Ruben, and to half the tribe of Manasseth the Son of Joseph for a
possession: this conquest being about six months before Joshua passed over
Jordan, as Codoman notes. The seventh year from hence inclusively, was
therefore the beginning of the first year of Rest, in the year of the Julian
Period And was the year of the Jews Period 2317.
3269. And the seventh seven in like manner the first Iubilee, in the year of
the same Period 3311. and year of the World 2602.

But if it be so, that every Seventh Seven must be a Iubilee, Iubilee be the
fiftieth year.

Well enough: Iubilee fell always into the Seventh Seven, yet nevertheless it
was the fiftieth year by including that year from whence the nine and forty
exclusively were accounted. For if the year of Iubilee be reckoned otherwise,
the commandment concerning the years of Rest for the Land could not be
observed, but the whole order would be disturbed, and the eighth year in every
Iubilee be accounted for a year of Rest, though it were indeed the first year
of another Week, and a year in which they were to plow and sow their ground,
Levit. 25.22. And that the manner of this reckoning may not seem strange, I
will show you in a word or two some few other presidents, wherein the accounts
are of the same nature. As for example: In Music we call that an eighth which
exclusively is but seven, and no ways eight but by including the two extreme
Notes. So also we call a Quartaine Ague, which has not four days but by
including the two sick days. Christ likewise is said to arise the third day;
which could not be but by including as well the day of his death and burial,
as of his Resurrection: for on Friday he suffered; on Saturday was the Jews
Sabbath; and on Sunday in the morning (that being the first day of the week) he
arose, Math. 16.21. Mark 16.2. And thus also it must be in the account for the
year of Iubilee; which though it fall into the seventh Seven, is nevertheless
the fiftieth year by including the two extreme terms of the reckoning.

But if this be not enough for the clear understanding of this difficulty,
know we that here (as in all numbering) two things are to be considered: The
parts numbered, and the manner of numbering. The parts numbered are three:
namely, The two extreme terms; and the Midst, or what is between them: The
manner of reckoning, that also is threefold: The first is, when the middle
numbers only are accounted, and the two extreme terms excluded. The other,
when the midst with both the extreme terms are included; and under this manner
of reckoning is contained whatsoever is expressed by any Ordinal number. The
third and last is, when the midst and one extreme term only is included, the
other (which is the first term) being excluded: and under this form of
reckoning falls the true account of all such reckonings as are made by
Cardinal numbers: For there be Ordinall numbers, and Cardinal numbers: By
Cardinal numbers we inquire how many: And by Ordinall numbers we inquire of
what Order the thing in question is. As for example, If the question be first
concerning the number of years in a Jubilee; the answer then is, That there are
but forty nine. But secondly, If the question be, of what order is the year of
Jubilee, the answer then is, That it falls into the fiftieth year: Both which
the holy text does well express. For thou shall number unto thee (says God
unto Moses) seven Sabbaths of years, seven times seven years, and the space of
seven Sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years, Levit. 25.8.
In which words we have the first question resolved; namely, of the number of
years in a Jubilee, That they are but forty nine. Then for the second, Moses
shows that also, at the tenth verse, saying, And ye shall hallow the fiftieth
year, etc. Now that this fiftieth year was no other then the last year of the
seventh Week, is plain in regard that it is a question whose resolution is by
Ordinall numbers, having the middle years with both the extreme terms
included. That therefore which learned Junius has noted upon this text of
Moses, Jun. edit. 2.
is worth the marking. [And thou shall hallow the fiftieth year] that is, says
he, The fiftieth year inclusively considered, as the Jews use to reckon. By
which I doubt not but he means the ancient Jews, who had seen as well the
observation of the Jubilee, as of the Passover, which Maimonides never did:
and therefore the less reason had Broughton and Ainsworth to follow him in
this particular; especially considering that the Period or Cycle of the Jews,
Hillel set forth this Period, anno dom. 358. but Maimon was not till about the
year of Christ 1180.
which they call Era Mundi (set forth long before Maimon lived) will allow of
no interruption of the Sabbaticall years, but grants them to succeed orderly
each to other: the dividing of it else by seven could never show any one true
year of the Rest. And if so, then must the Jubilee necessarily fall into the
seventh seven, and not into the year next after it: for if the Iubilee be not
till the year next after the seventh seven, then must the year next after that
be accounted but for the first year of a new Week, which is manifestly false:
for if that supposed first year be divided by seven, it will not have one, but
two remaining. The like method is to be observed for finding the Sabbaticall
years by dividing the year of the Julian Period, in any year after the death of
Moses, by seven: for if nothing remain, then does the Autumn of the year
divided begin a year of Rest or Sabbath to the Land: if one remain, then about
Autumn the first year of Sowing begins; if two, then the second: And so of
all the other years, according to what remains. As for example, the 150. year
of the Grecians (when Eupator besieged Jerusalem) was in the year of the Julian
Period 4551. which being divided by seven, has one remaining: and therefore
that year was Sabathicall unto the Autumn thereof, 1 Maccab. 6. Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 12. cap. 14. So also for the year when Simon the Father of Hyrcanus was
slain, Joseph ontiq. lib. 13 c. 15.
it was in the year of the Julian Period 4579. before the year of the Grecians
177. was ended: which year of the said Period being divided by seven, has also
one remaining; and was therefore Sabbaticall until the Autumn thereof. So
also for the year when Herod took Jerusalem, it was when M. Agrippa and L.
Canidius Gallus were Consuls, in the year of the Julian Period 4677. the ninth
Julian year, and year of the City 716. Now this year of the said Period being
likewise divided by seven, has also one remaining; and was therefore a
Sabbathicall year, or year of Rest, from the Autumn before until the Autumn
thereof: and so Josephus shows, in his Antiquities, l. 14. c. 28. By which
three examples all the other Sabbathicall years are known to be rightly fixed,
and may be evermore found by the method aforesaid: yea though the head of their
reckoning should not take place, until either the seventh or fourteenth year
of Joshua.

Some I know (and they no mean Authors) begin this account at that Division
of the Land which was in the seventh year of Joshua, when Caleb was eighty five
years old. But because the Land was not fully divided then, nor the Tribes sent
home until Joshua caused a further Division to be made, and then sent the
Tribes home to their possessions, therefore have others deferred the head of
this reckoning till then: Bonfrer. in Exodus 23.12.
that is, till the fourteenth year of Joshua. Bonfrerius in his Comment upon
Exodus, as he is cited by Philippus in his Chronology, observes the same;
saying, Duae fuerunt distributiones terrae, etc. There were (says he) two
Divisions of the Land: the one in Gilgal, about the seventh or eighth year
after the entrance thereinto: the other in Shiloh some years after. At the
first, the Division was but begun, not finished: yea, for certain causes put
off, and to be accounted as if nothing had been done: From the latter therefore
(in his judgment) the Sabbathical year ought to be reckoned. Philip in
Chonology
Adding moreover, and saying; Hebraei idem sentiunt, qui Sabbata terrae a
decimo quarto anno ab ingressu computant. Hereunto agree sundry others; as
Masius, Magalianus, Menochius, and Wolphius in his first book De Tempore,
Wolphius De Temp. page 61.
where he has words to the same purpose, saying; The Sabbaths of the Holy Land
neither were nor could be observed before the possession thereof: which he
means to be then when it was fully divided, and the Tribes brought home to
their possessions from helping their brethren, Joshua 22.4.

All this I know, and find to be the opinions of Scaliger, Bucholcerus,
Calvisius, Alstedius, Armachanus, and of those other Authors aforesaid.
Howbeit, because the Jubilees do afford the bestharmony, if they begin when
the Jews were ready to pass over Jordan into the promised Land, and end when
they were ready to be cast out, I hold me to what I mentioned first. For though
they who strive for the fourteenth year of Joshua have said enought to remove
the head of this reckoning from the seventh of Joshua, in regard that the Land
was not fully conquered then, nor the Tribes sent home till afterward: yet is
not their argument strong enough to six it in the time they strive for. For if
the observation of this account had been deferred so long, it had been an
argument of great neglect, especially in them who had their Parts or Portions
long before. The two tribes and the half had their inheritance at the very
first on the other side of the river, before the other passed over Jordan; and
there they left their Cattle, Wives, and Children: which happened toward the
end of the last year of Moses already mentioned. After which, by such time as
they were gone over, they had no more Manna, but lived on the annual fruits of
the Land, and did rather (as day by day they came into their hands) husband in
common the Fields, Vineyards, and Olive-yards, then spoil and wast them. And
as they husbanded them in common, so by virtue of that Law which belonged to
them all, they all of them (as well on the one side of the river as the other)
let the Land rest by a joint consent, in the seventh year after they, or any of
them, began to possess any part of it: and had at that Rest as much
particularly divided among some other of the Tribes, as was then conquered: the
rest of the Land being as well undivided as fully conquered until the seventh
year after, which was the second seven, and thirteenth (not fourteenth) year of
Joshua.

CHAP. VI. Of the Julian Period, and how to join the years of the World
thereunto.
THe Julian Period is an Astronomical Cycle artificially composed and invented
by Joseph Scaliger, who by a continued multiplication of three Cycles used in
the Julian year ( viz. the Cycle of the Sun, Moon, and Roman Indiction) found
out a Period of 7980. years, in the which those Cycles return again to their
first numbers: and though by reason of that artificial composition of it we
find that it reaches beyond the first year of the World, yet is it of
singular use both for the right computation of the Julian year in all Ages,
even before the institution therefore by Julius Caesar, as also to record the
allowed and granted distances of all times in Chronological accounts; the 4713.
year thereof exactly agreeing with the year foregoing the first year of the
common account of our Saviors birth; that first year being also the first year
of the first Period of Dionysius Exiguus: according to the beginning of whose
first Period, we vulgarly account the year of Christ's birth, though it fails
four years of the true time, as afterward shall be showed. Adding this now as
not impertinent, that by putting 709. to any year of the World, we have the
year of the Julian Period: so on the contrary, by taking 709. out of any year
of the Julian Period, we have the year of the World as perfectly and exactly as
may be; only with this Proviso, that the year of the Julian Period begins on
the first of January, and the year of the World not until the Vernall Equinox
next after.

And know further, that by applying this Rule to the Periods a foregoing, it
will appear that the first year of the World fell into the year of the Julian
Period 710. The Flood into the year of the Julian Period 2366. and year of the
World 1657. The Promise into the year of the Julian Period 2794. and year of
the World 2085. The coming out of Egypt into the year of the Julian Period
3224. and year of the World 2515. The foundation of Salomons Temple into the
year of the Julian Period 3703. and year of the World 2994. The destruction
thereof by Nebuchadnezzar, into the year of the Julian Period 4126. and year of
the World 3417. The second year of Darius King of Persia into the year of the
Julian Period 4194. and year of the World 3485. The beginning of Daniels
seventy Weeks into the year of the Julian Period 4259. and year of the World
3550. The first year of Christ's Ministry into the year of the Julian Period
4742. and year of the World 4033. The passion of Christ into the year of the
Julian Period 4746. and year of the world 4037. And last of all the Destruction
of Jerusalem by the Romans into the year of the Julian Period 4783. and year of
the World 4074.

CHAP. VII. Other Observations concerning the Times in their Periods, until
the Destruction of the Temple by Nebuchadnezzar.
IN the year of the Julian Period 710. the Creation began; The Creation
as by the former Periods appears: The precise time of which beginning
seems to be at the evening of the twenty three day of April. For by the
primitive practice of Gods own example, the day was from evening to evening;
and was so commanded also afterward by a written Law, in Lev. 23.32. To speak
therefore of the divine institution of natural days, we are to say that the
evening as well as the morning, is pertinent to one and the same day, but make
not up the whole day: for the whole day naturally, is that which we call in
Greek (...), and is a day of day and night together. And therefore in that
phrase of Moses [the Evening and the Morning were the first Day] is a
Synecdoche, by which the beginning of the night and of the day, is put for the
whole night and day; a^ by that before pointed at in Leviticus may be seen: for
there the day is reckoned from even to even, as being that which (if we respect
the progress of the Worlds Creation) naturally and indeed is a true day,
although the artificial day be but from the Sunrising to the setting thereof.

This being premised, I take the beginning of the Creation to be, according to
the Julian account, on the twenty three day of April at evening: so that the
first day of the World was not ended till the evening of the twenty fourth day.
The second day was after the same manner April the twenty five. The third,
April the twenty six. The fourth, April the twenty seventh: On which day the
Sun, Moon and Stars were made, and set in the firmament of Heaven: The Sun
probably in that part thereof which we now call the fourth degree of Aries. The
fifth day was April the twenty eight. The sixth, April the twenty nine: that
being the very day when the Sun and Moon were first of all in Conjunction:
which was therefore the first day of the month, and might well by Adam be
accounted so, because it was also the very first day that ever he saw. Of Adam
and his fall.
Now that on this Day Adam sell, diverse of the Learned (both Jews and
Christians) think: but it is a Tenet scarcely probable, not only in regard of
the multitude and variety of things don on the day that he was made, both
before and after his Creation; but also because this sixth day concluded by
Moses with these words: And God beheld all that he had made, and lo it was
exceeding good: So the Evening and the Morning were the sixth day, Genesis 1.31.
More like it is that Adam fell on the twelf day of May toward Genesis 3.8.
Evening, when the fourteenth day of the first month was ending, and the
fifteenth (which was on the sixth day of the week) ready to begin: which time
and day agree very well to the institution of the first Passover, Exodus 12. as
also to the eating of the last Passover and crucifying of Christ on the sixth
day of the Week, and fifteenth day of the month: For on that day Christ dyed,
even as on that day (4037. years before) Christ was promised to Adam, who had
fallen as it were the day before, toward evening; as already has been said.
In this year the Cycle of the Sun was ten, the Dominicall letter B. the Cycle
of the Moon seven, the Equinox at evening on the twenty three day of April
when the creation began, and the New Moon (or first day of the first month) on
the nine and twenty day of April feria sexta, which was the sixth day of the
Week as has been said, and is exactly true according to Calculation.

Also, to the year of the Julian Period 2366. The Flood.
when the Flood came, the Cycle of the Sun was 14. the Dominicall letter D. and
the Cycle of the Moon ten: The Vernall Equinox was on the tenth of April, and
the Autumnall on the fourteenth of October. By which is gathered that the first
day of the first month, in this year of the Flood was on the twenty one day of
April, feria tertia: the beginning of every month ordinarily being according
to the Phasis or first vision of the Moon, which in the Land of Israel (and the
parts thereabout) might for the most part be by eleven hours and thirty minutes
after the time of the mean Conjunction.

And at no time could she be hid longer then 28. hours and 30. minu. as the
learned Jews have told us. Now the first day on the first Month being on the
21 day of April, shows that the 17. day of the second Month when the Flood
began, was on the fifth of June feria sexta, even on the same day of the week
on which the Beasts and Man was made. So that as on the sixth day of the week
both Man and Beast were created, in like manner on the very same day of week
the Flood began by which they were destroyed.

Know also that this first Month, or the first Month of this year, had but
29. days. The Second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth had 30 days a piece. The
seventh 28. the last of which was on the 13 day of October. The eighth had 30.
The ninth 29. The tenth 30. The eleventh 29. And the twelfth 30. the last of
which was on the tenth day of April in the year of the Julian Period 2367. So
that the 27 day of the second Month in the said year, was on the same day
that the Flood began in the year before; even on the fifth of June, which now
was Sabbath day, on the which Noah came out of the Arc and offered Sacrifice,
at the very time of a full year of days after the Flood began, Genesis 8.14.

The reason of which reckoning thus, is this: namely, Note this; it is no mean
Character of a right time.
That though the Ancients even in the times of Noah and Abraham used to begin
their Month a prima (...), or from the 1. sight of the Moon; yet if the Moon
could not be seen by reason of clouds, they then accounted 30 days for every
such Month, though to some of them there would have been but 29 if the first
sight of the Moon had been hindered.

Now in such a wet cloudie time as we may certainly conceive it to be when the
Flood came, the Moon must needs be obscured and hid for many days; not only
the 40 days and nights when it rained continually, but even to the end of the
CL. on which if some rain had not fallen, but that the sky had been clear and
without clouds, there would in all probability have been an abatement of the
waters before those 150. days were ended: but no abatement was till then, if
the words be taken as they Originally signify in Genesis 8.3.

And now why the seventh Month here mentioned had but 28 days, is because
after the 150. days were ended, the Air began to be clear, insomuch that
Noah knew when to begin the next Month by sight of the Moon: upon which I
believe it was that Berosus said, Noah ordered the year to the course of the
Sun, and the Month to the course of the Moon. For as Wolphius truly gathers
out of Genesis Wolph De Temp. lib. 1. page 21.
8.22. Noah was not the first Author of the ancient year: but the year being
somewhat interrupted by the Flood was by him brought back to the old ancient
form, which he taught his posterity.

But now for the finding out of this eighth Month, Noah I say knew when to
begin it by the first sight of the Moon, which at Babylon and the parts
thereabouts was on the 14. day of October in the year of the Julian Period
2366, after which Noah was in the Arc until the 27 day of the second Month,
and then came forth, even to the fifth day of June which was a Sabbath day and
a just Solar year after the Flood began.

And note that the day on which the Arc rested upon Mount Ararat was the
second day of November, in the year of the Julian Period 2366. for that was
the seventeenth day of the seventh Month, and the next after the last of CL.
days that the Waters prevailed. For (I said before) the waters prevailed 150.
days, of which the 40 days of the continual rain were part; else how could
the Arc rest on the seventeenth day of the seventh Month? we are sure enough
it did, Genesis 8.4.

But it is objected,

Not so. The tops of the Mountains; but not the tops of the highest
Mountains. For the Mountain tops appearing on the first day of the tenth
Month, were rather the tops of the Iower and inferior Hills, then of the
highest Mountains. And for the ark resting on the Ararat two Months before;
to that I answer: namely thus. The Arc was a vast body; and being so vast a
body as it was, it could not choose but draw many Cubits of water. Now suppose
this proportion to be XI Cubits (and so many it might well be;) And if XI. then
will it follow that the bottom of the Ark could never be more then four
Cubits from the tops of of the highest hills: and in one day (and less) those 4
Cubits (and more) might easily be abated. Nor may this seem strange: for
though the depth from the tops of the highest Hills, to the superficies of the
Iower grounds, were as great as 30 furlongs (of which height they say Mount
Tabor is;) yet by confidering in what time that space was dried up, and drawing
the abatement into a proportion, it will easily appear that even to the first
day may be allowed more by far then four Cubits. See Doctor Willet on
Genesis, and there you shall find, That some who have proportioned the full
time of abatement (which was from the seventeenth day of the seventh Month, to
the first day of the first Month) with the space from the height to the
highest Mountains, have allowed 37. Cubits and an half for every day. But
Igrant not every days abatement to be alike, because the greatest compass
above must have the lesser abatement; yet nevertheless the first day might
well have so much as would suffer the Arc to rest so soon as it did on the
high Mountains of Ararat: upon which Moses says it rested on the seventeenth
day of the seventh Month, CL. days after the beginning of the Flood. What
more concerns the Flood shall be handled afterward.

Terah dyed in the year of the Julian Period 2794, The Promise.
and (as may be conjectured) not many days before the Promise was made to
Abraham, who hereupon departed out of Haran, from his Kindred and his Fathers
house, when he had almost finished the seventy fifth of his age, even in the
year of the World 2085. Now in this year the Cycle of the Sun was twenty two,
the Dominicall letter A. the Cycle of the Moon one, and the Vernall Equinox
April the seventh. By which is gathered that the first day of the first
month, called afterward Nisan, was one the 31. day of March, feria sexta. The
next month began April the twenty nine, feria septima: The Promise might be
then. After which Abraham departed out of Haran on the third or fourth of May,
when the Sun was in the twenty six or twenty seventh degrees of Aries, in which
place it was 430. years after on the twenty nine or thirtieth of April, when
Israel came out of Egypt, as you shall see by and by in that which I am to
mention next.

For in the next place the time of the coming out of Egypt is to be
considered. The Exodus or coming out of Egypt
This was in the year of the Julian Period 3224. and in the year of the World
2515. In this year the Equinox was on the third day of April, feria septima:
The Cycle of the Sun was four, the Dominicall letter C. and the Cycle of the
Moon thirteen. By which is gathered that the first day of Abib or Nisan was on
the sixteenth day of April, feria sexta: the Israelites therefore killed and
eat the Passover on the twenty ninth day of April, which was the fourteenth day
of the month, feria quinta. After midnight they are driven out of Egypt, and
sent away in haste: and therefore their coming from thence is to be reckoned
on the thirteenth day of April, which was the sixth day of the Week; even as
on the same day of the Week Christ purchased a better Redemption by the blood
of the Cross. In all which I do much admire at the wonderful Providence of
God, in disposing of the times so exactly and harmoniously: For as on the sixth
day of the Week Man was made, and Christ suffered; So on the sixth day of the
week Israel was delivered out of the Egyptian bondage, on the very next day
after the Passover, even as on the next day after the Passover Christ our
Passover was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7.
to free us from the bon dage of Sin and Satan. In this year at this time,
the Sun was in the 27. degree of Aries: Abraham therefore by an exact account
(having received the promise) went out of Haran on the fourth day of May 430.
years before, when the Sun was also in the same point of Heaven that he was
in now. And why on the fourth of May, rather then on the thirtieth of April,
was in regard of the anticipation of the Equinoctial; which, if we will reckon
precisely, is to be observed, because (as has been showed) the Julian year
agrees not exactly to the course of the Sun. But to go on: The History of
the Exodus 16.1.
Manna does also well accord to this, viz. that the day of the coming out of
Egypt should be on the fixth day of the week: and in that is another spark of
Gods Providence; witness the fifteenth day of the second Month, Another
Character of a right time.
which by accounting nine and twenty days to the first Month, fell into the
seventh day of the week on which the Israelites murmured, had Quails at even,
and on the morrow morning Manna; which they gathered six days, but on the
seventh day they found none, Exodus 16.26. By which we see not only the two and
twentieth day of the second month was Sabbath day, but also that the first
Manna fell on the first day of the Week, now called the Lords day in memory of
our Saviors Resurrection, and has been the Christians Sabbath ever since: and
for the first month to have but 29 days, Let this be remembered: for it is a
Rule to me in all the months in every year.
is more consentaneous to the motion of the Moon, then to have 30 before the
odd hours arise to a day, which is not till the second month: The first
month therefore has but 29 days, though the second has 30. For in one
month (according to the mean motion of the Moon, from one Conjunction to
another) we have but 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, three seconds, and 12
thirds. I account therefore that the Israelites came out of Egypt when the nine
and twentieth day of April was ending, and the thirtieth beginning. I account
likewise that the first Manna fell on the thirtieth day of May, feria prima:
and consequently that the nine and twentieth day of May and fifth of June were
Sabbath days; the one on the fifteenth day of the second month, and the other
on the two and twentieth.

That which I shall mention next is the year of the Julian Period 3703. The
Temple founding.
and year of the World 2994. in which year King Solomon laid the foundation of
the Temple on the second day of the second month. The Cycle of the Sun was
seven, the Dominicall letter F. the Vernall Equinox upon the one and thirty day
of March, and the Cycle of the Moon seventeen. By which is gathered that the
first day of Nisan was on the last day of March, feria prima: and consequently
that King Solomon began to build the Temple on the last day of April, which
was the second day of the second month, feria tertia: for on the second day of
the second month this great work was begun, as may be seen in 2 Chronicles
3.2. This was the fourth year of King Solomon, and after the coming out of
Egypt the 480. not complete but current. For indeed there were but 479. years
fully finished, which with respect had to the place of the Sun at both times,
and the anticipation of the Equinoctial from the coming of Egypt to this time
of the Temple, does show the end of their reckoning to be on the twenty six or
twenty seventh day of April, three or four days and no more before the Temple
was founded. Thus then from the coming out of Egypt to the beginning of the
building of the Temple were 479. years and about four days: it was founded
therefore in the 480. year after the coming out of Egypt, as is mentioned in 1
Kings 6.1.

The next that I shall mention is the year of the Julian Perion 3710. The
Temple dedicated.
It was the eleventh year of King Solomon, and year when the Temple was
dedicated, 1 Kings c. 6. ver. 38. and Chap. 8.2. The Cycle of the Sun was 14.
the Dominical letter D. the Cycle of the Moon five, the Vernall Equinox March
the 31. and the Autumnall Equinox October the fourth. By which is gathered that
the first day of the seventh month called Tisri was on the fifth day of
October, feria secunda; and that the Dedication began October. the eleventh,
feria prima. This was 3000. years after the Creation, even in the year of the
World 3001. The Calendar of which Month is as follows.

TISRI. October. Tisri, the seventh month, An. Mundi 3001. and anno Per. Jul.
3710. Cyclo 14. 5. In which Year and Month the Temple was dedicated, 1 Kin.
8.2. 1 5 E 2 6 F 3 7 G 4 8 A 5 9 B 6 10 C Sabbath Day: 7 11 D 1. The first day
of the Dedication. 8 12 E 2. The second day. 9 13 F 3. The third day. 10 14 G
4. The fourth day. This (being the 10. day of the month) was the Expiation
day. 11 15 A 5. The fifth day. 12 16 B 6. The sixth day. 13 17 C 7.
The 7th d. of the Dedicat. Which was also Sab. Day 14 18 D 8. The 8th d. on which
was a solemn Assembly, 2 Chr. 7.9 15 19 E 1. The first day of the Feast of
Tabernacles, Levit. 23.24. 16 20 F 2. The second day. 17 21 G 3. The third day.
18 22 A 4. The fourth day. 19 23 B 5. The fifth day. 20 24 C 6. The sixth day of
the Feast, which was now Sabbath Day. 21 25 D 7. The seventh day. 22 26 E 8.
The last and great day of the Feast. 23 27 F On this day (being the 23. of the
month) Solomon sends the People away, 2 Chronicles. 7.10. 24 28 G 25 29 A 26 30 B
27 31 C 28 1 November. D 29 2 E

This seventh Month being ended there was nothing wanting to the Temple for the
quite completing of it whereupon it is (as Codoman notes) that in 1 Kings
6.38. the Temple is said to be finished in the eighth Month, in the eleventh
year of King Solomon: That is, It was then finished in all the parts thereof,
and according to all the fashion and Ordinances of it both within and without.
Or as the marginall reading in our last translation expresses, It was then
finished with all the appurtenances, and with all the Ordinances thereof. Which
is as Bucholcerus observes. It was dedicated (says he) in the Month Ethanim;
and in the following Month Bull it was finished with all the Vtensils thereof.

All which considered, we shall not need to drive the dedication into the
twelfth year of King Solomon, as some have done: for if it were not dedicated
till then, it must necessarily follow that it lay void for a whole year
together after it was finished, which is very unlike.

Beside, that this was the right year of the dedication, I can further
demonstrate by the courses of the Priests which served in the Temple till
Nebuchadnezzar destroyed it: for we may easily believe that in the first
Sabbath of the dedication, the course of Joarib began, which we here see to be
on the seventeenth day of October. To which time if we add 224. Julian years
(in which space the courses return to the same day again) we shall come to
the year of the Julian Period 3934. on the seventeenth day of October. After
which we have 192. years more before we can come to the year of the Julian
Period 4126. in which the Temple was destroyed; noting these 192. years to end
on the seventeeenth day of October likewise. And in 192. years we find 417.
courses with 72. days over and above: which 72 days being taken out of the
number of days which were from the beginning of that year of the Julian Period
to the said seventeenth day of October, do direct us to the sixth day of August
which then was Sabbath day and the course of Joarib: even that course of his in
which the Temple was destroyed.

For when the Temple was destroyed it was the watch and course of Joarib, as
the Jews have told us in their Seder Olam rabba: the course I say of Joarib:
and IX. of Ab; which day is noted by them to be the next after the Sabbath, and
the next after the Weeks end, as Master Livelie expounds the Hebrew text of
that testimony.

And thus having done with this, The Temple destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar.
I go on to the year of the Julian Period 4126, which was the nineteenth year
of Nebuchadnezzar when the Temple and City were destroyed. The Cycle of the Sun
was 10. the Dominicall letter B. the Cycle of the Moon 3. and the Vernall
Equinox on the 27 day of March. Calvisius I am sure, and Scaliger as I
remember, reckon this Destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, to be in the
year of the Julian Period 4124. But they fail of the true time. For in that
year the first day of the first Month could not be any day later then the 27.
day of March, and that was feria quinta: whereas if it be the true time, it
should be rather feria prima. Petavius is for the next year, viz. 4125. But in
that year take either the Conjunction in March, or in April, and neither will
serve. For the one conjunction casts the first of Nisan into the fifteenth of
March, feria secunda; and the other into the thirteenth of April, feria
tertia: This therefore could not be the year neither, as appears by the day
of the week before mentioned on which the IX. day of A^ must be.

Langius, in his book De annis Christi, pitcheth upon the year of the Julian
Peried 4117: but therein has also failed of the true time; not only because he
is thereupon enforced to alter the reign of Nabopollassar; but also because
the 40. years that Ezekiel says Egypt was under Babel, will thereby be ended
before their right time. For Egypt had not shaken off that yoke till after
Cyrus had conquered Babylon, as is more then once recorded by Xenophon, and
approved therein by men of no mean learning, and particularly by Jacobus
Armachanus in his Annals of holy Scripture.

I do undoubtingly therefore conciude the right year to be the year of the
Julian Period 4126. in which year the first of Nisan was on the third day of
April feria prima: and the IX. of Ab. on the seventh day of August, which was
also feria prima: at which time Joarib was in his course, having entered on it
August the 6. feria Septima, for that the IX. of Ab was on the Eve of the
Sabbath; I do not understand it otherwise then of the Eve ending the Sabbath;
at which time the Enemy entered into the Temple to destroy it; even in the
Course of Joarib. And thereupon it is that the Jews in mournful manner
(according to the institution of their great Synedrion) use to sing thus: Die
nona mensis Ab, bora Vespertini temporis,
Quum essem in Vigilia mea, Vigilia Joarib,
Introiit hostis, and Sacrificia sua obtulit,
Ingressus est in Sanctuarium injussu Dei.


Thus they, as their words sound in the Latin. But in this we are to note,
that albeit the enemy entered into the Temple to destroy it on the ninth of Ab
and course of Joarib, yet the said Temple was not burnt until the next day:
for it was on the tenth day of the fifth month; as the Prophet shows, in
Jerem. 52.12. And note also that on some part of Jerusalem the fire was kindled
sooner, even three days before, 2 Kings 25.8. burning from the seventh day
until the tenth. For so those two texts (in Jeremiah and the second book of
the Kings) may well enough be reconciled. And note last of all, that the City
was broken up and Zedechia taken a full month before: viz. on the ninth day of
the fourth month, 2 Kings 25.3. which (according to our Julian Calendar) was
this year on the eighth day of July, feria sexta. So then, the City was broken
up on the eigthh of July; and the Temple burnt on the eighth of August.

And as for that which Scaliger alleges out of that book of the Jews which
they call Liber Angariarum, wherein is written that they fast on the fifth day
of the week, as if on that day of the week the Temple was burnt by the
Chaldeans. To that I answer, that as in speaking of the ninth of Ab, they do
one day antedate the account of the Prophet Jeremiah for the day of the month:
so in like manner they do here antedate one day of the week, and make that to
be on the fifth day of the week, which by comparing their testimony with
another Scriptures) appears to be on the 6th day of the Week. For if
according to the Seder Olam, the ninth of Ab were on the first day of the week,
then must the seventh of Ab be on the sixth day of the week, and to be that day
on which the Chaldeans began to set fire on some part of Jerusalem; as already
has been showed out of 2 Kin. 25.8.

Moreover Sealiger and some others have supposed that this year of the
destruction of the Temple by Nebuchadnezzar must be Sabbathicall from the
Autumn before: and this they say the Prophet Jeremy confirms, in the 28.
chapter of his prophecy, at the first verse: where he shows that when
Zedechia began to reign, it was the fourth year; which they take to be the
fourth year of a week from the Autumn before. And if so, then will the fourth
year of his reign be Sabbathicall till the Autumn thereof: and if his fourth
year, then his eleventh or last year in like manner. Nor was this (say they)
but that year of Rest which the same Prophet mentions in the 34 chapter of his
prophecy, where we read that when Nebuchadnezzar had raised his seige from
Jerusalem to go against the King of Egypt, the Jews took again their
Man-servants and Maide-servants, which they had a little before set at liberty,
because it was a Sabbathicall year, and would not let them go free as the Law
required in Deuteronomy. 15.12.

To which I answer, that the clearing of this depends upon the resolution of
that doubt which concerns that year in which the false Prophet Hananiah
resisted Jeremiah, and dyed because he taught rebellion against the Lord, and
persuaded the people (contrary to the prophecy of Jeremiah) that
Nebuchadnezzars yoke must not be endured 70 years, but that within two full
years it must be broken. Which story is at large set down in the 27 and 28
Chapters of Jeremiah, and by Scaliger referred to the first year of Zedechia,
who indeed supposes it to be the fourth year after a year of Rest: of which I
see no reason, because the whole scope of the four and thirtieth Chapter does
demonstrate that year to be a year of Rest when Nebuchadnezzar laid his seige
against Jerusalem; which we know to be the ninth year of Zedechia, and tenth
day of the tenth month, Ier. 52.4. Now this was in the year of the Julian
Period 4124. on the seventh of January feria tertia; at which time the ninth of
Zedechia was still running on, and was not ended till about the beginning of
the fourth month next after. Nebuchadnezzar therefore began to beseige
Jerusalem on the seventh day of January in the year of the Julian Period 4124.
which year was Sabbathicall from the Autumn before till the Autumn thereof,
and was that Sabbathicall year in which the Jews let their servants go free in
the beginning thereof, thereby encouraging them to fight against the Chaldeans
who then were come into the confines of Judea, ser. 34.1.
and fought againg the Cities thereof, Jerusalem not excepted, but had not yet
laid their seige against it: for that was not until the time before mentioned.
How long this continued before the Egyptians came with an Army to succor
Zedechia, by raising this first seige, is not expressed: Jer. 37.5.
but that they came, and that the seige thereupon was raised, is certain. This
when the Jews perceived, and saw that the Chaldeans were gone from them to
fight against the Egyptians, Jer. 37.10.
they took their freed servants again into bondage, vainly persuading
themselves that the Chaldeans would come back no more, which proved far
otherwise. For Nebuchadnezzar having put to flight the Army of Pharaoh, returns
again to Jerusalem, and on the fourth day of May, in the year of the Julian
Period 4125. renewes his seige against it, viz. by reckoning, first 390. and
then forty days, Ezekiel. 4.5.6. for these put together do make 430. and end on
the eighth day of July: they must therefore begin on the fourth of May in the
year next before that year in which they ended.
430. days before the City was broken up, as may be gathered out of the fourth
Chapter of Ezekiel. This fourth day of May was on the two and twenty day of the
second month, feria tertia: from whence the seige continued without any
further interruption until the City was taken, which was (as I said before) on
the eighth day of July. When therefore we read in Ier. 32.1.2. that
Nebuchadnezzars Army lay before Jerusalem in the tenth year of Zedechia, and
eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, it is to be understood of his lying against
it after this renewing of his seige, and before the beginning of the fourth
month: for about the end of the third month, or beginning of the fourth, was
the beginning of Zedechia's eleventh year, and likewise of all the other years
of his reign; insomuch that his ninth year began at the same time, in the year
of the Julian Period 4123 and was Sabbathicall from the Autumn thereof, until
the Autumn next after. From whence I conclude that if any part of Zedchia's
ninth year was Sabbathicall, then could to his first year be the fourth after a
Rest, but the sixth. Hananiah therefore dyed in no other then the fourth year
of Zedechia, having resisted the Prophet Jeremiah from the beginning of
Zedechia's reign till then; as Iearned Iunius, in his Annotations upon the
place, well observes.

And as for the burning of the Temple, take this note further; viz. that the
Temple was burnt before the full end of Nebuchadnezzars ninteenth year. 2 Kin.
25.8. For though at that time Zedechia had reigned eleven years complete, yet
was not Nebuchadnezzars ninteenth year fully finished, in regard that
Nebuchadnezzar began his reign something later in the year then Zedechia did:
for Zedechia began about the beginning of the fourth month, and Nebuchadnezzar
began not till after the seventh day of the fifth month at the soonest, whose
first year was in the end of Jehoiakims third year and beginning of his fourth,
in the year of the Julian Period 4107. at the Summer time of that year: For in
the Spring time of the year of the Julian Period 4104. toward the end of the
second month, Josiah was slain; Dan. 1.1. Jer. 25.1. Toward the end of the
third the seige began: but not till the fourth was entered did God give
Jehoiakim into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar. 2 Chro 36.6.
after whom Iehoahaz reigned three months: Then, in the Summer time of the
same year, Iehoaikim began; in the end of whose third year, and beginning of
his fourth, was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, as comparing the Prophet
Daniel to the Prophet Jeremy may be seen: at which time his Father was alive,
as Berosus shows. Moreover, in this year in the ninth month (and that's the
reason why the Jews fast then) God gave Iehoiakim into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar: he was thereupon his prisoner, and bound in chains to be
carried to Babylon, but went not; for afterward, by an argreement of
servitude, he was released and sent home, viz. in the But not till near the
entering of the Spring quarter.
beginning of the year of the Julian Period 4108. and so became his servant 2
Kings 26.1. from whence the 70 years in Jeremy do undoubtedly take their
beginning, Ier. cap. 25.2. and cap. 29.10. After this, Nebuchadnezzar
prosecuting his victories, takes all that belonged to the King of Egypt,
between the river of Egypt to the great river Euphrates: and in the mean while
his Father dyed, after he had reigned one and twenty years, as Berosus and
Ptolomy in his Mathematical Canon have declared. And now upon this
Nebuchadnezzar is sent for home into Babylon, where he takes the whole Empire
upon him, and reigns from hence 43 years, as is testified by the Authors
aforesaid: of which, more shall be spoken viz In cha. 11. An Eclipse in the
fifth year of Nabopollassar.
afterward.

And note that in the Julian Period 4093. was an Eclipse of the Moon, noted by
Ptolomy to be in the year of Nabonassar 127. and fifth year of Nabopollassar;
and so indeed there was. For though in this year of the Julian Period the sixth
year of Nabopollassar began, yet the Eclipse was whilst the fifth year was
still running on: for the Eclipse was on the 23 day of April, 29 minutes past
five in the morning; the sixth year not beginning until some time after.

Shall I add any thing more? A list of the Kings of Babylon from the beginning
of Nabonassar.
then take a list of the Kings of Babylon and their years from the beginning of
Nabonassar, till the death of Nebuchadnezzar; which is as follows.

Nabonassar began in the year of the Julian Period 3967. and reigned 14 years.
Nadius two, Chozirus and Porus five, Ilulaeus five, Mardokempadius 12. Arcianus
five. An Interregnum two, Belithus three; Apronadius six, Regebelus one,
Mesessimordachus four; An Interregnum eight; Assaradinus 12 complete, or 13
current. Saosduchaeus 20: his first was in the thirteenth or last of
Assaradinus. Then Chyniladanus 22, Nabopollassarus 21. And after him
Nebuchadnezzar 43. He reigned as it were Or one year and some odd months.
two years with his Father; which, with the 43 after him, ammount to 44 and
some odd months.

The rest of the Kings after Nebuchadnezzar until Cyrus shall be mentioned
afterward. Here therefore now is the end of this Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. The Periods again considered, and all such doubts and scruples
cleared as may arise concerning the just length of any of them: together with
Answers to certain other Questions not impertinent.
SECT. I. Of the time from the Creation to the end of the Flood.
THat the Flood came in the year of the World 1656. is granted by almost al
Chronologers: only some few have cast it into the year 1657. which I also take
to be the right year, and have so accounted it: And that for these reasons.

First because it came not till Methuselah was dead; who being born in the year
of the World 688. (as by the ages of the Patriarchs well appears) and living
969. years, must needs be a live till the year of the World 1656. was ended:
The Flood therefore came not till the year of the World 1657. It is but a
fabulous fancy to say that this Patriarch was alive and taken into Paradise:
for unless his abode were with Noah in the Ark, the Waters of the Flood could
not but drown him. But as his name in the Hebrew signifies, He dies, and the
Emission or Dart (meaning the Flood) comes.

Secondly, Noah was born (as does also well appear by the ages of the
Patriarchs) in the year of the World 1057. and lived 950 years: he dyed not
therefore till the year of the World 2007. was begun. Out of which take 350.
(for so long Moses says Noah lived after the Flood) and there will remain
1657. for the year when the Flood began.

And thirdly, the Mathematical calculations already mentioned agree well to
that year.

But it is objected: If the Flood came not in the year of the World 1656. how
then could it come in the six hundredth year of Noah; as Moses (in Genesis 7.11.)
says it did.

Well enough, For though the Six hundredth year of Noah was not ended till after
that Month in which the Flood began; yet it might be ended within some short
time after. For though the years of the Patriarchs (both when they begat their
children, and also when they themselves died) were full and complete years:
yet who can clearly prove that they were all born at one and the same time of
the year. It is therefore to be observed that Moses beginns not his account of
their years from the punctual day of their Nativity, but rather from the
beginning of the natural year nearest and next after the day of their birth,
as learned Langius notes. Patet id. (says he) in Noacho. Anno namque quo
diluvium finitum est ineunte, primo die primo mensis, statim incipiti 601
Noachi, cum tamen minime certum sit Noachum isto die aut tempore fuisse natum.
Lang. l 2. page 253.

Reckon therefore thus: viz. That Seth was borne to Adam when Adam was fully
and completely 130. years old: that is in the year of the world 131. Genesis
5.3. To which add 105. (theage of Seth when Enos was borne) and so will the
birth of Enos be in the year of the world 236, Genesis 5.6. To which add 90. (the
age of Enos when Kenan was born) so shall the birth of Kenan be in the year of
the world 326. Gen 5.9. To which add 70 (the age of Kenan when Mahalaleel was
borne, so shall the birth of Mahalaleel be in the year of the World 396. Genesis
5.12. To which add 65 the age of Mahalaleel when Jared was borne) so shall the
birth of Jared be in the year of the world 461. Genesis 5.15. To which add 162.
(the age of Jared when Henoch was born) so shalll the birth of Henoch be in the
year of the World 623. Genesis 5.18. To which add 65. (the age of Henoch when
Methuselah was born) so shall the birth of Methuselah be in the year of the
world 688. Genesis 5.21. To which add 187. (the age of Methuselah when Lamech was
born) so shall the birth of Lamech be in the year of the World 875. Genesis 5.25.
To which add 182. (the age of Lamech when Noah was borne) so shall the birth of
Noah be in the year of the world 1057. Genesis 5.29. To which add 600 years of
Noah, so shall the year of the world be 1657. in the beginning whereof the six
hundredth year of Noah was not quite finished, as already has been showed. And
thus we see the year of the Flood to be in the year of the World 1657, which
ended not until the year 1658. was begun.

And now for the time of the year when it began, Moses says that it was in
the second Month and seventeenth day of the Month when all the fountains of
the great Deep and Windows of Heaven were opened: which second Month must be
reckoned from the Spring, and not from Autumn; as in the second Chapter I have
already proved. Berosus the Chaldean agrees thereunto, saying that the Flood
began on the fifteenth day of that Month, which with them was called by the
name of Desius, which Month Desius is confessed by Scaliger in his Notes, page
44. to agree to that which Moses calls the second Month: The less reason
therefore had Scaliger to decline it; only he might have held to this, that
though the Month were right, yet the day was wrong; for if Desius were
altogether the same with that which was the second Month among the Jews,
then should not the day mentioned be the fifteenth, but seventeenth, Genesis 7.10.

Or if the Month were not altogether the same, but must have a fixed time of
beginning, which Langius proves to be on the 25 day of May; then must the
Flood begin, not on the fifteenth day thereof, but on thr twelfth: which day of
Desius I take to be the first day of the Flood, in regard that in this year it
agrees both to the fifteenth day of the second Month mentioned by Moses, as
also to the fifth day of June when the Flood began.

But of this I shall need to say no more. That which is next, shall be an
Hebrew and Julian Calendar for the whole time of the Flood, accounting the
beginning thereof to be in the year of the Julian Period 2366. on the fifth
day of June, feria sexta.

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood,
beginning in the year of the Julian Period 2366. and year of the World 1657.
The Cycle of the Sun Wat 14. Teh Dominicall Letter D, and the Cycle of the Moon
10.
The first Month. APRIL. The first Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 21 F 2 22 G 3 23
A 4 24 B 5 25 C 6 26 D The first day fo the Week. 7 27 E 8 28 F 9 29 G 10 30 A
11 1 May. B The first day of MAY. 12 2 C 13 3 D The first day of the Week. 14 4
E 15 5 F 16 6 G 17 7 A 18 8 B 19 9 C 20 10 D The first day of the Week. 21 11 E
22 12 F 23 13 G 24 14 A 25 15 B 26 16 C 27 17 D The first day of the Week. 28
18 E 29 19 F

An Hebrew and Iluian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The second Month MAY. The second Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 20 G 2 21 A 3 22 B
4 23 C 5 24 D The First day of the Week 6 25 E The frist day of JUNE. 7 26 F 8
27 G 9 28 A 10 29 B On this day the Flood began, Genesis 7.11. -- It was the very
same day of the Week on which Man was made: which circumstance of time is worth
the marking; for as on the sxth day of the Week God made both Man ad Beast, so
on the same day of the Week he sends a Flood of Waters to destroy them. 11 30 C
12 31 D 13 1 June. E 14 2 F 15 3 G 16 4 A 17 5 B 18 6 C 19 7 D 20 8 E 21 9 F 22
10 G 23 11 A 24 12 B 25 13 C 26 14 D 27 15 E 28 16 F 29 17 G 30 18 A

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Yeor of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The third Month JUNE. The third Month, Anno Mundi, 1657. 1 19 B 2 20 C 3 21
D The first day of the Week. 4 22 E 5 23 F 6 24 G 7 25 A 8 26 B 9 27 C 10 28 D
The first day of the Week. 11 29 E 12 30 F 13 1 July. G The first day of JULY.
14 2 A 15 3 B 16 4 C 17 5 D The first day of the Week. 18 6 E 19 7 F 20 8 G 21
9 A 22 10 B 23 11 C 24 12 D The first day of the Week. 25 13 E 26 14 F * This
was the last day of the forty days that it rained. 27 15 G On this day the
forty days that it rained were ended, but the Waters are still to prevail
until these forty be 150. Genesis 7.24. Dies enim pluviarum hisce 190. diebus
includendos esse, ex eo patet quod Arca quievit die xvii. Mensis septimi.
Calvis. in Chronol. 28 16 A 29 17 B 30 18 C

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Food.
The fourth Month JULY. The fourth Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 19 D The first
day of the Week. 2 20 E 3 21 F 4 22 G 5 23 A 6 24 B 7 25 C 8 26 D The first day
of the Week. 9 27 E 10 28 F 11 29 G 12 30 A 13 31 B 14 1 August. C The first
day of AUGUST. 15 2 D The first day of Week. 16 3 E 17 4 F 18 5 G 19 6 A 20 7 B
21 8 C 22 9 D The first day of the Week. 23 10 E 24 11 F 25 12 G 26 13 A 27 14
B 28 15 C 29 16 D The first day of the Week. 30 17 E

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The fifth Month. AUGUST. The fifth Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 18 F 2 19 G 3 20
A 4 21 B 5 22 C 6 23 D The first day of the Week. 7 24 E 8 25 F 9 26 G 10 27 A
11 28 B 12 29 C 13 30 D The first day of the Week. 14 31 E 15 1 September. F
This was the first day of SEPTEMBER. 16 2 G 17 3 A 18 4 B 19 5 C 20 6 D The
first day of the Week. 21 7 E 22 8 F 23 9 G 24 10 A 25 11 B 26 12 C 27 13 D The
first day of the Week. 28 14 E 29 15 F 30 16 G

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The six Month. SEPTEMBER The sixth Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 17 A 2 18 B 3
19 C 4 20 D The first day of the Week. 5 21 E 6 22 F 7 23 G 8 24 A 9 25 B 10 26
C 11 27 D The first day of the Week. 12 28 E 13 29 F 14 30 G 15 1 October. A
The first day of OCTOBER. 16 2 B 17 3 C 18 4 D The first day of the Week. 19 5
E 20 6 F 21 7 G 22 8 A 23 9 B 24 10 C 25 11 D The first day of the Week. 26 12
E 27 13 F 28 14 G On this day was the Autumnall Equinox. 29 15 A 30 16 B

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The seventh Month OCTOBER. The seventh Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 17 C 2 18 D
The first day of the Week. 3 19 E 4 20 F 5 21 G 6 22 A 7 23 B 8 24 C 9 25 D The
first day of the Week. 10 26 E 11 27 F 12 28 G 13 29 A 14 30 B 15 31 C 16 1
November. D The last of the hundred and fifty days, Genesis 7.24. 17 2 E On this
day the Ark rested on Mount Ararat; from whence the Waters decreased day by
day, until they were quite dried up and gone, Genesis 8.4, 5. 18 3 F 19 4 G 20 5
A 21 6 B 22 7 C 23 8 D The first day of the Week. 24 9 E 25 10 F 26 11 G 27 12
A 28 13 B

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The eighth Month. NOVEMBER The eighth Month, Anno Mundi, 1657. 1 14 C 2 15 D
The first day of the Week. 3 16 E 4 17 F 5 18 G 6 19 A 7 20 B 8 21 C 9 22 D The
first day of the Week. 10 23 E 11 24 F 12 25 G 13 26 A 14 27 B 15 28 C 16 29 D
The first day of the Week. 17 30 E 18 1 December. F The first day of DECEMBER.
19 2 G 20 3 A 21 4 B 22 5 C 23 6 D The first day of the Week. 24 7 E 25 8 F 26
9 G 27 10 A 28 11 B 29 12 C 30 13 D The first day of the Week.

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The ninth Month. DECEMBER. The ninth Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 14 E 2 15 F 3
16 G 4 17 A 5 18 B 6 19 C 7 20 D The first day of the Week. 8 21 E 9 22 F 10 23
G 11 24 A 12 25 B 13 26 C 14 27 D The first day of the Week. 15 28 E 16 29 F 17
30 G 18 31 A 19 1 January A On this day the Year of the Julian Period 2367.
began, and now the Cycle of the was 15. the Dominicall Letter C, and the Cycle
of the 11. 20 2 B 21 3 C 22 4 D 23 5 E 24 6 F 25 7 G 26 8 A 27 9 B 28 10 C the
first day of the Week. 29 11 D

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The tenth Month. JANUARY. The tenth Month, Anno Mundi, 1657. 1 12 E On this
day (being the first day of the tenth Month) the Mountain tops appeared; which
must be meant of the lower sort of Hills, how else could the Ark rest upon Mount
Ararat above two months before? see Genesis 8.4, 5. 2 13 F 3 14 G 4 15 A 5 16 B 6
17 C The first day of the Week. 7 18 D 8 19 E 9 20 F 10 21 G 11 22 A 12 23 B 13
24 C The first day of the Week. 14 25 D 15 26 E 16 27 F 17 28 G 18 29 A 19 30 B
20 31 C The first day of the Week. 21 1 February D The first day of FEBRUARY.
22 2 E 23 3 F 24 4 G 25 5 A 26 6 B 27 7 C The first day of the Week. 28 8 D 29
9 E 30 10 F

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The 11th Month. FEBRUARY. The eleventh Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 11 G 2 12 A
3 13 B 4 14 C The first day of the Week. 5 15 D 6 16 E 7 17 F 8 18 G 9 19 A 10
20 B On this day (being Sabbath day, and forth days after the appearing of the
Mountain tops) Noah sends forth a Raven out of the Ark, which flies up and
down till the Waters were abated, and returns into the Ark no more, Genesis 8.6,
7. 11 21 C 12 22 D 13 23 E 14 24 F 15 25 G 16 26 A 17 27 B On this day Noah
sends forth a Dove, and she (finding no rest) returns again, Genesis 8.9. 18
28 C 19 1 March. D 20 2 E 21 3 F 22 4 G 23 5 A 24 6 B On this day he again
sends forth a Dove, and she reutrned to him with an Olive branch (or stalk)
in her mouth; which showed the falling of the Waters, Genesis 8.10, 11. 25 7 C 26
8 D 27 9 E 28 10 F 29 11 G

An Hebrew and Julian Calendar for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The second Month MAY. The second Month, Anno Mundi 1658. 1 10 D 2 11 E 3 12 F
4 13 G 5 14 A 6 15 B 7 16 C The first day of the Week. 8 17 D 9 18 E 10 19 F 11
20 G 12 21 A 13 22 B 14 23 C The first day of the Week. 15 24 D 16 25 E 17 26 F
18 27 G 19 28 A 20 29 B 21 30 C The first day of the Week. 22 31 D 23 1 June. E
The first day of JUNE. 24 2 F 25 3 G 26 4 A 27 5 B On this day (being Sabbath
day) NOah came forth from the Ark, and offered Sacrifice, Genesis 8.14, 15. This
was a full year of days after the Flood began. 28 6 C 29 7 D 30 8 E

SECT. II. Of the Second Period from the end of the Flood when the face of the
ground was dry, to the Promise at the time of Abraham's departure from Charran
into Canaan, that it was a Period of 427. years almost ended.
THis Period is proved by the age of the Patriarchs after the Flood, as that
before it was proved by the age of the Patriarchs before the Flood.

The Flood (as we have already seen) began in the year of the world 1657. and
continued a year; so that it was not ended until after the year of the World
1658. was begun: for on the 27 day of the second Month, was the full end
thereof. Two years after which Arphaxad was borne, that is, in the year of
the world 1660. Genesis 11.10. To which year of the World add 35 (the age of
Arphaxad when Salah was borne) so shall the birth of Salah be in the year of
the world 1695, Genesis 11.12. To which add 30 (the age of Salah when Heber was
born) so shall the birth of Heber be in the year of the world 1725. Genesis 11.14.
To which add 34 (the age of Heber when Peleg was born) so shall the birth of
Peleg be in the year of the world 1759. Genesis 11, 16. To which add 30 the age of
Peleg when Reu was borne, so shall the birth of Reu be in the year of the
world 1789, Genesis 11.18. To which add 32 (the age of Reu when Serug was borne
(so shall the birth of Serug be in the year of the world 1821. Genesis 11.20. To
which add 30 (the age of Serug when Nahor was borne) so shall the birth of
Nahor be in the year of the world 1851. Genesis 11.22. To which add 29 (the age
of Nahor when Terah was borne) so shall the birth of Terah be in the year of
the world 1880. Genesis 11.24. To which add 130. (the age of Terah when Abraham
was borne) so shall the birth of Abraham be in the year of world 2010. To
which add 75 (the age of Abraham soon after the death of Terah) so shall we
come to the year of the world 2085. and year of the Julian Period 2794: in
which year, about the beginning of May, Abraham having received the promise
departed out of Haran, and was a Son of seventie five years old; Genesis 12.4.
that is, he was going on in his Seventie and fifth year, which not long after
was accomplished,
the reckoning being here as before in the 600. year of Noah when the Flood
began.

Quest. The true time of Abraham's birth.
But why is it that Abraham is reckoned to be borne when his Father was 130.
years old, and not rather when he was seventie as the text seems to intimate
Genesis 11.27?

Answ. Because Abraham, who was a Son of Genesis 12.4.
75 years at his departure from Haran, departed not thence until his Father
was dead; as Saint Stephen witnesses, Act. 7.4. Now we know that his Father
lived Genesis 11.32.
205. years; from whence if we take 75, it will appear that Abraham was not
borne when Terah was Seventie, as the text seems to intimate, but when he was
130. because 75. taken out of 205, leaves for the remainder 130.

Secondly, it is witnessed by the ancient testimony of the true, not forged
Philo, who being a Jew, was Ambassador from his own Nation to Caius Caligula;
witnessed I say by him, that Abraham went not from Haran (otherwise called
Charran) until his Father was dead. For it is not like (says he) that any who
have read the Law can be ignorant how Abraham removing from the Chaldean Land
stayed in Charran: and when his Father dyed there, he removed also from that
Land. And again, He leaves it being seventie five years old, which Moses also
says in Genesis 12.4.

This of Philo is a clear testimony, and well worthy of our serious
acceptance: for he was as ancient as the Protomartyr Stephen, and understands
Moses no other way then he had done.

Thirdly, Rabbi Menasseh (in his Conciliator) declares the same; showing
there, that their best learned Interpreters understand it so.

Fourthly, The age of Abraham bring expressed when he came from Charran, and
not when he removed from Vr, was for no reason but to guide us to the time his
of birth by being joined to the time of Terah's death, who dyed in Charran and
not in Vr, Genesis 11.32. And further note, that in Chaldea God appears to
Abraham, and bids him, Get thee out of thy Country and from thy kindred, but
makes no mention of leaving his Fathers house, for that he took along with
him, Gens 11.31. But when God calls him from Haran or Charran, he then bids him
depart from his Father house as well as he had done from his Country and
kindred before; for now he left his brother Nahor and all his Fathers house
behind him. In the first Call Terah was alive, and to him is ascribed the
conduct of that Journey from Vr to the Chaldees, as if he had received the
Call, and had been the chief mover in the business; but it is only to show
his Joshua 24.2.
Conversion and readiness to go with Abraham, to whom God appeared whilst he
was in Vr of the Chaldees, Genesis 15.7. saying, Get thee out of thy Country, and
from thy kindred, Acts 7.2.3. See also Josh. 24.2. But in the second Call Terah
was dead, and Abraham was 57 years old, Genesis 12.1.4. Acts 7.4. And as he was
57, so his Father was 205. which shows still that Abraham was borne when
Terah was 130. For the story in Genesis runs current and in a continuation,
this being the order of the words: And the days of Terah were 205 years, and
he dyed in Charran; and God said unto Ahraham, Get thee from thy Fathers house:
and in thee all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed: and Abraham was 75
years old when he departed from Charran.

To illustrate then the whole by way of paraphrase: God in Vr of the Chaldees
appeared to Abraham and said unto him, Get thee out from thy kindred, but take
thy Fathers house with thee, and go to to a Land which I shall show thee: And
when Abraham told Terah of his command, Terah condescended and consented; And
Terah took Abraham, and Lot and Sarai, and they went away together from Vr to
Haran, and dwelt there. And Terah dyed in Haran; And then God says to Abraham,
Get thee out of thy Country and from thy kindered, and from thy Fathers house
also now, and go into the Land that I shall show thee: that is, into Canaan;
whether Abraham went so soon as he departed from Charran, which was in the Land
of Chaldea also, and not far from Vr; wherefore God again called Abraham
thence to go into Canaan, Genesis 12.1. And although there was a nearer way from
Vr to Canaan, than to go By Charran (as in the Maps of those Countries may be
seen) yet because the nearest way was most dangerous and troublesome, God led
them about by an inhabited and safe way, providing so for their infirmities, as
he did the like afterward for Abraham's children, Exodus 13.11.18.

Beside, when Joshua says: Joshua 24.2.
Our fathers beyond the River worshipped strange Gods, even Terah the Father of
Abraham: he makes Moses more clear and manifest; viz. that to Abraham in Vr
God appeared, by whom Terah was moved to go with Abraham. Now Moses mentions
only the appearing to Abraham, and the bringing of him out of Vr; but leaves
the speech to be gathered by the like in Genesis the twelfe, from whence Saint
Stephen frames it; saying, that after Terah's death, God bids him leave his
Fathers house, and not his Land and kindred only. And note that the family of
Terah was in his house: out of which Abraham could not depart while Terah is
with him, as principal of the journey. Nor does the Hebrew text in Genesis,
Chap. 12. verse. 1. but run on in plainness, thus: And God said unto Abraham.
Not, for God had said. And therefore when Terah dyed in Haran, God said unto
Abraham, Get thee out of thy Country and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers
house, unto the Land that I will show thee. And in a word, to take away all
further cavil about these two callings of Abraham, let it be again observed
that he was in his Country whilst he was at Haran as well as when he was at Vr
of the Chaldees: for both these places were in one Country, in Mesopotamia, the
Country between the viz. Chabora and Euphrates. See Willet on Genesis c. 25.
Quest. 22.
rivers, containing both Syria and Chaldea. And in that regard Abraham
afterward sending to Haran for a wife for his Son Isaac, called it his
Country, and the place of his kindred, as is recorded in Genesis 24.2.10. See also
Codoman in his Chronology, Note this, that as it was in the birth of Noah's
Sons: so also in the birth of Thares Sons.
lib. 1. cap. 3.

But to go and give truth the more perfect luster, let this be likewise known
and well observed, that Their (or Terah) being 70 years old begat the eldest of
those three Sons ( Abram, Nahor, and Haran) and not all of them: even as Noah
had done before, who begat the eldest of his three [ Sem, Ham, and Japhet] when
he was 500. The eldest of them I say, and not any of them before that year: So
that if Noah begat the eldest of his three, when he was 500. then Terah begat
the eldest of his three when he was 70. The eldest of Noah's three, was not
Sem: neither could the eldest of Terah's three, be Abraham; because the manner
of speaking is used in the Genealogies of the one, which is in the Genealogies
of the other. If therefore it could be proved that Sem were the eldest of
Noah's children, it would be the more easily granted that Abraham was the
eldest of Terah's children: but the one cannot be proved, and therefore the
other may not be granted. The contrary may be found and made apparent, viz.
that Sem was not the eldest, nor that any of the three was borne before Noah
was 500. which being so, the like must be in the begetting of Terah's Sons;
namely, that Abraham was not the eldest (though first named) nor that any of
the three was borne before Terah was 70. The nameing of Sem first, and of
Abraham first, does nothing prove their Eldership: For it is no necessary
consequence to say the first named in Scripture were always the eldest in
blood and birth; then should Jacob be elder then Esau, and Ephraim elder then
Manasses: which we know to be otherwise, Genesis 28.5. and chap. 48.20. It is
therefore well observed that Moses does neither reckon the Sons of Terah, nor
those of Noah, according to their Eldership, but according to their Dignity:
and although they who be first named, had not the priority of Birthright; yet
the Dignity of it is bestowed on them, as it was upon Jacob and others: because
the Scriptures honor the blessed seed and line of Christ above the rest. For
in Scripture there is a threefold order of numbering men: the first is
Natural; the second Personal, or of Dignity; and the third Historical. Now
hereupon it was that Saint Austin said: Piety (says he) or rather divine
Election, which evermore does carry piety and the fear of God along with it,
was the thing which gave place and precedence to Sem among the children of
Noah, and to Abraham among those of Terah. And indeed Abraham being the Father
of the faithful, in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, was
in that respect preferred before his other brethren. When therefore Moses comes
at Terah, he then ends his Genealogy, and reckons three together, as he did
before when he came at Noah; only setting down the time when either of them
begat the eldest of the three: And lest it might be thought that the first
named was the first born, he does show that to be otherwise; as in Sem when he
begat Arphaxad two years after the Flood, for then was Sem but an hundred years
old; and in Abraham when his Father dyed, for then was Abraham but 75 years
old. The eldership among Noah's three belonged to Iapeth, but the dignity and
prerogative belonged to Sem. For this is certain: The Flood began in the 600
year of Noab's life; and Sem two years after that was but an hundred years
old, Genesis 11.10. Which being so, two must be added to 600. and then taking
Sems 100 out of 602. the remainder will not be 500, but 502, which was the true
and right age of Noah at Sems birth. The 500 year therefore is assigned for the
birth of his eldest, which Moses more expressly says was not Sem but Japhet;
calling Sem the Father of the Sons of Heber, and brother of Iapeth the elder:
Not the elder brother of Iapeth; as may be seen, Genesis 10.21. And of Cham (or
Ham) he likewise says, that he was a younger Son: For when Noah awoke from his
wine, he knew what Cham his younger Son had done, Genesis 9.24, In which place the
word younger has relation to the other two Sons who were free from the fact:
and therefore this Cham was the youngest of them all; for (as we see) it was in
respect of his other brethren that he is called the younger son. And note that
this also shows, that till Noah was 500, none of all the three was born.
Norwil the true reading of the text suffer it to be otherwise: For thus stand
the Words. And Noah was 500 years old: and Noah begat Sem, Ham, and Iapeth. By
which it appears, that unless he had lived no longer then 500 years, not any
of them all could be born before that time. Draw then the Parallel, and the
like will be in the children of Terah which was in those of Noah; viz. that the
eldest of the three was born when their Father was 70, and this (as far as I
can see any probability in the matter) must needs be Haran, who dyed before
Terah, and had children marriageable for his two brethren; namely Milcha for
Nahor, and Ischa (if she were Sarai) for Abraham. But however, whether she were
Sarai, yea or no, it makes no matter: for this is certain, Lot was the Son of
Haran, and not much younger then Abraham. For at the destruction of Sodom (
Abraham being then At which time Abraham's body was said to be dead, but was
revived by the power of God, not only for the generation of Isaac, but for
further procreation; as appears, Genesis 25.
99 years old) when the daughters of Lot lay with their Father, they said of
him that he was an old man. Set then the birth of Abraham before Harans, and
how can any of these things be?

Beside, the time from the Flood to Terah's seventieth year was too short to
have the world so full of People and Kingdoms as it was in Abraham's time:
Hist. of the World, lib. 2. page 190.
For in Abraham's time, and long before (as it is excellently observed by Sir
Walter Raleigh) all the then known parts of the World were peopled: All regions
and countries had their Kings. Egypt had many magnificent Cities: and so also
had Palestine and all the bordring Countries; yea and all that part of the
World beside, as far as India: And those not built with sticks, but of hewn
stones, and defended with walls and Rampires: Which magnificence needed a Parent
of more Antiquity then they have supposed, who place the birth of Abraham so
near the Flood as Terah's seventieth year. For that time, even in reason, is
not sufficient, being It was no more then 292
less then 300 years.

All therefore considered do make me conclude that Abraham, undoubtedly, was
borne when Terah was 130 years old. For though some frivilous objections may be
made to the contrary, yet it is in vain to object against such testimonies and
proofs as will pass for current any where but among the Singular and
inconsiderate, who are rather willing to wrangle for the upholding of their
opinions, then to yield or give over from what they first took up to be true.
For as there be some who love to keep to that which best fits their fancy: so
there be others who think it a discredit to let go what they at first
maintained.

SECT. III. Of the third Period, from the Promise at Abraham's departing out of
Haran, to the coming of the Israelites out of Egypt, that it was a Period of
four hundred and thirty years.
THis is proved by texts and testimonies out of Scripture. For first Saint Paul
says expressly, That the Law began There were some odd months more. But the
Apostle leaves out the months as an imperfect number.
430 years after the Promise, Galat. 3.17. Which that it was the same promise
of Christ that Abraham had in Genesis 12. is manifest by what the same Apostle
said before, at the eighth verse, viz. That in thee shall all the Nations of
the Earth be sed: agreeing therein to Moses, Genesis 12.3.

Now this directs to the right reckoning, but is not altogether so precise as
that which we have in Exodus 12.40. For there we may perceive that the precise
and exact ending of these years was not on the day that the Law was given, but
on the day that the Israelites came away out of Egypt. The words of which Text
be these; And the sojourning of the Children of Israel, whereby they sojourned
in Egypt 30 years, and 400 years. which speech is altogether Elliptica oration,
or a defectve speech: and is thus to be supplied; namely, And the sojourning of
the Children of Israel, whereby they sojourned in Egypt, was to the end of 430
years. Not that they were in Egypt so long, but that they were a sojourning
Nation so long: the beginning whereof was in the days of Abraham, at the time
when he received the Promise, as by that of the Apostle before mentioned may be
seen. The word Sojourning therefore (here used by Moses) has relation to that
time of the Promise when Abraham left his Fathers house and became a sojourner
in a strange Land, even the Land which God had promised to show him, and which
he afterward gave to him to be possessed by his posterity in the fourth
generation after him, Genesis 15.16.

And now that these years are precisely and exactly so many and no more,
appears by what follows in the next verse, viz. Exodus 12.41. wherein it is
said, That when the 430 years were finished, even on the same day, all the
hosts of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt.

They therefore that begin this reckoning at Jacobs going thither are deceived.
For first Koath was one who went when Jacob went, Genesis 46.11. His son was
Amram, Exodus 6.18.20. and Amrams son was Moses, Number. 26.59. Wherefore seeing
Koath was the enterer, and Moses the departer, the time from thence could not
extend to 430 years; for Koath lived but 133 years, Exodus 6.18. Amram but 137,
verse. 20. and Moses was but 80 at the departure, Exodus 77. All which added
together make but 350. and yet some of those years must be deducted, because
they were not born one at the just end of another life, but lived some while
the father and the son together: which deduction being made, the years
remaining will be yet fewer and want still more of 430.

Secondly, Jochabed was the mother of Moses, and immediate daughter of Levi,
born to him in Egypt; as it is, Number. 26.59. Take then for a trial the age of
Moses at the departure, which was Exodus 7.7.
80 years; and the whole age of Levi was Exodus 6.16.
137. years: and add them together, so shall you have 217. Unto which number
must be added 213 for the age of Jochabed, or else there cannot be 430. But
that this should thus hang together, is impossible: for Levi was born 43 years
before he came into Egypt, and living but 137 in all, there can be but 94 taken
from him, and but 80 from Moses; which added together make but 174. Now then
supposing that the abode in Egypt, from Jacobs going thither, was fully 430
years, it must needs be that Jochabed lived 256 years, although her age be
accounted but from the day of her fathers death unto the day of her sons birth:
But to say there is likelihood in this, were extreme madness. For who thinks
it probable that a woman (in those days) could be 256 years, and yet bear a
child? or that a Kings daughter would make choice of one so old to be her
Nurse? Beside, this woman's age must be yet longer: for it is not like that she
was born just at her fathers death, neither is it true that she dyed at her
sons birth, because she was chosen (by Pharaoh's daughter) to be his Nurse.

And as for Levi, to prove that he was 43 years old (as has been mentioned)
this is well known; viz. that Joseph was but four years younger then he, and
when Joseph's brethren came into Egypt, Joseph then was but 39 years old: Levi
therefore must needs be 43 at the same time (because four and 39 make 43) and
not live his whole time after the descending of Jacob thither. Se Genesis 41.46.
and compare it with Genesis 45.6.

Thus we see how Moses is to be understood in Exodus 12.40. and consequently to
account the 430. years of this Period. For the dwelling of the children of
Israel who dwelled in Egypt, was 430. years: that is, Their peregrination, or
their dwelling as strangers. And so the Greek translateth; which the Apostle
also confirms, in Act. 13.17. Their dwelling (I say) as strangers, begun from
the time that Abraham left his kindred and his Fathers house, as already has
been proved. For though this people were not called Israelites in Abraham's
time,
but afterward: N. B.
yet because they proceeded out of Abraham's loins, and did evermore boast of
him as their Father, and because he also (the thing which Moses aims at) was
the first in their generation who sojourned in a strange land, the foresaid
Text in Exodus puts no difference, but speaks of them all according to that
name by which they were then called when Moses brought the seed of Abraham out
of Egypt, even in the fourth generation, as God himself had formerly spoken
and told it to Abraham in particular long before. And thus we have hitherto the
right meaning of that text.

Quest. Moses to be understood in his number of 400. years in Genesis 15.13? does
not that cross the former account.

Answ. Nothing at all. For there is a double sum of years mentioned
concerning the seed of Abraham sojourning and afflicted; viz. 400. Genesis 15.13.
and 430. Exodus 12.40. The 430. years was from Abraham's departing out of Haran
to the coming of the Israelites out of Egypt, as has been proved. And the 400
was from the fifth of Isaac to that time also: for both these reckonings have
both one time of ending, but begin not both at once; the latter not beginning
till Ismael (who was borne of the Egyptian woman Hagar) mocked Isaac, and was
cast out of Abraham's house. The Apostle makes this manifest, by calling Ismaels
mocking of Isaac persecution, Galat. 4.28. So also Moses, in saying that
Abraham's seed should be evil entreated. For know this of a surety, that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land not theirs: and shall serve them, and they
shall entreat them evil 400. years, Genesis 15.13. meaning, that from the
beginning of this affliction should be 400. years before the end of their
affliction from the Egyptian bondage. For as the first manifest affliction of
Ahrahams seed began now when this son of the Egyptian woman in a strange land
mocked Isaac, so it ended at the bringing of the same out of Egypt 400. years
after. Not that they were afflicted all that time, but that their affliction
which began now in a strange land should not be ended, nor they brought into
their promised land, until the end thereof.

SECT. IIII. Of the fourth Period, from the coming out of Egypt to the
beginning of the building of King Salomons Temple, that it was a Period of 479.
years complete, or of 480. years current.
THis is proved by a plain Text, in 1 King. 6.1, where we read thus; And it
came to pass in the four hundredth and fourscore year, after the children
of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Salomons
reign over Israel, in the month of Zif which is the second Month, that he
began to build the house of the Lord.

In which Text we have the whole sum in gross, but must find the
particulars elsewhere: and they are found as follows.

First, 40. years in the wilderness after the Israelites came out of Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 1.3. Deuteronomy. 34.4.5. Josh. 1.2. Psalm. 95.10. Act. 13.18.

Secondly, 17 to the death of Joshua after Moses. For seeing all the other
numbers but this may be found expressly written, this must needs be as much, as
all the other (when they are gathered together) shall want of 480.

Thirdly, from the death of Joshua to the death of Othniel, 40. Jud. 3.11.

Fourthly, 80. after that to the death of Ehud, Jud. 3.30.

Fifthly, 40. from thence to the death of Deborah, Jud. 5, 31.

Sixthly, 40. after that to the death of Gideon, Judge. 8.28.

Seventhly, Abimelech 3 years after Gideon, Judge. 9.22.

Then Thola 23, Judge. 10.2. Jair 22. Judge. 10.3. Jeptha 6. Judge. 12.7. Ibsan 2.
Judge. 12.9. Elon X. Judge. 12.9. Abdon VIII. Judge. 12.14. Sampson. XX. Judge.
16.31. Heli 40. 1 Samuel 4.18. Samuel and Saul 40.10 Act. 13.21. David after Saul
40.2 Sam 5.4. Solomon after David till the founding of the Temple 4 current:
for in the fourth year of his reign the Temple was founded, 1 King. 6.1.

All which Sums being added together, amount to 480. To which I add this
note, that if Solomon began in the last year of King David, as some men
think, then must Joshua have 18 years for the time that he had ruled after
Moses: which I also think he had.

Quest. But if this account be true, Judge. 11.26. where Jeptha says, That the
children of Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her Towns, and in Aroer and her
Towns, and in all the Cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon, three
hunded years. By which it seems to be gathered that Jeptha judged not till
300 years after the children of Israel came out of the wilderness into the
land of Canaan, at the death of Moses. And if the time from thence thither,
were 300. years then must the time from the coming out of Egypt to the
Temple, be more then 480. For from the first year of Jeptha to the fourth
year of King Solomon, were 175. years: which added to the 40 years of the
wilderness, and to the 300. after that to Jeptha, do make in all 515.

But I answer that these 300. Moses death, but from the time mentioned in the
beginning of Jeptha's narration, ver. 16. where the words are, But when Israel
came up from Egypt, etc. From whence to the days of Jeptha were 306. years,
which 6 odd years Jeptha omitted, it being not greatly material to account
them so precisely; thus does Luther understand the place, Iunius, Broughton and
others. Broughtons observation being this; Note (says he) that the 40 years
in the wilderness are joined as one time here, that things done in sundry
parts of it be reckoned from one beginning.

Or (as a late writer answers) About 34 years after that Sihon King of the
Amorites had fought against the predecessor of Balack the son of Zippor King
of Moah, and had taken all his Land, even unto Arnon; Israel smote Sihon and
all his people, and possessed his Country: Which was in the last year of Moses.
From whence unto Ieptha were but 266 years current; yet by adding the years of
their own possession unto Sihon's whose right they had by the Law of Conquest,
Ieptha did justly say, that they had dwelt in or possessed those Countries 300
years. Which indeed is the same answer that Sir Walter Raleigh gives in his
History of the World, lib. 2. cap. 13. sect. 8. But I take the first answer to
be the best: leaving the Reader nevertheless to make choyc of which he
pleases.

Qust. Paul's number mentioned in Acts 13.20. where we read that after the Land
was divided, God gave his people Judges by the space of 450. years till Samuel
the Prophet? Verily if that time were a space of 450 years, then (what with the
forty years in the Wilderness, the whole time of Joshua, the forty years of
Samuel and Saul, the forty of David, and the four of Solomon) the whole time
from the coming out of Egypt to the Temple, will be almost 600 years.

Answ. No, it will not: For it is answered, either that the word (...), which
signifies 400, was mistaken by the scribe and put for (...), which is but
three hundred: or else that Saint Paul reckoned as they did who reckoned the
years of the Oppressors so as they added them to the years of the Judges, and
not included them.

As for the first, Beroald. lib. 3. Chronol. c. 4.
it might be granted were it not that all Copies have 450. For we do not know
(says Beroaldus) of any Copy, either Greek or Latin, which has 350, but (as
the ordinary reading is) 450. And therefore we cannot think either that there
was a fault in the scribe, or that after the Apostles time some one or other
Master Perkins thinks so, in his Harmony of Scripture.
took in hand to correct the text, according to their understanding of the Book
of Judges, as Master Perkins supposes. For (as another speaks) Non est cur
dicamus omnes Codices Graecos and Latinos esse corruptos: cum suppeditat
expedita conciliationis ratio.

And therefore (according to the second solution) we may rather think that
Saint Paul reckoned as they did, who took the years of the Oppressors and
added them to the years of the Judges: accounting those times apart, which are
of right to be included.

As for Example: When Jabin oppressed Israel, Deborah was one who Judged at the
same time, Judges 4.4. And when the Philistines oppressed, then was Sampson a
Judge: For (says the text) He judged. Israel in the days of the Philistines,
twenty years, Judges 15.20. By which two places I doubt not but we are taught
how to account the rest.

The maine objection is, how the Land can be said to have rest 40 years after
the overthrow of Chusan by whom they were afflicted eight years, or eighty
after the overthrow of Eglon, if part of those years it were vexed with war,
and the people held by their oppressors under a miserable bondage.

But to this I find a late writer, in his Annotations upon the place, give a
fair answer; viz. That it is not unusual in the Scripture to denominate a full
number of years, from that which is properly true only of the greater part of
that number; as we see Genesis 35.26. Where after the naming of the twelve sons of
Jacob, this clause is added, These are the sons of Jacob that were born to him
in Padan-Aram, and yet Benjamin is mentioned amongst them, who was not born in
Padan-Aram, but in the Land of Canaan; and so likewise, Acts 7.14. where it is
said, that Joseph sent and called his Father and all his kindred, threescore
and fifteen souls, and yet indeed there went but threescore and ten of them at
that time into Egypt, Genesis 46.27. And so again, Exodus 12.40. where it is said,
that the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four
hundred and thirty years, and yet they were not in Egypt after Jacobs going
thither above two hundred and fifteen years. And therefore in that it is said,
And the Land had rest forty years, the meaning may well be, that the Land had
rest to the end of forty years, to wit, counting the forty years from the death
of Joshua, to the death of Othniel; and so of the rest where the like phrase is
found. And so indeed Tremelius translates these words, usque ad quadragesimum
annum, unto the expiration of forty years. Which is further confirmed by the
like expression, in the fourteenth Chap. at the seventeenth verse, where it is
said of Sampsons wife, that she wept before him the seven days while the feast
lasted: and yet the meaning is only, that she wept to the ending of those
seven days, to wit, from the time he refused to tell her the meaning of his
Riddle.

Furthermore, Saint Matthews Genealogies from Rahab to David, do make it yet
more manifest. For Rahab hid the spies; She was the mother of Boaz; He the
father of Obed; and Obed of Iesse; and Iesse of David. Now though Rahab should
bring forth Boaz at 80; and Boaz beget Obed at 120; and Obed Iesse at 120; and
Iesse David at 120: yet all these far stretched ages would fall short of 450.

How Saint Paul therefore reckoned, is apparent: and his true meaning is
explained, without wrong to any text. For in mentioning 450, it is with a
clause of Proviso; saying, not absolutely God gave them Judges 450 years, but
as it were (or after a sort) 450 years. Which is as if it should be said, they
were 450 years by adding the Judges and Opressours years together: Joseph
Antiq. lib. 9. c. 11.
after which manner the Jews (as we see by Josephus) used to reckon these
times. For Josephus sets the building of the Temple, five hundred ninty
years and one, after the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt: which in an
express text of Scripture, is but 480; as at the first I showed, out of the 1
Kings 6.1. and have hitherto cleared it to be so, against all objections made
to the contrary.

Howbeit, some perhaps may not as yet be fully satisfied until I further speak
my mind concerning the opinions of Codoman and Petavius, who have declined the
common path, and pitched upon an Interpretation serving rather to enlarge this
Period, then to open the truth of the reckoning.

And as for Codoman, Codom. Chro. lib. 1. c. 17. and lib 2. quest 27 20.
he reckons from the death of Joshua to the death of Eli 430 years, not
accounting Sampsons 20 years, but under the 40 years of the Philistines. And
whereas Saint Paul names 450, he finds 20 years to make up Saint Paul's
number, to have been spent after the death of Joshua by the Seniours, before
the Oppression under Chusan. After which to make all this reconcilable with the
account of the 480 years in the 1 Kings 6.1. he says we must begin to reckon
them, not in the beginning, but in the ending of the journying of the
Israelites from Egypt, which he makes to be 25 years after the beginning of
Othniels government; from whence if we cast the years of the Judges with the
years of Servitude, and so to these years add the 40 of Samuel and Saul, the 40
of David and the three of Solomon, we shall have the just sum of 480 years.
Some texts he brings to prove that the Annus egressionis ex Egypto, be
egressionis non incipientis, sed finitae: as in Deuteronomy. 4.45. and Psalm. 114.1.3.

And next, how their journying should be said to have had an end, not till the
25 year after the victory of Othniel, is (says he) because all the Tribes had
not obtained their possessions till then; at which time the Danites at length
seated themselves, as is declared, Judge. 18.

And finally, whereas it is said the expedition of the Danites was when there
was no King in Israel, it is because either Othniel might be dead by that time,
or else that he might have refused all Sovereignty, and have betaken himself
to a private life.

But (as is excellently answered by Sir Walter Raleigh) what help of authority
has Codoman for this? Histor^ of the World, lib. 2. c. 13. sect. 8.
Or who did ever tell him that the conquest of Laish by the Tribe of Dan was
performed in the 25 year of Othniel? Or what more has he then his own
conjecture, to show that Othniel did so renounce the office of a Judge after 25
years, that it might be truly said that there was then no King in Israel, but
that every man did what was good in his own eyes? Nor is it but most improper
to give date unto actions commenced long after, from an expedition finished
long before. Or who will not think it strange, that the most notable account of
time, serving as the only guide for certain ages in sacred Chronology,
should not take name and beginning from that illustrious deliverance out of
Egypt rehearsed often by God himself as the principal of his benefits to
Israel; but should rather have reference to the taking of a town by 600 men
that robbed a Chapel by the way, and stole from thence Idols to be their
guides, as not going to work in God's name? Surely this accident upon which
Codoman builds, has either no time given it, or a time far different from
that which he supposes, and is indeed rather by him placed in such a year,
because it best stood with his interpretation so to have it, then for any
certainty or likelihood of the thing it self.

Nor be there but certain ages in Scripture which (as I showed before) will
make against this large account.

Beroaldus likewise has sufficiently justified the words of Saint Paul,
Beroald. in his Chronol. lib. 3. c. 4.
as having reference to a common opinion among the Scribes in those days, that
the hunded and eleven years of the servitude, were to be reckoned apart from
the 339. years ascribed to the Judges; which account the Apostle would not
stand precisely to contradict, but rather chose to speak as the vulgar,
qualifying it with a quasi, where he says quasi quadringentis and
quinquagentis annis, as it were 450. years. But Codoman not being thus
contented, would needs have it to be so indeed, and therefore disjoynes the
members to make the account even: although in so doing he dasheth himself
against a notable Text, on which all Authors have builded for the true account
of the times from the departure out of Egypt to the foundation of Salomons
Temple. This (for the most of it) is the answer of Sir Walter Raleigh to
Codomans opinion: an answer full and home enough, and does strike to the root
also of Petavius his Tenet, by whose account were 520. years from the coming
out of Egypt to the Temple. Petav. in his Rat. Temp. par. 2. l. 2. c. 6. See
him also lib. 9. c. 33. De Doctr. Tempo.


I come therefore now to him who in answer to that in the 1 K. 6.1. says (as
Codoman before him) the Annus egressionis late sumitur. Nos (says he)
egressionem ex Egypto pro anno illo accipimus, quo post quadragenariam in
Arabiae solitudine mansionem, Chananaeam ingressi sunt Jordane trajecto. Ita
enim solet interdu^ in sacris literis usurpari; ut Deu. 4.45.46. Ps. 114 etc.
Thus Petavius in his Rationario Temporum, and in his Ninth book and 33 Chapter
De Doctrina Temporum, who gives to Joshua 14 years, to the Seniours after him
10. and includes the years of the fifth and Sixth Servitude within the years
of the Judges, as not being expressly severed from them: so also Heli has 20 of
his 40 years included within the times of Sampson; and in that he follows
the Septuagint, wherein Heli has but 20 years. But the Hebrew (text which is
the Original) spoyleth the account of this great Chronologer, in which Heli
has not 20 but 40 years; and therefore though he be excellent in many things,
yet here he must give us leave to decline him; yea, though he cites Saint
Austin to defend him: for the Original is to be followed, and not the
translation; all men of any learning knowing how corrupt the Septuagint is in
numbers, and how differing from the Hebrew text.

But if he will be ruled by the Septuagint for Heli, why not also for Elon the
tenth Judge, who though he be in the Original Hebrew text (as may be seen,
Judge. 12.11.) is not at all to be found in their translation?

And as for Saint Austin though in the place viz. lib. 17. de civit Dei. c. 13.
quoted by Petavius in his Rationario Temporum, he reckons the whole time of
Ehud ( viz. 80 years) apart, and does not include the 18. years Oppression
under Eglon within the compass thereof: yet in viz. lib. 18. de civit Dei c.
22.
another place he reckons otherwise; accounting 27. years for Joshua, and
after him 329. more for the Judges till Samuel and Soul: which could not be but
by including the Oppressors years within the years of the Judges, there being
nothing wanting but the 10 years of Elon to make all right, which Judge Saint
Austin (by following the Septuagint) has left quite out, though it be contrary
to the truth, as I have already showed ont of Judge. 12.11. For if those 10
years were added to 329, they then would make 339. which is indeed the whole
time of the Judges, that being the time which the Scripture allows them after
Joshua.

And thus we see how Petavius also as well as Codoman, goes a wrong way to
work: of whom I shall need to say no more; neither had I said so much in the
contradicting so eminent a man, had it not been for the love of truth.

SECT. V. Of the fifth Period, from the foundation of the Temple in the fourth
year of King Solomon, to the Desolation thereof in the nineteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzar. In which is also showed the true and right account of the 390.
and 40 years in Ezekiel.
THis next Period is the time that the Temple stood, and is a Period of 423.
years, three Julian Months, and about eight days; beginning in the year of
the Julian Period 3703. and ending in the year of the same Period 4126. which
space is thus gathered; namely by the time after the fourth year of King
Solomon to the first year of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to
sin: Ezekiel. 4.5.
after which were 390. years taught us by Ezekiel in the fourth Chapter of
Ezekiel his Prophecy: at the end whereof the Land is left desolate of all her
Inhabitants, in the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadnezzar, almost 427.
years after the Temple began to be built. For the first year of Jeroboam was
Because K. Solomon reigned 40. years and but 3, before he began to build the
Temple.
37 years after King Solomon began to lay the foundation: to which if we add
390. we have 427. Now out of this number we must deduct 4 (because the Temple
was burnt in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar as appears 2 King.
25.8.9.) and then there will remain 423. the whole time of the years that the
Temple stood. And as for the Months and days that were more, they were I say
three Julian Months and about eight days: for King Solomon laid the
foundation on the last day of April, and on the eighth of August it was
destroyed. And then again, that there were 37 years from the fourth of King
Solomon to the beginning of the 390. years of Ezekiel in the first year of
Jeroboam when he concluded for the setting up of his Idolatry, is true: for
indeed there were 37 years, threesore days and one: For (as I said before)
King Solomon laid the foundation of the Temple on the last day of April in the
year of the Julian Period 3703. and Jeroboam concluded with his Council for
the the setting up of his Idolatry on the last day of June, which was the three
and twentieth day of the third month in the year of the Period Iulion 3740:
from whence to the last of June in the year of the Julian Period 4130 were 390
years. In that year therefore 4130, about the later end of June, before the
full end of the 23 year of Nebuchadnezzar, the 390 years of the sin of Israel,
and the 40 years of the sin of Judah ended. For we may not think that these 390
began precisely on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, when Jeroboam
instituted a Feast for the worship of his golden Calves, but rather before in
the same year, viz. when he and his Council had concluded for the making of
them, or being made when he first set them in open view, and said, Behold thy
Gods O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, 1 Kin. 12.28.
which without scruple I take to be on the 23 day of the third month, as is
aforesaid; on which day the Jews fast, because of this which Jeroboam did.

And note further, that the reason why I say these 390 years end not until
near four years after the Temple was destroyed, is because Nebuchadnezzar had
not done all that he was to do against Jerusalem, until the 23 year of his
reign, at which time that small remnant which was left in the Land with
Gedaliah, Joseph Antiq. lib. 10. c. 11.
was carried away, the number then carried being 745, as is recorded, Jer.
25.15. For now at this time (being about four years after the Temple was burnt)
Nebuzaradan a Captain of the guard was sent by Nebuchadnezzar to carry all
away; which he did: and so there was none of the posterity of Israel left
remaining in the Land to provoke the Lord, either by their sins which they
learned of Manasses, or by their sins of that Idolatry which they learned of
Jeroboam 390 years before. For albeit the Kingdom of Israel ceased to be in
the ninth year of Hoshea, yet there this reckoning of 390 may not end, but is
still accounted till a full end be made, and that the Lord 2 Kin. 23.27.
remove Judah out of his sight as well as Israel; some relics of Israel
remaining among those of Judah till the whole number of 390 was accomplished:
beyound which time, God in that holy Land of Promise would not endure the sin
of Israel any more, which coming from Jeroboam had infected even them of Judah
too, 2 Kings 17.16.19. and therefore could not be thoroughly rooted out until
all (as well of Judah as of Israel) were carried out of that good Land given to
their Fathers many hundred years before.

This again is proved by another number; Ezekiel. 4.6.
a number of 40 years, taught us also by Ezekiel. For albeit the number of 390
(as it is whole) has relation to both houses, yet 40 years of that reckoning
are in more particular, pertinent only to the house of Judah, the thirtieth
year whereof agrees with the fifth year of Zedechia, Ezekiel 1.1. and
therefore the last must needs reach to the 23 of Nebuchadnezzar, and the first
begin in the eighteenth of Josiah: from which year the whole number of these 40
years are undoubtedly to be accounted. For in that year Huldah the Prophetess
did foretell the inevitable destruction of Judah, 2 Kin. 22, 3, 15, 16, etc.
Then did Josiah celebrate a solemn Passover; then was it that the book of the
Law, which had been lost, was found and read: at the hearing whereof the good
King wept, the people (for their Sins) being threatened with Captivity. But from
that evil to come Josiah had a promise to be taken away before it came: whose
Godly courses should have moved his godless Subjects; But they (though bad
before) growing then to be worse and worse, are fitly said to begin this burden
of their 40 years sin, declining so far from a wished Conversion, that finally
they fell into a dismal destruction. Yea then was it that the Altar in Bethel
was destroyed; and so, as the 390 years began in that year when Jeroboham
caused the said Altar to be built: in like manner these 40 years began in that
year wherein Josiah caused it to be beaten down. For though it were a time of
Reformation in respect of what Josiah did, yet not being followed on by the
people and Kings after him (though threatened by Huldah with destruction) it is
of all things herein the most probable that Ezekiel was moved to have respect
thereunto, when he was commanded to set apart 40 years from his 390, and
appropriate them to Judah in more particular then when he joined the sins of
Israel and Judah both together.

All which is likewise seen in the fifth Chapter of Ezekiel: for the Prophet
there by shaving his head, and parting the hair, shows Judah's case. One
part he burnt with fire: another part he cut with a sword: a third part he
scattered into the wind: One part he bound up; and soon after he burnt even
that part also. So Jerusalem with her Inhabitants should perish by fire and
sword, with other miserable destructions: And albeit a small remnant was left
for a while with Gedaliah, yet soon after they also shall be brought to
nothing; which accordingly came to pass in the three and twentieth year of
Nebuchadnezzar, when clean riddance is made of all out of their own Land,
signified by that part of hair which for a time was bound up, and at the last
taken and burnt.

Finally, the length of this Period is likewise proved by two Sabbathicall
years; the one in the days of Hezekia, the other in the days of Zedechia
Kings of Judah: and both these noted in Scripture; the one by the Prophet Esaias,
Chapter 37. verse 30. The other by the Prophet Jeremiah, Chapter 34. verse 8.

That which the Prophet Esaias mentions began in the eighteenth year of Hezekia,
in the year after the Temple was founded 302, and year of the Julian Period
4004, and was Sabbathicall till the Autumn next after: at which time they
sowed their fields which had rested from the Autumn before, as the law
required. For this we are to note, That that expedition which Senacharib began
against the Kingdom of Judah and Jerusalem in the latter end of the 14 year of
Hezekia was an expedition of Esaias 20.3.4.
three years, and intended chiefly the invading of Egypt: and therefore ended
not till after the harvest time of the year of the Julian Period 4004 when his
host was slain by an Angel. For in the year of the same Period 4001 (the
fourteenth year of Hezekia tending toward an end) Senacharib began it, and
invaded some part of the Kingdom of Judah first, where he took no few of the
defenced Cities thereof, Esa. 36.1. About which time Hezekia fell sick, and
upon his recovery had a promise not only that his life should be prolonged for
fifteen years, but also that he and his City should be delivered out of the
hand of the Assyrian, Esaias 38.5.6. Which story is indeed mentioned after the
death of Senacharib, but in general terms in respect of the time; as thus: In
diebus illis, In those days: Petavius therefore had no just cause to blame
Torniellus for his account herein. And as God had made this promise, so he
accomplished it, and drew away Senacharib into Egypt, where he incountred with
Sethon the King thereof in the year of the Julian Period 4002, and came not
into Judea again until the year 4004: the harvest of which year was thereupon
spoiled and trodden out in the fields. The next year had no harvest at all by
reason of the year of Rest which began at the Autumn before. But in the year
4006 there was an harvest again: as was foretold in Esaias 37.30. And thus is
that place in Esaias to be understood.

The other Sabbathicall year began in the ninth year of Zedecbia 119. years
after the former: This was in the year of the Julian Period 4123. In the next
year the tenth of Zedechia began: In the next after that ( viz. in the year of
the Julian Period 4125.) his eleventh, and ended not till about the beginning
of the fourth Month in the year after, viz. in the year of the Julian Period
4126. in which year, before the full end of Nebuchadnezzars nineteenth year of
reign, and soon after the end of Zedechias eleventh year, the Temple was
burnt, having then stood 423. years, three Julian Months and about eight
days. And why I say were 119 years from the eighteenth of Hezechia to the
ninth of Zedechia, is because Hezechia (who reigned 29 years) reigned 11 after
his eighteenth year, Manasses 55. Amon 2. Josiah 31. Jehoahaz 3. Jehoiakim 11
years. Jechoniah 3 Months, and Zedechia 11 years: whose last year was (as I
have already said) fully finished before the fifth month, in the which the
Temple was burnt. And why also from the fourth of Solomon to the eighteenth of
Hezechia were three hundred years and one complete, is in regard that the
reigns of the Kings of Judah and Israel (rightly compared each with other) do
make it so, as in the following Table may be seen.

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Ye. Of rest and Jubilees Years
of the Temple. A Table of the Years of the Kings of JuDAH and ISRAEL, during
the time that the Temple stood. 3703 2994 7 7 1 4 In this Year, on the second
day of the second Month, King Solomon began to build the Temple. At the
seventh Month the ninth Jubilee began: See 2 Chronicles. 3.2. 3704 2995 1 Jub. ix.
2 5 3705 2996 2 3 6 3706 2997 3 4 7 3707 2998 4 5 8 3708 2999 5 6 9 3709 3000 6
7 10 3710 3001 7 1 8 11 In this Year (at the seventh month) the Temple was
Dedicated, 1 Kings 8.2. It was in the beginning of a Year of Rest. 3711 3002 1
9 12 3712 3003 2 10 13 3713 3004 3 11 14 3714 3005 4 12 15 3715 3006 5 13 16
3716 3007 6 14 17 3717 3008 7 2 15 18 3718 3009 1 16 19 3719 3010 2 17 20 3720
3011 3 18 21 3721 3012 4 19 22 3722 3013 5 20 23 About this time King Solomon
finished the Buildings of his own House, 2 Chronicles. 8.1. 3723 3014 6 21 24 3724
3015 7 3 22 25 3725 3016 1 23 26 3726 3017 2 24 27 3727 3018 3 25 28 3728 3019
4 26 29 3729 3020 5 27 30 3730 3021 6 28 31 3731 3022 7 4 29 32 3732 3023 1 30
33 About this time (as is supposed) Salomons strange Wives and Concubines
entice him to Idolatry; but before he died he repented, and (among his other
Books) writes that of the Preacher, as a recantation for his former errors
and sins that he had committed: and having reigned forty years, died in the
year of the World 3031. 3733 3024 2 31 34 3734 3025 3 32 35 3735 3026 4 33 36
3736 3027 5 34 37

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Ye. Of rest and Jub. Ye. Of
the Temple A Table of the Kings of JUDAH and ISRAEL, during the time that the
Temple stood. 3737 3028 6 35 3738 3029 7 5 36 3739 3030 1 37 The KINGDOM
divided. Kings of Judab. Kings of Israel. 3740 3031 2 38 1 Rehoboam the son of
Solomon reigned over Judah 17. years, 1 Kin. 24.21. 1 Jeroboam reigned over
Israel 22. years, 1 Kin. 14.20. the last of which years was incomplete as
appears by the reign of his son Nadab. Salomons idolatry caused by his
strange Wives and Concubines together with Rehoboams tyranny, was the cause of
this rent or division. 3741 3032 3 39 2 2 3742 3033 4 40 3 3 3743 3034 5 41 4 4
3744 3035 6 42 5 In this year Sesac King of Egypt made an inroad to Jerusalem,
and spoiled the Temple, carrying from thence the Treasures, the golden Shields,
etc. as it is in 1 Kin. 14, 25, 26. and in 2 Chronicles. 12.9. 5 3745 3036 7 6 43 6
6 3746 3037 1 44 7 7 3747 3038 2 45 8 8 3748 3039 3 46 9 9 3749 3040 4 47 10 10
3750 3041 5 48 11 11 3751 3042 6 49 12 12 3752 3043 7 7 50 13 13 3753 3044 1
Jub. x. 51 14 14 At the 7th month of this year the tenth Iubilee began. 3754
3045 2 52 15 15 3755 3046 3 53 16 16 3756 3047 4 54 17 17 3757 3048 5 55 1
Abiah the son of Rahoboam reigned three years complete, 1 Kin. 15.1. 18 3758
3049 6 56 2 19 3759 3050 7 1 57 3 20 3760 3051 1 58 1 Asa the son of Abiah
reigned 41 years, 1 Kin. 15.9. He began in the latter part of Jerobeams 20th
year, as appears 21 3761 3052 2 59 2 22 Nadab began in the second of Asa, and
reigned two years, 1 King. 15.25. Baasa 3762 3053 3 60 3 1 1 3763 3054 4 61 4 2
2 3764 3055 5 62 5 3

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Ye. Of Rest and Jub. Ye. Of
the Temple. A Table of the Kings of JUDAH and ISRAEL, during the time that the
Temple stood. Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel. 3765 3056 6 63 6 by the reign of
Nadab, which else would have ended as soon as his fathers: and yet the Text
says he reigned 2 years after him; and so he did, viz. 2 years current, which
is to be a rule for some of the rest. 4 kills Nadab in the third of Asa, and
reigned 24 years, 1 Kings 15, 28, 33. 3766 3057 7 2 64 7 5 3767 3058 1 65 8 6
3768 3059 2 66 9 7 3769 3060 3 67 10 8 3770 3061 4 68 11 9 3771 3062 5 69 12 10
3772 3063 6 70 13 11 3773 3064 7 3 71 14 12 3774 3065 1 72 15 * This was that
famous year of Asa, where in he demolished the Idols, and restored the true
worship of God in his Land, 2 Chronicles. 15.10. 13 3775 3066 2 73 16 14 3776 3067 3
74 17 15 3777 3068 4 75 18 16 3778 3069 5 76 19 17 3779 3070 6 77 20 18 3780
3071 7 4 78 21 19 3781 3072 1 79 22 20 3782 3073 2 80 23 21 3783 3074 3 81 24
22 3784 3075 4 82 25 23 3785 3076 5 83 26 24. 1 Ela 2. he beg. In 26. Asa 3786
3077 6 84 27 1 2 Zimri, 3787 3078 7 5 85 28 2 Tibni, See 1 K. 16.10 3788 3079 1
86 29 3 Omri, 3789 3080 2 87 30 4 3790 3081 3 88 31 5 In this year (being the
31 of Asa) Omri begins to reign alone; he builds Samaria, and keeps his Court
there, as did also the other Kings of Israel after him ^ See 1 Kin. 16.23. 3791
3082 4 89 32 6 3792 3083 5 90 33 7 3793 3084 6 91 34 8 3794 3085 7 6 92 35 9
3795 3086 1 93 36 10 3796 3087 2 94 37 11 3797 3088 3 95 38 12. 1 Achab 22. he
began in the 38. of Asa, 1 Kin. 16.29. in his time Jericho was built. 3798 3089
4 96 39 2

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Ye. Of Rest and Jub. Ye. Of
Rest and Jub. A Table of the Kings of JUDAH and ISRAEL, during the time that
the Temple stoood. Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel. 3799 3090 5 97 40
Jehosaphat 25. years, 1 Kin. 22.41. He began in the 4th year of Achab, viz. in
the latter part thereof, 1 Kin. 22.41. 3 3800 3091 6 98 41 4 3801 3092 7 7 99 1
5 3802 3093 1 Jub. 100 2 6 3803 3094 2 xi. 101 3 7 3804 3095 3 102 4 8 3805
3096 4 103 5 9 3806 3097 5 104 6 10 3807 3098 6 105 7 11 3808 3099 7 1 106 8 12
3809 3100 1 107 9 13 3810 3101 2 108 10 14 3811 3102 3 109 11 15 3812 3103 4
110 12 16 3813 3104 5 111 13 17 3814 3105 6 112 14 18 3815 3106 7 2 113 15 19
3816 3107 1 114 16 20 3817 3108 2 115 17 Jehosaphat decrees that the Kingdom
sal be Joram's, because he was his eldest; but to his other Sons he given
Gifts, 2 Chronicles. 21.3. 21 3818 3109 3 116 18 1 22 Achazia two years, 1 Kin.
22.51. 3819 3110 4 117 19 2 1 3820 3111 5 118 20 2 Iehoram 12. he began in the
eighteenth ve. Of Jebosaphat, viz. in the latter part there of, 2 Kin. 3.1.
3821 3112 6 119 21 3 3822 3113 7 3 120 22 4 3823 3114 1 121 23 1 Jehoram 8. he
began in the fifth year of Jehoram King of Israel, 2 King. 8.16. 5 3824 3115 2
122 24 2 6 3825 3116 3 123 25 3 7 3826 3117 4 124 4 8 3827 3118 5 125 5 9 3828
3119 6 126 6 10 3829 3120 7 4 127 7 11 3830 3121 1 128 1 8 Achaziah, 2 Kin.
8.25 26. Athalia seven years current: see 2 Kin. 11.4 12 3831 3122 2 129 1 1
Jehu 28 years, 2 Kin. chap. 9. he and Athalia began both in one year. 3832 3123
3 130 2 2

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Years of Rest and Jubilees.
Years of the Temple. A Table of the Kings of JUDAH and ISRAEL, during the time
that the Temple stood. Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel. 3833 3124 4 131 3 3
3834 3125 5 132 4 4 3835 3126 6 133 5 5 3836 3127 7 5 134 6 6 3837 3128 1 135 1
7 joash 40. he began in the seventeenth of jehu king of israel, 2 kings 11.4. 7
3838 3129 2 136 2 8 3839 3130 3 137 3 9 3840 3131 4 138 4 10 3841 3132 5 139 5
11 3842 3133 6 140 6 12 3843 3134 7 6 141 7 13 3844 3135 1 142 8 14 3845 3136 2
143 9 15 3846 3137 3 144 10 16 Carthage built. Joseph. 3847 3138 4 145 11 17
3848 3139 5 146 12 18 3849 3140 6 147 13 19 3850 3141 7 7 148 14 At the Autumn
of this year the twelfth Jubilee began. 20 3851 3142 1 Jub. xii. 149 15 21 3852
3143 2 150 16 22 3853 3144 3 151 17 23 3854 3145 4 152 18 24 3855 3146 5 153 19
25 3856 3147 6 154 20 26 3857 3148 7 1 155 21 27 3858 3149 1 156 22 28 3859
3150 2 157 23 1 Jehoahaz 17. he began in the 23 year of Ioash K. of Judah, 2 K.
13.1. the Syrians vexed him very much. 3860 3151 3 158 24 2 3861 3152 4 159 25
3 3862 3153 5 160 26 4 3863 3154 6 161 27 5

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Years of Rest and Jubilees.
Years of the Temple. A Table of the Kings of JUDAH and ISRAEL, during the time
that the Temple stood. Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel. 3864 3155 7 2 162 28 6
3865 3156 1 163 29 7 3866 3157 2 164 30 8 3867 3158 3 165 31 9 3868 3159 4 166
32 10 3869 3160 5 167 33 11 3870 3161 6 168 34 12 3871 3162 7 3 169 35 13 3872
3163 1 170 36 14 3873 3164 2 171 37 15 3874 3165 3 172 38 16 1 Joash 16. he
began in the latter part of the 37. year of Joash King of Judah, 2 Kin. 13.10.
3875 3166 4 173 39 17 2 3876 3167 5 174 40 1 Amaziah began in the latter part
of the second year of Joash King of Israel, and reigned 29 years 2 King. 14.1.
at the end whereof he is slain by the People of Lachish, 27. years current
after Jeroboam's Father recovered the Kingdom of Israel from the Syrians; and
in that regard Azariah (the son of this Amaziah) is said to begin his reign in
the 27 year of Jeroboam, 2 K. 15.1, 2. that is, in the 27 year of Jeroboams
Kingdom recovered, which his father recovered from the Syrians about the sixth
year of his reign, according to the saying of Elisha, 2 K. 13.14. Like to this
is that 3 3877 3168 6 175 2 4 3878 3169 7 4 176 3 5 3879 3170 1 177 4 6 Here
Joash recovers his Kingdom from the Syrians, 2 K. 13.25. it is thought that
going to this War he took in his son Jeroboam as partner with him in the
Empire: whereupon it came to pass that Azariah is said to begin his reign in
the 27. year of Jeroboam, 2 Kin. 15.1. Thus some. But see the other column.
3880 3171 2 178 5 7 3881 3172 3 179 6 8 3882 3173 4 180 7 9 3883 3174 5 181 8
10 3884 3175 6 182 9 11 3885 3176 7 5 183 10 12 3886 3177 1 184 11 13 3887 3178
2 185 12 14 3888 3179 3 186 13 15 3889 3180 4 187 14 16 3890 3181 5 188 15 1
Jeroboam the second 41 he began in the 15 year of Amaziah King of Judah, 2
King. 14.23. from which year he reigned 3891 3182 6 189 16 2 3892 3183 7 6 190
17 3 3893 3184 1 191 18 4 3894 3185 2 192 19 5

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Years of Rest and Jubilees.
Yeeers of the Temple. A Table of the Kings of JUDAH and ISRAEL, during the time
that the Temple stood. Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel. 3895 3186 3 193 20 of
the 36. year of Asa, mentioned in the second Book of the Chronicles, chap. 16
ver. 1. where Baasa is alive, and diverted from building of Ramah: which if it
be understood properly, cannot be true. 6 his 41. years, ibid. See also Petav.
De Doctr. Temp. l. 9. c. 55. 3896 3187 4 194 21 7 3897 3188 5 195 22 8 3898
3189 6 196 23 9 3899 3190 7 7 197 24 10 The XIII. Iubilee. 3900 3191 1 Jub.
xiii. 198 25 11 3901 3192 2 199 26 12 3902 3193 3 200 27 13 3903 3194 4 201 28
14 3904 3195 5 202 29 15 3905 3196 6 203 1 Azariah began in this year; he was
otherwise called Vzziah, and reigned 52. years, 2 Kin. 15.1. 16 3906 3197 7 1
204 2 17 3907 3198 1 205 3 18 3908 3199 2 206 4 19 3909 3200 3 207 5 20 3910
3201 4 208 6 21 3911 3202 5 209 7 22 3912 3203 6 210 8 23 3913 3204 7 2 211 9
24 3914 3205 1 212 10 25 3915 3206 2 213 11 26 3916 3207 3 214 12 If the 27th
year of Jeroboam, for the beginning of Azariah, be taken properly for the 27th
year of his own reign, then must Azariah be 11 years of his 52 under tutours
before he took upon him the administration of the 27 3917 3208 4 215 13 28 3918
3209 5 216 14 29 3919 3210 6 217 15 30 3920 3211 7 3 218 16 31 3921 3212 1 219
17 32 3922 3213 2 220 18 33 3923 3214 3 221 19 34 3924 3215 4 222 20 35 3925
3216 5 223 21 36

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Years of Rest and Jubilees.
Yeeers of the Temple. A Table of the Kings of JUDAH and ISRAEL, during the time
that the Temple stood. Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel. 3926 3217 6 224 22
Kingdom; and so Codoman in his Chronology, lib. 3. cap. 7. 37 3927 3218 7 4 225
23 38 3928 3219 1 226 24 39 3929 3220 2 227 25 40 3930 3221 3 228 26 41 3931
3222 4 229 27 1 After the death of Jeroboam there was no King in Israel till
the 38. year of Azariah King of Judah, 2 King. 15.8. and therefore here must be
an interregnum of twelve years: Hoseae the prophet speaks of it in the tenth
chapter of his prophecy, at the first and third verses. 3932 3223 5 230 28
Esaias began to Prophecy. 2 3933 3224 6 231 Olympiads. 29 3 3934 3225 7 5 232 30
4 3935 3226 1 233 31 5 3936 3227 2 234 32 6 3937 3228 3 235 33 7 3938 3229 4
236 1. 1 34 the first year of the first Olympiad. 8 3939 3230 5 237 2 35 9 3940
3231 6 238 3 36 10 3941 3232 7 6 239 4 37 11 3942 3233 1 240 1 2 38 12 3943
3234 2 241 2 39 1 Zachary and Shallum. Menahen began in the latter part of the
39. year of Azariah, after he had slain Shallum; he reigned ten years, 2 Kin.
15.14, 17. 3944 3235 3 242 3 40 1 3945 3236 4 243 4 41 2 3946 3237 5 244 1 3 42
3 3947 3238 6 245 2 43 4 3948 3239 7 7 246 3 44 The XIV. Jubilee. 5 3949 3240 1
247 4 45 6 3950 3241 2 248 1 4 46 7 3951 3242 3 249 2 47 8 3952 3243 4 250 3 48
9 3953 3244 5 251 4 49 10 Pekaia 2. he began in the 50 year of Azariah, 2 Kin.
15.27. 3954 3245 6 252 1 5 50 1 3955 3246 7 1 253 2 51 2 3956 3247 1 254 3 52 1
Peka 20. he began

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Years of Rest and Jubilees.
Olimpiads. Yees of the Temple. A Table of the Kings of JUDAH and ISRAEL, during
the time that the Temple stood. Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel. 3957 3248 2 4
255 1 Jotham the son of Azariah began his reign in the second year of Peka King
of Israel, and reigned sixteen years, 2 Kin. 15.33. 2 in the 52. year of
Azariah, 2 Kin. 15.27. 3958 3249 3 1 6 256 2 3 3959 3250 4 2 257 3 4 3960 3251
5 3 258 4 5 3961 3252 6 4 259 5 6 3962 3253 7 2 1 7 260 6 7 In this year began
the Building of Rome by Romulus, on the 21. day of April; and on the 27. of
July next after, the seventh Olympiad began. 3963 3254 1 2 261 7 8 3964 3255 2
3 262 8 9 3965 3256 3 4 263 9 10 3966 3257 4 1 8 264 10 11 3967 3258 5 2 265 11
This was the first year of the Era of Nabonassar: he reigned fourteen years.
Ptol. 12 3968 3259 6 3 266 12 13 3969 3260 7 3 4 267 13 14 3970 3261 1 1 9 268
14 15 3971 3262 2 2 269 15 16 3972 3263 3 3 270 16 1 Achas began in the
seventeenth year of Peka King of Israel, and reigned sixteen years, 2 King.
16.1. 17 3973 3264 4 4 271 2 18 3974 3265 5 1 10 272 3 19 3975 3266 6 2 273 4
20 3976 3267 7 4 3 274 5 1 Hoshea kills Peka in this year, being the fifth
year of Achas, and the twentieth year since the beginning of Jotham's reign;
from which time till the twelfth of Achas, he was unsettled in his Kingdom, and
no absolute King till then: See 2 Kin. 15.30. and chapter 17.1. Egypt. 3977 3268 1
4 275 6 2 3978 3269 2 1 11 276 7 3 3979 3270 3 2 277 8 4 3980 3271 4 3 278 9 5
41 3981 3272 5 4 279 10 6 42 3982 3273 6 1 12 280 11 7 43 3983 3274 7 5 2 281
12 8 44 3984 3275 1 3 282 13 1 Here Hoshea began to reign, viz. in the latter
part of the twelfth year of Achas, and reigned nine years, 2 Kin. 17.1. 1
Sabaccon 8. 3985 3276 2 4 283 14 2 2 3986 3277 3 1 13 284 15 3 3 3987 3278 4 2
285 16 1 Ezekias began in 4 4

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Years of Rest and Jubilees.
Olympiads. Yees of the Temple. A Table of the Years of the Kings of JUDAH and
ISRAEL, during the time that the Temple stood. Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel.
3988 3279 5 3 286 2 the end of Hoshea's third year, and reigned 29. years, as
may be seen in the second Book of Kings, chap. 18. 5 5 3989 3280 6 4 287 3 6 6
3990 3281 7 6 1 12 288 4 7 7 3991 3282 1 2 289 5 8 8 3992 3283 2 3 290 6 9 Here
the Kingdom of Israel ended. 1 Sethon or Sevechus 14. 3993 3284 3 4 291 7 2
3994 3285 4 1 13 292 8 3 3995 3286 5 2 293 9 4 3996 3287 6 3 294 10 5 3997 3288
7 7 4 295 11 At Autumn the XV. IUbilee began. 6 3998 3289 1 Jub. xv. 1 14 296
12 7 3999 3290 2 2 297 13 8 4000 3291 3 3 298 14 9 4001 3292 4 4 299 15
Sennacharib invades Judea, the 14 year of Ezekia almost ended 10 4002 3293 5 1
15 300 16 In this year he invades Egypt, viz. in the 11. year of Sethon King of
Egypt. 11 4003 3294 6 2 301 17 12 4004 3295 7 1 3 302 18 In this year he
returns into Judea again, and has 185000 of his Soldiers slain by an Angel, 2
Kin. 18.13. and chap. 19.35. Herodotus heard of these things in Egypt, but they
were greatly corrupted, telling us how a great multitude of Mice came into the
Army of Sennacherib in the night, and did so gnaw the Bows, Quivers and straps
of his men's Armor, that they were glad to fly away the next morning, etc.
Herod. lib. 2. 13 4005 3296 1 4 303 19 14 4006 3297 2 1 16 304 20 1 Tharachus
18. 4007 3298 3 2 305 21 2 4008 3299 4 3 306 22 3 4009 3300 5 4 307 23 4 4010
3301 6 1 17 308 24 5 4011 3302 7 2 2 309 25 6 4012 3303 1 3 310 26 7 4013 3304
2 4 311 27 8 4014 3305 3 1 18 312 28 9 4015 3306 4 2 313 29 10 4016 3307 5 3
314 1 Manasses 55. years, 2 Kin. 21.1. he was one while a very wicked King, but
repented 11 4017 3308 6 4 315 2 12

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Rests and Jubilees. Olympiads.
Years of the Temple. Kings of Judah. Fgypt. Things of Note in the continuation
of the TABLE. 4018 3309 7 3 1 21 316 3 13 Me^^ Babylom. afterward, 2 Chr.
33.11, 12. The Jews say that he caused the Prophet Esaias to be sawen asunder in
the twelfth year of his reign. 4019 3310 1 2 317 4 14 4020 3311 2 3 318 5 15 17
6 4021 3312 3 4 319 6 16 18 1 Rigebelns 1. 4022 3313 4 1 22 320 7 17 19 1
Mefessimordachus 4. Rigebelus in Babylon one year. Ptol. 4023 3314 5 2 321 8 18
20 2 Mesessimordachus in Babylon 4 years. I Would. 4024 3315 6 3 322 9 Anarchia 2.
XII. Captains 15. 21 3 4025 3316 7 4 4 323 10 2 22 4 4026 3317 1 1 23 324 11 1
23 1 An Interregnum 8. An Interregnum in Babylon, which laster eight years.
I Would. 4027 3318 2 2 325 12 2 24 2 4028 3319 3 3 326 13 3 25 3 4029 3320 4 4 327
14 4 26 4 4030 3321 5 1 24 328 15 5 27 5 Bellarmine sets the imprisonment of
Manasses in this year. 4031 3322 6 2 329 16 6 28 6 4032 3323 7 5 3 330 17 7 29
7 4033 3324 1 4 331 18 8 30 8 4034 3325 2 1 25 332 19 9 31 1 Asaradinus 13.
current. At the end of the interregnum in Babylon, Assaradinus began, having
reigned before in Nineveh, and was (as is probable) Asserhaddon the son of
Sennacharib. 4035 3326 3 2 333 20 10 32 2 4036 3327 4 3 334 21 11 33 3 4037
3328 5 4 335 22 12 34 4 In this year according to the Seder Olam Rabba (cited
by Kimchi on the fourth chapter of Ezekiel) Manasses was led into Captivity.
4038 3329 6 1 26 336 23 13 35 5 4039 3330 7 6 2 337 24 14 36 6 4040 3331 1 3
338 25 15 37 7 4041 3332 2 4 339 26 1 Psammiticus 54 38 8 4042 3333 3 1 27 340
27 2 39 9 The Author of the great Hebrew Chronology (cited by Sir Walter
Raleign) says, Manasses was imprisoned in this year, being the 27th. year of
his reign. 4043 3334 4 2 341 28 3 40 10 4044 3335 5 3 342 29 4 41 11 4045 3336
6 4 343 30 5 42 12 4046 3337 7 7 1 28 344 31 6 43 13 Saosduchinus in the Book
of Judith

Years of the Julian Peried. Years of the World. Rests and Jubilees. Olympiads.
Egypt. Medes. Babylon. Years of the Temple. Kings of Judah. Things of Note in
the continuation of the TABLE. 4047 3338 1 Jub. xvi. 2 7 44 2 Saosduchinus 20.
345 32 is called Nabuchadonosor, as by the very time of his reign appears.
4048 3339 2 3 8 45 3 346 33 4049 3340 3 4 9 46 4 347 34 4050 3341 4 1 28 10 47
5 348 35 4051 3342 5 2 11 48 6 349 36 4052 3343 6 3 12 49 7 350 37 4053 3344 7
1 4 13 50 8 351 38 4054 3345 1 1 29 14 51 9 352 39 4055 3346 2 2 15 52 10 353
40 4056 3347 3 3 16 53 11 354 41 4057 3348 4 4 17 1 Phraortes 22. 12 355 42
Dioces (otherwise called Arphauad) slain this year. 4058 3349 5 1 30 18 2 13
356 43 Holophernes slain in this year, being the next after the death of
Dioces. 4059 3350 6 2 19 3 14 357 44 4060 3351 7 2 3 20 4 15 358 45 4061 3352 1
4 21 5 16 359 46 4062 3353 2 1 31 22 6 17 360 47 4063 3354 3 2 23 7 18 361 48
4064 3355 4 3 24 8 19 362 49 4065 3356 5 4 25 9 20 363 50 4066 3357 6 1 32 26
10 1 Chyniladanus 22. 364 51 4067 3358 7 3 2 27 11 2 365 52 4068 3359 1 3 28 12
3 366 53 4069 3360 2 4 29 13 4 367 54 4070 3361 3 1 33 30 14 5 368 55 4071 3362
4 2 31 15 6 369 1 Amon 2. Amon the son of Manasses two years 2 Kings 21.19.
4072 3363 5 3 32 16 7 370 2 4073 3364 6 4 33 17 8 371 1 Jostah 31. Josiah
succeeded his Father Amon, and reigned after him 31. years, 2 Kings 22.1. 4074
3365 7 4 1 34 34 18 9 372 2 4075 3366 1 2 35 19 10 373 3

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Rests and Jubilees. Olympiads.
Egypt. Medes. Babylon. Years of the Temple. Kings of Judah. Things of Note in
the continuation of the TABLE. 4076 3367 2 3 36 20 11 374 4 4077 3368 3 4 37 21
12 375 5 4078 3369 4 1 36 38 22 13 376 6 4079 3370 5 2 39 1 Cyaxares 40. 14 377
7 4080 3371 6 3 40 2 15 378 8 In this year Josiah is said to seek after the God
of David, and did openly show his zeal, though he were but young, 2 Chronicles.
34.3. 4081 3372 7 5 4 41 3 16 379 9 4082 3373 1 1 37 42 4 17 380 10 4083 3374 2
2 43 5 18 381 11 Ezekiels 40. years. 4084 3375 3 3 44 6 19 382 12 In this year
Josiah began to suppress Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 34.3. 4085 3376 4 4 45 7 20 383 13
4086 3377 5 1 38 46 8 21 384 14 4087 3378 6 2 47 9 22 385 15 4088 3379 7 6 3 48
10 1 Nabopollassar 21. 386 16 Nabopollassar (the Father of Nebuchadnezzar)
began in this year. 4089 3380 1 4 49 11 2 387 17 4090 3381 2 1 39 50 12 3 388
18 1 In this year was Iosiah's solemn Passover, 2 Kin. 23.22. 4091 3382 3 2 51
13 4 389 19 2 4092 3383 4 3 52 14 5 390 20 3 4093 3384 5 4 53 15 6 391 21 4 In
this year an Eclipse of the Moon on the 23. day of April, 29. min. past 5. in
the morning, at which time the fifth year of Nabopollassar was not ended, as is
noted by Ptolomey. 4094 3385 6 1 40 54 16 7 392 22 5 Ezekiels 390. 4095 3386 7
7 2 1 Necho 17. 17 8 393 23 6 4096 3387 1 Job. xvii. 3 2 18 9 394 24 7 4097
3388 2 4 3 19 10 395 25 8 4098 3389 3 1 41 4 20 11 396 26 9 4099 3390 4 2 5 21
12 397 27 10 4100 3391 5 3 6 13 398 28 11 361 4101 3392 6 4 7 14 399 29 12 362
4102 3393 7 1 1 42 8 15 400 30 13 363 4103 3394 1 2 9 16 401 31 14 364 4104
3395 2 3 10 17 402 1^ 15 365 Josiah slain in the spring, Iehoahaz

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Judah. Babylon. Egypt. Rests
and Inbilees Ezekiel's 390. Ezekiel's 40. Year of the Temple Things of Note in
the continuation of the TABLE. Olympiads. 4105 3396 2 Jehoiakim 11. 18 11 3 366
16 403 succeeds, and reigned three months: then Jehoiakim 11 years, 2 Kin.
23.36 4 4106 3397 3 19 12 4 367 17 404 1 43 4107 3398 4 20 1 Nebuchadnezzar. 13
5 368 18 405 Nebuchadnezzar begins in the end of Iehoiakims third year, and
beginning of his fourth, Dan. 1.1. and Ier. 25.1. at which time his father was
alive, as Josephus out of Berosus shows. 2 4108 3399 5 21 2 14 6 369 19 406 3
4109 3400 6 3 15 7 2 370 20 407 4 4110 3401 7 4 16 1 371 21 408 1 44 4111 3402
8 5 17 2 372 22 409 2 4112 3403 9 6 1 Psammis 6. 3 373 23 410 3 4113 3404 10 7
2 4 374 24 411 4 4114 3405 11 8 3 5 375 25 412 1 45 4115 3406 1 Zedechiah 11. 9
4 6 376 26 413 Zedekiah began about the beginning of the fourth month, and
reigned eleven years complete, and some few days more, Ier. 52. 2 4116 3407 2
10 5 7 3 377 27 414 3 4117 3408 3 11 6 1 378 28 415 4 4118 3409 4 12 1 Apries
25. 2 379 29 416 1 46 4119 3410 5 13 2 3 380 30 417 2 4120 3411 6 14 3 4 381 31
418 3 4121 3412 7 15 4 5 382 32 419 4 4122 3413 8 16 5 6 383 33 420 1 47 4123
3414 9 17 6 7 4 384 34 421 At Autumn a year of Rest began, and was that Rest
metioned Ier. 34.8. 2 4124 3415 10 18 7 1 385 35 422 3 4125 3416 11 19 8 2 386
36 423 4 4126 3417 * 20 9 3 387 37 * In this year the Temple destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar before the full end of his 19th year, 2 Kin. 25.8. It was is the
first year of the 48. Olympiad. 1 48 4127 3418 -- 21 10 4 388 38 2 4128 3419 --
22 11 5 389 39 3 4129 3420 -- 23 12 6 390 40 4 4130 3421 ** 24 13 7 5 ** In
this year (before the beginning of the four and twentieth year of
Nebuchadnezzar) the 390. and 40. years of Ezekiel ended, Ezekiel. chap. 4. and
Ier. 52.30. 49

SECT. VI. Of the sixth Period, from the destruction of the Temple by
Nebuchadnezzar, to the beginning of the building thereof again by Zorobabel in
the second year of Darius King of Persia.
THis next Period is the time that the Temple lay wast, and is a Period of 68
years complete; the first whereof began in the year of the Julian Period 4126,
and the last was ended in the year of the same Period 4194, which was the first
year of the 65 Olympiad, the 228 of Nabonassar, and second of Darius the son of
Hystaspis.

This the Prophet shows, Zach. 1.12. Where he tells that the second year of
that Darius who gave order by his Edict for the building again of the Temple,
was the seventieth year from the desolation of the Cities of Judah and
Jerusalem. For Oh Lord of Hosts (says he) how long shall it be before thou
take pity on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, with which thou have
been angry: This is the seventieth year. Thus that Prophet: In which words we
are to note, first that these 70 years, at the time mentioned, were not
complete, but current; And secondly that they are to begin at the
demonstration of Gods wrath fully and firmly fixed against the Cities of Judah
and Jerusalem: which I take to be then when the Jews were made to see and
perceive that their great hopes of help from Egypt were become frustrate and
void, Pharaoh's Army being beaten back from the succor of Jerusalem by the
Chaldeans, who put that Army to flight, and then returned again to Jerusalem,
against which they then laid that siege, which from thenceforth continued
without any further interruption until the City was taken. Now this return I
have already noted to be on the fourth day of May, in the year of the Julian
Period 4125: from whence to the fourth of May in the year of the same Period
4195 are fully 70 years. But because these years were not complete at the time
when the Angel made mention of them, we shall not need to descend so low as the
fourth of May on which they were ended, but rather and indeed have recourse (as
the seventh verse shows) to the 24 day of the eleventh month, whilst the
second year of Darius was still running on: and so doing we shall come as I
take it, to the twelfe day of February which was before the fourth day of May
before mentioned; at which time not only was the seventieth year unfinished,
but also the second of Darius was not ended: for the years of Darius did so
begin and end, as one year of his reign did certainly partake with two years
of the Julian Period. And therefore though the second year of Darius here
mentioned began in the year of the Julian Period 4194, yet it was not ended in
that year, but at the least did reach beyond March in the year 4195; as
appears by the third day of Adar which was about the tenth day of March in
that year when this Temple was finished. See Ezr. 6.15.

And thus is this a plain proof: howbeit I find it contradicted by Joseph
Scaliger, not only in his Animadversions upon Eusebius, but lib. 6. De
Emendat. Tempor.
elsewhere; affirming that the Temple was not restored until the second year
of Darius Nothus, near an hundred years later then this second of Darius
Hystaspis.

But what though Joseph Scaliger thinks so? Josephus the Jew thought
otherwise; so did the ancient Christian Fathers, Clemens, Eusebius, Augustine,
Hierom, and others. Severus Sulpitius indeed is of Scaligers side, and so does
Tertullian also confusedly seem to be, beside many other late writers, who take
part with Scaliger: but we may justly call them all into question with him in
this particular; not out of any Spirit of contradiction, but for the
advancement of a more likely truth. For what says the Prophet Haggai, c. 2. v.
3? Who is he among you who saw this House in her first glory? and how do ye
see it now? Is it not in your eyes, in comparison of it, as nothing? yet now be
strong, etc. By which words we see that both Houses must be in the memory of a
man, and some must be then alive who saw both: which in the second of Nothus,
upon due consideration, will be scarce thought probable.

The like may be also thought concerning the ages of Zorobabel and Joshua, who
were in office in the first year of Cyrus, and so continued till the Temple was
built, and after: but from the first year of Cyrus to the second of Darius
Nothus, were an hundred and thirteen years; and from the destruction of the
Temple in the nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar, to the same time, an hundred sixty
and five years: to which must be added such a competent number of years more as
shall make them who are officers capable of office, and the other apt to
remember from the time that we account; and so to remember, as that they be
able to judge between the glory of the one House, and the glory of the other
House, which a child of few years could not do. And note that these distances
are thus, in regard that the ninteenth of Nebuchadnezzar was in the year of the
Julian Period 4126; the first of Cyrus over Babylon, in the year of the Julian
Period 4178; and the second of Darius Nothus, in the year of the Julian Period
4291.

But the adverse party have answered. And first (say they) we mistake the
Prophet Zachary. For although he speaks of 70 years in the days of Darius,
yet he does not mean that those 70 years ended but then. His meaning rather
is, that the Jews had endured the 70 years of Captivity which were prophesied
of, and yet they saw not the full restitution of their City and Country: and
therefore says the Angel, Domine, quousque? Lord, How long? etc. As if he
should say, The 70 years for the desolation of Jerusalem are long since ended,
and will thou still be angry with thy people?

Which answer though it may a little color the business, is nothing at all
convincing: for the words of the Text do plainly show that the last of those
years was but then when the Prophet had his vision: and therefore says the
Angel, This is the seventieth year. Which (as at the first verse appears) was
even then when the word of the Lord came to Zedechiah in the second year of
Darius. To which reply lib. 12. De Doctr. Temp. cap. 24.
Petavius well accords, saying; Haec est certissima loci hujus interpretatis,
This is a most certain interpretation of the place. And so also Cluverus, in
his Computo Chronologico. Nor is this but confirmed further out of Zach. 2.4.
where the said Prophet Zachary is called a young man, even in the days of that
Darius who made an Edict for the building of the Templ; eand yet this Zachary
was one who prophesied before, among them that prophesied in the second year of
Cyrus, when the foundation first was laid, after the Captivity, that it might
be built; as may be gathered out of the eighth Chapter of the same Prophecy, at
the ninth verse. And if but a young man in Darius his time, and yet a Prophet
before when Cyrus reigned, in whose second year the foundation of this Temple
was laid, how can it be that the time for the building of it should be so late
as the reign of Darius Nothus? for if Zachary lived till then, he must not be
young, but very old, Zacha. 8.9.

Beside, in the seventh chapter of the same Prophecy, at the first and fifth
verses, the Prophet again speaks of 70 years in the fourth year of Darius,
which being accounted from the year of the Julian Period 4126. (when both City
and Temple were destroyed) do end exactly in the fourth year of Darius, as is
required, not Nothus, but Hystaspis.

2. Go we on therefore to the next, Neither is it granted (say they) that the
Prophet Haggai speaks of any who had seen both Temples. For by an usual
manner of speaking the phrase of the Prophet imports but this: namely, That if
any were alive who had seen the former Temple, he would take this latter as
nothing to that. For when the Prophet says, who is he among you, etc. he does
but express himself as our Savior did in the Parable of the lost sheep,
Luke 15.4. saying, which of you having an hundred sheep, etc. that is, If any
among you having an hundred sheep, Matthew. 18.12. Thus they answer. But here is
no Parable; nor will the words admit of any such gloss. For the Prophet
speaks to them in the second person, saying: Is it not in your eyes? that is,
In yours which did know and see the other Temple. This is the plain sense
without any wresting or flying from that which was spoken properly to what was
spoken Parabolically. One therefore says Sed hoc festivum est; and nulla
responsione dignum, quod locum allegatum Haggaei prophetae in modum Parabolae
accipiunt. Pawell in his Council. Chro. page 114. 115.
And a little after, Nullibi verbum hic substantivum subjunctivi modi in
tempore imperfecto, cum particula conditionali. But I can prove it further; For
they were (says Ezra) the children of the Captivity who as soon (as the Temple
was built) kept the Passover upon the fourteenth day of the first Month, Ezr.
6.19. And if the children of the Captivity, then not the children of a new Age;
as by and by shall be further manifest. And if not the children of a new Age;
then they were such as had seen as well the former as the latter house.

3. Come we then to the next: to which they answer, That the Ages of Joshua and
Zorobabel, though extended as far as Darius Nothus, were not so long but that
they might live till then.

So say I; they might live so long; But that they did, is very improbable: and
most of all that they should live so long fit for action and public
employment. For by this account they must be in office together 117. years at
the least, from the first of Cyrus to the sixth of Darius Nothus: but how old
they were when they entered on their office, how long in it before the Captivity
ended, or at what time they dyed after the Temple was finished, is not
declared. And indeed it is too much to grant, without better evidence, that in
an hundred and seventeen years and more should be but one high Priest, and
that in the times following (being about 115. years) till the end of this
Monarchy there should be five; as may be seen Neb. 12.10. I take therefore
this proportion of time to be as true as that other assertion of theirs annexed
hereunto, That in 150 years (for so long must be by them till Nehemiah came
up) there should be but one governor, namely Zerobabel; and that Nehemiah was
the next after him, none coming between: whereas the truth is, there were some
between and such as had oppressed the people, mentioned by Nehemiah, though not
named who they were, Neh. 5.15.

Beside, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, Nehemiah demanded in what case
they were at Jerusalem, who were the remnant of the Captivity, Neh. 1.2, 3. And
if so long after the building of the Temple, as the twentieth of Artaxerxes a
remnant of them who went into Captivity were still alive, the difficulty
increases, and cannot be removed but by yiedling to them who stand (as they
ought) for the second year of Darius the son of Histaspis. Which reply I
shall confirm yet further by what is afterward mentioned by Nehemiah c. 7. v.
4. where he confesses that the people in the City, in the twentieth of
Artaxerxes aforesaid, were but few, and therefore many houses still unbuilt;
giving thereby great suspicion still to this supposed lengeh of time. For when
they returned out of Captivity, Ezra 2.64.
Ezra says there were 42360. of them, beside their menservants and their
maidservants, of whom there were 7337. which added to the other do make 49697
in all. Now that in 150 years (for so long must be to the twentieth of
Artaxerxes who was after Darius Nothus) this company should be no better
increased, but that Nehemiah must complain of an empty City, is a thing very
unlike, considering the natural fruitfulness of that Nation, and those
infinite multitudes whereunto they grew within 40 years after in spite of the
continual wars which daily did consume them.

But perhaps you will say, the other Cities had emptied this, and therefore
there were but few. Surely no: for (as may be gathered out of the eleventh
Chapter of Nehemiah) those Cities about Jerusalem had but 30440. in them;
because the Tithe, Neh. 11.1.
which was chosen by lot out of every company, amounted but to 3044.

There were therefore before this Tything was made, more in Jerusalem for the
part (considering the company which came up at the first) then in the other
Cities: which number surely would have been so much increased by Nehemiahs
time, that he should not have needed to have complained for lack of
inhabitants, if the time had been so long as Scaliger and his followers would
make it.

But they object further concerning the time of this Temple, that it could not
be till the days of Darius Nothus, because the decree which Cyrus made
concerning it was forgotten; witness the great search that was made about it,
no man alive being able to remember it.

To which I answer, that the Adversaries of the Jews would be sure to carry
the matter against them as cunningly as they could; and therefore having
recourse to a King newly come to his throne, they might and did desire search
to be made among the Rols, hoping that either Cyrus had not registered the
Decree that he made (especially seeing it concerned not his own people) or
else that it might be lost through negligence; or else these might be other and
younger Adversaries then those who at the first withstood the building; and
therefore on their own knowledge could not remember it. Nay though there might
be enough alive who could easily remember the departing of the Jews home
again into their own Country; yet that the building of their Temple was
granted by Decree, and that Decree registered, but few regarded; and indeed
might rather think there was no such thing then that there was, because the
building was hindered in Cyrus his life time, as the Prophet Daniel shows. For
in the third year of Cyrus, the Prince of Persia withstood it, Dan. 10.1.13.

But they have this to object, That for all this it must be Darius Nothus who
restored the Temple, and not that other Darius the son of Hystaspis, because
(as Ezra, c. 4.) it must be such a Darius as had an Artaxerxes before him, and
an Artaxerxes after him: which none of the Kings of Persia had but Darius
Nothus.

To which is answered, that Cambyses succeeding his Father in the throne is
called by Ezra, c. 4. verse. 6. by the name of Ahasuerus, which was his Imperial
name; and was so called as being the first that obtained the Persian Monarchy
by the right of inheritance: for such (says Master Lydiat) is the
signification of the word Ahasuerus or Assuerus. Nor will Scaliger himself but
confess that it was ordinary with these Kings to change their names when they
took the Government of the Empire upon them, as Cluverus observes in his
Computo Chronologico. Cambyses therefore is not unfitly taken for Ahasuerus,
Ezra 4.6. Next after whom was Magus the Magician, who reigned under the name of
the brother of Cambyses, the other son of Cyrus, called by Ctesias (not
Smerdis, as in Herodotus, but) Tanyoxarces, or Tanyoxerxes: the same sure which
Ezra calls Artaxerxes, or Arthashast, Ezra 4.7. So that thus we have the
first Artaxerxes, he who was before Darius. And as for the other after him, we
need not make question but he was Artaxerxes Longimanus: For though Longimanus
did not immediately succeed Darius, yet was he the first King after him who
showed favor in the restoring Jerusalem.

If they say the reign of the Magician was too short to have any hand in the
hindering the building of the Temple; I answer, it was not so short as some may
imagine: for though he reigned but seven months after the death of Cambyses,
yet was not that the whole time of his reign: for he sat in the throne a good
while before, even most of the time that Cambyses was out of Persia making war
in Egypt and in Ethiopia, and against the Ammonians.

To all which, Petavius well accords, in his twelfth book and 25 Chapter, De
Doctrina Temporum: where noting the Kings of Persia in that order wherein they
stand in the book of Ezra, thus he says; The first is Cyrus, then Assuerus,
cap. 4.6. to whom the Jews were accused. Then Artaxerxes, verse 7. who also
favored the Jews enemies, and forbad the building of the Temple. Afterward
Darius, cap. 5. in whose second year the Temple is restored. And after him
Artaxerxes.

That Artaxerxes (says he) who is mentioned next after Assuerus, was not
Longimanus; but either the same with Assuerus, as Josephus thinks: supposing
Cambyses to be signified by both those names; to whom Torniellus agrees. Or
else to speak truly, Assuerus is Cambyses; and Smerdis (the Magician)
Artaxerxes, who cunningly held the Empire eight months after Cambyses: and
has some of his acts remembered by Herodotus; as that he should free his
subjects from tribute, and grant them a cessation from military employments for
the space of three years, yea even for almost six years did this personated
brother of Cambyses lie hid says Ctesias, and carried himself so cunningly as
if he had been Tanyoxerces indeed, whom Herodotus call Smerdis. Quare and ad
hunc trahi non immerito potest, quod in Esdra legitur; Praefectos adversus
Judaeos literas ad Artaxerxem dedisse. Petav. De Doctr. Tempor. lib. 12. c. 25.
Learned Langius likewise assenteth hereunto, and has lately declared himself
against Scaliger in this particular. Quid enim vetat (says he) reliquorum
Regum more, and hos, cum imperium capescerent, nomen mutasse: and ex Cambyse
Oxyarem, sive Assuerum; ex Smerde supposititio (quem Ctesias Tanyoxarcen vocat)
Artoxarcen factum fuisse? Thus he, with much more to the same purpose, in his
second book and ninth Chapter, De annis Christi.

And thus in this Section I have showed the true time of the building of
Zorobabels Temple, and proved it to be (not in the days of Darius Nothus, but)
in the days of Darius the son of Hystaspis, who began his reign in the year
of the Julian Period 4193, which was fifteen years after Cyrus proclaimed
liberty for the Jews to return home again into their own Country: Which
account does exactly agree to the Caelestiall Observations of Ptolomie, joining
the twentieth year of this Darius with the 246 of Nabonassar, as also the one
and thirtieth with the 257 of Nahonassar: the first whereof was in the year of
the Julian Period 4212, and the next in the year of the same Period 4223. In
both which years the Moon is noted by him to be Eclipsed: The first, according
to our Julian account, was on the nineteenth day of November; And the other on
the 25 of April. Before which there is another Eclipse noted by him, in the
seventh year of Cambyses, whereto he joyneth the 225 of Nabonassar, and was in
the year of the Julian Period 4191. The first of Darius Hystaspis must
therefore needs be in the year of the said Period 4193.

SECT. VII. Of the seventh Period, from the second year of Darius Histaspis to
the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus.
THis seventh Period is a Period of 65 years: which I cannot better demonstrate
then by running through the reigns of all the Kings of Persia, from the first
of Cyrus to the end of the last Darius whom Alexander conquered.

I begin then with Cyrus, who by the consent of all Authors began to reign in
the first year of the 55 Olympiad; viz. in the latter part thereof, which was
in the year of the Julian Period 4155, at the Summer time whereof the second
year of the said Olympiad began. He reigned 30 years, as Ctesias and most
Authors write: of which, seven were over Babylon according to Xenophon; or
nine according to Ptolomie in his Mathematical Canon of the Kings of Babylon.
But I like best to follow Xenophon.

The next after Cyrus was Cambyses, who had some kind of Dominion in the third
year of Cyrus, as Daniel shows; but from his Fathers death (who dyed in the
year of the Julian Period 4185) to his own death, he had but seven years and
five months, as it is testified by Herodotus, and confirmed by Ptolomie. In
Ctesias his fragment we find 18: which I believe to be a corruption, and
should more rightly be eight; the last of which was incomplete, as by the seven
years and five months noted in Herodotus well appears.

This King Cambyses went to war in Egypt in the third year of the sixty third
Olympiad, which was in the year of the Julian Period 4188; as Diodorus shows,
lib. 2. during which time of his war there, and in Ethiopia, and against the
Ammonians, his Kingdom at home was governed partly by his own brother
Tanyoxerxes, and partly by one of the Magoi of Persia who slew his brother and
then counterfeted his person, and under the veil of his name held the Empire
til the death of Cambyses and seven months after, at which time the chief
Nobles of Persia discovering the fraud slew him, and advanced Darius the son of
Hystaspis to the throne in the year of the Julian Period 4193.

The next therefore that reigned after this counterfeit brother of Cambyses, was
Darius the son of Hystaspis; the years of whose reign are so diversely computed
by sundry Authors as that it may seem hard to say how long he reigned: For
Tertullian, lib. contra Judaeos, gives him but ninteen years; the Marmora
Arundelliana 28; Orosius 30; Ctesias 31; Julianus Toletanus 34; Herodotus 36;
and Clemens of Alexandria 46. In which diversity, all the help that we have is
from Herodotus; who, though he give him 36 years, does nevertheless declare
that he dyed in the fifth year after the Marathon war: which war was not till
the second year of the seventy second Olympiad, in which was the one and
thirtieth year of his reign: And therefore the whole time of his reign could
be but 34 years complete, as Julianus Toletanus reckons; And of these he
reigned but 33 before his son Xerxes was taken in to reign with him, as in
Herodotus again appears, lib. 7.

Xerxes therefore began in the year of the Julian Period 4226, and (as Diodorus
says) reigned something more then twenty years: after whom Artabanus (by whom
Xerxes was slain) continued seven months, and at the end thereof Artabanus
also being slain, Artaxerxes Longimanus began to reign alone, and dyed not
until the seventh year of the Peloponnesian War in the winter time thereof;
viz, in the year of the Julian Period 4289 almost finished; as both Thucidides
and Diodorus witness, Thucid. lib. 4. Diodor. lib. 11. Ctesias therefore was
right in giving 42 years to this King after the death of Artabanus.

But we are to note that this Artaxerxes had a twofold beginning to reign: The
one, some years before his Father Xerxes dyed: The other after his Fathers
death, when he had slain Artabanus, who slew his Father seven months before.
From the first he reigned 49 years: and from the second but 42, as has been
showed. The first began in the year of the Julian Period 4240 toward the end
thereof, even before the beginning of the seventh month: the other, in the
year of the same Period 4247.

Thucidides has an eye to the first of these, and so have the holy Scriptures
in accounting the years of this King: but other old Authors generally account
from the latter time, when he began to reign alone; in which Diodorus a little
differs from Ctesias, and has therefore but 40 years in the stead of 42.

But now why this King should begin in his Fathers life time, and so soon as I
have mentioned, is in regard of what we find storyed concerning the banishment
of Themistocles the Athenian, who being expelled out of Athens by his
unthankful Countrymen and Citizens, fled to the King of Persia for succor in
the second year of the seventy seventh Olympiad, as Diodorus casts the time:
and then we are sure Xerxes was living, because the time of his reign was
something more then twenty years. Diodorus hereupon says that Themistocles
came to Xerxes, and so do some others; but Thucidides who was near those
times, as also Plutarch, Charon Lampsacenus, and Aemilius Probus have witnessed
that he came to Artaxerxes of late having begun to reign. And if to Artaxerxes
of late having begun to reign, it must needs follow that Artaxerxes had a
beginning before the second year of the 77 Olympiad, which (as appears by the
account of Daniels 70 Weeks) was in the year of the Julian Period 4240 about
the sixth month, which among the Jews was called Elul: and living after that
till the seventh year of the Peloponnesian War, must needs have a longer time
of reign from this beginning then either forty or two and forty years.

But for a more clear demonstration, and so to reconcile these Authors that
they may speak true on either side, let me add out of Petavius, namely, That
Themistocles being banished came to come to Xerxes King of Persia, as Diodorus
and diverse other Story-writers declare; and finding Xerxes busied in some
expedition, or not in the City which was the seat of his Kingdom, he sent
letters to his son Artaxerxes who of late had began to reign, as Thucidides
shows. For in this respect Story-writers may indifferently relate that he
fled as well to the one as the other: and our conclusion from hence may be,
that he fled to the Persians, Xerxes yet living, when Artaxerxes was already
taken in to reign with him in the Empire, as being the next that was to reign
alone after him. Thus Xerxes also began to reign before Darius dyed, as has
been proved out of Herodotus. Petay. lib. 12. cap. 25.
For according to a Law among the Persians, when the King went to war abroad,
he did for the most part appoint and constitute one of his sons for his
successor; from which time some Authors account the years of such an ones
reign, whilst others account but from the time of his Fathers death. And in
the Kingdom of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzars reign began after the same manner, as
by Berosus compared with holy Scripture may be seen. This was usual also among
the Kings of Judah and Israel, as by the Scripture alone is: manifest: which
not observed, has caused many gross mistakes concerning the right reckoning
of their reigns.

Eusebius mentions the flight of Themistocles two years sooner then Diodorus
does, who therefore casts it into the fourth year of the seventy sixth
Olympiad, which was in the year of the Julian Period 4241, and then was the
first year of Artaxerxes still running on by my account.

This of Eusebius I find approved by a late learned writer, Jacobus Armachanus
in his Annals of holy Scripture; who says that it agrees conveniently enough
to the tradition of Thucidides, which sets the coming of Themistocles to
Artaxerxes between the siege of Naxus and that noble victory gotten by Cimon
over the Persians at Eurimedon; and does withal place the beginning of the
reign of Artaxerxes between those bounds. For viz. Thucidides.
he said, Themistocles then sent letters to Artaxerxes (...), of late having
begun to reign; by which he both desired his friendship, and also promised his
own aid to him against the Greeks. From which is found out the true
beginning of the reign of Artaxerxes, and is from hence proved not to be so
late by nine years as is commonly accounted. Thus he, in his Annals I say of
holy Scripture: which when I saw, I was not a little confirmed in my judgment.
For though I accounted thus, long before I ever read any thing of his in this
kind; yet for my better confirmation herein, I was glad to meet with the
concurrence of so eminent a man: from whom though I vary much in the ancient
account of the Hebrew months and year, as also in some other particulars; yet
here (as in many things elsewhere) I cannot but embrace him with much
gladness, and shall ever esteem him (as sure enough he is) a man of excellent
parts, great industry, piety, and much learning, worthy to be accounted among
the number of those whose memories are precious after their deaths.

But to return: There is moreover a passage mentioned by Petavius, out of
Justin, to show the occasion of this beginning, as may be seen in his Doctrina
Temporum, lib. 10. c. 25. where he also answers to what Pererius objecteth
against it. And indeed it is probable that when Xerxes (upon the death of
Pausanias, who should have betrayed Greece to the Persians, but was discovered)
went about to renew his war against the Grecians that then he took this his
son Artaxerxes to reign with him, and to be his next successor, which
Artabanus afterward would have hindered and made void, but could not.

The next after this Artaxerxes was Xerxes the second who reigned two Months,
or (as Ctesias says) 45 days. After whom Sogdianus had seven or eight Months
more: And when Sogdianus was dead, Darius Nothus (in the year of the Julian
Period 4290) began to enter upon those XIX. years which Diodorus says was the
time of his reign: according to whom I reckon the years of all the other
Kings in this Monarchy to the end thereof. And must therefore give to
Artaxerxes Mnemon after the death of Nothus 43 years. To Artaxerxes Ochus after
the death of Mnemon 23. To Arses after Ochus 3. And to Darius Codoman after
Arses 6.

And thus we have all the Kings of this Monarchy together with the years of
their reign: and do thereby find the death of the last of them to be in the
year of the Julian Period 4384. But for a more clear demonstration, see the
Table following.

Y. of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Rests and Jubilees Captivity.
Olympiads. Egypt. Babylon Lydians Medes. Persians A Perfect Table for the
better understanding of some of the former and following Passages. 4131 3422 1
24 2 14 25 35 13 CYRUS over Persta. * This was the 24th year of the Captivity,
the fourteenth year of Apries King of Egypt, the 25th year of Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babylon, the 35. of Halyattes King of Lydia, and the thirteenth of
Astyages King of Media. 4132 3423 2 25 3 15 26 36 14 4133 3424 3 26 4 16 27 37
15 4134 3425 4 27 1 17 28 38 16 4135 3426 5 28 2 18 29 39 17 4136 3427 6 29 3
19 30 40 18 4137 3428 7 6 30 4 20 31 41 19 4138 3429 1 31 1 21 32 42 20 4139
3430 2 32 2 22 33 43 21 4140 3431 3 33 3 23 34 44 22 4141 3432 4 34 4 24 35 45
23 Tyrus is yielded to Nebuchadnezzar, and Egypt is conquered soon after,
continuing under Babel forty years. 4142 3433 5 35 1 25 Amafis 45. 36 46 24
4143 3434 6 36 2 1 37 47 25 4144 3435 7 7 37 3 2 38 48 26 4145 3436 1 Jub.
xviii. 38 4 3 39 49 27 1 * Nebuchadnezzar is seven years mad. 4146 3437 2 39 1
4 40 50 28 2 4147 3438 3 40 2 5 41 51 29 3 4148 3439 4 41 3 6 42 52 30 4 4149
3440 5 42 4 7 43 53 31 5 4150 3441 6 43 1 8 44 54 32 6 4151 3442 7 1 44 2 9 45
55 33 7 4152 3443 1 45 3 10 1 Evilmerodaeh 12. 56 34 Evilmerodach began in this
year, and reigned twelve years. Sulpit. 4153 3444 2 46 4 11 2 57 35 4154 3445 3
47 1 12 3 1 Crefus 14. 1 Cyaxares secundus. Astyages being dead, Cyaxares
began. Xenoph. 4155 3446 4 48 2 13 4 2 2 1 In this year Cyrus is made General
of the Persian and Median Forces; from which time his thirty years of reign are
to be accounted. 4156 3447 5 49 3 14 5 3 3 2 4157 3448 6 50 4 15 6 4 4 3 4158
3449 7 2 51 1 16 7 5 5 4 4159 3450 1 52 2 17 8 6 6 5 4160 3451 2 53 3 18 9 7 7
6 4161 3452 3 54 4 19 10 8 8 7 4162 3453 4 55 1 20 11 9 9 8 4163 3454 5 56 2 21
12 10 10 9 4164 3455 6 57 3 22 1 Belshazzar 14. 11 11 10 Evilmerodach being
slain in battle, Belshazzar began, and reigned 14. years. Sulpit. 4165 3456 7 3
58 4 23 2 12 12 11 4166 3457 1 59 1 24 3 13 13 12 4167 3458 2 60 2 25 4 14 14
13 In this year Cyrus conquers Croesus, and possesses his Kingdom. 4168 3459 3
61 3 26 5 15 14 4169 3460 4 62 4 27 6 16 15 4170 3461 5 63 1 28 7 17 16

Y. of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Rests and Jubilees Olympiads.
Persians Medes. Egypt. Babylon Captivity. A Perfect Table for the better
understanding of some of the former and following Passages. 4171 3462 6 2 17 18
29 8 64 4172 3463 7 4 3 18 19 30 9 65 4173 3464 1 4 19 20 31 10 66 4174 3465 2
1 60 20 21 32 11 67 4175 3466 3 2 21 22 33 12 68 4176 3467 4 3 22 23 34 13 69
4177 3468 5 4 23 24 35 14 Cyrus 7. 70 4178 3469 6 1 61 24 25 36 1 Babylon is
taken by Cyrus, and the seventy years of the Captivity are ended, even in this
first year of Cyrus, which was also the first of Darius-Medus. 4179 3470 7 5 2
25 37 2 4180 3471 1 3 26 38 3 4181 3472 2 4 27 39 4 4182 3473 3 1 62 28 40 5
Egypt shakes off all subjection to the Kingdom of Babylon, forty years after
Nebuchadnezzar conquered it, Ezekiel. 29.13. Jer. 46.26. 4183 3474 4 2 29 41 6
4184 3475 5 3 30 42 7 4185 3476 6 4 43 1 Cambyses 7. and 5 m. Cyrus being dead,
Cambyses began to reign alone, and reigned from hence seven years and five
months. Herodot. 4186 3477 7 6 1 63 44 2 4187 3478 1 2 45 3 4188 3479 2 3 6 4
Cambyses conquers Egypt; and being absent from home, has his Kingdom governed
by the Magoi of Persia, when they had slain his brother. 4189 3480 3 4 m 5 4190
3481 4 1 64 6 4191 3482 5 2 7 4192 3483 6 3 8 Magus seven months after
Cambyses. 4193 3484 7 7 4 1 Darius Hystaspis 34. Darius the son of Hystaspis 34
years. 4194 3485 1 Jub. xix. 1 65 2 Haggai and Zachary Prophecy in this year
and exhort to the building of the Temple. 4195 3486 2 2 3 4196 3487 3 3 4 4197
3488 4 4 5 4198 3489 5 1 66 6 4199 3490 6 2 7 in this year (before the sixth
year of darius was ended) the building of the temple was finished on the third
day of the month adar ezra 6.15. 4200 3491 7 1 3 8 4201 3492 1 4 9 4202 3493 2
1 67 10 4203 3494 3 2 11 4204 3495 4 3 12 4205 3496 5 4 13 4206 3497 6 1 68 14
4207 3498 7 2 2 15 4208 3499 1 3 16 4209 3500 2 4 17 4210 3501 3 1 69 18

Y. of the Julian Period. Teers of the World. Rests and Jerbilees Olympis.
Persians. A perfect Table for the better understanding of some of the former
and following Passages. 4211 3502 4 2 19 4212 3503 5 3 20 In this year (being
the 246 of Nabonassar) Ptolomy notes an Eclipse of the Moon, which by the
Julian Calendar was on the nineteenth of November: It was, as he also says, in
the twentieth year of Darius Hystaspis. 4213 3504 6 4 21 4214 3505 7 3 170 22
4215 3506 1 2 23 4216 3507 2 3 24 4217 3508 3 4 25 4218 3509 4 171 26 4219 3510
5 2 27 4220 3511 6 3 28 4221 3512 7 4 4 29 4222 3513 1 172 30 4223 3514 2 2 31
Here again Ptolomy notes another Eclipse of the in the 31 of Darius, and year
of Nabonassar 257. it was by the Julian Calendar April 25. 4224 3515 3 3 32
4225 3516 4 4 33 4226 3517 5 173 34 1 Xerxes 20. In this year Xerxes began to
reign, and reigned somewhat more then twenty years. Diod. This King in the Book
of Esther is called Ahasuerus, as is supposed, and thought to be the Husband of
Esther. Scalig. 4227 3518 6 2 ARTAXERXES from hence 49. 2 4228 3519 7 5 3 3
4229 3520 1 4 4 4230 3521 2 174 5 4231 3522 3 2 6 4232 3523 4 3 7 4233 3524 5 4
8 In this year Xerxes began to move toward Greece. 4234 3525 6 175 9 In this
year he comes into Greece with his huge Army, and is quickly beaten home
again. Petav. lib. 13. 4235 3526 7 6 2 10 4236 3527 1 3 11 4237 3528 2 4 12
4238 3529 3 176 13 4239 3530 4 2 14 4240 3531 5 3 1 15 In this year (about the
sixth month) Artaxerxes Longimanus began first of all to reign; he reigned till
the seventh year of the Peloponnesian War, dying in the Winter time thereof,
and had therefore from hence 49 years of reign, though from the death of
Artabanus but 42 Ctes. 4241 3532 6 4 2 16 4242 3533 7 7 177 3 17 4243 3534 1
Jub. xx. 2 4 18 4244 3535 2 3 5 19 4245 3536 3 4 6 20 4246 3537 4 178 7 7 m
Artabanus (after Xerxes) seven months. 4247 3538 5 2 8 1 Artaxerxes 42. In
this year, before ethe seventh of Artaxerxes was ended, Ezra having obtained a
Commission from the King, (who now began to reign alone) begins his journey
to Jerusalem on the first day of the first month, Ezr. 7.9 4248 3539 6 3 9 2
4249 3540 7 1 4 10 3 4250 3541 1 179 11 4

Y. Of the Julian Peiod. Yerrs of the World. Rests and Iuhilees. Olympiads.
Persians A perfect tAble for the better understanding of some of the former and
following Passages. 4251 3542 2 2 12 5 4252 3543 3 3 13 6 4253 3544 4 4 14 7
4254 3545 5 180 15 8 4255 3546 6 2 16 9 4256 3547 7 2 3 17 10 4257 3548 1 4 18
11 4258 3549 2 181 19 12 In this year, on the sixth day of October (which was
the 10th day fo the seventh month, the Sun being then in 7th d. of Libra) the
first year of DAniels Weeks began. For in Dan. 9.25. the Angel shows that
they were to begin from the executionof the Decree of build again Jerusalem;
which was not till the twentieth year of ARtaxerxes Longimanus, when God
stirred up Hanani with certain other men of Judah, to go up to Shushan to
Nehemiah, who related unto him the woeful condition Jerusalem still was in: he
thereupon (after he had fasted and prayed) besought the King's leave and favor
that he might go and build the City; which was granted. From hence herefore
(even from the beginning of the these men's journey to Shusban) the precise
account of these Weeks beginenth, which hereupon casts the just middle of the
last week into the year of the Julian Period 4746. and lays it exactly on the
third day of April: For form the sixth of October in this year, when the Sun was
in the seventh degree of Libra, to the their dof October in the year of the
Julian Period 4745. when the Sun was also in the seventh degree of Libra, were
486. years; to which add 182. days, and so we come to the third of April in
the year of the same Period 4746 in which year, and on which very day our
Savior suffered. 4259 3550 3 2 20 13 4260 3551 4 3 21 14 4261 3552 5 4 22 15
4262 3553 6 182 23 16 4263 3554 7 3 2 24 17 4264 3555 1 3 25 18 4265 3556 2 4
26 19 4266 3557 3 183 27 20 4267 3558 4 2 28 21 4268 3559 5 3 29 22 4269 3560 6
4 30 23 4270 3561 7 4 184 31 24 4271 3562 1 2 32 25 4272 3563 2 3 33 26 4273
3564 3 4 34 27 4274 3565 4 185 35 28 4275 3566 5 2 36 29 Years of the
Peloponnesian War. 4276 3567 6 3 37 30 4277 3568 7 5 4 38 31 4278 3569 1 186 39
32 4279 3570 2 2 40 33 4280 3571 3 3 41 34 4281 3572 4 4 42 35 4282 3573 5 187
43 36 4283 3574 6 2 44 37 1 This was the first year of the Peloponnestan War;
it began at the Spring: witness that great Eclipse of the Sun which was on the
fourth of August next after. This War lasted 27. years. 4284 3575 7 6 3 45 38 2
4285 3576 1 4 46 39 3 4286 3577 2 188 47 40 4 4287 3578 3 2 48 41 5 4288 3579 4
3 49 42 6 4289 3580 5 4 2m 8m 7 Xerxes the 2d two months, after whom Sogdianus
8 m. 4290 3581 6 189 1 8 In this year Darius Nothus began, and reigned 19 years

SECT. VIII. Of Daniels seventy Weeks, in the ninth Chapter of his Prophecy,
at the 24.25.26. and 27. Verses.
I Shall need to say nothing of the seventh Period more then what has been
already in the former Section, and Table annexed to it. I come therefore to the
eighth which takes beginning the 20th year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, in the
year of the Julian Period 4259, and ends at the beginning of Christ's
Ministry in the year of the same Period 4742. This is a Period of 69 Weeks,
Petavius De Doctr. Temp. lib. 12. c. 35.
or of 483 years accounted from the Execution of the Decree for the restoring
and building of Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince, verse. 25. Of which Petavius
speaks excellently, in these words, saying; Sexaginta novem hebdomades
desinunt in Christum Ducem; non nanscentem quidem, sed in lucem apertumque
prodeuntem, seque ad (...), atque (...) accingentem; hoc est in Baptismum
ipsius, qui anno primo septuagesimae hebdomadis incurrit. Meaning in effect the
same that I do: for though he applies the end of the 69 Weeks to the Baptism
of Christ; yet he says as well that they end at Messiah the Prince: namely,
not at the time when he was borne, but when he came abroad and showed himself
openly, beginning to dispose of his hid treasures, and to preach the Gospel in
the Synagogues of Galilee; which was not until the very end of these 69 Weeks
(made up of seven and sixty two) and beginning of the seventieth. For (as
before I noted, in the fifth Chapter) after John was put in prison, Jesus came
into Galilee preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and saying; (...),
The time is fulfilled (that is, the last Week of the seventy is come) and the
Kingdom of God is at hand, Mar. 1.14. In the middle of which last week, the
Messiah (Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior) was slain, verse. 26. And by the end
of it, the Covenant was confirmed with many of the Jews, verse 27. Immediately
after which time, the Apostles turn to the Gentiles, Acts 10.1. and Acts 11.18.

They were all of them Weeks (not of Days, but) of years; according to the
custom of Prophetical Days, and years of Jubilee: there being seven Weeks in
49 years, as is seen in Levit. 25.8. Whereupon it follows, that in seventy
Weeks are 490 years. There can be no doubt of this: I may therefore go on;
and for the more clear understanding of what I have already briefly touched,
set down the words of the text, in each verse, at large.

Ver. 24. Seventy Weeks is cut out upon thy people, and upon thy holy Cities,
to finish transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to make reconciliation
for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up
Vision and Prophet, and to anoint the Most Holy.

Ver. 25. Know therefore and understand, that from the Out-going of the word to
return and to build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince shall be seven Weeks,
and threescore and two Weeks: it shall be built again, Street and Wall, even
in the strait of times.

Ver. 26. And after the threescore and two Weeks, shall Messiah be slain, but
not for himself: wherefore the Princes people to come shall destroy the City
and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a Flood, and unto the end
of the War desolations are determined.

Verse. 27 But in one week he shall confirm the Covenant with many; and in the
midst of the week he shall cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease: and
by a Wing of abominations making desolate, he shall flow upon the desolate,
even until the Consummation determined.

These be the words of the Prophecy, carefully translated: which in the next
place I think fit to open and explain, noting upon them as follows.

Verse. 24. [Seventy weeks is cut out] By which phrase is meant, that the full
and just number of 70 weeks is cut out. For when a Verb singular is joined to
a Substantive plural, it teaches in Hebrew that an exact account is then in
every part thereof fully intended.

Thy people] that is, Thy Country men the Jews; as may be seen in the first
Chapter of Ruth, at the tenth verse: where the Jews are called Naomies people.
The like is also in the third Chapter of the Lamentations at the fourteenth
verse; where Jeremy complaining, says, He was a laughing stock to all his
people.

Thy Holy City] this means Jerusalem, Esa. 52.1. Matthew. 4.5. so called because
it was the special place consecrate to the holy worship of God. This
Prerogative of being called The holy City, it was to retain (as here
appears) until the full end of these 70. weeks: And therefore when Christ
came, Salvation was first tendered to the Jews. They in general made light of
it, and put Christ to death: howbeit the covenant of the Gospel was confirmed
with many of them during the time of the last week; which being ended, their
Prerogative ceased, and thereupon the Apostles turn to the Gentiles, to whom
the Gospel began not to be preached until three years and an half after
Christ's Passion, at which time every one of the Seventy weeks were fully
ended. Now this holy City was called Daniels City, either because he was born
there or because that was the place of his bringing up, or in which he dwelt
till he was carried away Captive. Thus Capernaum is called Christ's City because
he dwelled in it, Matthew. 9.1. and Mar. 2.3. So also Rogelim was the city of
Barzil. lai, 2 Samuel 19.38.

To finish transgression and to make an end of sinne] Or as some render it; To
consume wickedness, and to abolish Sins: following therein the margent
Hebrew, as an exposition for plainness. The text is to seal, or to make an
end of Sin rather; Vt finem accipiat peccatum, that sin may have an end: as
Saint Hierom interprets it and is approved, therein by a great Hebrician, who
says that according to the true reading of the words, they signify properly
to consume, finish or end Sin. This was fulfilled by Jesus Christ, who was that
Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. To which
agrees that of the Apostle, Being then made free from sin, ye became the
servants of righteousness. Romans 6.18. And again, But now once in the end of
the world has he appeared to put away Sin, by the Sacrifice of himself,
Hebr. 9.26.

And to make reconciliation for iniquitie] This Christ did by appeasing and
pacifying the wrath of God against sin: and it was an effect of his passion.
For by his death we are reconciled unto God, Romans 5.10. Coloss. 1.20.

And to bring in everlasting righteousnesse] This Christ Jesus also did. For by
his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption, Hebr. 9 12.

And to seal up vision and prophet] Meaning, that Messiah shall make good,
fulfill and perform all the prophecies that were of him, of his Passion and
resurrection, putting an end to them all, and that therefore we ought to look
for no other, Luke 18.31. This we are also taught in the first Chapter of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, at the first verse. where the Apostle says, God who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last times spoken unto us by his son.

And to anoint the most Holy] Or the Holiness of Holiness: that is, the most
holy. This is also meant of Christ, who was endued with the Holy Ghost without
measure: even a very fountain of holiness was in him, of whose fullness we
have all received, Joh. 3.34. Joh. 1.16. and 1 Cor. 1.30.

In the time of the Law, the Kings, Priests and Prophets, when they first took
their Offices upon them, were anointed with holy oil. And this was the
Ceremony of consecrating them to the service of God in those callings. Now
Christ was both King, Priest, and Prophet: he had in himself alone all those
dignities at once together, to the which others were anointed severally; and
is therefore called by way of eminency, (...), The Messiah, that is, the
anointed. For though he were anointed with no material oil, yet he was
spiritually anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm.
45.7. that is, with the holy Ghost. And hereupon it is that Saint John says,
Ye have an ointment from him that is holy, 1 John 2.20, 22.

Neither does Christ himself but say as much: and thereupon when he began to
preach, he shows how the Prophet Esaias pointed at him in this, Luke 4.18. It
was an excellent saying therefore of Clemens of Alexandria: Our Lord Christ
(says he) the holy of holies, who came and fulfilled Vision and Prophet, was
anointed in the flesh with the Spirit of his Father whose material
annointings therefore of the Law; were nothing else but types and figures of
this spiritual anointing of Christ, as Mr Livelie concludes. And I would to
God he had kept him close to this in his interpretation of the next verse: for
it is as clear as the Sun at noon that there is but one and the same Messiah
spoken of through out his Prophecy.

And thus have we seen the generality of Daniels weeks. Now follows a more
special and particular handling them, divided into three parts in the verses
following.

Verse. The beginning of the 70 Weeks.
25. From the out-going of the word] This is commonly understood of the
publishing or proclaiming of a decree by some of the Kings of Persia (either
Cyrus, Darius or Artaxerxes for the restoring and building again of Jerusalem.
But more likely it is, that this out going of the word, should be rendered from
the executing of the word or Decree for the return and building of Jerusalem;
that is (as the Hebrew phrase fignifyeth) for the building again of Jerusalem.
Cyrus made such a decree; in which, though Ezr. 1.2, 3, 4. and Chro. 36.22, 23.
Ezra mentions only the Temple, as the chief part of the City: yet Esaias
shows, that even the building of the City was included; as is plain by what
is written in the four and fortyeth Chapter of his Prophecy, at the 28 verse;
and in the Chapter next after, at the 13 verse. Darius seconded this, when
after Cyrus his time, the building was hindered, making the foresaid decree of
Cyrus the ground of his favor and assistance. After which Ezra comes up, and
by virtue of a commission granted to him from Artaxerxes Longimanus (in the
seventh year of his reign) does much good, Ezr. chap. 6. Ezr. chap. 7.
and goes fairly on in repairing the desolations and wall (as is mentioned
Ezr. 9.9.) but could not effect the whole business: for the Adversaries of the
Jews prevailed still against them. And therefore 13 years after all this,
news is brought to Nehemiah at Shushan by Hanani and certain men of Judah, that
the Jews were still in great affliction and reproach: for the wall of
Jerusalem was broken down, Neh. 1.2.3.4.
and the gates thereof burnt with fire. At the hearing whereof Nehemiah sat
down and wept, and mourned certain days, and prayed before the God of heaven.
After which prayer, because he was the Kings Cup Bearer, he was to attend upon
his place: Neh. 2.5.6. etc.
and being observed to look heavy and sad in the presence of the King, the
King demanded the reason; which he told him: and thereupon obtained leave and
authority with letters of Commission from him to go up unto Judah (the City of
his fathers Sepulchers) that he might build it; as may be seen in the first and
second Chapters of Nehemiah. This was in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes before
mentioned: at which time Nehemiah came up and prevailed so far against the
Adversary, that the work went on, and a tithe was taken out of other Cities
to come and dwell at Jerusalem, the building whereof was never after hindered
any more but by the end of the Seven Weeks (mentioned afterward) was brought
to perfection.

And hereto agrees Petavius saying; Exitus sermonis non Edicti solum
pronounciatio est, sed executio, lib. 12. De Doctr. Temp. cap. 35. And in the
same book, at the 32 Chapter, speaking first of the common acceptance of the
word, and showing how thereby the beginning of these Weeks is drawn to sundry
times, by reason of several goings forth of the Word, he concludes and says;
At ego vocabulum (...) non solam arbitror edicti promulgationem, sed amplius
aliquid esse: nempe id quod Latina vox proprie significat, veram ac seriam
decreti illius executionem, etc. Meaning, That that which we commonly read from
the going forth of the Word, is of larger extent then so; and does therefore
stand to express that which the Latin word Exitus properly signifies, viz. A
true and serious execution of the Decree for the building again of Jerusalem.
And thus do I also understand it; only with this difference: By the Decree I
understand that which was first set forth, even by Cyrus; for though it was
seconded once and again, yet not fully executed till the days of Nehemiah, in
the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, as I have already showed.

Or however, be the reading according to the common acceptance, yet it must be
with reference to the building again of Jerusalem, as the Original intends:
and so we are still directed to the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, when Nehemiah
came up and built (not the Temple, but) the City for which he petitioned, even
the City of his Fathers Sepulchers, Neh. 2.5. And for this the King sent
letters to the Governors beyond the River, and a letter to Asaph the keeper of
the Kings Forest: in which the word may very well be said to go forth for the
building again of Jerusalem.

So that both ways we are directed to one and the same time for the beginning
of these Weeks.

But for my part I like best of the first exposition. For (as is observed by
others, as well as Petavius) it is genuina interpretatio, a genuine
interpretation: nempe ut dicamus ex quo tempore res illa, quam Deus per
Propehtas suos praedixerat, and quam Reges Persarum Edictis sanciverant,
effecta est reddita, remotis omnibusremoris. So that Ab Exitu Verbi, is as much
as Ex quo Verbum prodiit; id est, in effectum producta est.

And thus much for the Out-going of the Word, by which we are taught where to
begin the first year of Daniels Weeks.

[To return and build Jerusalem] that is, To build again Jerusalem: for so
the Hebrew phrase signifies. As for Example: Isaac returned and dug the
wels of water, which they had dug in the days of Abraham his Father: for
the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham, Genesis 26.18. By
which is meant, that he dug them again. Rursus fodit: so says Saint
Hierom. To which the word (...) in the Septuagint, well agrees: and is
therefore translated in our Bibles, Isaac dug again.

So also in the fixed Chapter of Zachary, at the first verse: I returned and
lifted up mine eyes and saw; That is, Lifting up mine eyes I saw again, as
Tremelius translates the place.

So also in the first Chapter of Malachie, at the fourth verse, We will return
and build the desolate places: that is, We will build again the desolate
places. And so here. To return and build Jerusalem, is as much as to say, To
build again Jerusalem: and is therefore so interpreted by Saint Hierom, in his
Comment upon the place. Which being well observed, will discover the gross
mistake of those Expositors,, who imagine that the Angel speaks here
concerning the return of the people out of the Captivity of Babylon, and that
therefore the 70 Weeks must begin in the first year of Cyrus. But beside their
mistake of the Hebrew phrase, the very time from thence to Christ will be
against them.

For should the Weeks begin at the first year of Cyrus his Monarchy, The
Weeks begin not in the first year of Cyrus.
they would be ended long before Christ was born: but that may not be; for they
must reach full three years and a half beyond his Passion; as is plainly
manifest by the verses following.

But to help this, some are bold to cut off at one blow no less then near a
hundred years from the Persian Mornarchy, as if they had traitorously crept
into the Chronology of those times: an easy way to make their accounts even,
but no sure stay for truth to rest upon.

I know and have seen their choycest arguments to uphold this tottring
building, but by diligent search have found themfrivolous, there being nothing
either in Beroaldus, Broughton, More, or others of them, but may be easily
answered. But I list not to trifle away much time about them: Only in few
words I shall say not only that the full current of Authors do begin the
reign of Cyrus over Persia in the 55 Olympied, but even Thucidides (who wrote
of the Peloponnesian War, saw it from the beginning to the end, was an Athenian
Gentleman, a Captain in it, and Author for certain truth of History, and
perfect reekoning of times most excellent: whose Works Demosthenes the famous
Orator of Athenes Copyed out with his own hands no less then eight times, as
Lucian reports) he I say reckons from the Marathon fight in the latter end
of Darius Hystaspis his reign, to the end of the Peloponnesian War 85 years:
that is to say, ten to the invading of Greece be Xerxes, and 50 thence
inclusively to the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, with 27 more to the end
thereof. Now, that we may know how to place these in their right times,
Xenophon (being the next after Thucidides) has taught us that the four and
twentieth year of the Peloponnesian War must be joined with the first year of
the 93 Olympiad. Whereupon it must needs follow that the firstyear of this War
began in the end of the first year of the 87 Olympiad: and the War of Xerxes in
the first year of the 75 Olympiad: and the fight at Marathon in the end of the
second year of the 72 Olympiad. Nor does Thucidides but tell us as much;
Thucid. lib. 2.
For as he declares, the beginning of the Peloponnesian War was in the
fifteenth year of that League which after the taking of the Island of Eubaea was
made for 30 years to come, Aenesias being then Major of Sparta, and Pythodorus
of Athens, the year of their Majorality now within two months expired, in the
beginning of the Spring. Now the time of this League is referred by Pausanias
(in the first of his Eliaca) to the third year of that Olympiad wherein Criso
of Himaera won the race: which (according to Antiq. Romans lib. 10. prope finem,
and li. 11. in princio. Lib. 2.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus) was the eighty third Olympiad. Account therefore 15
years from the third year of the 83 Olympiad, and the beginning of this War
will fall into the latter end of the first year of the 87 Olympiad; where also
Perk. Harm. Script.
Diodorus Siculus has placed the Majorality of Pythodorus, in the end whereof
Thucidides begins that War. Which is also confirmed by an Eclipse of the Sun
mentioned by Thucidides, and by Mathematical Calculation found to be then;
beside other Eclipses, in some of the following years of the said War, fitly
agreeing. These Charcters are regarded of the Learned, and not unfitly called
Gharecteres infallibilies, and vere Bases Chronologiae fallere nesciae: Of
which Master Perkins speaks further, saying: Qui haec fictitia putoverit,
eundem oportet Astronomiam omnem logisticam a radicibus revellere, etc. And a
little after, Eo hoc mihi (says he) documento est, initium Hebdomadum Danielis
haud esse aptanduin annis vel Cyri, vel Darii Hystaspis: quia tunc Historiae
humanae fere omnes, and Astronomicae observationes, ut supposititiae, fuerint
negandae.

Also, do not those Marmora Arundelliana, brought out of Asia hither, prove
speaking stones to stop the mouths of those who rashly reject the allowed
Antiquity of these times, and by proofelesse proofs cut off as many years from
this Monarchy as they please? The Author of those Marbles was of no small
standing, 500 years and more before Eusebius; and none among the Greek
Historiographers more ancient then he, excepting Herodotus, Thucidides, and
Xenophon, as Master Seldom, that learned Antiquary of our times, has plainly
proved. Who, out of the said Marbles has gathered, that Craejus began his
reign in the first year of the 56 Olympiad; that Cyrus took Sardes in the
third year of the 58 Olympiad; that the fight at Marathon (in quo Persarum
clades, and Atheniensium victoria) was in the second year of the 72 Olympiad;
that Xerxes went to War in Greece in the fourth year of the 74 Olympiad; That
in the next year he was overthrown at Plataea, the fire of Aetna then first of
all breaking out; and that the fight at Leuctra was in the second of the 102
Olympiad.

Men then I see may cavil without cause, and make a disturbance in the
Chronology of these times, but not prevail in what they strive for; no not
with all the help Beroaldus and Master Broughton can afford them. To which let
me add, how grossly they have been mistaken, not well observing how childishly
they have shrunck the successions of sundry Lives. For when it is said that one
man lived in such and such a man's days, they presently and rashly take their
years and ages to be equal: which is in effect as if they should deny that
ayoung man might not live in an old man's time, or that a grave Philosoper might
not have a young Pupil, or that an aged Father might not sometimes beget a son
in the time of his age, or that it was incredible to grant an hundred years for
any man to live. All which are but poor shifts, little or nothing to the
purpose, although at the first sight some perhaps may highly prize them.

And so also for Olympiads; Broughton I confess has gathered together many
scattered fragments, chiefly out of Suidas, by which he thinks to overthrow the
credit of Olympiads, and cast the hand-maide out of fervice. But I answer, one
Swallow is not enough to proclaim a Summer; nor be things done without care,
able to prevail against the truth. Suidas in this deserves no better credit,
unless we account him an expert Archer who kills a Crow by chance. In a word,
most of his numbers were negligently corrupted, or were at the first not
carefully gathered. And so also may we say of other Authors, who write of such
things as these are, only by the way, and not on purpose: Neither have some
but oftentimes mistaken Suidas, taking his meaning in a wrong sense; chiefly
when things are thought to be contemporary, which indeed are very far asunder:
or if at all contemporary, but only in part; as I have already showed. And
further, for Olympiads, that which has caused others to deliver wrong
collections from them, was because they did not follow the common course which
was most usual in that kind of reckoning: for whilst from the beginning of
sundry Games, they had a Series or order of sundry years, the fiftieth from one
thing might be the 25th from another thing. And so Pausanias shows, that
there were at the least a dozen several Games, and Game-rulers accordingly,
set up at several times far distant the one from the other: which not well
regarded might make a confused Chaos amongst careless Authors. The truth
therefore is, That that account which was most common, was least faulty: for it
had but one head from whence to reckon, and was set forth in Tables by Hyppias
of Elis, received also generally in Computations; yea even by Plutarch hims
self, although in the Life of Numa he moved some scruple about it: in which he
seemed to savor of an usual custom of the Academicall Sect, which was
always ready furnished to dispute on either side, either pro or contra, either
for or against the truth.

I grant indeed that the ancientest of Antiquities among humane Authors cannot
but be full of error: but this was rather in the times before the Olympiads
then afterward, as Marcus Varre a learned Roman well observes; concluding the
times after to be more certain and Historical, because then the times began
to be recorded veris testatisque literarum Monumentis, as one rightly speaks.

Unto Varro agreed Julius Africanus, another ancient He was a Christian Writer.
Author, who in the third book of his Annals (as Eusebius witnesses in his
tenth book De praeparat. Evangelica) writes, that until the Olympiads there
was no sure knowledge in the Greek History, all things being confusedly written
without agreement between themselves: but after the Olympiads, because their
acts were diligently registered within the limits of every four years space, no
confusion of times was found amongst them.

After whom Censorinus also says, that after the first Olympiad there never
was any great dissension or controversy among Writers for Computation of time;
except in some six or seven years at the most. Or if in some particular the
difference perhaps might be something more, yet by comparing Author with
Author, and circumstance with circumstance, I cannot but think that men of
judgment may not only correct corrupted Copies, but even reconcile the most
material disagreements, or at the least show how and wherein an Author
sometimes has been mistaken.

In a word, this reckoning by Olympiads has been allowed, followed, and
commended by even the very flower and chief of the ancient Fathers; as by
Clemens of Alexandria the Master of Origin, Julius Africanus aforementioned,
Fusebius, Hierom, Augustine, Orosius, and others both pious and learned
Christians. And among these, let me for a conclusion mention what Saint
Augustine says in Commendation of them, in his second, book and 28 Chapter De
Doctrina Christiana: showing, That the observation of Olympiads is a great help
for the understanding of many sacred questions, and explanations of matters
Ecclesiastical; Nam and per Olympiadas (says that Father there) and per
Consulum nomina, multa saepe quaeruntur anobis. And a little before; Nos
adjuvat (says he) ad Sanctos libros intelligendos.

I would therefore that every man would lay a side all rash and inconsiderate
zeal, that so weighing things with an equal Balance, he may no longer be a
careless disturber of the true and right Computation of these times.

But they have objections out of Scripture.


And first they produce the age of Mordecai, Mordeca's age objected.
affirming that he was carried captive with Iechoniah, Esth. 2.5. and therefore
could not live till the days of Xerxes: to which time he must live, if Xerxes
were that Assuerus who married Esther.

To which is answered, Mordecai was not carried captive, but rather Kish the
great Grandfather of Mordecai. For thus stand the words in the place objected:
There was a certain Jew at Shushan the Kings seat, sth. 2.5.
whose name was Mordecai the son of Iair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a
man of Iemini, who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the Captivity,
etc. Where the Relative [who] is to be referred not to the furthest Antecedent,
Mordecai: but to the nearest, Kish; as may be seen in an Example much like it,
in 1 Chronicles. 2.7. where the words are, And the sons of Carmi, Achar, the
troubler of Israel, who transgressed in the thing accursed.

And indeed to what other end should mention be made of Kish, or why is the
Genealogy produced no higher then to him, but that thereby we may be taught,
that he, and not Mordecai, went into Captivity? it was to show by his carrying
away captive, how Mordecai a Jew, born of him, became Citizen of Shushan. And
so also the Apocryphal fragment, in Esth. 11.4. (brought forth by some to
prove the contrary) fully shows, saying: Erat autem (viz. Mordecai) ex
Captiva turba, quam captam Nebuchadnezzar abduxerat: that is, Mordecai arose of
that company (or came of that company) which Nebuchaanezzar carried Catptive.
Which well observed, does excellently confirm the truth of Gods Promise made
to his people, Ier. 24.6. namely, That they should return, be built up,
planted, and not rooted out: Whereupon they were commanded tomarry wives and
beget children, that they might increase there, and not be minished, Ier. 29.6.
From which places itwell appears, that the promise was made to them and their
posterity: the accomplishment whereof is excellently declared by this of
Mordecai and Esther, both of them born in the time of Captivity.

The truth of which is yet further manifest, in regard That that Mordecai which
nourished Esther, was not the same who returned in the first year of Cyrus: For
he who nourished Esther staid still at Shushan; The other returned with them
who went first into the Land of Judea, Neh. 7.7. It is not enough to say, he
gave his name to go up, but went not; for what were this but to deny a plain
and express testimony, as may be seen also, Ezra 2.2. And therefore these two
not being both one, their opinion is still more and more weakened, who strive to
prove Mordecai and not Kish, to be the man that was carried captive: for it was
common and ordinary to call diverse men by one and the same name; as afterward
shall be showed.

Secondly, they object the age of Ezra the son of Seraiah, Ezra's age objected.
who was slain by Nebuchadnezzar in the nineteenth year of his reign, 2 Kin.
25.18. Arguing from thence that the time of the Persian Monarchy could not be
so long as is usually accounted. For Ezra saw well near the whole time thereof,
being alive in the days of Johanan the father of Jaduah, Ezra 10.6. Which
Jaduah was high priest in the reign of the last Darius, when Alexander
conquered the Monarchy and won it wholly from the Persians, Neh. 12.22. See
also Joseph. in the eleventh book of his Antiquities, at the seventh and eighth
Chapters. Which being so, it will follow that had Ezra been begot but a day
before his fathers death, his age must be 250 years or thereabouts, though we
account not to the end of this Monarchy by almost ten years.

To which I answer, There is ambiguity in the word Son, Ezra had been the
immediate son of Seraiah: whereas he was so Seraiahs son, as the Jews used to
call their posterity by the name of Son, even to the fifth or sixth descent. As
for example: Josiah is said to be the father of Iechoniah, Matthew. 1.11. whereas
the father of Ieconiah was Iehoiakim, 2 Chronicles. 36.8. So also Zedekiah is called
in 2 Chronicles 36.10.
one place the brother of Ieconiah, and in 1 Chro. 3.16.
in another place the son of Ieconiah, because he reigned next after him; and
yet we know, that by propriety of speech he was his uncle, as may be seen in 2
Kin. 24.17. So also Salathiel is called the son of Iechoniah, Mat. 1.12. and
yet not only did Ieconiah dye childlesse, Ier. 22.30. but also Salathiel was
indeed the son of Assir, 1 Chronicles. 3.17. So also Zorobabel is said to be the
Ezra 5.2. and Mat. 1.12.
son of Salathiel, Matthew. 1.12. whereas he was not his immediate son: for
Zorobabel was indeed the son of Pedaiah, 1 Chronicles. 3.19. So also the Prophet
Zachariah is called the son of Iddo, Ezra. 5.1. whereas indeed he was the
Grandchilde of Iddo, and son of Barachiah, Zachar. 1.1. And more nearly
concerning the party objected: it is not manifest that neither was he the
proper and immediate son of Seraiah. For though Ezra in the viz. Ezra 7.1.2.
etc.
place objected made good his purpose, in showing (for his greater honor and
renown) that he came from Aaron: yet he has not precisely set down all his
Ancestors which were in that line between Seraiah and Aaron, but has omitted
viz. Amariah, Ahitub, Zadok, Ahimaaz, Azariah, and Jonathan: as may be seen by
comparing Ezra 7.3. with 1 Chronicles. ca. 6 ver. 7.8.9.10.
six in one place, and might also omit some in that other place between
himself and Seraiah: for this we find herein to be true and certain, that
Iehozadak was the immediate son of Seraiah, as is expressly mentioned in 1 Chronicles
6.14. And therefore though Ezra were so near kindred to that stock, yet it
might be in a collateral line by some that proceeded from Seraiah, and yet
nevertheless be reckoned in Genealogy as if he were his son; according to that
before mentioned of Salathiel, called the son of Ieconiah; or that of Zedechia,
in 1 Chronicles. 3.16. Where, though Zedechia were the Uncle, yet he stands upon
record as if he were the very son of Ieconiah: For thus we see some brought in
as sons, which were indeed but near kinsmen.

But for all this some perhaps will say, Artaxerxes Longimanus, to the end of
the Persian Monarchy, were 122 years or thereabouts: and therefore Ezra living
till toward the end thereof, will be still older then can be well allowed,
though he were born after the Captivity, and were not the immediate son of
Seraiah.

To which I answer, Iohanan, and wrote the Books of the Chronicles to his time;
as appears, Ezra 10.6. and Neh. 12.23. yet nevertheless he reached not to
the end of the Monarchy by far: not further then the days of Darius Nothus,
Neh. 12.22. which could not be much more then 50 years after the time that he
came away from Babylon to Jerusalem: at which time suppose he were 40 years
old, then should his whole time want ten of an hundred; which age no man of
judgment would conclude to be improbable, but likely and probable enough. And
herein Cluverus is to be applauded, who speaking of the high priests that were
in the times of this Monarchy, says thus; Iehoshua was in that office Ezra.
cap. 2. and cap. 5.
under Cyrus, Cambyses, and Darius Hystaspis; Ioiakim under Xerxes and in the
forepart of Artaxerxes his reign, Ezra 8.33. Neh. 12.10. Eliashib after him
till the twentieth of the same King and something lower, Neh. 3.1. Ioiada after
him in the residue of Artaxerxes his reign, and in the forepart of Darius
Nothus. Jonathan after him in the Neh 12.10.23.
residue of Darius Nothus, and under Joseph. lib. 11. cap. 7.
Artaxerxes Mnemon. And last of all, Iaduah under Ochus, Arses, and Darius
Codoman, Joseph. lib. 11. cap. 8. All which proportions are so congruous and
well agreeing to the stories of Ezra and Nehemiah, that no man I think who is
serious will ever go about to alter them: except it be to make Jaduah's time
fall also into a part of Mnemon's.

But they have still to urge: Nehemiah's age objected.
and in the next place they object the age of Nehemiah, which must be longer
then the length of this Monarchy; because (say they) at the beginning of it he
was of fit age to be the Jews Captain and one of their Conductours home from
Babylon: and living in the end of it, he wrote of their last Darius, and of
Jaduah the High Priest who met and appeased mighty Alexander. For the proof of
which we are directed to Ezra 2.2. Neh. 7.7. Neh. 12.22. and to Josephus, lib.
11. cap. 8.

To which I answer, Nehemiah who was in the beginning of this Monarchy, was not
the same who lived something toward the end of it, nor ever was sent to build
the Walls of Jerusalem by Artaxerxes. For [first] that Nehemiah who was in the
first of Cyrus, returned home at the end of the Captivity, Ezra 2.2. Neh. 7.7.
Whereas this, who was servant to Artaxerxes, went not home till the Walls of
Jerusalem were to be built, Neh. 2.5.8. Secondly, it was a common thing among
the Jews to call more then one by the same name; as is evident almost in every
Catalogue where Catalogues are recorded. As for example: In Neh. 12.1. there is
an Ezra who returned with Zorobabel; and in Ezra 7.1. another who came not up
until the days of Artaxerxes. Also, in Ezra 2.2. and Neh. 7.7. there is a
Mordecai who returned in the first of Cyrus; and in Esther 2.5. another who
lived at Shushan and nourished Esther: For if Esthers Mordecai had returned
with Zorobabel, he would not have dwelt at Shushan and trained up Esther among
the Heathen but rather in the Holy Land among the people of God. Also, See the
first book of the Chronicles, the Catalogues in Ezra and Nehemiah, and then
amongst the multitude of persons, many are known by one name. A Jeremiah which
(even Speed himself will say) was not Jeremiah the Prophet, Neh. 10.2. A
Daniel likewise, though not the same who was cast into the Den of Lions, Neh.
10.6. A Seraiah also, though not the same who was slain by Nebuchadnezzar,
Ezra 2.2. And in 1 Chronicles. chap. 6. two Abitubs, two Zadockes, and three
Azariabs in one line.

And so also for Nehemiah, he who came up in the first of Cyrus, was not
Nehemiah the famous, but another of the same name. For I find three Nehemiahs
in the History of these times: One, mentioned Ezra 2.2. Neh. 7.7. Another who
returned in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, Nehemiah, cap. 1. and cap. 2. And
a third differing from all these. Nehe. 3.16. For Nehemiah the great was
Nehemiah the sone of Hachaliah; but this other was Nehemiah the son of Azbuck,
the Ruler of the half part of Beth-zur.

So then Nehemiah was not in the beginning of this Monarchy. And as not in the
beginning, so neither in the end of it he was indeed in the days of Darius:
but this was not the last Darius, as is commonly supposed. It was rather that
Darius who reigned next after Artaxerxes Longimanus, as by the course of the
History appears, and is so understood by Lydiat, Cluverus, Conradus, Pawell
and others.

But this you will say cannot be, in regard that Nehemiah was in the days of
the High priest Jaduah, who (as Josephus writes) met and appeased mighty
Alexander coming against Jerusalem, in the year before he conquered Darius
Codoman, the last King of this Monarchy.

To which Petavius answers, Petavil. lib. 12. cap 25.
that Nehemiah indeed recorded the Priests and Levites so as his times; and
then some one or other, coming after him, put in that of Iaduah and the last
Darius. The like where of is to be found in other Books of Scripture; as in
the end of Deuteronomie, where those things that concern the death of Moses
were written by some other. So also in the end of the Books of Joshua, Tobias
and Jeremiah, some things are added which were not of the Authors putting in.

But I like not of this answer so well as I like the answer of Master Lydiat in
his Book De emendat Temporum, saying; that though Nehemiah makes mention of
Iaduah in his Catalogue of the high Priests; yet thereby is only gathered, that
writing his book in the days of Darius Nothus, and recording the High priests
to that time, Iaduah was borne heir to the Priesthood, and is therefore
recorded among them: who afterward succeeded his Father, and in his venerable
old age came and met with Alexander.

Like to which is also that of Cl^verus in his Computo Chronologico. or
Nehemiah (says he) non dicit se vixisse usq. ad tempus Darii ultimi, sed iste
Darius, cujus meminit cap. 12.22. fuit Darius Nothus. Quod vel inde potest
intelligi, quod eodem capite, v. 23. subdit, descriptos esse Sacerdotes usque
ad tempora Iohannis, summi Pontificis. Is autem non fuit sub Dario ultimo, sed
Iaddus ejus filius quem puerum videre potuit Nehemias, sed non summum
Pontificem, neque etiam illud asserit. That is, Nehemiah does not say that he
lived to the time of the last Darius, but that Darius which he mentions,
Chap. 12.22. was Darius Nothus; which we are given to understand even from that
which he presently subjoyneth in the same Chap. v. 23. namely, That the Priests
were written to the times of Iohanan the chief Priest. But he was not under
the last Darius; it was his son Iaduah, whom Nehemiah might see being a
child, but not a chief Priest: neither does he say he did.

So then, though Nehemiah might, and did, come low in the times of this
Monarchy, yet not to the end of it by far. For beside all this, Iaduah began
to be in the Priests office 32 years at the least, before the last year of the
last Darius, although he entered thereon but at the death of Mnemon; whereas no
man can tell but he might be in the Priesthood some years before: and so, not
only be old when he met Alexander, but also be so high in the Persian times, as
Nehemiah might record him heir of the Priesthood. At which time though it were
when Nehemiah was old, yet is not this granted without warrant: For, that
Nehemiah lived till he was laden with age, Josephus affirms in his
Antiquities, at the end of the fifth Chapter of the eleventh book.

But I do ill, you will say, to mention Josephus: for by him Nehemiah (being of
equal time with Sanballat) must be as low as the days of the last Darius.
Joseph lib. 11. cap. 8.


Whereto Iansw. that though it be commonly collected from Josephus, that he who
resisted Nehemiah at the building of the walls of Jerusalem was the same
Sanballat who obtained leave of Alexander to build a Temple on mount Garizim
for his son in law Manasses; yet by Scripture records compared with his
writings, it appears otherwise. For in Josephus, Manasses who was then the
son in law to Sanballat, and cast out by a tumult of the people through the
assistance of the high priest Jaduah, was the brother of Jaduah. But he whom
Nehemiah mentions, was not the brother of Jaduah, but the brother of the
father of Jaduah; and not cast out by the people assisted by the chief priest,
but cast out by Nehemiah himself, as is manifest in Neh. 13.28.

It can therefore be no absurdity to grant there were two Sanballats; the one
in the days of Nehemiah, and the other in the days of the last Darius, and of
Alexander magnus: which last died after the end of the Persian Monarchy, two
years after the taking of Gaza, Joseph. antiq. lib. 11. c. 8.

And thus having removed all such Scruples as may seem to hinder the beginning
of Daniels weeks in the 20th year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, I proceed, and go
on to interpret the words following.

Unto Messiah the Prince] This is meant of Christ Jesus our Lord; as may be
seen Esa. 55.4. Psalm. 2.2. Ioh. 1.41. For this is to be noted, that the word
Messiah is never used for an Adjective being set before the Substantive, as
here MESSIAH NAGID, Messiah the Prince. And therefore does here mean no other
then (...), CHRIST THE LORD, as the Angel styles him, Luke 2.11. and is for
certain a proper name in this text belonging unto him who is the Savior of
the world: who after seven weeks and threescore and two weeks was crucified
upon the Cross, even in the last week of the Seventy. And note likewise, that
when in other texts, it is attributed to other persons, it is then after
another manner, having a Pronounce affixed, or a Substantive of the Genitive
case: as, Mine anointed, Thine anointed, The anointed of God, his anointed,
or The Priest which is anointed. But here is no such thing: and therefore must
upon necessity mean CHRIT JESUS our Lord, and no other. Which even Rabbi Judah
confesses, in his Comment upon Daniel: alleging thereupon that saying of the
prophet, in Esa 55.4. Behold I have given him for a witness to the people, a
Prince and a Commander of the Nations.

Seven weeks, and threescore and two weekes] These put together do make 69.
weeks, or 483. years; whose precise end was at the beginning of Christ's
Ministry: for then did Christ Jesus our Savior [Messiah the Prince] openly
manifest himself, being anointed to that office a little before when he was
baptized by John in Jordan, and proclaimed then by a voice from Heaven to be
the son of God. Both which fell into the year of the Julian Period 4742. the
one on the sixth of January, when he was baptized; the other, on the third of
October, when he began his Ministry, 483. years from the beginning of the
weeks. For in 69 weeks, are 69 sevens of years: and they put together do
make 483. years.

If it be objected, that the Medea distinctio, or the Hebrew point Athnah,
standing in the original next after Seven weeks, are against this
interpretation; my answer then is: that though there be indeed such a
distinction or point there, yet the sense is not therefore to be suspended at
Seven weeks, as if they might not together with the 62 make one whole number
of 69. For in the first Chapter of Genesis, at the first verse, thewords and
the points stand thus. In the beginning God: created the Heavens and the Earth.
And yet there Athnah has not so much as the force of a Comma.

It would therefore be observed, that the holy Hebrew (as one says) has 19
Kingly accents, and eleven Servants: The Kings stay many times on the chief
word or number in the sentence, whilst the servants hasten on. And although any
King for the most part will make a full sense, as words be pointed in other
tongues: yet sometimes not so much as a Comma:

But why is seven separated from sixty two, Astreight of times. In which first
intervall most like it is that the City was fully finished and set in order:
That is, both public and private works and buildings; as houses, streets and
ways, substituting of right Officers, with other things of the like kind. With
which interpretation the interlinearie Gloss agrees, as Petavius notes.

Verse 26. And after 62 weeks Messiah shall be slaine] That is, Sixty and two
weeks after the Seven: for when the Seven weeks were ended, then were the 62.
to take beginning, and the one week next after them for the confirming of the
Covenant. In which one week it was that the Messiiah was slain: for as the
Angel here shows, it was after seven and sixty two; and therefore in the
seventieth or last Week of the seventy. And why I say, after seven and sixty
two, is because of the division: first seven, then sixty two. Which is all one
with after sixty two, accounted from the end of the seven: for so without doubt
the Angel means. To which purpose Lansbergius notes, saying: Non putat
Angelus sexaginta duas Septimanas a principio septimanae primae, sed a fine
Septimae: ut sensus sit, Christum moriturum esse Septimana Septuagesima. That
is, The Angel accounts not the sixty and two Weeks from the beginning of the
first Week, but from the end of the seventh: so that the sense is, Christ was
to dye in the seventieth Week. But in what year of that Week, is showed
afterward.

Shall be slain] The word in the Original is Carath, which signifies to cut
off either by banishment, or death. In the first sense Christ was cut off when
the Jews said, We have no other King but Caesar, Joh. 19.15. and in the other
sense he was cut off, when after their loud cries of crucify him, crucify
him, they put him to death.

But not for himselfe] This is likewise true of Christ, as the Prophet shows,
Esa. 53.4, 5, 6. But whether it be the right reading of this place, some make
question: and do therefore render the words thus: And there shall not be unto
him] that is, He shall not be; or not have any being, but be extinct and gone.
Meaning, that being slain or cut off by death, he should have no longer being
among the living: and so also Esaias says, He was cut off out of the Land of the
living, for the transgression of my people was the stroke upon him, Esa. 53.8.
All which was certainly fulfilled when Christ tasting death was not only
buried, but by his enemies shut in the Sepulcher, least he should again be
seen in the Land of the living.

And the people of the Prince to come, shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary] This is meant of the Romans under the Conduct of Titus the son of
Vespasian Emperor of Rome, by whom the City of Jerusalem and the Temple were
destroyed: which is here foretold as a judgment to come upon the Jews for
their putting Christ to death.

And the end thereof shall be with a Flood] Meaning, that the Roman Army
should be unto them as the overflowing of Waters in a Flood: and should
therefore prevail against all the force that the forsaken Jews could make
against them.

And unto the end of the War desolations are determined] By which is meant,
that so long as the War continued, should be nothing but desolations and
destructions. Which accordingly came to pass, fast one upon another: first in
one place, then in another, till all was wasted; as Josephus has at large
declared, in his seventh book of the Jews War, at the first chapter, and in his
sixth book at the first chapter likewise; as also in some other places of his
writings. Whose relations do excellently agree with the word desolations in
the plural number, here foretold by the Angel in the words of this prophecy.

Ver. 27. One Weeke] This is the last week of the seventy: in which the Angel
shows, that though the Jewish Nation should be cast off, and their City and
Temple destroyed; yet nevertheless the Messiah should for one whole Week Offer
himself unto them, and gather many of them into the Covenant of the Gospel.
This Week was therefore wholly spent in preaching to those of the Circumcision:
in the forepart whereof Christ himself in his own person preached unto them;
and in the latter part he also preached unto them by his Apostles, who went not
unto the Gentiles till this Week was ended. For as the 70 Weeks were cut out
over the People of Israel, and over the holy City, but not over the Gentiles:
so also the confirming of the Covenant by Christ in this last Week of the 70,
was cut out over the people of Israel, and over the holy City, but not over the
Gentiles. And that not without cause: For though Christ by his death redeemed
as well the Gentiles as the Jews, Ioh. 11.52. yet because he was in the first
place promised to the Jewish Nation, and after a peculiar manner their Savior,
it was consentaneous that in the first place he should offer Salvation unto
them, and confirm his Covenant with many of them, before he caused his Gospel
to be spread abroad, and to take place among the Gentiles. This appears by
that Caveat which in this Week he gave to his Apostles, when they had their first
power to preach; namely, that they should not turn into the way of the
Gentiles, Mat. 10.5. It appears also by that which himself said to the woman
of Canaan, That he was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
Math. 15.24. And as they had this Caveat, so they heeded it very carefully,
even after his death and Passion: insomuch that Peter abstained from preaching
to any but the Jews, until he was taught by Vision, that the Gentiles also
pertained to the society of the Church, Acts 10.1. In a word, Paul was
converted about six months after the Passion of Christ; three years after
which, he returned to Jerusalem that he might see Peter: from whence (after he
had stayed 15 days) he went into the regions of Syria, and Cilicia, and
preached there to the Gentiles, Gal. 1.18. By which it appears, that it was
full three years and an half after Christ's Passion before they began to preach
to any but the Jews: and at that time this One Week was ended. For (as it
follows) Christ's death was in the middle of this very Week.

And in the midst of the Week he shall cause Sacrifice and Oblation to cease]
This was certainly done by Christ's death. For in the former verse it was said,
That after threescore and two Weeks Messiah should be slain: and now in this
verse is showed the very precise time of his death, viz. That it was in the
middle of this Week: for then was Christ to cause the Sacrifices and Oblations
to cease. Yea, all the Sacrifices of the old Testament, and the whole Legal
and Typical service was then at an end, by that one Oblation of Christ upon
the Cross: for nothing but the death of Christ was of efficacy to abolish the
Sacrifices and Legal figures, which were but figures of him and of his
Sacrifice; as may be seen by that which St Paul writes to the Hebrews, in the
ninth and tenth Chapters. He takes away the first, that he may establish the
second; says the Apostle there, Chap. 10. verse 9. Not that the Jewish
Sacrifices did actually then cease: Peta De Doct. Temp. lib. 12. cap. 35.
but that they were de jure, or in very deed and truth then abolished, as
Petavius notes. Which also not only the last voice of Christ's dying, saying,
It is finished, but even the veil of the Temple being rent in twain, from the
top to the bottom, declared, Mat. 27.51. For by that Symbol Christ witnessed
that he by his death abolished all the Sacrifices, and all the legal worship.
For (as Lansbergius well observes) so long as that Shadowie service of the
Jews remained, Lansberg. in his Chronol. lib. 2. cap. 11.
the veil was between in the earthly Sanctuary: but the veil being rent, the
legal Ceremonies were abrogated, and all use of the old Covenant taken away,
and a passage opened for us to the Heavenly Sanctuary. But it follows,

And by a Wing of Abominations making desolate, he shall flow upon the
desolate] Here again after speech of the death of Christ is subjoyned a
threatening against the Jews for putting him to death. For by this Wing of
Abominations, is meant the Army of the Romans: and that (as will appear) very
significantly. For the word in the Original here translated Wing, is derived
from a verb (but once found in the Hebrew Scripture) which signifies according
to the Chaldee, Master Mede in his exposition of Daniels Weeks pa. 41.
To gather together: so also in the Arabic: in which it signifies also, To
environ or compass about; as is gallantly observed by one upon the place. Both
which significations suit well to an Army; and the latter to such an Army as
beleagureth a City or Fort.

The w^rd Wing therefore used for this Army, is very pertinent. For, if we
look further we shall find, shat Saint Luke speaking of that which in Saint
Mathewes Gospel is called the Abomination of Desolation, Mat. 24.15. and Mar.
13.14.
spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the Holy place, expounds it by
compassing Jerusalem with Armies, Luke 21.20. By which he does for certain
mean the Army of the Romans, called here an Army of Abominations, or a people
of Abominations; That is, of Gentles and worshippers of Idols: as is manifest,
in regard that the Scripture often not only calls Idols by the name of
Abominations; but uses also to express and imply under the names of the Gods,
the Nations themselves that worshipped them. Thus Ashtaroth is called the
Abomination of the Sidonians, 2 Kin. 23.13. And in another place, The strangers
with whom the children of Israel had contracted affinity, are called expressly
the people of Abominations, Ezra 9.14. So here, The Army which the Angel
foretold should come against Jerusalem, is called a Wing (or an Army) of a
people of Abominations: by which the Messiah should flow upon the Desolate;
That is, upon the desolate and forsaken Jews. For in this service (though an
Army of Abominations) it was the Army of the Messiah: as in a fit Parable,
aiming at this Prophecy, our Savior tells us, Matthew 22.7.

Even until the Consummation determined] Meaning, That the Desolation, which
this Army of Abominations brought upon the Jews, should continue till the end
of that time which God had determined: that is, until the times of the
Gentiles be fulfilled, Luke 21.24. For when the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled (then as Saint Paul tells us) The deliverer shall come out of Sion,
and all Israel shall be saved, Romans 11.25.26.

And thus I have now expounded this sacred Prophecy of Daniels LXX Weeks, then
which there is no one Prophecy in all the whole Bible that does more convince
the Jew, nor better confirm the Christian for the coming of Christ. For when
the Angel had divided the Weeks into seven and sixty two, which were to end at
Messiah the Prince, then presently in the next verse he adds, saying, And
after 62 Weeks Messiah shall be slain: joining hereunto the One Week
remaining; In the middle whereof the Sacrifice and Oblation was to cease; that
is to be abolished or made void and of none effect by his death and Passion.
Quare post sexaginta novem absolutas, in Septuagesima utique, ac postrema,
Christus occidendus erat; as says Petavius. Who hereupon concludes, that they
do in vain seek the end of these Weeks who look for it so low as the
destruction of the City by the Romans. Or, as his own Words are; Frustra
igitur finis alius Hebdomadibus iisce terminandis quaeritur: frustra longius a
Dominica Passione summoventur ad excidium urbis, Petav. lib. 12. c. 32.

So also Conradus Pawel, in his Concilio Chronologico; saying, Septuaginta
hebdomades in annos resolutae confi ciunt quadringentos nonaginta annos;
harumque hebdomadum finis praefinitus est, paucis annis post excisionem, hoc
est, passionem and mortem Christi. Verba enim Oraculi apud Danielem express
designant medium ultimae hebdomadis.

So also Pontanus, in his Chronology of Sabbathical years page 155. in these
words; Quod in dimidio ipsius hebdomadis dicitur Christum facturum ut cessent
Sacrificia and Oblationes, hoc dubio procul impletum est, quum ille seipsum in
sacrificium offerens legales oblationes and sacrificia abolevit, in dimidio,
vel circa dimidium illius hebdomadis, and de praeciso tempore mortis illius
intelligendum est.

So also Lansbergius, in his Chronology, lib. 2, c. 11. Porro and tempus
definit Angelus in quo Christus Sacrificia and Oblationes legales per mortem
suam abrogaturus sit, nimirum Dimidia Septimanae septuagesimae, hoc est anno
quarto ejusdem septimanae vel quando tres anni and sex menses finiuntur.

So also Cluverus, in his Computo Chronologico; where speaking of the last
week, and showing how it is divided into two parts, when he comes to the last
part, he has these words: Alterius Semiquadriennii principium est in
abrogatione hostiae and sacrificii, per Crucem and resurrectionem Christi
facta: finis vero in abdicatione gentis Judaicae, and translatione Evangelii ad
Ethnicos. Nam sicut priori semiquadriennio Christus in propria persona Judaeos
docuerat; sic posteriori per Apostolos suos and alios Doctores itidem solis
Judaeis pactum paternum confirmavit. Verum cum illi repudiarent istud, and
sacrificiis suis irrationalibus inhaererent, occisis insuper Stephano and aliis
Christianis, monstravit Chrstus Petro per visionem, ad gentes transferendum
esse regnum suum, Act. 10. and Paulum singulari miraculo conversum emisit, ut
gentibus annunciaret Evangelium regni Dei.

And now if after all this it be objected, Jerusalem by the Romans, because the
Angel says They be determined or cut out over the people and the holy City: if
(I say) this be objected, my answer then is, in populi sui Redemptorem, for a
Redeemer of his people. For although Christ always had the Spirit, yet for all
that there was to be a kind of solemn anointing him to undertake that Office,
witnessed by the Prophet Esa. 61.1. and performed accordingly at his Baptism
when the last week was ready to begin: For then the holy Ghost came down upon
him in the likeness of a Dove, the Heavens being also opened, and a voice from
the Father saying, This is my welbeloved son in whom I am well pleased,
Matthew, 3.16.17. Luke 3.22. After which inauguration, at the beginning of the
last week, he entered on his Ministry, and began to preach deliverance to the
Captives: and in the middle of the week satisfied for us on the Cross, and by
his death made an end of sin, freeing us from it and putting it away by the
Sacrifice of himself: as was before proved, Joh. 1.29. Romans 6.18. Heb. 9.26

All therefore that shall need to be now observed further, is the method of the
Angel in the verse objected; speaking of that last which was done first, and of
that first which was done last: which if Calvisius had well observed, he needed
not have urged the anointing of the Most holy against the right ending of
these weeks.

But perhaps it will be still objected out of the 26 and 27 verses, as a token
or sign of the ruin of the City, Mat, 24.15.

To which I answer, that although the destruction of the City be there
mentioned, yet not because it was within the compass of the weeks, or because
the end of them must be extended thither, but because the destruction of the
City was to follow and fall upon the Jews as a punishment for their putting
Christ to death; as in the Annotations foregoing has been showed. It was
spoken of to show the heinousness of that sin, and is foreshewed to follow as
a just judgment of God for so great a wickedness, and not because it is to be
included within the compass of the weeks. And of this destruction, the
Abomination of Desolation was but a sign, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet:
that's all; and more then that cannot be justly gathered from the places
objected.

But they further urge, Jews was the cause of their punishment; yea, and among
other sins, that of putting Christ to death: yet did not Jerusalem utterly
cease to be a City or Church of God till they contradicted and blaspemed the
Apostolical Ministry, by persisting still in their wickedness. For when
Jerusalem had condemned and crucified Christ, Saint Peter inspired by the holy
Ghost says still, To you belong the Promises, and to your children, Acts 2.39.

True, Gentiles. For in the last Week, Christ first by himself, and afterward
by his Apostles preached to the Jews; confirming a Covenant with many of them
during the time of that Week: which being ended, the Apostles turn to the
Gentiles, as already I have most fully and plainly proved.

But perhaps it will be objected out of Beroaldus, Middle, Beroald. lib. 3.
cap. 8.
must be translated Half; and not Middle. So that Christ shall be said to
abolish Sacrifice and Oblation, not in the Middle of the Week, but in Half of
the week: which Half was not the first Half; because seventy weeks, and not
sixty nine and were cut out over the people and the Holy City.

To which is answered, though the word indeed is used as well for Half as
Middle; yet here it must be rendered Middle and not Half. For even in the text
it self, Christ is said to cause to cease, or to abolish Sacrifice and
Oblation. Now this action is not Actio manens and continuata, but cito
transiens: for it is meant of the death of Christ, who put away sin by the
death or Sacrifice of himself, abolishing legal offerings for sin, to
establish his own Sacrifice and Oblation once offered upon the Cross, Heb.
9.26. chap. 10.9. Unless therefore we will make Christ's death to be a
continued action, and say that he continued in that act of dying for the space
of three years and an half, we must needs grant (as the truth is) that he was
crucified or slain in the Middle of the Week: which the confirming of the
Covenant does fully prove.

But says Funccius, the Sacrifices were of right abolished when Christ was
Baptized: in witness whereof there came a voice from heaven saying, This is my
beloved son in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3.17. Quasi dicat: Nulla posthac
hostia, nullum Sacrificium Mosaicum mihi placebit. Which is as if it should be
said, No offering, no Mosaicall Sacrifice shall henceforwards please me any
more.

Whereunto is answered, that the Sacrifices of the Law did never please God
otherwise then types and shadows of Christ's own Sacrifice of himself; and in
that respect, Moses his Sacrifices and such types of Christ, were as well
acceptable to God after his Baptism till his Passion, as before; which is
plain by that in Matthew 8.3. where Christ after his Baptism bids the Leper
offer the gift that Moses commanded: which (among other things) was two He
Lambs, and one Ewe Lamb; as is recorded, Levit. 14.10. So that still I see the
former exposition will stand, notwithstanding this Objection.

But however, though their ending may be right, yet their beginning cannot,
unless they begin in the first year of Cyrus. For if the 70 weeks begin not in
the first year of Cyrus, the alogie of the 70 years of Captivity, and the seven
times 70 years of liberty, cannot stand.

To which is answered, Joh. 3.14.
As the Serpent was lift up in the wilderness, so must the son of Man be
lifted up: there was a true analogy, but many years between. As Jonas was
three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so must the son of Man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the Earth: Mat 12.40.
there also was a true analogy, but with many years again between. This
objection therefore is no hindrance either to the length of the Persian
Monarchy, or to the beginning of the 70 weeks, although they begin not just
when 70 years of Captivity were ended.

I conclude therefore that the beginning of the LXX Weeks was in the twentieth
year of Ataxerxes Longimanus, in the year of the Julian Period 4259, on the
tenth of Tisri which then was on the sixth day of October, the sun being then
in the seventh degree of Libra: From whence to the beginning of Christ's
Ministry, in the year of the said Period 4742. were 483 years which ended (not
on the sixth of October, but) on the third, because the Sun was also then in
the same point of heaven that he was at the first: which third of October was
now the second day of the Week, and seventh day of the seventh Month. After
this was the middle of the last Week, on the third day of April, in the year
of the same Period 4746; for the third year of it ended on the third of October
next before: from whence if we account 182 days (which make half a year) we
shall come to the third of April and just middle of this last Week; on which
very day our Savior suffered, as afterward shall be more fully proved. And
thus, having respect to the motion of the Sun, is this account so exact as I
cannot but admire to find it so.

CHAP. IX. Of the LXX years in the Prophecy of the Prophet Jeremiah.
HAving finished the proofs of the several Periods so far as is necessary, I
come now to some other things pertinent also to Chronology. And first of the
70 years in Jeremy, commonly called the LXX years of Judah's Captivity, which
some begin in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, at the destruction of the
City and Temple: because then was not only a desolation of the Kingdom and
People, but of the Fields and Grounds which were to lie desolate until the
Land had enjoyed her Sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate, she kept
Sabbath, to fulfill threescore and ten years; as is recorded in 2 Chronicles. 36.21.

But against this may be excepted, That they who reckon from hence, may as well
account from a time which is four years after. For if they stand upon it to
prove that there must be a Desolation, not only of the People, but of the
Fields and Ground; and that the Land was to lie desolate and keep a Sabbath,
free from all Inhabitants, for the full and complete time of 70 years, and
that thereupon the 70 years in Jeremy could not begin till such a Desolation:
if so, then this (I say) must needs fall into the three and twentieth year of
Nebuchadnezzar, because the Land was not freed from all her Inhabitans till
then, nor the Desolations of Judah fully finished until that year, as may be
seen in Jer. 52.30.

Nor secondly, does that place (in 2 Chronicles. 36.21.) of keeping Sabbath 70 year,
prove a continual Sabbath of so long time: but rather shows, that the Land
during the years of her Desolation, beginning from the absence of her
inhabitants, kept a Sabbath to fill up the number of 70 years. To fill up the
number; that is all. The text therefore means not, as they would have, that no
part of that number was begun till then: but that there should not be any
people again in the Land, until the whole number of 70 years, formerly begun,
should be fully finished: but where, or when they began, that text mentions not.

Others therefore reckon from the transmigration of Jechonia, in the eighth
year of Nebuchannezzar: and they build chiefly upon two grounds. The one,
because the Prophet Ezekiel accounts from thence, calling the time after it,
The time of our Captivity, Ezekiel. 40.1. The other is a proof from the Prophet
Jeremy, who when he sent an Epistle to those who were carried away with
Jechonia, tells them plainly that when 70 years are accomplished at Babylon,
that they shall return again, Jer. 29.10.

But here also may be excepted, First, that the Prophets did usually date their
Prophecies from some remarkable accident or other: and therefore this Prophet
Ezekiel, who was carried away with Jechonia, and had Visions after he came to
Babylon, could do no less then date them from the time of that Captivity. For
he not only began to prophecy in the Land of Chaldea, after he was carried
away thither: but also dated his Prophecies with respect to that time, and
calls it Our Captivity; because it had relation to those who were carried
away at the same time when he was captivated. This is all: here therefore is no
such absolute warrant for the beginning of the foresaid seventy years, as some
at the first may think.

And secondly, for that Epistle which was sent to the Captives by Jeremiah, it
is true indeed that they to whom he wrote were carried away with Iechonia; but
for all that there is nothing in it to prove that the 70 years began but then.
For the Prophet in the letter to them does not say that they should return
after they had accomplished 70 years at Babylon: but (without defining any
beginning or time from whence) after 70 years were accomplished. By which it
appears plainly enough, that this alleged cannot prove the beginning of the
70 years: for we see there is no necessity to begin the reckoning of them when
that Epistle was sent, but rather from the time when Judah first began to be a
stranger in her own Land, and to bewail her case at Babylon, which was not
begun in Iechonias, but in Daniel and Iehoiakim, with some other of the Kings
seed, together with part of the Vessels of the house of God, Dan. 1.2. Which
appears further to be so, in regard that the whole time of Babels Kingdom was
but 70 years, Esa. 23.15. during which time, not only the Jews, but the other
neighboring Nations were to serve the King of Babylon. These Nations (says
the Prophet Jeremy) shall serve the King of Babylon 70 years: and when seventy
years are fulfilled, I will make the Land of the Chaldeans a perpetual
desolation, Ier. 25.11.12. And again, They shall serve him, and his sons, and
his sons son, Ier. 27.7. Which time among these, that it was but 70 years, is
clear by that before; mentioning, not only how long the Nations were to serve
the King of Babylon, but also how long that Kingdom was to stand. Esaias
therefore says, And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tire shall be
forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one King, Esa. 23.15. Which
expression [According to the days of one King] is meant of one Kingdom, as
appears by a like phrase in Dan. 7.17.23. And this one Kingdom was sure
enough the Kingdom of Babylon, which was Nebuchadnezzars Kingdom, continued
only to him, his son, and his sons son; as already has been said. Beside, When
70 years are accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you says the Lord, in Ier,
29.10. And if when 70 years be accomplished at Babylon, then must the beginning
be from the time of the Captivity of the first of the Jews that Nebuchadnezzar
carried thither, even in the beginning of his Kingdom. And when was this, but
when God had given Iehoiakim into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, with part of the
vessels of the house of God? at which time not only was Iehoiakim bound in
fetters to be carried to Babylon, but Daniel, with certain more of the
Children of Israel, and of the Kings seed, and of the Princes were brought
thither by Ashpenaz the master of the Eunuchs, and taught there the learning
and tongue of the Chaldeans, Daniel 1.3, 4.

Nor does the same Prophet elsewhere but understand the beginning of these
years thus: For I understood (says he) by books the number of the years,
whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would
accomplish 70 years in the desolations of Jerusalem, Dan 9.2. In which text
the word is plural, [Desolations:] to show that the 70 years must include all
the Calamities which fell upon Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon,
beginning even from the first of them, and were not ended until the reign of
the Kingdom of Persia; namely, when Cyrus King of Persia had conquered
Babylon, and thereupon could say, All the Kingdoms of the Earth has the Lord
God of Heaven given me, and has charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem,
2 Chronicles. 36.20.23.

There is (says Petavius) a double intervall of 70 years expressed in the
Scriptures: the one by the Prophet Jeremiah; the other by the Prophet Zachary,
and is altogether strange and differing from the former. The first intervall is
from the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, to the two and twentieth year of Cyrus
when he took Babylon: The second is from the Desolations of the Temple and
City, to the second year of Darius the son of Hystaspis.

Thus he, in his twelfth book and twenty fourth Chapter De Doctrina Temporum.
And certainly he was not far from truth in all this, as by that which I have
already written may be seen. I account I confess a little otherwise, but
decline not his grounds: for in the first seventy I come two years lower then
the two and twentieth of Cyrus; and begin not the second when Nebuchadnezzar
destroyed the City and burnt the Temple, but when he laid his last siege
against Jerusalem in the year of the Julian Period 4125. of which see more in
the eighth Chapter and sixth Section.

And now of all in this Chapter hitherto, this is the conclusion: that
Nebuchadnezzar being sent by his father upon an expedition into Egypt and
Syria, came against Jerusalem and besieged it in the third year of Jehoiakim,
and by such time at his third year was ended and his fourth a little entered,
the Lord gave Jehoiakim into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of
God. This was in the year of the Julian Period 4107. in the ninth Month: by
reason whereof the Jews kept a Fast in that Month; as is mentioned, Ier. 36.9.
The Scripture accounts this for the first year of Nebuchadnezzars reign; as
well it might: for not only now was Nebuchadnezzar taken in as a consort with
his father in the Empire, but also whilst he was employed in this expedition
his father died, even in the twentieth year of his reign, as afterward shall
be proved. And note that Iehoiakim being now taken by this rod of Gods anger,
to whom Judah and other Neighboring Nations must be put in Subjection, was
bound in fetters to be carried to Babylon among the other Captives [2 Chronicles.
36.6.] but went not: For afterward in the way, by an agreement of servitude,
he was released and sent home again, and so became his servant, 2 Kin. 26.1.
This was about the Spring time of the year of the Julian Period 4108. from
whence the 70 years in Jeremy began, as without all further scruple may be
freely granted: especially considering that the first draught must be given to
Judah, as may be seen in Jer. 25.18.29.

CHAP. X. Of the time when Tyrus and Egypt were subdued and taken by
Nebuchadnezzar, according to the Prophecies of Esaias, Jeremiah and Ezekiel.
THat the Jews and other neighboring Nations were delivered into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar in the first year of his Kingdom, already has been proved:
Jer. 25.9.11.
and albeit they refused to bear his yoke, yet by degrees he brought them all
under.

Jerusalem he took and destroyed in the nineteenth year of his reign, at
which time Tyrus thought her self safe and secure enough. She therefore
rejoiced at the fall of that great City, and is thereupon threatened with
destruction: for the power and might of Nebuchadnezzar was to come against her.
This was spoken in the eleventh year of Jechoniah's Captivity, which all men
know was the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar: and therefore till after this
time there was no siege laid against Tyrus, witnessed by the Prophet Ezekiel.
26.1.2. and at the seventh verse most plainly. For thus says the Lord God:
Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus, Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon. Where note
that he was not yet come, but was after this time to come against her. Scaliger
therefore casts his account amiss, when he reckoned that Tyrus was besieged
and taken before the time of this threatening.

That Tyrus was besieged thirteen years, we have it from Josephus in his first
book against Apion, who had it out of the Annals of the Phoenicians. These
eighteen years siege were in the reign of Ithobalus, and began in the seventh
year of his reign, which was also the three and twentieth of Nebuchadnezzar,
as appears by accounting on to the 14 year of Irom; from the 14 year of Irom
must (at least in some part of it) fall into the first year of Cyrus, as Joseph.
here shows: that is, into his first year over Babylon, and not into his first
year over Persia. And thus will this account agree well with that already
mentioned out of the 26. Chapter of Ezekiel, although it differ much from that
which Joseph Scaliger mainly strives for. And note also that from the time at
which Tyrus began to be besieged to the death of Irom, are 54 years: which by
this account is as right as can be.

I conclude therefore that Tyrus was taken in the end of the year of the
Julian Period 4141. or in the beginning of the next year whilst the seven and
twentieth year of Iechoniah's Captivity was still running on: for then does
Ezekiel mention the taking of it: even after a long siege and service against
it; as may be seen, Ezekiel. 29.17.18. After which, Tyrus is to be forgotten till
the end of those seventy years which were the date of Nebuchadnezzars
Kingdom, began from the beginning of the Captivity: as the Peophet means, in
Esa 23.15. A like Phrase is in Gen 11.32. and in Exodus 12.40. as Philippus in
his Chronology upon that place in Esaias has observed. In oblivione eris o
Tire, 70 annis] Tyrus dicitur in oblivione futura 70 annis; non quod totos
illos annos oblivio tenuerit, sed terminarit. Thus he, and thereupon referrs us
to Genesis 11.32. and to Exodus 12.40.

And thus we have the right time, both for the besieging and taking of Tyrus. A
list of them that reigned there is as follows.

The latter Kings of Tire out of Josephus exactly accounted, and fixed in their
right times.
years of their reign. The years of the Julian Period when they began to
reign. 1. Ithobalus 19 -- 4123 2. Baal 10 -- 4142 3. Ecnibalus M. 2. -- 4152
4. Chelbes M. 10. -- 4152 5. Abharus M. 3. -- 4153 6. Mytgonus 6 -- 4153 7.
Gerastus 6 -- 4153 8. Belatorus 1 -- 4159 9. Merbalus 4 -- 4160 10. Iromus 20
-- 4164

This is the lift. By which it appears that Tyrus began to be besieged in the
year of the Julian Period 4129. three years after the destruction of Jerusalem,
and a little more then 13 years before the Conquest of Egypt. For this we are
to note, that about the Summer time of the year of the Julian Period 4142.
Nebuchadnezzar conquered Egypt, not many Months after Tyrus was taken, Ezekiel.
29.17, 18, 19, 20. This was the Six and thirtieth year of his reign, or five
and thirtieth year ending; being also the beginning of the first year of his
absolute Monarchy: before which time he had his dream of the four Monarchies.
For that dream could not be in the second year of his absolute Monarchy after
he had conquered Egypt; because Tyrus (as we have seen) was first conquered,
and Egypt given him for his wages: but Daniel was famous before Tyrus was
taken, and yet his wisdom not known till the expounding of this dream, Ezekiel.
28.3. and Dan. 2. In the second year therefore of Daniels service with the King
he expounded this dream. For though it be said, In the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, yet are not those words to be joined with the former, in the
second year, as appears (says one) by the Hebrew distinction, rebiah, set
over the word shetaim, Second: but to show that it was not in the Second year
of Cyrus. For in the last words of Daniels first Chapter, it is said, that
Daniel was to the first year of King Cyrus: Now therefore least any should
think that this was done in the second of Cyrus, direct mention is made of the
reign of Nebuchadnezzar. This I thought good to touch at by the way, in regard
of that mistake which is among many who account the time of this dream to be in
the second year after the conquest of Egypt. More like it is that in these
times Nebuchadnezzar set up his golden Image, was famous for his stately
buildings, had his dream of the Tree, and twelve Months after began to be
mad: which I take to be about the end of the eight and thirtieth year of his
reign. For in that year I account that the first year of his madness began,
which lasted seven years: at the end whereof he was restored, and died soon
after. For if his death had not been soon after the end of his madness, it is
thought he would have restored the Jews out of Captivity. But because it was
not he that must do this, it is like God took him away, and kept them still in
Captivity until the first year of Cyrus.

And thus we have the right time also of the conquest of Egypt.

The King that reigned there then was Apries, or (as he is called by the
Prophet) Hophra, Ier. 44.30. in whose two and twentieth year I think it
probable that Amasis rebelled against him, which thereupon perhaps was the
cause why Diodorus says he reigned but 22 years: whereas in Herodotus we find
that he reigned twenty five. And indeed it is not unlike but that Egypt was
sore shaken before Nebuchadnezzar came to conquer it, which therefore helped
him to effect that he came for the sooner and with the greater ease. For what
with the calamity of the Cyrenian war, and what with the rebellion of Amasis
thereupon, the strength and arm of Egypt was greatly broken, and so fair a
way made for Nebuchadnezzar to come and conquer it, as that he might quickly
and with much ease perform the work, the business in a manner being done to
his hand before he came: which agrees well to the speech and phrase of the
Prophet, who says that this Country was given to him as his wages for that
great service which he caused his Army to serve against Tyrus, Ezekiel. 29.18.19.

And note after all this, that Egypt was not restored until the end of 40
years from hence. Ezekiel. 29.13. Ier. 46.26. And if so, then shall Amasis have
but five years reign after he revolted from the Babylonian, by whom (as is
very probable) he was entrusted with the Lieutenantship of the Country, as a
reward for his rebellion against his natural Prince, in regard that he thereby
helped Nebuchadnezzar there to fix his throne. For it is without question, that
Amasis was neither 44 nor 55 years together King of Egypt after Apries, though
Herodotus and Diodore tell us so. The truth is, the Priests of Egypt would not
mention any thing of Nebuchadnezzars reigning there, but did notably delude
Herodotus and Diodorus with lies, coined upon a vainglorious purpose of
hiding their own disgrace and bondage: and so these two being strangers to
that which Nebuchadnezzar did there, because they wanted the help of holy
Scripture, rested satisfied with any thing (though false) that the lying
Priests would tell them. But as for us we know the contrary, and may not
smother that which the word of God relates: For thus says the Lord of Hosts
the God of Israel; Behold I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon my servant, and will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid,
and he shall spread his royal Pavilion over them, Ier. 43.10.

But now see the list of them that reigned.

A List of the latter Kings of Egypt, out of Herodotus and fixed in their right
times.
Years of their reign. The years of the Julian Per. when they began to reign.
1. Psammiricus 54 -- 4041 2. Pharaoh Necho 17 -- 4095 3. Psammis 6 -- 4112 4.
Apries 25 -- 4118


CHAP. XI. Of the number of Kings that reigned in Babylon during the time of
the Captivity.
THe fragments of Berosus and Megasthenes, in accounting more Kings then three
during the time of the Captivity, agree so ill with the Scripture as I know not
how to build upon them. For they tell us of Nebuchadnezzar, Evilmerodach,
Naragalrasar, Labosardach, and Nabonidus: whereas in Scripture we find no more
named then Nebuchadnezzar, Evilmerodach, and Belshazzar. And as no more named,
so no more to be named nor reckoned for Kings of Babylon during these times:
For in Scripture this we find; This whole Land shall be a desolation, and an
astonishment; and these Nations shall serve the King of Babylon 70 years. And
it shall come to pass when 70 years are accomplished, that I will punish the
King of Babylon, and that Nation, says the Lord, Jer. 25.11, 12. And again,
All Nations shall serve him, and his son, and his sons son, until the very
time of his Land come: and then many Nations and great Kings shall serve
themselves of him, Ier. 27.7. And when 70 years are accomplished at Babylon, I
will visit you, Ier. 29.10, For I will rise up against them, says the Lord of
hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name and remnant, both son and nephew,
says the Lord. Esa. 14.22. And again, When there comes a Nation out of the
North, and lays Babel wast, then in those days and at that time, says the
Lord, the Children of Israel shall come weeping and enquiring the way to Sion,
Ier. 50.4. Now that no part of this could go beyound the death of Belshazzar
the third King, is apparent out of Daniels prophecy. For this (says he) is the
interpretation of the thing: MEAN, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished
it, Dan. 5.26. Where note, that if Nebuchadnezzars Kingdom were numbered and
finished at the death of Belshazzar, then must no part either of his Kingdom,
or of the 70 years be after that time: for not only were the years of the
Kingdom, but of the Captivity to end then, their dates by Scripture depending
each upon other. It is therefore said in Esaias, that Tyrus (which we know was one
of them that was to bear Babels yoke) shall be forgotten 70 years, according
the days of one King, Esa. 23.15. Which expression [according to the days of
one King] is certainly meant of one Kingdom, and is expounded so by a like
phrase in Dan. 7.17, 23. Of one Kingdom I say; viz. The Kingdom of Babylon,
which was Nebuchadnezzars Kingdom, continued only to him, his son, and his
sons son: as was before mentioned out of Ier. 27.7. and Esaias 14.22.

Upon consideration of which sure it was, Hist. World. lib. 3. c. 1. sect. 4.
that Sir Walter Raleigh, in his History of the World could say; They who
merely follow the authority of the Scripture without borrowing any help from
others, name only three Kings, viz. Nebuchadnezzar, Evilmerodach, and
Belshazzar. For which they have not only the filence of Daniel for their
warrant, who names none other; but even the promise of Jeremiah also, precisely
and in a manner purposely teaching the same, Jer. 27.7. In which text be words
expressing the continuance of the Chaldaean Empire, and number of the Kings, so
as will hardly be qualified with any distinction. And indeed I find no other
necessity of qualification to be used herein, then such as may grow out of men's
desire to reconcile the Scriptures unto profane Authors: Which desire were
not unjust, if the consent of all Histories were on the one side, and the
letter of the holy Text were single on the other side. Thus he, very gravely
and judiciously: and therefore, without some handsome way of reconcilement, I
shall build no more upon the Authority of this Fragment of Berosus, then I have
hitherto done.

But perhaps a way may be found. Suppose we then this to be propable, That
after Evilmerodach had reigned two years, that then he gave himself to sloth
and luxury, and thereupon appointed Naragalrazar (his sisters husband) to be
his Deputy, which continued for the space of four years: at the end whereof
Evilmerodach either dyed or was slain by his Debuty, who thereupon strove what
he could to establish the Kingdom to his own son Labosardach, albeit he were
a child. But Nabonidus (otherwise called Balthazar, or Belshazzar) impatient of
such an injury, prevails against him: For though for nine months space he was
a little molested, yet at the end thereof he was quietly possessed of his
Fathers throne, which he held for the space of seventeen years; and was then
slain at the taking of Babylon by King Cyrus, who in the second year of his
expedition took the City, and so ended the time of Babels Kingdom, in which
the Nations were to serve Nebuchadnezzar, his son, and his sons son.

This I confess would seem something probable, were all things correspondent:
but here is so short a time for the reign of these Kings, that they will be all
dead and gone before the Captivity was ended: which can by no means be.

I remember therefore what is conjectured by the knight before mentioned, in
his History of the World, lib. 3. cap. 1. sect. 13. viz. That the seven years
(or six years and nine months) given by Berosus to Evilmerodach, Naragalrazar,
and Labosardach, are not to be reckoned after the death of Nebuchadnezzar, but
rather before; namely, in the time of his Madness, and living Wild: during
which time, Evilmerodach (having expected the recovery of his Father about some
three months) reigned two years: then Naragalrazar having put him down, rules
four years: and last of all, Labosardach nine months; in the end whereof
Nebuchadnezzar is again restored. Which opinion, though differing from that of
Lyranus and Pererius, who make Evilmerodach the sole Regent in his Fathers
absence; and is also differing from that of Josephus, who (speaking of
Nebuchadnezzars madness) says, none durst invade the Kingdom all those seven
years: yet for all that, I think no wise man will lightly esteem it; for it
serves better to reconcile Berosus to the Scriptures, then any other opinion
that hitherto has been extant.

Scaliger, in his Animadversions upon Eusebius, expounds Berosus otherwise, and
says Evilmerodach succeeded Nebuchadnezzar, whom Naragalrazar slew, thereby to
advance his own son, the nephew of Nebuchadnezzar, to the Septer, which himself
swayed as Protector in the minority of his son who was called Labosardach: But
Naragalrazar being dead, and his son more fit for a Chamber then a Throne,
Nabonidus conspired against him and slew him. This Nabonidus (says Scaliger)
is Darius Medus, and Labosardach is that Belshazzar mentioned by Daniel,
according to his interpretation of the Prophet out of Berosus and Megasthenes:
which indeed is but his interpretation; who we know was in all thing singular,
and in most things peremptory: and therefore though he scorneth all other
Chronologers who subscribe not to his magisteriall Dictates, yet are his bare
words no warrant, nor scorns good proofs to make us think his Tenets the
only true ones; no not here, in this now under question: For the Oracle of the
Prophet points us out no other then Nebuchadnezzar, Evilmerodach, and
Belshazzar; as already has been proved. Unto which let me add, that Herodotus
calls the last King of Babylon Labynitus: and who was this but Nabonidus in
Berosus? and who was Nabonidus but Belshazzar, called by the Babylonians
Naboandel as says Josephus? and who was Belshazzar, but he whom Cyrus
conquered? as Xenophon plainly, with the Prophet Daniel, bears witness. Note
also further that Darius Medus was a Mede by birth, and not a Babylonian, being
Darius of the seed of the Medes, Dan. 9.1. And if a Mede by birth, then how
could Nabonidus be Darius Medus, who even in Berosus himself is said to be a
Babylonian?

And as Daniel is against him, so also Esaias; showing that he came not to his
Kingdom by Election. For behold I will stur up the Medes against thee, Esa.
13.17. The Medes therefore assaulted Babylon and took it, together with the
Persians, not by favor, but by violence, being assisted by Cyrus kinsman to
Darius, as Josephus writes. And good reason had Josephus for it: Joseph.
antiq. lib. 10. ca. 12.
For the fall of Babylon was by the joint forces of two, as in another Chapter
of the same Prophecy may be seen. For thus has the Lord said unto me; Go, set
a whatchman; let him declare what he sees: And behold he saw a Charet with a
couple of horses, Esa. 21.7. and at the ninth verse; And behold here comes a
Charet of men, and a couple of Horsemen: and he answered and said, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen. But by whom is it fallen? this the second verse shows, in
these words: Go up, O Elam; besiege, O Media. By which we see that the
Elamites, and Medians (or the Persians and Medes) united into one body, but
under two Commanders, were the people foretold to come with joint forces for
the destruction of Babylon: these being that Ram with two horns, in the eighth
of Daniel. For the Ram which thou saw having two horns, are the Kings of
Media and Persia, Dan 8.20. And hereupon it came to pass that at the taking of
Babylon and death of Belshazzar, the Kingdom was divided among the Medes and
the Persians, Dan 5.28. Howbeit the chief authority and power might be in the
Medes: and therefore says Jeremy, Make bright the arrows: gather the shields:
the Lord has raised up the Spirit of the Kings of the Medes: for his device is
against Babylon to destroy it, Jer. 51.11. Which though it were, yet the
dexterity in expediting this business, and in using that Stratageme of See
Xenoph. in his Cyrop. li. 7. and Jer. 51.36.
dividing the great river Euphrates, is ascribed by Xenophon unto Cyrus. Nor
does Herodotus but name him the only author and beginner of this War: the
reason whereof is, because by his valor and skill the victory was gotten.
Which being obtained, Cyrus forthwith intitles Darius to the Kingdom, both
because he was his Uncle and also his Elder, as Saint Jerome observes; and as
Xenophon likewise gives a touch at: telling us what Cyrus first said to
Cyaxares after the taking of Babylon; namely that there was provided for him in
Babylon, a choice Palace with stately Edifices; that if he come thither he
might keep his Court there as in his own, Xenoph. lib. 8. Which is as if it
should be said he had now conquered it for him, and he might if he pleased
freely receive it: agreeing therein with the Prophet Daniel, who says that
when Belshazzar was slain, Darius Medus received the Kingdom, being about
threescore and two year old, Dan. 5.30.31. But then again because at this
victory there were [Parsin] parters to share the Empire, not of Madai only,
but also of Elam: we must know that Cyrus King of Paras or Elam, excluded not
himself, but was fellow in Empire with Darius: and so the Kingdom was divided
between the Medes and the Persians, as in the handwriting upon the wall was
declared. And so likewise the Jews which were to serve the Chaldeans during the
time of their Kingdom (which has been already proved tobe 70 years) served
them till the reign of the Persians, 2 Chronicles. 36.20. Nor was this uniting but
known to those Greeks, in whom the Persian Armies are called Medes, as I shall
afterward mention. To whom the seventy Translaters applied themselves, when
they put for the Hebrew text Paras, the term Medes in this text of the
Chronicles.

And further, as for Nabonidas formerly mentioned, questionless he was the
same with Belshazzar: for neither does Josephus, nor Berosus, attribute to
either of them more then 17 years. Nor does Josephus tell us any other thing
then that Belshazzar was by the Babylonians called Naboandel, as before was
noted: a name not far differing from Nabonidus in Berosus, but differing far
enough from Darius Medus. To which Josephus does once again bear witness, in
saying, that Darius, together with Cyrus his allie, destroyed the state of the
Babylonians; as before was also noted: affirming moreover that he was the son
of Astyages, and is otherwise called by the Greeks. And therefore in very
truth, Darius Medus was not Nabonidus, but Cyaxares the second; as Xenophon
plainly and perspicuously has related.

Beside all which, this also may be added, That the Babylonians would not be so
simple to deliver their Empire to a man who was a Mede, seeing they thought not
so well of the Medes as of other Nations, because the bounds of their Kingdom
were enlarged far, and trenched much upon the Chaldean greatness, which made
them therefore fearful and suspicious over them. To which opinion (as says
Pererius) Herodotus adds no little force; Perer. on Da. Herodot. lib. 1
writing that Nitocris Queen of Babylon, and mother to Labynitus, did greatly
fortify the City of Babylon against the forces and invasions of the Medes. Nay
more, when the Lord rendered unto Babylon, and to all the Inhabitants of
Chaldea, all their evil that they had done in Sion, he then stirred up the
Nations with the Kings of the Medes, and the Captains thereof, and all the
Land of his Dominion, Jer. 51.24, 28. and Esa. 13.17.

There is therefore more in it I see, then the bare delivering of the Kingdom
to a man born in Media, and brought up in Babylon: Hist. World lib 3: cap. 2.
sect. 2.3.
for as Sir Walter Raleigh truly gathered from hence, the Medes were chief
actors in the subversion of the Babylonian Empire. And though the Greeks (says
he) ascribe the conquest of Babylon to Cyrus alone, yet the Scriptures teach
uss that Darius was not only King of Media, and had the Persians to be his
followers, but that the Army victorious over Belshazzar was his; being
compounded of the strength of both Nations, to wit, the Medes and Persians,
with other the vassals of Darius, which were all led under the conduct of
Cyrus, who was chief General of the Army, and had the honor of the victory
wholly given to him, who was the instrument preordained and forenamed by God
himself for this action, even for the sake of his Church, Esa. 45.1, 2, 3, 4.
And again, It is not (says he) more certain, that Belshazzar Iost his life
and Kingdom, I Would. lib. 3. ca. 1. sect. 5.
then that his Kingdom was divided and given to the Medes and Persians.
Neither did the Medes and Persians fall out about it, as by supposing Nabonidus
to have been Darius, they should be thought to have done; but these two Nations
did compound the body of the Empire, and were accounted Lords of the subject
Provinces, insomuch that the Greek Historians did commonly call those Wars
which Darius, and after him Xerxes, made upon Greece, The Wars of the Medes;
Dan. 8.20.
yea to clear this point (says the same author still) even Daniel himself
resembles that King with whom Alexander fought, unto a Ram with two horns,
calling him the King of the Medes and the Persians. Wherefore (says he) the
whole Nation of Chronologers were not to have been condemned by Joseph
Scaliger, for maintaining upon such good grounds, that Darius of Medes, was
partner with Cyrus in his victories, and not a Chaldean King by him subdued.
Neither was Josephus to be the less regarded, for affirming that Belshazzar
was destroyed by Darius of the Medes, and his nephew Cyrus, though herein he
varied from Berosus, and others, whose authority elsewhere he gladly cites.
For Josephus had no reason to believe any man's faith or knowledge of those
times, half so well as Daniels, whom I believe that he understood, as was
needful in this case. Lawful it was for him to allege all Authors that had
any mention, though unperfect, of the same things that were contained in the
writings of the Jews, to whose histories thereby he procured reputation in the
Roman World, where they were strangers, and might seem fabulous. Even so
Eusebius, and other writers, willingly embrace the testimonies of heathen
books making for the truth in some particulars; yet will they not therefore be
tried in general by the same, but leave them where they are against the truth;
as Josephus in this case has left Berosus. Thus that Knight.

And as for Belshazzar: one word again of him. How is it possible that he
could be the Labosardach of Berosus, seeing Labosardach was but a child, and
reigned only nine months? whereas those things which are written of Belshazzar
by the Prophet Daniel, are pertinent to a man, and one who had reigned several
years: yea, more then three; which is the time that some give him. For first
Daniel had visions in the third year of Belshazzar, and was then an officer in
the Kings Court, as himself declares, Dan. 8, 1.17. and therefore must needs
be known to the King. Howbeit in that year which was the last of Belshazzar,
he was out of office and forgotten; as may be seen at large in the fifth
Chapter of the same Prophecy, where the Queen first tells the King of him, and
the King also questioneth saying, Art thou Daniel? speaking to him as a
stranger, or as to one whom some long tract of time had made to be forgotten.
And secondly, when this King Belshazzar made his great and fatal Xenophon
mentions this Feast, lib. 7. agreeing to Daniel and Jeremiah. Dan. 5. and Jer.
51.39. Herod. lib. 1. Xenoph. lib. 7.
Feast, he had his Wives and Concubines present with him: quae Puero minime
competunt, as says Pererius. Neither does Daniel obscurely show that
Belshazzar was slain by his own people, but rather by his enemies: Or if by
his own people, it was by Gadata and Gobryas, who betrayed the City and
brought in Cyrus his Army. For the King had offended them before, causing
Gadata to be gelded, and the son of Gobryas to be slain in hunting; as
Herodotus and Xenophon tell us. And note whereas it is said in Jer. 51.31. that
when the City was broken up, there were Posts and Messengers which passed to
and fro to inquire and bring the King the certain news thereof; note (I say)
that this was, not because the King was in some remote place out of the City,
as Calvisius thinks; but because of the distance of the Palace from the place
where the enemy entered: the noise of whose coming in was so sudden and
unexpected, that it could not be believed without posting to and fro to inquire
and know it certainly. Which even the Prophets words, in the place alleged,
well marked, do declare. For when the Posts and Messengers went to and fro to
inquire, it was to show the King of Babylon that his City was taken at one end.
And at the 39 verse, the very drunken feast is foretold; at the which many were
so overcome with wine that they slept: yea slept they did and waked not; for
they were slain by the enemy before they awaked, and so they slept a perpetual
sleep, as there the Prophet says. Yea, and to show that Cyrus had it in his
mind to set the Jews free, if once the City was taken, he caused Proclamation
to be made at his very entrance into it, that all who could speak the Syriacke
tongue (which the Jews could) should keep within doors, and so be safe; as
Xenophon shows, lib. 7.

By all which I see, that they who reject Xenophon and Josephus in these
passages to embrace Berosus and Megasthenes, do run upon the rock of many a
text in the assured word of God dellvered to us by the Prophets, Esaias, Jeremy,
Daniel.

There be indeed in Xenophon many things spoken highly in commendation of
Cyrus, and much Rhetoric used to garnish and set forth that History,
describing in Cyrus the pattern of a most Heoricall Prince: yet nevertheless
the body and bulk thereof is founded upon mere Historical truth. Putting
therefore apart the Moral and Politic discourse, and examining but the History
of things done, it will easily appear, that Xenophon has handled his
undertaken subject in such sort, that by beautyfying the face thereof, he has
not in any sort corrupted the body: as is gallantly observed by Sir Walter
Raleigh, in his History of the world, lib. 3. c. 2. Section 3.

I conclude therefore that the last King of this Monarchy was Belshazzar, the
first was Nebuchadnezzar, and the middlemost was Evilmerodach: and that the
whole time among these three was 70 years, beginning from the time of Daniels
Captivity, and agreement of servitude which Iehoiakim made with Nebuchadnezzar,
2 Kin. 26, 1. Ier. 25.2. The first of these had 44 years, as may be gathered
out of Scripture; the second 12, and the third 14, as Sulpitius Severus has
told us, in the second book of his sacred History, affirming there, that so he
found it an old Anonymus, wherein the times of the Kings of Babylon were
recorded. And why I say Nebuchadnezzar had 44 years as may be gathered out of
Scripture, is, because Jechonia was carried away Captive in the eighth year of
Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Kin. 24.12. and in the seven and thirtieth year after
Evilmerodach began to reign: which because it was late in that year, might
make Nebuchadnezzars reign to be some odd Months more then forty four years;
as may be seen 2 Kin. 25.27. Berosus gives to Nabonidus 17 years, and him we
have already proved to be Belshazzar: Josephus therefore says that Belshazzar
was slain in the seventeenth year of his reign: and if so, then must
Evilmerodach have about 9 years; because 44, 9 and 17 will make the full number
of 70.

They that like this last account better then the former, may if they please
embrace it. Or whether this or that, it is not much material: for the
Scriptures have told us that God gave the empire of Babylon for 70 years, to
Nebuchadnezzar, his son and his sons son: and therefore though there may be
some small difference in the particulars, yet does that hinder nothing from
being satisfied in the general assured sum.

One thing more I would gladly touch at; and this it is: the death of
Nabopollassar, who was alive when Nebuchadnezzar began his expedition against
Egypt and Syria, but died soon after: probably about such time as
Nebuchadnezzar altered his purpose concerning Jehoiakim: For having bound him
in fetters with an intent to carry him to Babylon, he agreed with him that he
should become his servant, and so sent him home to Jerusalem: which I take to
be in regard of the news of his Fathers death. And if so, then will the reign
of Nabopollassar be something short of 20 years. For whilst some give him 29
years, some Copies of Ptolomey 25, other 21, I should rather think 19 to be
the truer number, which in Berosus his fragment is corruptly said to be 29. or
if 20, it must be but 20 running on: and so shall both the beginning of the
Captivity, and the beginning of Nebuchadnezzar after the death of his Father,
be at one and the same time, viz. in the year of the Julian Period 4108.
Howbeit the ordinary account of Nebuch adnezzars reign is not to be taken from
hence, but from the beginning of his expedition.

CHAP. XII. Of the first year of Cyrus, and of Darius Medus mentioned in holy
Scripture.
THe first year of Cyrus mentioned in Scripture, was not the first year of his
reign over Persia, but the first year of his Monarchy which began at the
conquest of Babylon: and was a Date reckoned, not only by the Jews as an Era
or Epoch first began in honor of their return out of Captivity, but as the
first year of a new Kingdom: in the beginning whereof the Jews indeed came out
of Babylon; but the Record bearing date for this was found in a Coffer which
was at Achmetha, a Provice of the Medes, in the Palace there, Ezr. 6.2. We may
not therefore with Joseph Scaliger begin this Monarchy some certain years
after the taking of Babylon, but at the very time thereof. For first, if there
were four Monarchies one to succeed another, as we are taught in the second and
seventh Chapters of Daniel: then I ask, from whence shall we reckon the
beginning of the second, but from the end of the first which went before it? Or
shall we say that when the one was extinguished, the other was not as yet
begun? Surely no. For Nebuchadnezzars Image, which represented the four
Monarchies, was but one entire body, and withal an entire body: wherefore, as
soon as the Head of Gold was cut off (which was at the Nam ante ejus
expugnationem populum ibidem captivum dimittere non potuit, neque pronunciare,
data sibi esse a Deo caeli omnia regna, terrae. Regnum enim Babylonicum erat
omnium potentissimum, quo nondum subacto, ipse Monarcha jure appellari
nequibat. vide Cluverum.
taking of Babylon, Jer. 27.7. and chap. 50.4.) the power remained in the Arms
and Breast of Silver: and well might Cyrus at that time say, All the Kingdoms
of the earth were given unto him; because his power was then so great and so
much increased by that conquest (in having won the destroyer, and conquered
the conqueror) that other subordinate Kingdoms were as nothing to resist him.
Secondly, Daniel was unto the first year of Cyrus, Dan. 1.21. that is, he
continued in Babylon till that state was altered, and the Kingdom translated to
Cyrus. For upon the conquest Darius took Daniel thence, and carried him to the
Medes, as Josep. Antiq. lib. 10. ca. 12.
Josehus writes; in which Country he was had in great honor, and made a
chief officer in the Kingdom. To which testimony of Josephus, even Daniel
also adds no little light, seeming to point out the place of his own
imprisonment among the Lions, to be in Media: For in the sixth Chapter, at the
eighth verse, the Law of the Medes and Persians is urged.

Now that this was also the first year of Darius, is apparent out of the two
foremost verses of the ninth Chapter. For in the first year of Darius, Daniel
understood by books that the 70 years were accomplished: which could not be, if
this first of Darius had not been likewise the first of Cyrus. For not only
upon the immediate dissolution of the Babylonian state did Cyrus begin, as
already has been proved out of Dan. 1.21. but even the 70. years of the Jews
servitude was at an end, in which the Jews and the other threatened Nations were
to serve Nebuchadnezzar, his son and his sons son; not that they were subdued
all at once, but by degrees; and were not delisered out of that servitude
until the end of the 70 years, which were not only to end the Captivity, but
the time also of Babels Kingdom, as in the former Chapter I have fully proved.

CHAP. XIII. Of Alexander the great, signified by the Horn between the eyes of
the Goat, Dan. 8.5.
IN this eighth Chapter of Daniel, the Prophet relates what he saw in a vision
concerning the Persian and Grecian kingdoms. The first whereof is described by
a Ram verse 4. The second by a Goat, verse 5.

The Ram, says the Angel, having two horns, are the Kings of the Medes and
Persians, verse 20. The Goat is the King of Grecia, and the great horn which
is between his eyes, is the first king, verse 21.

This great horn then was Alexander ille magnus, Alexander the great, born 33
years before the beginning of the 114 Olympiad: at the day of whose birth the
Temple of Diana at Ephesus was set on fire, which the Magicians interpreted to
signify that one then was borne who should set fire on all Asia.

At fifteen years of age he was committed by his Father to Aristotle's tuition,
with whom (as Justin reports) he spent five years in the learning of Arts
and other knowledge meet for a King: and about the end of this time his Father
died. Then began he to reign; and having reigned 6 years he prevailed over
the Ram: and by the end of six years more he is broken off. This was when
his fortunes were at the greatest, as was signified, verse. 8. for being
returned from his conquest of the Indians, and purposing to pass over into
Greece, and the Western parts, he died in the way at Babylon, where
Ambassadors from most parts in the world expected him. Some say he was
poisoned: but the most agree that he died of a surfeit which he gat at a
Physicians house, where having first of all glutted himself with eating, he
drowned himself in extreme quaffing and carousing; through which distemper he
fell into a burning fever and so died before he came again into his own
Country.

His success in Battle was admirable: for he never encountered enemy but he
overcame him, never besieged City but he took it; and in three fights he
overcame all the power of Asia, extending his Empire to such a wonderful
largeness, that he came not only to India and the river Ganges, and to those
places where Semiramis, Hercules, and Cyrus had set up Altars before him, but
also conquered the more Noble parts of Europe, Syria, and Egypt: and these
things done with such celerity, that he might well appear to Daniel in one of
his Visions, with Quia nihil fuit velocius Alexandri victoria: as Saint Hierom
observes.
wings on his back, Dan. 7.6.

Apelles knew no such Prophecy, and yet (to signify his great swiftness and
agility) he added to his Picture a Thunderbolt; and Lysippus another painter,
drew him in this fashion, looking up toward Heaven, and as it were uttering
these words; Jupiter, asserui terram mihi; tu assere coelum, Jupiter, I have
taken the earth to my self; do thou take the Heaven. Which Poesy pleased him
and gave him great content; insomuch that none afterward might take his
Picture except Lysippus: and at length growing to be more and more taken with
an itch of vain glory, he called himself the son of Jupiter, arrogating such
a worship to be due unto him, as was conferred on the Gods; which when
Callisthenes refused to give, he caused him to be killed. Howbeit, before he
had glutted himself with the pleasures of Asia, he was more mild and
better-minded: for (as Josephus has recorded) meeting Jaduah the high Priest
of the Jews in his Pontifical robes, Joseph Antiq. lib. 11. cap. 8.
he fell down before him and gave him reverence; and being asked by Parmenio
why he did so, he answers: I worship not the man, but God in the man, who in
the same habit had appeared to him, and gave him encouragement to go forward in
that enterprise concerning the conquest of Asia. And indeed upon this
appearance he grew confident, went on courageously, and with good success,
until the time came that he must be broken off, which was in the first year of
the 114 Olympiad, as most Authors reckon: aster which, four other horns
sprang up in his stead.

CHAP. XIV. Of the four Horns which came up in stead of the great Horn broken
off, as was prophesied Dan. 8.8.21.22.
As also the beginning of that Date of the Kingdom of the Greeks so often
mentioned in the Books of the Maccabees, and in Josephus.

THese four Horns were the four successors of Alexander, or rather the four
Kingdoms into which his great and mighty Monarchy was divided after him: not
instantly or immediately after he was dead, but by the time that his whole
stock and posterity were rooted out. And for this we have the warrant of
Daniel, in another place of his prophecy; namely in the eleventh Chapter, at
the fourth verse: in which place is said, His Kingdom shall be divided toward
the four winds of Heaven, but not to his posterity. This was not until
twelve years after the death of Alexander: for then none of his posterity
being left alive (neither Mother, Brother, Wife, nor child) his Captains
composed the differences that were between them, by entering into a League among
themselves, and began to reign; bringing the dominion of the whole, for which
they strove, into four Heads: and so there were four Kingdoms, though not
according to the dominion which he ruled, nor in such power as he had; Daniel
shows it, Dan. 8.22. and Dan. 11.4.

The most eminent among these, and which had most to do with the Jews, was the
Kingdom of the Syro-Grecians, or the Kingdom of the Greeks in Syria and
Babylon. For Ptolomy the son of Lagus obtained Egypt, and is called (he and
his successors after him) the King of the South: In the North Antigonus held
Asta minor: In the West Cassander possessed the Kingdom of Macedonia: and in
the East Seleucus Nicanor obtained the Kingdom of Babylon and Syria, in whose
first year that date so often mentioned in the Books of the Maccahees, and in
Josephus, took beginning: That in the first Book of Maccabees, on the
thirteenth day of March in the year of the Julian Period 4402. That in the
second Book of the Maccabees, at the Spring time of the next year: between
both which was another, beginning on the sixth day of September in the same
year with the first. And thus we have the several heads of this Era of
Seleucus.

The first is called Minjan staros, that is Era Contractuum. Eusebius calls
it Era Edessenorum: and others, the Era of the author of the first Book of
Maccabees, and is followed by Josephus. They that cast it into the 436. year
of Nabonassar, are right, if they mark how they account it: which must be
thus. The 436. year of Nabonassar began in the year of the Julian Period
4401, on the ninth day of November, and on the thirteenth day of March next
after (whilst the same year of Nabonassar was still running on) the first
year of the Greeks began. This first year therefore of the Kingdom of the
Greeks began in the year of the Julian Period 4402. (as at the first was
said) on the thirteenth day of March: at the Summer time of which, year entered
in the first year of the 117 Olympiad.

The second is called Era Antiochena, seu Alexandrea, sive Id est, a duobus
co^^bus seu duobus imperiis, quae ex uno orientali Alexandrino enata sunt. Orig
De temp p. 24. and Lydiat De emend tem. page 83.84.
Dilkarnaim; beginning on the sixth of September, in the same year with the
former.

The third, is Era Chaldaica seu Macedonica, beginning in the Spring time of
the following year, falling therefore into the year of the Julian Period 4403.
and is called the Era of the Author of the second Book of Maccabees, followed
(as I conceive) by Ptolomy, Lib. magni operis 11. cap. 7. who begins his
account in the year of Nabonassar 437.

In the 148 year of this Kingdom, according to the first account, Judas
Maccabeus purged the Temple and the holy places, which the Heathen had polluted
and defiled; building a new Altar, and restoring the Sacrifices, as is recorded
in 1 Macc. 4.52, 53. This was in the year of the Julian Period 4549, and year
of the World 3840, on the 25 day of Casleu. If this year were annus
Embolimaeus, then must the 25 day of Casleu be on the two and twentieth or
three and twentieth of November, as Calvisius reckons. But as I account, it
was not annus Embolimaeus: and therefore the 25 of Casleu was on the Because
the first of Nisan was April 6. f. 1. and so it must be by reason of the
Equinox.
two and twentieth day of December, f. 2. In the year next after was the
beginning of a year of Rest on the 21 day of September, and is mentioned after
the death of Antiochus, when Eupator beseiged Jerusalem, 1 Macc. 6.48, 49. In
the year therefore of the Julian Period 4550, this Sabbathical year began, and
reached to the seventh month of the next year. In the year of the same Period
4578 began another: and in the year 4676, another. All of them spoken of in
Josephus; and two of them in the History of the Maccabees.

CHAP. XV. Of the little Horn in the eighth Chapter of Daniel, at the ninth
verse. And of the 2300 days that were given unto it, verse 14.
I May fitly make a difference between this little horn, and that mentioned in
the seventh Chapter; because this arose out of the third Monarchy; that out of
the fourth: this out of a Beast which had but four horns after the first was
broken; that out of a Beast which had ten horns and trampled the other Beasts
under it is feet: this bore rule but 2300 natural days; that prevailed for a
Time, Times, and half a Time. And albeit the third Monarchy be one while
expressed by a Leopard, another while by a Goat; yet must the Leopard mean the
whole Kingdom of Alexander and his successors, as well as the Goat: for the
four heads on either of these Beasts proclaim as much, as will be seen more
plainly afterward. But in the mean time this I set down as certain, That
the little horn here mentioned, is no other then Antiochus Epiphanes, who
committed many and sundry outrages both against other Nations, and also against
the people of God, proceeding in profaneness even against God himself.

He is called a little horn, not because his Kingdom was little or mean; but
because he was of a base flattring nature, having no true Princely quality or
condition in him: and also because he had no title to the Kingdom at the first,
being the younger brother, Seleuchus the elder having an issue male alive at
the same time when he began to take the Kingdom. This was his beginning: yet
afterward he came to be famous, and was therefore called Antiochus Epiphanes,
which is famous or noble; or (as some say) Epimanes, Jun. ex Polyb.
which is furious or mad.

Daniel was informed concerning the mischief that he should commit; and
thereupon he tells us what he heard one of the Saints say unto another
certain Saint, who was the numberer of Secrets or the wonderful Numberer,
namely, That the Sanctuary and the host should be trodden under foot unto the
evening and the morning two thousand and three hundred, Dan. 8.13, 14. In which
number we are not to understand so many years, but natural days: for albeit a
day is to be taken for a year in many reckonings and prophetical predictions
in Scripture, yet never when the words Evening and Morning are annexed: for
then they mean but such days as are in the first Chapter of Genesis, where it
is said that the Evening and the Morning were the first day. etc. For that
which is a Natural day comprehends the day and night; or, as it is here, the
Evening and the Morning.

Howbeit in 2300 days there will arise a number of certain years, which (by
accounting 365 days to a year, and thirty days to a month) will amount to
six years, three months, and twenty days. And albeit there be no precise
point mentioned from whence to account these six years, three months, and
twenty days; yet this is certain, that their end must be fixed at the
cleansing of the Sanctuary: which, as Josephus and the Authors of the first
book of the Maccabees have recorded, Josph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 11. and Macc.
4.52.
was in the hundredth and forty eighth year of the Grecians. For whereas the
Maccabees do expressly name the 148 year, Josephus says it was three years
after the hundredth and five and fortieth, upon the 25 day of the ninth month
which is called Casleu.

Now then from this time substract six years, three months, and twenty days;
and the head of your reckoning will fall into the hundredth and two and fortieth
year, the sixth month, and fifth or sixth day of the month: about which time
Antiochus ( 1 Macc. cap. 1. ver. 13.16. and 20.
a little before he went into Egypt) gave leave to set up the fashions of the
Gentiles in Jerusalem, returning again (after he had smitten that Country) in
the 143 year; at which time he came in his own person against Israel with a
great multitude, and entering proudly into the Sanctuary, took from thence the
Golden Altar, and Candlestick of light, etc. offering many sundry outrages, as
in the first book of Maccabees at the first Chapter does well appear.

And thus we have seen this little Horn, together with those years wherein it
prevailed after it was grown and waxen great. As for that other in the seventh
Chapter, it cannot be the same with this, because it arose in the days of the
fourth Monarchy: of which see more in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XVI. Of the fourth Kingdom in Daniel that it signifies the Monarchy of
the Romans.
I Was once almost drawn to think that this fourth Monarchy ought to be taken
for the divided Kingdom of the Syrians or Seleucians: but now, upon a more
diligent search into the Prophecies concerning the four Monarchies, I have
reason to conclude against it.

For first the third Monarchy (being the Kingdom of the Grecians) prevailed
greatly over the face of the Earth, Dan. 2.39. Howbeitthe fourth Beast or
Monarchy was stronger then the third, as appears, Dan. 2.40. where it is
compared to Iron which subdueth all things: and in Dan. 7.7. It is said to be
exceeding terrible, stamping the residue under its feet: and verse 23, It shall
devour the whole Earth, and shall tread it down and break it in pieces. Which
if it be understood of the Seleucian or Syrian Kingdoms, is very improbable:
for they (put case that we make them no part of the Grecian or third Monarchy)
were nothing so strong as it; neither did they trample the residue under their
feet, seeing Alexander was not conquered by them; neither did they reign so
much over the whole Earth, as he had done before them, but were a great deal
feebler then the Kingdom of Alexander. It is therefore said after the breaking
off the great Horn, that there were four which stood up for it, being four
Kingdoms of the same Nation, but not in his strength; as it is, Dan. 8.22.

To which some have answered, Antiochus that great tyrant. Antiochus; witness
that which Nebuchadnezzar did when he set up his Golden Image, commanding that
whosoever would not fall down and worship it, should be cast into the hot
fiery furnace: nay, that it must be made seven times hotter then ordinary, for
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3.6.19. Befide, neither did Antiochus so
prevail against the Jews as if he had stamped them all in pieces: for in the
end they resisted him, restored their Religion, and settled the state of their
Commonwealth: whereas this strength and stamping is rather meant of the
Monarchies, one eating up and subduing another.

Secondly, the Seleucians or Syrians who succeeded Alexander, and Alexander
also himself, are said to reign as Grecians, and not as two Kingdoms diverse
from one Monarchy. Whereupon we read in the eighth Chapter of Daniel, that the
two horned Ram is expressly meant of the Medes and Persians, verse 20, and that
the Goat fignifieth the whole Kingdom of the Gecians, Dan. 8.20.21.22.
viz. of Alexonder and his successors. For, at the one and twentieth verse,
The Goat is the King of Grecia, and the great horn which is betwixt his eyes,
is the first King. Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it, four
Kingdoms shall stand up of that Nation, but not in his strength. If then there
be a first King, there must be no more then one: and if more then one, the
Monarchy could not end in Alexander: and if the Monarchy did not end with
Alexander, then the Seleucian or Syrian Kings must necessarily be part of the
third Monarchy: and they being part of the third Monarchy, the fourth and last
is the Monarchy of the Romans.

And now also, lest it should be thought that the third Beast of the seventh
Chapter does not likewise comprehend the whole Kingdom of Grecia, both of
Alexander and his successors, the words of the sixth verse stand thus; After
this I beheld, and lo there was another like a leopard which had upon his back
four wings of a foul; the beast had also four heads, and Dominion was given
him. These wings were Emblems of Alexanders speedy conquests, together with
that sudden division of one body into four parts, soon after the great horn
was broken off. The four heads are his four successors; even as is seen in the
eighth Chapter, and signified there by the four horns of a Goat. By which it
appears, that both Alexander and his successors, are comprehended under both
Beasts; for what the one expresses by four heads, is in the other also meant
by four horns: then which there can be nothing plainer.

Thirdly, Antiochus Epiphanes is described by that little horn which came
fourth of one of the four horns of the Goat, Chap. 8.9. Which beast is taken
(as has been already seen) for Alexander and his successors, answering to the
third beast of the seventh Chapter. But if Antiochus, belonging to the
Seleucian Kingdom, be a part of the third Beast, he cannot also signify the
fourth or any part thereof: for then one Beast should be both the third and
fourth Monarchy.

Fourthly, the Kingdom of this fourth Beast ends with the destruction of
that little horn which came up among the ten horns, Chap. 7.11. and then the
everlasting Kingdom of Christ succeeds: but the Kingdom of the Seleucians
ended not with Antiochus; many of that line succeeded afterward: and there was
almost as many years from Antiochus Epiphanes death unto the coming of Christ,
as there were from Alexanders death to Antiochus.

Fifthly, it is said that the life of each Beast was prolonged for a certain
time and season, Dan. 7.12. But Alexanders reign lasted no longer then six
years and a few months, after the destruction of the second Beast, or Persian
Monarchy. And in so short a season, what Periods or conversions of times could
be observed?

Sixthly, Saint John's Beast in the Revelation, is described according to the
pattern of Daniels fourth Beast, having ten horns, and a mouth speaking great
things, and reigning also (under the regiment of that blasphemous mouth) for
the space of 42 months, or for a Time, Times, and half a Time; as may be seen
in the thirteenth and seventeenth Chapters of the Revelation. Wherefore seeing
one and the same Beast is described in both Prophecies, neither in Daniel, nor
in the Revelation, can be signified by either of them the Kingdoms of the
Seleucians and Syrians. For look what things concerning this Beast are told to
Daniel more succinctly and abstrusely, the same are revealed to Saint John more
largely, and as it were with a kind of explanation. And may not the ten toes
in the feet of the Image, serve as certain tokens to show, that although the
Beast had always ten horns in respect of the principal Provinces under it, yet
the ten horns called by the name of ten Kings are not to be looked for in the
first days of the Monarchy, but in the declining estate and weakened times of
the Empire, as the toes signify.

Seventhly, it is said Dan. 2.28. There is a God in heaven that reveals
secrets, and has showed to the King what shall be in the latter days. But the
latter days are the days since the first coming of Christ; this time being
the last hour, and the last age, 1 John 2 18.
as Saint John has told us: whereas the Syrians or Seleucians both began and
ended long before Christ was born. The latter days therefore were not come
till they were gone, and the prolonging of their kingdom come to an end: for
(as I said before) the life of each Beast was prolonged for a certain time and
season, Dan. 7.12.

Eighthly, in the days of these Kings or Kingdoms ( viz. before they be all
destroyed) the God of heaven shall raise up the eternal Kingdom of Christ,
and of his Saints, Dan. 2.44. But if the fourth Kingdom be interpreted of the
Seleucians, then these kingdoms were all extinguished before Christ's kingdom
began, whether we reckon it from his first or second coming: whereas on the
contrary, Christ's birth fell into the reign of the Romans; who are not utterly
to be destroyed, in all and every relic, till his coming again to
judgment. Which is manifest by that of Daniel also in the seventh Chapter;
namely, that there shall remain some show or relicts of the fourth Beast
until the thrones be set, verse 9. and the Books be opened, verse 10. and till
the son of Man come in the clouds of heaven, verse 13. and till he get all
dominion, and honor, and Kingdoms; and that all People, Nations, and tongues
may serve him, verse 14. and until the Ancient of days cause judgment to be
given, verse 22. and till his everlasting Kingdom come, which never shall have
an end, verse 27. All which do properly belong unto the day of judgment, and
second coming of Christ: and therefore the fourth Monarchy must needs be meant
of the Roman Empire; and not of the Syrian or Seleucian Kingdom which was
decayed and gone before Christ was born: for it fell first of all to Tigranes
King of Armenia; and afterward to the Romans, in the days of Lucullus and
Pompey Yea, and at the death of Cleopatra Augustus was sole Monarch, the
longest surviver of the four heads and horns, being then expired in the loss
of Egypt: And so the fourth Beast trampled the rest under his feet, as was
foretold, Dan. 7.7.

And note that the Jews, in not expecting the coming of the Messiah until the
Roman Monarchy be destroyed, have put a false gloss upon Daniel. For it is (as
Helvicus well observes) a vain interpretation which they bring. For Daniel
(in chap. 2. verse. 44, 45.) does not say that the Kingdom of the Messiah shall
come after the end of the fourth Monarchy, Helvic. vindic. locorum S.
Scripturae page 306. 307.
Sed durante adhuc tempore seu periodo illorum regnorum; that is, in the days
of those Kingdoms, or before they be all destroyed. Ergo falso expectant id
post finem Romani imperii. Nam durante ipso quarto regno debebat regnum aliud
(spirituale scilicet, and aeternum) alterius conditionis suscitari, quod est
regnum Messiae. They do therefore in vain look for it after the end of the
Roman Empire. For even during the fourth Kingdom, another Kingdom ( to wit, a
spiritual and an eternal one) of another condition was to be raised up, which
is the Kingdom of the Messiah: Nor do some of their own Writings but
confirm this truth: For as the same Author says still, in libr. Sanhedrim,
cap. Chelek, it is expressly written, Helvic. ibid.
That the son of David shall not come until a wicked Kingdom bear rule; that
is says Rabbi Solomon, the Kingdom of the Romans. And in Midras Tillim upon
the two and twentieth Psalm; Surge in Edom, id est, Romany, cum futurum est
ut astare nobis facias regem Messiam, meaning, That God would cause to stand up
for them in the days of the Romans, the King Messiah.

And thus I have delivered what I think to be true concerning the fourth
Kingdom in Daniel, firmly grounding upon such proofs, as in my judgment
cannot but carry the whole dispute against Junius and all his followers: whom I
honor both for their great learning and pains, although I cannot be their
disciple in this particular.

CHAP. XVII. Of the times and distances of the taking of Jerusalem by Pompie,
Herod, and Titus.
THat which must be the chiefest Load star in these particulars, must be the
time of the taking of Jerusalem by Herod; Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 28.
for which Josephus gives us two plain Characters: the one, that it was
befieged and taken in a Sabbathical year; viz. after it began, and before it
was ended: the other that it was taken in that year when M. Agrippa and
Canidius Gallus were Consuls. The time of their Consulship was in the ninth
Julian year, and year of the Julian Period 4677, which was the fourth year of
the 185 Olympiad, and year of the building of Rome 716. And indeed in that year
was a year of Rest, which began from the Autumn before, and was not ended
until the Autumn thereof: how then could it be taken on the tenth day of the
seventh month, as Langius says it was? I am sure it agrees nothing at all to
Josephus to say that it was taken so late in the year: for, as he has told us,
not only was it besieged in a Sabbathical year, but even after it was taken,
the year of Rest was not ended, which makes him therefore say that the fields
and grounds lay still untilled, and were not sown because of the year of Rest.
See this in his Antiquities, lib. 15. cap. 1. and compare it with what is in
lib. 14. cap. 28.

Dion says it was taken on the Sabbath day, lib. 49. and Josephus says it was
in the third month at such time as the Jews kept a solemn Fast. The third
month was Sivan, on whose three and twentieth day was a Fast observed, by
reason of the Idolatry of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin. Now
in this year the first of Sivan was on the 31 day of May, feria sexta: the
three and twentieth of Sivan must therefore needs be on the two and twentieth
day of June, feria septima, or on the Sabbath day; For the Cycle of the Sun was
one, the Dominicall letters G. F. and the Cycle of the Moon three.

Seven and twenty years before this, Dion. lib. 37.
Pompie also took Jerusalem, even on the same day of the Month; which
according to Dion and Xiphilin was then also Sabbath day. And indeed so I find
it: for in the year of the Julian Period 4650, the Cycle of the Sun was two,
the Dominicall letter E. and the Cycle of the Moon 14. By which is gathered
that the first of Sivan now was on the thirtieth day of May, feria sexta: the
three and twentieth therefore must be June the 21, feria septima, or Sabbath
day, as the Dominicall letter shows. And herein do Josephus, Dion, and
Xiphilin well accord: all of them directing us to the foresaid year of the
Julian Period 4650; to which if 27 be added, according to the direction of
Josephus, we have then the year of the Julian Period 4677, when Herod took it,
as at the first was said. And note moreover, that whereas Josephus says when
Pompey took this City, C. Antonius and M. Tull. Cicero were Consuls, that it
is true of that year which I account: for though at that very time when the
City was taken they were not in that office, yet in that year they began, even
in the year of the Julian Period 4650, their office not expiring until the
same time of the next year: which I thought good to mention, because the not
observing it has been an occasion of seeking this time one year too late. The
like may be also said of the 179 Olympiad, which began also in the same year,
although a little after the City was taken: for the City was taken in June; the
Olympiad began not until the July next after. And as for the third month when
it was taken, which learned Langius would not have to be the third month of
the year, but of the siege; and thereupon directs his Reader to Josephus De
bello Judaic. lib. 1. cap. 5. where the history of the taking Jerusalem by
Pompey is also related. To that I answer, that it hinders not from accounting
so as I have done; For the third month of the seige might be also the third
month of the year, and is here proved to be so in regard of the day of the
Fast, and day of the week, when the City was taken, yea and of the year also,
which must be (by Josephus his own account) 27 years distant from the taking
thereof by Herod. I conclude therefore that Pompey going forth against
Jerusalem in Nisan, and taking it in the third month after, must needs take
it in Sivan; which because it was on such a day as the Jews kept a solemn
Fast, must be on the three and twentieth day of the same: which three and
twentieth day of Sivan was this year on the one and twentieh day of June, and
on the Sabbath day, as before was said.

Indeed when Herod took it, the seige lasted longer by the space of two
months, De bell. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 13.
as Josephus plainly shows. It began therefore sooner: not in Nisan (which
entered not till the second of April) but some months before, Ibid viz. lib.
1. cap. 13. Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 27.
even when the worst of Winter was past; which in one place of Josephus is
translated rigor hyemis: as thus, ubi autem rigor hyemis cessit, etc. and in
another place, ubi tempestas desaeviit. Now we know that even in our Northern
Climate the worst of Winter is past long before April, which in hotter
Countries, must be passed sooner then with us by far. I reckon therefore that
Herod came against Jerusalem in the beginning of February, and laid seige
against it, and that the Jews resisted him for five months space before he took
it: for he took not the City till the 22 of June next after, which was the
three and twentieth of Sivan, and Sabbath day as well in this year as in that
when Pompey took it; the authorities else of Dion and Xiphilin will be nothing
worth; no nor the authority of Josephus for the Sabbathical year, which was
running on whilst the City was beseiged, and withal was not ended when Herod
had taken it: which well regarded will give no leave to that opinion
maintaining that he took it not till the tenth day of the seventh month called
Tisri, as I have already showed. Note also further, Antig. lib. 14. cap. 28.
that on the fortieth day after Herod returned from the marriage of Mariamne,
and that he and Sosius both of them bent their forces against the City, the
first Wall was taken; fifteen days after that, the second: for so I understand
Josephus in those particulars. But that it were three months after this before
the Temple and upper City was taken, I cannot think: for the Porches and
outward Temple were taken and burnt even when the second wall was taken; and
then quickly after, the fury of the Soldiers set them on work to take the
rest, sparing neither sex nor age, as Josephus also shows. This was (says
he) in the hundredth and seven and twentieth year of the Assamonaean Family: but
how we must account these years, I do not well understand; unless it be that
we are to begin our account in the 150 year of the Greeks, which was in the
year of the Julian Period 4551. for then did Antiochus Eupator make a Covenant
(though he quickly broke it) with Judas Maccabeus and the rest of the Jews,
that they should enjoy their Laws and Liberties as formerly they had done, 1
Macc. 6.58. And indeed there is reason to reckon from hence, seeing the end of
these years is fixed in the death of Antigonus, when Herod and Sosius took
Jerusalem.

And now also for the time when Titus took and destroyed this City, it must be
one hundred and seven years after Herod had taken it; and these 107, not
complete but current. For Jerusalem was destroyed (as says Josephus) by the
Romans one hundred and seven years after Herod had taken it; yet so, Antiq.
lib. 20. cap. 8.
as the destruction thereof by Titus must fall into the second year of
Vespasian, as he again declares. De bello Iudaic. lib. 7. cap. 10. and cap.
18.
The time therefore when Titus destroyed it will fall into the year of the
Julian Period 4783; which was in the hundredth and seventh year after it was
taken by Herod and Sosius. For whereas Herod took it toward the latter end of
June, in the year of the Julian Period 4677; the Temple was burned by Titus his
Soldiers in August, in the year of the same Period 4783, and the City in
September next after; the second year of Vespasian being begun on the Kalends
of July before. For there were (says Xiphilin) from the death of Nero (who
dyed on the ninth of June) to the beginning of Vespasian, one year and two and
twenty days.

But of this destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, I shall speak more afterward
in the last Chapter. I come therefore now to show the true time of Herod's
reign.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the time of Herod's reign, and of his Posterity.
IT was near about such time as the Romans were growing into a full Monarchy,
that Herod the great, the son of Antipater, came to his Kingdom. He had a
reign of 37 years from that time wherein he was declared King by the Senate,
and of 34 from the taking of Jerusalem by himself and Sosius, witnessed by
Josephus Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 26. and lib. 17. ca. 10. and De bello Iudaic.
lib. 1. cap. ult.
in sundry places of his Writings. Then after him his son Archelaus reigned
nine years complete, and near the beginning of his tenth year was banished by
Augustus: And in the twentieth year of Tiberius his other son Philip dyed;
having then had a reign of 37 years after his Father, as Antiq. lib. 17. cap.
ultim. and lib. 18 cap. 6.
Josephus again declares. Antipas also another of his sons was Tetrarch of
Galile, which he held from the time of his Fathers death until the days of
Caius Caligula, who (by the means of Agrippa) banished him into France. This
Antipas was he by whom the Baptist was beheaded, and under whom out Savior
suffered. Agrippa was the son of Aristobulus, and Nephew to Antipas: for
Aristobulus was another of Herod's sons, who was put to death by his Father. And
as for Agrippa, it was he who put James to death, and was himself eaten up of
Worms. Herod King of Chalcis was this Agrippa's brother: he dyed in the eighth
year of Claudius, and had his Kingdom given to Agrippa junior, the son of
Agrippa senior, who reigned over it for the space of four years: at the end
whereof the Emperor takes it away from him also, and in the stead thereof
gives to him the Tetrarchships of Philip and Lysanias, etc. In them he reigned,
and lived in friendship with the Romans until the third year of Trajan; and
was therefore alive thirty years after the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus.

But this is not that which I aim at: for that which I chiefly intend to
prove, is, the true time of Herod the great, before whose death our Savior
Christ was certainly borne. Math. 2.1.
For (as the Scripture speaks) he was born in the days of Herod the King.

This Herod (as I said before) had a reign of 37 years from that time wherein
he was declared King by the Romans; and of 34 from the taking of Jerusalem by
himself and Sosius. The first of these reckonings began in the sixth Julian
year, when Cn. Domitius Calvinus and C. Asinius Pollio were Consuls: the other,
in the ninth Julian year when M. Agrippa and L. Canidius Gallus were Consuls.
And if so, then the last of these years must certainly begin in the two and
fortieth Julian year, and year of the Julian Period 4710: Herod therefore dyed
in the three and fortieth Julian year, and year of the same Period 4711 before
Easter, when from his first beginning he had reigned 37 years complete; and
from his second, 34 years current. Petavius strives for the year before this,
and that chiefly in regard of an Eclipse of the Moon which was then on the
thirteenth day of March: Kepl. in his Silva Chro. annexed to his book De novis
stellis, and Petav. in his Doctr. Temper. lib. 11. cap. 1.
for in the 42 Julian year was an Eclipse of the Moon on the thirteenth day of
March, about three hours before Sunrising, continuing two hours and 47
minutes; the digits eclipsed being six, as Kepler and Petavius have observed.
Now this they think to be that Eclips which Josephus speaks of in his
Antiquities, lib. 17. cap. 8. But in case Josephus should there mean a
natural Eclipse of the Moon, yet could not this be it; for there was too small
a space between the thirteenth day of March, and the Easter of this year (which
was on the eleventh of April) to have all those things done which Josephus
mentions to be done between that time of the Moons darkness and the death of
Herod. Inter enim crematos Rabbinos and Paschatis festum, contigerunt tam multa
variaque, ut ad ea non paucularum hebdomadum, sed multorum mensium tempus
requiratur. Vossius de Te^b Na^iv. Christi.
Quod cuivis Iosephum legenti apertissimum erit; as says a famons Author.
Adding moreover, That every darkness and obscurity of the Moon deserves not
the name of an Eclipse, unless the Earth be placed between the Sun and the
Moon; howbeit it is vulgarly called an Eclipse, when, without that cause, the
palenesse and darkness of a Star of light, has the show of an Eclipse: As
happened at the death of Maro primo Georg. Plin. lib. 2 cap 30. Et Plutarch in
vita Caesaris.
Julius Caesar, or when his Nephew Octavius hearing of his death came to Rome
and entered the City. Of which, Calvisius also speaks, saying; Nullibi hoc
anno hisce diebus, quando Octavius urbem ingressus est, Eclipsis Solis
invenitur, quam anxie inquirit Harwartus ab Hohnburg. Concludendum igitur
fuisse aliquod Phenomenon in Sole, etc. So also when Xerxes moved from Sardes,
there was (as says Herodotus) a great darkness of the Sun in a clear air;
which almost all Chronologers taking to be meant of an Eclipse at that time,
have grievously tormented and vexed themselves to find it out: but failing to
find any at the right time, they have moved this march of Xerxes, some to one
year, and some to another; that thereby they might fit it to an Eclipse, when
indeed there was no Eclipse meant, but only some Phenomenon, strange sight,
or miraculous disappearing of the Sun for a season.

Beside, if that Eclipse of the Moon in the two and fortieth Julian year must
serve as a true Character to show the time of Herod's death, then how shall the
years of his reign be made good? for in the beginning of that year Herod had
reigned but 36 years from his first beginning, and not 33 from his second
beginning. The two and fortieth Julian year could not therefore be the year of
Herod's death; no evasion can serve to bring it up so high, but upon necessity
it must be in the year next after, and that was the three and fortieth year.

As much also do they err who bring his death down to the 44 Julian year:
for it is directly against the testimony of Josephus to say that Herod was not
made King by the Romans till a little before the end of the sixth Julian year.
Antiq. lib 14. cap. 25.26.
It was Winter time indeed when he hazarded himself upon the Seas to come to
Rome where the Senate made him King; but it was not the Winter that entered near
the end of the sixth Julian year: for then the Olympiad was not 184, but 185.
Now we know it from Josephus, that Herod was made King by the Romans in the 184
Olympiad, as well as when Domitius Calvinus and Asinius Pollio were Consuls;
for if we take only this and not likewise that, we lay hold but upon half our
testimony: And if in the 184 Olympiad, then before the Winter which entered near
the going out of their Consulships. The series therefore of the passages in
Josephus which concern this, Antiq. lib 14. c. 24 25. 26.
stands thus; namely, that at the Pentecost of the fifth Julian year Herod
was in Judea: at Autumn he purposed to go from Alexandria to Rome, but was
hindered by a great tempest, and came not to Rome till a good part of the Winter
was entered, and that the new Consuls were in their Offices; who, entering on the
first day of January, tell us plainly that it was in the beginning of the
sixth Julian year when the Senate made him King. I commend Calvisius therefore
in this particular, for he has here faithfully delivered the mind of
Josephus, though he afterward wrong him as much in setting the death of Herod
in the 45 Julian year, which is two years after the end of those 37 years that
Josephus gives him. But there was an Eclipse of the Moon in the 45 Julian
year, on the ninth of January at the thirteenth hour, which lasted for the
space of four hours, and that is the reason why Scaliger and Calvisius kept
Herod alive till then. Howbeit it is not that will serve their turn, for
Herod's longest time of reign being but 37 years from his first beginning, will
have him dead two years before the time that they mention, do what they can.

And as Herod's own years be against them, so are the years also of his
sons, Archelaus and Philip.

For first, Archelaus had but nine years complete after his Father, and was
banished in the tenth; and that is the reason why Josephus in one place gives
him nine years, and in another place ten; telling us moreover that he was
banished in the seven and thirtieth year of the Actium fight. Ant. l. 18. c. 3.
The seven and thirtieth year of which fight began in the fifty one Julian
year, on the second of September, and ended at the same time in the next year:
in the beginning therefore of the 52 Julian year was the banishment of
Archelaus, a little after he had begun the tenth year of his reign; which
still shows the death of Herod to be at the time aforesaid. This is also
further confirmed by Dion [ lib. 55.] writing that Herod of Palestine being
accused of his brethren, was banished beyond the Alps, when Emilius Lepidus,
and Lucius Arruntius were Consuls, which was in the 51 Julian year. By which
difference between him and Josephus I take to be meant, that the accusation
against Archelaus came to Rome near the end of the 51 Julian year, and that
then the Emperor decreed his banishment; but before it could be effected, and
he take notice of it by being actually put out of his Kingdom, and the
President sent to confiscate his Goods, both the two and fiftieth Julian year
and tenth year also of his reign was begun. And note also further, that by this
Testimony of Dion it well appears, that Archelaus was sometimes called Herod
of Palestine, or Herod Archelaus; which is nothing strange, because others of
the same stock had the like Praenomen, or forename. As for Example, his name
who was the Tetrarch of Galilee when the Baptist was beheaded, and under whom
our Savior suffered, was Antipas; howbeit he was also called Herod, Luke 23.8.
Also Agrippa son of Aristobulus, had not only the name of Agrippa, but of
Herod, Act. 12.19. and so I do not doubt but that Archelaus was also sometimes
called by the name of Herod.

Secondly, Josep. ant. lib. 18, cap. 6.
Philip dyed in the twentieth year of Tiberius, and in the seven and thirtieth
year after his Father. The twentieth of Tyberius began in the 78 Julian year on
the nineteenth day of August, and ended not until the same time in the next
year: the death of Philip therefore was in the 79 Julian year before the
nineteenth of August; and consequently the death of Herod in the three and
fortieth year, as at the first was proved. Scaliger did somewhat stick at
these things; whereupon his conjecture was that there might be some fault in
Josephus, and that for the 20 year of Tyberius we ought to read the 22; which
he found warranted by Ruffinus, an ancient interpreter of Josephus. Kep. Silva
Chronol.
But Kepler answers, that the Greek Copies of Josephus are of better credit;
and that the fault therefore is in the Latin, which we may not prefer above
the Greek, because the one is the Translation, the other the Original.

Thirdly, after Philip had gotten the Tetrachship of Galile, Josephus tells
us that he built a Town, and in the honor of Iulia the Daughter of Augustus,
called it Iuliada; which certainly he did whilst Iulia was in favor,
otherwise he had transgressed against the Emperor: but Iulia was out of favor
and banished for her foul adultery, in the four and fortieth Julian year; And
therefore Herod could not be alive in the beginning of the next year (as
Scaliger would have him) because this Town was not built by Philip till after
his Fathers death.

And as for the banishment of Iulia, Dion lib. 48.
that it was in the year aforesaid, is thus proved. She was born (says Dion)
when Marcus Censorinus and Calvisius Sabinus were Consuls; and from thenceforth
flourished and lived in her Fathers favor, and in the favor of the people of
Rome, Macrob. Sat. lib. 2. cap. 5.
until (as says Macrobius) the eighth and thirtieth year of her age.

These men were Consuls in the seventh Julian year; the eight and thirtieth
from whence, was (sure enough) the four and fortieth: in which year Caesar
himself was the thirteenth time Consul.

Fourthly, Josephus also testifies, that after Herod was dead, the sons of
Herod contended before Augustus concerning their Fathers Heritage; and then
Cajus was at Rome, and sat in judgment: but Cajus was absent and gone into
Syria in the same year that Iulia was banished; And therefore Herod must needs
be dead before that time.

And that Cajus went so soon into Syria may thus be proved. He was borne (as
Dion shows) in that year when Apuleius and Nerva were Consuls, which was in
the six and twentieth Julian year: in the nineteenth year after he went into
Syria, and afterward into Armenia, returning no more; for he died in the 49
Julian year when Sex Aelius and Sentius were Consuls as is testified by
Paterculus. Tacitus says, Quirinus was made an Overseer to Cajus Caesar, not
being twenty years old when he went to Wars in Armenia. Ovid de Art amandi,
lib. 1.
Ovid gives him the same age which his Father had when he also began to be
famous and enter into the Wars, which was about nineteen; according to what
is found in an old Monument recording the famous deeds done by Augustus. Annos
undeviginti natus exercitum privato concilio, privataque impensa c^mparavi.
Where the word [undeviginti] shows that he wanted one of twenty.

But what need I urge these two last proofs thus far, seeing those before them
are sufficient? I conclude therefore that Herod dyed in the forty three Julian
year, about the six and twentieth day of February, which was three and thirty
days before Easter: for that he dyed so long before Easter appears by the
great Pomp and State at his Funeral, together with some other circumstances
mentioned by Josephus. Three and thirty days before; that is the least, it
might perhaps be forty, which will therefore make his death to be on the
nineteenth day of February, feria tertia; that being the fifth day of the
twelfth Month Adar, thirty seven years complete from his first beginning to
reign, and thirty four current from the death of Antigonus, when he and Socius
took Jerusalem.

There is no objection of moment that can be made against it: howbeit because
something is objected, I shall not be wanting to give an answer.

Our Countryman Lydiat has greatly taxed Josephus, as if herein he had
reckoned amiss, but it was an unjust censure. For questionless those things
wherein he blames him, and would make the world think him to be faulty, would
never have been forgotten by his adversary Apion, if in them he had been
worthy of blame.

The greatest Cavil which I suppose can be urged, is out of the fourteenth
book of his Antiquities, at the beginning of the seventeenth Chapter, where
Herod is said to be of the age of fifteen years in the time of the Pharsalian
battle, which was in the year of the City 705, and year of the Julian Period,
4666. from whence he lived until he was about seventy years old: testified
also by the same Author in the 17th Book of his Antiquities at the eight
Chapter, and in his first Book De bello Iudaico at the last Chapter. From
whence it follows, that Herod dyed not till the year of the Julian Period
4720. which was the 52 Julian year when A. Licinius and Q. Caeeilius were
Consuls. Which if it be true, then must not the beginning of his reign be
until the first year of the Actium fight, where Josephus sets the seventh
year of his reign and not the first, even the seventh of his 34 years
accounted from the taking of Jerusalem by him and Socius.

Some indeed (and among them Cardinal Baronius and our Countryman Lydiat)
begin the thirty seven years of his reign but then; grounding chiefly upon
this, That that fight being ended, and the Victory falling on the side of
Augustus, Herod (who had taken part with Antonius against him) came as a
suppliant, laid down his Crown, and had never more taken it up if Augustus
the Conqueror had not been favorable and given him leave again to wear it:
so that receiving his Crown at that time from the hands of Augustus he at that
time began the 37 years of his reign. A weak argument I dare boldly say; for
this, at the most, was but the pardoning of his offense, and thereupon the
confirming of him in his former Royalty and reign begun ten years before this
time of the Actium victory. For should he reign thirty seven years from
hence, and after him Archelaus nine, then where shall we find room for them
that governed in Judea after Archelaus was removed from his Kingdom. For after
Archelaus was removed from his Kingdom, Antiq. lib. 17. c 15. and lib. 18. c.
3.
Josephus names Cyrenius, and Coponius, as Rulers and disposers of Judea for a
season. And after Coponius, Marcus Ambibuchus was Ruler; and after him Aanius
Rufus, and then dyed Augustus. Joseph. antiq. lib. 18. c. 3.

Now lay all these together, and it will necessarily follow, that Herod could
not begin his thirty seven years so late as the first year of the Actium fight.
And if not so late as the Actium fight, then for those 15 of Herod's age at the
Pharsalian battle, we must read 25. And so Suslyga, Kepler, and Tirin^usin
Sacr. Bib. Tom. 1 and. Tornicl in Annall.
others have answered, namely, that the forementioned age of 15 years is
directly against the mind of Josephus, because he writes Antiq. lib. 14. c. 23.
elsewhere, that Herod was familiarly acquainted with the most Noble among the
Romans about ten years before this time: which could not be properly said of
a Child, being between five or six years old. We may therefore acknowledge an
ancient fault in some one or other who at the first transcribed the Authors
Copy, writing 15. in the stead of 25. which being long ago is still continued
both in the old Manuscripts, and later printed Books. For who sees not how
easily (...) might be written for (...); the one signifies 15, the other 25.
(...), says the Greek text of Josephus, where the word (...) signifies olim
or quondam: showing that Antonius had had familiar acquaintance with Herod and
Phasaelus in former times. This sure cannot be denied, especially seeing all
the other numbers and years, both in Herod and his succeeding Sons, agree very
well, and may be taken up without any the least contradiction.

Torniellus therefore in his Annals admonishes, that (...) vitiose scriptum
est in Josepho, and qui ex Josepho descripserunt, viz. Gorionide, Photio,
Nicephoro, and Abulensi, etc. meaning that 15. is corruptly written in Josephus
for 25; as also in those who have written out of Josephus, viz. in Gorionides,
Photion, Nicephorus and Abulensis. Tirinius also, in his Comment upon the holy
Bible, is of the same opinion; and therefore he places the birth of Herod in
the fourth year of the 176. Olympiad; from whence to the three and fortieth
Julian year we have seventy years; about which age Herod was when he dyed: For
the fourth year of the 176 Olympiad was in the year of the Julian Period 4641.
and the three and fortieth Julian year in the year of the same Period 4711.
which was 70 years after. So also it will be if you account forty five from
the year of the Julian Period 4666. when the Pharsalian battle was: for in
that battle Herod was twenty five, to which add forty five, and so shall his
age be seventy in the year of the Julian Period 4711, as hitherto has been
proved.

But do I not hear it yet objected, that the death of Herod will be far later
then I have hitherto mentioned, and that because the time of Archelaus his
banishment was not till the reign of Tiberius? Josephus and Strabo are
compared to fortify this objection. For first, Josephus is witness that
Archelaus was married to Glaphyra the daughter of Archelaus King of Cappadocia,
whose last husband before him had been Iuba King of Mauritania. Now Iuba, as is
in the second place alleged out of Strabo, was alive till toward the middle
of the second year of Tiberius, and therefore Archelaus marrying his Widow,
could not be banished till the end of the said year, or beginning of the next.

To which I answer, first that Master Tho. Lydyat.
he who makes this objection is not constant to himself: for in his Book De
emendat. Temp. page 162. he places the the banishment of Archelaus in the last
year of Augustus, saying that he was not banished in the 37 year of the fight
at Actium, but in the 37 year after Augustus had received that power and
dignity which was called Tribunitia potestas; and thereupon he dissenteth every
way from Josephus, and gives him but eight years after his father. Then, in
another book, written on purpose to confirm the arguments of his first, he
would not have Archelaus banished till the days of Tiberius, in regard of Iuba
who was alive till then, and whose Widow he married, as formerly has been
said. But to this I have a second answer, to wit, that in Strabo we find more
Iuba's then one who were Kings of Mauritania about such time as the Romans were
the greatest Monarchs in the World: and therefore it were little less then
great folly to distrub the times by pitching upon none but the last to be him
whose Widow Archelaus should marry. We may as well say that among the Popes
Gregory the first and Gregory the second were both one: Or that among the Kings
of England, Richard the first and Richard the second were the same. See
therefore what Strabo says, in the end of his seventeenth and last book, in
the Description of Mouritania: After Syphaces (says he) Masinissa obtained the
Kingdom, and then Micipsa and his successors; and in our times Iuba, who was
father to that Iuba who dyed lately.

And thus much concerning the times of Herod and his posterity. The next thing
to be spoken of, is the birth of Christ: of which in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XIX. Of the true and right year of our Saviors birth and Baptism.
HAving in the former Chapter clearly showed the times of Herod and of his
posterity, it will in the next place be worth our while to inqure into the the
right time of our Saviors birth.

Concerning which I find a variety of opinions, both among the Ancient and
Modern Writers; and were it not for the time of Herod's death, should scarce
know which to follow.

For first, the Ancients: they are divided and tell us thus. When Calvisius
Sabinus and Lucius Rufinus were Consuls, then was Christ borne, according to
Sulpitius Severus in the second book of his sacred History: this was in the 42
Julian year, and year of the Julian Period 4710. But when Lentulus and
Messalinus were Consuls, then was Christ borne, according to Tertullian,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Cassiodorus, Maximus Monachus, and Cedrenus: this was in
the 43 Julian year. Epiphanius and Eusebius are for the next year, when Caesar
the 13th time and Sillanus were Consuls: this was in the 44 Julian year.
Dionysius Exiguus pitcheth upon the next year after, when Lentulus and Piso
were Consuls.

By which testimonies we find how the Ancients were divided, and that from
them may be gathered four several years for the birth of Christ.

And as for the Modernes; Dekerius and Petavius are for the one and fortieth
Julian year: Kepler for the fortieth; and M. Antonius Capellus Franciscanus for
the nine and thirtieth.

Scaliger goes along with them who pitch upon that year when Lentulus and
Messalinus were Consuls; Bucholcerus follows Epiphanius and Eusebius, and so
do many others. But that which is the latest taken up, is the 48 Julian year,
three years latter then the common account; and is mainely defended by Master
Thomas Lydyat, both in his book De Emendatione Temporum, as also in another
book written on purpose to confirm it.

Thus they. But I for my part shall absolutely rely upon none of them: for no
authority without good ground can be sufficient. And therefore my course herein
shall be this; that having already (out of Herodis imperium, and res ab
e^gestas, primus and antiqu^ssimus omnium, qui quidem extant, Josephus in
historiam retulit: reliqui, eadem comm^ntati postea sunt, ex ejus fontibus
rivulos suos duxerunt. Et tamen incredibile est quantum ab authore ipso,
magistroque su^ dissentiant; ex quo intolerabiles quidam in historiam errores
perturbationesque sunt infusae. Petav. Doctr. Temp. lib. 11. cap. 1.
Josephus) found the true time of Herod's death, I shall next seek for the birth
of Christ in some year before it, as by Scripture I am directed: And if in that
I can have any of the Ancients to guide me, I shall gladly embrace them,
otherwise not.

Or to make my way the more plain, I shall first note the year of Herod, in
which the Ancients say Christ was borne. Secondly the year of Augustus; and
Thirdly, the time of the general taxing, when all the world under the Roman
Empire went to be taxed. For as in Saint Matthew we read, that he was borne in
the days of Herod the King, Mat. 2.1. So in Saint Luke we read, that it was
in the days of Augustus, when the Decree was gone forth that all the World
should be taxed, Luke 2.1.

And for the first, we have the testimony of Epiphanius and Severus Sulpitius,
expressly noting that the three and thirtieth year of Herod to be the time of
our Saviors birth: Which will be proved true, if it be rightly taken: For it
might very well be his three and thirtieth year, not from his first beginning
to reign, but from the time that he and Sosius took Jerusalem; else should
Christ be 36 years old when he was baptized, which is certainly false. Herod
therefore could not be alive four years after the birth of Christ, although
Epiphanius as well as Sulpitius has written so; for they having an eye only to
his 37 years, mistook themselves in this particular, and thereupon have cast
the years of Christ afterward into wrong years of Archelaus and Antipas, as is
plainly manifest.

As for the second, Tertullian and Saint Hierom point us to the 41 year of
Augustus. But from whence must this 41 year be accounted? Saint Hierom joins
it with the 28 year of Augustus, and yet seems to compute both that 28 year,
and the 41 year, from one time; which is very absurd. Tertullian accounts it
from the death of Cleopatra, not only against the truth of the thing it self,
but also against his own reckoning; who writes that after this, Augustus
lived fifteen years, and yet reigned but 43 after Cleopatra. From which
confused and contradictory accounts of theirs it well appears, that albeit
they found in some ancient Rolls and public Records of the Romans, that there
was a general taxing of the World by Augustus about such a year as bore the
date of an one and 40th year, yet from whence to derive the right head of their
reckoning they were either careless or altogether ignorant. I should therefore
think, that by this 41 year was meant the 41 Julian year: for with that, the
three and thirtieth year of Herod (before mentioned) does exactly accord.
Jrenaeus, more ancient then either of these, affirms it to be about the 41
year of Augustus. For Natus est Dominus noster (says he) circa primum and
quadragesimum annum Augusti imperii, lib. 3. contra. haeres. cap. 25. And in
this, he is none of the worst Authors: for Christ being born on the 25 day of
December, and in the 33 year of Herod, was born in the latter end of the 41
Julian year, and so near the beginning of the 41 year of Augustus from the
death of Julius Caesar, that there were but seven days wanting to make his
birth fall fully into it. I conclude therefore from hence, that the first year
of Christ was (for the most part of it) in the 41 year of Augustus, and that
Christ was born but seven days before that year took beginning. For he was
born in the 41 Julian year, on the 25 day of December: that day being
accknowledged and kept for the day of his Nativity throughout many ages long
before our times, as in the Chapter next following shall be showed.

Come we then now to the third and last thing that I noted to be a directour to
us in this particular: I mean the time of the general taxing, when all the
World under the Roman Empire went to be taxed. In the searching after which,
this I find; viz. that in all the time of Augustus, there were only three
general taxings: and in one of those three it must need be that Christ was
born; witness the words of Saint Luke, saying, There went out a Decree from
Augustus that all the World should be taxed, Luke 2.1. By which words it
appears that we must not seek for Christ's birth at the time of a particular
taxing, but at a such time as there was a general taxing. And that there were
three such taxings in the days of Augustus, is testified by Suetonius in the
life of the said Emperor, about the end of the seven and twentieth Chapter;
where he tells us that Augustus made three general taxings. Censum populi ter
egit; primum ac tertium cum Collega; medium solus. The first of these was too
soon for the birth of Christ: for it was (as Dion shows, lib. 52. and lib.
53.) when Caesar Augustus the fifth time, and Sextus Apuleius were Consuls; viz.
in the seventeenth Julian year, and year of the City 724, which was but the
twelfth year of Herod's reign after his first beginning, and 56 years before
the fifteenth year of Tiberius. And as for the last, it was too late: for when
that began, Herod had been sixteen years dead well nigh. It follows therefore
that Christ must needs be born in the time of the middle taxing: for if the
first were too soon, and the last too late, then must the birth of our Savior
be for certain in that which was between both.

Kepler refers the beginning of it to the 36 Julian year, when those
incredible Conquests of Drusus, Tiberius, and L. Piso had purchased a peace to
the Empire: But he was deceived in his reckoning without all question. For
first, when this taxing began, Cyrenius (or as he is otherwise called,
Quirinius) was President of Syria, which could not be until the fifth year
after his Consulship; for until such a time not any who had been Consul, could
be sent as an Officer into the Provinces, as Suetonius and Dion tell us: and
therefore until then Quirinius was not President of Syria.

Secondly, there is in very good Authors mention made of an old Monument of
Stone recording the famous deeds of Augustus, wherein these three taxings are
recorded: and although age has somewhat eaten into it, and in certain places
worn out some pieces of the words, yet it well appears that the Middle
taxing was about the Consulship of one whose name was Asinius. For when the
Monument speaks of that Taxing, although some of the letters be wanting, yet
we find sinio Cos. By which is meant Asinio Cos. That is, Asinius being
Consul: for if the letter A. be put to sinio, it will upon necessity be so. And
indeed where was there a Consul, or what was his name who had that termination,
but Asinius?

Well, but what Asinius was this? In the 38. Julian year we find one called
by the name of Cajus Asinius Gallus, who was then Consul with Cajus Martius
Censorinus: After whom there was none of that name Consul til after Herod was
dead. This then declares that here was the beginning of that taxing, within
the compass whereof Christ was born. For first, though Dion omitteth to tell
us in what year this Middle Taxing was, yet does his silence hinder nothing;
for by these Characters we find it. Secondly this was the fifth year after the
Consulship of Quirinius. And thirdly, we find a passage in Tertullian, by which
we are pointed to the days of Sentius Saturnius: which is not impertinent. For
Saint Luke does not say that our Saviors birth was under the taxing made by
Cyrenius, but rather that Cyrenius first began the taxing, or that it was first
made when Cyrenius was President of Syria. To which Suidas well accords,
saying; Augustus obtaining a Monarchy, appointed twenty men of honest life and
conversation, whom he sent throughout his Provinces to tax the people and their
substances, of which they were to give an account in public: and this he first
began when Quirinius, or (as Saint Luke calls him) Cyrenius was President of
Syria. By all which it well appears, that as this Taxing began in some part
of the 38 Julian year, so it was depending and not ended until the 42 Julian
year, which was the 28 year of the Actium fight, and the year next after the
birth of Christ. For if the testimony of Tertullian, in his fourth book and 19
Chapter, against Marcion, formerly mentioned, be understood otherwise, it must
needs clash with the holy Scripture: which upon such terms may by no means be
admitted.

Nor does this hitherto mentioned, concerning the year of Christ's birth, but
agree well with the time of the slaughter of the Innocents at Bethlem, and the
parts thereabouts; which (as appears by Scripture) was in the second year
after either the conception or birth of Christ: For Herod having inquired
diligently of the Wise men at what time the Star appeared to them, was
punctually informed of the time thereof: and thereupon when (a little before
his death) he put in practice his bloody purpose of slaying the infants, he
slew them who were of two years old and under, according to the time that he
had diligently inquired of the Wisemen, who came not to Jerusalem in the
second year after Christ was born, but in the same year, even before the day of
Mary's Purification. For first, when they came, they inquired for Christ under
the notion of (...): which word properly taken is to be understood of a child
newly born, and is so used to express the birth of Moses, in Heb. 11.23.
Secondly, when in the form of their inquiry they say, Where is he that is born
King of the Jews? it is more properly to be undestood of a King lately born,
then of one born some certain years before. Thirdly, when they made this
inquiry, all Jerusalem was troubled as at some new thing, of which they had
heard nothing before: whereas at the time of the Purification he was proclaimed
openly in the Temple, where were enough to take notice of him, and to spread
the fame thereof abroad to others. Then did good old Simeon take him up in his
arms, and hold him forth as the glory of Gods people Israel, because he was
born among them: and likewise as a light to lighten the Gentiles, because in
these Wisemen he showed them the way unto him. Fourthly and lastly, when the
Wisemen came, they found him at Bethlehem, where he was not to be found after
the time of his mothers Purification: for (as Saint Luke tells us) after his
parents had in that duty of theirs, performed all things according to the Law
of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own City Nazareth, that is,
They went bach again Hoc est postquam Maria and Joseph omnia illa adimplerunt,
quae secundam legis praec^pta ad ritum purificationis spectabant, says one.
now to that very place from whence they departed when they went to Bethlehem,
the City of David, to be taxed; as may be seen Luke 2, 4, 39. Saint Matthew I
grant passes this over in silence, and writes as if Joseph and Mary came not
with Jesus to Nazareth until they had been in Egypt: But that (says
Theophilact) which Matthew was silent in, Theoph. in Matthew. c. 2.
Saint Luke supplied. Disce igitur qued quae siluit Matthaeus, dicit Lucas. Vt
exempli gratia, Postquom natus est, implevit quadraginta dies, deinde descendit
in Nazareth, haec dicit Lucas. Matthaeus autem dicit post haec, quod fugerit in
Aegyptum, deinde venerit ab Aegypto in Nazareth. Non dissident ergo inter se.
Nam Lucas dicit descensum a Bethlehem in Nazareth. Matthaeus autem postea
reditum ab Egypto in Nazareth. Thus that Father.

Well, but though the coming of the Wisemen was while Mary lay in at
Bethlehem; yet (as I said before) the slaughter of the Infants was not until
the second year after the Star appeared, as is plain out of the Text, telling
us of what age they were that Herod slew; Mat. 2.7.16.
and that his slaughter of them was, according to the time that he had
diligently inquired of the Wisemen. Now his inquiry was of the time of the
Stars appearing; according whereunto he ordered that the male Children of such
an age as he knew well agreed thereto, should be massacred both in Bethlem and
the parts thereabout, by his bloody men of war. And thereupon he slew all,
(...), a bimatu and infra, from the age of two Bimatus signifies one who is of
the age of two years, as having finished his first year and his going on in his
second.
years and under: using therein such circumspection, as that if Christ was
either as old now as by the Wisemens relation he seemed to be, or hid among
those that were younger, he might be sure not to fail in the slaughter of him:
no, though he were not in Bethlehem, but in the parts thereabout. But what
Policy Herod might have in deferring the execution of his purpose thus long, I
cannot easily perceive: he was politic enough we see when he went about it,
and might have some politic end propounded to himself too, why he would not
do it presently after he saw that he was mocked of the Wisemen, though it be
not laid open for every eye to discern. But be his policy herein what it
would, I do believe there was an overruling Providence that went along with
it, and was as much unknown to Herod, as was the cause, why Herod deferred the
slaughter unknown to others. For the longer it was before Mary was forced to
fly with her child into Egypt, the more was their strength and fitness for
such a journey: nor could their stay there be overlong, if they went but late,
and so be the better able to endure the hardship of a strange Country.
Sabellicus says that Herod was necessitated to defer this slaughter thus long,
by reason that he was forced to go to Rome, and there to purge himself before
Caesar of those accusations which his own Sons brought against him; which is
not unlike: until therefore he had done that, and was come back again, he
could not slay these Innocents. But that being done, and he come home again,
his anger which he had before conceived against the Wisemen for mocking him,
and his purpose to murder Christ for fear he should get his Kingdom from
him, put him upon the execution of this Massacre.

And thus I doubt not but I have found out the right year of our Saviors
birth; which was the 41 Julian year, the 33 year of Herod, the 40 year of
Augustus, the fourth year of the 193 Olympiad, the year of the Julian Period
4709, and year of World 4000. John in Jordan, affirming from the words of Saint
Luke in the third Chapter of his Gospel, Luke 3. ver. 1. and ver. 23.
that in the fifteenth year of Tiberius Christ was but thirty years old, and
that therefore he could not be born sooner then the third year of the 194
Olympiad, which was in the 44 Julian year, and year of the Julian Period 4712.

To which I answer, Luke speaks no more of Christ's thirtieth, then of his nine
and twentieth, one and thirtieth or two and thirtieth year. For in the text
alleged Saint Luke only says, that Jesus was about thirty years of age;
populari modo loquendi, by a common phrase of speech not seldom used in such
numbers as are Numeri rotundi, Round or Even numbers; and is when the thing
mentioned falls out to be by a precise account nearer to the number named
then to the next round number after it. Let therefore that text of Saint Luke
be well observed, (...), and Jesus himself was about thirty years of age: where
the word (...) takes away all scruple for concluding from thence of any
certainty of just thirty and no more, seeing according to that doubtful phrase
it might be either more or less. Now here it could not be less, but more;
Christ else would be borne after Herod was dead: which we know for certain
cannot be. And indeed if we look into Ignatius we shall find it so: for he
was an ancient Martyr, and one who had seen Christ in the flesh; from whose
testimony we are taught that Jesus was not baptized by John in Jordan until
after three Decades of years: but how long after he does not tell us. If it
were just at the end of them, then whereto shall the word (...) serve in the
text aforesaid? or if necessarily within some few days after three Decades
were fulfilled, then shall we restrain it more strictly then is usual in that
common phrase of speech which is often used in round or even Numbers, such as
is this here in this place: especially there being no necessity through any
attending circumstance to compel us. Seeing therefore neither the word it
self, nor the common phrase of speech do absolutely tie us, nor the
circumstance of time for Herod's death will give us leave here so to take it,
there is no reason to the contrary but that it may be taken otherwise; and not
only that it may, but that here it must, although the text be not (...).

My conclusion then is this, that Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior was
baptized when he was two and thirty years old, with thirteen days over and
above, being baptized on the sixth day of January in the 74 Julian year, and
year of the Julian Period 4742. when two the Gemini were Consuls, and whilst
the fifteenth year of Tiberius was still running on, for it ended not until
the nineteenth day of August next after.

And as for the word (...) which follows in Saint Lukes text, signifying
incipiens or beginning; it means not that Jesus was beginning to be about 30
years of age; but rather and indeed, that beginning [or when he began] he was
about thirty years of age, that is, when he began to prepare himself for his
office, calling his Disciples, and to go in and cut among them (...) incipiens
a baptismate Johannis, beginning from the baptism of John; as Saint Luke has
elsewhere told us, namely, in Act. 1.21.22.

Participium (...), faith one, Lydiat de emend. and alibi.
videtur dictum de coepta a Baptismo publica functione illa triplici
ministerii, officii and muneris, nempe Prophetici, Sacerdotalis, and Regii, ad
quam Christus ante jacta mundi fundamenta destinatus erat, and propter quam
tandem carnem humanam assumpserat, potius quam de annoaetatis ipsius ut multi
intelligunt. Sca. de emend. l. 6. Petav. lib. 11.
Neither does Joseph Scaliger think it probable that the word (...) ought to
be referred to the thirty years, but put absolute by it self. Petavius also
finds by the time of Christ's birth that he must be above thirty years old at
the time of John's baptism. Learned Weemse assenteth also to Scaliger: for, in
his Christian Synagogue, speaking of Stigmatologie or right pointing of
Scripture, he says that the word (...) is not to be construed with the
Genitive case (...): and therefore he terms this to be the wrong reading,
namely, And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age. If therefore
the word (...) have no relation to (...), then must it needs be taken in the
sense aforesaid; and the meaning of the whole text run thus; namely, that
Jesus beginning to prepare himself for his Office, calling his Disciples, and
to go in and out among them, was about thirty years of age; being (as was
supposed) the son of Joseph.

And thus I have showed not only the year of Christ's birth, but also the year
and day of his baptism, being baptized (as the Church by tradition generally
holds) on the sixth day of January, in the year of the Julian Period 4742.
and year of the World 4032.

That which is next, concerns the day of his birth: in the searching after
which, the authorities of the Ancients will be considerable, though for the
year they were at odds and could help us little. For when they speak of the
year, they delivered but matter of opinion; but in this they speak matter of
practice, which is to be regarded before the private fancies of later times.

CHAP. XX. Of the day of Christ's Birth, that it was kept, and on what day, both
among the Ancients, and in the succeeding Ages.
IF the authority of Clement (in the fifth book and 12 chapter of his
Apostolical Constitutions) might pass for granted, we should have a testimony
as ancient as the very times of the Apostles, to show that then and in those
days, the Birth day of our Savior was observed.

But because many learned men make question whether those Constitutions were
ever any of his, I shall rather allege a testimony out of the first book and
sixth chapter of the Centuriatours or Magdeburgenses, wherein is said; That the
Apostles and other Christians, as they used other things indifferent, so also
they freely used Feasts. Which testimony ought the rather to be regarded,
because the Apostle Saint Paul himself has said; Christ our Passover is
Sacrificed for us; therefore (says he) let us keep the Feast: as is written,
in 1 Cor. 5.7. Which words do confirm the testimony before mentioned, and is
also an evidence to convince them of error, who would have Christians keep no
Feast days at all: no, not so much as a day in honor to Jesus Christ the
Savior of the World.

The Ancients were of another mind: they therefore kept such a day. And in the
Greek or Eastern Church they called it (...), or (...): which signifies in
English, God's appearing. And indeed when Christ was born, God appeared to the
World by the Nativity of his son. Which is but what the Apostle shows: for
speaking to Timothy of the Incarnation of Christ Jesus, our Lord and Savior,
thus he says; It was God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. And if God
manifested in the flesh, then may the day thereof, in that respect, be fitly
called Theophania.

The Latin or Western Church called it Dies Nativitatis; the day of the
Nativity: Dies natalis Domini, vel Natalitia Domini; The Birth day of our Lord;
agreeing therein to that of the Angel in Luke 2.10. Behold I bring you glad
tidings of great joy which shall be to all people: For unto you is borne this
day, in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord.

The news then we see came first from heaven: an Angel brought the first
tidings of the Day; by whom it was declared to be a day of great joy to all
people. And therefore (to show men what they should do) there was suddenly
with the Angel a multitude of the Heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory
to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men, Luke 2.13.14.
Which very Hymn was afterward by Telesphorus (who was Bishop of Rome in the
year after Christ's Passion 107) ordained to be sung in the Church on the Eve
always of Christ's Nativity; Anno Dom. 140
as is noted by Calvisius ex Sigeberto: And as may be seen also in a decretall
Epistle of the Authors own setting forth, if that Epistle were any of his.
But whether it were or no, it was ancient: And so all things considered, it
well appears, that though the singing of this Hymn was but then appointed to
be used in the Church, yet the Day (on whose Eve it was appointed to be Sung)
was observed and kept before; yea even in the times of the Apostles, if
Polydore Virgil may be credited, lib. 6. cap. 6.

Next after this is the undoubted testimony of Theophilus, Anno Dom. 190
who was Bishop of Cesarea in Palestine about 157 years after Christ's Passion:
and he, speaking of this day, says; We ought to celebrate the Birth day of our
Lord, on what day soever the eight Calends of January shall happen. For proof
of which, See the Magdeburgenses, Centur. 2. cap. 6. See also Hospinian of the
Original of Christian Feasts. And know moreover, that the eight Calends of
January was always on the XXV day of December, in respect of the day of the
Month, although it varieth every year in respect of the day of the week.

Clemens of Alexandria was much about the same time with Theophilus: Anno Dom.
195
and in him mention is made of some, who being more curious then others,
persuaded themselves that Christ's Birth Day was either on the 25 day of the
Egyptian month Pharmuth (which answers, the most part of it, to April) or on
the 25 of Phacon, which answers in like manner to May. For, Sunt qui
curiosius (says he) natali Domini non solum annum sed etiam diem assignant. In
which words, saying, Sunt qui curiosius: me thinks it is but as if he should
barely relate the opinion of some, whom the ordinary Day observed would not
content: for they being more curious then others, search after another day; and
that must be either in the month Pharmuth or Phacon: but in which of these,
they were at a stand. Thus it may be in any thing else, though never so
certainly known: for what is there which may not be either questioned or
contradicted by such as are either ignorant, wilful, or have an affectation of
singularity? Chemnitius says well concerning the ground of this error, that
it was because they reckoned the sixth Month (in which the Angel was sent unto
the Virgin Mary) not from the Conception of John the Baptist, but from the
beginning of the Hebrew year which began from Nisan or March, near the vernall
Equinox: from whence the sixth Month is And this in regard of the account,
inclusively or exclusively taken.
either August or September, and the ninth from thence either April or May. So
that this being in all probability the ground of their error, Master Lydiat
had little reason to close with them in it for the time of Christ's birth. For
the Angel Gabrel does directly say, This is the sixth Month (not from the
beginning of the year, but) with her who was called barren; that is from the
Conception of John the Baptist, Luke 1.36.

The next may be a proof out of the Writings of that godly Martyr Cyprian,
Anno Dom. 240
who in his Treatise of the Nativity shows the great joy that was in his time
on the day of Christ's birth, called by him the day of the Nativity of Christ.
He was Bishop of Carthage, and flourished about the year of our Lord 240: who
was so good a man, and so dear to the people of his Church, that when he went
to suffer Martyrdom, they cried out and said, Moriamur simul cum sancto
Episcopo, Let us also dye with our holy Bishop.

And in the days of Dioclesian the Tyrant, Anno Dom. 284.
who began to reign in the year of our Lord 284, there was a great multitude
of Christians burnt together in a Church at Nicomedia a City of Bithinia, by
the command of that bloody Emperor, even when they were met together there to
celebrate the day of that Festival, as is noted by Nicephorus in the seventh
book, and sixth chapter of his Ecclesiastical History.

Nor was the Feast of the Annunciation (and consequently the Feast day of
Christ's birth) but observed in the days of Athanasius: as Master Isaacson
notes in his Chronology, Anno Dom. 350.
Anno Dom. 350.

The same Author likewise shows ( Anno Dom. 361.) how Julian feigning
himself to be a Christian, Anno Dom. 361.
kept the Feast of the Epiphanie with the Christians.

In the time of Nazianzen, Anno Dom. 377.
the same Feast is also noted to be kept; as also the custom of Parents
standing by at their Childrens Baptizing. I Would. anno 377. Greg. Naz. Orat. 38.
But that which is most pertinent, is what the said Father speaks in an
Oration of his, on the day of Christ's birth: saying, I am confident that the
heavenly powers do also this present day celebrate the Feast together, and
leap exceedingly for joy, if at all they be endued with the love of God and Men.

Ambrose lived in his time; and in him we find these words. Length of Nights
(says he) had possessed the whole day, had not the coming of Christ shined
gloriously in the very shortness of days, Sermon. 13. And why that Father
says, in the very shortness of days, is, because in the time of Augustus
(under whom we know Christ was born) the shortest day was on the 25 of
December, as Pliny observes.

Hierom says, Anno Dom. 385.
that the day kept in memory of our Lords Nativity, is the Day on which the
ancient report runs he was borne. Dies, qua traditur natus.

Augustine also says, Anno Dom. 420.
John was born (as the Church by tradition teaches) on the eighth Calends of
July (or 24th day of Juno) even when the days begin to shorten: but our Lord
was born on the eighth Calends of January (or 25th day of December) even when
the days begin to lengthen. For as John himself has confessed, He must
increase, but I must decrease, John 3.30. See August. in Psalm. 132. Et. lib.
3. de Trinit. cap. 5.

Orosius says, Anno Dom 425
Christ was born on the twenty fifth day of December, when all increases of the
ensuing year do first begin. lib. 7. cap. 2.

But before either Augustine or Orosius, Anno Dom. 398
Chrysostom gave notice of this day, affirming it to be on the eighth Calends
of January, six Months after the eighth Calends of July. For though the
Eastern or Greek Churches at the first observed the sixth day of January (and
that is the reason why Epiphanius, who lived about twenty years before
Chrysostom, mentioned that day) yet they changed their opinion, and embraced
the former observed in the Western or Latin Churches on the 25. day of
December: which though it were new to them of Constantinople (where this father
was Bishop) when it came first among them, because they had not observed it
before, was nevertheless acknowledged by him who was the eye of that and other
Churches (as Isidor Pelusiota calls him) to be ancient, and long before
observed by them of the West, from whom the Eastern Churches first had it.

Ab illis (says he) qui exact haec norunt, Chrysostom homil. in Natalem
Domini. quae est XXXI. ex 71 illis a Frontone Ducaeo editis Tomo de diversis N.
T. locis page 466.
quique illam whem (Romam scilicet) inhabitant, hunc diem accepimus. Nam illi
ipsi qui istic degunt jam a superioribus temporibus, and ex antiqua traditione,
ipsum celebrantes, ad nos usque illius notitiam transmiserunt. That is, We have
received this day from them who know these things exactly, and who inhabit the
City; namely, Rome. For they who live there now from the times of old, and out
of ancient tradition celebrating it, have transmitted the knowledge thereof to
us.

These are the testimonies of the Ancients, A new: opinion first published by
Beroaldus, Anno Dom. 1577.
according whereunto the succeeding ages of the Church (both before and since
the Reformation) have precisely and exactly walked. And yet let me not forget
that some of late years have strove to introduce a new opinion, not once so
much as dreamed of until Beroaldus published his book of strange Chronology;
which was not until the year of our Lord 1577. This new opinion is, that
Christ should be borne in September, or when the Sun entering into Libra made
the second Equinoctial.

Scaliger had done well if he had confuted it: but he, as also his Scholar
Calvisius, endeavored the contrary, adding their strength to uphold it,
although upon as weak grounds as he that first set it abroach.

The best argument that they have, is built upon the courses of the Priests,
which Beroaldus accounts from their first time in the days of King David,
and begins at Joarib; thinking, because there were 24 courses in all, that
therefore two Courses were appointed for every Month. And indeed Joaribs
Course was the first of all the Courses, which Beroaldus begins in March,
and without any respect at all to any interruption, continues his account from
thence ever after. But this is strange: for not only were the Courses
interrupted, but even the beginning of them is fixed by him in an uncertain
time; unless he were sure that it was in March when David first appointed
them: of which I am sure he neither was nor could be.

Scaliger also begins at Joarib, and accounts but from the time when the
Courses of the Priests were restored by Judas Macchabeus in the 148. year of
the Grecians, on the 25 day of Casleu; thinking because the Shewbread was
changed every Sabbath day in the morning, that therefore every Course had but
his week of Service. Which for the time of their service is probable enough,
and may be granted; as may be seen in 2 King. 11.7. and in 2 Chronicles 23.4. But
why, when Judas purged the Temple, and restored the Courses, Scaliger should
then begin his account at Ioarib, without any proof at all to warrant it, is
altogether as uncertain as at the first to begin them in March. For who knows
but Judas might restore them so, as they began again (at the time when he
restored them) where they were interrupted and broken off by Anciochus: and at
whose Course that was, is no where recorded by any Author.

Nor will the Calendar of the Courses, set forth by Master Lightfoot in his
Harmony of the four Evangelists, serve the turn. For [first] it is but upon
conjecture that he begins the first Course on the next Sabbath day after the
Feast of Tabernacles. Secondly, by making the Courses keep their constant
round in such order as he accounts them, he makes the Course of Bilgah (which
was the fifteenth Course) to be in that part of the fifth Month, where should
be the Course of Ioarib: For when Nebuchadnezzar destroyed the first Temple at
Jerusalem, it was (as the Jews bear witness) the watch or Course of Ioarib.
Now the Course of Ioarib was not the fifteenth, but the first Course, 1 Chronicles.
24.7. Thirdly, he makes the Course of Gamul, in the end of the sixth Month, to
have but four days: which should have seven as well as the rest. And last of
all were his Calendar perfect, it could be so but for one year; because that
day of the Month which is Sabbath day in this year, will not be so in the
next: which together with the three weeks of the there great Feasts (in which
he tells us there was no distinct course that served, but all the Courses
served indifferently together) will make a great and manifest alteration every
year.

It is therefore the best and only way to come to the knowledge of these
Courses by accounting them back from the time that the second Temple was
destroyed by the Romans, at which time was the week and Course of Ioarib; as
is witnessed by the Jews, in their ancient Chronicle called Seder Olam rabba.
For seeing the Courses were interrupted often before the days of Judas
Maccabeus, but never after till the destructiof the Temple by the Romans, there
can be no better way then to account back from thence. And so doing, I find
that Ioaribs Course, in the fortieth Julian year (the year that the Baptist
was conceived) began on the fourteenth day of August which was the nine and
twentieth day of the fifth Month, feria septima. And Ioaribs Course beginning
then, Abijah's Course (to which Zacharias belonged) must needs begin on the
second day of October, which was the nineteenth day of the 7th Month foria
septima. on the 8th of October was the last day of this Course: at the night
whereof, or on the night after when the Sabbath was ended (which we know was but
from Even to Even) the Baptist was conceved, and born 258 days after, viz. on
the 24th day of June in the 41 Julian year. And note that this is the soonest
time for a Child to be borne in a birth that is ordinary. For in ordinary
births (and such this was, Luke 157.) carried on according to the course of
Nature, the continuance of the infant in the Mothers Womb depends much upon
the place of the Moon at the time of the conception, as they know who are any
thing at all acquainted with Hermes his Trutina, in which may be seen, that as
the shortest time is 258. days; so the middle time is 273. days, and the
longest time is 288. days. Now Christ's time of abode in the Virgins Womb was
neither of the longest time, nor of the shortest time, Luke 1.36.
but much about the middle time. For in the sixth Month after the Baptists
conception, ( viz. five Months and nineteen days) our Savior Jesus Christ
was conceived, on the 25 day of March, in the 41 Julian year, which in that
year was the And was also the Sabbath day.
seventeenth day of the first Month. From whence to the The day of his birth
was on the second day of the week even as he himself was the second Person of
the holy Trinity: and as the second day of the week, so the 27 day of the
tenth Month. Beroald. in his Chrono. lib. 3. cap. 8.
day of his birth were 275. days complete, as many as are from the 25. of
March to the 25 of December. Saint Austin names 276 days, which must be
understood of so many days current: for so long Christ remained in the Virgins
Womb as the Church (says he) had it by tradition. Aug. lib. 4. de Trin. cap.
ult.

And as for that which Beroaldus has further concerning the Indictions which
began on the 24 of September, and were instituted to bear account of the
payment of tribute, it is an argument very absurd. For when Christ was born,
the Indictions were not known, but were instituted above 300 years after, at
which time they were invented, even in the seventh year of Constantine the
great, and in the year of the common Era of Christ's birth 312. Why should
they therefore be alleged to show the times of Christ's birth? Because (says
Beroaldus) they concerned the Taxes and Tributes of the Empire; and beginning
on the 24 day of September, they show that to be the day of Christ's birth, when
the decree went forth from Augustus that all the World should be taxed. This is
strange, and more absurd still then before: For if the issuing forth of Cesars
Decree and our Savious birth were on one and the same day, then must the Decree
fly above a thousand miles in one day; as far as from Rome to Nazareth: And
after that (in the same day still, Mary must travel with Joseph about 95
miles, before she be delivered; even as far as from Nazareth to Bethlehem. By
which cluster of absurdities all men may see that Beroaldus might have been
better advised then to use this as an argument to prove Christ's birth to be on
the 24 day of September.

As weak also is that objection concerning the Shepherds keeping watch over
their Flocks by night, Luke 2.8. For the temperature of the Land of Canaan in
the dead of Winter, is nothing like the Winter in our cold Northern Countries,
but warm enough for their Cattle to lie abroad, and consequently for the
Shepherds to keep watch over their Floks by night. For there, in that
Country, they began their Harvest at Easter in the Month of Abib or Nisan,
Levit. 23.5.6.10. compared with Deuteronomy. 16.1.9.10. see also Josephus and Chemnit.
Har. Evang. Prolegom. c. 3.
as may be proved out of the Scriptures: offering a sheafe of the first fruits
thereof yearly on the second day after the Passover. This also Josephus
shows in the third book of his Antiquities at the tenth Chapter: and
Chemnitius, in the Prologomena to his Harmony, Chapter the third. Their Winter
therefore must needs be far warmer then Winter is with us: which even the
situation of their Country, both in respect of the Longitude and the Latitude
that it has, declares. As for Longitude, it is placed betwixt the degree 64,
32 minutes, and the degree 69, and ten minutes: And as for the Latitude or
Elevation, it is found to extend it self from the degree 30, and 52 minutes,
unto the degree 33, and 44 minutes. So that all things considered, their Sheep
were not only abroad in Winter when Christ was born, but might also have young
Lambs, for the safety whereof the Shepherds were watching over their Flocks by
night. For even we our selves, in our cold Countries, have seen young Lambs in
December, as cannot be denied.

I conclude therefore, that there is no just cause (for any thing that can be
alleged against it) why we should depart from the ancient and received opinion
of Christ's birth on the 25 day of December.

And now see a Calender for that year in which John the Baptist was conceived.

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the fortieth Julian Year, in which the
Baptist was conceived; wherein the Courses of the Priests are set down in their
places, and found to be so by accounting them back from the time of the
destruction of the second Temple by the Romans; the Cycle of the Sun in this
year being four, and the Cycle of the Moon 15.
January Da. of the we The bet the X. Month. The fortieth Julian Year.
February D. of the week Shebet the XI. Month. The fortieth Julian Year. 1 A 6
11 1 D 2 12 2 B 7 12 Hezir, the 17th course 2 E 3 13 3 C 1 13 3 F 4 14 4 D 2 14
4 G 5 15 5 E 3 15 5 A 6 16 6 F 4 16 6 B 7 17 Gamul, the 22th course 7 G 5 17 7
C 1 18 8 A 6 18 8 D 2 19 9 B 7 19 Aphses, the 18. course 9 E 3 20 10 C 1 20 10
F 4 21 11 D 2 21 11 G 5 22 12 E 3 22 12 A 6 23 13 F 4 23 13 B 7 24 Delaiah, the
23th course. 14 G 5 24 14 C 1 25 15 A 6 25 15 D 2 26 16 B 7 26 Pethabiah, the
19th course. 16 E 3 27 17 C 1 27 17 F 4 28 18 D 2 28 18 G 5 29 19 E 3 29 19 A 6
1 Adbar the XII. Month. 20 F 4 30 20 B 7 2 Maaziah, the 24th course 21 G 5 1
Shebet the XI. Month. 21 C 1 3 22 A 6 2 22 D 2 4 23 B 7 3 23 E 3 5 24 C 1 4 24
F 4 6 25 D 2 5 25 G 5 7 26 E 3 6 26 A 6 8 27 F 4 7 27 B 7 9 Iearib, the first.
course. 28 G 5 8 28 C 1 10 29 A 6 9 30 B 7 10 Iachin, the 21. course 31 C 1 11

An Hebrew and Julian Calendar for the fortieth Julian Year, in which the
Baptist was conceived; wherein the courses of the Priests are set down in their
places, and found to be so, by accounting them back from the time of the
destruction of the second Temple by the Romans.
March. D. of the week Adar. the XII. Month. The fortieth Julian Year. April.
D. of the week Nifan the first Month. The fortieth Julian Year. 1 D 2 11 1 G 5
12 2 E 3 12 2 A 6 13 3 F 4 13 3 B 7 14 Mijamin the sixth course. 4 G 5 14 4 C 1
15 Pascha or Easter. 5 A 6 15 5 D 2 16 6 B 7 16 Iedaiah, the second course. 6 E
3 17 7 C 1 17 7 F 4 18 8 D 2 18 8 G 5 19 9 E 3 19 9 A 6 20 10 F 4 20 10 B 7 21
Hakkoz the seventh course. 11 G 5 21 11 C 1 22 12 A 6 22 12 D 2 23 13 B 7 23
Harim, the third course. 13 E 3 24 14 C 1 24 14 F 4 25 15 D 2 25 15 G 5 26 16 E
3 26 16 A 6 27 17 F 4 27 17 B 7 28 Abijah the eighth course 18 G 5 28 18 C 1 29
19 A 6 29 19 D 2 1 (...) the second Month. 20 B 7 30 Seorim, the fourth
course. 20 E 3 2 21 C 1 1 Nifan the first Month. 21 F 4 3 22 D 2 2 22 G 5 4 23
E 3 3 23 A 6 5 24 F 4 4 24 B 7 6 Jeshua the 9th course 25 G 5 5 25 C 1 7 26 A 6
6 26 D 2 8 27 B 7 7 Malchijah, the fifth course. 27 E 3 9 28 C 1 8 28 F 4 10 29
D 2 9 29 G 5 11 30 E 3 10 30 A 6 12 31 F 4 11

An Hebrew and Julian Calendar for the fortieth Julian Year, in which the
Baptist was conceived; wherein the courses of the Priests are set down in their
places, and found to be so by accounting them back from the time of the
Destruction of the second Temply by the Romans.
May. D. of the week (...) the second Month. The fortieth Julian Year. June.
Week Dayet. Sivan the third Month. The fortieth Julian Year. 1 B 7 13 1 E 3 14
2 C 1 14 2 F 4 15 3 D 2 15 3 G 5 16 4 E 3 16 4 A 6 17 5 F 4 17 5 B 7 18 Bilgah,
the fifteenth course. 6 G 5 18 6 C 1 19 7 A 6 19 7 D 2 20 8 B 7 20 8 E 3 21 9 C
1 21 9 F 4 22 10 D 2 22 10 G 5 23 11 E 3 23 11 A 6 24 12 F 4 24 12 B 7 25
Immer, the sixteenth course. 13 G 5 25 13 C 1 26 14 A 6 26 14 D 2 27 15 B 7 27
15 E 3 28 16 C 1 28 16 F 4 29 17 D 2 29 17 G 5 1 Tamnuz the fourth Month. 18 E
3 30 18 A 6 2 19 F 4 1 Sivan the third Month. 19 B 7 3 Hezir, the seventeenth
course 20 G 5 2 20 C 1 4 21 A 6 3 21 D 2 5 22 B 7 4 Huppah, the thirteenth
course, and Feast of Pentecost. 22 E 3 6 23 C 1 5 23 F 4 7 24 D 2 6 24 G 5 8 25
E 3 7 25 A 6 9 26 F 4 8 26 B 7 10 Aphses, the eighteenth course. 27 G 5 9 27 C
1 11 28 A 6 10 28 D 2 12 29 B 7 11 Jeshabeab, the four-teenth course. 29 E 3 13
30 C 1 12 30 F 4 14 31 D 2 13

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the fortieth Julian Year, in which the
Baptist was conceived; wherein the Courses of the Priests are set down in their
places, and found to be so by accounting them back from the time of the
destruction of the second Temple by the Romans; the Cycle of the Sun in this
year being four, and the Cycle of the Moon 15.
July. Da. Of the we. Tammuz the IV. Month. The fortieth Julian Year. August.
D. of the week Ab the V. Month. The fortieth Julian Year. 1 G 5 15 1 C 1 16 2
A 6 16 2 D 2 17 3 B 7 17 Pethahiab, the 19th course. 3 E 3 18 4 C 1 18 4 F 4 19
5 D 2 19 5 G 5 20 6 E 3 20 6 A 6 21 7 F 4 21 7 B 7 22 Maaziah, the 24th course.
8 G 5 22 8 C 1 23 9 A 6 23 Jehezekel, the 20th course. 9 D 2 24 10 B 7 24 10 E
3 25 11 C 1 25 11 F 4 26 12 D 2 26 12 G 5 27 13 E 3 27 13 A 6 28 14 F 4 28 14 B
7 29 Ioarib, the first course. 15 G 5 29 Jachin, the 21th course. 15 C 1 1 Elul
the VI. Month. 16 A 6 30 16 D 2 2 17 B 7 1 Ab the fifth Month. 17 E 3 3 18 C
1 2 18 F 4 4 19 D 2 3 19 G 5 5 20 E 3 4 20 A 6 6 21 F 4 5 21 B 7 7 Iedaiah, the
second course. 22 G 5 6 22 C 1 8 23 A 6 7 Gamul, the 22th course. 23 D 2 9 24 B
7 8 24 E 3 10 25 C 1 9 25 F 4 11 26 D 2 10 26 G 5 12 27 E 3 11 27 A 6 13 28 F 4
12 28 B 7 14 Harim, the third course. 29 G 5 13 29 C 1 15 30 A 6 14 Delaiah,
the 23th course. 30 D 2 16 31 B 7 15 31 E 3 17

In Hebrew and Julian Calendar for the fortieth Julian Year, in which the
Baptist was conceived; wherein the courses of the Priests are set down in their
places, and found to be so, by accounting them back from the time of the
destruction of the second Temple by the Romans.
September. D. of the week ^ ^ul the V Month. The fortieth Julian Year. October.
D. of the week Tisri the 7th Month. The fortieth Julian Year. 1 F 4 18 1 A 6
18 Abijah, or Abia, the eighth course 2 G 5 19 2 B 7 19 3 A 6 20 3 C 1 20 In
this Course Zacharias had the tidings of the Birth of John the Baptist, and
probobly on the first day thereof, Luke 1.1. which was just nine months before
he was born, and seven days before Elizabeth conceived him. 4 B 7 21 Seorim,
the foruth course. 4 D 2 21 5 C 1 22 5 E 3 22 6 D 2 23 6 F 4 23 7 E 3 24 7 G 5
24 8 F 4 25 8 A 6 25 9 G 5 26 9 B 7 26 Jeshua the 9th course 10 A 6 27 10 C 1
27 In the night foregoing this day, the Baptist was conceived, and born 258
days after, viz. on the 2^. Of June, which in the 1 Julian year was the 20.
day of the fourth month, Jeria septima. 11 B 7 28 Malchijah, the fifth course.
11 D 2 28 12 C 1 29 12 E 3 29 13 D 2 30 13 F 4 1 M^^^h^s^an the eighth Month.
14 E 3 1 Tisri the seventh Month. The feast of Trum pets. 14 G 5 2 15 F 4 2 15
A 6 3 16 G 5 3 16 B 7 4 Shechaniah, the 10. course. 17 A 6 4 Mijamin the sixth
course. 17 C 1 5 18 B 7 5 18 D 2 6 19 C 1 6 19 E 3 7 20 D 2 7 20 F 4 8 21 E 3 8
21 G 5 9 22 F 4 9 22 A 6 10 23 G 5 10 The day of Expia^on. 23 B 7 11 Eliashib,
the 11th course. 24 A 6 11 24 C 1 12 25 B 7 12 Hakkoz the seventh course. 25 D
2 13 26 C 1 13 26 E 3 14 27 D 2 14 The first day of the Feast of Tabernacles;
before the end of which Feast was Zacharias his Lot. 27 F 4 15 28 E 3 15 28 G 5
16 29 F 4 16 29 A 6 17 30 G 5 17 30 B 7 18 Jakim the twelfth course. 31 C 1 19

An Hebrew and Julian Calendar for the fortieth Julian Year, in which the
Baptist was conceived; wherein the courses of the Priests are set down in their
places, and f^und to be so by accounting them back from the time of the
Destruction of the second Temple by the Romans.
November. D. of the week Marches^an the eighth Month. The fortieth Julian Year.
December. Week Days. Chasseu the ix. Month. The fortieth Julian Year. 1 D 2 20
1 F 4 20 2 E 3 21 2 G 5 21 3 F 4 22 3 A 6 22 4 G 5 23 4 B 7 23 Hezir, the
seventeenth course. 5 A 6 24 5 C 1 24 6 B 7 25 Huppah, the thirteenth course. 6
D 2 25 The Feast of Dedication instituted by Judas Maccabeus 159 years before
this time, and was then in that year when it was appointed on the 22 of
December. 7 C 1 26 7 E 3 26 8 D 2 27 8 F 4 27 9 E 3 28 9 G 5 28 10 F 4 29 10 A
6 29 11 G 5 30 11 B 7 1 Thebeth the tenth Month. Aphses, the eighteenth
course. 12 A 6 1 C^ the ninth Month. 12 C 1 2 13 B 7 2 Jeshabeab, the
fourteenth course. 13 D 2 3 14 C 1 3 14 E 3 4 15 D 2 4 15 F 4 5 16 E 3 5 16 G 5
6 17 F 4 6 17 A 6 7 18 G 5 7 18 B 7 8 Pethaniah the 19th course. 19 A 6 8 19 C
1 9 20 B 7 9 Bilgah, the fifteenth course. 20 D 2 10 21 C 1 10 21 E 3 11 22 D 2
11 22 F 4 12 23 E 3 12 23 G 5 13 24 F 4 13 24 A 6 14 25 G 5 14 25 B 7 15
Jebezekel the 20th course. 26 A 6 15 26 C 1 16 27 B 7 16 Immer, the sixteenth
course. 27 D 2 17 28 C 1 17 28 E 3 18 29 D 2 18 29 F 4 19 30 E 3 19 30 G 5 20
31 A 6 21

CHAP. XXI. Of the reign of Tiberius, and of the beginning and end of Pontius
Pilate his Government. As also of the year and day of our Saviors Passion.
TAcitus, in the 15 Book of the tenth Chapter of his Annals, speaking of the
Christians, says: The Author of that name was Christ, who in Tiberius reign
was put to death under Pontius Pilate Procuratour of Iudaea. But in what year
of Tiberius or Pontius Pilate, he does not show.

Some I find who would have the beginning of Tiberius be before the death of
Augustus; and so would have then two Emperors to reign at once: for which
they chiefly build upon the testimony of Velleius, who says that before
Augustus dyed Tiberius was equalled with him in command. But to begin the
reign of Tiberius upon this mistaken ground, is to unjoynt the settled times,
and make old Authors speak that which they never meant. For (as Petavius well
observes) the Proconsular dignity was given without the Empire: and never were
two men Emperors together till Aurelius Antonius his time. And therefore
though Tiberius was equalled in command with Augustus, some time before
Augustus dyed, yet it was but in some things; which dignity was bestowed upon
him not as Emperor, but as he was a gallant General over the Army, and like
to be the next succeeding Emperor. This, even Velleius shows, who accounts
but 16 years from the beginning of Tiberius as Emperor, to the Consulship of
M. Vinitius and C. Cassius: the seventeenth year therefore of his reign began
in the time of their Consulship, which was in the 75 Julian year. Tacitus
declaring moreover, not only how loath Tiberius was (which also Velleius
shows) to take the Empire upon him when Augustus was dead; but also how
fearful his Mother Livia was, lest any other should get into the Empire before
him. This again may be seen in Tacitus, by the tenth year of Tiberius, for
when Tiberius had reigned nine years, then was C. Asinius and C. Antistius the
Consuls; viz. in the 68 Julian year. The beginning therefore of Tiberius is
certain, and may not be set either here or there, as men upon false
persuasions shall be pleased; but must be accounted from the death of Augustus,
and no sooner. For though it were usual among the Kings of Persia to have
their years accounted from such time as they began to be Copartners with their
Fathers in the Empire; as Ciesias, compared with other Authors, makes
manifest; and as was also among the Kings of Judah and Israel: yet that it was
so among the Romans, or that two were Emperors together till Aurelius Antonius
his time, we do not find. Now Augustus we know dyed (as Velleius, Dion, and
all others testify) when Sextus Pompeius, and Sextus Appuleius were Consuls,
on the nineteenth day of August, in the 59 Julian year, and year of the Julian
Period 47 27: there therefore we must begin the first year of Tiberius who
reigned 22 years, seven months, and seven days; and dyed when Cn. Proculus
and Pontius Nigrinus were Consuls, on the 26 day of March, in the 82 Julian
year, and year of the Julian Period 4750. By which it appears that the
Passion of Christ must necessarily be in some year after the 74 Julian year,
and before the 82.

By Orosius his account it must be in the 75 Julian year. For Sejanus perished
in the 76 Julian year, as cannot be denied: and according to Orosius Christ
must suffer before the fall of Sejanus. For, in his seventh Book and fourth
Chapter, we read, That when Tiberius had heard what Pilate related to him of
the Death and Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ, and that thereupon
Tiberius would that the Senate should Canonize Christ for a God, the Senate
would not but stood against it, and so (says he) did Sejanus, who showed
himself a great enemy to the Christian profession: whereupon it came to pass
that an Edict was made for the rooting of all Christians out of the City. Thus
says Orosius: and therefore by him, Christ must suffer not one jot later then
the 75 Julian year, in the year of the Julian Perion 4743, when M. Vinitius and
C. Cassius were Consuls: in whose Consulship, Epiphanius also sets Christ's
Passion. But this is false, as appears not only by the several Passeovers
mentioned by Saint John after Christ's Baptism, to the day of his death, but
also by the silence of other Authors. And therefore the testimonies of Orosius
concerning Sejanus cannot stand good, for being a matter of story, he must have
it from them who wrote before him, but that he has not. For Tertullian makes
no mention of it, nor Eusebius: and yet they speak how Tiberius would have had
Christ Canonized for a God by the Senate, when Pilate had related to him the
Passion and Resurrection of Christ. I find indeed that Sejanus (like another
Haman) did earnestly endeavor and desire it of the Emperor, that the whole
Nation of the Jews might be rooted out; as Eusebius relates out of Philo the
Jew: And from hence sure it was that Orosius mistook himself, and applied that
to the Christians after Christ's Passion, which was pertinent to the Jews before
Christ's Passion.

Tertullian says, Christ was baptized in the twelfth year of Tiberius, and
crucified in the fifteenth when the two Gemini were Consuls: this was in the
74th Julian year. Epiphanius makes Christ about 29 years old when he was
baptized, and names Iunius Silanus and Silius Nerva to be Consuls then; which
was one year sooner then the Consulships of the Gemini: which two Gemini,
albeit they were Consuls but in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, are said not
only by Teriullian, but by Julius Africanus, Lactantius, Saint Austine,
Sulpitius, Cedrenus and others, to be Consuls when Christ was crucified. This I
believe they took up from what Clemens of Alexandria held before them: for it
was the opinion of Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. 1. that Christ lived fifteen
years under Augustus, and as many under Tiberius; in all 30: In the last
whereof he preached and suffered. For which opinion he had none before him that
he followed but the Gnostickes, and no other then a mistaken ground to uphold
it. His ground was in Esaias, chap. 61.2. Concerning the Acceptable year of the
Lord which Christ was to preach. Which I say was a mistaken ground: For though
it be true that Christ indeed proclaimed that year in the sense that the
Prophet meant it, and in the first year after his Baptism when he preached at
Nazareth showed that it was come, as we read in Luke 4.19. Yet that he
therefore preached but one year, is such an extreme mistake, that it is a
wonder any who had read the Gospels, should not see to avoid it. Origin erred
much after the same manner: for lib. 4. (...), cap. 1. thus he says; Anno and
aliquot mensibus, docuit. He taught one year and some odd months: which is
also false; for it is certain that the Baptist began not to preach and
baptize, until the fifteenth year of Tiberius, Luke 3.1. and that Christ was
presently put to death after John began, is very justly denied. For he must
increase, says John, but I must decrease, John 3.30. Which words John spoke
after there had been one Passover since the Baptism of Christ, John 2.23.
Beside which, the same Evangelist expressly names two more; the last whereof
was that in which Christ suffered, as may be seen in John 6.4. and chap. 13.1.
But of the Passeovers more shall be spoken by and by.

Among late Writers the greatest part go along with Eusebius, who makes
choice of the eighteenth year of Tiberius for the year of Christ's Passion.
Scaliger (more rightly) is for the nineteenth year, and year of the Julian
Period 4746. Petavius says Christ was baptized in the year of the Julian
Period 4742, and crucified in the year of the same Period 4744, even in the
third Passover after his Baptism: for he was baptized on the sixth day of
January, as Epiphanius says. And as for the day of his Passion, he refers
it to the 23 day of March: therein following Irenaeus, lib. 2. cap. 38.
Apollinaris of Laodicea apud Hieron, in 9. Dan. Origin, cap. 2. cont. Cells.
Epiphanius, Haeres. 51. Which also a Council held at Caesaria, Anno Dom. 197,
under Victor Bishop of Rome declares. The 23 day of March was indeed in that
year which Petavius mentions on the sixth day of the Week, but the Passover
was not until three or four days after: and therefore how could Christ suffer
on the 23 day of March in the year of the Julian Pe. 4744.

Scaliger is for the third of April: and Paulus Forosemproniensis for the
thirtieth of March, in the six and thirtieth year of Christ, according to the
common account, even whilst the 22 year of Tiberius was still running on,
which was in the 81 Julian year, and year of the Julian Period 4749, when Q.
Plautius and Sextus Papinius were Consuls. This last is taken up by Master
Lydyat, and mainely defended by him: but all in vain.

For not only was Christ crucified whilst Tiberius was alive, but also whilst
Pontius Pilate was in office. Now Pontius Pilate was certainly out of office
before the Easter of the eighty first Julian year, and therefore that could not
be the year of Christ's Passion. For as Tacitus shows, Vitellius came into
Syria toward the end of the viz. when C. Cestius and M Servilius were Consuls,
Taci. lib. 6.
eightieth Julian year: before whom Pilate was accused, and was sent to Rome to
defend his cause before the Easter of that year in which Vitellius was at
Jerusalem; as appears out of Josephus, in the eighteenth book of his
Antiquities, at the fifth and sixth Chapters. Before which time of his being
sent away, he had been President of Iudaea ten whole years, and did succeed in
that office Valerius Gratus whom Tiberius soon after the beginning of his
Empire, at the death of Augustus, sent to rule and govern that Province, which
he did for the space of eleven years; as Josephus again declares. Take then
eleven of Gratus, and ten of Pilate, and add them each to other, so we have 21
years. Which one and twenty being added to the 59 Julian year, in the latter
part whereof Tiberius began, will make it appear that Pilate departed from his
Province in the end of the eightieth Julian year; or however, before the Easter
of the eighty first. For Vitellius, after he had commanded Pilate to go away
to Rome, and had set Marcellus over his Province, came to the solemn feast of
the This was in the 81. Jul an year, when Quint. Plauii. and Sex. Papinius
were Consuls.
Passover at Jerusalem, and gave leave to the chief Priests to keep the holy
Robe, as Josephus also shows. After which time he received letters from
Tiberius of making peace with Artabanus: which he did, and wrote thereof to
Tiberius. But Herod the Tetrarch prevented his intelligence, and had wrote of
all to the Emperor before him: Whereupon Tiberius wrote back again to
Vitellius that he knew all the whole business already, having had notice
thereof by the Letters of Herod. Now these things being thus certified each to
other after Easter, could not be done in the eighty second Julian year: for
before the Easter of that year Tiberius died. And if not in the eighty second
Julian year, then must they necessarily be done in the year before; viz. in the
81. And if in the eighty first, then could not that be the year of Christ's
passion: for at the Easter time of that year when our Savior suffered, Pilate
was in full power; which made him therefore say, Know thou not that I have
Power to Crucify thee, and have Power to release thee? Ioh. 19.10. This he
spoke in the seventy eight Julian year, about two years before he departed his
Province, as will easily appear to him who computeth the times aright, and as I
shall after show more fully and clearly to every eye.

For by the Passovers already mentioned out of the Gospel of Saint John, it is
most plainly manifest that the first year wherein we can but think of
searching for our Saviors Passion, must be the 76 Julian year: for the three
Passovers in Saint John, after the fifteenth year of Tiberius when Christ was
baptized, will certainly reach thither. That year therefore is the first year
wherein we must search: and if upon the search we can find that the fifteenth
day of Nisan falls on the sixth day of the week, then may that be the year
of his Passion, and the Passovers after his Baptism till his death be no more
then three. But upon the search, the fifteenth day of Nisan in that year is
found to be on the third day of the week: that therefore could not be the
year, nor those the just number of the Passovers. For though Saint John has
clearly and expressly mentioned but three, yet for all that we are not tied from
searching after more. For as it is certain that all things which Jesus did are
not written: so also it is as certain that all things which are written of him
in the Gospels, are not recorded by one Evangelist.

And again why I name the fifteenth day of Nisan (when the Passover was kept)
to be on the sixth day of the week at Christ's Passion, is because he arose
from the dead on the first day of the week, and on the third day after his
death. That it was on the first day of the Week, is manifest by all the four
Evagnelists, chiefly by St Mark, in his 16th. Chap. at the ninth verse. And
that it was likewise on the third day after his Passion, is as manifest by a
whole multitude of Scriptures. As for example, in Matthew 16.21. from that time
forth began Jesus to show unto his Disciples, how that he must go into
Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders and chief Priests, and Scribes,
and be killed, and be raised again the third day. And in the next Chapter at
the 23. verse, they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised
again. And in the 20 Chapter at the nineteenth verse, They shall deliver him
to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to curcifie him, and the third
day he shall rise again. And in Mark 9.31. he taught his Disciples, and said
unto them. The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall
kill him, and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day. And in the
next Chapter, at the 34 verse: They shall mock him, and shall scourge him, and
shall spit upon him, and shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise
again. And in Luke 9.22. The Son of man must suffer many things, and be
rejected of the Elders, and chief Priests, and Scribes, and be slain, and be
raised the third day. And in the eighteenth Chapter at the 33. verse. They
shall scourge him and put him to death, and the third day he shall rise again.
And in the four and twentieth Chapter, at the seventeenth verse, The Son of Man
must be delivered into the hands of Sinful men, and be crucified, and the
third day rise again. And in Act. 10.40. Him God raised up the third day, and
showed him openly. And in 1. Cor. 15.4. That he was buried, and that he rose
again the third day according to the Scriptures.

In which last Testimony note I pray you, not only what the Apostle
maintains, but how; namely; That the rising of Christ from the dead on the
third day, is according to the Scriptures. If there be any text of Scripture
which at the first fight may seem to say, Christ rose not till after the third
day, it is to admit of an interpretation, that thereby it may be like the other
Scriptures. As for example, in Mark 8.31. the phrase is, (...), post tres
dies, after three days, as it is usually translated. Where the word (...),
Mat. 16.26. Mar. 14.22. Luke 22.20.
is not to be taken for post, after: but for intra, within. As it should be
said, They shall put him to death, and within three days he shall rise again.
Now this appears by Deuteronomy. 14.28. compared with Deuteronomy 26.12. A like phrase is
in Luke 2.46. as the context declares. That also which Matthew and Mark do
say concerning the institution of the holy Supper, that it was (...), Luke
says was (...), which we must not translate, After Supper; but inter
coenandum, whilst they were at Supper. 'The Pharisees also who told Pilat what
Christ would do after his three days, understood the Phrase but of the third
day: for no longer did they desire that the Sepulcher should be watched, Mat.
27.63. And indeed Christ had said the same before in words plain enough: for
says he, Destroy this Temple, and within three days I will raise it up, John
2.19. This is that time to which the Prophet pointed, when he said; After two
days he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall
live in his sight, Hos. 6.2. Upon which words one observes this; vivificat nos
post duos dies, and tertio die eriget, ut vivamus coram ipso: quia in Christo
and cum Christo pater caelestis nos nipote membra Christi ex mortuis
suscitavit, Ephesians. 2.5.6. By which we see that the Resurrection is certainly
bounded within the compass of three days, and not to be expected afterward.

The only place remaining to be objected against it, is in Mat. 12.40. where
our Savior says; As Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales
belly, so must the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of
the earth. Which words are also to be interpreted; they agree not else to the
other Scriptures.

Know therefore that by three days and three nights, we are to understand
three natural days, accounted from Evening to Evening; as the Jews use to
reckon; in which respect the day and the night are confounded, and both of them
made but one. By the three days then and the three nights, we are (I say) to
understand three such days, in the last where of Christ arose: for by a
Senecdoche we reckon that done after three days, which is done but after the
third day is begun. The first of these three days was the sixth day of the
Week, and the fifteenth day of Nisan, and was from one Sunsetting to another.
For before the fifteenth day of Nisan was quite out, Christ was crucified dead
and buried. The second day began at the Sunsetting next after, during which
time was the Sabbath.

The third and last began at the end of the former, and was the first day of
the week: in the morning whereof very early Christ arose; And all this
according to the Scriptures.

But I go on, and am to search next into the 77 Julian year; at the Easter
whereof must be a fourth Passover since Christ's Baptism: which if it be found
to fall on the Sixth day of the week, may be the year of his Passion. But I
find it otherwise: for in the 77 Julian year the fifteenth of Nisan was on the
first or second day of the week, and not on the Sixth day. This therefore
could not be the year of Christ's Passion, no more then the former.

The year next after this was the 78. Julian year, and year of the Julian
Period 4746. which will be found to be the very year we seek after. For in
this year the fifteenth of Nisan was for certain on the Sixth day of the week,
being the third day of April and day of the fifth Passover which is mentioned
by all the four Evangelists, not one of them omitting it. The year that
follows, affords no such Character: no, nor the year next after that. This
therefore must needs be the year of Christ's death; which being in this year, was
on the third day of April: the Cycle of the Sun was 14, the Dominicall letter
D. and the Cycle of the Moon 15. It was the nineteenth year of Tiberius, the
fourth year of the 202. Olympiad, the 33 year of Christ according to the
common account: but according to the true time of his birth, the seven and
thirtieth; and year of the World 4037.

And thus we have no fewer then five Passovers from the time that Christ was
baptized, to the time that he suffered: which though they be not all of them
mentioned by one Evangelist; yet out of them all they may be gathered.

Between the first and second of these Passovers, it was that John the Baptist
was cast into prison: and then was the full beginning of Christ's Ministry. For
now was the course of his forerunner accomplished, and therefore now must
Christ be only looked upon as the Messiah; here being the first beginning of
the last week of the Seventy: from whence our Savior preached three years and
an half, before he suffered. For though there were some Testimonies and
manifestations of Christ before, yet was not the time of the Messiah fully come
till now, Mark 1.14.15. And thus much for the year and day of Christ's Passion.
Only a Question or two would be resolved: of which in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XXII. Of killing the Paschal Lambs, and whether at Christ's death the
Jews and our Savior kept the Passover upon one and the same day.
IT is recorded by Maymonides, that no Pascha might be kept but of those Lambs
which were killed by the Priests in the Temple.

But that was not so: as appears by the Testimony of Philo Judaeus, who
expressly writes, Philo in vita Mosis, et in Libro de Decalogo.
that in the Paschal festivity all the Jews exercised the Priests office, in
regard that every one at his own home might Sacrifice the Lamb. Thus he; a man
who had seen the observation of many a Passover, which Maymonides never did.
For Philo Judaeus lived in Christ's time; but Maymonides was not till a long
time after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. Master Broughton
therefore and Ainsworth followed Rambam or Maymonides too confidently in this
particular: as also in that of the Chagigah, which they say was a voluntary
sacrifice, and not of command: for it was commanded, we as may see Deuteronomy. 16.2.
There might indeed no Paschal Lamb be s^^in, but at Jerusalem; and tha's the
reason why the Jews now observe no Passover: and in the Temple were some Lambs
likewise slain by the Priests, but it was for them who came out of the Country
to keep the Feast. For the Inhabitants of the City were at their own choice,
and might take a Lamb and kill it at their own houses; how else could they
exercise the Priests office in this Sacrifice of the Lamb, which Philo Judaeus
says they did?

They who say our Savior (in the year when he suffered) kept not the Passover
on the same day with the Jews, ground their tenet upon these texts. First upon
that of Saint John, Chapt. 19. verse. 14. where the day on the which Christ was
put to death is expressly called The preparation of the Passover. And in the
Chapter before, at the 28 verse, The Iowes themselves went not into the
Judgment Hall, lest they should be defiled: but that they might eat the
Passover. And in Matthew 27.62. the day after Christ's death and burial, is
called the day that was next after the preparation. And in Ioh. 19.31. The Jews
because it was the Preparation, that the bodies should not remain on the
Cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was an high day) besought Pilate that
their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away. Which texts
seem to prove that for which they are cited.

Notwithstanding all which, some there be who upon good grounds maintain the
contrary, and are very confident that the Jews and Christ kept one and the
same day: And for proof thereof they allege these places. First, Mat. 2.6.2.
You know (says Christ to his Disciples) that after two days is the Passover:
and the Son of Man is given up to be crucified. The Evangelists do here call
the 14 of Nisan the day of unleavened bread, because on that day as soon as
dinner was over the people cast all leaven out of their houses.
Which speech imports a general agreement for the Passover. And so much
says Saint Mark chap. 14. verse. 12. On the first day of the * unleavened
Bread, when they sacrificed the Passover, two of his Disciples said: where will thou that we go and prepare that thou may eat the Passover. And in Luke
22.7.8. Then came the day of unleavened Bread, when the Passover must be
killed. And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the Passover that
we may eat. In which texts by the words [when they sacrificed the Passover, and
when the Passover must be killed] is also showed that three was a general
agreement for the time of the Passover, which must be done before the Lamb was
slain: at the eating whereof they first of all began to eat unleavened bread,
and so continued for the space of 7 days, Exodus 12.8.15. and Deuteronomy. 16.4.
and that our Lord and all the Jews kept one and the same day for the killing
and eating the Lamb.

And therefore to that in John 18.28. they answer, that there is meant not the
eating of the Paschal Lamb, but the Ox, or the flesh of the Chagigah Passover,
which was added to the former, and commanded in Deuteronomy. 16.2. where it is written
thou shall sacrifice a Pascha unto the Lord, of the Flock, and of the Herd.
The practice whereof was notably seen in that solemn Passover which Josiah
kept, 2 Chronicles. 35.7. The eating of this was for two days and one night, as
says Maymonides. Or else in the text objected is to be understood the eating
of the Loafes of Sweetbread, which was to be observed for an whole week
together. For as one observes upon Luke 22.7. the word Pascha, used for the
Passover, is taken many ways: As first, for the Paschal Lamb, Mark 14.12.
Secondly, for the whole week of Sweetbread, or of the Paschal solemnity which
lasted seven days, Act. 12.3.4. Thirdly for the Paschal solemnity of the sixth
day. Fourthly, for the hour of immolation and eating of the Paschal Lamb, Mark
14.1. Fifthly, for whatsoever meat or bread belonging to the Feast, the Jews
eat during the solemnity thereof, John 18.28. where the story tells us, They
would not go into the Judgment Hall, lest they should be defiled; but that
they might eat the Passover: that is says he Azimos Panes, The unleavened
Bread belonging to the Passover. Sixthly, for that which was figured by the
Passover, to wit, Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7. And Sevnthly, for the Festivity of the
Paschal cheer, 2 Chronicles. 35.7.18. If therefore the word Pascha might be taken
these many ways, there is no necessity to tie us absolutely to conclude, that
in John 18.28. the Jews meant what they said of eating the Passover, to be
understood of the Lamb rather then of any other thing eaten by them at that
Feast.

But how will that place in Job. 19.14. be answered; where the day of Christ's
death is called the Preparation of the Passover? It is called there the
Preparation of the Passover; not in regard of the Passover, but in regard of
the Sabbath in the Passover, as Master Perkns observes. In Mark therefore,
chap. 15. verse 42. it is called the Preparation (not of the Passover, but the
preparation) which went before the Sabbath. And in Luke 23.54. It was the
Preparation (says the Evangelist) and the Sabbath drew on. Which Sabbath was
an high day, because of the Chagigah Passover which was then to be eaten, ae
well as on the day before. Or else thus: The forenoon of the day of Christ's
death was the Preparation to the eating of the Passover Bullock; and in the
afternoon was the Preparation of the Sabbath. And thus is this Text answered.

From it also appears, that the translation of days which Scaliger speaks
of, was not in use so soon as these times. For though the late Jews tell us
that the constitutions thereunto belonging, were set forth by Eleazar in the
beginning of the second Temple, and that they have a book treating of the
motion of the Sun and the Moon, said to be written by Rabbi Gamaliel, in which
this translation of days is confirmed: although I say they tell us these
things, yet will the whole be found inventions of a later age.

For when the Authors of the Mischna and Thalmud lived, the sixteenth day of
Nisan might be on the Sabbath day, as is written Cod. Pesachim, cap. 7. And if
the sixteenth were and might be Sabbath day, then both was and might the
fifteenth be feria sexta: as it was in this year of our Saviors Passion.

Learned Langius has gallantly declared this: howbeit he agrees with those
who say Christ and the Jews kept not one and the same day. And the reason of
their difference he takes to be in regard of two chief Sects among the Jews,
viz. the Karraeans, and the Thalmudists: who though they both began their
Months according to the Phasis or Vision of the Moon, yet in regard of the
manner of their observation they did sometimes differ a day each from other;
insomuch that that which to the Karraeans was the second day of the Month, The
Thalmudists accounted but the first. And so it was (says he) in that year when
Christ suffered. Now Christ following the Karraeans, did therefore eat the
Passover one day sooner then the rest of the Jews who followed the
Thalmudists. But I doubt much of the truth of this opinion, not only because
all the Jews kept one and the same day, as I have already showed; but also
because it makes Christ's Passion (as he accounts the difference, now and in
this year) to be on the Thursday, and fifth day of the week, which is
contrary to the Scriptures, and to all the Creeds of the Christian Church.

I confess him indeed to be a man of full deep learning, much reading, and
great knowledge in the Tongues: but in this I do believe he will have but few
to follow him; especially considering what the Apostle says, in 1 Cor. 15.4.
namely, That Christ rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures:
whereas by his opinion, he must not arise until the fourth day. If then the
third be according to the Scriptures, the fourth is not, but is to be refused
of all them who will be guided by the Scriptures.

CHAP. XXIII. The times of Vespasian and Titus, together with the Destruction
of Jerusalem.
WHen the reigns of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius had well near measured the
length of a year, then was Vespasian advanced to the Empire: in the second
year of whose reign his son Titus destroyed the City and Commonwealth of
the Jews; this destruction falling out to be in the year of the Julian Period
4783. and seventyeth year of Christ according to the Vulgar and common
account. The Ancients (as Egesippus, Clemens of Alexandria, Eusebius, Hierom,
and others) say that it was 40 years after Christ's Passion: and the reason of
that I take to be, because many of the Fathers accounted Christ's Baptism to
be in the twelfth year of Tiherius, and his Passion in the fifteenth; which
was certain an absolute error, as I have already plainly showed. I take it
therefore for granted that this was the year when Jerusalem was destroyed, and
have already proved it so in the seventeenth Chapter.

It was without doubt a dismal overthrow; and sundry were the Signs and tokens
that went before it: of which we read at large in Josephus De bello Judaico,
lib. 7. cap. 12. as also in Eusebius his Eclesiasticall History, lib. 3. cap. 8.

There was a terrible blazing Star or Comet fashioned like a Sword, which for
a years space, in threatening manner hung over the City.

The Moon suffered an Eclipse for twelve nights together. Before the War, in
the Feast of Sweetbread, upon the eighth day of April in the night a clear
light as bright as day was seen in the Temple, abiding the full space of half
an hour. And upon the same Feast, day a Calfe being prepared for the
Sacrifice, brought forth a Lamb in the middle of the Temple. The East Gate of
the inward Temple, being a Gate of Brass, fast locked and barred, opened by
its own accord; this was about the middle of the night and much labor there
was to shut it up again. Some few days after, upon the 21. day of May a
little before Sunsetting, in the Skies were seen Armies of men fighting, and
Horses and Chariots running too and fro. And on the day of Pentecost the
Priests entering into the Temple according to their custom, heard a terrible
voice sounding out these words Let us go hence. But that (says Josephus) which
was more terrible then all these, was the cry of one Josus the son of Anani;
He was a man of the common sort of people, and brought up in the Country, who
in the days of Albinus the Roman Governor of Judea and Jerusalem, at the
Feast of Tabernacles (four years before the beginning of their Wars)
suddenly as he was in the Temple began to cry after this manner; A voice from
the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four Winds, a voice against.
Jerusalem and the Temple, a voice against the Bridegroomes and Brides, and a
voice against the whole multitude of the City. In which manner he continued
crying day and night, up and down the streets, without any hoarsnesse or
weariness, for the space of seven years and five Months, but chiefly on the
Feast days; neither cursing them that hurt him, nor thanking them that
releeved him: and being brought before the Deputy by the Magistrates and Nobles
of the City, they whip this flesh to the very bones, for which he neither wept
nor craved mercy, but at every stroke cried Woe, woe to Jerusalem: and at last
climbing up upon the Walls, when the City was besieged, he adds these words, And
woe also to mine one self; upon the uttering whereof he was presently slain by
the Enemies with a stone cast at him out of an Engine.

These and the like tokens were signs that God gives warning before he
punishes; whereupon says Chrysostom, in his 46 Homily upon Saint Matthew,
God does not punish a Nation or a City so soon as they offend, but suspends
his punishment for many generations; and one while commands, another while
threatens, and sometimes adds a small correction; that by how much the
longer he has expected, by so much his judgments may be the more just, and
their punishment the more deserved. Oh Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
Jerusalem (therefore says our Savior) thou that killest the Prophets and
stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a Hen gathers her chickins under her Wings, but ye
would not: And hereupon it came to pass that that City which seemed as a thing
impregnable, was taken by the Romans on the seventh day of Elul (which in this
year was on the first of September, and seventh day of the week) and on the
day following it was burnt and destroyed and made so ruinous that quickly after
it was wholly demolished and cast down, there not being one stone left upon
another; therein fulfilling the Prophecy of Christ, in Luke 19.43, 44.

And hereupon it is that Dion Nicaeus, in the life of Vespasian, says;
Jerusalem was taken on the Sabbath day: Die Saturni Judaeis sacro.

This was in the CXV. Julian year, the 4783. of the Julian Period, the second
of the 212. Olympiad, the 822. of Rome, the 818. of Nabonassar, the 74. year
of Christ according to the true (not common) account, and year of the World
4074. It was also fince the Israelites came out of Egypt 1559. years complete;
and since the two Tribes and an half entered on their possessions, 1520.

That which follows, and with which I intend to conclude, is a Table of some
remarkable passages: and after that a Calendar for the year of this dismal
desolation; even for the year when Tiues took this gallant City. To which
Calendar I shall add the Courses of the Priests out of the Seder Olam,
according as their lot had cast them for their service in the Temple. All which
will add great light to some former passages, as the ingenious Reader cannot
but grant.

Years of the Jullan Period. Years of the world Olympriads. Romes Years. Flests
and Jubiker. Julian Years Emperors. The double reigh of Herod Agiuon. The
TABLE. Consuls. Things memorable. 4674 3965 1 185 713 5 6 5 1 Years of the
Actium Fighe. Domit. Calvinm, Asaniut Pollio Herod made K. by the Romans, and
reigned 87. years. 4675 3966 2 714 6 7 6 2 Martius and Calvisius Sabinus. 4676
3967 3 715 7 6 8 7 3 Ap. Claudius and C. Nobanus. A year of Rest begins. 4677
3968 4 716 1 9 8 4 1 M. Agrippa, and L. Canidius. 4678 3969 1 186 717 2 10 9 5
2 L. Gellius, and M. Cocceius. Herod takes Jerusalem this Year, before the year
of Rest is ended; and therefore not so late as the 10 day of the Teventh
month. From hence he reigned 34. years. 4679 3970 2 718 3 11 10 6 3 L.
Cornificius, and Sex. Pompeius 4680 3971 3 719 4 12 11 7 4 Libo and Sempronius.
4681 3972 4 720 5 13 12 8 5 Aug. Ces. 2. and L. Volat. Tull. 4682 3973 1 187
721 6 14 13 9 6 Domitius Abn, and C. Sossius. 4683 3974 2 722 7 7 15 14 10 7 1
Aug. Ces. 3. and M. Valor. Mess The Actium Fight September. 2. 4684 3975 3 723 1
Jub. Xxix. 16 15 11 8 2 Aug. Ces. 4. and M. Li. Crassus. 4685 3976 4 724 2 17
16 12 9 3 Aug. Ces. 4. Here was the firstgeneral Taxing made by Augustus. 4686
3977 1 188 725 3 18 17 13 10 4 Aug. Cess. 6. and M. Vip. Agrip. 2. 4687 3978 2
726 4 19 18 14 11 5 Aug. Ces. 7. and M. Vip. Agrip. 3. Here began they eers
called Anni Augustorum. 4688 3979 3 727 5 20 19 15 12 6 Aug. Cess. 8. and
Statil. Taurus. 4689 3980 4 728 6 21 20 16 13 7 Aug. Ces. 9. and M. Jun.
Syllan. 4690 3981 1 189 729 7 1 22 21 17 14 8 Aug. Ces. 10. and Norbanus. 4691
3982 2 730 1 23 22 18 15 9 Aug. Ces. 11. and Calpburs. Piso. Here began the
first year of the Tribunitiall Power. 4692 3983 3 731 2 24 23 19 16 10 Mr.
Maneellus, and L. Aruntius. 4693 3984 4 732 3 25 24 20 17 11 M. Lollivs, and Q.
Leipidut. 4694 3985 1 190 733 4 26 25 21 18 12 M. Apulius, and P. Sitius Ner.
Hereod begins to build Cesarea, twelve years before the death of DRusus. 4695
3986 2 734 5 27 26 22 19 13 Saturnius and Q. Lueretius. 4696 3987 3 735 6 28 27
23 20 14 Cn. Lentulus, and P. Lentulus. 4697 3988 4 736 7 2 29 28 24 21 15
Cajus Furnins, and Cajus Junius Herod begins to build the Temple 46 year,
before the first Passover after Christ's Baptism, John 2.20. 4698 3989 1 191 737
1 30 29 25 22 16 L. Domitius, and P. Scipio. 4699 3990 2 738 2 31 30 26 23 17
Marcus Livius, and L. Piso. 4700 3991 3 739 3 32 31 27 24 18 M. Crassus, and
Cor. Lentulus. 4701 3992 4 740 4 33 32 28 25 19 Tib. Nero, and Quint. Varus.
4702 3993 1 192 741 5 34 33 29 26 20 M. Messala, and P. Sul. Qurinus. 4703 3994
2 742 6 35 34 30 27 21 Q. Aelius, and Paulus Favbus. The true years of Christ.
4704 3995 3 743 7 3 36 35 31 28 22 Tib. Aritonius and Q. Max. Fabius 4705 3996
4 744 1 37 36 32 29 23 Drusus Neto, and Quinctius. 4706 3997 1 193 745 2 38 37
33 30 24 Of Maritivs and Cajus Asmius. The seoond general Taxing began, but
ended not til after Christ was boru. 4707 3998 2 746 3 39 38 34 31 25 Tib.
Nero, and Calphur. Piso. 4708 3999 3 747 4 40 39 35 32 26 D. Laeius, and C.
Antistuius. 4709 4000 4 748 5 41 40 36 33 27 Aug. Ces. 12. and L. Sylla. In
this year Christ was born, Anno Mundi (...). 1 4710 4001 1 194 749 6 42 41 37
34 28 C. lois. Sab. and L. Rufinus. 2 4711 4002 2 750 7 4 43 42 1 Archelaus. 1
Anrlpai. 29 C. Lentulus, and M. Messalinus. Herod died and Archelaus
sueceedeth; Philip also, and Antipas. 3 4712 4003 3 751 1 44 43 2 2 30 Aug.
Ces. 13. and M. Plautius Syl. 4 4713 4004 4 752 2 45 44 3 3 31 Cor. Lentulus,
and Calph. Piso.

Years of the Julian Period. Years of the World. Olympiads Roms ye. Kests and
Jubilees. Julian ye. Emperors. Actium. Aichelaus. Yee's of Christ. Consuls.
Things memorable. Com. True. 4714 4005 1 195 753 3 46 45 32 4 1 5 Cajus and
Aemilius Paulus. Here we begin the first year of the common Era of Christ's
Nativity. 4715 4006 2 754 4 47 46 33 5 2 6 Alfinius and Vinitius. 4716 4007 3
755 5 48 47 34 6 3 7 L. Aelius and M. Servilius. 4717 4008 4 756 6 49 48 35 7 4
8 Sex. Aelius and C. Sent. Satur. 4718 4009 1 196 757 7 5 50 49 36 8 5 9 Corn.
Cinna, and L. Valerius. 4719 4010 2 758 1 51 50 37 9 6 10 L. Aruntius, and M.
Lepidus. Archelaus is banished, and Copenius is sent to govern Indea; after
whom was Marcus Ambibuchus; after him Anius Rofus, in whose time Augustus died.
4720 4011 3 759 2 52 51 Roman Presidents. 1 Coponius. 7 11 A. Licinius, and Q.
Caecilius. 4721 4012 4 760 3 53 52 2 8 12 M. Furius, and Sex. Nonius. 4722 4013
1 197 761 4 54 53 3 9 13 Q. Sulpit. and C. Poppaeus. 4723 4014 2 762 5 55 54 1
Amb. 10 14 Dolabella and Syllanus. 4724 4015 3 763 6 56 55 2 11 15 T.
Statilius, and M. Lepidus. 4725 4016 4 764 7 6 57 56 1 Rusu^. 12 16 Germanicus
and Fonteius. 4726 4017 1 198 765 1 58 57 2 13 17 Silius and Plancus. 4727 4018
2 766 2 59 1 Valerius 23. current. 3 14 18 Sext. Pompeius, and Sex. Apuleius.
Augustus dies, Aug. 19. and Tiberius succeeds him, by whom Valerius Gratus
is sent; after whom was Pantius Pilose ten years, and somewhat above. 4728 4019
3 767 3 60 2 1 Valerius Gratus 11. Antipas his Years continued. 18 15 19 Drusus
and Norbanus. 4729 4020 4 768 4 61 3 2 19 16 20 Statilus and Scribonius. 4730
4021 1 199 769 5 62 4 3 20 17 21 C. Caeilius, and L. Pomponius. 4731 4022 2 770
6 63 5 4 21 18 22 Tib. Caesar and Germanicus. 4732 4023 3 771 7 7 64 6 5 22 19
23 M. Junius, and L. Norbanus. 4733 4024 4 772 1 Jub. xxx. 65 7 6 23 20 24 M.
Messals, and Aurel. Cetta. 4734 4025 1 200 773 2 66 8 7 24 21 25 Tiberius and
Drusus. 4735 4026 2 774 3 67 9 8 25 22 26 D. Hatterius, and C. Sulpitius. 4736
4027 3 775 4 68 10 9 26 23 27 C. Asinius, and C. Antistius. 4737 4028 4 776 5
69 11 10 27 24 28 Serve. Corn. and L. Vitcllines. 4738 4029 1 201 777 6 70 12 11
28 25 29 Asinius and Lentuius. Pilate begins about the beginning of this, or
end of the former year. 4739 4030 2 778 7 1 71 13 1 Pontius Pilate 10. 29 26 30
Corn. Lent. and C. Calvisius. 4740 4031 3 779 1 72 14 2 30 27 31 M Crassus, and
C. Piso. 4741 4032 4 780 2 73 15 3 31 28 32 Ap. Junius, and Pub. Silius. Christ
baptized by John in this year, Jan. 6. 4742 4033 1 202 781 3 74 16 4 32 29 33
Rubel. Gem. and Fusins Gem. 4743 4034 2 782 4 75 17 5 33 30 34 M. Vinitius, and
L. Cassius. 4744 4035 3 783 5 76 18 6 34 31 35 Tiber. Ces. and Aelius Sejanus.
4745 4036 4 784 6 77 19 7 35 32 36 Dom. Ahenob. and Aulus Vitellius In this
year, on the third of April, our Savior Jesus Christ was Crucified. 4746 4037
1 203 785 7 2 78 20 8 36 33 37 Sulp. Galba, and Corn. Sulla. 4747 4038 2 786 1
79 21 9 37 34 38 P. Fabius, and Luc. Vitellius. 4748 4039 3 787 2 80 22 10 38
35 39 C. Sestius, and M. Servilius. 4749 4040 4 788 3 81 23 0 39 36 40 Platius
and Papienus. At the seventh month of this year was the full end of Daniel's
LXX. Weeks; where also I conclude this Table: It might have eeub extended
further, but to avoid tediousness, I thought good to end it here.

All that I have to say more, before I come to the Calendar, is a note upon a
passage or two in Josephus: the one has place in this Table: the other
concerns the Calendar. That which belongs to this Table, is what Josephus
mentions in the sixteenth book and ninth Chapter of his Antiquities,
concerning the great solemnity which was at the dedication of Caesarea, and
that it was in the tenth year after the beginning of the building thereof, to
wit, in the eight and twentieth year of Herod, and in the 192. Olympiad: which
is generally understood of the first year thereof, in regard of the many sports
and games used when this City was dedicated. Now upon this ground it is that
Lansbergius begins not the first year of Herod until the next year after
the Confulships of Domitius Calvinus, and Asinius Pollio: and sets not the
taking of Jerusalem by him and Sosius until the year of the City 717, which
was the tenth Julian year, and year when L-Gellius and M-Cocceius were Consuls.

But surely that wherein Josephus himself was mistaken, can be no sure ground
for others to build upon: it will appear so out of his fifteenth Book and
thirteenth Chapter. For there we find that the Dedication of Cesaraea was in
the twelfth year after it began to be built; which must therefore make it to be
in the thirtieth year of Herod: and this, not the thirtieth since he first
began to reign, but the thirtieth since the death of Antigonus, at the taking
of Jerusalem. And as for the Olympiad, that will also appear to be 193, in the
first year whereof was the thirtieth year of Herod as aforesaid. And why 193,
is in regard Caesarea was not dedicated after it was built until Drusus was
dead, as Josephus also in the place above cited has declared. Now Drusus was
Consul, and alive in the fourth year of the 192, Olympiad, but dyed in the same
year, as Velleius shows, lib. 2. cap. 97. All which considered, will make it
very plain and manifest that I have rightly explained Josephus in this
particular; as also that the building of the Temple by King Herod, was not
begun until his twentieth year: for there must be as much difference between
the true and ordinary account, as is between ten and twelve.

That which concerns the Calendar, is nothing else but the joining of several
Months together; which without wrong to Josephus, cannot be understood of the
Hebrew and Julian Months, but of the Hebrew and Macedonian Months: for their
days accord in the Calendar, but not the other.

The Calendar is for the year of the Julian Period 4783. when Jerusalem (as I
have already said) was destroyed by the Romans. The Cycle of the Sun then was
23, the Dominicall letter G. and the Cycle of the Moon 14. By which is gathered
that the first day of the first Month, namely Nisan, was on or near the last
day of March: for the mean conjunction of the Luminaries at Jerusalem was on
the thirtieth day of March, 24 minutes past two in the afternoon; And therefore
the Month being according to the Vision of the Moon, could not begin until
the next day at the soonest. And so also for the fifth Month Ab, the
Conjunction was on the six and twentieth day of July, about 24 minutes past
five in the afternoon: the first day of Ab was not therefore till the twenty
seventh day: and consequently the ninth of Ab not till the fourth of August,
which day was Sabbath day. But the ninth of Ab, faith Scaliger, was feria
prima: agreeing therein to the testimony of Rabbi Iose, who writes that the
Temple was destroyed by Titus on the ninth of Ab and evening of the Sabbath
day; See Master Lively in his Persian Monarchy, p. 151.
which I understand of the evening ending the Sabbath. Which also the Seder
Olam Rabba shows, saying; when the first Temple was destroyed, that day was
the next after the Sabbath, and the next after the weeks end, and the Course of
Iehoiarib, and the ninth of Ab: and in like manner was it at the destruction of
the second Temple. We have already found it to be so at the destruction of the
first Temple: and by these testimonies it should be so at the destruction of
the second Temple. And indeed the late time of the day when the Luminaries were
in Conjuction, do rather cast the beginning of the fifth Month into the day
that the Seder Olam notes, then into the day before Scaliger therefore makes
here a two fold calculation: and approves best of that which makes the ninth of
Ab to be on the first day of the week. I shall therefore begin the first day
of the first Month on the first of April: and the first of Ab on the 28th day
of July; as in the Calendar following may be seen. And why I give it the title
of a Macedonian Calendar, is because the Jews accounted the Macedonian Months
as they did their own: changing them as other people did, who had been
Postquam vero Menses by Macedonum una oum victoribus in Asiam penetraverunt,
mutationem quandamsubi^re. Quamvis enim apud plurimos Graeiorum tales manerent,
quales pr ncipio suerant: ab aliis tamen immutati sunt, et ad cujusvis populi
annum civilem accommodati. Quippe Judaei, quibus Neomenia non a jugo, sed (...)
dependebat, etiam Mecedonum Menses inde inchoanent. Hanc obcausam menses
Judaici Macedonici ita inter se conferuntu, ut plane pro iisdem habeantur.
Quartus decimus namque Nisan apud Josephum cum 14. Xanthici, and quartus
decimus Tisri dum quarto decimo Hyperberetaei plane convenient. Larg De annis
Christi, lib. 1. page 184.
conquered by the Grecians to make them serviceable to their own account. This
we may see in the Antiquities of Josephus, lib 3. c. 10.

An Hebrew, Julian and Macedonian Calendar for the year of the Destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, in the year of the Julian Period 4783. The Cycle of the Sum
then was 23, the Dominicall letter G, and the Cycle of the Moon 14.
The first Month. April. Nisan, or (as Josephus calls it) Xanticus. This
was the first Month. 1 1 1 G Note that in the Kasender of this year, osephus
joyneth the Hebrew and Mecedonians Month together, and makes his account by
them. And why I every where account but 29. days to the first month: See
before Chap. 7. I believe it was not otherwise, until the Kalenders of the
later Jews came in use: in which we have indeed the sirst 30. the second 29.
the third 30, etc. 2 2 2 A 3 3 3 B 4 4 4 C 5 5 5 D 6 6 6 E 7 7 7 F Abijah, The
eighth course, 1 Chronicles. 24.10. 8 1 8 G 9 2 9 A 10 3 10 B 11 4 11 C 12 5 12 D 13
6 13 E 14 7 14 F Jeshua, The ninth course, 1 Chronicles. 24.11. And now was the
Passover, at which time Jerusalem. began to be besieged. 15 1 15 G 16 2 16 A
17 3 17 B 18 4 18 C 19 5 19 D 20 6 20 E 21 7 21 F Shechaniah, The tenth course,
1 Chronicles. 24.11. 22 1 22 G 23 2 23 A 24 3 24 B 25 4 25 C 26 5 26 D 27 6 27 E 28
7 28 F Eliashib, The eleventh course, 1 Chronicles. 24.12. 29 1 29 G

An Hebrew, Julian and Macedonian Calendar for the year of the Destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, in the year of the Julian Period 4783.
The Jecod Marleek. May. Ijar the second Month, which with the Macedonians was
Artemisius. 1 2 30 A 2 3 1 B 3 4 2 C 4 5 3 D 5 6 4 E 6 7 5 F Jakim, the twelsth
course, 1 Chronicles. 24.12. 7 1 6 G 8 2 7 A 9 3 8 B 10 4 9 C 11 5 10 D 12 6 11 E 13
7 12 F Huppah, the thirteenth course, 1 Chronicles. 24.13. 14 1 13 G 15 2 14 A 16 3
15 B 17 4 16 C 18 5 17 D 19 6 18 E 20 7 19 F Jeshabeab, the fourteenth course,
1 Chronicles. 24.13. 21 1 20 G 22 2 21 A 23 3 22 B 24 4 23 C 25 5 24 D 26 6 25 E 27
7 26 F Bilgah, the fifteenth course, 1 Chronicles. 24.14. 28 1 27 G 29 2 28 A 30 3
29 B

An Hebrew, Julian and Macedonian Calendar for the year of the Destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, in the year of the Julian Period 4783.
The third Month. June. Sivan the third Month; in Josephus, Daesius. 1 4 30 C
2 5 31 D 3 6 1 June. E 4 7 2 F Sabbath day, and Pentecost. It was the sixteenth
course, and course of Immer, 1 Chronicles. 24.14. 5 1 3 G 6 2 4 A 7 3 5 B 8 4 6 C 9
5 7 D 10 6 8 E 11 7 9 F Hezir. the seventeenth course, 1 Chronicles. 24.15. 12 1 10
G 13 2 11 A 14 3 12 B 15 4 13 C 16 5 14 D 17 6 15 E 18 7 16 F Aphses, the
eighteenth course, 1 Chronicles. 24.15. 19 1 17 G 20 2 18 A 21 3 19 B 22 4 20 C 23 5
21 D 24 6 22 E 25 7 23 F Pethahiah, the nineteenth course, 1 Chronicles. 24.16. 26 1
24 G 27 2 25 A 28 3 26 B 29 4 27 C

An Hebrew, Julian and Macedonian Calendar for the year of the Destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, in the year of the Julian Period 4783.
The fourth Month. July. Thamuz the fourth Month, which in Josephus is
Panemus. 1 5 28 D 2 6 29 E 3 7 30 F Jehezekel, the 20th. course, 1 Chronicles.
24.16. 4 1 1 July. G 5 2 2 A 6 3 3 B 7 4 4 C 8 5 5 D 9 6 6 E 10 7 7 F Jachin,
the 21th course, 1 Chronicles. 24.17. On the next Sabbath the course of Gamul began;
it was the 22th course; howbeit, the Sacrifices ceased then through the want of
Priests. 11 1 8 G 12 2 9 A 13 3 10 B 14 4 11 C 15 5 12 D 16 6 13 E 17 7 14 F On
this day the Sacrifices ceased through the want of Priests; which day of their
ceasing, being by calculation found to be Sabbath day, is an excellent
character to prove this tobe the right year of the destruction of Jerusalem:
for the Priests always entered upon the Ministration belonging to their lot on
the Sabbath day. Italy (says Lansbergius) cum familia deficiens ministerium
suum in temp'o inire debuerit 17. die Panemi, consequens est 17. Panemi fuisse
diem Sabati. 18 1 15 G 19 2 16 A 20 3 17 B 21 4 18 C 22 5 19 D 23 6 20 E 24 7
21 F Delaiah, the 23th course, 1 Chronicles. 24.18. Sabbato adjiciebant
Benedictionem unam Ephemer iae illi, quae exibat. Ergo die Sabbati exibant ex
ministerio, nempe. ante matutinum suffitum, in instanratione panum
propositionis. Scal. Notae, page 55. ex lib. Liturgiarum. 25 1 22 G 26 2 23 A
27 3 24 B 28 4 25 C 29 5 26 D 30 6 27 E

An Hebrew, Julian and Macedonian Calendar for the year of the Destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, in the year of the Julian Period 4783.
The fifth Month August Ab, the fifth Month: which in Josephus is Lovs. 1 7
89 F Maaziah, The 24th. course, 1 Chronicles. 24.18. On the next Sabbath after this,
was the course of Jehoiarib: For though the Sacrifices ceased before; yet there
was the time of his course. 2 2 29 G 3 2 30 A 4 3 31 B 5 4 1 August C 6 5 2 D 7
6 3 E On this day the doors of the Tempin are burnt by the command of Titus,
who on the day following caused it to be quenched. 8 7 4 F 9 1 5 G On this day
the Romans possess the holds the Jews had In the Temple, and on the day
following they set the whole Temple on fire, even on the selfsame day that
the Cha'daeans burnt it, 657 years before. And now was the course of Jehoiarib,
as may be seen in an ancient Hebrew Chronicle called Sedar Olam rabba. This
course of his began on the fourth of August: from whence to the beginning of
the fortieth Julian year before going, in which the Baptist was conceived, are
27609, days: and in so many days are 164. Orbs of courses, with 57. odd
days beside. By which is found that Jehoiarib began his course in the fortieth
Julian year, on the 27. day of February. His next course began 168. days after
this, viz. on the fourteenth day of Augest: The eight course from whence began
therefore on the second of October; as was before noted, cap. 20. 10 2 6 A 11 3
7 B 12 4 8 C 13 5 9 D 14 6 10 E 15 7 11 F 16 1 12 G 17 2 13 A 18 3 14 B 19 4 15
C 20 5 16 D On this day the Honians set their battering Rame against the upper
Walls of the City, the seventeenth day before they took it. 21 6 17 E 22 7 18 F
Sabbath day. 23 1 19 G 24 2 20 A 25 3 21 B 26 4 22 C 27 5 23 D 28 6 24 E 29 7
25 F Sabbath day.

An Hebrew, Julian and Macedonian Calendar for the year of the Destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, in the year of the Julian Period 4783.
The fixth Month. September. Elul the sixth Month, which in Josephus is
Gorpiaeus. 1 1 26 G Dies Dominicus, The Lord's day; or, first day of the Week.
2 2 27 A 3 3 28 B 4 4 29 C 5 5 30 D 6 6 31 E 7 7 1 September F On this day
(being Sabbath day) the City was taken; and on the day following it was burnt
and destroyed, and made so ruinous, that quickly after it was wholly demolished
and cast down, there not being one stone left upon another; therein fulfilling
the Prophecy of Christ, in the nineteenth chapter of Saint Luke, at the 43 and
44 verses. 8 1 2 G 9 2 3 A 10 3 4 B 11 4 5 C 12 5 6 D 13 6 7 E 14 7 8 F Sabbath
day. 15 1 9 G Dies Dominicus, The Lords day. 16 2 10 A 17 3 11 B 18 4 12 C 19 5
13 D 20 6 14 E 21 7 15 F Sabbath day. 22 1 16 G Dies Dominicus, The Lords day.
23 2 17 A 24 3 18 B 25 4 19 C 26 5 20 D 27 6 21 E 28 7 22 F Sabbath day. 29 1
23 G Dies Dominicus, The Lords day. 30 2 24 A

FINIS.
Laus Deo:
CALVMVS MENSVRANS. The Measuring Reed. OR, The Standard of Time. CONTAINING
The chief and principal Kingdoms of the WORLD, both before and after CHRIST,
to the Destruction of JERUSALEM by the ROMANS.

Wherein the names of the KINGS, and years of their reigns are noted and set
down in their right times; with other things well worthy of Observation.

The second PART.

By JOHN SWAN.

Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations, Deuteronomy. 32.7.
I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times, Psa. 77.5.
LONDON: Printed for John Williams at the sign of the Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1653.

The Contents of the Second PART.
CHAP. I. OF Peleg and Jocktan, the two Sons of Heber, and of Nimrod; the
beginning of whose Kingdom was at the building of Babel; from whence he went
into the Land of Assyria, and founded Niniveh, etc. Page 1. CHAP. II. Of Ninus
and his Successors. p. 7. CHAP. III. Of the Kingdom of Egypt, and of the Kings
that reigned there. p. 15 CHAP. IV. Of the Kingdom of Sycionia, and of the
Kings that reigned there. p. 24. CHAP. V. Of the Kingdom and Kings of the
Argives, and of the Mycenae that succeeded them. p. 34. CHAP. VI. Of the
Kingdom and Kings of Athens; the first whereof was Cecrops. p. 45. CHAP. VII.
Of the Kings that reigned in the Kiagdome of Troy, before the Greeks destroyed
it. p. 54. CHAP. VIII. Of the Kingdom of the Aborigines. p. 55. CHAP. IX. Of
the Kings of Italy after Latinus. p. 56. CHAP. X. Of the British Kings that
reigned in England from Brute to the time of Julius Caesar and after. p. 59
CHAP. XI. Containyng the Dynasties of several other Kingdoms. p. 64. CHAP.
XII. Of the Kings and other Governors of Rome from the founddation thereof by
Romulus, to the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. p. 75.
CALAMVS MENSVRANS: OR, The Measuring REED.
The second Part.
CHAP. I. Of Peleg and Jocktan, the two Sons of Heber, and of Nimrod; the
beginning of whose Kingdom was at the building of Babel: from whence he went
into the Land of Assyria, and founded Niniveh, etc.
OF Heber it is said in Genesis 10.25. And unto Heber were borne two Sons, the
name of the one was Peleg, for in his days was the Earth divided; and his
brothers name was Jocktan. Now this Jocktan had thirteen sons, men grown at
the confusion of Tongues, as the verses following make apparent: and therefore
that division of the Earth which was made at the birth of Peleg (if the text be
so to be understood, as that there must be a division then) could not be the
same with that which was at the confusion of Tongues; for Heber was but 34.
years old when Peleg was borne, Genesis 11.16. and Jocktan (though he were borne
before) could not be old enough to have any of his Sons either born, or (if
borne) of age sufficient at their Uncles birth, to be Conductors of Colonies
from Babel to other Countries. The confusion of Tongues was therefore long
after the birth of Peleg, and yet at the time of his birth there might be a
division made of the Earth by Noah, who (when he saw his Sons and their
Children begin to increase) might take in hand to divide the Earth among them,
appointing to the head of each Family his place and portion: but they loath to
break company, and not willing to separate themselves each from other,
departed away together from the East, where the Arc rested, to the Land of
Shinar where they found a Plain that pleased them, and for a time they dwelled
there, Genesis 11.1, 2. This time of their dwelling there before they began to
build the Tower of Babel, might end about fourteen years after the birth of
Peleg: for so long time I find between his birth and the beginning of of the
Chaldaean date, which at the time when Alexander the great took Babylon (as was
observed by Calisthenes the Philosopher, then present) was running on in the
year thereof 1903. which was also the year of the Julian Period 4484. out of
which if we take 1902. complete, the beginning of the said date will be in the
year of the Julian Period 2482. There therefore upon this ground I justly fix
it, and do there also (for the reasons aforesaid concerning Jocktan and his
Sons) place the beginning of that Tower whose top they intended should reach
unto Heaven. Perhaps they might begin the City before, but not the Tower. This
Tower as Michael Glycas says was forty years in building, which will
therefore make the confusion of Tongues to be 54. years after the birth of
Peleg, by which time the very youngest of Jocktans Sons might be of age
sufficient to conduct a Colonie from thence according to the division of his
Tongue.

This I find to be 155. years after the Flood was ended, in the year of the
World 1813. and in the year of the Julian Period 2522. And now had Nimrod
reigned forty years from the beginning of the Chaldaean Date; or at least had
been a mighty man among them that built this City and Tower of Babel for so
long a time.

The Scripture says, he began to be a mighty one in the Earth, Genesis 10.8.
thereby declaring that he was the first who had others under him. Which if he
began to have when the Nations first began to build the City, and Tower of
Babel, as we find in Josephus; then had he more under his command at that time
then when Languages were confounded: And for that cause perhaps it was that
afterward he ranged further (like a mighty Hunter) to enlarge his Dominions.
For after he had builded and gotten to himself Babel, Erech, Accad and Chalne
in the Land of Shinar, he went out of that Land (says Moses) into Assiria, and
builded Niniveh, and the City Reh^both, and Chalah, and Resen between Niniveh
and Chalah, Genesis 10.11.12. Some I know read that text otherwise; as thus, Out
of that Land went Ashur and builded Niniveh. Concluding hereupon that Ashur of
Sems race, being wearied with Nimrods cruelty, went out of Shinar into another
Country which he called after his own name, and there built Niniveh with the
three other Cities aforesaid. But of this there is little probability: more
like it is that Nimrod (as I said before) having gotten Babel, Erech, Accad and
Chalne in the Land of Shinar, was not therewithal content, but coveting more
and larger territories, advanced farther, even into the Land of Assyria, and
there he built Niniveh with three Cities more. For this we are to note that the
Scripture names not Ashur who came of Sem to be the mighty Hunter, but Nimrod
who was the Son of Cush, and the Grandchild of Cham. The margent therefore of
our last Translation does not without cause point us to that reading which at
the first I mentioned; agreeing therein to learned Junius, Willet, and a great
many more of good note, whom upon necessity I am bound now to follow, unless I
will acquit Nimrod of that brand which the Scripture lays upon him, and by
following a wrong translation lay it without other warrant upon another. This I
may not do: and therefore I look upon Nimrod still as the great and mighty
Hunter, who was the first that hunted out of one Country into another to
enlarge his dominions.

This he began to do eight years after the confusion of Tongues, viz. in the
year of the Julian Period 2530. when the year of the World was 1821. And why
I place Nimrods going into Assyria, his building of Niniveh, and laying the
foundation of a Kingdom there in this year, is because it must be about one
thousand years before the destruction of Troy, as Diodorus Siculus has told
us, lib. 2. cap. 6. Now Troy (as we know) was destroyed in the year of the
Julian Period 3530. at which time (as he also says) Tautanes reigned in
Assyria: Tautanes and not Semiramis; for she was rather in the Patriarch
Abraham's time, when (as Josephus says) the Assyrians had the Empire of Asia.
Howbeit some have accounted otherwise: the ground of which mistake I do believe
arose first from hence and came to be embraced, both because there were more
Zoroasters then one, and also because there was another Semiramis later then
she that reigned next after Ninus the grandchild of Nimrod. One of the
Zoroasters was but six hundred years before Xerxes the Persian went with his
huge Army into Greece, as Xanthus Lydius mentioned by Diogenes Laertius has
told us: another long before and was that King of the Bactrians with whom King
Ninus waged war, as Diodorus and Justin out of Trogus testify. And as for
Semiramis, the first was the daughter of Derceto, begotten on her by an unknown
man: the other was the daughter of the second Belochus King of Assyria many
years after Ninus. And therefore whereas Porphyrius alleges out of
Sanchoniato that Semiramis was not long after the days of Moses, it must be
understood of the latter and not of the first Semiramis: for the latter indeed
began to flourish with her Father, not above 15. years after the death of
Moses, as by warrantable computation appears; but the former was a long time
before.

But to return again to Nimrod; he (as I said) began to lay the foundation of
the Assyrian Kingdom in the year of the Julian Period 2530. from whence it
continued, without any great alteration, till the year of the Julian Period
3893. in which year Sardanapalus came to his end through the conspiracy that
Arbaces and Belesis made against him. For when they saw how he retired himself
from his Nobles, and betook him to spin and dally with his Curtizans, they
then rise up in Arms against him, and do at last drive him to sacrifice
himself with his Wealth nd Wenches, to Vulcan in a great pile of Wood set on
fire, that in it he might dye with all his Delights about him: in which only
thing (says Justin) he showed himself a man.

This time of his death was 1238. years after Ninus began, as in Eusebius may
be seen by gathering into one sum the particular years of the Kings that
reigned here. And as it was 1238 years after Ninus (before whom Belus, next
after Nimrod reigned sixty five years:) So was it 1363. years from the time
that Nimrod came out of Shinar and founded first this Kingdom here. Herodotus
I know falls far short of these numbers, but is followed by none of the
Ancients, neither Ctesias, Trogus Pompeius, Diodorus Siculus, Velleius
Paterculus, Josephus, Eusebius, nor Augustine. Ctesias I confess reckons 1360.
from Ninus to the death of Sardanapalus: but it had been better and in a manner
right, if he had reckoned from the time aforesaid when Nimrod went into
Assyria, built Niniveh, and laid the foundation of this Kingdom there: for in
reckoning so, I can find but three years difference between him and my self.
Trogus (or Justin out of him) reckons no more then 1300. leaving out perhaps
the sixty three odd years, and speaks only of the round or even number: but
begins (as Ctesias before him) from Ninus instead of beginning from the time
when Niniveh was first founded. Or rather, he accounts 1300. from Ninus to the
time aforesaid; instead of accounting them from Belus the Father of Ninus: for
from Belus to the end of Sardanapalus, were but three years more; as will
afterward better appear.

Diodore, in the end of his second book, says that this Kingdom continued
more then 1400. years; which is also true, if we account from the time that
Nimrod (who also founded this Kingdom) began to reign at Babylon: for from
thence hither were 1411. years. Velleius helps nothing for the beginning,
but much for the ending: for by him we gather that this Kingdom ended not many
more then sixty five years before the building of Rome; which upon a precise
account was just sixty nine before Romulus laid the foundation thereof. Eusebeus
without question had seen all these, but sought not thus narrowly into the
ground of their difference: howbeit he might and did perceive they all aimed at
this, to make Ninus the Establisher of the Assyrian Kingdom: At him therefore
he begins his Chronology, and finds (according to the testimony aforesaid) that
in the Temple of the Trojan war and when Troy was taken, Tautanes reigned in
Assyria. This T^utanes (says Diodorus) sent aid to Priamus in the time of the
Trojan War, viz. one thousand Ethiopians, and as many Susians, with two
hundred Chariots, and made Memnon (a Duke of Persia) General over them: This
Memnon did good service, but was slain by the treason of the Thessalians.
Diod. lib. 2. cap. 6. Moreover Eusebius (by some Testimony sure that he had
seen) dates the time of Sardanapalus by the reigns of Ariphron and Tespieus,
Archons of Athens: namely that in one of them he began to reign; and in the
other he lost his life when Arbaces and Belesis rose up against him.

I reckon therefore that Belus (who was the next King after Nimrod) began his
reign in the year of the Julian Period 2590. and reigned (as Eusebius and
Augustine say) sixty five years. He was a man of a more contenting disposition
then his Father and employed himself most in drayning the Fennes about
Babylon, and carrying of the water from the low grounds to make the Country the
more useful: which pleasing government of his was so grateful to his Subjects,
as that they even deified him, and made him the Sire of many petty gods; such
as B^l, Baal, Baalberith, Baalzephon, and the like. Howbeit it is a question
whether the Assyrians worshipped him for a god before his death when by the
means of his warlike son Ninus he had a Temple built for him in Babylon,
which in Pliny his time was standing still: who also says of him, that he was
the Inventor of Astronomy, and that the Assyrians dedicated a Jewel to him,
which they call Belus his eye. He might perhaps add something considerable to
Astronomy, though the Art it self was found out long before. Moreover the
Caldeans prefixed Bell, or Bal, as an Ensign of honor to their names; as
Baladan, Balthazar. The Carthagineans, they added it to theirs; as may beseen
in the names of Asdrubal and Hanibal.

But how long did Nimrod reign before this Belus began?

I Answer, that he reigned eight and forty years in Babylon, and sixty years
in Assyria, which together do make 108. from the beginning of the Tower of
Babel, as already in what I have written by way of computation may be seen. Nor
is this time of reign too long; it seems rather too short, if we consider how
long men lived in those days.

But I have done with these, of whom I have spoken more then at the first I
intended: and therefore now I come to Ninus^ of whom and his successors in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of Ninus and his Successors.
THough the Assyrian Kingdom was not founded by Ninus, yet the Monarchy
thereof began first in him, according to the consent of all Authors. To which
purpose Sir Walter Raleigh speaks well in his History of the World, saying;
it will be found best agreeing to Scripture and to reason, and best agreeing
with the story of that Age written by profane Authors, that Nimrod founded
Babel, Erech, Accad and Chalne, the first works and beginning of his Empire,
according to Moses; and that these being finished within the Valley of Shinar,
he looked further abroad, and set in hand the work of Ninus, lying near unto
the same stream that Babel and Chalne did: which work his Granchild Ninus
afterward amplyfied and finished, as Semiramis (this Ninus his wife) did
Babylon. Hence it came to pass, that as Semiramis was counted the Foundresse
of the City which she only finished: so also Ninus of Niniveh. For so did
Nabuchodonosor vaunt himself to be the Founder of Babylon also, because he
built up again some part of the Wall, over born by the fury of the River: which
work of his stood till Alexanders time, whereupon he vaunted thus, Is not this
great Babel that I have built, Dan. 4.27. Thus then these works of Babylon and
Niniveh, begun by Nimrod in Chaldea and Assyria, Ninus and Semiramis made
perfect. Ninus finished Niniveh, Semiramis Babylon wherein she thought to
exceed her Husband by far. Thus that Knight, lib. 1. cap. 10. Sect. 3. and
lib. 1. cap. 12. Sect. 1.

I shall not need therefore to answer further to objections made out of other
Authors concerning the building of these Cities, as if they were to own no
other Builders but Ninus and Semiramis: for it is one thing to begin, another
thing to add and bring to perfection.

Nimrod did the first, they the latter; the fame whereof, in after ages,
swallowed up the memory of the first Founder, and made those Authors which knew
not the holy Scripture speak as they did without distinction.

Leaving this therefore I shall come more nearly to Ninus, Ninus.
who when he enlarged Niniveh imparted to it his own name: He began to reign in
the year of the Julian Period 2655. and (as Eusebius says) reigned fity two
years. He caused the Statua of his Father Belus to be set up and worshipped,
probably in that Temple which was built for him in Babylon: which Image of his
(as some say) continued until Daniels, when it was destroyed by Darius Medus
or Cyrus, upon the discovery of the Imposture of Bells Priests, shown in that
Apocriphall fragment of Bell and the Dragon. Nimrod being the first, he must
needs be the third King of Assyria, in whose time the dominion of the Assyrians
was very large: for there was then no Kingdom so famous nor so spacious as the
Assyrian* which was afterward increased by Semiramis after his death, as Saint
Austin writes, lib. 18. cap. 2. De Civit. Dei. Orosius also says that this
King waging War abroad, continued that course by the space of fifty years.
Oros. lib. 1. cap. 4. In which I think Orosius was not altogether right, for
his whole time of reign was but fifty two years; in the beginning whereof he
was busied in the building of that Temple which he built in honor of his dead
Father Belus, and at the first had but a small part of Asia under his command,
as Dionysius Halcarnassensis says in the first book of his Roman Antiquities,
but afterward, joining in society with Ariaeus King of the Arabians, he did in
seventeen years bring all Asia under his subjection, excepting the Indians and
the Bactrians; and at the last the Bactrians were subdued by him, as Diodorus
and Justin testify. At which time Zoroaster was King of that Country, and
slain by him: of whom Saint Austin writes, that he laughed at the time of his
birth; which prodigious mirth, in the opinion of the same Father, booded him no
good: for he was (says he) as is reported the first Inventor of Magic. By
which if he means Natural Magic, being the knowledge of things in respect
of their causes, there was no cause why he should be blamed: For (as Pliny
also writes) he not only laughed when he was born, but had also such a brain
as was perceived to beat at the time of his birth; which signified some great
Excellency to be in him, as appeared afterward when he was grown up: I mean
if this were that Zoroaster whom Ninus slew.

Eusebius would that Abram should be borne in the three and fortieth year of
this King Ninus his reign: but note that this is not from any given or recorded
Testimony that he thus places Abrams birth, but from that manner of reckoning
which he brings back from the fifteenth year of Tiberius; as may be seen in
his tenth book, and third Chapter De Praep. Evang. And in that regard, though
he be followed by Saint Austin and some other of the Ancients, yet a righter
computation may be made by such as shall more exactly cast the times according
to Scripture, and then apply the accounts thereunto following therein the
Hebrew verity, and not the numbers which the Septuagint produces.

Next after Ninus, was his Wife Semiramis: Semiramis
she succeeded her Husband, and began to reign in the year of the Julian
Period 2707. twelve years complete before the birth of Abram; for his birth
falls into the thirteenth year of her reign. She was the daughter of a
Nymph whose name was Dercero, and was begotten on her by an unknown man; for
which cause she drowned her self in the Lake Ascalon as soon as she was
delivered, and left this her daughter Semiramis among the Rocks, where the
wild Beasts fed her with their Milk, till Symnas the Kings Sheapheard found
her, who took her away and brought her up. And being very beautiful, she was
afterward married to one Memnon a Noble man; by the means whereof she became
acquainted with King Ninus when he be sieged the City Bactras, teaching him
both how to take the City, and subdue the Country. He thereupon admiring her
wit, and being caught with her beauty, took her away from her Husband and
married her: and she afterward to possess her self of the Throne, desired of
him to have all the power of royalty put into her hands, but for the space of
five days, which he granted; in which time she caused him to beslain, and then
reigned after him forty two years. Diod. Eusebius. She enlarged the City of
Babylon to admiration, which once being like to be surprised, upon hearing of
it, she rescued with her hair half hanging about her ears, not staying to
dress it wholly, and therefore is so pictured.

Next after her was her Son Zameis, Ninias.
otherwise called Ninias; who began in the year of the Julian Period 2749. and
reigned 38. years. Eusebius. He was tenderly brought up by his Mother among her
Ladies, Aug de cipit dea lib. 18. c. 2.
and was at the last slain by him for her incestuous lust toward him, as
Saint Austin notes, saying; He did it because she bare an Incestuous lust
toward him; it being also usual with her to murder those whom she had to do
with. Howbeit her son would not be thus dealt withand thereupon, both to
prevent her murdering of him, and also though the hatred he bore to her
unnatural Act, he flew her, and reigned afte thirty eight years.

The next after him was Thuras, Arius.
otherwise called Arius, or (according to Moses in Genests, chap. 14.)
Amraphel. For by the course of time this must needs be he, who with the rest of
the confederate Princes came against Sodom, and took Lot prisoner, but was
vanquished by Abraham, Haner, Eshcol, and Mamre, Genesis 14.13. Suidas says of
him, that he was a man of a fierce disposition, who bidding battle to Caucasus
of the stock of Japeth, slew him: but this may be fabulous. The same Author
likewise says, that the Assyrians deified him, and worshipped his Image for a
god. He began his reign in the year of the Julian Period 2787. and reigned (as
says Eusebius thirty years.

As for the rest that follow from hence to Sardanapalus, Tonosconcoleros.
otherwise called Tonosconcoleros, there is little or nothing mentioned of them
of them save only their bare names, years that they reigned, and that the
Son (as Velleius says) always succeeded the Father: I can therefore make no
large description of them. Only let me note that Belochus the second, who
began his reign in the year of the Julian Period 3279. and reigned twenty five
years, was (as Eusebius writes) the Father of the second Semiramis, who was
famous in the time of his reign. Also that Tautanes (who began his reign in
the year of the Julian Period 3507. and reigned thirty two years) was in the
time of the Trojan War, and (as already has been said) sent Aid to Priamus:
for so Diodorus writes. Bethese I know no other, till we come to Sardanapalus,
that can have much more said of them.

Howbeit I have something still to say, which would be mentioned here in this
Chapter, wherein I treat of the Assyrian Monarchy: and this it is. Calvisius
(out of Julius Affricanus) writes, that in the eight and twentieth year of
Belus the Father of Ninus aforesaid, the Kingdom of Chalea was subdued to the
Kingdom of Assyria. Which I believe to be a mere mistake: For this needed not,
seeing in those time, and a long while after, Chaldea end Assyria were both
under one King. More like it is that in the eight and twentieth year of
Belochus the first, the Caldeans revolted from the Assyrians and reigned apart
in a Dynastie by themselves, 224. years. At the end whereof, viz. in the year
of the Julian Period 3176. the Arahians overcame them and reigned in Chaldea
until 520. years before the overthrow of Sardanapalus: for when he was
overthrown by Arbaces, the Assyrians had had the whole dominion of Asia 520.
years, as says Herodotus, lib. 1. Now this seems probable, because in the
This 18. in Eusebius. is (by my account) the 22. For where his 18. stands there
stands my 22.
eighteenth year of Cecrops (which was in the year of the Julian Period
3175.) the Chaldeans; as says Eusebius, strove with the Phenicians. By which
is first proved, that then and at that time the Chaldeans had a distinct
Kingdom by themselves: and secondly, that whilst they were at War with the
Phenicians, the Arabians came in and got it away from them; holding it from
thence until the viz in the year of the Julian Period 3176. which was the 23.
year of Sparetus King of Assi^ia
eighth year of Sosares, King of Assyria: In which year (being the year of
the Julian Period 3373.) the Assyrians have again the whole Monarchy by this
account; and from thence they hold it 520. years. For, if thus we may
reconcile Herodofus to other Authors his Testimony of 520. years for the time
of the Assyrian Monarchy, may be embraced: otherwise not. which is not from any
given Testimony; but from the course of computation.


And would you now that I set down the distinct reign of these Kings? I shall
do it: but first take a List of the Kings of Assyria as they be found in
Eusebius, from Ninus to to the end of Sardanapalus that Epicureous Monster; who
made no matter of it to cry out and say, Ede, bibe, and lude, post mortem nulla
voluptas. Eat, drink and play, whilst thou art here:
For after death there is no good cheer.


This was whilst he was in his fullest madness, causing also this Epitaph (as
it is translated by Tullie; for it was first written in Greek to be engraven
upon his Tomb.

Haec habeo quae edi, quae que ex saturata voluptas
Hausit: at illa jacent multa and preclara relicta.
What I consumed, and what my Guts engross't,
I have: but all the wealth I left, I lost.
This was his Epitaph, made by himself before his trouble came: but as
Aristotle says, it was sitter to be written upon the grave of an Ox, then
upon the grave of a King; And so I think: for this is he who was the very
shame and Monster of men. But leaving him, see the List: it is according to
what I find in Eusebius whom herein I follow. Only I have added the year of
the Julian Period when each King began his reign.

A List or Catalogue of the Kings of ASSYRIA from Ninus to Sardanapalus.
2655. Ninus 52. 2707. Semiramis 42. 2749. Ninias 38. 2787. Arius 30. 2817.
Aralius 40. 2857. Xerxes 30. 2887. Armametres 38. 2925. Belochus 35. 2960.
Baleus 52. 3012. Altadas 32. 3044. Manithus 30. 3074. Mancaleus 30. 3104.
Iphereus 20. 3124. Mamylus 30. 3154. Sparetus 40. 3194. Ascatides 40. 3234.
Amyntes 45. 3279. Belochus 25. 3304. Belepares 30. 3334. Lamprides 32. 3366.
Sosares 20. 3386. Lampares 30. 3416. Panias 45. 3461. Sosarmus 19. 3480.
Mithreus 27. 3507. Tautanes 32. 3539. Tauteus 40. 3579. Thineus 30. 3609.
Dercilus 40. 3649. Eupales 38. 3687. Laosthenes 45. 3732. Piriciades 30. 3762.
Ophrateus 20. 3782. Ophratanes 50. 3832. Ocrazapes 41. 3873. Sardanapalus 20.
3893. In this year was the end of Sardanapalus.
This is the first List; in which we have not only the number of years that
each King reigned, but also the very year of the Julian Period when any of them
began his reign: out of which if you take 709. you have the year of the world
in the stead thereof as exactly as may be.

Now follows the List of the other Kings before mentioned; namely, of the
Chaldeans and Arabians, in two Dynasties. That of the Caldeans continued 224.
years, and began (as I account) in the year of the Julian Period 2952. Their
first King was Evechous, he reigned six years. Their second, Chomuseolos: he
reigned seven years. Their third, Poros: he reigned thirty five years. Their
fourth, Nechubes: he reigned forty three years. Their fifth Abios: he reigned
forty eight years. Their sixth, Oniballos: he reigned forty years. Their
seventh and last, before the Arabians, was Zinziros: he reigned 45. years. All
which particulars put into one sum, do make 224. as before was mentioned.

The Catalogue thereof or List of them must run thus, according to the method
before in the Kings of Assyria.

years of the Iul. Per. A Dynastie of the Chaldeans, which lasted two hundred
twenty four years. 2952. Evechous 6. Years of his reign. 2958. Chomuseolos
7. Years of his reign. 2965. Poros 35. Years of his reign. 3000. Nechubes
43. Years of his reign. 3043. Abios 48. Years of his reign. 3091. Oniballos
40. Years of his reign. 3131. Zinziros 45. Years of his reign. 3176. In
this year the Arabians began. years of the Iul. Pe. A Dynastie of the ARABIANS
in BABYLON. 3176. Mardocentes 45. Years of his reign. 3221. Sisimardachos 27.
Years of his reign. 3248. Abias 37. Years of his reign. 3285. Anonimus 41.
Years of his reign. 3326 Nabonnabos 25. Years of his reign. 3351 Anonimus
alter 22. Years of his reign. 3373. In this year the Assyrians have again the
whole Monarchy under them, which they hold 520. years, even uniill the
overthrow of Sardanapalus.

This Dynastie, according to the common account of it, is said to continue 216.
years: but indeed, when I have rightly fixed it, I cannot find above 197.
years to be given unto it; unless the end of Sardanapalus be set nineteen
years lower then before is mentioned; which is altogether improbable, and so
far from what Eusebius: us has set down otherwise, as I cannot but conclude
against it. For if we follow Eusebius, and in the account have an eye also to
Heredotus, we shall find that Arbaces (who began his reign at the death of
Sardanapalus) reigned twenty eight. After him Sosarmus 30. Medidus 40.
Cardiceas 13. Dioces 53. Phraortes 22. Cyaxares 40. Astyages 35.

But these are Kings of Medea, and therefore more of them must be spoken
afterward.

CHAP. III. Of the Kingdom of Egypt, and of the Kings that reigned there.
THat Kingdom which by the course of time offers it self next to be
considered, is the Kingdom of Egypt: in which to produce a right reckoning of
the Kings that reigned there, is a thing of much perplexity. For Diodorus
varies from Herodotus, Herodotus from Diodorus, and both of them from Africanus
and Eusebius: which therefore made St. Austin omit the succession of these
Kings. For though he were a man of incomparable diligence, a great searcher
into Antiquities, and one who had read the books of Marcus Varro, which now
are lost; yet he omitted the succession of the Kings of Egypt: which surely
(says a learned Author) he had not done, if there had not been less certainty
in the accounts of their reigns then in the accounts of the Sycionian Argive,
and Athenian Kings. One great occasion of this obscurity in the Egyptian Story,
was (as the same Author also says) the ambition of their fabling Priests; who
to magnify their Antiquities, filled the Records put into their trust, with
many falsities, and recounted unto strangers the names of many Kings that never
reigned: Some whereof might be but Viceroyes (as Joseph was) and reckoned
afterward as Kings; and others, but vain inventions of the ambitious Priests,
who thought it their glory to boast much of great Antiquity.

But leaving them and their fabling, the accout which Master Lydyat brings
(and another man more learned then he) from the Annals of Constantinns
Manasses, carries with it a great probability of much truth; namely, that this
Kingdom began 1663. years before Cambyses King of Persia went and subdued it
to the Persian Monarchy. The due consideration of which casts the head of our
reckoning into the year of the Julian Period 2525. which (as I account) was
but three years after the Confusion of Tongues. Now from this year of the
Julian Period to the time that Saltis began to reign in Egypt, were an hundred
and six years; as by an account taken a posteriori well appears.

The beginning therefore of Saltis was in the year of the Julian Period 2631.
whose time of reign was (as Josephus says) nineteen years. Baeon succeeded,
and reigned after him 44. years Apachnas after Baeon 36. years and seven
Months. Apochis after Apachnas sixty years and one. Janias after Apochis 50.
years and one month. Assis after Janias 49. years and two Months: and with
him I take it for certain, that that which is commonly called the 17th Dynastie
was concluded; although how in this time there should be so many Dynasties, I
cannot see. For from the beginning of the Kingdom to the end of the reign of
this King Assis, were but 366. years; and how they should be divided into
seventeene distinct and several Dynasties, I am yet to learn.

Howbeit I shall be content to account seventeene of them to reach no further
then to the time hitherto mentioned, that thereby I may the better go on with
them that follow. But first see a Catalogue or List of all the Kings from
Saltis, to the end of Assis, in their right times.

Years of the Julian Period when they began. Kings of Egypt as they are
mentioned by Josephus. 2631. Saltis began, and had nineteen years. 2650.
Baeon forty four years. 2694. Apachnas thirty six years and seven Months.
2731. Apochis years fixty one. 2792. Janias fifty years and one Month. 2842.
Assis forty nine years and two Months. 2891. In this year was the end of the
reign of Assis, and beginning of the eighteenth Dynastie.

Next after these follow the Kings that reigned in the eighteenth Dynastie, as
we likewise find them in Josephus; who, in his first book against Apion,
reckons on as follows: beginning first with Themosis otherwise called
Amasis, to whom he gives 25. years and four Months. Chebron succeeded, and
had twelve years. Amenophis 20. years and seven Months. Amesses sister to
Amenophis, 21. years and nine Months. Mephres twelve years and nine Months.
Mephramuthosis 25. years and ten Months. Thmosis nine years and eight Months.
Amenophis 30. years and ten Months. This is he who was surnamed Memnon, or
the speaking stone, because his Image (as says Eusebius, Strabo, and others)
gave a sound at the Sunrising, till the coming of Christ. The next after him
was Orus, thirty six years and five Months. After Orus was Acenchres the
daughter of Orus, 12. years and one month. Then Rathoris the brother of
Acenchres, 9. years. His Son succeeded; his name Acencheres, and the time of
his reign 12. years and five Months. Another Acencheres was after him, and
reigned 12. years and three Months. Armais four years and one Month.
Armesis one year, and four Months: or as he is otherwise written, Ramesses by
a transposition of letters. His successor had the same name, and was Ramesses
Miamun, though commonly written Armesesmiamun: the time of whose reign was
sixty six years and two Months. This was that new King which knew not Joseph,
as being born after his death, and willing to forget the memory of his
benefits, Exodus 1.8. The hard bondage of the Children of Israel began in his
time: His Daughter was Thermutis, by whom Moses was preserved; for so Josephus
and Epiphanius call her.

Amenophis succeeded next in the Kingdom of Egypt, and reigned after
Amnesesmiamun, nineteen years and six Months: and not until the end thereof
were the Children of Israel delivered. For though his Predecessor (who reigned
long) was dead and gone yet their bondage still endured, as is noted by Moses
in Exodus 2.23. where the words be these; And it came to pass after a long
time, that the King of Egypt died, and the Children of Israel sighing by reason
of the bondage, cried, etc. that is, they cried by reason of their hard bondage
and servitude which still continued, notwithstanding the long reign of the
former King was ended. Now this King (as I apsaid before) reigned nineteen
years and six Months, and pears plainly to be that very Pharaoh which was
drowned in the Red Sea. Nor does Manetho but confess as much, in that which
Josephus relates out of him, in his first book against Apion. For though
Manetho (like a lying Priest of Egypt) does what he can, with fabulous reports,
to color over the matter for the credit of his Nation: yet all things well
observed he has delivered enough to show that Amenophis here mentioned was
that King that followed after Moses, when he led the Children of Israel out of
Egypt. Master Lydyat also shows the same, not only by mentioning this
Testimony of Manetho, but by adding thereunto that this was he Qui ab
Hippotamo raptus interiisse fertur: which though it be taken as a Fable, yet
(says he, and not amiss) it is digna attentione fabula; a Table well worthy
of attention.

And thus having thus far considered the several Kings of this Dynastie, I
shall in the next place present them in a perfect List or Catalogue, all fixed
in their right times.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. Kings of Egypt in the eighteenth
Dynastie ex Josepho. 2891. Themosis, otherwise called Amasis, twenty five
years and four months. 2916. Ghebron twelve years. 2928. Amenophis twenty
years and seven months. 2949. Amesses ejus soror one and twenty years and
nine Months. 2971. Mephres, twelve years and nine Months. 2984.
Mephramuthosis twenty five years and ten Months. 3010. Thmosis nine years and
eight Months. 3020. Amenophis thirty years and ten Months. 3051. Orus,
thirty six years and five Months. 3087. Acenchres Ori Filia, twelve years and
one Month. 3099. Rathoris Frater Acenchris nine years. 3108. Acencheres
Rathoris Filius twelve years and five Months. 3120. Acencheres alter twelve
years and three Months. 3133. Armais four years and one Month. 3137.
Ramesses or Armesis one year and four Months. 3138. Ramesses or Armesesmiamun
fixty fix years and two Months. 3204. Amenophis nineteen years and fix
Months. 3224. In this year Amenophis was drowned in the Red Sea whose death
gave an end to this Dynastie.

The next that followed was the nineteenth Dynastie: in which these Kings
reigned. The first was Sethosis, whose time of reign was 51. years, Helvic ex
Afric. This Sethosis (or Sethos) was Egyptus the brother of Danaus, as Manetho
shows: and is also thought to be the same whom Herodotus and Diodorus call
Sesostres. This King (if he were Sesostres) is said to grow so mighty and
proud, that he made his tributary Kings to draw his Chariot by turns: But it
one day so happened that one of those unfortunate Princes cast his eye many
times on the Chariot Wheels, and being by Sesostres asked the cause of his
doing so, he replied; That the falling of that Spoke lowest, which but just
before was in the height of the Wheel, put him in mind of the instability of
Fortune. Which when Sesostres deeply weighed, he gave over to use that
barbarous custom any more.

Next after Sethosis (if we follow Africanus for this Dynastie) Rhapsaces
reigned 61. years. After him Ammenepthes 20. Then Ramases 60. After Ramases
was Ammenemes 5. And last of all Thuoris 6. All which particulars being cast
into one sum, do amount to 203.

Thus then this Dynastie presents it self.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. Kings of Egypt, the nineteenth
Dynastie: ex Africano. 3224. Sethosis began and reigned fifty one years. 3275.
Rhapsaces sixty one. 3336. Ammenepthes twenty. 3356. Ramases or Rampses sixty.
3416. Ammenemes five. 3421. Thuoris six. 3427. Here was the end of this
Dynastie and beginning of the next.

The next was the twentieth Dynastie; to which they who follow Africanus gives
125. but that is a number too short, as in the following reckonings better
known, will well appear. It is better therefore to account so many years to
it as we find in Eusebius; 178. It had in it twelve Kings, accorto Africanus,
but neither does he nor Eusebius name them. Howbeit I think it probable that
Cetes (otherwise called Proteus ( Rampsynitus, Nileus, and those other that
were before Chembis Memphites, reigned now, as we find in Diodorus. This
Dynastie began (as has been said) in the year of the Julian Period 3427, and
ended in the year of the same Julian Period 3605.

The next after this was the one and twentieth Dynastie: to which (not without
cause) Eusebius gives 130. years, and reckons it in these Kings; Semendes.
26. Psusennes 41. Nephercheres 4. Amenophthis 9. Opsochon 6. Spinaces 9.
Psusennes 35.

The first of these I take to bethe same whom other Authors call Cephrenes. The
second I think to be Cheops or Chembis Memphites, who (as Diodorus says)
reigned 1000. years before the 180. Olympiad; and built the greatest of the
Pyramids, which (as he also says) was twenty years in building. Nephercheres
might be Cherinus, or Mycerinus. Opsochon might be Alychis. And the last
Psusennes might be Chabeas, or Vaphres the Father in Law of King Solomon.

Or rather (which is most probable) let some of these be looked upon as
Viceroyes, reigning under Chembis and Chabreus; and then this Dynastie will not
have more then three chief Kings, though it might and did last 130. years. And
they were these, Semendes or Chephrenes, to whom we may give 24. years.
Chembis (or as Herodotus calls him) Cheops 50. years. Chabreus or Vaphreus; or
(as he is otherwise called) Vaphres 56. years. All which sums put together,
do make 130. There is no great scruple sure in all this, unless it be that
Chephrenes is set before Cheops; and indeed that scruple would be removed,
which cannot be unless we set him after Cheops. Take them therefore thus; that
as he whom Herodotus calls Cheops, Diodorus calls Chembis: so he whom Diodorus
calls Chabreus, Herodotus calls Chephrenes. The first of which (namely Cheops)
reigned fifty years; the second (namely Chephrenes) 56.

And now after all this let us proceed to List them into their right times.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. Kings of Egypt in the XXI.
Dynastie, set down in their right times. 3605. Smendes, or Semendes 24. 3629.
Cheops otherwise called Chembis 50. 3679. Chephrenes otherwise called Chabreus
or Vaphres fifty six. 3735. Here was the end of Vaphres his reign, with whom
this Dynastie concluded and gave way unto the next; in the beginning whereof
Sesac began to reign. I therefore leave this and come to that.

Sesac was as I said, the first King here. Some Authors call him Sesochosis;
others Sesonchosis: but in the sacred Scripture he is called Shesack, or
Shishak, King of Egypt; who in the fifth year of Rehoboam came up against
Jerusalem, 1 King. 14.25.

The seventy Interpreters (says one) call him Susachim, and the Hebrew text
Sesak, he reigned twenty one years, and was succeeded by his son Vsorthon,
otherwise called Osorthon, whose time of reign was fifteen years. After
Osorthon Scaliger and Helvicus reckon three Anonumoi, who had among them twenty
five years, at the end whereof Takellothis began, and reigned thirteen years.
After him were again three Anonumoi, to whom the forecited Authors give 42.
years. All which parcels being put into one sum, do make 116. years.

And now see them in their times.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. Kings of Egypt in the XXII.
Dynanastie fitted to their right times. 3735. Sesochosis or Sesac 21. 3756.
Vsorthon or Osorthon 15. 3771. Anonumoi tres 25. 3796. Takellothis 13. 3809.
Anonumoi tres 42. 3851. In this year was the end of this Dynastie and the
beginning of the next. Years of the Julian Period when they beg. Kings of
Egypt in the XXIII. Dynastie fitted to their right times. 3851. Petubastes was
the first King, he reigned 40. years. 3891. Osorchos 8. 3899. Psammus 10.
3909. Ze, otherwise called Zerah (omitted by Eusebius) began in this year and
reigned 31 years. This is that King whom Asa King of Judah overthrew, 2 Chapter
1.4.9.12. 3940. Here was the end of this twenty three Dynastie.

As for the Dynasties following, I shall omit the distinguishing of them in
such a manner as I have done these before going. Howbeit I shall set down the
reigns of the Kings in their right times, and begin first with him who is
next: namely Becchorus.

3940. Bocchorus began now and reigned 44. years. 3984. Sabaccon 8. the
Scripture calls him So, 2 Kin. 17.4. 3992. Sevechus otherwise called Sethon, 14.
4006. Tharacus 18. the Scripture calls him Tirhakah. 4024. Here began an Anarchy
which lasted two years Diod. 4026. Twelve Captanes begin. and reign 15.
years, i would. 4041. Psammiticus subdues them, and reigns 54 years Herod. 4095.
Pharaoh Necho began and reigned 17 years i would. 4112. Psammis 6. i would. 4118.
Arries or (as the Scripture calls him) Hophra 25. 4143. Ausasis: he had rather
45. then 55. or 44. 4188. Cambyses goes into Egypt and conquers it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Kingdom of Sycionia, and of the Kings that reigned there.
THe next Kingdom which by the course of time offers it self, is the Kingdom
of Sycionia. It was at the first called Aegialea, from Aegialeus the first King
thereof, who began to reign in the year of the Julian Period 2616. Afterward
it was called Apia, of Apis the fourth King; and then Peloponesus of Pelops, as
being Peninsula Pelopis: and after that, it came to be called Sycionia of
Sycion the 19th King thereof. The Sycionians (says Pausanias) bordering upon
Corinth, say that Aegialeus was their first King, that he came out of that part
of Peloponesus that is called Aegialos after him and dwelt first in the City
Aegialea, where the Tower stood then, where the Temple of Minerva is now.

In a word, Sycionia at the first was but a small Region in Achia; but the
Kings thereof enlarged their Dominions, through all Achaia, and made Sycion
their Seat; as Ludovicus Vives notes.

This Kingdom continued from hence, to the death of Zeuxippus, 992. years; as
I find in Eusebius. After which, Apollo's Priests reigned thirty two; even
until the return of the Heraclidae, at eighty years after the destruction of
Troy. And note that by this account thus fixed, the Theban War (in the days
of Adrastus) will be just thirty seven years before the fall of Troy: and so
Clemens of Alexandria says it should be.

Eusebius likewise gives us the particular reign of each King, thus, Aegialeus
52. Europs 45. Selchin or Telchin. 20. Apis 25. Thelasion 52. Saint Austin
calls this King by the name Thelxion, and says he had so happy a reign,
that when he was dead the Sycionians adored him as a god with Sacrifices and
Plays; of which it is said, they were the first Inventors. After Thelasion
Aegydius reigned thirty four years. Then was Thurimachus 45. At his Tomb the
Syoionians used to offer Sacrifice, as the said Father also says. After
Thurimachus was Leucippus, he reigned 53. Mossapius or Messapius 47. Eratus or
Peratus 46. Plemneus 48. Or thopolis 63. Marathon 30. Marathus 20. Echyreus 55.
Corax 30. Epopeus 35, he built a Temple to Minerva, by reason of the good
success he had against Nyctaeus, the Brother Lycus Tyrant of Thebes, as some
suppose. Next after him was Lamedon 40. Then was Sycion 45. and of him the
Country was called Sycionia. Polybus was next after him, and reigned 40. Then
Janischus (whom Eusebius calls Inachus) 42. After him Phaestus 8. Adrastus (in
whose time was the Theban War) 4. Polyphydes 31. Pelasgus 20. And last of all
Zeuxippus 32.

In the Dynastie next after these, were the Priests of Apollo's Temple: who
reigned as follows. 1. Archelaus 1 year. 2. Automedon 1 year. 3. Methodeutos
1 year. 4. Euneus 1 year. 5. Theonomos 1 year. 6. Amphiction 9. year. 7.
Charidemus 18. years, at the end whereof this Kingdom ended, even at the
descent of the Heraclidae, four score years after the fall of Troy, but see
them now, set all down in their right times.


Years of the Julian Period when they beg. Kings of Sycionia to the death of
Zeuxippus ex Eusebio. 2616. Aegialeus 52. 2668. Europs 55. 2713. Selchin 20.
2733. Apis 25. 2758. Thelasion 52. 2810. Aegidius 34. 2844. Thurimachus 45.
2889. Leucippus 53. 2942. Messapius 47. 2989. Peratus 46. 3035. Plemnaeus 48.
3083. Orthopolis 63. 3146. Marathon 30. 3176. Marathus 20. 3196. Echyreus 55.
3251. Corax 30. 3281. Epopeus 35. 3316. Lamedon 40. 3356. Sycion 45. 3401.
Polybus 40. 3441. Janiscus 42. 3483. Phaestus 8. 3491. Adrastus 4. 3495.
Polyphides 31. 3526. Pelasgus 20. 3546. Zeuxippus 32. 3578. In this Zeuxippus
ended, and the Priests of Apoll's Temple began. Years of the Julian Period
when they beg. The Priests of Apollo's Temple 3578. Archelaus 1. 3579.
Automedon 1. 3580. Methoduetos 1. 3581. Funeus 1. 3582. Theonomos 1. 3583.
Amphictyon 9. 3592. Charidemus 18. 3610. In this year (being eighty years
after the destruction of Troy) this Kingdom of Sycionia ended.

CHAP. V. Of the Kingdom and Kings of the Argives, and of the Mycenae that
succeeded them.
THe Kingdom of Argos is that which is to be considered next: the first King
thereof was Inachus, who reigned fifty years, and began to reign in the year
of the Julian Period 2852. which was 1086. years before the first year of the
first Olympiad. This King was the Father of Jo, whom Jupiter defloured, and
(perceiving that Juno espied his act) turned her into a Cow. Which is to be
understood after this manner, viz. that being defloured by Jupiter, and not
knowing how to abide the fury of her Father, she fled away by Sea into Egypt,
in a Ship called the Cow which Jupiter provided for her: and being there she
taught the people Tillage, and the use of Letters, for which she was called by
the Egyptians Isis, and Deified by them.

The next after Inachus was Phoroneus, he reigned 60 years and was called a
Judge because he made Laws to decide Controversies among his people, and was
one of them that judged in a Controversy between Juno and Neptune. And
hereupon some also think that Forum [the name of a place to plead in] came
first from hence, but how truly (says Vives) look they to that.

Orosius says that the Thelcissans and Carsathians warred upon him; but he
vanquished them, and drove them to seek a new habitation by the Sea. Plato
calls him the first man, because he first taught the Greeks civility and
Husbandry. Others say as much of Argus; Of Ogyges and his Flood.
as I shall afterward mention, when I come to speak of him. Ogyges reigned in
Attica in this Kings time, 1020. years before the first Olympiad; which
therefore was in the year of the Julian Period 2918. Two and thirty years from
whence (for so long Ogyges reigned, according to Cedrenus) was that great and
notable Flood, which was called the Ogygian Food, both because it happened in the
Country wherein he reigned, and also because he was drowned in it. For indeed
the Flood which bears his name drowned him and his whole Country: which for
204 years after lay void, until Cecrops his reign there. Africanus (in
Eusebius. lib, 10. De praeparat. Evang. cap. 3.) reckons not so many by five
years for this void space: howbeit I find by careful computation, as many as
I have mentioned, and do begin Ogyges reign 1020 years before the Olympiads,
and so also does Africanus. This Flood therefore, of which I now speak, was in
the year of the Julian Period 2950. which was the 49th year of Phoroneus the
second King of Argos. Eusebius places it much about the same time: and whereas
Cedrenus accounts. 248. years from hence to the Flood of Deucalion, I shall
afterward show whether that be so or no. Deucalians Flood was great, but this
was greater, extending it self to the banks of Archi-pelago or the Aegean
Sea; drowding likewise the Regions of Artica about Athens, and that of Achaia
in Peloponesus: at which time the Cities Helice and Bura (which were seated on
the North part of Peloponesus) were also swallowed up.

The next King after Phoroneus was Apis; he reigned thirty five years. That
which some write of this King, viz. that he went into Egypt, and dying there
was called Serapis, the greatest god of Egypt, seems rather to belong to
Osyris the Husband of Isis. For Apis in their language signifies an Ox, which
the Egyptians worshipped either from the institution of Isis and Osyris, in
regard of the use that they found out of this Beast in Tillage, or for the
honor of Osyris whose soul they say went into an Ox, and remains
continually in the Ox Apis, passing from one Apis to another: or else it was
in regard that Isis gathered together the scattered members of Osyris, when
Typhon had slain him, and put them into a wooden Ox covered with an Oxes
hide; which when the people saw, they believed that Osyris was become an Ox,
and so began to adore that, as if it had been himself.

Next after Apis, Argus reigned: the time of his reign was seventy years. Of
him the Country was called Argos, and the People Argives: For till now the
Country bore the name of Peloponesus; or (as some think) was formerly called
Thessalia, or Pelasgia. Homer calls it Argos Pelasgicum, as Master Isaacson
mentions in his Chronology.

It is also written that in Argus his time Greece began to Namely better then
before.
know Husbandry and Tillage, and that after his death he was accounted for a
god, and honored with Temples and Sacrifices; which honor a private man, one
Homogyrus, had before him, because he was the first among them who ever yoaked
Oxen to the Plow: howbeit he was slain with Thunder, as Saint Austin notes in
the sixth Chapter of his eighteenth book De civit. Dei. But if Isis before
this, carried the knowledge of these things out of Greece into Egypt, and that
Phoroneus also before mentioned, was (as Plato says) the first man, because he
first taught the Greeks civility and Husbandry; then must this which is here
attributed to Argus, be understood of a more full and perfect knowledge then
they had at the first: for it is easier to add then to invent, which therefore
makes things come to perfection but by degrees.

Criasus succeeded Argus, and reigned after him fifty four years. Saint
Austin says that Prometheus and his brother Arlas were famous in the days of
Saphrus (otherwise called Sphaerus, or Iphaereus whilst Criasus reigned still
in Argos, lib. 18 De civit. Dei, cap. 8. The first of these viz. Prometheus, is
reported to have formed men out of Clay: which was, because he was an excellent
teacher of wisdom. And as for that fiction also, of his stealing away of
Jupiters Fire: by it is meant either that he first taught to strike Fire with a
Flint; or else that his knowledge reached to the very Stars; For he was a
great Astronomer, and did thereupon ascend to the Mount Caucasus, where 9with a
restless desire) he used to search out the natures, motions, and influences of
the heavenly bodies. His Brother was also a great Astronomer: from whence arose
that Fable of his supporting Heaven with his Shoulders.

Phorbas succeeded Criasus, and reigned after him thirty five years. This King
Phorbas (in the thirteenth year of his reign took Rhodes, and cleared it
from venomous Beasts, with which the Country had been infected: for which, he
and his Wife were deified after their deaths, as Strabo and Eusebius tell us.

Triopas succeeded Phorbas, and reigned after him forty six years.

Next after Triopas was Crolopus, whose time of reign was twenty one years.
In his days (as Eusebius mentions out of Tatianus) was Phaetous burning, and
Deucalions Flood: to which the account of Varro well agrees: who says that
the Flood of Deucalion was in the days of Cranaus the second King of Athens,
who (as I shall afterward show you) was contemporary to this King Crotopus.

Next after Crotopus, was Stethnelas, he reigned eleven years, and was the
ninth King of Argos.

Gelanor being about to succeed him, is expulsed by Danaus, who being driven
out of Egypt by his Brother, arriveth in Greece, and there gets the Kingdom of
Argos, in which he reigned 50. years. For when he was driven out of Egypt, he
came (as I said) into Greece among the Argives: and being come among them, he
contended with Gelanor about the Kingdom; in which contention the People were
to umpire. And when much was said on both sides, Danaus seemed to speak as
good reason as the other: whereupon they could not determine until the next
day. And on the next day a Wolf comes hurling into the Pasture, where he
begins a fight with the chief Bull of the Kings Heard: which when the People
saw, they attended the issue; and finding that the Wolf had the hap to kill
the Bull, they gave the judgment on Danaus his side. For as the Wolf is a
stranger to Man, so was Danaus to them: but because the Wolf overcame Danaus
must reign, and Gelanor be expulsed. This was 382. years after this Kingdom
of Argos first began. And note that this King was the first that dug Wels in
Argos, who also because of the Wolf that seemed to predict his good Fortune,
built and dedicated a Temple to Apollo Lycius. Finally, he was slain by his
Son in Law Lynceus who reigned after him one and forty years: the Story of
which is as follows.

This Danaus (of whom we speak) ruled first in Egypt nine years for his
brother Sethosis, otherwise called Aegyptus: in which time it was told him by
the Oracle, that he should one day be slain by a man who should be his Son
in law. For fear of which Prediction, he refused to marry his daughters, and
would not thereupon give them to the Sons of his Brother, although his
Brother did earnestly desire it. For which denial (together with other things,
wherein he had by his misrule, offended his Brother) Aegyptus his said Brother
expelled him out of Egypt by force, and coming (as has been said into Argos,
was received there as King, in the stead of Gelanor. Thither did Aegyptus send
his Sons after him, with command, either to marry his daughters, or to kill
him. Which charge they pursued so well, that they forced him to condescend,
that they should enjoy them; yet so, that he gave to every Daughter privately a
Sword, with charge to kill their Husbands. All of them executed his will,
except Hypemnestra, who discovered the Plot to Lynceus her Husband, and
thereupon he saved himself by flight. Now this disobedience caused Danaus to
arraign his Daughter; but she was acquit by the Argives: howbeit her Father
would not release her, but kept her still in prison. After this, Lynceus
returned from Egypt with so ces, slew Danaus, released his Wife Hypemnestra,
and possessed her Fathers Kingdom: which (as I said before) he held for the
space of 41 years. The lives of the other Sisters, were spared for
Hypemnestra's sake, but embarked in a Ship without Pilot, Mast, or Sail, and
so committed to the mercy of the Sea: where for a time floating up and down,
they are at the last (as I find in some Authors) cast upon the Isle of Albion,
which was then inhabited by Giants, who on them begat Children of their own
proportion. And for all this, Master Isaackson quotes Justin, Pausanias,
Higinus, Virgil.

Next after Lynceus, was the reign of Abas; he was the Father of Praetus, and
Acrisius, and reigned 23. years: Of him the Argive Kings were called
Abantiadae.

Proetas succeeded Abas, and reigned 17. years. His three Daughters called the
Proetides) were so extremely proud of their own beauties, that they fell mad,
and were cured by Melampus with Hellebour: which ever since has been called
Melampodium. He had the one of them given him for his cure, and was married to
her. And of this man Melampus, it is further said; that he understood the notes
of Birds, and the voice of Beasts, as Pausanias writes.

Acrisius (the last King of Argos) succeeded Proetus, and reigned after him 31.
years. He was accidentally slain by his Grandchild Perseus, the Son of his
Daughter Danae; who thereupon forsook this Country of Argos, and founded this
Kingdom at Mycenae. For we are to know that Acrisius had a daughter called
Danae, whom he sequestered to a Tower, and there kept her private; because the
Oracle had told him that her son should kill him. Now Jupiter hearing of the
same of her beauty, and finding no means to come to her, descended (as is
said) into her lap, through the roof of the Tower, in a shower of Gold, and
had thereby the opportunity to get her with child: By which is meant, that he
corrupted her keepers with gold, and thereupon had liberty to work his will.
At last she was delivered of a son, even of this son Perseus: which when
Acrisius her Father came to know, he forthwith caused her and the child to be
enclosed in a Chest, and cast into the Sea. The Chest was driven upon the coast
of Apulia, and taken up by Fishermen, who finding her and the child in it,
presented them to Pylumnus the King, to whom she was married. Perseus after
this, being grown to be a man, did many valiant exploits, and coming into
Argos where he practiced the throwing of the quoit, did by mischance brain his
Grandfather Acrisius with one of them: and so ended the Kingdom of Argos, For
when Perseus saw what he had done, he translated the Kingdom from thence to
Mycenae. Some say that this accident happened whilst he endeavored to show his
Grandfather the invention of the Discus, or Leaden ball: for whilst Acrisius
was more curious to see what was done, then careful to avoid the danger that
might betide him, he came under the dint of what was thrown (whether Quoit, or
Ball of Lead) and so was slain.

But I must now set down the Kings already mentioned, in their right times,
and present them in one List at once before thee. After which I shall proceed to
the Kingdom of Mycenae: in which I shall meet with difficulty more then
ordinary, because the Kings of that Kingdom are scarce rightly computed by any
Author that I have seen. Petavius in his Rat. Temp. comes nearest to truth, as
will be afterward showed.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. Kings of Argos to the death of
Acrisius ex Eusebio. 2852. Inachus 50. Years of his reign. 2902. Phoroneus 60.
Years of his reign. 2962. Apis 35. Years of his reign. 2997. Argus 70. Years
of his reign. 3067. Criasus 54. Years of his reign. 3121. Phorbas 35. Years
of his reign. 3156. Triopas 46. Years of his reign. 3202. Crotopus 21 Years
of his reign. 3223. Stethnelas 11. Years of his reign. 3234. Danaus 50. Years
of his reign. 3284. Lynceus 41. Years of his reign. 3325. Abas 23. Years of
his reign. 3348. Praetus 17. Years of his reign. 3365. Acrisius 31. Years of
his reign. 3396. In this year the Kingdom of Argos was ended through the
untimely death of Acrisius, 544. years after it began.

I come therefore now to that of Mycenae: in the handling of which that I may
account aright, I shall crave a little leave to depart away from the common
path. For, as is commonly accounted, Perseus and Sthenelus had but eight years
together: whereas Perseus alone had not less then one and thirty years,
because mention is made of the two and thirtieth year of his reign as may be
seen in Eusebius, his tenth Book, and his third Chapter De Praeparatione
Evangelica. After these two, Euristheus reigned 38 say some, 43. say others.
Then Atreus and Thyestes 65. and Agamemnon 15. After him Aegystus 7. Orestes
70. and last of all Tisamenus, Penthilus, and Cometes 3. among them: the end
whereof must be at 80. years after the destruction of Troy; as Velleius
shows, lib. 1. cap 2.

The years of these last, after Agamemnon, I think may pass as they, are
except (with Sir Walter Raleigh) I reckon six, and not seven to Aegystus; or
else account some one of their years after Agamemnon to be but current. And as
for Agamemnon, himself, that he should have but 15 is contrary to what
Eusebius writes in the Chapter and book aforesaid, where (agreeing with
Clemens of Alexandria) he tells us that Agamemnon reigned 18. years in the
last whereof Troy was taken. Then for Atreus and Thyestes, that they together
should have 65. years, is nothing probable: for (as Petavius proves out of
Thucidides and Isocrates) it is not to be doubted but that Eurystheus
(predecessor to them) was slain by the posterity of Hercules after Hercules
himself was dead. To which (says he) Diodorus adds, saying; the posterity
of Hercules fought against Eurystheus, having Theseus and Hyllus for their
Captains. Have an eye then to the time when Theseus both began and ended his
reign, and see whether the time of Eurystheus can possibly be thrust up so
high as the 65. years of Atreus and Thyestes will crowd it. More like it is
that they two between them, had not above six years: For the Scholiast of
Thucidides sets down the time of the Heraclidae's first eruption into
Peloponnesus, to be twenty years before the destruction of Troy; and the
latter to be 80. years after it was destroyed.

But (says Petavius their first coming in, is to be taken two ways: For in
the beginning thereof, they (with their Captains Jolaus, Theseus and Hillus)
fought against Eurystheus, and he being slain they enjoyed Peloponnesus for
about a year, until by pestilence they were driven out. Then in the third
year after, they come again (even just twenty years before the destruction
of Troy) when Hyllus concluded with Atreus the successor of Eurystheus, that if
he (viz. Hyllus) were overcome in single fight the Heraclidae should depart to
the place from whence they came, and not return into Peloponnesus again
until an hundred years after. Now it so fell out that Hyllus was slain; they
thereupon depart as was agreed, and return not again until the time
appointed, which being an hundred years after, and yet but 80. years after
the fall of Troy; must needs declare that Hyllus was slain twenty years
before Troy was destroyed, viz. in the year of the Julian Period 3510 three
years before which ( viz. in the year of the Julian Period 3507.) Eurystheus
was slain. In that year therefore of his death was the first year of Atreus,
who (together with his Partner in reign Thyestes) could have but six years,
if Agamemnon have eighteen. And that Agamemnon had eighteen rather then
fifteen, is witnessed (as I said before) by Clemens in Eusebius; who says
that Troy was taken in the eighteenth year of his reign. Nor does Eusebius
himself but record so many years for the whole reign of Agamemnon, though he
wrongfully coupleth his fifteenth with the fall of Troy, which is indeed the
only reason why some Authors say, that he had but fifteen years of reign.
For if Troy was taken in his fifteenth year, then must that be his last,
because at his return from thence he was slain by Aegystus, set on to do it by
the suggestion of Clytemnestra Agamemnons own Wife, who in the absence of her
Husband, and whilst he was at the Seige of Troy, committed Adultery with
Aegystus, and now (together with him) defiles her hands with Blood, as before
for the satisfying of her wicked lust, she had filthily defiled her Husbands
bed; and so in conclusion adds murder and Adultery both together. But it was
not the fifteenth, but eighteenth year of this gallant King when the Greeks
took Troy, according to the Testimony aforesaid: and therefore we must not
account less then eighteen years for Agamemnon.

And as for Perseus the first King of this Kingdom, mention (as I said before)
is made of the two and thirtieth years of his reign: but how much he reigned
longer is uncertain. Only that he began in the year of the Julian Period
3396. I am very confident, and have reason for it; For first Danaus was
banished out of Egypt nine years after King Pharaoh was drowned in the
Red Sea: which therefore makes his banishment to be in the year of the Julian
Period 3233. and consequently his beginning to reign in Argos in the year of
the same Period 3234. Which time of Danaus being thus fixed, serves well to
direct us both to the beginning and end of the Kingdom of Argos, and
consequently for the beginning of the Kingdom of Mycenae, whose first King was
(as already has been said) King Perseus, Secondly, the two and thirtieth year
of Perseus before mentioned was 63. years before the expedition of the
Argonauts, and therefore in the year of the Julian Period 3427. which
thereupon directs us to the beginning of his reign in the year of the same
Period 3396. And that it was so long before that expedition, is mentioned by
Eusebius out of Apollodorus in libro de temporibus. But you will say, when and
in what year was that Expedition? I answer it was in the end of the reign of
Laomedon, and in the beginning of the reign of Priamus; as Helvicus has well
observed. Now Priamus we know reigned but till the destruction of Troy, which
was destroyed in the year of the Julian Period 3530. 408. years before the
beginning of the Olympiads of Iphitus, Diod. lib. 14.
and 432 before Rome was built. Priamus therefore must needs begin to reign in
the year of the Julian Period 3490, for he reigned forty years, and no more; as
Bucholcerus, out of Archilochus has recorded. And if Priamus began to reign
then, it will follow that then also was the expedition of the Argonauts: how
else could it be in the end of the reign of Laomedon, and beginning of
Priamus, as Helvicus says it was.

And thus we have the beginning and ending of the Kingdom of Argos rightly
fixed, and consequently the beginning of the Kingdom of Mycenae: but how long
Perseus reigned is still unknown. Probable it is that he and his son
Stethlenus had together sixty six years, Eurystheus 45. Atreus and Thyestes
six, Agamemnon 18. Aegystus six, Orestes 70. Tisamenus, Penthilus, and Cometes
three: these ended in the year of the Julian Period 3610. at that descent of
the Heraclidae which was four score years after the fall of Troy.

Know also that the Olympiads of Hercules began 442. years before those of
Iphitus, as is reckoned by Clemens out of an old ancient Chronologer, after
which he lived not above nine years, as is very probable; and therefore dyed in
the year of the Julian Period 3505. upon whose death, his children are banished
by Eurystheus, for fear they should deprive him of his Kingdom. But by this
fear he wrought himself a mischief: for hereupon it came to pass that by
two years after they came against him and destroyed him, as already has been
said.

But now see a Catalogue of these in their right times, as near as in all
probability can be gathered.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A Catalogue of the Kings of
Mycenae, probably fixed in their right times. 3396, Ferseus and Stethlenus 66.
3426. Euristhous 45. 3507. Atrius and Thyestes 6. 3513. Agamemnon 18. 3531.
Aegystus 6. 3537. Orestes 70. 3607. Tisamenus, Penthilus and Cometes 3. 3610.
In this year was the descent of the Heraclidae, four score years after the
fall of Troy. Now also ended the Kingdom of Sycionia: For (as most Authors
say) upon this return of the posterity of Hercules, the Kingdom of Mycenae
was changed to Lacedemon, and was under the government of Euristhenes: whilst
that of Sycion was translated unto Corinth, and was under the government of
Alethes; both these beginning much about one and the same time. Of which more
shall be spoken afterward.

CHAP. VI. Of the Kingdom and Kings of Athens; the first whereof was Cecrops.
THis Kingdom of Athens was situated also in Greece as well as those of
Sycion, Argos and Mycenae already mentioned. The The first I mean in this
known Dinastie.
first King was Cecrops, from the beginning of whose reign to the death of
Codrus were 490 years, as Gaffarell shows from the testimony of those, who
have read no less from the Characters of the Stars. Eusebius wants three
years of this number; the reason whereof I take to be, because he accounts no
time of Interregnum between Pandion and Aegeus; of which I shall speak more by
and by.

In the mean time I begin with Cecrops, who reigned fifty years, and began in
the year of the Julian Period 3154. It is reported that he was of a double
shape; his upper part like a man, and his lower part like a beast; but this is
a fable. For he was indeed called Id est. A duobus nature is constants.
(...), but it was because he spoke two languages, says Eusebius; as well the
language of the Greecians, as the language of the Egyptians among whom he was
borne, and from whom he came. Or else being taller then other men, he was as if
he had the proportion of two men. Or finally, he was called Diphyes because he
taught the people civility, and did also institute a strict observance of the
matrimonial band and society, taking order that women should be deprived of
that licensious liberty which formerly was a little too common among them: this
therefore made some say, that he was man in his upper parts; but his lower were
feminine, as Ludovicus Vives notes. When he began to repair the City where he
reigned; called afterward Athens: an Olive tree grew suddenly up in one place,
and a fountain burst as suddenly out in another. Which prodigies drove the King
to Delphos, to know the Oracles mind; whose answer was, that the Olive tree
signified Minerva, and the fountain Neptune, and that the City might be called
after which of these the people pleased. Hereupon Cecrops gathered all the
people of both sexes together, to make their Election, the men being for
Neptune, Aug. De. tivit. Dei, li. 18. c. 9.
and the women for Minerva: now it so fell out that the women had the most
voices; who thereupon named the City (...), which is as Saint Austine says)
Minerva. Neptune being displeased herewith, spoiled the Country by This was
through the power of the Devil, by whom also their Oracles spoke.
inundation. And the people (to pacify him) punished the women by enacting
three laws against them. First, that thenceforth no woman should be admitted
to any consultation. Secondly, that none after that time should be named after
the name of their mother. And thirdly, that none of their families should be
named Athenae. Ludovicus Vives says, there were three Cities of this name. The
first this, in Achaia. The second, in the I Will of Euboea. And the third, in
Laconia.

The next King after Ceerops, was Cranaus, Deucaliens Flood.
he reigned nineyeares, and was Son in Law to Cecrops. Deucalions Flood was
in his time, as Varro says: and, as the Marmora Arundelliana cast it, in the
fourth year of his reign: which by my account falls into the year of the
Julian Period 3207. and after the Flood of Ogyges 257. years. This Flood was in
Thessalie, where Deucalion then was King: For we are to note that he reigned in
Thessalie, near the mount of Pernasus; But it extended farther then so. For it
wasted Italy, Greece, and the Island of Atalanta: and yet that in Ogyges time
is said to be greater. Prometheus foretold of this Deluge: Deucalion thereupon
He also invented the wearing of Rings on the fourth finger, as says Eusebius.
provided himself a kind of Vessel called Cibotium or Larnax: in which he
saved them who fled to him for succor.

The conflagration under Phaeton is said to be much about the same time, not
only in Ethiopia, Phaetons burning.
but in Istria a Region in Italy, and about Cumae, and the Mountains of
Vesuvius. Of both which be strange Fables: as that Phaeton should set the World
on fire by overthrowing the Chariot of the Sun; which indeed and truth was
nothing else but an extraordinary great heat wherewith the World was vexed in
those days. And as for the other, that Deucalion and his wife should be the
restorers of mankind; it was nothing else but because he cherished them that
fled to him for succor: for in his Boat Larnax or Cibotium, he preserved many,
who otherwise had been drowned.

Ovid (the Father of these Fables) had without doubt read the first book of
Moses: but Ovid was a professed Heathen; Romans 1.2^.25.
and the Heathen (as Saint Paul tells us) became vain in their imaginations;
and thereupon, to fit their own fancy, turned the truth of God into a lie; as
well in this, as in such other things as the Apostle mentions in his first
Chapter to the Romans.

Amphiction succeeded Cranaus, and reigned after him ten years. He finding
Greece to be weak, and subject to the incursions of the Barbarians, instituted
(out of the body of the whole Country) one general meeting or Assembly; which
from him was called the Amphictionian Council and in it he made Laws, which
(beside those that were proper to every City) were common to all, as Helvicus
notes. So that this seems to be the first Parliament that ever was in the
world. The first Parliament.


The next that reigned here was Ericthonius; who having deposed Amphyction)
reigned after him 50. years. He is said to be the Inventor of Wagons, and to
be the first that built a Temple to Minerva.

Pandion (whose daughters were Progne, and Philomela) succeeded Ericthonius,
and reigned after him forty years. This Pandion (in the nine and thirtieth
year of his reign) warred with Labdacus King of Thebes, being aided by Tereus
the Son of Mars: for which favor Pandion gave him his daughter Progne. Of whom
we read, that after Tereus had married her, he ravished her other Sister
Philomela, cut out her tongue, and cast her into prison; where she wrought her
story in needle work, and sent it to her Sister. Progne hereupon slew her
Son Itys, whom she had borne to Tereus, and set him before her Husband to
eat. Tereus upon this attempted to kill her, but she fled and escaped. Of all
which Ovid fableth after this manner; viz. that whilst Tereus followed after
Progne, he was turned into a Lapwing, she into a Swallow, and Philomela into a
Nightingale.

Ericthius was the next King, he succeeded Pandion, and reigned after him 50.
years. His daughter Orithya was taken away and ravished by Boreas of Thrace.

The Poets ascribe this Rape to the North wind; which was for nothing else but
because Thrace was North from Athens. About which time was also the Rape of
Proserpina by Orcus, or Aidoneus King of the Molossians. But whether of these
was first, Eusebius shows: but is not clear, whether they were when
Ericthonius or Ericthius reigned.

Cecrops the second reigned next after Ericthius, forty years.

Pandion the second succeeded Cecrops, and reigned 25. years between whom and
his successor, was an Interregnum of two years. For less then so there could
not be, in regard the whole time of this Kingdom to the death of Codrus, was
490. which the particulars in Eusebius will not make, unless there be so many
years of Interregnum; as at the first was noted.

Aegeus was the next: he succeeded Pandion at the end of the Interregnum, and
reigned after 48. years. He had (as Justin says) two Wives. The first was
Ae^^ra, by whom he had Theseus: the second was Medea, whom he married after she
was rejected by Jason, and by her he had Medus, It is proble that he came to
gain his Fathers Kingdom by the aid of his Grandfather Pyla, King of the
Magarenses. For (as Pausanias says) when his Father was expeiled, he fled to
his Wives Father Pyla and died in his Country. The aid therefore that was
granted by Pyla, was not to (...) Pandion, but his Son Aegeus; though
Sygonius writes otherwise. Or if it were to restore Pandion, yet because he
died before his restitution could be effected, it must needs be that not he,
but his son was restored by it.

After Aegeus, Theseus succeeded, and reigned thirty years: who before he was
King, according to his lot was sent into Creete to be devoured of the
Minotaure. For we are to know that not many years before the end of Aegeus his
reign, A^^rogeus (son to Minos King of Creet) was treacherously slain at
Athens. For which fact Mi^^^ rose up in Arms against the Athenians, and being
too hard for them, propounded them peace upon this condition: namely, that they
should every year send seven Noble young men, and as many Virgins to Creete to
be devoured by the Minotaure.

Now it came to pass that in the fourth year of this agreement, the lot fell
upon Theseus the Kings Son, who thereupon was sent thither in a Ship with
black S^ils and Rigging, in token of the great sorrow that was in Athens at
his departure; but chiefly in Aegeus his Father, who gave command to his Son
that if his hap were so good as to slay the Minotaure, he should change his
Sails from black to white at his coming home again. Now it so fell out that
Theseus (by Ariadnes advice) slew the Minotaure: but at his return being
overjoyed with his good fortune, forgot to alter his Sails. Whereupon it came
to pass, that his Father Aegeus, looking from an high Tower, and seeing the
Ship to come back with Black Sails, thought his Son to be dead: and for
grief thereof he presently cast himself into the Sea, and was drowned. Which
Sea wasever after called by the name of Aegean-Sea. But as for this Theseus he
was Cousin German to Hercules; to whom he was assistant in many of his Labors.
He it was that first of all stole away the beauteous Helena, being aided
therein by Pyrithous whom he must therefore aid in the like Rape: which he
did. For though Helena was at this time rescued again by her brothers Castor
Pollux, yet Theseus makes good his promise to Pyrithous, and is assistant to
him in his attempt to steal Proserpine the daughter of Aidoneus King of the
Molossians: In which theft Theseus was taken Prisoner, and afterward set free
by Hercules.

Coelius Rhodiginus relates this story otherwise, and says that her name whom
these two came to steal, was Cora the daughter of Ades: and that they went to
the River Acheron there to have done it. Which I like better then to call her
Proserpine, because that Rape was long before this; and was either in the days
of Ericthonius, or in the days of Ericthius as I have already mentioned.

Mnestheus was the next King of Athens, who attained the Kingdom through the
faction of Helen's brethren, who expelled Theseus and made him King. This
Mnestheus reigned twenty four years, and dyed but a little before Aeneas came
into Italy, as Ludovicus Vives notes.

Demophoon reigned next, but was none of his Son. For Demophoon was the Son of
Theseus and Phaedra, who upon the death of Mnestheus recovered his Fathers
Kingdom, and reigned in it thirty three years: This was he who for his neglect
caused fair Phillis to hang her self.

Oxintes succeeded Demophoon, and reigned after him twelve years. His
successor was Aphidas, who reigned one year. After Aphidas was Timoetes, who
reigned eight years. Then after him was Melanthus, who reigned 37. years.

The next after him was Codrus, who reigned 21. years; and was the seventeenth
and last King of Athens. For the next that governed here after Codrus were the
Archontes perpetui: after them, the Archontes decennales: and last of all the
Archontes annui. The Archontes perpetui were for term of life and did in their
successions reign 316. years after the death of Codrus. The Archontes
decennales had ten years a piece, and did reign each after other until
seventy years were ended. The Archontes annui, were no other then yearly
officers: whose first beginning was in the year of the Julian Period 4030 which
was the first year of the 24. Olympiad, and is an account commended much by
Master Seldom in his Marmora Arundelliana, who in that book places the first
of these annual officers in the very same year.

I shall not need to set down the particular names of these, until I come to
show you them in their right times: which shall be now, in the following
Catalogues.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A perfect List or Catalogue of the
Athenian Kings, ex Eusebio. 3154. Cecrops 50. 3204. Cranaus 9. 3213. Amphyction
10. 3223. Ericthonius 50. 3273. Pandion 40. 3313. Ericthius 50. 3363. Cecrops
secundus 40. 3403. Pandion the second 25. 3428. An Interregnum of two years
began now. 3430. The end of the Interregnum, and beginning of Aegeus, whose
time of reign was 48. years. 3478. Theseus 30. 3508. Mnestheus 24. 3532.
Demophoon 33. 3565. Oxintes 12. 3577. Aphydas 1. 3578. Timoetes 8. 3586.
Metanthus 37. 3623. Codrus 21. 3644.

In this year was the death of Codrus, just four hundred and ninety years
fince Cecrops the first began to reign. This was the last King of Athens, who
for the good of his Country put himself into a disguise that he might be
slame. For when the Kings of Peloponnesus (who descended from Hercules) warred
upon Athens, it was told them by the Oracle that they should conquer if they
killed not the Atheman King: hereupon they concealed (as much as they could)
the answer of the Oracle, and withal gave a strict charge that none should
touch Codrus. But the Athenians hearing of this Oracle, Codrus being desirous
of glory and the good of his Country, disguised himself, went into the Camp of
his Enemies, and falling to brable with the Soldiers was flaine: from whence
Aug de civit. dei lib. 18. c. 19
came that saying of Virgill, Aut jurgia Godri. Now after this, the Athenians
would have no more Kings: which was not out of any inconvenience found in the
rule of Sovereignty, but in honor of Codrus, as says a learned Knight, Sir
Walter Raleigh lib. 2 cap. 17. Sect. 10.
in his History of the World. And indeed it might very well be so; for after
Codrus had thus delivered his Country, the Athenians Aug. lib. 18. cap. 19. de
civit dei.
sacrificed to him as a God, and would (as I said) have after him no more
Kings, for fear I think they should not be so good as he. For his worth was
able to Eclipse theirs, if at any time they failed of what was required.
Howbeit the Government was still in a manner Regal; for between Kings and the
Archontes perpetui, was little or no difference, save only in the name. For
the Princes that followed after Codrus, without regal name governed Athens
during the time of their life; and so in effect were Kings, although they were
called Archonts. The first of these was Medon; from whom all else, in the same
Dynastie, were called Medontidae: of which as follows.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A perfect List or Catalogue, of the
Archonts of Athens, called Archontes perpetui: ex Eusebio. 3644. Medon 20.
3664. Agas^us 36. 3700. Archippus 19. 3719. Tersippus 41. 3760. Phorbas 31.
3791. Mezades 30. 3821. Diognetus 28. 3849. Pheredus 19. 3868. Ariphron 20. In
his time Sardanapalus began to reig. 3888. Tespi^us, or Thesphorus 27. In his
time Sardanapalus lost his Kingdom, as says Eusebius. 3915. Agamnestor 20.
3935. Aeschilus 23. 3958. Alemenon 2. 3960. Here was the end of this Dynastie.
Archontes decennales. 3960. Carops 10 3970. Aesimides 10. 3980. Elidicus 10.
3990. Hippomenes 10. 4000. Leocrates 10. 4010. Absander 10. 4020. Erixias 10.
4030.

Here the Archontes decennales ended, and the Archontes annui began: therein
agreeing to that which Master Seldom commends in his Marmora Arundelliana,
who places the first of these Annual officers in the very same year, as I
said before.

CHAP. VII. Of the Kings that reigned in the Kingdom of Troy, before the
Greeks destroyed it.
THe first of these Kings with whom I begin, was Dardanus the son in Law of
Teucer: he began to reign in the year of the Julian Period 3234, and (as
Eusebius says) reigned 63. years. His Kingdom was in Phrygia the less, and
Asia the lesser. The chief City was Troy, which he built and called it (after
his own name) Dardania. Of Tros it came to be called Troy; and of Ilus, Ilium.

Ericthonius, succeeded Dardanus, and reigned after him 46. years; Eusebius Homer
and Diodorus say, that he was extremely rich, and that he had 30000 Mares and
their Colts continually feeding in his Pastures.

Tros succeeded Ericthonius, and reigned after him 61. Eusebius. He altered the
name of Dardania and turned it to Troy, from whom the people also were called
Trojans.

Ilus was the next King: he would that the City should be called Ilium; and so
was. Howbeit it lost not the name of Troy but it was known by both names. The
time of his reign here was 50 years.

Laomedon succeeded Illus, and reigned after him thirty six years Ral.

After Laomedon was King Priamus, who reigned (not 52. but 40. years according
to the best and truest account, taken by Bucholcerus out of Archilochus.

So that all the times of these Kings, was 296. years. And now see their List
rightly fixed.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A List or Catalogue of the Kings of
Troy, before it was destroyed: all of them fixed in their right times. 3234.
Dardanus 63. 3297. Fricthonius 46. 3343. Tros 61. 3404. Ilus 50. 3454. Laomedon
36. 3490. Priamus 40 3530.

In this year Troy was taken and destroyed, 408. years before the Olympiads
of Iphitus, and 432. before the building of Rome began, as is witnessed by
Diodorus lib. 14.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Kingdom of the Aborigines
THis Kingdom was in Italy, and began in the year of the Julian Period 3385.
Janus was the first King: he reigned 33. years. In his time Saturn fled out of
Crete into this Country, as both Poets and Historiograpers witness. The time
when he came was in the 17. year of Janus: after which he and Janus reigned
about 17. years, accounting the year when he came to be the first year of
his reign. Scal. Eusebius.

These people were called Aborigines at the first, because their Original was
unknown: and yet Dionys. Hal.
some say they were formerly Arcadians, and came with Oenotrius (Son of
Lycan) into Italy. But Scaliger says their right name was Aberrigines, a multo
errore, from their much wandering.

The next King after those two before mentioned, was Picus the Son of
Saturn: he reigned 37. years. Eusebius.

Saint Austin speaking of Picus, says, that he was the Son of Saturn, and
first successor in the Kingdom of the Laurentines. For Laurentium was the
eldest City of Latium, the seat of the Aborigines, and the place where their
Kingdom, after they came into Italy, was founded: called Laurentum of the
Laurel Wood that grew near it. Moreover, it is said of Picus that he was
turned into a Pie, because (being a great Sooth-sayer) he kept such a Bird
always for his Augury. Of which see more in Saint Aug. De civit. lib. 18. cap.
15. together with the notes of Ludovicus Vives thereupon.

Faunus the Son of Picus succeeded, and reigned 44. years Eusebius. Vives ex
Dionys.
Helvic. Dionisius says that some held Mars to be his great Grandfather, and
that the Romans worshipped him with Songs and Sacrifices, as their Countries
Genius.

Latinus reigned after Faunus, 36. years: in the latter end of his reign,
Aeneas came into Italy, and when Latinus was dead reigned after him three
years. But of Aeneas more shall be spoken afterward. And now see all these in
their right times.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A List of the ancient Kings of
Italy before Aeneas, rightly fixed. 3385. Janus and Saturn 33. 3418. Picus the
Son of Saturn 37. 3455. Faunus the Son of Picus 44. 3499. Latinus after
Faunus 36. 3535. In this year Latinus dyed, and Aeneas began to reign.

CHAP. VI. Of the Kings of Italy after Latinus.
PEtavius gathers out of Dionisius, that Aeneas the Successor of La^inus began
to reign in Italy, in the fifth year after the destruction of Troy. The first
year therefore of his reign, was in the year of the Julian Period 3535. and
year of the World 2826. This was about three years after he came into this
Country: for he came hither about the second or third year after that City was
destroyed. Soon after his coming he married Lavinia, Daughter to Latinus, and
built Lavinium. Then, when Latinus was slain in the War with the Rutili, and
leaving no issue Male behind him, he succeeds in the Kingdom: but is warred
against by Turnus (formerly betroathed to Lavinia) but in this War Turnus is
slain by Aeneas: and he also slain afterward in another War with Mezentius
King of Tuscanie, after he had reigned three years.

Ascanius was his Successor, with whom also Mezentius waged War, and besieged
him so straightly in Lavinium, that he was glad to crave for peace, but could
not have it unless upon hard conditions: whereupon he sallied out suddenly,
and slew Lausus the son of Mezentius which put that Army into such a fear,
that Mezentius not only condiscended to peace upon equal terms, but ever
after remained a true friend to Ascanius. His Father was Aeneas, and his Mother
(not Lavinia but) Creusa. For though Lavinia were with child by Aeneas, yet she
was not delivered till after her Husbands death. And indeed being left alone
without either Father or Husband, she much feared his Son Ascanius, and
thereupon betook her to the chief Herdsman of her deceased Husband, by whom
she had an house built her in the Woods, and was there delivered of a Son
whom she called Silvius Posthumus.

Now the People knew nothing of this, save only that she was with Child:
Ascanius thereupon is suspected to have murdered her, but (he to clear
himself) causes them to be both brought from thence, and provideth carefully
for them. For in the seven and twentieth year of his reign he leaves the
City Lavinium to his Step mother, and built Alba longa, where he reigned to the
end of 38. years from the death of Aeneas: and at his death (neglecting his
Son Julus) he constituted From him all the Albanian Kings were called Silvii.
Silvius Posthumus for his Successor. Howbeit Julus was honorably provided for:
and from him descended the Family of the Julii.

This Son then of Aeneas by Lavinia, succeeded Ascanius and reigned after him
twenty nine years: who because he was born in a Wood, and after his Fathers
death, had this name of Silvius Posthumus.

The next after him was Aeneas Silvius: he reigned one and thirty years.

After him was Latinus Silvius, who reigned 51. years: For if that which was
the first year of Numitor, was also the first year of Romulus, as Saint Austin
says it was; then must the time of this man's reign be rather 51. then 50.
years. And note that of him the people were called Latins.

Alba Silvius succeeded and reigned 39. years. Then Silvius Athys 24. Capis
Silvius 28. Calpetus Silvius 13. Tiberinus Silvius 8. Of him the River came to
be called Tiber, because it was his hap to be drowned in it. Agrippa Silvius
succeeded and reigned 40. years.

After him was Aremulus, otherwise called Alladius Silvius: who having reigned
19. years, was with Palace wherein he lived, swallowed up, because he strived
to imitate the Thunder. Next after him was Aventinus Silvius 37. Then Proca
Silvius 23. Amulius Silvius 44. And last of all Numitor one, which was also the
first year of Romulus.

And now see them in their right times.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A Catalogue of the Kings after
Latinus, ex Eusebio: all of them fixed in their right times. 3535. Aeneas 3.
3538. Ascanius 38. 3576. Silvius Pasthumus 29. 3605. Aeneas Silvius 31. 3636.
Latinus. Silvius 51. 3687. Alba Silvius 39 3726. Silvius Athys 24. 3750. Capis
Silvius 28. 3778. Calpetus Silvins 13. 3791. Tiberinus Silvius 8. 3799. Agrippa
Silvius 40. 3839. Aremulus, sive Alladius 19. 3858. Aventinus Silvius 37. 3895.
Proca Silvius 23. 3918. Amulius Silvius 44. 3962. Nunitor 1. Which was also the
first year of Romulus: and year when the foundation of Rome was laid.

CHAP. X. Of the British Kings that reigned in England, from Brute to the time
of Julius Caesar and after.
BRute, the first King of the Britains, arrived here in this Island (according
to the common opinion 1108. years before the vulgar time of the birth of
Christ: which because it was about such time as Silvius Posthumus ended his
reign, gave occasion to some idle headed Monks, to deliver to posterity, that
Brute was his Son, and thereupon descended from the blood of the Trojans. And
that this might carry with it the face of an History they stuck not to tell us
that, which no Roman Writer reports, viz. that he should kill his own Father
by chance, and thereupon forsook his own Country, to seek his fortune
elsewhere. But Verstegan proves all this to be fabulous, and admireth much to
see how many people have sought to derive their discents from the Trojans, and
how that many foundations of Cities are reported to have laid by them. Yea
(says he) the follies of men have been such, that they have given the glory to
the fugitive People, of almost all that is excellent in all Europe. This
therefore would be wisely considered: for it stands with far more
likelihood of truth, that we hold him for some Alstedius says he came into
France out of Italy and was at the first a King of a people there, called
Rutuli: and that he was droven thence by Aeneas.
Prince of Gallia from whence he came when he arrived here in this Island then
called Albion: where conquering the present Inhabitants, he settled himself,
and obtained the rule and dominion over the whole Land, which now after him the
Conqueror must be called Britain. At the time of his death he divided the
whole into three parts, and left them to be governed by his three Sons;
Locrine, Albanact and Camber. Unto Locrine who was the eldest, he left Loegria,
now called England. Unto Albanact the second Son, he allotted Albania, now
called Scotland: and unto Camber, the third Son he gave Cambria, now called
Wales. And all this when he had reigned twenty four years: namely, twenty
after he built London, and four before. This was the first King.

The next (as I said) was Locrine: of whom and his Successors, I intend to make
no large discourse, but shall rather endeavor to set down the Kings and
years that they reigned, as punctually as I can, not varying from what is
commonly accounted, except upon good ground for the reconciling of this Story
to other Histories. And to effect this I shall gather out of sundry Authors,
the years of their reign; following no one, not further then I find just cause.
For unless an eye be had not only to the times of Belinus and Brennus, but
also to the time of Coilus (otherwise called Coelius, or Cecilius) I believe I
shall produce no truer account then what has been produced already, by such as
have trod this path before me: from which I must here and there step a little
aside, the better I say to reconcile this Story to other Histories.

But first, if the Britains came not from the Trojans, it would be showed how
the now City of London came to be called Troy novant.

I answer, that where it has been conceited that any Country or people have
had their descent from the Trojans, there they have interpreted the names of
their Cities according as in nearness of sound they came near to any thing
concerning Troy: and so or Trenevid.
Trenewith (which in the British Tongue, is as much as to say New town) came
to be corruptly called Troy novant; that is to say new Troy, which is now
(says In his Restit. of Antiq. c. 4.
Verstegan) our old London.

This being answered, I come now to the List or Catalogue; which is as
follows.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A Catalogue of the British Kings,
probably fixed in their right times. 3606. Brute 24. He built London, and was
buried there. 3630. Locrin 20. 3650. Guendolin 15. 36^5. Madan * 40. * He built
Don caster: and was slain by Wolves and wild beasts in hunting. 3705.
Mempricius 20. 3725. Ebranke * 60. * He built York: and by 20. Wives had
twenty Sons and thirty daughters. 3786. Brute * Greensheild. 30. 3815. Leill *
22. * He built Carlisle, and was buried there. 3837. Rudburdibras * 39. * He
built Canterbury, Shaftsbury, and Winthester. 3876. Bladud * 20. * He was a
great Astronomer, and made the Bathes at Caerbrand, and attempting to fly, fell
down and was broken in pieces; falling upon the top of Apollo's Temple. 3896.
Leir 40. 3936. Cordilla, or * Cordelia 5. 3941. Cunedag and Morgan 12. 3953.
Cunedag alone * 33. * He built three Temples: the first to Mars, at Pexth in
Scotland: the second to Mercury at Bangor in Wales, the third to Apollo in
Cornwall. 3986. Rivallo * 22. 4008. Gurgustus 15. 4023. Sicilius 49. 4072. Jago
25. 4097. Kinimachus. 54. 4151. Gorbodug 58. 4209. Ferex and * Porex 5. In the
death of these two the line of Brute failed. 4214. Cloten 50. 4264. Dunwallo *
40. He was the first King of Britain that was crowned with a Crown of Gold:
and by him Blackwell Hall was built, Malmsbury and the Vies He also ordained
weights and 4304. * Belinus and Brennus 15. 4319. Belinus alone 11. 4330.
Gurngust 19. So called of bearing such a shield in the wars with Gaul.
Between her reign, and that of Queen Mary, Daughter of K. Henry the eight no
woman ruled in Britain.
In his time it: rained blood for: three days.
He built Belingsgate and the Tower of London.
Years of the Julian Period when they beg. The continuation of the former List
of the British Kings. 4349. Guentholen 26. Measures and made good Laws against
Theft. 4375. Coilus * 7. * He was slain in his Bed by Fergus: in reward
whereof the Scots made Fergus their King. 4382. Kymor 3. 4385. Elanius * Howan
6. 4391. Morwith * 9. * This King fonght with is Monster that came out of the
Irish Sea, and was slain by it. 4400. Grandabod or * Grantbodian 10 4410.
Arthogaile 1. 4411. Elidurus 3. 4414. Arthogaile again 10. 4424. Elidure
again * 1. * The reigns of ^^e Kings from the death of this Elidure, are held
to be very uncertain: howbeit I have assayed to set them down according to
what I find in some Authors; but am not fully satisfied why Heli afterward
thentioned should have but one year. 4425. Vigenius and * Peridure 7. 4432.
Peridure alone * 2. 4434. Elidure again 4. 4438. Gorbonian 10. 4448. Morgan 2.
4450. Emerianus 6. 4456. Idwallan 8. 4464. Rhimo 11. 4475. Geruntius 13. 4488.
Catill 10. 4498. Coel 12. 4510. Porrex 2. 4512. Cherin 1. 4513. Fulgen 2. 4515.
Eldred 1. 4516. Andragie 1. 4517. Vranius 3. 4520. Eliud 5. 4525. Dedantius 5.
4530. Detonus 2. 4532. Gurginius 3. 4535. Merian 2. He was buried at Ikaldown
or (as we now call it) Jekelton in Cambridgesheir. For so I find it in a very
old Chronicle of England.
He built Cambride and Grantham.
He built the Town of Pickering.
Years of the Julian Period when they beg. The continuation of the former List
or Catalogue of the British Kings. 4537. Bladunc 2. 4539. Capb 1. 4540. Ovinus
2. 4542. Cicill 2. 4544. Bledgebred 20. 4564. Archemall 14. 4578. Eldelus 4.
4582. Rodianus 32. 4614. Hertir or Redarius 5. 4619. Samulius 2. 4621.
Penisellus 3. 4624. Pyrrhus 6. 4630. Caporus 7. 4637. Dinellus 3. 4640. Helius
* 1. * The Isle of Eley was named after his name: and the town thereof built by
him. 4641. Lud 11. 4652. Cassibelan 19. 4659. In this year (being the eighth of
Cassibelan) Caesar came first against Britain, but was repulsed, and made no
Conquest here till the next year. 4660. This was that next; the ninth of
Cassibelan, the 699. of Rome, and the third year of the 181. Olympiad: it was
also the 4660. year of the Julian Period, and year o^ the World 3951. And now
had the Britains reigned 1055. years current when Caesar made this conquest.
4671. Theomantius reigned next. 23. 4694. Cymbeline 35. In his time Christ was
born. 4729. Guiderius 28. He denied to pay the Romans their tribute, whereupon
the Emperor Claudius raised a great Army, and came against him in the year of
our Lord 43. He is said by some to rule 60. years, and that the years of the
Kings before him ever since the death of Elidure, are uncertain in his time
Cherry-Trees was first planted in this Island, as Master Is^^cson writes in his
Chronology, page 171.


The next after Guiderius, was Arviragus, he reigned 28. years, and began in
the year of the Julian Period 4757. In the last year but one of his reign,
Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus the son of Vespasian; even in the year of
the Julian Period 4783.

And thus I have prosecuted this History of the British Kings thus far, and
listed them in their right times and order, as near as I can: and have, as you
see taken my first Rise from the arrival of their first King Brutus; who
coming out of France, came into this Land (then called Albion) and found no
other Inhabitants in it, but some Giants which dwelled in Moutaines and Caves;
these were vanquished by him and his men, the chiefest whereof was Corin, one
of Brutes strongest Champions, by whom the Giant Gogmagog was slain.

But if this Island were once a Continent to France, as Verstegan proves, in
his chap 4.
restitution of decayed Antiquities, then I do suppose the most ancient name
thereof was Samothea. Afterward being made an Island by the Sea eating through
that little Isthmus or neck of Land between Dover and Calice it was called
Albion, from Albion a Son of Neptune as some have said; by whom and whose
posterity, it was inhabited until Brute made conquest of it: which, as is
commonly accounted, was in the year before Christ 1108. And there I have fixed
it, even in the year of the Julian Period 3606. and year of the World by my
account 2897.

CHAP. XI. Containing the Dynasties of several other Kingdoms.
THe Kingdoms which next offer themselves to be considered, are the Kingdomee
of Lacedemon and Corinth, which began at the last descent of the Heraclidae,
fourscore years after the destruction of Troy; as before in the end of the
fifth Chapter was showed. Some begin them both in one year, whilst others make
a years difference: which I do believe arises from this, that Automenes is
sometimes reckoned for the last King of Corinth, and sometimes for the first
Annual Officer, after the end of the second Dynastie. But I for my part shall
reckon Automenes for the and so Eusebius also reckons
last King: after whom were Annual Officers or Princes for 124. years, as is
accounted by Helvicus in his Chronology. At the end of which years, Cypselus
began to reign and reigned 28. years. Some say that he was a Tyrant: but by
Sir Walter Raleigh, in his History of the World, lib. 2. cap. 28. Sect. 5. he
is mentioned, not as a Tyrant, but as a quiet Prince; who notwithstanding by
expelling the race of the Bachidae, made himself Lord of Corinth. After
Cypselus was Periander, who was indeed a Tyrant, and reigned 44. years,
according to Aristotle; dying in the fourth year of the 48. Olympiad, as says
Laertius. The death therefore of this Tyrant, and end of the Kingdom of
Corinth, fell into the year of the Julian Period 4129. for then was the fourth
year of the 48. Olympiad. And as for the beginning of it, that must be in the
year of the same Period 3610. four score years after the fall of Troy, as
already has been said.

See now the List.
Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A List of the Kings of Corinth ex
Eusebius. all fixed in their right times. 3610. Athletes or Alethes 35. Dynastie
1. 3645. Ixion 37. Dynastie 1. 3682. Agilaus 37. Dynastie 1. 3719. Pryminas 35.
Dynastie 1. Years of the Julian Period when they beg. The Dynastie of the
Bachidae in Corinth, ex Eusebio. 3754. Bachis. 35. Dynastie 2 3789. Agelas 30.
Dynastie 2 3819. Eudemus 25. Dynastie 2 3844. Aristemedes 35. Dynastie 2 3879.
Egemnon 16. Dynastie 2 3895. Alexander 25. Dynastie 2 3920. Phelesteus 12.
Dynastie 2 3932. Automenes 1. Dynastie 2 3933. Annual Officers began and
continued one hundred twenty four years. 4057. Cypselus 28. 4085. Periander
44. 4129. The death of Periander, and fourth year of the forty eight Olympiad.
Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A List or Catalogue of the
Lacedemonian Kings taken out of Eusebius, and fitted to their right times.
3610. Euristheus 42. 3652. Agis 1. 3653. Archestratus 35. 3688. Labotes 37.
3725. Doristus 29. 3754. Agesilaus 44. 3798. Archelaus 60. 3858. Telechus 40.
3898. Alcamenes 37. 3935. Here was the end of this List or Catalogue, in in
which were seven Kings: and they among them reigned 325. year.

The next that I shall mention, The reigns of the Lydians.
were the Kings of Lydia and the time of their Dynasties: the first of which I
must pass over, as not knowing how to reckon it.

The second began in the year of the Julian Period 3492. and lasted (as says
Herodotus) 505. years, even till the beginning of Gyges: but we want a
continued Series of the Kings for the space of 426. years, even till the first
year of Ardysus who reigned 36. years. Alyattes 14. Meles 12. Candaules 17.

After Candaules the third Dynastie began: and had in it 170 not complete but
current.
years, divided among five Kings; and they were these. Giges 38. Ardis 49.
Sadiattes 12. Halyattes 57. Croesus 14.

Scaliger gathers out of Sosicrates a Laconian Historiographer, that Cyrus
took Sardes, and subdued Croesus, 41. years after the death of Periander, who
thereupon sets the end of Croesus his Kingdom in the first year of the 59.
Olympiad; the like does Helvicus and some others. And indeed the account would
fit the turn well enough, if all things else were correspondent: but because
they are not, I must let it alone to them that like it. For though from the
fortieth year of Periander (which was all the time that he reigned, according
to Laertius) there be 41. years to the time that Cyrus subdued Croesus; yet not
so many from the end of his 44. at which time he dyed; even in the fourth year
of the 48. Olympiad, as already has been showed. I conclude therefore that
when Croesus lost his Kingdom, it was not the first year of the 59. Olympiad,
but rather and indeed the first year of the 58. Olympiad, and fourteenth year
of his reign. For we are not to account that last of his to be complete, but
current, when this calamity fell upon him: and that it was also toward Winter,
in the year of the Julian Period 4166. Which being considered I would that the
reign of the Lydians be set one year higher then they be in the Table in the
first Part, next after the one hundred and nineteenth Page. For there the
conquest that Cyrus made of Croesus his Kingdom, stands against the year of
the Julian Period 4167: whereas here I conclude it to be in the year of the
same Period 4166. when the Soldiers were ready to take up their winter quarters.

But now see the List.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A List or Catalogue of the Kings of
Lydia, rightly fixed. 3918. Ardysus 36. 3954. Alyattes 14. 3968. Meles 12.
3980. Candaules 17. This is he, who lost his Kingdom by showing his naked Wife
to Gyges. 3997. Giges 38. 4035. Ardys 49. 4084. Sadiattes 12. 4096. Halyattes
57. 4153. Croesus 14. current. Cyrus conquered him and his Kingdom in the
first year of the 58. Olympiad, test Solino: and that was in the year of the
Julian Period 4166. as before was said. He had a Son who never spoke in all
life till now: but now seeing a Soldier go about to kill his Father, upon a
sudden passion he brake his Tongue-string, cried out and said; Oh man take
heed, will thou kill Croesus? And from that day to his death he could speak as
well as other men. Herodot.

The next to be mentioned according to their order or course of time be the
Kings of the Medes: The reign of the Medes.
of whom I gave notice in the latter end of the second Chapter.

They reigned without any strict hand over their subjects, until the days of
Dioces: and that is the reason why he is accounted by Herodotus, as the first
King. Nor is this my opinion alone, Hist. World l. 2. c. 27. S. 5.
but of Sir Walter Raleigh likewise in his History of the World: saying, this
Dioces was the first that ruled the Medes in a strict form, commanding more
absolutely then his Predecessors had done. For they following the example of
Arbaces, had given to the people so much license, as caused every one to desire
the wholesome severity of a more Lordly King. Herein Dioces answered their
desires to the full. For he caused them to build for him a stately Palace; he
took unto him a Guard, for the defense of his Person; he seldom gave presence
which also when he did, it was with such austerity, that no man durst presume
to spit or cough in his fight. By these and the like Ceremonies he bred in the
people an awful regard and highly upheld the Majesty, which his Predecessors
had almost letten fall, through neglect of due comportments.

In execution of his royal office, he did uprightly and severely administer
justice, keeping secret spies to inform him of all that was done in the
Kingdom. He cared not to enlarge the bounds of his Dominion, by encroaching
upon others, but studied how to govern well his own.

The difference found between this King, and such as were before him, seems to
have bred that opinion which Herodotus delivers, that Dioces was the first who
reigned in Media. Thus that Knight.

Moreover this was he that built the great City of Echatane, which now is
called Tauris; and therefore should in all likelihood be that King Arphaxad,
mentioned in the book of Judith: which even the course of time approves.

But if he be Arphaxad, who was it that was that great Nabuchodonosor which
fought against him. I answer, this seems to be Saosduchinus King of the
Assirians: about the beginning of whose twelfth year Dioces was slain. For so
it is read in the first Chapter of the book of Judith, translated into Latin
out of the Caldee by St. Hierom, as a worthy Author well observes, in his
laborious and learned Annals of the old Testament. In the Greek indeeed we are
one while directed to the twelfth year, another while to the seventeenth year
of this King: but that unconstancie argues a defect in the Copy; and so I
leave it, coming now to show the course of succession among these Kings of
Media, who began at the death of Sardanapalus.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A Catalogue or List of the Kings of
Media; partly out of Eusebius, and partly out of Herodotus. 3893. Arbaces 28.
3921. Sosarmus 30. 3951. Medidus 40. 3991. Cardiceas 13. 4004. Dioces 53. 4057.
Phraortes 22. 4079. Cyaxares 40. 4119. Astyages 35. 4154. Here was the end of
Astyages, and the beginning of the reign of Cyaxares secundus: who according
to Xenophon, was the son of Astyages, and called in the sacred Prophecy of
Daniel by the name of Darius Medus. He was the Uncle of Cyrus, as being Brother
to his Mother; which Xenophon also shows. Moreover we are to note, that in
the book of Tobit and Daniel, Astyages the Father of this Cyaxares, is called
Ahasuerus or Assuerus; as may be seen, Dan. 9.1. and Tob. 14.17.

Next after these we are to reckon the Kings of Assyria which reigned at
Niniveh after the death of Sardanapalus, Kings of Assyria after Sardanapalus
as those before mentioned reigned in Media. The first of them may be granted
to be that King whom Castor in his Canon calls Ninus secundus; saying (as his
words sound in the Latin: Initium Chronographiae fecimus a Nino, and eam
deduximus usque ad Ninum qui successionis jure accepit Regnum a Sardanapalo.
Thus he. Now this name some think was given him for the better luck sake:
namely as I conceive; That as the ancient Ninus did at the first enlarge this
Kingdom so as it came to be a great Monarchy: in like manner the same was
hoped for by them who gave this name to this King. Or else, because he was
fortunate in the enlarging of it, they said of him that he was a second Ninus:
the time of whose reign is gathered out of Castor aforesaid, in the Greek
Chronicle of Eusebius, to be nine years.

His Successor I take to be the same who in the Scripture is called Phul, and
came in the days of Menahem and invaded the land of Israel, 2 Kin. 15.19. and
1 Chr. 5.26. How long he reigned is not expressed any where that I know, except
it be in the Writings of Annius, where we find 48. years mentioned for the
time of his reign. Tiglath pilezer succeeded him, and (according to the said
Author) reigned 25. years, Salmanasar 17. Senacharib 7.

How I should contradict this Author for the reigns of these four Kings, I
cannot see; except it be in the reign of Phul, who (if the rest be right) must
have but 43. because after Senacharibs army was slain by the Angel, and that he
thereupon went straight way home with shame to his own Country, he lived not
fully fifty five days. For before 55. days were ended, he was slain by his
own Sons, Adramelech and Sharezer, as he was worshipping in the house of
Nisroch his god, Tob. 1.21. and Esa. 37.38. If any further help could be had
from other Authors, I would not be beholding to Annius for thus much: but
because it cannot, it will I hope be no harm to take aim from him so far as
he thwarts no other. To the next King (namely Esarhaddon; or, as he is
otherwise written, Asarhaddon) he gives ten years, but there I leave him. For
it is extremely probable that he had a longer time then so: thirty years in
Niniveh; and after that, twelve years more in Babylon; In all 42. with some
odd months over and above. For at the end of the eight years of Interregnum
that were in Babylon, the King that began to reign there was Assaradinus, as
Ptolomy calls him in his Mathematical Canon of the Kings of Babylon: who in
all probability was this Assarhaddon the Son of Senacharib, formerly
mentioned.

And now see the List.

Years of the Julian when they began to reign. A List or Catalogue of the
Kings of Assyria after Sardanapalus. 3893. Ninus junior 19. 3912. Phul 43.
3955. Tiglath. pileser 25. 3980. Salmanassar 17. 3997. Senacharib 7. 4004.
Esarhaddon 30. 4034. Here (as is probable) this King Esarhaddon beto reign in
Babylon, after he had been King of Assyria 30. years.

But the first of them in Babylon (whose years of reign stand upon record)
since the Death of Sardanapalus, was Nabonassar: and with him Ptolomy begins
his Mathematical Canon before mentioned. Howbeit, by what we find elsewhere, it
may be gathered that there were Kings of Babylon after Sardanapalus, before the
Era of this King Nabonassar took beginning as in Eusebius his Chronicle may be
seen, in the beginning, of the reign of Arbaces. For first, having showed how
the Empire of the Assyrians was shattered in pieces by the fall of this
Epicurious King, he says that the Medes brought it home to themselves; that
is, they purchased hereby their ancient Liberty: which (with reference to the
opinion of Herodotus, before mentioned) he shows to be so great, that it was
as if they had no Princes to reign over them until the time of Dioces; and
yet he sets down four that reigned before him. But they, by slacking too
much the reins of Sovereignty, did more hurt to the general estate of Media
then the pleasure of freedom, which it enjoyed could recompense. For hereupon
it came to pass that the Assyrians encroached upon their Dominions, and got
away some towns from them, which they held still in the days of Salmanassar
when the ten Tribes were carried away captive, as the holy Scriptures bear us
witness in 2 Kin. 18.11. and elsewhere. Then secondly, the Chaldeans also
prevailed, and had (says Eusebius) successions of Kings: And so had other
Nations too, who were now governed by their own proper Kings as well as they. By
which it appears, that there were Kings of Babylon before Nabonassar: for the
time from the death of Sardanapalus to the beginning of his reign, was 74
years; But who they were that reigned in that space (excepting Belesis or
Belochus who was contemporary with Arbaces) is altogether unknown. Probable it
is that a new race of Kings began in Nabonassar, or that he was some excellent
restorer of Astronomy, and thereupon had the honor of an account of times to
be instituted and observed in memory of him ever after: which began on the six
and twentieth day of February, in the year of the Julian Period 3967, when the
year of the World was 3258. And as for the Kings you have them before, in the
first Part; even in the latter end of the seventh Chapter, page 50.

The reigns also of the Kings of Persia, The Kings of Persia.
from the beginning of Cyrus, to the end of the last Darius, be likewise there,
in the seventh Section of the eighth Chapter. I shall not need therefore to set
them down again here in this place, but come next to the Kings of Mecedon.

These reigned 485 years, from the beginning of Cranaus, The Kings of Mecedon.
to the death of Alexander Magnus: as Saint Austin rightly reckons, in his
twelfth book, and tenth Chapte Decivitate Dei. This Cranaus began in the year
of the Julian Period 3905. and reigned twenty eight years: of whom, and his
Successors, in the following List.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A List or Catalogue of the Kings of
Macedon, fixed in their right times. 3905. Cranaus 28. 3933. Coenus 12. 3945.
Tyrimas 38. 3983. Perdiccas the first 51. 4034. Archeus 38.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. The continuation of the former List
or Catalogue of the Kings of Macedon. 4072. Philippus 38. 4110. Aeropus 26.
4136. Alcetas 29. 4165. Amyntas the first 50. 4215. Alexander dives 43. 4258.
Perdiccas the second 41. 4299. Archelaus 16. 4315. Orestes 00. 4315. Aeropas,
tutour to Orestes 6. 4321. Pausanias 1. 4322. Amyntas primo 1. 4323. Argeus 2.
4325. Amyntas again 21. 4346. Alexander 1. 4347. Alorites 3. 4350. Prediccas 4.
4354. Philip the Father of Alexander 24. 4378. Alexander magnus 12. 4390. Here
Alexander dyed, even in the first year of the hundredth and fourteenth Olympiad.

And note that Perdiccas the second had a longer reign then is commonly given
him: for he was alive in the sixtenth year of the Peloponnesian War, and
could not therefore have less then forty one years, which number is given him
by Nicomedes Acanthius, as he is cited by Master Seldom in his Marmora
Arundelliana. When he had reigned about twenty seven years ( viz. about the
third or fourth year of the Peloponnesian War) Sitalces King of Thrace came
against him with a purpose to have made Philip the son of Amyntas King: but
by the care of Perdicccas a Peace was made, and so Perdiccas kept his Kingdom
still.

Note also that at the death of Alexander magnus, the Grecian Monarchy was
divided, and came at last to be in four chief darts; viz. Syria, Macedon,
Egypt, and Asia the less: as before, in the first Part may be seen.

CHAP. XII. Of the Kings, and other Governors of Rome from the foundation
thereof by Romulus, to the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus.
I Showed before, in the end of the ninth Chapter of this second Part, that
when Romulus began to reign the foundation of Rome was laid; viz. in the year
of the Julian Period 3962. at the Summer time whereof the first year of the
seventh Olympiad began, 432. years after the Destruction of Troy. This was in
the year of the World 3253. the sixth year of Jotham King of Judah, and the
seventh of Paka King of Israel: before which time, that which now began to be a
City, was but an ordinary Village. The first Government whereof was by Kings,
which lasted 244. years; as in the following Catalogue may be seen.

Years of the Julian Period when they beg. A Catalogue of the Kings of Rome,
fixing them all in their right places. 3962. Romulus 37. 3999. An Interregnum
1. 4000. Numa Pompilius 43. 4043. Tullus Hostilius 32. 4075. Ancus Martius 24.
4099. Tarquinius Priscus 38. 4137. Servius Tullius 44. 4181. Tarquinius
Superbus 25. 4206. Here was the end of the Government by Kings.

The next Government was of Consuls, who began in the year of the Julian Period
4206. There were other alterations afterward: but that which was most eminent
was the Government of Emperors. The first whereof in some sort was Julius
Caesar, by whom the Britains were made tributary in the ninth of Cassibelan:
but not till Augustus was Rome fully brought under the command of one
Sovereign Imperial Monarch. He therefore properly was the first Emperor:
whose death did so much greive the people, that they wished either that he had
never been borne, or else that he had never dyed. Tiberius succeeded him, and
began in the Julian Period 4727. after his Predecessor forementioned had
reigned 57. years, five months, and four days; for Caesar was slain in the
Senate house (receiving there three and twenty wounds) in the year of the
Julian Period 4670. on the fifteenth day of March: and Tiberius began on the
nineteenth day of August, when Augustus dyed, even in the year of the said
Period 4727 aforesaid, not long before that Eclipse of the Moon which Tacitus
mentions.

This Tiberius dyed on the sixteenth day of March, in the year of the Julian
Period 4750, after he had reigned 22 years, six months, and 28 days.

His successor was Caligula, who reigned three years ten months, and nine
days: He was so prodigal that he spent an hundred Millions of money in three
years. He deflowred his three fisters, and one of their daughters: and was also
so cruel, that he wished all the people of Rome to have had but one neck, that
he might cut it off at one blow. Finally, he dyed (being slain by Cassius,
Cherea, and Sabinus the Tribune) on the 24 day of January, in the year of the
Julian Period 4754.

His Uncle Claudius succeeded him, and reighed thirteen years, eight months,
and ten days. In his time was that Famine which Agabus foretold, Acts 11.28.
He commanded all Jews to depart from Rome, Asts 18.2. And made Felix Governor
of Judea, who was made to tremble in the presence of his Minion Drausilla, at
Saint Paul's Sermon of Temperance, and Judgment to come, Acts 24.24, 25. Simon
Magus lived in his time, and so played his pranks in Rome that he got to be
honored as a God.

After Claudius, that cruel monster Nero began to reign, in the year of the
Julian Period 4767, on the thirteenth day of October; at which time the
aforesaid Emperor dyed, being poisoned by his wife Agrippina through the help
of a Physician whose name was Xenophon. This Nero was a most notorious wicked
man; he reigned thirteen years, seven months, and 28. days; dying by his own
hand on the ninth of June in the year of the Julian Period 1681, one year and
20 days before Vespasion was made Emperor.

Galba succeeded in the year aforesaid; whose whole time was but seven months
and eight days. He was slain by Otho, who (after three months and four
days) killed himself, being overcome by Vitellius, who also, after nine
months is slain, and Vesprtian thereupon sole Emperor. In the second year of
whose reign, that stately City and Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus,
the gallant and brave son of this Emperor, in the year of the Julian Period
4783; as more at large, in my first Part and last Chapter I have declared: to
which I now send you. For here I intend no more, but shall put an end now even
to this Part also; giving thanks unto God, who has brought me unto it.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 5. for evolvendo, read revolvendo. page 9. line 24. for be the best, read
be in the best. p. 12. l. 27. read excerptis, p. 14. l. 21. r. course of the
Sun. p. 15. l. 1. f. no other, r. no month, p. 16 l. 2. for twentieth r. two
and tweitieth, and l. 4. f. been r. but, p. 17. l. 4. r. spoken of, p 25. cap
5. f. October r. April, p 29. f. a Quartaine r. that a quartaine, p. 31. l. 8.
for of the Rest r. of Rest, p. 33. l. 3. r. enough, p. 36. l. 18. r. is
concluded, p. 37. l. 1. f. to r. in, l. 14. f. on r. of, p 38 l. 1. r. had not
been, l. 27. f. to r. on, f. a Sabbath r. Sabbath, l. 34. r. as I said, l. 37.
r. as we are, page 39. l. 11. r. on Ararat, p. 40. lin 32. for thirteenth read
thirtieth, page 42. line 42. for Egypt, read out of Egypt, page 49. line 9. for
to read not, page 70. line 13. r. of the Chaldees and l. 20. f. 57, r. 75. p.
71, l. 23, r. was his house, p. 72, l. 3, r. go on, p. 75, l. 17, f. sed r.
blessed, p. 76, l. 27, r. which was 137 p. 77, l. 17, r. how to account, p. 83,
lin 36, r. Danites, p. 91, l. 14, r. Jehoahaz 3 months: In the Table of the
Kings of Judah in Joash his reign, f. the seventeenth of Jehu, r. the seventh,
p. 108, l. 37, r. Zacharia, p. 110, l. 32, r. Zorobabel, p. 112, l. 24, r. as
Ezra shows, c. 4.

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The twelfe Month MARCH. The twelfth Month, Anno Mundi 1657. 1 12 A 2 13 B On
this day a third Dove is sent, and she returns no more; howbeit, Noah did not
open the covering of the Ark until the first day of the next Month, Genesis
8.12, 13. 3 14 C 4 15 D 5 16 E 6 17 F 7 18 G 8 19 A 9 20 B 10 21 C The first
day of the Week. 11 22 D 12 23 E 13 24 F 14 25 G 15 26 A 16 27 B 17 28 C The
first day of the Week. 18 29 D 19 30 E 20 31 F 21 1 April. G The first day of
APRIL. 22 2 A 23 3 B 24 4 C The first day of the Week. 25 5 D 26 6 E 27 7 F 28
8 G 29 9 A 30 10 B On this day was the Vernall Equinox. In Part I. the first
leaf of K. is fall, put this leaf in its place.

An Hebrew and Julian Calender for the Year of the Universal Deluge or Flood.
The first Month. APRIL. The first Month, Anno Mundi 1658. 1 11 C On the
first day of this Month Noah removed the Covering of the Ark, and looked, and
behold the face of the ground was dry, Genesis 8.13. howbeit he comes not out
till God commanded him, which was not until the 27th. day of the next Month:
For though the Waters were dried from off the Superficies of the Earth by this
first day of the first Month, yet the ground was still soft, unfit for
habitation, and not dry enough to be trodden on by either Man or Beast, until
the twenty seventh day of the second Month, in this year of the World 1658. 2
12 D 3 13 E 4 14 F 5 15 G 6 16 A 7 17 B 8 18 C 9 19 D 10 20 E 11 21 F 12 22 G
13 23 A 14 24 B 15 25 C The first day of the Week. 16 26 D 17 27 E 18 28 F 19
29 G 20 30 A 21 1 May B The first day of MAY. 22 2 C The first day of the Week.
23 3 D ^4 4 E 25 5 F 26 6 G 27 7 A 28 8 B 29 9 C The first day of the Week.

A Postscript to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
I Am now come toward the conclusion or end of what at my first undertaking I
intended: for the close of which I have got together a few Characters
Chronologicall Characters, which now in the last place I present unto thee:
They are pertinent to what is before written in my Measuring Reed, and will
serve well to confirm the whole Fabric of my foregoing computation.

And first I will begin with Adam, of whom I have not much to say, and yet if I
might not be thought too curious, I could show wi^h very much ease and
probability the very day as well as the year of his death. He was not borne
nor begotten, but treated in the year of the Julian Period 710, on the 29 day
of April, Feria sexta, when the Sun was in the sixth degree of Aries, as I have
elsewhere showed: from whence he lived (as the Scripture tells us) 930
years, Genesis 5.5. His Death must therefore be in the year of the same period
1640, at such time as the Sun was again in the same point of Heaven, as at the
first when God created him: which in this year of his death is found to be on
the 22 day of April. This 22 day in the year aforesaid was on the sixth day of
the week, when was also the 14 day of the first month. Adam therefore dyed on
the same day of the week on which he was made, which was also the same day of
the month on which I find it probable that he fell. To which the Testimony of
Eutychius a learned Patriarch of Constantinople well agrees, for as has been
told us by that famous and illustrious Master Seldom, Adam died on the sixth
day of the week, and fourteenth day of that month which was nearest to the
Vernall Equinox, as learned Languius expounds that passage of his taken from
Eutychius which is indeed an exposition very true. For thus stands the words in
Mr. Seldens Book De Anno Judaico, if they be set down in English; And Adam
dyed on Friday on the fourteenth day of the Moonth, which was the sixth day of
the Month Nisan etc. By which sixth day of Nisan he certainly means the
sixth day after the Sun entered into Aries, at which time must be the fourteenth
day of the Moon and sixth day of the week. All which I find to be exactly on
the 22 day of April aforesaid, in the year of the Julian Period 1640, which
was therefore the very day and year of Adams death, and very beginning of the
year of the World, 931.

The further consideration of which is not only a sure character of the
precise time of the creation, but also serves to declare that the Ages of the
Patriarchs were full and complete years, and that therefore Noah's Flood came
not in the year of the World 1656, as the most account; but in the year of
the World 1657. for Methuselah must finish the years of his life before it
came, as the signification of his name in the Hebrew shows; which is, He
dies, and the emission, or Dart comes.

In this year of the World (being the year of the Julian Period 2366) the
seventeenth day of the second month, on which day the Flood began, was also on
the sixth day of the week: which is a character likewise worth the marking.
For it clearly shows that as on the sixth day of the week, God made both
Man and Beast; so on the same day of the week he sends a flood of Waters to
destroy them. And as this was on the sixth day of the week; so when Noah came
out of the Arc was the seventh day of the week, in the year of the Julian
Period 2367. on the fifth day of June, which in that year was the 27 day of
the second month and Sabbath day: at which time Noah offered Sacrifice, even
at the very end of a full year of days after the flood began: which adds still
something for confirmation.

Another Character next after this confirming me yet more fully in a firm
confidence of the truth of my accounts, is taken from the time of the coming
out of Egypt, which I find to be on the last day of April in the year of the
Julian Period 3224. which very day in that year was on the sixth day of the
week, even as on the same day of the week Christ purchased a better Redemption
by the blood of his cross, one thousand five hundred and two and twenty years
after. In all which I do much admire at the wonderful providence of God, in
disposing of the Times so exactly and harmoniously: for as on the sixth day of
the week Man was made, and Christ suffered; so on the sixth day of the week
Israel was delivered out of the Egyptian bondage, on the very next day after
the Passover, even as on the next day after the Passover Christ our Passover
was sacrificed for us, to free us from the bondage of sin and Satan.

Nor in this year would that character which we have in Exodus, from the
history of the Quails and Manna, be forgotten. For as we read in the sixteenth
chapter, on the fifteenth day of the second month the people murmured for
lack of meat: whereupon God sent them Quails at Even, and on the morrow
morning Manna; which they gathered six days but on the seventh day they found
none, Exodus 16.26. By which we see, not only that the 22 day of the month
must be Sabbath day, but also that the first Manna fell on the first day of the
week now called the Lords Day in memory of our Saviors Resurrection, and has
been the Christians Sabbath ever since. Which is exactly true in the year that
I account, if but 29 days be reckoned for the first month, awd 30 for the
second: which (as I have showed before, in place convenient) is more
consentaneous to the motion of the Moon, then to have 30 for the first, before
the odd hours arise to a day; for this could not be before the second month.
The first month therefore in any year has but 29 days, the second 30, the
third 29, the fourth 30 etc. For in one month (according to the mean motion
of the Moon, from one conjunction to another) we have but 29 days, 12 hours,
44 minutes, three seconds, and 12 thirds. I account therefore that the
Israelites came out of Egypt, when the 29 day of April was ending, and the 30
beginning, which was Feria sexta. I account likewise that the first Magna fell
on the 30 day of May, which was the 16 day of the secrnd month Feria prima:
and consequently that the 29 day of of May, and fifth of June were Sabbath
days; the one on the 15 day of the second month, and the other on the 22. And
thus is this year truly found by the correspondence we see it has with these
characters.

The like confirmation I find for the years in which I account the Temple to
be founded and dedicated by King Solomon, and aster that burnt by
Nebuchadnezzar. For first it being true, that the Israelites came out of Egypt
in the year of the Julian Period 3224, it must needs follow, that King
Solomon laid the foundation of the Temple in the year of the same Period 3703,
for it must be in the fourth year of King Solomon, on the second day of the
second month, 480 years current after the coming out of Egypt, as we are
taught in the 1 Kin. 6.1. And that being the year when it was dedicated (being
seven years after) must needs be in the year of the same Period 3710; which
was not only seven years after, but was also the eleventh year of Solomon,
as we are likewise taught it should be, in the 1 Kin. chap. 6. verse. 38. and
chap. 8.2. Now this I confirm both by the time that the Temple stood, and also
by the courses of the Priests which served in the said Temple till
Nebuchadnezzar destroyed it. The first of these is abundantly proved by me to
be 423 years and some odd months, which therefore casts the destruction
thereof into the year of the Julian Period 4126. Over and above which proofs
of mine, I have seen that since which I do much admire; namely, that some of
the skillful Rabbis have said and recorded it, that the same number was
heretofore read in the Heavens from such letters as the Stars in their
position made: For as Gaffarell a learned French man has told us, R. Rapoll,
Chomier, and Abjudan have delivered to posterity the deep secrets of a
caelestiall writing and Reading, which discovers many strange things to them
who are able to understand it: and among the rest this is one, namely, That a
little before this Temple we now speak of was destroyed and burnt by
Nebuchadnezzar, it was observed that eleven of the Stars that were most
vertical to it, composed, for a pretty while together, five Hebrew Letters,
which being joined together, made up this word (reading it from the North
toward the West) Hikschich, which signifies to reject, and forsake without
any Mercy: and the number of three of them added together, amounted to 423, the
very space of Time that this stately piece of building had stood. All this I
find in the unheard of curiosities of James Gaffarell, at the 13 chapter,
which whilst I mention I look upon mine own proofs with the more confidence,
and though I profess no skill in such curiosities, yet I will embrace truth
wheresoever I find it.

This then for the time of the Temple being thus, the Character which I have to
confirm all else about it, is this; namely, the courses of the Priests which
served in the Temple, from the first Sabbath of the Dedication, till
Nebuchadnezzar destroyed it. For we may easily believe that in the first
Sabbath of the Dedication, the first course (which was the course of Joarib)
began, which I have elsewhere proved by the Hebrew and Julian Calendar of that
year (which was the year of the Julian Period 3710) to be on the 17 day of
October. To which time and year if we add 224 Julian years (in which space
the courses return to the same day again) we shall come to the year of the
Julian period 3934. on the 17 day of October. After which we have 192 years
more before we can come to the year of the Julian period 4126, in which the
Temple was destroyed; noting these 192 years to end on the 17 of October
likewise. And in 192 years we find 417 courses with 72 days over and above:
which 72 days being taken out of the number of days which were from the
beginning of that year of the Julian period to the said 17 day of October, do
direct us to the sixth day of August, which then was Sabbath day, and the
course of Joarib: even that very course of his, in which the Temple was
destroyed; as before, in the seventh Chapter, page 44.45, etc. may be seen.

But I cannot forget the 423 so strangely found out by Chomier for the time of
the Temple. Gaffarell, out of him has other periods not impertinent, found out
also by the foresaid Reading of the Stars: as that the Kingdom of the Jews,
from the beginning of the 40 years given to Samuel and Saul in the Acts of the
Apostles, to the deplorable condition of Zedechia, should be 505 years, for so
indeed it was, if we reckon from the beginning of the 40 year aforesaid to the
time that Nebuchadnezzar laid his last siege against Jerusalem, 430 days
before the City was taken. This number of 505 he says was signified by five
stars, which composed three mystical letters, out of which was made an Hebrew
word whose signification was to break, cast down, and to drive out: the
Number arising from those letters being 505. And why I end them at the foresaid
deplorable condition of Zedechia in the time of the siege, is, ecause this
position of Stars was seen thus and read a little before the Jews saw their
Scepter cast down to the ground, and their liberty quite carried Captive into
Babylon: which must needs be in the year of the Julian period 4125, when
Nebuchadnezzar laid his last siege against Jerusalem.

Thus after the same manner the length of the Persian Monarchy founded by
Cyrus, is said to be 208 years: in which though he may seem to differ two
years from my account, which precisely allows but 206; yet he does
abundantly confute Beroaldus, Broughton, and such others who would make the
world believe that this Monarchy lasted but 130 years or thereabouts, whereas
it must be 206 at the least, and begin (according to Xenophon) seven years
before the death of King Cyrus: or 208 if we account from the time that Cyrus
laid the foundation thereof in conquering Asia and the whole continent about
Babylon, against which he made his last expedition two years before he took
it. The notice of which time is not impertinent: for even the prophet had an
eye thereunto, in Jer. 51.46. Howbeit the Head of Gold was not as yet quite cut
off: for that was not till Babylon was taken and Belshazzar slain: not many
hours before which, there was an handwriting upon the wall which told it.
Then was as well the first year of Cyrus, as of Darius Medus, how else had
Daniel been in Babylon unto the first of Cyrus, seeing upon the Conquest Darius
took him with him into Media, as Josephus shows: where he was unto the third
year of Cyrus, though how much longer we know not; Dan. 10.1. Whereas
therefore it is said [in Dan. 1.21.] that Daniel was unto the first year of
Cyrus, it is to be understood thus; namely, That Daniel continued in Babylon
till that state was altered, and the Kingdom translated to Cyrus: who made
such a partition thereof between himself and Darius, as that Darius had the
chief Title of honor, though he in effect had the dominion. That which we
read in the fifth Chapter has respect hereunto; for there we read, not only
that Belshazzars Kingdom was divided, and given to the Medes and the Persians;
but also that Darius Medus took the Kingdom, being threescore and two years
old, Dan. 5.28.31. After which it seems probable that he lived but a while:
not only because his Climactericall year was now at hand, but also in regard
of the time noted in the date of Daniels Visions. For in this new State, after
Daniels first Vision in the first year of Darius, when he prayed for the
return of the people from their captivity, there is no more mentioned of any
thing dated in the years of his Reign, but in the years of Cyrus: which if
Darius had been still alive, would not have been; as is easy to go grant if
we do but consider that Darius took Daniel away with him into Media as soon as
Babylon was conquered, and made him there the chiefest Officer of his Kingdom.
Nay more, that this first year of Darius must be the very year likewise when
Cyrus released the captivity, is plain; not only because now the 70 years
were accomplished, which were both the date of Nebuchadnezzars Kingdom Dau.
5.26. Jer. 2^.
finished at the death of Belshazzar and of the peoples servitude which was to
be during the Reign of him, his son, and his sons son, whom Esaias calls his
Esa. 14.22 in which place by Nephew, we are to understand the sons son. The
same with that in Jer. 27.7.
Nephew: but also in regard of Daniels prayer for their Return made at this
time, which was indeed the fulfilling of the condition required of God in his
promise concerning their freedom. For as soon as ever God had made a promise
to his people that they should come home again when 70 years began to be
accomplished at Babylon, then this follows, and is annexed as the condition
of his promise; namely, that they seek him: for (as Junius renders that text)
when ye shall call upon me that ye may Or go away.
return, and pray unto me, then will I hear you, Ier. 29.10.12. which when
Daniel considered, he prays earnestly to God in the behalf of the people, even
in the first year of Darius, and is told by the Angel Gabrel not only that
his prayer was heard, but also that the Lord had decreed a spiritual
deliverance for his Church, which at the time appointed, and mentioned in the
seventy weeks, should be accomplished by the death of Christ, whom Daniel
calls the Messiah; as may beseen at large in the ninth Chapter of his prophecy.

But to return again to Gaffarel and his learned Chomier, who tell us that the
continuation likewise of the Grecian Kingdom is also found after the same
manner, and in the Heavens pointed out to be 284 years; which was foreshewed
by four Stars that made up the Verb Parad, a word which signifies to divide;
and in which the number was 284. Now this is true as well as the rest that are
before mentioned, if we begin to reckon from the year of the Julian period
4384 when Alexander the Great subdued He was the last King of the Persian
Monarchy.
Darius Codoman, and end in the year of the same period 4668. when Julius
Caesar was created perpetual Dictator for the Romans, in whom the foundation
also of their Monarchy began first to be laid, though it came to no great
perfection till Augustus overcame Mark Anthony: from whence all the time
after, to the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, is ninety and nine years. And
at that I end. LAUS SOLI DEO.

FINIS.

